Jean-Claude Trichet: Fostering sound financial globalisation – the role of 
Europe 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  Paris 
Europlace  Financial  Forum  “The  Paris  Marketplace  Contribution  to  the  Global  Economy”, 
Paris, 2-3 July 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Mesdames et Messieurs, 
Je  suis  très  heureux  d’intervenir  aujourd’hui  à  l’occasion  du  Forum  financier  de  Paris 
Europlace. En premier lieu, permettez-moi de préciser que mon discours intervient durant la 
« purdah  period »  précédant  une  réunion  du  Conseil  des  gouverneurs.  En  conséquence, 
aucun  de  mes  propos  ne  saurait  être  interprété  en  termes  d’intentions  du  Conseil  des 
gouverneurs sur l’orientation de la politique monétaire et le niveau des taux directeurs. Je me 
concentrerai aujourd’hui sur le rôle de l’Europe dans les marchés financiers globalisés. Il est 
en effet particulièrement opportun de procéder à une évaluation de la contribution, au sein 
de l’économie mondiale, des marchés de capitaux européens. Les événements observés sur 
les  marchés  de  capitaux  depuis  plusieurs  mois  nous  ont  rappelé  à  quel  point  le  système 
financier mondial était devenu étroitement intégré. La mondialisation financière est un facteur 
important  du  dynamisme  économique  mondial  et  de  la  stabilité,  car  elle  favorise  une 
allocation  efficace  du  capital  et  accroît  les  possibilités  de  partage  et  de  diversification  des 
risques.  Il  convient  toutefois  que  son  développement  se  déroule  dans  un  environnement 
caractérisé  par  l’efficacité  et  la  discipline.  Pour  cela,  il  nous  appartient  à  tous  d’assumer 
notre  part  de  responsabilité  pour  garantir  un  fonctionnement  sûr  et  efficace  du  système 
financier mondial.  
Europe is one of the major building blocks of the global economy and, as such, needs to play 
a very active role in fostering sound financial globalisation. I would like to highlight two main 
priorities in this respect.  
First,  we  should  further  step  up  our  efforts  to  build  a  truly  integrated,  safe  and  highly 
competitive  European  financial  market.  The  tenth  anniversary  of  the  ECB  one  month  ago 
gave  us  the  occasion  to  take  stock  of  the  achievements  in  European  financial  integration 
over the past decade. We were proud to find that significant progress has been achieved and 
that the introduction of the single currency has acted as a major driving force in this regard. 
However, as I would like to underline today, further efforts are necessary to make the single 
financial market a reality.  
While financial integration is first and foremost a market-driven process, authorities can play 
an  important  supportive  role  in  a  number  of  ways,  for  instance  by  acting  as  catalysts  for 
private  sector  initiatives  and  by  reducing  policy-related  obstacles  to  cross-border  finance. 
The  Eurosystem  can  also  provide  central  banking  services  that  support  the  financial 
integration process. I will highlight a few areas, which, in my view, particularly merit further 
public sector action.  
Second, Europe should also contribute actively to safeguarding the resilience of the global 
financial system. At the present juncture, the main priority in this regard is to address, from a 
systemic point of view, the global financial system weaknesses which have been identified 
during 
time,  greater  global 
interconnectedness  will  continue  to  necessitate  substantial  efforts  towards  enhanced 
international cooperation. I will mention a number of priority issues in this context. 
financial  market  correction.  At 
the  ongoing 
the  same 
BIS Review 86/2008 
 1
The state of European financial integration  
Let  me  begin  with  a  brief  review  of  the  current  state  of  European  financial  integration. 
Completing the single financial market is a key priority on the European economic agenda for 
a number of reasons. First, an integrated financial market is a prerequisite for realising the 
full economic potential of Europe, as highlighted in the Lisbon strategy. A study by London 
Economics  estimates  that  the  integration  of  the  European  bond  and  equity  markets  could 
result in additional GDP growth of around 1% over a ten-year period, or approximately 100 
billion euro.1 Second, financial integration is also a crucial element in the safe and efficient 
functioning of  the  monetary  union.  In  particular,  financial  markets  that  are  more  integrated 
provide strong support for the effective transmission of the single monetary policy  and the 
smooth operation of the underlying payment systems. By enhancing the depth and liquidity of 
financial markets, integration also enhances the resilience of the European financial system.  
The  ECB  has,  therefore,  always  been  a  strong  supporter  of  the  European  financial 
integration process and we have monitored the respective developments very closely. Based 
on a set of quantitative indicators, we review the state of financial integration in the money, 
bond,  equity  and  banking  markets  in  our  annual  report  on  Financial  Integration  in  Europe. 
The second issue of this report was published last April.2
Our  findings  show  that  European  financial  integration  has  advanced  significantly  since  the 
introduction  of  the  single  currency.  However,  the  progress  made  differs  across  financial 
market  segments.  In  particular,  integration  is  more  advanced  in  those  segments  that  are 
closer to the single monetary policy and it also depends on the integration of the underlying 
market infrastructures.  
The euro area unsecured money markets score well in both of these respects. It is therefore 
not  surprising  that  these  markets  reached  a  stage  of  near-perfect  integration  almost 
immediately after the introduction of the euro, when the cross-country standard deviation of 
the unsecured interbank lending rates rapidly decreased to an almost negligible level of two 
to  three  basis  points.  The  collateralised  money  markets  are  also  well  integrated.  Although 
there was a slight increase in the standard deviation of unsecured rates during the financial 
market  correction,  the  fact  that  collateralised  rates  have  not  reacted  in  a  similar  way 
suggests  that  the  reason  lies  in  an  increased  variability  of  credit  risk  among  banks  rather 
than in growing cross-border market segmentation. 
The  close  integration  of  large-value  payment  systems  has  been  instrumental  in  achieving 
and  sustaining  money  market  integration.  TARGET,  the  Eurosystem’s  real-time  gross 
settlement  facility  for  euro  payments,  became  operational  in  January  1999  and  since  then 
has  enabled  the  safe  and  efficient  euro-area  wide  handling  of  interbank  payment 
transactions. The move to a single shared platform with TARGET2, which on 19 May 2008 
fully replaced the former TARGET system, will render wholesale euro payments even more 
integrated and efficient.  
Bond  and  equity  markets  also  show  clear  signs  of  integration,  especially  the  government 
bond  markets.  Progress  has  also  been  achieved  in  the  corporate  bond  markets  and,  to  a 
lesser extent, in equity markets. Both bond yields and equity returns are increasingly driven 
by  common  factors  and  the  cross-border  shares  of  bond  and  equity  holdings  have  been 
growing  to 60%  and  one  third  of  total  holdings,  respectively.  This suggests  that euro  area 
investors are progressively diversifying their portfolios on a cross-border basis. At the same 
time,  country-specific  factors  still  play  an  important  role,  especially  in  corporate  bond  and 
                                                 
1   London  Economics  (2002),  “Quantification  of  the  macroeconomic  impact  of  integration  of  EU  financial 
markets”, Report to the European Commission. 
2   See the Report on Financial Integration in Europe at 
 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/other/financialintegrationineurope200804en.pdf. 
2 
 BIS Review 86/2008
equity markets. A key obstacle to greater bond and equity market integration is the lack of a 
sufficiently integrated infrastructure for securities clearing and settlement in the EU. 
Substantial progress has also been made on the integration of banking markets, namely in 
the  wholesale  and  capital  market-related  segments.  Cross-border  interbank  loans  have 
increased  to  almost  a  quarter  of  total  interbank  loans  and  euro  area  banks’  holdings  of 
securities  issued  by  banks  in  other  euro  area  countries  have  almost  tripled  over  the  past 
decade. By contrast, retail banking markets have remained fragmented so far. For instance, 
the cross-border share of loans to non-banks has more or less stagnated at a very low level, 
below 5%. Similarly, the cross-country dispersion of banks’ interest rates on loans to non-
financial corporations and households has remained relatively high, especially with regard to 
consumer loans.  
Public sector action to foster financial integration 
Further efforts are needed to complete the single financial market, particularly in those areas 
where integration is currently lagging behind, namely in the corporate bond, equity and retail 
banking markets. While I would like to highlight again the primary role of market-led action in 
this  respect,  public  authorities  should  nevertheless  strive  to  facilitate  progress.  I  see  three 
main  priorities  at  the  current  juncture,  namely  to:  (i)  further  enhance  the  EU  institutional 
setting  for  financial  regulation  and  supervision;  (ii)  remove  obstacles  to  cross-border 
securities clearing and settlement; and (iii) enhance the EU regulatory framework and market 
infrastructure for retail banking. 
The European financial integration process presents a twin challenge for the EU regulatory 
and  supervisory  architecture.  First, closer  convergence  of  prudential  rules  and  supervisory 
practices  is  needed  in  order  to  facilitate  the  efficient  operation  of  cross-border  financial 
institutions  and  to  safeguard  an  effective  pan-European  level  playing  field.  Second,  while 
financial integration increases the overall shock-absorbing capacity of the financial system it 
also  increases  the  likelihood  that  financial  risks  may  be  cross-border  in  origin  or  nature. 
Against  this  background  closer  cross-border  cooperation  in  monitoring  and  addressing 
financial risks is of the essence.  
The EU has already taken important steps to foster regulatory and supervisory convergence 
and  cooperation  in  recent  years.  The  introduction  of  an  enhanced  institutional  setting  for 
financial regulation and supervision with the Lamfalussy framework has been a milestone in 
this  respect,  coupled  with  improvements  to  the  EU  legislative  framework  for  financial 
services, including in particular the adoption of the Financial Services Action Plan and the 
respective follow-up policy for the period 2005-2010.  
However,  the  first  full  review  of  the  Lamfalussy  framework  by  ECOFIN  in  December  2007 
demonstrated that the new institutional setting has not yet reached its full potential. While the 
review confirmed the widely shared assessment that the Lamfalussy framework has greatly 
enhanced the EU regulatory and supervisory process in recent years, it also underlined that 
the optimal level of cross-border convergence and cooperation has not yet been attained.  
In order to move forward, the December 2007 ECOFIN pointed to the need to: (i) strengthen 
the  roles,  tools  and  decision-making  procedures  of  the  EU  committees  of  supervisors;  (ii) 
enhance  the  supervisory  arrangements  for  cross-border  financial  groups  by  improving  the 
functioning of the supervisory colleges formed by the competent home and host supervisors; 
and (iii) consider introducing a reference to the EU in the mandates of national supervisors. 
The ECOFIN Council set out a specific roadmap for achieving progress on these issues by 
the end of 2008.  
The  Eurosystem  strongly  supports  these  initiatives.  Indeed,  from  the  inception  of  the 
Lamfalussy framework we have argued that this innovative institutional approach provides an 
appropriate  basis  for  achieving  the  heightened  degree  of  cross-border  convergence  and 
cooperation which is required. One of the key advantages of the Lamfalussy approach is the 
BIS Review 86/2008 
 3
combination  of  a  decentralised  set-up  with  cross-border  coordination  at  EU  level.  A 
decentralised approach is in line with the national responsibilities for safeguarding financial 
stability  –  relating  not  only  to  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  but  also  to  financial 
stability monitoring and assessment, crisis management, and deposit insurance – while also 
allowing  for  the  benefits  of  geographical  proximity  and  the  established  experience  and 
knowledge  of  local  authorities  to  be  drawn  upon.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  clear  that  the 
accompanying coordinating mechanisms need to be sufficiently strong, and this has not been 
the case so far. Therefore, a key priority on the EU financial services policy agenda is the 
effective  and  timely  implementation  of  the  measures  that  will  allow  the  full  benefits  of  the 
Lamfalussy framework to be reaped. 
Let me now turn to the work underway on enhancing securities clearing and settlement that 
is  underway  in  Europe.  Given  the  existing  fragmentation  of  the  securities  market 
infrastructure  the  post-trading  costs  of  cross-border  securities  transactions  in  the  EU  are 
excessively high and this constitutes an important impediment to the enhanced integration of 
European bond and equity markets. A number of initiatives have been launched to achieve 
progress  in  this  field,  relating  in  particular  to  the  implementation  of  the  industry’s  Code  of 
Conduct and the removal of the so-called Giovannini barriers. A crucial complementary step 
towards  an  integrated  European  securities  market  infrastructure  would  be  to  establish  a 
common securities settlement platform. This is the objective of the Eurosystem’s TARGET2-
Securities (T2S) initiative.  
Under T2S, cross-border transactions will be settled at the same price and as efficiently as 
domestic  transactions.  Moreover,  the  T2S  settlement  cost  will  be  significantly  lower  even 
than the cost today of domestic transactions. If T2S existed now, the average settlement cost 
could be reduced very substantially. If the geographical scope of T2S were extended beyond 
the  euro  area,  substantial  further  cost  savings  would  be  achieved.  In  addition  to  the  pure 
settlement cost, banks and other users would also enjoy substantial back office and collateral 
savings.  
The details of the economic impact analysis of T2S are set out in the proposal by the ECB’s 
Governing Council’s proposal for all European central securities depositories to join the T2S 
project. This proposal also includes the user requirements that have been developed in close 
co-operation with hundreds of experts from central securities depositories (CSDs), banks and 
central banks. The entire documentation, which was sent to the CSDs on 23 May 2008, is 
available  on  the  ECB’s  website.  The  Governing  Council  has  invited  all  European  CSDs  to 
express  their  views  with  regard  to  their  participation  in  T2S  by  4  July  2008  and  will 
subsequently decide whether to proceed with the project. 
While the Code of Conduct, the removal of the Giovannini barriers and T2S are different lines 
of work, they all aim at enhancing the efficiency of post-trading services in Europe. They are 
complemented by the ESCB-CESR recommendations, which aim to ensure the safety and 
soundness of EU post-trading activities. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  make  a  few  remarks  on  further  steps  to  promote  retail  banking 
integration. Again, a multi-pronged approach is most promising in this regard. For instance, 
the European Commission, as part of its financial services policy for the years 2005-2010, is 
pursuing a number of initiatives to overcome both regulatory and  market-based barriers in 
this  field.  In  addition,  it  is  expected  that  the  above  mentioned  initiatives  to  streamline  the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  interface  for  cross-border  financial  institutions  will  foster  an 
enhanced cross-border provision of banking services, including in the retail segment.  
Furthermore, in January 2008 the market-led initiative to establish a Single Euro Payments 
Area  (SEPA)  was  launched,  which  aims  at  achieving  a  fully  integrated  market  for  retail 
payment services in the euro area via harmonised technical standards and market practices, 
with  no  distinction  between  cross-border  and  national  payments.  The  main  priority  at  the 
current juncture is for all stakeholders to make every possible effort to achieve the full and 
4 
 BIS Review 86/2008
timely implementation of SEPA in order to ensure that a critical mass of retail payments will 
be made on the basis of SEPA instruments by end 2010.  
As  ECOFIN  concluded  in  January  this  year,  public  authorities  have  an  important  catalytic 
function  in  driving  the  migration  process  to  SEPA  forward,  namely  by  supporting  and 
explaining SEPA in their communication with their national constituencies. In addition to this 
political  task,  they  also  have  an  operational  role  to  play  in  becoming  early  users  of  SEPA 
products and services. As initiators and receivers of high volumes of payment transactions, 
public authorities – such as national and local administrations, tax authorities, social security 
agencies and pension funds – are key stakeholders which can make SEPA a success.  
We have noted that there is still a lack of information and awareness about SEPA among the 
public  at  large.  Greater  effort  should  be  made  to  communicate  the  benefits  of  SEPA  to 
corporate enterprises and private customers at European and national levels.  
While we expect that the critical mass of retail payments will have moved to SEPA payments 
by the end of 2010 on a voluntary basis, an official end-date for the migration period may 
need to be set, by which time the use of national credit transfers and direct debits should 
have  been  phased  out.  Recent  studies  by  the  ECB  and  the  European  Commission  have 
clearly  shown  that  a  lengthy  period  of  processing  the  old  national  and  the  new  SEPA 
instruments  in  parallel  will  be  costly  for  both  banks  and  their  customers.  Therefore,  this 
period of dual processing should be kept as short as possible.  
Responding to the global financial market correction 
Financial  integration  is  proceeding  not  only  within  Europe,  but  also  at  the  global  level. 
Financial  globalisation  enables  the  international  community  to  share  significant  benefits  in 
terms  of  enhanced  financial  efficiency  and  economic  growth,  but  it  also  makes  the 
safeguarding of financial stability a more interdependent endeavour. Effectively coordinated 
international  action  aimed  at  addressing  financial  system  vulnerabilities  has  therefore 
become very important, as highlighted during the ongoing financial market correction. 
Against  this  background,  the  major  collective  effort  undertaken  by  both  the  public  and  the 
private  sector  to  cope  with  the  financial  market  turbulences  has  been  encouraging.  Hard 
work has been done in terms of restoring the orderly functioning of financial markets in the 
short  term  and  identifying  proper  measures  to  strengthen  the  resilience  of  the  financial 
system in the longer term in order to avoid the recurrence of similar events in the future. The 
report  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF)  on  “Enhancing  Market  and  Institutional 
Resilience”3 has been fully endorsed by the international community and provides the main 
reference point for the necessary improvements. In this context, let me briefly point out that 
enhancements will be required in a number of areas, with particular focus on (i) aspects of 
the prudential framework, relating to capital and liquidity risk as well as to banks’ liquidity risk 
management  practices;  (ii)  transparency,  including  full  disclosure  of  banks’  exposures  on 
structured  products  and  off-balance  sheet  vehicles;  (iii)  valuation  standards,  especially  as 
regards marking-to-market illiquid assets; (iv) market functioning, including possible conflicts 
of interest of credit rating agencies and their role in rating structured finance instruments; and 
(v) authorities’ responsiveness to risks and arrangements for crisis management. 
At  the  present  juncture,  the  key  priority  is  to  ensure  the  expeditious  and  effective 
implementation  of  the  respective  recommendations  set  out  in  the  FSF  report.  There  is  a 
strong consensus among the international community to act with determination in this regard. 
In  addition,  it  is  fortunate  that  many  of  the  recommendations  were  developed  by  the 
authorities that now have the mandate to apply them. Nevertheless, the competent national, 
                                                 
3   The report was published on 11 April 2008. It is available at http://www.fsforum.org/home/home.html. 
BIS Review 86/2008 
 5
financial 
regional and international authorities and bodies will need to make every possible effort to 
ensure adequate progress. This relates especially to those actions which were agreed to be 
implemented  within  100  days  or  by  the  end  of  this  year.  In  addition,  it  will  be  crucial  to 
continuously monitor the progress made in order to keep up the momentum for reform and, 
possibly, to identify elements that may require further follow-up action. The FSF will play an 
instrumental role in monitoring the efficacy of the implementation of its recommendations. 
I would like to point out that some of the financial system weaknesses exhibited during the 
recent  financial  market  correction  present  more  structural,  longer-term  challenges  and  will 
require  our  continued  attention  in  the  coming  years.  Let  me  draw  your  attention  to  four 
important issues in this regard. 
First,  it  will  be  crucial  to  ensure  adequate  transparency  regarding  financial  markets, 
institutions  and  financial  instruments.  The  availability  of  adequate  information  is  the  basic 
prerequisite  for  sound  investment  decisions,  effective  risk  management  and  market 
discipline.  In  this  way,  transparency  not  only  contributes  to  a  more  efficient  allocation  of 
capital, but is also the best insurance against irrational herd behaviour and the propagation 
of financial turbulence. Various episodes of financial stress, including the most recent one, 
have clearly demonstrated that the lack of reliable financial information is a key element in 
the  excessive  building  up  and  unwinding  of 
imbalances.  The  continuous 
enhancement of financial disclosure requirements, accounting rules and valuation practices 
in line with market developments will therefore be indispensable. 
Second,  pro-cyclical  features  of  the  regulatory  framework  need  to  be  identified  and 
addressed. While  to  some  extent  procyclicality  is  inherent  in  the  financial  system  because 
risk is by its own nature cyclical, it is important to ensure that the regulatory framework does 
not  amplify  these  fluctuations.  Instead,  the  public  sector  should  play  an  active  role  in 
mitigating procyclical behaviour as far as possible by enhancing the forward-looking nature of 
the  regulatory  framework.  Concrete  areas  for  attention  that  have  been  identified  include 
certain elements of the fair value accounting rules and the implementation of the new capital 
requirements for banks and insurance companies. In the future, public authorities will need to 
be  continuously  aware  of  the  importance  of  applying  sufficiently  long-term  horizons  for 
financial rules and prudential practices.  
Third, it will be necessary to pay closer attention to the growing importance and complexity of 
liquidity risk in the more market-based financial system. In this context it will be essential to 
ensure  that prudent  liquidity  risk  management  of  financial  institutions  provides  an  effective 
line  of  defence,  also  to  pre-empt  the  moral  hazard  risk  associated  with  a  possible  undue 
reliance  of  market  participants  on  central  bank  actions.  The  experience  gained  from  the 
financial market correction has indicated that the liquidity risk management of a number of 
financial  institutions  was  not  commensurate  with  their  increasing  exposure  to  liquidity  risk 
from both the assets and liabilities side. To ensure progress towards best practices in this 
field as well as to respond to the increasing need for the effective cross-border mobilisation 
of  liquidity,  closer  coherence  of  supervisory  requirements  and  approaches  with  respect  to 
liquidity  risk  is  also  warranted.  The  recently  published  consultation  paper  by  the  Basel 
Committee on “Principles for Sound Liquidity Risk Management and Supervision” constitutes 
an important starting point in that direction. 
Finally, the institutional arrangements for cross-border cooperation among authorities should 
be  further  enhanced,  both  during  situations  of  financial  distress  and  in  normal  times.  As 
regards  crisis  management  arrangements,  one  priority  in  my  view  will  be  to  clarify 
responsibilities and procedures to support timely and well-targeted public sector action. The 
recently  agreed  EU-wide  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  supervisory  authorities, 
central banks and finance ministries on cooperation in cross-border financial crisis situations 
could also serve as a basis for improvements at the international level.  
With regard to ongoing supervision, I fully support the FSF’s proposal to set up colleges of 
supervisory authorities for the largest globally active institutions by the end of this year. In the 
6 
 BIS Review 86/2008
EU, such informal institutional infrastructures of supervisors to support greater information-
sharing and coordination in the supervision of cross-border groups are already in place. Our 
experience  in  Europe  points  to  a  number  of  elements  that  are  crucial  for  ensuring  the 
effective  functioning  of  supervisory  colleges,  which  may  also  be  relevant  for  further 
developing  the  international  arrangements  in  this  field.  These  include  especially  the 
adequate  involvement  of  all  relevant  host  authorities;  a  coordinating  role  for  the  home 
country  supervisor,  with  due  respect  to  the  responsibilities  of  host  authorities;  and 
arrangements – to be devised by the EU committees of supervisors established under the 
Lamfalussy  approach  –  to  foster  consistent  procedures  and  policies  across  different 
supervisory colleges.  
Lastly, closer ongoing cooperation should be pursued not only between supervisors, but also 
between  supervisors  and  central  banks.  Such  joint  work,  to  be  pursued  at  all  levels 
(nationally,  regionally  and  globally),  would  in  particular  aim  to  enhance  the  integration  of 
supervisors’ micro-prudential functions and central banks’ macro-prudential functions in the 
assessment  of  possible  financial  risks  and  vulnerabilities.  This  would  make  a  significant 
contribution to raising awareness of emerging financial system imbalances at an earlier stage 
and devising effectively coordinated public sector action to address them. Furthermore, given 
the growing role of correspondent and custodian banks in payment and settlement systems, 
closer  cooperation  between  supervisors  and  central  banks,  in  their  role  as  overseers,  is 
increasingly important to ensure a comprehensive and consistent treatment of the respective 
financial risks.  
Conclusion  
Mesdames et Messieurs, permettez-moi de conclure mon intervention. La mise en place d’un 
marché  des  capitaux  européen  sûr,  efficient  et  totalement  intégré  est  une  contribution 
essentielle  que  l’Europe  peut  apporter  dans  le  cadre  d’un  processus  harmonieux  de 
mondialisation  financière.  Des  progrès  significatifs  ont  déjà  été  réalisés  dans  ce  domaine, 
mais de nouvelles avancées doivent être réalisées. Il importe que le secteur public soutienne 
le  processus  d’intégration  financière,  notamment  à  travers  l’amélioration  de  la  structure 
réglementaire et de surveillance au sein de l’Union européenne, la levée des obstacles dans 
le  domaine  des  systèmes  de  compensation  et  de  règlement-livraison  de  titres  et  le 
renforcement  du  cadre  réglementaire  et  de  l’infrastructure  de  marché  pour  les  services 
bancaires aux particuliers.  
L’Europe  doit  aussi  s’impliquer  fortement  dans  la  sauvegarde  de  la  résilience  du  système 
financier  mondial,  en  voie  d’intégration  complète.  La  coopération  mondiale  face  à  la 
correction observée récemment sur les marchés de capitaux a été efficace jusqu’à présent, 
mais il ne faut céder à aucun excès de confiance. De nombreux défis sont en effet encore 
devant  nous.  La  mise  en  œuvre  en  temps  opportun  et  de  façon  cohérente  des 
recommandations  formulées  par  le  Forum  de  la  stabilité  financière  réclamera  des  efforts 
soutenus de la part de chacun d’entre nous, à la mesure de nos responsabilités. De même, 
un  engagement  constant  en  faveur  d’une  étroite  coopération  transfrontière  demeurera 
essentiel, non seulement pour surmonter les turbulences actuelles mais, plus généralement, 
pour  assurer  une  stabilité  financière  mondiale  satisfaisante  dans  le contexte  d’un  système 
financier  international  de  plus  en  plus  intégré  et  complexe.  Le  renforcement  de  la 
transparence, l’atténuation de la procyclicité du système financier, une gestion efficace des 
risques de liquidité et la consolidation des dispositifs institutionnels de coopération entre les 
différentes autorités responsables constituent les grands axes des réformes nécessaires. 
Je vous remercie de votre attention. I thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 86/2008 
 7
