Lucas  Papademos:  Eurosystem  and  Bank  of  Russia  cooperation 
programme 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice  President  of  the  European  Central 
Bank,  on  the  occasion  of  launching  the  Eurosystem  and  Bank  of  Russia  cooperation 
programme on banking supervision and internal audit, Moscow, 20 March 2008. 
 It is a pleasure for me to be here in Moscow today, together with my esteemed colleague 
First  Deputy  Chairman  Melikyan  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Russian  Federation  and  His 
Excellency Ambassador Marc Franco, Head of the Delegation of the European Commission 
to Russia.  
I would first like to thank First Deputy Chairman Melikyan for his kind opening remarks and 
all  those  who  have  contributed  to  the  organisation  of  this  ceremony.  I  would  also  like  to 
greet  the  representatives  of  the  eight  national  central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem  who 
accompany me here today, marking their strong institutional commitment to and support for 
this cooperation programme: the Deutsche Bundesbank, the Bank of Greece, the Banco de 
España,  the  Banca  d’Italia,  the  Banque  de  France,  De  Nederlandsche  Bank,  the 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank and the Suomen Pankki-Finlands Bank. 
Today,  we  are  taking  a  further  step  that  advances  the  increasingly  close  cooperation 
between the Bank of Russia and the Eurosystem, by signing a protocol which accompanies 
the contract for the Eurosystem cooperation programme with the Bank of Russia that was 
signed  by  Ambassador  Franco  earlier  today.  Over  the  past  few  months,  the  staff  of  our 
institutions have been in very close contact, preparing together the terms of the contract and 
finding appropriate solutions to a rather diverse set of challenges. I would like to ask you, Mr 
Chairman, to extend our warmest thanks to the staff of the Bank of Russia for their efforts to 
address all pertinent issues.  
The new three-year cooperation programme will start on 1 April and will focus on banking 
supervision  and  internal  audit.  In  the  area  of  banking  supervision,  the  Eurosystem  will 
support  the  Bank  of  Russia  in  its  gradual  implementation  of  the  internationally  accepted 
principles of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision that are commonly known as the 
Basel  II  framework.  The  financial  market  turmoil  that  emanated  from  the  US  subprime 
mortgage crisis has highlighted, among other things, the importance of transparency and of 
sophisticated and effective risk management standards and practices in banks. The Basel II 
framework provides an advanced approach to capital measurement and capital standards. It 
represents  the  regulatory  response  to  the  increasingly  complex  and  globally  integrated 
financial markets, where credit risks are often passed from the originators of bank loans to a 
wide range of investors, instead of remaining on the books of the originating banks. Indeed, 
the Basel II framework was conceived to support banks in the implementation of advanced 
risk management standards with the overall aim of improving the stability and soundness of 
the financial system in all the economies around the world. Within the European Union, we 
have gathered extensive experience with the implementation of Basel II which we are happy 
to share. As part of this cooperation programme, experts on banking supervision from the 
Eurosystem  will  travel  to  Moscow  and  support  the  Bank  of  Russia’s  internal  work  on 
implementing Basel II. 
With regard to the internal audit component of the cooperation programme, the Eurosystem 
will offer its expertise and advice on risk-based internal audit methods and best practices. 
The objective of this cooperation with the Bank of Russia is to enhance the capacity of the 
Chief Auditor’s Service to carry out risk-based internal audits. In today’s world, central banks 
also  need  modern  and  sophisticated  internal  audit  procedures.  Risk-based  internal  audits 
provide, on the basis of a risk analysis, assurance on the proper functioning of central bank 
BIS Review 32/2008 
 1
activities, especially on those aspects where the risks are highest, rather than performing a 
less differentiated, simple compliance audit. Such a risk-based approach represents, in our 
view, the appropriate response to the challenges faced by the internal audit services and we 
are pleased to share our experience in this field. During this part of the project, Eurosystem 
experts will train about 350 Bank of Russia experts on internal audit.  
In  the  implementation  of  this  cooperation  programme,  we  will  employ  a  coordinated 
“Eurosystem approach” which involves the ECB and a number of national central banks of 
the  euro  area.  This  formula,  which  was  conceived  for  the  first  Eurosystem  cooperation 
programme with the Bank of Russia on banking supervision, was successfully implemented 
between  2003  and  2005.  Over  the  coming  33  months,  the  ECB  and  the  national  central 
banks  that  I  mentioned  earlier  will  be  working  closely  with  the  Bank  of  Russia  on  the 
programme. The project will be coordinated by a team consisting of Ms Gulsana Barpiyeva, 
from the Deutsche Bundesbank, who will be the Eurosystem project coordinator in Moscow, 
Mr Christian Fehlker, the Eurosystem team leader for banking supervision, and Mr Lukasz 
Kubicki, the Eurosystem team leader for internal audit. The project will be managed by an 
ECB team in Frankfurt. The expertise on the implementation of the Basel II framework and 
the risk-based internal audit practices will be provided by the national central banks and the 
ECB’s Internal Audit Department. In the context of this programme, Bank of Russia experts 
will have the opportunity to visit their colleagues in EU countries.  
Russia and the European Union are important partners. One key aspect of the partnership 
is the overall objective of the European Union and the Russian Federation to enhance the 
regulation,  supervision  and  governance  of  financial  markets  in  Russia.  This  should 
contribute  to  improving  the  investment  climate  and  supporting  closer  economic  relations 
between  the  EU  and  Russia.  We  very  much  appreciate  the  assistance  of  the  European 
Commission in giving substance to this aim, as this cooperation programme is supported by 
the  Delegation  of  the  European  Commission  to  Russia  with  a  budget  of  €3  million.  I  can 
assure  you,  Ambassador  Franco,  that  we  look  forward  to  continuing  the  successful 
cooperation with you and your staff that we had during the previous project. I would also like 
to thank you and your collaborators for having supported the preparations and for your help 
in handling a number of technical, administrative and legal issues. 
Sound practices in the fields of banking supervision and internal audit are important not only 
for the effective performance of the tasks of a central bank, but also because they contribute 
to the efficient and stable functioning of the financial system that benefits the economy as a 
whole.  We have  noted with  great interest  the reform  efforts  of  Chairman  Ignatiev  and  his 
team  in  the  Bank  of  Russia  over  the  past  years.  With  this  programme,  the  Eurosystem 
hopes to contribute to further strengthening the Bank of Russia’s banking supervision and 
internal  audit  functions.  Allow  me  to  conclude  by  expressing  my  confidence  that  the 
implementation  of  this  programme  will  be  characterised  by  the  close  and  constructive 
cooperation  between  the  Eurosystem  and  the  Bank  of  Russia,  as  well  as  with  the 
Delegation of the European Commission to Moscow. Za nashe sotrudnichestvo! 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2008
