Christian Noyer: Basel II – new challenges 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, before the Bank of Algeria 
and the Algerian financial community, Algiers, 16 December 2007. 
 I am very pleased and honoured to be here and I wish to wholeheartedly thank my friend 
Mohamed Laksaci for inviting me to speak on the subject of Basel II. This subject is topical 
for two reasons: first, we have already entered into (or, in some countries, are about to enter 
into) the operational implementation of the new capital adequacy framework, which requires 
a  greater-than-ever  involvement  of  banks  and  supervisors;  second,  the  current  financial 
market turmoil raises questions as to the best way to implement this framework. In view of its 
topical nature, I will present a few thoughts on “Basel II: New challenges”, while attempting to 
focus on the practical aspects of the implementation of the new capital requirements. 
In  this  respect,  and  before  moving  on,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Bank  of  Algeria  for  its 
participation  in  the  Group  of  French-Speaking  supervisors,  created  at  the  meeting  of 
Governors  of  central  banks  of  French-speaking  countries  in  June  2004  in  Paris,  which 
coincided with the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s publication of the New Basel 
Capital Accord. I know that this Group is appreciated by many of its members as it enables 
them  to  exchange  experiences  and  information  and  promotes  best  banking  supervisory 
practices.  It  has  already  carried  out  useful  work,  in  co-operation  in  particular  with  the 
Financial  Stability  Institute  (FSI)  of  the  BIS,  on  the  theoretical  aspects  and  practical 
application of Basel II. 
Today,  I  will  start  by  discussing  the  practical  challenges  arising  from  the  effective 
implementation of Basel II. I will then stress the need to pursue efforts to implement the 
new Basel II framework in the context of the current financial market turmoil. Lastly, I will try 
to draw some initial lessons from this turmoil with a view to ensuring that implementation is 
optimal. 
1.  
The effective implementation of Basel II is demanding and requires on the part 
of credit institutions and supervisors considerable efforts and significant 
resources. 
The first challenge regarding Basel II is indeed of a practical nature, i.e. successfully moving 
from the planning stage of this capital adequacy reform to that of its implementation. This will 
be particularly challenging since Basel II is a much more ambitious supervisory framework 
than Basel I, based on three complementary pillars: 
– 
minimum capital requirements (Pillar I), which can be calculated in accordance with 
various  approaches,  from  standardised  approaches  to  internal  ratings-based 
approaches  (IRB),  specifically  developed  by  each  credit  institution.  The  approach 
must be chosen by each institution under the control of the supervisor, in relation to 
size and level of sophistication; 
the  supervisory  review  process  (Pillar  II),  which  gives  supervisors  a  key  role  in 
assessing the risk profile and the quality of risk management of each institution as 
well as the corresponding minimum regulatory capital ratios; 
market discipline (Pillar III), which enhances public disclosure requirements. 
– 
These  three  pillars,  whose  technical  aspects  I  shall  not  discuss  today,  constitute  an 
ensemble  aiming  mainly  to:  i)  improve  banks’  risk  management,  ii)  align  regulatory 
capital  more  closely  with  the  actual  risks  incurred  by  banks,  iii)  enhance  the  role  of 
 BIS Review 11/2008 
 1
supervisors, as well as iv) that of market discipline and therefore, ultimately, v) strengthen 
financial stability. 
The  implementation  of  such  a  framework,  embracing  a  broad  spectrum  of  possible 
approaches  for  banks  and  covering  a  large  array  of  risks,  is  no  simple  matter  and 
accounts  for  the  current  variety  of  national  situations,  including  within  the  G10:  Japan  for 
example implemented Basel II in 2007, EU Member States are set to do so in 2008 and the 
United States in 2009. The magnitude of this task is particularly vast since Basel II, in view of 
the  very  nature  of  its  objectives  that  I  have  just  recalled,  will  be  applied  in  a  very  large 
number of countries. The latest study by the FSI on the application of Basel II, published in 
September 2006 and conducted among 115 countries, shows that 82 Non-Basel Committee 
Member  Countries  intend  to  implement  the  new  framework,  in  most  cases  as  of  2008  or 
2009, and in some cases at a later date. 
Fully  aware  of  the  practical  aspects  of  implementing  a  more  modern,  complete  and 
risk-sensitive prudential framework, the Basel Committee published, in July 2004, i.e. 
directly in the wake of the New Capital Accord, a document entitled “Implementation 
of  Basel  II:  practical  considerations”.  Recognising  that  the  adoption  and  application  of 
Basel II may not be a  short-term priority for a  certain number of supervisory authorities of 
non-G10 Countries, the Committee encouraged the latter to develop their own approaches 
and implementation timetables. Given that the necessary legislative and regulatory changes 
and  human  resource  requirements  have  to  be  identified,  the  application  of  Basel  II  will 
necessarily  be  a  gradual  process  throughout  the  world.  This  is  especially  the  case  since 
technical  decisions  often  have  to  be  taken  on  the  exact  choice  regarding  the  scope  of 
application of Basel II or the possibility of a staggered implementation of the three pillars. 
In this respect, I welcome the choice made by Algeria to adopt and implement Basel II in the 
near  future.  This  choice  should  not  be  seen  by  banks  as  a  regulatory  constraint  but 
rather  as  a  great  opportunity  to  converge  towards  best  international  practices. 
Moreover, this choice should preserve and strengthen the stability of the Algerian banking 
system, which has been achieved in particular by strong economic and financial performance 
since 2001 and the enhanced supervision capacities. The strengthening of these capacities 
over  the  past  years  constitutes  a  major  asset  for  the  Bank  of  Algeria  and  should  make  it 
possible  not  only  to  successfully  ensure  that  Algerian  banking  regulation  and  supervision 
complies  with  international  standards  (such  as  the  Basel  Committee’s  Core  Principles  for 
Effective Banking Supervision), but also to efficiently prepare the implementation of Basel II 
with a good take up of the Accord by Algerian banks. 
As  Governor  of  the  Banque  de  France  and  Chairman  of  the  Commission  bancaire,  I  am 
aware of the extent to which the preparation of the implementation of Basel II requires efforts 
and resources on the part of both institutions and supervisors. Allow me to illustrate this by 
briefly  presenting  initiatives  carried  out  by  the  Commission  bancaire  and  its  General 
Secretariat for effectively implementing Basel II in France. By 31 December 2007, over 
30  on-site  inspections will  have  been  conducted  in  20  institutions,  involving  at  times  up  to 
100 inspectors at a time. These on-site inspections examined IRB systems for credit risk and 
advanced operational risk measurement approaches. 
This choice to carry out on-site inspections of internal risk measurement systems and 
approaches and the importance attached by the Commission bancaire to such checks 
is mainly due to the fact that, in 2008, 17 institutions (accounting for almost 95% of the total 
assets in the French banking system) are set to use an IRB approach to measure their credit 
risk and 5 institutions (accounting for almost 60% of the total assets in the French banking 
system)  are  expected  to  adopt  an  advanced  operational  risk  measurement  approach.  As 
institutions  have  the  possibility  under  Basel  II  of  using  their  IRB  approaches  to  calculate 
regulatory capital requirements, supervisors must ensure that these approaches are reliable. 
Following these on-site inspections and the examination by the Commission bancaire of the 
corresponding  inspection  reports,  26  Memoranda  of  Understanding  (MoU)  were  signed 
2 
 BIS Review 11/2008
institutions.  Following 
with  the  institutions  concerned.  Improvements  were  requested  mainly  in  the  following 
areas i) the different classes of risk held by the institutions, sometimes also ii) the definition 
of default used by them, iii) the estimate of certain parameters such as Loss Given Default 
(LGD),  iv)  the  operational  integration  of  the  approaches  implemented  in  the  daily 
management of risks and v) the governance principles applicable to these approaches. 
Until the end of 2007, the Commission bancaire will monitor the implementation of the 
corrective  measures  requested  of  the 
the 
Commission  bancaire  will  take  a  formal  decision  as  to  whether  or  not  to  authorise  the 
institutions in question to adopt the advanced approaches of Basel II on 1 January 2008. For 
institutions with foreign entities, this authorisation is granted, where appropriate, following an 
exchange of information with the host supervisors, i.e. where the institutions’ subsidiaries are 
established. 
While many counties, such as France, have entered into the effective implementation phase 
of  Basel  II,  the  recent  financial  turmoil  has  once  again  drawn  attention  to  this  framework, 
leading  some  observers  to  call  into  question  its  overall  rationale.  This  turmoil  has  new 
characteristics  as  it  is  a  credit  crisis  in  a  market  environment  with  particular 
implications  concerning  contagion  channels.  Risk  transfer  operations,  in  particular 
securitisation,  and  the  interaction  between  funding  liquidity  and  market  liquidity  risks 
have played new or at any rate greater roles than before. I am nevertheless convinced that 
the reform of the capital adequacy ratio rightly remains a crucial element in the regulatory 
response to the problems facing us today. I would now like to explain why I am convinced of 
this. 
this  process, 
2.  
The current financial turmoil confirms the need to concretely implement  
Basel II. 
This  turmoil  may  very  legitimately  raise  questions  about  several  of  the  major 
provisions  of  Basel  II,  such  as  the  use  of  rating  agencies  or  the  internal  approaches 
developed by banks to assess credit risk. The risk associated with a regulatory capital ratio 
that is more sensitive to risk, and therefore potentially pro-cyclical, has also been advanced 
in some quarters. I shall, however, give five main reasons showing that these questions 
do not cast doubt on the benefits provided by the implementation of Basel II. 
Firstly,  unlike  the  present  solvency  ratio,  the  Pillar  1  of  Basel  II  stipulates  down  a 
specific calculation of regulatory capital to set against credit risk transfer transactions 
(such  as  securitisations  and  credit  derivatives).  This  is  essential  in  the  framework  of  the 
“originate and distribute” model currently used by many financial institutions and that consists 
in transferring as quickly as possible the risks associated with the loans extended and not 
retaining  them  as  in  the  past.  The  treatment  set  out  in  Basel  II  thus  aims  to  ensure  that 
securitisation  transactions  now  have  their  own  economic  reality,  rather  than  seeking 
regulatory arbitrage as was sometimes the case under Basel I. Based on two fundamental 
principles – first, the actual nature of risk transfer and second, the significant nature of these 
transfers  –  the  treatment  of  securitisation  in  Basel  II  applies  not  only  to  banks  acting  as 
originators  and  investors  but  also  as  sponsors.  This  treatment  also  takes  account  of  the 
many specific mechanisms in this type of transaction, such as early amortisation clauses and 
credit enhancement. Lastly, it introduces a requirement for regulatory capital to be tailored for 
certain  off-balance  sheet  exposures,  particularly  liquidity  facilities  associated  with  these 
transactions, which under Basel I were generally exempted of any capital charge. 
Second,  by  reinforcing  the  link  between  the  capital  base  and  the  risks  actually 
incurred,  Basel  II  encourages  banks  to  improve  their  systems  for  managing  these 
risks  as  well  as  their  due  diligence  procedures.  Beyond  reminding  banks  of  the  basic 
caution  required  when  extending  credit,  this  encouragement  is  all  the  more  useful  in  that 
banks now often play a role in securitisation transactions for which the underlying assets, for 
example  housing  loans,  may  be  initiated  by  unregulated  entities,  that  are  not  always 
BIS Review 11/2008 
 3
accountable  for  their  risk  analysis  and  pricing.  In  other  words,  the  weaker  the  discipline 
surrounding the granting of a loan the stronger banks’ diligence procedures needs to be. 
Thirdly, Basel II gives banks and supervisors a vital tool, Pillar 2, with which to assess 
the risk profile of institutions and in particular to take account of certain risks that are 
sometimes  difficult  to  quantify  but  whose  impact  can  be  great.  By  way  of  example,  I 
shall  merely  mention  refinancing  risk  and  reputational  risk.  Pillar  2  thus  enables  banks, 
through the determination of the level of economic capital and supervisors, via for example 
an increase in capital requirements, to ensure that all of the risks incurred are appropriately 
covered. 
Fourth, Basel II sets out to promote stress tests as one of the tools for managing and 
assessing risks. This is very important in dealing with the turmoil like that we are currently 
experiencing. Basel II stipulates that the stress tests conducted by banks must incorporate 
the effects of a large increase in credit and market risks as well as those of a rise in liquidity 
risk. The aim is to ensure that banks hold sufficient capital to absorb severe shocks. 
Fifth  and  last,  Basel  II  aims  to  substantially  reinforce  transparency  and  market 
discipline.  Pillar  3  of  the  framework  lays  down  numerous  requirements  regarding  the 
disclosure  of  qualitative  and  quantitative  information  about  capital  and  risk,  including  in 
respect  of  risk  transfer  transactions.  The  importance  of  this  information  was  thrown  into 
sharp  relief  by  the  financial  turmoil  this  summer,  during  which  greater  transparency, 
particularly  regarding  the  nature  and  quality  of  assets  recorded  by  credit  institutions  in 
securitisation vehicles, proved necessary. 
To sum up, and before trying to draw any preliminary conclusions from this turmoil aimed at 
optimal  implementation  of  Basel  II,  I  should  like  to  emphasise  that  the  new  framework 
encourages  banks  to  better  assess  and  manage  risks  linked  to  securitisation 
transactions  and  to  improve  their  financial  reporting,  two  crucial  areas  in  which  the 
current problems have highlighted that significant progress needs to be made. 
3.  
The financial turmoil has shown that optimal implementation of Basel II 
requires further progress in several areas. 
While  it  is  too  early  to  draw  definitive  conclusions  from  the  current  episode,  it  is 
nevertheless  apparent  that  progress  needs  to  be  made  by  credit  institutions,  for 
example in the management of credit risk, market risk, liquidity risk, the risks associated with 
certain activities such as asset management and risks linked to the valuation methods used 
for some financial instruments. 
Regarding credit risk: 
 
It  is  important  to  check  that  banks’  internal  rating  systems,  along  with  the 
– 
estimation of the different risk parameters they use, are updated in order to 
reflect  the  increase  in  default  risk  and  losses  in  the  wake  of  the  current 
turmoil.  It  is  indeed  vital  that  these  systems  do  not  lead  to  risk  being 
underestimated. This update appears all the more necessary at the present time 
given  that  in  the  case  of  real  estate  loan  portfolios,  estimates  of  risk  parameters 
have  perhaps  not  been  sufficiently  rigorously  tailored  by  all  banks  to  the  specific 
features of some risky forms of credit such as US subprime mortgages. The same 
thing may have happened in other countries. In a more general way, it seems useful 
that  supervisors  should  continue  their  analysis  of  the  ways  in  which  banks  take 
account of the specific features of certain financial assets whose risk profile may be 
higher than that of the regulatory asset classes defined in Basel II; 
We need also to deal better with the issue – crucial for some assets such as 
housing  loans  and  specialised  financing  –  of  the  correlation  between 
probabilities  of  default  (PD)  and  loss  given  default  (LGD).  This  may  be  quite 
 4 
 BIS Review 11/2008
     variable  depending  on  the  characteristics  of  housing  loans  in  different  countries. 
More generally, we need to analyse in greater depth the ways in which banks take 
into  account  the  guarantees  and  collateral  used  and  especially  the  correlation 
between  the  risk  associated  with  the  hedged  instrument  and  that  related  to  the 
collateral.  This  is  all  the  more  important  given  that  Basel  II  increases  very 
substantially the range of collateral eligible for prudential recognition. 
Lastly, it is important to improve the quality of stress tests relating to credit 
risk  –  including  concentration  risk  –  by  including  in  them  possible  chain 
reactions and spillovers on different markets. The way in which the results of 
these  stress  tests  are  factored  into  risk  management  and  assessment 
systems  as  well  as,  where  appropriate,  into  the  level  of  economic  or 
regulatory capital required must also be closely examined, both by banks and 
the  supervisory  authorities.  This  should  also  be  one  of  the  aspects  of  Pillar  2, 
which I have mentioned several times and which I will come back to a bit later, given 
its importance. 
Regarding market risk, it is important: 
to ensure that banks only book their transactions in the trading book if they 
are carried out on sufficiently liquid markets; 
and to better capture all of the risks within the trading book, especially default 
risk  the  weight  of  which  has  increased  over  the  past  few  years,  notably  due  to 
growing trade in structured credit products and products including stakes in hedge 
funds.  The  publication  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  12  October  of  guidelines  for 
computing  the  capital  charge  for  incremental  default  risk  in  the  trading  book 
constitutes an important step forward in this regard. 
Regarding liquidity risk, the recent financial turmoil has highlighted the need  
for banks, to reassess the way in which refinancing risk can materialise and 
analyse its impact on other risks such as credit risk and concentration risk, in the 
event of liquidity facilities extended to securitisation vehicles being drawn on; 
for supervisors, to ensure that banks have set in place, within the framework 
of their business continuity and “back-to-normal” plans, robust mechanisms 
and  procedures  for  liquidity  management,  taking  account  both  of  their  own 
refinancing  risk,  the  risk  of  markets  drying  up  and  the  potential  interaction 
between  these  two  risks.  This  is  all  the  more  important  in  the  context  of  the 
“originate  and  distribute”  model  given  that  the  effectiveness  of  the  risk  transfer 
instruments  on  the  basis  of  which  the  latter  has  developed  requires  sufficient 
liquidity both on the part of agents and markets. 
It is, incidentally, worth noting that the Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS) 
and  the  Basel  Committee  are  working  on  a  revision  of  the  current  regulations  regarding 
liquidity. 
Moreover, concerning risks incurred by some activities such as asset management, it 
appears  necessary  to  gain  a  better  insight  into  the  transmission  channels  of  these 
risks between activities carried out for banks’ own account and for third parties as well 
as the liquidity requirements generated by the latter. More generally, the methods used to 
assess  and  capture  some  risks  such  as  reputational  risk  and  strategic  risk,  notably  in  the 
context of Pillar 2, need to be developed. 
I  would  like  to  stress  the  very  important  role  that  Pillar  2  must  play  in  improving 
banks’ management practices i) regarding new risks not covered by Pillar 1 and ii) in 
areas  that  supervisors  deem,  specifically, 
liable  to  become  new  sources  of 
vulnerability.  In  practice,  for  some  activities,  there  are  still  no  universally  accepted 
standards for risk management. This does not mean, however, that banks’ risk management 
BIS Review 11/2008 
 5
processes in these activities are always sufficiently stringent, but rather that there is a wide 
range of instruments available for this purpose, each with its advantages and disadvantages. 
This  also  means  that  supervisors  should  not  carry  out  a  mechanical  assessment  of  these 
risks  and  their  management  by  banks  such  as  would  result  for  example  from  the  simple 
observation  of  a  statistical  confidence  interval.  The  assessment  must  be  more  refined.  In 
addition,  Pillar  2  should  ultimately  serve  to  improve  risk  management  in  the  areas  that 
supervisors,  at  a  given  moment,  deem  to  be  crucial  for  financial stability,  using  a  forward-
looking approach. 
Lastly, the recent financial turmoil has highlighted the difficulties and risks associated 
with the valuation methods used for certain financial instruments, particularly complex 
structured  products  but  also  some  products  regarded  as  more  straightforward.  Indeed,  a 
sometimes  very  great  disparity  has  been  observed  between  the  theoretical  valuations 
derived from models and market values. However, the issue of the accurate estimation of the 
price of complex transactions has taken on particular importance with the gradual adoption 
across the board of fair value assessments since the entry into force of the new accounting 
standards (IFRS). 
In this respect, it seems necessary to include in risk assessments assumptions of an 
erosion of liquidity and a rise in volatility as well as, more generally, to ensure that 
processes for monitoring valuations within banks are strengthened. In particular, it is 
vital to reinforce critical, independent and regular analysis of valuations obtained for 
certain complex positions, which appear to have relied too often on external data supplied 
by external rating agencies or service providers, without real analysis of the characteristics of 
the  underlying  and  collateral.  It  is  also  important  to  increase  the  banks’  transparency 
with regard to information on fair value valuation methods and how they are used to produce 
income statements. 
 As you can see, the challenges related to the implementation of Basel II are numerous. 
Whether these are long-recognised or recent, such as those that have appeared since the 
financial  turmoil  this summer,  they  must  be  addressed.  To  use  what is  I  believe Governor 
Laksaci’s expression, the “challenge is a feasible one” and over the coming period, banking 
supervisors will have to continue to work towards the robust and sound implementation of the 
new framework. This implementation will bring about significant improvements with regard to 
risk  assessment  and  management,  as  has  been  confirmed  by  the  initial  feedback  by 
authorities that have already switched to Basel II. 
I will conclude my contribution by citing a formulation used by the General Secretariat of the 
Basel  Committee,  which,  it  seems  to  me,  sums  up  perfectly  the  spirit  in  which  the  reform 
should be introduced in each country: “Basel II is not a destination but a journey”. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 11/2008
