Lucas Papademos: ECB Financial Stability Review June 2008 – opening 
remarks 
Opening remarks by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at 
the press briefing on the occasion of the publication of the June 2008 ECB Financial Stability 
Review, Frankfurt am Main, 9 June 2008. 
 Introduction  
I.  
My colleagues and I would like to welcome you to today’s press briefing on the occasion of 
the publication of the June 2008 edition of the ECB Financial Stability Review. The financial 
stability assessment contained in the Review has been prepared with the close involvement 
of  the  ESCB  Banking  Supervision  Committee.  It  is  for  the  most  part  based  on  information 
that was available up until 8 May, the “cut-off” date for this Review.  
It  is  now  ten  months  since  the  eruption  of  the  market  turmoil  which  was  triggered  by  the 
surge in delinquencies on US subprime mortgages. The financial systems of the euro area 
and other advanced economies are still undergoing further adjustment as the processes of 
risk repricing and de-leveraging continue. The stresses on financial systems have persisted 
longer and they have become broader and deeper than anticipated six months ago.  
Although there have been some signs of easing tensions in certain markets since mid-March, 
elevated pressures remain in others, notably in the term money markets of major currencies. 
Moreover, high uncertainty surrounds the future dynamics of property and other asset prices, 
the magnitude of possible further asset valuation write-downs by financial institutions and the 
effects of the market turmoil on the broader economy. 
Let me recall that the primary objective of the ECB’s Financial Stability Review is to identify 
the  main  sources  of  risk  and  vulnerability  to  financial  system  stability  and  to  provide  a 
comprehensive  assessment  of  the  capacity  of  the  euro  area  financial  system  to  absorb 
adverse disturbances. The June 2008 issue of the Review also examines in some detail the 
main  trends  and  events  that  characterised  the  operating  environment  of  the  euro  area 
financial system over the past six months and it contains 17 boxes and three special feature 
articles  that  address  topical  financial  stability  issues  in  a  more  focused  and  analytical 
manner.  
I will start my presentation with a brief review of the current state of some parts of the global 
financial system that have been significantly affected by the ongoing financial market turmoil. 
I will then examine the risks and vulnerabilities in: (1) the global macro-financial environment; 
(2) the euro area corporate and household sectors and; (3) the euro area financial system. 
Finally, I will conclude with the overall assessment of risks to euro area financial stability in 
the period ahead. 
The financial market turmoil: overview 
II.  
Over the past two months, money, credit and other financial markets appear to be sending 
mixed  signals.  The  term  money  market  spreads  between  euro  deposit  and  EONIA  swap 
rates  have  remained  high  and  close  to  record  levels,  for  maturities  from  three  to  twelve 
months (as shown in the left chart of slide 3). There was a considerable easing of tensions in 
the money markets at the beginning of this year in the wake of extraordinary measures taken 
by  central  banks  in  the  context  of  year-end  concerns  last  December.  But  new  strains 
emerged in advance of the first quarter of 2008 and money market spreads in the euro area 
and  elsewhere  reached  record  levels,  especially  during  the  Bear  Stearns  collapse  and 
rescue. After that, an easing of counterparty credit risk worries has been observed but very 
BIS Review 75/2008 
 1
large  liquidity  risk  premia  have  remained  in  money  market  interest  rates.  Tensions  in  the 
term  money  market  continue  to  be  a  global  phenomenon.  Currently,  the  spreads  between 
three-month deposit and overnight-indexed swaps (OIS) rates are virtually the same in the 
euro,  US  dollar  and  pound  sterling  money  markets,  although  pressures  have  somewhat 
eased in these latter two markets in recent weeks (as shown in the right chart of slide 3). In 
the credit markets, greater risk awareness by banks and increased bank funding costs have 
been  reflected  in  the  significant  and  general  further  tightening  of  lending  standards  in  the 
euro area, the US and the UK.  
At  the  same  time,  credit  default  swap  (CDS)  indices  in  Europe  and  the  US  have  declined 
since  mid-March  (as  shown  in  the  left  chart  of  slide  4),  corporate  bond  spreads  have 
narrowed  across-the-board,  and  the  availability  of  bank  credit  to  households  and  non-
financial corporations has not been significantly affected by the financial market turbulence. 
Moreover, the functioning of the leveraged loan market is showing some tentative signs of 
improvement.  
The  narrowing  of  the  CDS  spreads  of  financial  institutions,  which  reflects  an  easing  of 
concerns about counterparty credit risk, and, at the same time, the persisting high levels of 
term money market spreads may appear to be a puzzle at first sight. One way of reconciling 
these seemingly mixed messages is to examine the relative contributions of counterparty risk 
and liquidity risk factors to money market spreads. A decomposition of the one-month euro 
area term money market spread into counterparty credit risk and other components, mainly 
liquidity risk, is plotted in the chart on the right of slide 4. It shows that the role of credit risk 
seems to have diminished, while the contribution of other factors increased after mid-March, 
as liquidity concerns in money markets rose following the collapse of Bear Stearns, which 
induced banks to hoard more liquidity. Box 10 of the FSR elaborates on these issues. 
With  regard  to  the  impact  of  the  market  correction  on  bank  profits,  you  may  recall  that 
towards the end of last year, there was optimism that the extent of the size and spread of the 
costs of the turmoil across financial institutions and financial systems would be largely known 
once  audited  full-year  2007  financial  statements  had  been  published.  As  it  turned  out,  the 
write-downs disclosed by many financial institutions went far beyond the expectations of late 
last year. The chart on the left of slide 5 shows that although major euro area banking groups 
did  report  large  write-downs,  these  were  significantly  smaller  than  the  income  losses 
disclosed  by  their  European  peers  from  outside  the  euro  area  and  by  large  US  banking 
groups.  After  the  disclosure  of  full-year  2007  financial  statements,  more  write-downs  were 
expected  to  be  revealed  over  the  following  few  quarters,  and  these  expectations  were 
broadly confirmed by the financial results for the first quarter of 2008.  
This brings me to one key lesson from the turmoil, namely that full and meaningful disclosure 
of  exposures  and  losses  is  desirable,  in  order  to  reduce  market  pressures  and  restore 
confidence  in  financial  institutions  globally.  It  was  precisely  the  lack  of  knowledge  about 
banks’  exposures  and  the  great  uncertainty  about  the  valuation  of  these  exposures  which 
were key factors with pronounced impact on market indicators throughout the episode thus 
far. To illustrate this point, the chart on the right of slide 5 shows the CDS spreads for global 
and euro area large and complex banking groups (LCGBs): they increased after the start of 
the  turbulence,  and  further  widened  sharply  towards  the  end  of  2007  and  in  early  2008. 
Subsequently, they narrowed again significantly in conjunction with the more comprehensive 
reporting  of  banks’  financial  results,  with  the  measures  taken  by  the  Federal  Reserve  in 
March and also with the indications that the financial institutions most hit by the turmoil were 
taking  determined  action  to  restore  their  balance  sheets.  That  said,  we  should  not 
overinterpret  these  positive  developments  in  CDS  spreads  as  signs  of  banks’  improved 
creditworthiness.  There  are  a  number  of  risks  with  potentially  adverse  effects  on  banks’ 
profitability and capital positions.  
2 
 BIS Review 75/2008
Sources of risk and vulnerability 
II.  
This leads me to the second part of my presentation, namely the main sources of risk and 
vulnerability that may affect the euro area financial stability outlook over the next six to twelve 
months.  
The global macro-financial environment 
II.1.  
Starting with the global macro-financial environment, future developments in the US housing 
market remain a crucial determinant of the financial stability outlook also for the euro area. 
Two  interrelated  factors  are  of  relevance  in  this  respect:  first,  the  likelihood  that 
delinquencies  on  residential  mortgages  and  foreclosures  may  rise  in  the  coming  quarters 
and, second, the future trajectory of US house prices. The factors that will affect US house 
prices in the period ahead include an overhang of unsold homes, which is close to its highest 
level in decades and which could increase further because delinquencies are likely to rise in 
the  course  of  2008.  That  said,  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  future  course  of  US  house 
prices  is  considerable  and  there  is  a  very  wide  range  of  estimates  of  the  total  losses  that 
financial systems will eventually have to absorb. The chart on the left side of slide 6 shows 
that  the  futures  prices  for  the  S&P500/Case-Schiller  index  imply  an  expected  significant 
further fall in US house prices during 2008 and 2009. These futures prices factor in a peak-
to-trough decline of close to 30%.  
Conditions in the US housing market could deteriorate further in the course of 2008 because 
around two-fifths of the outstanding stock of subprime adjustable rate mortgages (ARMs) are 
scheduled  to  reset  to  higher  interest  rates  during  the  year  and  the  credit  quality  of  these 
mortgages  is  known  to  be  inferior  to  the  ARMs  that  were  reset  in  2007.  Even  though  the 
Federal  Reserve  cut  interest  rates  by  a  cumulative  3.25  percentage  points  since  summer 
2007, which has lowered the rates to which these mortgages will reset, repayment burdens 
are expected to increase and, hence, delinquencies and foreclosures are likely to rise in the 
period  ahead.  The  chart  on  the  right  of  slide  6  illustrates  the  paths  of  subprime  mortgage 
rates under different money market rate assumptions. Box 1 of the Review elaborates on the 
relationships between money market rates, mortgage resets and delinquencies. 
In assessing the potential implications of such future developments on the financial system, it 
is important to take into account that the affected related securities have already priced in a 
rather severe scenario for US house prices and that financial firms have taken much of the 
implied losses through their income statements. 
A  further  source  of  risk  to  the  financial  stability  outlook  is  the  potential  of  a  broadening  of 
stresses  in  the  credit  markets,  which  could  thereby  amplify  the  deterioration  in  the  credit 
cycle.  The  sources  of  potential  pressure  relate  to  both  the  household  and  the  corporate 
sectors. Let me mention three: 
• 
First,  so-called  charge-offs1  and  delinquencies  on  US  consumer  loans  other  than 
sub-prime  mortgages  continued  to  rise  until  the  end  of  the  fourth  quarter  of  2007 
(the latest observation available) which indicates a deteriorating financial position of 
households and a declining capacity to service their debts.  
Second,  there  are  signs  that  conditions  in  commercial  real  estate  markets  are 
weakening  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  The  significant  tightening  of  lending 
standards especially for commercial real estate loans (as shown on the chart on the 
left of slide 7), can be expected to accelerate unfavourable developments in a sector 
to which bank exposures are relatively large.  
                                                  
1   Charge-offs are the value of losses removed from banks’ books and charged against loss reserves; they are 
measured net of recoveries as a percentage (annualised) of average loans. 
BIS Review 75/2008 
 3
 Third, although the balance sheets of US firms are considerably stronger than they 
were  before  the  last  credit  cycle  downturn,  the  significantly  tightened  credit 
standards  and  financing  conditions will  cause  firms  that  have  very  low  profitability 
and  are  highly-leveraged  to  face  debt-servicing  problems.  This,  in  turn,  increases 
the probability of corporate defaults Indeed, rating agencies are predicting a surge in 
defaults by both US and euro area speculative-grade firms in the near term. Past 
experience  also  strongly  suggests  that  the  persistent  and  substantial  rise  in  oil 
prices can further contribute to a higher probability of corporate defaults. All these 
developments  and  expectations  have  resulted  in  a  widening  of  spreads  on 
investment-grade corporate bonds since the turn of the year, as shown on the right 
side  of  slide  7.  Although  these  spreads  have  narrowed  considerably  since  mid-
March, they have remained at high levels. 
Finally, global financial imbalances, while still a matter for concern, seem to have diminished 
somewhat,  reflecting  macroeconomic  developments  especially  in  deficit  countries.  In 
particular, the US current account deficit narrowed to 5.3% of GDP in 2007 – the first decline 
since  2001 –  and  is  projected  to  diminish  further  in  2008. Nevertheless,  the  prospect  of  a 
continued gradual correction remains fragile. Looking forward, the main source of uncertainty 
relates to the durability of current account developments, notably in deficit economies, and 
particularly when considering developments in oil prices and financial markets.  
Turning  to  other  risks  in  global  financial  markets,  a  significant  factor  behind  the  loss  of 
market  liquidity  in  the  second  half  of  2007  was  the  rapid  and  substantial  de-leveraging 
imposed  on  the  hedge  fund  sector  as  prime  brokers  tightened  margin  requirements  and 
terms on their lending for the funding of leveraged positions. Nevertheless, the hedge fund 
sector proved remarkably and unexpectedly resilient in the first phases of the turbulence. An 
important  reason  for  this  was  that  exposures  of  the  sector  to  the  sub-prime  and  related 
securities markets appear to have been more limited than initially feared. Other reasons put 
forward included, first, a much narrower, and therefore more specialised, investment scope 
than  that  of  banks  allowing  more  focused  risk  management  approaches  and,  second,  the 
alignment  of  hedge  fund  managers’  incentives  with  those  of  investors  due  to  the  co-
investment of their own money (see chart on the left of slide 8).  
As growing uncertainties about possible adverse second-round effects of the market turmoil 
on real economic activity started to percolate into broader asset markets – especially high-
grade corporate credit and equity markets – in early 2008, hedge fund performances began 
to suffer, as shown in the chart on the right of slide 8, and incidences of failure rose. Hedge 
fund  losses  have  set  in  motion  a  further  round  of  de-leveraging  and  prime  brokers  may 
further raise margin requirements on collateralised lending. Hence, at  present, the risks to 
financial  market  stability  related  to  growing  balance  sheet  vulnerabilities  within  the  hedge 
fund sector seem to have increased.  
The euro area corporate and household sectors 
II.2.  
After this review of the global aspects of our financial stability assessment, let me now turn to 
risks  and  vulnerabilities  in  the  euro  area  non-financial  sectors.  The  first  –  positive  – 
observation is that most available financial market indicators suggest that the balance sheets 
of euro area firms have remained reasonably strong. Firms seem to have been able – so far 
–  to  weather  the  financial  market  tensions  and  deteriorating  macroeconomic  outlook  that 
have  continued  to  adversely  affect  the  global  economy.  Looking  ahead,  however, 
corporations  could  face  problems  absorbing  further  shocks  to  their  balance  sheets  as  net 
income  growth  could  be  levelling  off  and  financing  costs  and  leverage  have  continued  to 
4 
 BIS Review 75/2008
edge up over the recent past.2 In particular, also in the euro area a fringe of highly-leveraged 
firms  with  very  low  profitability  are  expected  to  face  much  higher  refinancing  costs  than 
before. As already mentioned, rating agencies currently expect an increase in default rates 
by European speculative-grade firms in the period ahead as shown in the left chart of slide 9.  
Another source of vulnerability stems from the euro area commercial property markets where 
the overall outlook remains uncertain. Downside risks have increased and may have started 
to materialise. Higher funding costs and stabilising or, in some cases, falling property prices 
have  reduced  investor  demand  which  could  further  weaken  (as  shown  in  the  chart  on  the 
right of slide 9). Demand has fallen most in those countries where investment volumes have 
grown rapidly during recent years and where property prices have started to stagnate or fall. 
Moreover,  the  deteriorating  economic  outlook  in  some  parts  of  the  euro  area  has  the 
potential  to  negatively  affect  demand  for  rented  commercial  property,  thus  increasing 
vacancy rates and lowering rents. In addition, the market turmoil has had a sizeable impact 
on the issuance of commercial real estate-backed securities. 
In  our  overall  assessment,  highly-leveraged  firms  and  commercial  real  estate  corporations 
may entail significant risks to euro area financial stability not only because of potential asset 
price reversals, but especially because several euro area large and complex banking groups 
have large lending and investment exposures to these corporations. Developments in these 
sectors therefore need to be closely monitored in the period ahead.  
For  euro  area  households,  the  property  market  is  of  particular  relevance.  Residential 
property  prices  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  continued  to  rise  at  a  moderating  rate,  as  is 
shown  in  the  chart  on  the  left  of  slide  10.  Despite  the  recent  moderation  in  house  price 
inflation in the euro area on average, there are still indications of increasing overvaluation in 
the residential property market in some member states during the past six months (as can be 
derived, for instance, from house price-to-rent ratios). In those countries where overvaluation 
appears  to  be  most  acute,  the  housing  market  represents  a  source  of  risk  to  household 
sector balance sheets. From a broader financial system perspective, lending to households – 
even though on a declining path – remains an important business for most euro area banks. 
For some of them, loans to households represent a sizeable proportion of their overall loan 
portfolios and total assets, as shown in the chart on the right of slide 10. Hence, household 
sector  net  worth  and  creditworthiness  –  which  at  the  euro  area  level  remain  rather 
comfortable  despite  the  existence  of  previously  identified  pockets  of  vulnerability  –  are 
important in assessing the overall risk profile of these institutions.3  
The euro area financial system 
II.3  
For  the  assessment  of  the  financial  stability  outlook,  the  euro  area  large  and  complex 
banking groups are of particular importance. The disclosure of their full-year 2007 financial 
results  revealed  that  the  subprime-related  turmoil  has  had  a  material  impact  on  their 
profitability. In fact, banks’ profitability declined for the first time since 2003. The good news 
is that their capital buffers remained largely intact in 2007. Looking ahead, it can be expected 
that the profitability of these institutions will be adversely affected this year as the process of 
de-leveraging  continues  and  as  spillovers  to  asset  markets  and  the  real  economy 
materialise. The expected slowdown in profit growth – which is shown in the chart on the left 
                                                 
2   Box 6 of the FSR contains an assessment of some differences between euro area and US firms with regard to 
their exposure to bank and market-based financing. It concludes that euro area firms are, on average, more 
leveraged than their US counterparts. But because euro area firms are less reliant on market-based funding 
then US corporations, the higher market-based financing costs relative to bank financing costs, if they are to 
persist, are likely to have a less marked impact on euro area corporations. 
3   Box  5  of  the  FSR  examines  the  role  of  the  macroeconomic  environment  as  a  potential  source  of  risk  for 
financial stability by looking at past banking crises in an attempt to identify a common set of fault lines during 
periods of financial distress. 
BIS Review 75/2008 
 5
of slide 11 – is a consequence of possible further valuation losses, increased funding costs, 
as well as declining non-interest income from securitisation and capital market activities. 
Since the financial market turmoil has not led – thus far – to a material erosion of the capital 
buffers of euro area large and complex banking groups, there appears to be only a rather low 
risk of a significant shortage of credit in the economy as a result of de-leveraging on the part 
of  these  institutions.  Up  to  now,  banks  have  responded  to  the  market  turmoil  and  the 
resulting  exceptionally  challenging  operating  environment  by  retrenching  from  risk-taking. 
Banks have tightened their credit standards, as shown in the chart on the right of slide 11, 
either by limiting, or by even cutting, exposures to riskier business lines, such as commercial 
real  estate  lending,  leveraged  buy-out  financing  and  the  provision  of  prime  brokerage 
services to hedge funds.  
For  euro  area  banks,  the  financial  market  turmoil  has  underlined  the  importance  of  an 
adequate  management  of  funding  liquidity  risk.  In  particular,  many  euro  area  LCBGs 
continue  to  show  a  positive  customer  funding  gap  and  the  median  funding  gap  even 
increased  in  2007.  Although  there  are  wide  differences  across  LCBGs,  with  some  large 
banks maintaining a deposit surplus or a relatively narrow positive funding gap, overall large 
euro  area  banks  have  become  more  vulnerable  to  adverse  changes  in  the  cost  of,  and 
access to, market-based funding. 
The  sharp increase in  the  spreads of  bonds  issued  by  banks suggests  that debt  issuance 
could  have  become  very  expensive  for  many  lower-rated  banks.  Moreover,  the  decline  in 
banks’  issuance  of  medium  and  long-term  debt,  as  well  as  the  significant  decline  in 
securitisation  activities,  may  also  result  in  a  decrease  in  the  average  maturity  of  banks’ 
liabilities, thereby possibly increasing rollover risk. The chart on the right of slide 12 shows 
that recent debt securities issuance activity by euro area MFIs indicates a slowdown in long-
term  debt  issuance  coupled  with  a  rapid  rise  in  short-term  debt  issuance.  Overall,  these 
developments in capital markets have accentuated the pressures towards tighter financing 
conditions for banks.  
Finally,  in  the  euro  area  insurance  sector  developments  have  been  generally  favourable  . 
Insurance  companies  had  relatively  limited  exposures  to  structured  credit  products 
associated to US sub-prime mortgages, and, as a result, most of them faced limited write-
downs  in  the  second  half  of  2007,  especially  when  compared  to  those  recorded  by  many 
euro area large and complex banking groups (as shown in the chart on the left of slide 13). 
Exposures to other, non-sub-prime, structured credit products are, however, in some cases 
large.  They  therefore  constitute  a  source  of  vulnerability  in  the  event  that  credit  market 
problems were to spread further. Moreover, some euro area insurers could face losses from 
their links to the troubled US “monoline” financial guarantors, which are discussed in detail in 
Box  4  of  the  Review.  As  illustrated  in  the  chart  on  the  right  of  slide  13,  some  euro  area 
insurers have (i) built up rather large exposures to securities insured by financial guarantors, 
(ii) invested in the guarantors themselves, or (iii) used the financial guarantors as a source of 
reinsurance. 
Overall financial stability assessment 
III.  
Let me conclude my presentation with the overall assessment of euro area financial stability, 
as we see it at the current juncture. The information which has become available since the 
December 2007 Financial Stability Review suggests that the global and euro area financial 
systems have undergone further substantial adjustment to the financial turmoil. In the euro 
area,  asset  valuation  write-downs  disclosed  by  large  banking  groups  in  2007  materially 
impacted on their profitability, but their capital buffers have been maintained largely intact. 
Some  of  the  risks  to  euro  area  financial  system  stability  previously  identified  have 
materialised,  and  risks  on  balance  have  increased  over  the  past  six  months,  for  several 
reasons, including: 
6 
 BIS Review 75/2008
1. 
2. 
conditions in the US housing market have further deteriorated;  
the valuation losses endured by mature economy banking systems were larger than 
anticipated six months ago; and 
banks have tightened their lending standards significantly.  
3. 
The current financial stability outlook is highly uncertain and will depend, inter alia, mainly on 
the following three factors: first, how conditions in the US housing market develop; second, 
how banks respond to a much more challenging operating environment; and third, the extent 
to which initiatives and measures aimed at restoring confidence and strengthening financial 
system resilience are eventually implemented.  
It  is  probable  that  the  adjustment  process  within  the  financial  system will  be  protracted  as 
banks  continue  to  strengthen  their  liquidity  and  capital  positions.  This  means  that  balance 
sheet  expansion  is  likely  to  be  somewhat  curtailed  in  the  period  ahead.  In  a  negative 
scenario,  the  adjustment  could  risk  perturbing  the  smooth  intermediation  of  credit  in  the 
economy.  So  far,  however,  the  availability  of  bank  credit  to  households  and  non-financial 
corporations  has  not  been  significantly  affected  by  the  financial  market  turbulence.  At  the 
same time, the financial system may be more vulnerable than before to the crystallisation of 
other  risks  that  have  been  identified  in  previous  issues  of  the  Review  and  that  remain 
relevant. 
Given  the  heightened  uncertainty  and  an  environment  in  which  balance  sheet  conditions 
could  change  unexpectedly,  vigilance  by  financial  institutions  and  market  participants  is  of 
the essence and those with relevant exposures will need to step up their efforts to effectively 
manage the risks that may lie ahead.  
I would like to conclude on a positive note by recalling that the losses disclosed so far by the 
financial  institutions  affected  by  the  turmoil  are  mostly  mark-to-market  losses  on  hard-to-
value  assets.  If  the  outturns  for  implied  credit  losses  ultimately  prove  less  severe  than 
currently  expected,  then  it  cannot  be  ruled  out  that  those  financial  firms  still  holding  these 
assets will see some offsetting valuation gains in their portfolios.  
Thank you very much for your attention. I am now at your disposal for questions. 
 
 
 BIS Review 75/2008 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 75/2008
    9
BIS Review 75/2008 
     10 
 BIS Review 75/2008
    11
BIS Review 75/2008 
     12 
 BIS Review 75/2008
    13
BIS Review 75/2008 
  14 
 BIS Review 75/2008
