Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Overview of the Islamic fund industry in 
Bahrain 
Address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain, at The World Islamic Funds & Capital Markets Conference 2008, Manama, 26 May 
2008. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen – Good Morning. 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  today  to  address  the  Annual  World  Islamic  Funds  and 
Capital Markets Conference. Now in its 4th year, the conference is clearly establishing itself 
as an important event in the Islamic finance calendar.  
I  would  like  to  commend  the  organizers  for  once  again  putting  together  a  stimulating 
programme, which will no doubt enrich the ongoing dialogue and debate on Islamic finance 
matters.  I  would  also  like  to  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  the  delegates  and  the  many 
distinguished speakers for taking the time to contribute to this dialogue. 
These  are  interesting  times,  particularly  for  those  of  us  in  the  business  of  banking  and 
finance. The economic boom in the GCC region is well underway and is being manifested in 
all  segments  of  the  economy.  This  has  generated  significant  new  business  for  financial 
services  providers  across  the  board,  be  they  banks,  insurance  firms,  asset  managers  or 
capital market participants. 
The  growth  in  the  Islamic  funds  and  capital  markets  is  reflective  of  the  surge  sweeping 
through the region’s financial services industry. 
The Islamic and conventional fund industry in Bahrain is one of the fastest growing segments 
of  the  overall  financial  sector.  With  over  $16  billion  in  assets  under  management,  through 
more than 2,500 funds, the industry has been growing at an annual average of about 20% in 
recent years.  
The  CBB,  through  its  enabling  legislation,  promotes  the  development  of  new  products  for 
investors  in  both  Islamic  and  traditional  finance,  while  at  the  same  time  providing  credible 
regulation in both areas. This regulation extends to products offered through special purpose 
vehicles and trusts. 
As for the Bahrain Stock Exchange (BSE), the most open capital market in the region, it has 
seen  steady  and  sustainable  growth  during  recent  years.  With  a  market  capitalization 
currently at nearly US$30 billion, the BSE has been unscathed by the credit crunch which 
has brought about a slow down and volatility in international financial markets. 
The  BSE’s  sukuk  market  has  also  grown  significantly,  with  the  total  size  of  sukuk  listings 
currently  in  excess  if  US$3  billion,  double  that  from  five  years  ago.  On  its  part,  the  CBB, 
having pioneered the development of sukuk, remains active in the sovereign sukuk market, 
with a total of US$1.69 billion medium to long term sukuk issued, complemented by a regular 
programme of short term issuance. 
Recently,  the  CBB  issued  its  second  international  sukuk,  worth  US$350  million,  which  is 
listed on the London Stock Exchange, along with a previous issue of US$250 million. 
As the financial services regulator, the CBB is fully cognizant of the importance of the asset 
management industry and the capital market in attracting foreign capital and talent, and in 
facilitating economic development and the creation of high value-added jobs.  
The sound development of the two industries, therefore, is of interest to the CBB.  
BIS Review 72/2008 
 1
Last  year,  the  regulatory  framework  for  collective  investment  undertakings  (CIUs)  was 
revamped  to  provide  for  a  full  range  of  investment  funds  catering  to  various  categories  of 
investors,  from  retail  to  high  net  worth  individual  and  sophisticated  institutional.  The  new 
framework includes Bahrain’s first-ever rules allowing CIUs to target professional investors, 
such as hedge funds, derivatives and other alternative investment vehicles. 
In  keeping  with  Bahrain’s  leadership  in  Islamic  finance,  the  new  CIU  rules  also  provide  a 
solid  foundation  for  the  establishment  and  management  of  funds  that  comply  with  Islamic 
principles. 
We  are  also  engaged  in  a  host  of other  initiatives  to  stimulate  the  Islamic  finance  market, 
including the development of an Islamic version of the Repurchase Agreement (Repo), which 
we plan to bring to market very soon. 
The  CBB  is  actively  supporting  a  number  of  Islamic  capital  market-related  development 
initiatives, being undertaken by the International Islamic Financial Market (IIFM), which the 
CBB chairs. 
Another  Bahrain-based  organization,  the  Accounting  &  Auditing  Organisation  for  Islamic 
Financial  Institutions  (AAOIFI)  has  also  recently  issued  a  statement  on  sukuk,  providing 
important guidelines for sukuk issuers.  
It is the CBB’s hope that such initiatives will go a long way in harmonizing market practices 
and creating a deep and vibrant Islamic capital market, which though growing significantly, 
remains  small.  There  is  a  limited  number  of  Islamic  issuance  in  comparison  to  the 
conventional  fixed  income  market.  The  Islamic  finance  industry  should  put  substantial 
resources into creating a vibrant secondary market, including risk management products for 
Islamic investors and developing Shari’a compliant hedging mechanisms.  
The demand for Islamic financial products is clearly there. The question is will the industry 
rise to the challenge and fully grasp the opportunities ahead by offering competitive pricing, 
customer  service  and  transparency  similar  to  that  of  its  more  mature  conventional 
counterpart. I believe it will.  
Ladies & Gentlemen, the CBB intends to remain at the forefront of Islamic finance and we 
look forward to continuing to work with market players and other related parties in developing 
this key industry.  
Thank you for your attention and for attending. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2008
