Alan Bollard: Financial stability challenges for small open economies 
Remarks  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  at  the 
International Symposium on “Globalisation, Inflation and Monetary Policy”, organised by the 
Bank of France, Paris, 7 March 2008. 
 Two  asset  prices  that  are  of  particular  interest  for  policymakers  in  most  small  open 
economies  are  house  prices  and  the  exchange  rate.  Over  the  past  decade,  the  “global 
savings  glut”,  declining  interest  rates  and  a  search  for  yield  drove  up  exchange  rates  for 
many  small  open  economies  such  as  Australia  and  New  Zealand  and  also  helped  fuel  a 
sharp increase in house prices in many countries. Recent developments in global markets 
stand  to  have  further  impacts  on  housing  markets  and  exchanges  rates  and  create  some 
new challenges on both the monetary policy and financial stability fronts. 
The experience of the past decade is now doubtlessly familiar. The decline in interest rates 
was  reinforced  by  the  “great  moderation”  in  the  apparent  variability  of  most  economies. 
Investors became more willing to accept risk, partly in order to maintain returns as risk free 
interest rates dropped, and partly because the risks seemed smaller.  
From a monetary policy perspective, the past decade highlighted some of the challenges that 
we face in trying to run an independent monetary policy in a connected world. In targeting 
inflation, as many small open economies do, we set a domestic policy interest rate, which 
has some bearing on domestic monetary conditions. But domestic monetary conditions also 
hinge on what is happening to interest rates across the rest of the world. Sometimes global 
interest  rate  developments  are  “in  sync”  with  domestic  monetary  policy  and  support  it.  At 
other times, they are “out of sync” and can work against it, making monetary policy spongier, 
and perhaps less effective at the margin than would otherwise be the case.  
At  times  over  the  past  decade,  monetary  policy  in  New  Zealand  and  some  other  smaller 
open economies had to contend with global interest rates that were considerably lower than 
domestic economic conditions would warrant. Financial institutions in these countries were 
able to access cheaper funding than they could obtain domestically, exchange rates rose to 
uncomfortable  levels  on  the  back  of  the  carry  trade  and  some  asset  markets  –  such  as 
housing  –  were  able  to  surge  on  the  back  of  lower  effective  interest  rates  than  domestic 
policy settings might suggest. 
A strong element of the capital flow into New  Zealand – and this is a financial innovation, 
though now a relatively old one – has been the issuing of fixed income NZ Dollar securities to 
international retail investors by very high quality international names such as the World Bank. 
The  willingness  of  these  investors  to  take  NZ  Dollar  risk  at  elevated  currency  levels  has 
helped keep the currency relatively high and short term interest rates a bit lower than would 
otherwise have been the case. This has been far from an ideal mix of monetary conditions at 
a time when most of the inflation pressures have been concentrated in interest rate sensitive 
sectors like the housing market. The possibility of collateral damage on the country’s tradable 
sector  has  to  be  taken  seriously.  In  New  Zealand,  we  have  done  significant  work, 
documented  in  a  number  of  studies  on  our  website,  on  whether  there  might  be  additional 
regulatory measures or other policies that may have helped adjust the balance of monetary 
policy pressure to better match the underlying inflation pressure. It will not surprise anyone in 
this room to know we have not found a “silver bullet”, although analysis continues. 
Besides retail investors, we have also seen the presence of institutions such as hedge funds 
engaged  in  the  “carry”  of  funds  borrowed  in  low  yielding  markets  to  invest  in  markets  like 
New  Zealand.  An  unresolved  debate  is  whether  these  hedge  funds  actually  provide 
additional  market  liquidity  for  smaller  economies  or  whether  they  effectively  soak  it  up  – 
particularly in troubled times. The role that these hedge funds can play at the stage where an 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 1
over-valued  exchange  rate  begins  to  adjust  back  to  a  more  normal  level  is  also  unclear. 
Whether  hedge  funds  assist  the  adjustment  process  or  whether  they  make  it  more  abrupt 
and costly, is debatable. 
Many countries have seen pronounced strength in property markets over the past decade. 
Strong  residential  property  markets  have  often  gone  hand  in  hand  with  strong  consumer 
spending. New Zealand has been a leading example. House prices have risen substantially 
as a ratio to income over the past five years. As longer term interest rates have risen recently 
in New Zealand, and housing turnover has slowed, the elevated level of house prices has 
looked increasingly unsustainable. 
One interpretation of recent housing cycles is that a “glut of capital” lowered interest rates 
and  putting  upward  pressure  on  house  prices,  creating  a  persistent  tail  wind  for  some 
economies.  As  houses  change  hands  and  are  more  heavily  borrowed  against,  equity  is 
withdrawn by the seller, who may often choose to spend the money. This has helped to keep 
demand very robust in New Zealand for a number of years and seems to have supported 
consumer spending as well.  
With recent developments in global finance markets, we now seem to be moving into a new 
era  and  policymakers  are  facing  some  new  challenges  on  both  the  monetary  policy  and 
financial stability fronts. We are only just beginning to understand what is prompting such a 
marked  shift  away  from  risk  taking  and  the  pursuit  of  yield  to  heightened  risk  aversion.  A 
ready  pool  of  investors  and  an  appetite  for  risk  appears  to  have  encouraged  substantial 
financial innovations and the creation of a new set of financial instruments, some of which 
ultimately  proved  to  be  a  lot  riskier  than  they  initially  seemed.  Much  of  this  activity  was 
concentrated in the US. 
The creation of these instruments involved the following elements which I only mention here, 
but are likely to be worthy of further study and analysis in years to come: 
• 
Origination of credit on riskier terms. A clear example is the covenant-lite debt that 
private  equity  firms  were  able  to  obtain  until  2007,  and  the  increased  flow  of 
mortgage lending in the US that would previously not have occurred.  
Contracting  out  of  origination,  and  securitisation  of  the  completed  loan,  both  of 
which have at least the potential to create moral hazard.  
Pooling  of  risk  and  assumptions  about  correlation  which  were  based  on  historical 
data but did not always prove accurate ex post.  
Credit guarantees, often from the so-called “Monoline” insurers.  
The  use  of  conduits  by  financial  institutions  to  expand  credit  creation  and  asset 
holdings above and beyond the usual balance sheet constraints.  
A  relatively  relaxed  approach  to  liquidity  risk,  with  an  implicit  assumption  that 
wholesale funding was not at risk – as seen in the Northern Rock case, for example. 
These events are having important implications for smaller open economies, including New 
Zealand,  Australia  and  the  economies  of  Scandinavia  and  Eastern  Europe  which  have  a 
substantial  reliance  on  the  international  capital  markets.  Most  of  these  countries  have  not 
been very directly affected by the problems arising from the complex innovations described 
above. In New Zealand, for example, we have not really seen the development of any of the 
complex financial instruments at the heart of the US’s current financial problems. However, 
as  a  net  borrower  and  a  participant  in  international  markets,  New  Zealand  is  certainly 
affected by the sharp changes in interest rates, credit spreads and exchange rates that have 
occurred  as  a  result  of  recent  developments.  We  are  currently  seeing  increased  funding 
costs in global markets for reasons that are largely not of our own making. 
We currently face something of a mixed bag at present in terms of global interest rates. At 
one  level,  a  loosening  in  monetary  policy  in  the  US  and  some  other  countries  is  putting 
    2 
 BIS Review 28/2008
downward pressure on medium to longer-term interest rates. For those smaller economies 
like  New  Zealand  and  Australia  which  are  facing  relatively  strong  inflation  pressures  at 
present, that would ordinarily make the monetary policy challenge harder. On the other hand, 
higher  credit  spreads  are  actually  increasing  the  effective  cost  of  funds  for  many  of  our 
financial institutions and businesses accessing funds through the global capital markets. So 
we actually face some quite difficult judgements in assessing how policy settings and global 
conditions will affect domestic economic activity and inflation in the months ahead. 
Despite increased global risk aversion, it is not yet evident that the carry trade is dead. We 
have still seen a relatively strong issuance in the New Zealand dollar in recent months via 
Uridashi  bonds  for  example.  The  New  Zealand  dollar  remains  at  relatively  high  levels  and 
has  recently  been  at  a  post-float  high  against  the  US  dollar,  albeit  largely  reflecting  the 
weakness in the US dollar itself. However, as one might well expect, exchange rate volatility 
has been high of late and there is perhaps more than the usual uncertainty around the likely 
path of the exchange rate over the months ahead. 
With banks’ funding costs on the rise, mortgage rates have been increasing in New Zealand 
and Australia and in some other small open economies recently. This occurs at a time when 
New Zealand’s housing market is already slowing due to the effects of past policy tightening. 
Whilst  we  are  projecting  the  housing  slowdown  to  be  of  the  soft  landing  variety,  there  is 
obviously some risk of a more pronounced slowdown. History shows us that either scenario 
can happen. Clearly, the path of global interest rates from here on will have some bearing, 
given their influence on bank funding costs. 
Of  course,  monetary  policy  is  not  our  only  focus.  Global  market  developments  also  have 
important ramifications for financial system stability in smaller open economies. The banks in 
many  of  these  countries  are  net  borrowers  in  global  markets,  New  Zealand  and  Australia 
being  two  examples.  Recent  events  have  highlighted  some  risks  and  vulnerability  that 
institutions  and  regulators  need  to  ensure  are  properly  managed.  We  always  used  to  talk 
about these risks but they have come into sharper focus. Our institutions need to be able to 
cope with sharp changes in the cost of funds in the global market place. But as we saw in 
July last year, we also need to confront the possibility that global funds may not always be as 
readily  available  as  we  perhaps  used  to  think.  Financial  market  liquidity  policies  and  the 
management  of  funding  by  financial  institutions  are  two  areas  that  are  likely  to  receive 
considerable policy attention in many countries over the coming months. 
Specifically, I note a very timely and comprehensive analysis of liquidity issues was prepared 
in a Special Financial Stability Review by the Bank of France in February. In New Zealand, 
we have also been keenly aware of the liquidity risks that recent events have demonstrated. 
Banks  have  had  an  important  role  intermediating  capital  account  flows  into  New  Zealand 
(and Australia), and have accepted a significant amount of short term capital flows in order to 
minimise funding costs. We want to look at whether the vulnerabilities that this can create 
have  been  adequately  priced  and  managed  –  noting  that  some  of  the  costs  of  a  liquidity 
event are probably externalities that would ultimately be borne by other New Zealand parties. 
Breakdown  of  short  term  lending  markets  is  one  specific  challenge  we  would  expect  to 
confront if the financial stability situation deteriorates markedly further in one or more of the 
major advanced economies. There will doubtless be other flow-on effects as well. Like the 
transmission  of  subprime  issues  to  monolines  and  seemingly  unrelated  markets,  many  of 
these flow-on effects could surprise us. However, the potential for a deterioration in financial 
stability to further intensify risk aversion seems significant. For countries like New Zealand 
with substantial borrowing from abroad this could clearly have an impact on our cost of funds 
and/or our access to funds in some global financial markets. 
BIS Review 28/2008 
 3
