Mark Carney: Brief overview of the Canadian economy  
Opening statement by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Standing 
Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, 1 May 2008.  
 Good morning, Mr. Chairman and committee members. 
Let me begin by saying that it is a pleasure for me to appear before you for the first time as 
Governor of the Bank of Canada. I know that these regular discussions with your committee 
have  been  very  valuable  to  the  Bank,  and  they  are  also  an  important  part  of  our 
accountability to Canadians. I look forward to these meetings during my tenure. I would also 
like to acknowledge the important work that this committee does in addressing longer-term 
economic and financial issues facing Canada. 
Before  Paul  and  I  begin  to  answer  your  questions,  allow  me  to  take  a  moment  to  review 
some of the conclusions from our latest Monetary Policy Report, released last week.  
In it, we noted that growth in the global economy has weakened since the January Monetary 
Policy Report Update, reflecting the effects of a sharp slowdown in the U.S. economy and 
ongoing dislocations in global financial markets. Growth in the Canadian economy has also 
moderated. Buoyant growth in domestic demand, supported by high employment levels and 
improved terms of trade, has been substantially offset by a fall in net exports. Both total and 
core CPI inflation were running at about 1.5 per cent at the end of the first quarter, but the 
underlying  trend  of  inflation  is  judged  to  be  about  2  per  cent,  which  is  consistent  with  an 
economy that is running just above its production capacity. 
We now expect that the U.S. economic slowdown will be deeper and more protracted than 
was  projected  in  the  January  Update.  Our  latest  projection  reflects  a  more  pronounced 
impact  on  consumer  spending  from  the  contraction  in  the  U.S.  housing  market  and  from 
significantly tighter credit conditions.  
The deterioration in economic and financial conditions in the United States will have direct 
consequences for the Canadian economy. First, exports are projected to decline, exerting a 
significant  drag  on  growth  in  2008.  Second,  turbulence  in  global  financial  markets  will 
continue to affect the cost and availability of credit. Third, business and consumer sentiment 
in Canada is expected to soften somewhat. Nevertheless, domestic demand is projected to 
remain strong, supported by firm commodity prices, high employment levels, and the effect of 
the cumulative easing in monetary policy.  
We at the Bank project that the Canadian economy will grow by 1.4 per cent this year, 2.4 
per cent in 2009, and 3.3 per cent in 2010. The emergence of excess supply in the economy 
should  keep  inflation  below  2  per  cent  through  2009.  Both  core  and  total  inflation  are 
projected to move up to 2 per cent in 2010 as the economy moves back into balance. There 
are both upside and downside risks to our new projection for inflation; these risks appear to 
be balanced. 
In line with this outlook, some further monetary stimulus will likely be required to achieve the 
inflation  target  over  the  medium  term.  Given  the  cumulative  reduction  in  the  target  for  the 
overnight  rate  of  150  basis  points  since  December,  including  the  50-basis-point  reduction 
announced  last  week,  the  timing  of  any  further  monetary  stimulus  will  depend  on  the 
evolution  of  the  global  economy  and  domestic  demand,  and  their  impact  on  inflation  in 
Canada.  
With that, Paul and I would now be happy to take your questions. 
BIS Review 55/2008 
 1
