Kevin M Warsh: The federal funds rate in extraordinary times 
Speech  by  Mr  Kevin  M  Warsh,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Exchequer Club Luncheon, Washington DC, 21 May 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 This may be the most pronounced time of testing for central banks in a generation.1 Let me 
recount  just  a  few  of  our  challenges:  significant  market  turmoil,  unsatisfactory  economic 
growth, historic housing price declines, dramatic commodity price run-ups, risk of a secular 
reversal  of  global  inflation  trends,  sharp  changes  in  exchange  rates,  uneven  and 
unprecedented contours of economic growth – and policy responses – across major trading 
partners,  and  significant  domestic  debate  regarding  optimal  economic  and  regulatory 
policies. Mind you, my intention is not to declare, oh, woe is us.  
Thanks in no small measure to the scores of professionals long found in the four walls of the 
Federal Reserve System – and ample access to information – the Fed possesses both the 
commitment  and  resources  to  tackle  these  policy  challenges.  And,  by  virtue  of  the  Fed's 
institutional  credibility,  bequeathed  to  today's  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  by  its 
predecessors, the policy response tends to be as highly anticipated as it is consequential. 
But in affirming our formidable assets, it is similarly not my intention to suggest that we have 
devised error-free policies to painlessly and smoothly achieve agreed-upon objectives.  
On monetary policy…today 
The Fed is not omniscient. Neither are our tools uniquely and perfectly suited to ensure that 
the ills of yesterday do not recur. Nor can we guarantee that our policy response alone will 
set  the  economy  on  a  steady  and  obvious  path  to  unequalled  prosperity.  We  run  serious 
risks if we overstate our knowledge or overplay our hand. Look no further than the financial 
wizards in the financial sector recently who were convinced that risks were manageable and 
returns  exponential.  Milton  Friedman  reminded  us  long  ago,  and  Edmund  Phelps  more 
recently, of the "consequences of conceit."2 For all that has been learned about the practice 
of monetary policy, we must be mindful of the dangers of purporting to know more than we 
do about the relationship between central bank policies and the real economy. Humility, thus, 
is a particularly important attribute for a central banker, particularly when financial markets 
and financial intermediaries – through which the effects of monetary policy flow to the real 
economy – find themselves at a crossroads. 
Starting in August, my fellow Fed policymakers and I persistently subjected ourselves to the 
age-old dialectic in determining the breadth and depth of our policy response: What do we 
know? What do we think we know – that is, what do we suspect? What can't we know? And, 
perhaps most important, in light of various forms of uncertainty: What should we do about it?  
The more we asked ourselves these questions during this period of extraordinary tumult, the 
more we recognized the need to broaden our policy response beyond monetary policy's blunt 
traditional tool. Changes in the policy rate affect many sectors, not just those that seem out 
                                                 
1   The opinions I am expressing are my own and do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues on 
the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. Nellie Liang and Dave Reifschneider, of the 
Federal Reserve Board's staff, provided valuable contributions to these remarks. 
2   Milton Friedman (1968), "The Role of Monetary Policy", American Economic Review, vol. 58 (March), pp. 1-
17; Edmund S. Phelps (2008), "Our Uncertain Economy", Wall Street Journal, March 14. 
BIS Review 65/1008 
 1
of balance. Charlie Munger, the under-heralded partner of the "Oracle of Omaha," Warren 
Buffett (perhaps comprising the finest investment team of the last half-century), believes that 
economics  remains  a  rather  insular  field  of  practice.  He  seems  to  delight  in  accusing  the 
economics profession of suffering from "Man with a Hammer Syndrome." He recounts, "[T]o 
the man with only a hammer, every problem looks pretty much like a nail."3 I suspect Munger 
feels similarly about the orthodoxy of monetary policy.  
Consistent with Munger's admonition, the Fed saw it necessary to expand our toolkit beyond 
the  proverbial  hammer  of  the  policy  rate  in  the  last  nine  months.  And  as  I  discussed  in 
remarks last month, the Fed's nontraditional policy response included the use of innovative 
liquidity tools to counter the market turmoil and improve the functioning of financial and credit 
markets.4  
In  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  use  of  the  hammer  –  the  setting  of  the 
federal  funds  rate  –  particularly  in  extraordinary  times.  Of  course,  determining  the  proper 
level  of  the  federal  funds  rate  is  rarely  simple,  given  typical  imprecision  on  key  economic 
variables and relationships. It is far more challenging still when the financial architecture is in 
the  early  stages  of  redesign,  the  economy  is  adjusting  to  the  aftermath  of  a  credit  bubble 
(witnessed most acutely in the housing markets), and inflation risks are evident.  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  employed  the  hammer  with  considerable  force  in  the  last  nine 
months,  lowering  the  federal  funds  rate  by  3-1/4  percentage  points,  with  wide-ranging 
implications  for  the  economy.  Of  substantial  import,  we  have  filled  the  toolkit  with  other 
implements to provide liquidity and improve the provisioning of credit during the turmoil. But 
now, policymakers may be well served encouraging a new financial architecture to emerge, 
aided, in part, by the actions we have taken. Even if the economy were to weaken somewhat 
further, we should be inclined to resist expected, reflexive calls to trot out the hammer again.  
Policy actions should reinforce the notion with stakeholders that further hammering needs to 
be done, but it needs to be accomplished by the financial institutions themselves in retooling 
their businesses and rebuilding the credit channel to help ensure a stronger, more durable 
economy. Private financial institutions should raise substantial capital, reconstitute business 
models, and take other actions to reinvigorate the principal transmission channel of monetary 
policy. These private efforts are critical to improving market functioning, and until this process 
is  more  advanced,  the economy  is  unlikely,  in  my  view,  to  return  to sustainable trend-rate 
growth. We at the Fed have taken action to help foster this curative process to improve the 
real economy, but market participants will ultimately determine its speed and success. 
On monetary policy…generally 
The  Fed  is  charged  with  promoting  price  stability  and  maximum  sustainable  employment. 
Stakeholders  advocate  various  strategies  for  achieving  these  objectives.  In  recent  years, 
most central banks have elected to adjust the policy rate in response to changing economic 
conditions  to  achieve  their  goals.  A  key  question  for  central  bankers  under  this  approach: 
What level of the policy rate would bring real activity in line with its potential? In gauging this 
value, a central banker seeks to be forward-looking because monetary policy influences real 
activity  with  considerable  lag.  The  same  consideration  applies  to  assessing  the  effect  of 
policy actions on inflation.  
                                                 
3   Charles  T.  Munger  (2003),  "Academic  Economics:  Strengths  and  Faults  After  Considering  Interdisciplinary 
Needs",  Herb  Kay  Undergraduate  Lecture  delivered  at  the  Economics  Department,  University  of  California, 
Santa Barbara, October 3. 
4   Kevin  Warsh  (2008),  "Financial  Market  Turmoil  and  the  Federal  Reserve:  The  Plot  Thickens",  speech 
delivered at the New York University School of Law Global Economic Policy Forum, New York, April 14. 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2008
For analytical purposes only, let's assume that we are in a world where inflation is running 
well  within  acceptable  levels  and  that  the  central  bank  and  stakeholders  have  ultimate 
conviction it will remain as such. This, of course, smacks of the old joke about economists 
and  can-openers.5  I'll  revisit  this  heroic  assumption  later  in  my  remarks.  But  with  the 
assumption in mind, monetary policy can focus on the real side of the economy.  
The  Taylor  rule  provides  a  convenient  rule-of-thumb  for  setting  monetary  policy.6  The  rule 
posits  that  the  appropriate  setting  of  the  real  federal  funds  rate  incorporates  three 
components. The first component is the economy's natural rate of interest. This is the real 
federal funds rate consistent with output equal to potential, on average, over the medium- to 
long-run. If policymakers set the real federal funds rate at this level, the Fed would be neither 
artificially  boosting  nor  restricting  the  real  economy  over  long  periods.  Holding  the  federal 
funds rate at the natural rate, however, may yield an undesirably slow return of real activity to 
normal, particularly if shocks have a persistent effect on aggregate demand and supply.  
To expedite the process, the Taylor rule adds a second component to the real federal funds 
rate, one that purports to be proportional to the size of the current output gap. By setting the 
real  federal  funds  rate  below  the  natural  rate  when  resource  utilization  is  loose  –  and, 
correspondingly, above the natural rate when resource utilization is tight – policy purports to 
help  move  the  real  economy  back  to  normal  at  a  speedier  pace.  The  third  component 
responds to the gap between actual inflation and its desired rate, pushing real rates up when 
inflation is too high and pushing rates down when inflation is too low.  
The  Taylor  rule  provides  a  reasonable  description  of  actual  monetary  policy  behavior  on 
average over the past 20 years. The reasonably good macroeconomic performance of this 
period  suggests  that  central  banks  should  pay  some  heed  to  its  prescriptions.  By  design, 
however,  the  Taylor  rule  focuses  largely  on  what  can  be  observed  in  real-time,  without 
accounting for some factors that influence monetary policy. For example, policymakers may 
try  to  peer,  however  imperfectly,  into  the  future  when  setting  the  federal  funds  rate  rather 
than responding solely to the current state of the economy. Some central bankers find this 
more forward-looking approach to be particularly appealing when financial market prices and 
other  high-frequency  indicators  suggest  that  the  economy  is  poised  to  change  direction 
markedly. 
To implement a forward-looking strategy, a policymaker could seek to forecast the average 
level  of  the  real  federal  funds  rate  consistent  with  the  economy  either  approximating  or 
expeditiously  returning  to  potential.  Such  a  neutral  rate  thus  might  equilibrate  the  real 
economy over the next two or three years. Then, in our hypothetical example where inflation 
is stable at desired levels, the neutral rate would be a sufficient guide for monetary policy.7  
                                                 
5   A physicist, a chemist, and an economist are shipwrecked on a desert island. Starving, they find a case of 
canned vegetables  washed up on the beach, but they cannot locate a can opener. They consider possible 
solutions. The physicist says: "I've got it. We find a rock and propel it at the lid of the can at, oh, 40 meters per 
second at an angle of 82 degrees." The chemist thinks for awhile and responds: "No, let's weaken the can's 
seams with an acid made from decaying leaves, and then heat the can until the internal pressure is enough to 
burst it open." The economist merely shakes his head at his compatriots and says in a condescending tone: 
"Gentlemen, gentlemen, I have a much more elegant solution. Let's assume we have a can-opener..." 
6   John Taylor, professor and confidante, originally presented the construct for what later became known as the 
Taylor  rule  at  a  Carnegie-Rochester  conference  in  the  early  1990s;  see  John  B.  Taylor  (1993),  “Discretion 
versus Policy  Rules in Practice”, Carnegie-Rochester Conference  Series on Public Policy, vol. 39,  pp. 195-
214, http://econpapers.repec.org/article/eeecrcspp. 
7   The real funds rate prescribed by the Taylor rule also would not depend on inflation, obviously, if inflation were 
at its desired level. This does not mean, however, that a Taylor rule policy would replicate the neutral rate. 
While the neutral rate depends in part on current resource utilization, it also depends on all of the other factors 
influencing  the  trajectory  for  the  real  economy.  Thus,  the  two  approaches  can  sometimes  suggest  quite 
different  policies,  even  if  inflation  is  not  an  issue.  That  said,  both  the  Taylor  rule  and  the  forward-looking 
strategy will tend to prescribe similar movements in the real funds rate over the course of the business cycle. 
BIS Review 65/1008 
 3
The wisdom of emphasizing a forward-looking strategy over the Taylor rule approach may 
depend  in  part  on  policymakers'  forecasting  acumen.  To  estimate  the  neutral  rate,  central 
bankers must forecast how the forces affecting aggregate demand and supply will reconcile 
during the forecast period. Moreover, policymakers must project how changes in the federal 
funds rate – past and anticipated – will interact with asset prices, credit provision, and real-
side variables. Under the best of circumstances, these forecasts are subject to meaningful 
uncertainty. Thus, peering into the future and acting on what we think we see will invariably 
lead to some mistakes, certainly with the benefit of hindsight. Ignoring the future altogether, 
however, hardly seems the wisest course.  
Moreover, the Taylor rule approach does not remove uncertainty. Consider the natural rate of 
interest, a key element in the rule. This rate depends on many things – worldwide saving and 
investment propensities, the achievable trend growth rate of the economy, the natural rate of 
unemployment,  and  the  state  of  financial  markets  and  financial  intermediation.  Some  of 
these  factors  may  be  measurable;  others  can  only  be  estimated  indirectly.  And  many  of 
these estimates demand a judgment about the path of non-monetary policy factors that will 
almost assuredly change over time. Moreover, policymakers need to grapple with uncertainty 
from error in real-time estimates of real gross domestic product and estimates of potential 
output.  
The  key 
if 
misunderstood  or  miscalculated,  could  lead  to  policy  errors.  Munger,  the  proud  non-
economist,  recounts  another  lesson  born  of  his  investment  career  that  I  find  particularly 
heartening  in  considering  the  calculation  of  the  neutral  rate:  Avoid  the  error  of  false 
precision.8 Most monetary policy frameworks, while fiercely debated in the academy, tend to 
suffer  from  a  common  and  unavoidable  weakness  –  relying  on  provisional  estimates  in  a 
complex and uncertain world. This weakness argues in favor of being persistently inquisitive 
in  search  of  a  keener  understanding  of  the  economy.  This  consideration  applies  to  the 
making  of  monetary  policy  in  normal  times;  in  times  of  turmoil,  the  case  for  humility  is 
stronger. 
for  policymakers,  of  course, 
these  uncertainties 
to  recognize 
that, 
is 
On monetary policy…in times of financial market turmoil 
The  Fed  sets  monetary  policy  to  support  the  real  economy  through  several  important 
channels. In times of financial market turmoil, policymakers like me are especially focused on 
disruptions in the so-called credit channel. After all, much of the Fed's policy prescriptions 
are  carried  out  through  financial  intermediaries  –  commercial  banks,  investment  banks, 
others – to affect the real economy. 
When  the  economy  is  operating  below-trend,  so  long  as  financial  markets  are  functioning 
well, a lower federal funds rate can encourage lending by financial institutions to bolster the 
real economy.9 Hence, the Fed typically establishes the federal funds rate in anticipation of a 
customary market response, returning output to potential within a reasonable period, as well 
as to achieve its price objectives. In normal times, then, the neutral rate is equivalent to the 
real  federal  funds  rate  that  incorporates  typical  transmission  effects  and  normal  market 
functioning.  Thus,  subject  to  the  qualifications  I  raised  in  the  prior  section,  changes  in  the 
federal funds rate have a reasonably well-understood impact on the real economy, at least 
most of the time. 
What about the role of the federal funds rate when the real economy is performing smartly 
but financial markets are functioning with exceptionally low volatility, and liquidity and credit 
                                                 
8   See Munger (2003) in footnote 9. 
9   This is due in part to an increase in the value of financial institution balance sheets and collateral that can be 
pledged to back loans. 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2008
spreads are extremely narrow? In these periods, the relationship between the federal funds 
rate and real activity is more difficult to decipher. If abundant credit availability is perpetuated 
by investor overconfidence, I would submit, policymakers may need to target a higher federal 
funds  rate  than  otherwise  to  help  the  economy  attain  a  sustainable  equilibrium.  That  is,  a 
federal funds rate that is satisfactory in times of normal market functioning may turn out be 
lower than required to ensure that the economy performs at potential through the horizon. 
Making that judgment represents an important, but difficult task for policymakers.  
And  how  about  when  the  real  economy  is  operating  below-trend  in  large  part  because 
financial markets are impaired, many financial intermediaries are undercapitalized, and risk 
and  liquidity  premiums  are  large  and  especially  volatile?  What  happens  when  banks  and 
other  financial  institutions  that  stand  between  the  Fed  and  the  real  economy  restrict  the 
supply  of  credit  beyond  that  implied  by  higher  premiums  or,  potentially,  economic 
fundamentals? Should markedly higher doses of monetary medicine (read: lower rates) be 
proffered to compensate fully for the reduced efficacy of the transmission channels? 
Financial  turmoil  lowers  real  activity  expected  to  accompany  a  given  level  of  the  federal 
funds rate. Such a development is equivalent to a fall in the neutral rate. But policymakers 
should recognize that financial market turmoil is not a garden-variety  shock to output. It is 
different than, say, a demand shock caused by a change in exports. Financial market turmoil 
can lower output growth and limit the efficacy of the transmission mechanism concurrently. 
The federal funds rate, I maintain, will generally need to be lowered, and by more than in 
normal circumstances, to achieve an operative monetary policy rate that helps to restore the 
economy  expeditiously  to  equilibrium.  But  policymakers  need  to  think  carefully  about  two 
issues:  the  degree  of  reduction  in  the  federal  funds  rate  and  the  pace  at  which  the  rate 
returns to normal. The prudence of these moves in the funds rate may ultimately depend on 
one's diagnosis of what ails the real economy, the risk to that diagnosis, expected benefits of 
changes in wealth and the cost of capital to businesses and households, and the effect of a 
lower  federal  funds  rate  on  the  sum  of  credit  availability  to  the  real  economy.  Of  no  less 
importance, it may depend on policymakers' judgment on tradeoffs with other critical policy 
objectives. More on that to come.  
The differing nature of these infrequent episodes of financial turmoil makes it difficult to place 
great  confidence  in  available  econometric  evidence.  Almost  by  definition,  there  are  few 
historical  precedents  that  might  usefully  guide  forecasts  of  aggregate  demand  and  supply. 
My favorite saw of this period has it about right: If you have seen one financial crisis, you 
have seen one financial crisis. So, by necessity, policymakers must make judgments about 
how  the  crisis  will  unfold.  Economics,  and  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  after  all,  is  not 
physics.10 At least it isn't yet. Still, a strong case for a forward-looking approach to monetary 
policy  in  these  episodes  seems  compelling.  Waiting  for  the  effects  of  the  turmoil  to  reveal 
themselves in spending and production data before policy action, as in an unadjusted Taylor 
rule approach, could risk prolonged weakness.  
On monetary policy…in times of inflation risks  
Up  to  this  point,  I  focused  almost  exclusively  on  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  a  non-
inflationary  environment.  But  we  cannot  assume  inflation  concerns  away.  Determining 
appropriate policy necessarily involves more than figuring out the neutral real federal funds 
rate. This reality is especially obvious at present. Inflation has been elevated for some time 
and prices of commodities are surging. I find these trends particularly vexing at a time when 
global demand growth, most likely, has slowed. 
                                                 
10   Kevin  Warsh  (2007),  "The  End  of  History?"  speech  delivered  at  the  New  York  Association  for  Business 
Economics, New York, November 7. 
BIS Review 65/1008 
 5
to  humility  would  not  be  complete  without  acknowledging  our 
Concerns about price stability and concerns about the real economy may conflict with one 
another  in  the  short  run.  These  short-run  tensions  arise,  for  example,  if  shocks  to  energy 
prices hit the economy, boosting overall inflation while simultaneously weakening output and 
employment.  In  the  medium  and  long  run,  the  Fed's  dual  objectives  are  not  in  conflict. 
Investment, productivity, and real economic growth fare best in an environment of low and 
stable inflation. Central banks that ignore this lesson invariably pay a substantial cost, both 
economic and reputational. 
My  ode 
imperfect 
understanding of the mooring of inflation expectations. Survey measures suggest that long-
run inflation expectations have remained quite stable since the mid-1990s. This stability is 
due, in substantial measure, to our predecessors' success in bringing inflation under control 
after  the  1970s.  We  cannot  be  certain,  however,  about  the  durability  of  this  legacy.  If  a 
central  bank  enjoys  a  high  degree  of  credibility  with  its  stakeholders,  the  anchoring  of 
inflation expectations gives policymakers some scope for supporting real activity in the face 
of  adverse  shocks.  But,  such  a  strategy  poses  risks.  If  the  Fed  were  deemed  too 
accommodative  for  too  long,  credibility  could  be  undermined,  threatening  to  create  a 
persistent  inflation  problem  that  would  have  to  be  corrected,  no  doubt  at  great  cost.  The 
public could mistakenly see the stance of policy as a sign that our commitment to long-term 
price stability has wavered. That is not a perception we will countenance.  
The  inflation  news  since  last summer  offers  little  solace.  Oil  prices  are near  record  levels, 
food  prices  have  risen  rapidly,  prices  for  a  wide  range  of  commodities  are  up,  and  dollar 
depreciation  is  among  the  causes  pushing  up  import  prices.  Some  indicators  of  expected 
long-run inflation have also risen. Given changes in investor preferences for risk-free assets 
amid  the  market  turmoil,  I  take  less  signal  from  the  seemingly  satisfactory  signals  derived 
from  spreads  between  Treasury  securities  and  comparable  Treasury  inflation-protected 
securities. 
No fair recitation of inflation risks, however, should neglect the seeming steady state of core 
inflation.  It  is  running  at  about  the  same  pace  as  a  year  ago,  and  wage  growth  appears 
unlikely to accelerate. Moreover, if commodity prices level out as markets expect, prospects 
seem decent for a gradual moderation in inflation over time. Nonetheless, futures markets 
assessments of these prices have been wrong for awhile. As a result, a benign forecast for 
inflation carries considerable upside risk.  
On monetary policy…in times of possible paradigm shift 
We should be reminded that a country's macroeconomy is established by the microeconomic 
decisions  of  millions  of  individuals  on  the  front  lines  of  real  business  and  consumption. 
Adaptation, dynamism, and flexibility are watchwords of a successful economy, but they test 
the  capability  of  public  authorities  to  encourage,  measure,  and  incorporate.  Here  again, 
Munger,  my  preferred  investment  pro,  offers  a  final  lesson  applicable  to  the  crafting  of 
monetary  policy:  Resist  the  tendency  to  overweight  what  can  be  counted  and  thereby 
underweight  factors  that  are  more  important.11  If  the  flexibility  and  resiliency  of  our  labor, 
product, and capital markets change materially – resulting from some new policy consensus 
on  trade  policies,  tax  policies,  or  regulatory  policies  –  the  economy's  potential  would 
assuredly be affected. These changes are hard to incorporate into monetary policy, but that 
should not distract us from their importance. No surprise, then, that the determination of the 
proper level of the real federal funds rate continues to be subject to considerable debate. 
The  Fed,  of  course,  is  not  the  only  monetary  policy  maker  of  consequence  in  a  globally 
integrated economy. Our counterparts, particularly among our major trading partners, bring 
                                                 
11   See Munger (2003) in footnote 9. 
6 
 BIS Review 65/2008
their own prudential policy prescriptions to bear based on their judgments on the contours of 
their real economies, financial markets, and inflation risks. We should expect nothing else. 
Some argue that a new paradigm of global economic growth is at hand and that traditional 
engines  of  growth  like  the  United  States  are  stalling,  but  the  effects  on  the  world's  other 
major  economies  will  be  of  little  consequence.  Whether  the  economies  of  the  rest  of  the 
world  have  successfully  decoupled  from  the  United  States  is  a  judgment  we  will  have  to 
leave to the economic historians. What I do believe, however, is that our financial markets at 
the  center  of  this  turmoil  have  not  decoupled,  not  even  a  little  bit.  In  fact,  our  financial 
institutions and financial markets have never been more integrated. Policy differences, thus, 
should not be taken lightly. 
Conclusion 
In my judgment, the changes in credit availability during the past six years have less to do 
with  the  prevailing  stance  of  policy  and  more  to  do  with  changes  in  financial  markets  and 
financial intermediaries. Returning the economy to equilibrium requires actions more befitting 
than changes in the federal funds rate alone. The lending facilities created and employed by 
the Fed are likely proving useful in this regard. Increasing liquidity by having a central bank 
lower  the  federal  funds  rate  can  reduce  the  risk  of  a  more  severe  financial  crisis,  but  is 
imperfectly  suited  to  compensate  for  declines  in  liquidity  arising  from  retrenchment  in  the 
financial sector for long periods.12  
As  policymakers,  we  strive  to  distill  truths  about  how  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  the 
transmission mechanism of financial markets, and other determinants – domestic and foreign 
– affect real economic activity. In my remarks today, I tried to expound not only on what we 
know,  but  also  on  what  we  don't.  Successful  economies  are  dynamic  and  flexible.  Their 
citizens  respond  to  changes  in  policy  preferences,  financial  conditions,  and  global  forces. 
Central bankers must seek a better understanding of an economy's changing fundamentals, 
distilling lessons learned and aspiring to reduce monetary policy to a science. In the interim, 
the art of monetary policy rightly will predominate.  
                                                 
12   In my view, only when private financial agents resume their role as the primary source of liquidity in markets 
will  proper  credit  market  functioning  and  support  for  economic  growth  be  restored.  (See  Warsh  (2008)  in 
footnote 10.) 
BIS Review 65/1008 
 7
