Yves Mersch: The Luxembourg experience, resistance to reform and 
main avenues for change in Europe 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at the conference 
“The ageing of Europe’s population – consequences and reforms”, organized by the Bank of 
Greece, Athens, 17 January 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is certainly a pleasure to address such a distinguished audience on the subject of ageing 
populations and the ensuing need for reform. 
Economic  change  is  accelerating.  Globalisation  and  technological  evolution  are  drivers  of 
change, but the dramatic consequence of slow adjustment of national economies is further 
exacerbated by the dramatic and structural demographic change in Europe. 
Low fertility rates, the continuous extension of life expectancy and the retirement of the baby 
boom generations will in the coming decades exert professional, economic, budgetary and 
social consequences. 
 
The impact of ageing population on real economic activity feeds through many channels. A 
recent survey by the European Commission (EC) and the Economic Policy Committee (EPC) 
has  focused  on  the  labour  market,  education,  long-term  care  and  health  care  as  well  as 
pensions. 
The  main  finding  is  that  between  2004  and  2011,  both  demographic  and  employment 
developments  will  be  supportive  of  growth.  This  period  can  be  viewed  as  a  window  of 
opportunity for pursuing structural reforms. Between 2012 and 2017 rising employment rates 
will roughly offset the decline in the working-age population. During this period the working 
age  population  will  start  to  decline  as  the  baby-boom  generation  enters  retirement.  The 
continued projected increase in the employment rates of women and older workers might to 
some extent alleviate the demographic factors, but we might also witness tightening labour 
market conditions, growing skill mismatches and the risk of heightened wage pressures. The 
ageing effect will dominate as of 2018 and both the size of the working age population and 
the number of persons employed will be on a downward trajectory. 
As a result potential GDP growth rate is expected to fall from 2.2% in the first period to 1.8% 
from 2011-2030 and 1.3% thereafter. Employment will have a negative contribution to growth 
that would mostly depend on labour productivity or technological progress. 
BIS Review 16/2008 
 1
For the euro area public spending is projected to increase by about 4% a year between now 
and 2050. 
I  will  focus  on  the  pension  issue,  since  the  rise  in  the  old  age  dependency  ratio  is  the 
dominant factor increasing public spending in the coming decades. This is in particular the 
case in reform lagging countries with particular generous pension systems, like Luxembourg 
and Greece. Indeed pension reforms have been enacted in most countries of the EC and in 
half of them appear to have curtailed significantly the projected increase in public spending 
on pensions. Pension spending appears to be most sensitive to changes in life expectancy 
that rip apart the actuarial equilibrium of pay-as-you-go schemes. These pension schemes 
are nationally grown and closely associated with the history and culture of a society. 
I will first try to examine why the most generous systems seem to be the most resistant to 
change, then go through some of the arguments used against reform and finally establish a 
scoreboard of possible reforms. 
Resistance to change 
I.  
According to the E.C. the largest challenges on pension expenditure in the EU are faced by 
Portugal, Luxembourg and Spain. Greece is however missing in the statistics. Within the new 
EU  countries  Cyprus,  Slovenia,  Hungary  and  the  Czech  Republic  would  face  the  biggest 
challenges. 
Among  these  countries  the  OECD  2007  report  “Pensions  at  a  glance”  ranks  the  countries 
according to the generosity of pension promises. Different retirement-income indicators put 
Greece and Luxembourg at the top. 
Gross  pension  replacement  rates  in  the  OECD  tend  to  be  the  lowest  in  the  six  mainly 
English-speaking  countries  with  stronger  neoliberal  influences.  They are  the  highest  in  the 
five Southern European nations, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain and Turkey. If we look at the 
low earners the highest replacement rate is found in Denmark, while among the high earners 
Greece offers the highest pension reflecting both a high accrual rate and a high ceiling on 
pensionable earnings. 
1) This shows the first problem for reform. Pension schemes tend to mix an insurance policy 
for the level of living with social policy with redistributive elements. The border line between 
these two elements is not clear, but is fertile ground for inconclusive discussions. 
Whether the efficiency of the redistributive element beyond the level of a safety net is to be 
gauged is another question. In Denmark a low-income worker earns more once a pensioner 
than during his productive life. 
In  other  countries,  the  spectrum  of  benefit  design  is  more  oriented  towards  an  insurance 
scheme which aims to pay the same replacement rate to all workers when they retire. 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2008
 
This table shows that the most generous schemes are actually closer to insurance schemes 
and the need for actuarial equilibrium is therefore all the more necessary. 
But  inevitably  pensions  interact  with  tax.  Therefore  the  better  measure  might  be  net 
replacement rates. 
2)  Second  insight.  A  pension  reform  with  lower  benefits  in  order  to  mitigate  longer  life 
expectancy  and  hence  preserve  the  financial  balance  of  pension  schemes  might  result  in 
demands  for  more  generous  tax  treatment  (deductions,  allowances,  credits)  and  the  final 
result on public finances therefore needs careful observation. While the net replacement rate 
is on average 70% in the OECD, the gross replacement figure is 11% lower. 
BIS Review 16/2008 
 3
 
For  example  Belgium  and  Germany  have  considerably  higher  net  replacement  rates  than 
gross.  However,  Germany  is  now  gradually  withdrawing  the  current,  very  generous  fiscal 
treatment of pension income. 
The  OECD  report  notes  that  “the  ‘traditional’  way  of  encouraging  voluntary  savings  for 
retirement has been through tax incentives. However these can be expensive and there is 
strong evidence that they are inefficient, in that much of the saving would have happened 
anyway without the incentive; in addition tax incentives are counterproductive from the social 
perspective, as they tend to be worth more for higher earners, for example.” 
New  insights  of  behavioural  economics  about  people’s  natural  inertia  encourage  private 
pension  saving  through soft  coercion.  In  New  Zealand  people  are  required  to  save  unless 
they opt out. 
What  matters  for  governments,  however,  is  only  the  replacement  rate,  for  how  long  the 
pension benefit must be paid and how its value evolves over time, that is the stock of future 
flows  of  pension  benefits.  According  to  the  OECD  report,  Luxembourg  pays  to  each 
pensioner  close  to  1  Mio  €  or  20  times  individual  earnings  at  the  time  of  retirement!  The 
Netherlands and Greece rank second and third on this measure. 
4 
 BIS Review 16/2008
 
If we look at net pension wealth, taking taxes and social security contributions into account, 
there is no change in country ratings according to the generosity of their pension promises. 
BIS Review 16/2008 
  5
Please do not look at the graphics but at the note. 
At BCL we have reassessed the assumptions of the OECD calculations. Even using the most 
conservative assumptions the actuarial disequilibrium, namely the disequilibrium between the 
present value of social security contributions and of future pensions amounts to a bonus of 
roughly 300.000,- EUR in Luxembourg at a life expectancy of 87 years for a retirement at 65. 
The system is however skewed towards inciting contributors to leave at age 60, which brings 
us  closer  to  the  OECD  figures  mentioned  (the  apparent  discrepancy  with  the  OECD  also 
reflects the fact that the OECD calculated the present value of future pensions, whereas the 
BCL figure refers to the difference between (i) the present value of future pensions and (ii) 
the present value of social contributions paid during the career). 
3) History is in many respects an explanation for the capacity to change. The most radical 
reforms  were  enacted  in  some  of  the  new  member  countries  eager  to  switch  to  a  market 
economy. On the other hand, hysteresis seems to prevent reforms, especially in countries 
where the introduction of pension promises was achieved by social struggle. In the case of 
Luxembourg,  the  legal  retirement  age  was  introduced  in  1925  for  men  and  in  1931  for 
women.  The  quite  generous  promises  were  to  be  measured  against  an  average  life 
expectancy of 55 years only at that time! Steel and mining represented 1/3 of GDP, more in 
terms of employment. Today the banker has displaced the miner, but the schemes are the 
same. 
However,  the  institutions  that  run  the  pension  schemes  as  well  as  the  social  dialogue 
continue to be dominated on the employer’s side as well as on the employee side by heavy 
industry.  Today,  the  latter  represents  less  than  7%  of  GDP,  and  even  less  in  terms  of 
employment. Much of the restructuring of the economy from industry to services was done in 
a consensual way by early retirement schemes, or other measures at the expense of pension 
schemes.  The  success  of  this  social  change  management  with  generous  promises  in  the 
past might now be at the origin of resistance to measures aimed at curbing benefits today in 
order to live-up to longer life expectancy tomorrow. 
4) Another sociological barrier appear to be the numerous special regimes in many countries 
run by separate administrative structures. The defence of sectoral privileges, often intricate 
and  deeply-rooted  in  our  history,  complicates  the  social  dialogue  necessary  to  address 
solutions commensurate to the needs of our societies in the long run. 
The  first  advantage  of  streamlining  regimes  is  savings  in  administrative  costs,  as  many  of 
these institutionalised regimes duplicate work. Since these administrative structures are the 
official  dialogue  partners,  they  have  a  vested  interest  in  resisting  administrative  efficiency, 
even if the benefits of their regime would remain untouched. 
Italy started its pension reform with administrative unification back in the 90’s, while ensuing 
step-by-step harmonization of the benefits system is still on the way. For example, only this 
month the retirement age for Senate staff is to be lifted from 50 to 53 years. 
France  is  also  about  to  streamline  its  “special”  regimes.  In  Luxembourg  administrative 
unification is about to be implemented as a first step. 
5)  This  brings  me  to  the  largest  impediment  to  reforms:  timing.  Pension  reform  inherently 
means short-term pain for long-term gains. This does not square well with the electoral cycle. 
Therefore methods already considered were: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
- 
big reforms at the beginning of a legislature, 
small steps over the whole legislature, 
reforms agreed to be enacted only in subsequent legislatures, 
reforms on a trial base, 
opt ins with sweeteners, 
6 
 BIS Review 16/2008
reforms by stealth etc…. 
- 
There  seems  to  be  no  miracle  remedy.  At  the  opposite  end  even  parties  which  explicitly 
campaigned  on  a  “no  need  to  reform”  platform  or  pensioners’  parties  have  also  not 
succeeded. Today the situation in pension reform can be compared to the situation in fiscal 
reforms prior to the advent of the euro: The first reaction is to argue that your country is a 
special case, that the rules do not fit it and to list excuses. The second reaction is to buy time 
by taking one-off or temporary measures or window dressing. 
Only in the third wave do we face the inevitable structural reform. 
Excuses 
II.  
What are the excuses as regards pension reform? 
1) 
Demographic pressure is delayed 
 
The peak in the level of public spending will occur already by 2030 in Austria and Finland. 
Both countries have enacted reforms: Austria in such a way that it is the only EU country with 
an  expected  decrease  of  spending  on  the  pension  burden,  Finland  by  accumulating 
reserves. 
At the other extreme you find countries with peaks in 2050 only: Germany, Czech Republic, 
Cyprus,  Hungary,  Ireland,  Portugal,  Luxembourg.  Greek  data  are  missing.  Except  for 
Germany these are the countries that you find in the list of problem countries where reform is 
BIS Review 16/2008 
 7
lagging. Even the consciousness of a need for reform seems to have eluded some of these 
countries. 
Inside  the  EU  4  countries  (Greece  did  not  provide  data)  foresee  that  average  pension 
benefits will increase relative to wages: Cyprus, Ireland, Hungary, and Luxembourg. A quick 
comparison  with  present  inflation  rates  or  unit  labour  costs  shows  that  mostly  the  same 
countries are already today at the top of the league for future competitiveness problems in a 
monetary union. 
2) Or is it that these countries which also have some of the highest growth figures feel unable 
to communicate a decrease in benefits in such circumstances. 
 
 8 
 BIS Review 16/2008
 
In the case of Cyprus, Ireland and Luxembourg the main motor of fast growth is employment 
more  than  labour  productivity.  Is  today’s  growth  the  scourge  of  tomorrow  if  it  is  not  put  to 
good use? 
 
For Luxembourg growth is due to cross-border workers, who today represent more than one 
third  of  the  labour  force,  foreign  workers  another  third,  the  remaining  third  of  locals  being 
increasingly occupied in the public or protected sector. Younger than average migrants and 
cross-border workers act like a doping shot on economic growth and public sector finance. 
Cross-border commuters alone account for 30% of social contributions and receive 18% of 
old age and health care. This is equivalent to our 2% of GDP social security surplus, which is 
used as an argument against adjustment. Some years ago, a significant part of this surplus 
was even used for increasing the generosity of pension promises. 
BIS Review 16/2008 
 9
In fact these temporary present surpluses are insufficient to face the financing requirements 
of  pension  promises  over  the  long  run,  due  to  the  longevity  risk  and  to  the  generosity  of 
average pensions. 
The BCL has calculated that our pension promise is equivalent to a Government bond with 
an 8% coupon for representative individuals. In order to stabilize public sector expenditure 
we would need the economy to grow in excess of 5.2% a year which requires more than 1 
million  cross-border  workers  for  a  population  of  0.5  million.  We  could  alternatively  see  a 
doubling of contribution rates stifling growth or incur liabilities of 50% of GDP by 2050 and 
more than 150% of GDP by 2085. 
 With a growth rate only fuelled by labour productivity according to long term trend, the deficit 
of pension reserves would reach 100% of GDP by 2050 and even about 300% of GDP by the 
end of our projection horizon (2085). 
We suggested strengthening the revenue side of the actuarial imbalance by increasing the 
property  incomes  of  the  private  sector  pension  regime  through  better  management  of  the 
reserves (which is being implemented in the aftermath of a law adopted in May 2004 but with 
a  rather  conservative  strategy)  and  through  increasing  reserves  to  reach  a  fully  funded 
system  according  to  the  Modigliani/Muralidhar  reform  proposal.  The  latter  proposal  would 
request a prefunding effort to step up present reserves to the needed present value of future 
10 
 BIS Review 16/2008
outlay.  The  trade-off  between  the  speed  of  adjustment  and  intergenerational  fairness 
inherent in this proposal seems however to crash into a “political wall”. 
3)  Reform  seems  all  the  more  difficult  in  the context  of  relatively  balanced  public  finances 
and  an  exceptionally  low  debt  rate  of  7%  in  the  Luxembourg  case.  Already  now  1/3  of 
pension contributions, which are equal to 24% of gross contributory incomes, are paid from 
the general budget. 
The  buoyant  growth  rates  -  mainly  from  financial  services  -  over  the  last  decade  helped 
finance  the  adjustment  from  an  industrial  society  to  a  service-oriented  economy.  These 
growth  rates  masked  above  all  high  structural  public  expenditure,  since  the  latter  are 
matched by equivalent, but to a large extent cyclical or temporary, revenues. However this 
situation leaves a small and relatively undiversified open economy vulnerable to idiosyncratic 
shocks. The dominant financial sector might mature and yield lower growth with an end to 
the  snowballing  influx  of  cross-border  workers.  Luxembourg  would  then  hit  the  so-called 
“pension wall” in the absence of far-reaching reforms. 
The  volatility  of  public  revenue  is  already  now  twice  that  of  larger,  more  diversified 
economies such as Germany of France. The illusion of the balanced public budget has to be 
seen against the background of the depletion of budget reserves and even the occurrence of 
deficits during the last economic turn-down. The low debt level would only bring temporary 
relief, but acts as an encouragement to delay action. 
The currently favourable situation of the pension regime seems to encourage complacency 
rather  than  to  be  seen  as  a  window  of  opportunity  to  set  aside  large  assets.  This  is 
unfortunate,  because  the  corresponding  property  incomes  would  offset  the  rising  costs  of 
generous pension benefits, at least if pension assets were equal to about 150-200% of GDP. 
If the actuarial neutrality of pension promises, unsettled by longevity risk, cannot be mitigated 
by  action  on  the  asset  side,  like  accumulating  reserves  and  managing  them  more 
professionally  or  snow-balling 
to  prevent  rising 
contributions to threaten competitivity, then one must also start to look at corrections on the 
liability side. 
Let me just add that expanding the contributive base with migration or commuters also has a 
cost in terms of expense in public goods in order to stay attractive and to provide additional 
transportation and housing facilities. 
influxes  of  young 
foreign  workers 
 The scoreboard of benefits reform 
III. 
According  to  the  EU  Commission  70%  of  the  pressure  on  public  spending  covered  by 
demographic  developments  is  projected  to  be  offset  by  action  on  factors  such  as  the 
employment  rate,  the  eligibility  rate  and  the  relative  benefit  level  of  pensions.  In  the  new 
member states of the Union this percentage is supposed to reach 100%. Generally speaking 
BIS Review 16/2008 
 11
public pension expenditure projections are most sensitive to assumptions of life expectancy, 
especially in defined benefit schemes. 
Higher or lower labour productivity assumptions affect pension spending through their link to 
wage increases. If pensions are linked to wages the productivity and concomitant wage and 
pension increase cannot of course relieve pension spending. 
Interest rates only matter in case of funded or partially funded schemes. 
Employment  rates  also  matter  less  in  most  countries,  since  they  tend  to  affect  both  the 
contribution  and  the  benefit  side  as  well  as  the  level  of  GDP.  However  in  the  case  of  a 
defined  benefit  system,  the  increase  of  the  eligibility  age  through  longer  working  time  and 
less generous early retirement helps considerably in re-establishing an actuarial neutrality. 
Life expectancy: Links between earnings and benefits 
1)  
Systemic reforms to meet demographic pressure that adjust benefits or the pension age to 
increasing  life  expectancy  have  been  proposed  or  implemented  in  around  half  of  OECD 
countries. Defined contribution schemes funded or with notional accounts exist in Hungary, 
Poland, Slovakia, Italy, Sweden; a points system exists in Germany; financial sustainability 
adjustments were introduced in Austria, Finland, Portugal, Denmark and France. 
Some countries introduced private or partly private DC schemes as a substitute for part of 
the public earnings-related scheme. However there is still a transfer of resources between 
generations from workers to retirees and the overall financial effect remains uncertain. Social 
effects  on  lower  earners  remain  untested  since  financial  sustainability  adjustments,  due  to 
increases in average life expectancy, might hit lower earners disproportionally. 
Since much of the pressure on pension costs is yet to come, some countries have resorted 
to measures like broadening the contribution base (by increasing ceilings or contributions or 
by financing some costs from general revenue). Increasing numbers of cross border workers 
would also fall in this category of temporary short-term or self-defeating measures with a high 
long  term  cost  for  the  economy.  The  EPC  found  that  only  4  smaller  euro  member  states 
(Cyprus, Ireland, Luxembourg and Malta) are expecting considerably increased employment 
by 2050 as shown in the chart on slide 10. 
Benefits adjustment 
2)  
Adjustment  towards  financial  sustainability  or  actuarial  neutrality  is  mostly  done  through 
changes in the statutory retirement age and less generous indexation to price or real wage 
developments or valorisation. 
take-up ratio 
a) 
Most OECD countries now have a standard retirement age of 65. Denmark, Germany and 
the United Kingdom are in the process of legislating increases. Retirement ages for men and 
women are being equalized. 
In  most  countries  efforts  tend  to  close  the  gap  between  the  legal  retirement  age  and  the 
effective  retirement  age  in  order  to  re-establish  normal  careers  from  the  contributive  side; 
expenses  not  directly  related  to  old-age  pensions  such  as  disability  benefits  ought  not  to 
distort the actuarial balance. Fictive contribution periods or credits for missing contributions 
are being curtailed or financed through social policies. One of the most damaging economic 
theories in Europe has been the idea of distributing a finite amount of employment through 
early retirement. Company and sector related economic restructuring was thus socialized at 
the expense of the long-term equilibrium of pension schemes. 
To fight young age unemployment with early retirement incentives in fact only alleviated the 
employer’s  labour  cost  with  subsidies  from  the  pension  schemes.  Such  attempts  can  be 
12 
 BIS Review 16/2008
seen,  above  all  but  not  only,  in  monolithic  smaller  economies.  Today  penalties  for  early 
retirement  or  increases  in  the  number  of  years  of  contributions  required  to  receive  a  full 
pension  have  been  introduced  or  increased  in  many  countries.  Other  countries  have 
introduced or increased the increments or bonuses to late retirement. At some point in stage, 
countries had a general interdiction for retirees to work or earn a salary beyond a minimum 
amount! 
In  Finland,  older  workers  are  given  higher  accrual  rates.  Austria,  France,  Germany  and 
Portugal  increased  the  benefit  reductions  for  early  retirement  and  increments  for  late 
retirement.  Large  decreases  in  the  take  up  ratio  of  pensions  are  furthermore  projected  in 
Hungary,  Poland,  Czech  Republic,  Italy  and  Slovenia.  In  Luxembourg,  pensions  are 
increased beyond two thresholds related to age and the length of the career, respectively. 
Abolishing credited fictive contributions is not only improving financial sustainability but also 
equity between workers. 
calculated benefits 
b) 
At  one  extreme  in  Luxembourg  non-funded  public  sector pensions  are  still linked  for  elder 
public  employees  to  last  day  salary  and  many  final  promotions  are  made  for  a  couple  of 
months  only  in  order  to  increase  pension  entitlements.  Since  1999  reform  aligned  this 
scheme  to  reforms  in  17  out  of  22  OECD  countries  which  now  use  lifetime  earnings  or  a 
close proxy of them to calculate benefits rather than a few years of final or last earnings. 
These reforms usually carry no costs from a social point of view since low-skilled workers 
typically have flatter real age earning profiles, as do women. 
Furthermore progressive annuities are also increasingly being built in to discourage empty 
career periods. Unemployment or caring benefits for example can also be subject to social 
security contributions. 
valorisation of past earnings 
c) 
In all earnings-related public pension schemes past contributions or earnings are rescaled to 
adjust to changes in living standards between the time pension rights accrued and the time 
they are claimed. This valorisation of past earnings is mostly done in line with economy-wide 
wage growth or with labour productivity increase. 
France now rescales according to price growth only. Such an approach would considerably 
decrease the implicit liabilities of the pension system in Luxembourg. Finland, Portugal and 
Poland rescale according to a mix of wage and price growth with evolving benefits. 
indexation of pensions 
d) 
Price indexation protects purchasing power; wage indexation protects living standards. Is a 
pensioner entitled to benefit from productivity gains in which he did not participate? 
The traditional life cycle consumption pattern assumes that old age people consume less or 
differently by increasing health care consumption. Since health care is largely socialized or 
subsidized, productivity increases should benefit more wage income than pension income. 
This is all the more so as the labour force diminishes and the dependency ratio increases. 
In  response  one  can  argue  that  the  increase  in  life  expectancy  also  influences  the 
consumption  behaviour  of  old  age.  This  is  already  reflected  in  private  banking  wealth 
management profiles. 
Looking  at  the  number  of  countries  that  have  moved  away  from  indexation  of  pensions  to 
future wages the answer seems to be that political and financial sustainability do not seem to 
be mutually exclusive. But only piecemeal moves are observed in this area. 
Some adjust to a mix of wage growth and price inflation and change the weighting. In Italy, 
higher  pensions  are  increased  by  less  than  price  inflation.  Portugal  also  gives  larger 
BIS Review 16/2008 
 13
increases  to  smaller  pensions.  Austria  introduced  a  cap  on  price  inflation  adjustment.  In 
Belgium price indexation is linked to a trimmed down index excluding volatile elements such 
as oil products, alcohol or tobacco. In Luxembourg, we do not only fully index wages but also 
pensions. We share this situation with Slovenia. 
 Conclusion 
A  year  ago,  at  a  conference  on  structural  reforms  at  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg, 
Governor  Garganas  said  that  “Addressing  the  challenges  for  Greece’s  fiscal  position  and 
international  competitiveness  will  require,  first  and  foremost,  sustained  further  progress 
towards fiscal consolidation, including measures to put the public pension system on a sound 
basis.” These words have to be seen in the light of the EPC report that shows for Greece a 
below  EU  average  evolving  labour  productivity  rate  and  one  of  the  strongest  declines  in 
labour supply. 
There is a clear trend towards a reduced pension promise, as shown as a consequence of 
pension reform in 16 OECD countries. Six of the 10 countries with the highest expenditure on 
pensions in the 1990s took action including Finland. 4 saw little or no change over that period 
according  to  the  OECD.  They  are  Greece,  Luxembourg,  Belgium  and  Spain.  Of  course 
pension reforms have profound social and distributional implications. Old age poverty is not 
compatible with the objectives of the European Union. But is not the art of governance long 
term planning under short-term pressures? 
I therefore conclude with 2 observations from an investment bank report: 
One to show how we consistently misjudged life expectancy is the UK. This country example 
is probably also true in a continental perspective. 
14 
 BIS Review 16/2008
    The  final  synthetic  view  is  the  new  retirement  landscape  to  which  we  have  to  adjust 
according to the research team of a major investment bank: “Retirement, in its current form, 
will soon be a thing of the past as demographic, financial and lifestyle factors lay siege to the 
traditional  model.  People  are  living  longer  than  ever  before,  but  not  necessarily  working 
longer, which has led to a surge in the number of people collecting pension benefits. State 
pension  plans  are  under  growing  pressure  to  reform  and  will  likely  resort  to  some 
combination of reduced benefits or increased taxes to bring the programs into fiscal balance. 
The  same  forces  affecting  public  pension  provision  are  also  taking  a  toll  on  corporate 
BIS Review 16/2008 
 15
pension  plans.  Meanwhile,  medical  and  healthcare  spending  is  rising,  putting  government 
finances under additional strain.” (Robin Miranda and Kurt E. Reiman) 
Bibliography 
- 
The  impact  of  ageing  on  public  expenditure:  projections  for  the  EU25  Member 
States  on  pensions,  health  care,  long-term  care,  education  and  unemployment 
transfers (2004-2050): Report prepared by the Economic Policy Committee and the 
European Commission (DG ECFIN) 
Pensions at a Glance – Public policies across OECD countries: OECD 2007 
Annual Report 2006: Banque centrale du Luxembourg 
The transition from PAYG to funding: Application to the Luxembourg private sector 
pension  system:  Working  paper  n°  23  July  2006  by  Muriel  Bouchet  -  Banque 
centrale du Luxembourg 
Essentials  2008:  UBS  –  Transition  to  Retirement  by  Robin  Miranda  and  Kurt  E. 
Reiman 
Franco Modigliani and Arun S. Muralidhar, Rethinking Pension Reform, Cambridge 
University Press, 2004. 
   16 
 BIS Review 16/2008
