Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Economic developments and the financial 
sector – a Spanish perspective 
Speech  by  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  2008 
International Monetary Conference – Central Bankers Panel, Barcelona, 3 June 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the International Monetary Conference for inviting me to participate in 
today’s  Panel.  We  meet  at  a  moment  when  we  are  confronted  with  particularly  difficult 
challenges, in the wake of substantial economic shocks. 
I would like to take advantage of the opportunity to comment on these challenges from the 
Spanish  perspective.  I  will  first  focus  on  economic  developments,  and  then  turn  to  the 
financial sector. 
The Spanish economy began to show some signs of a slowdown in early-2007, after more 
than a decade of robust expansion. 
The slowdown preceded the recent financial turmoil. The deceleration in domestic demand 
arose  as  a  result  of  the  gradual  tightening  of  monetary  policy  since  2005,  and  of  a 
moderation  in  house  prices.  The  residential  investment  sector  has  suffered  a  particularly 
intense  slowdown,  entering  into  a  period  of  adjustment  after  a  protracted  boom.  The 
containment  of  domestic  demand  has  been  more  pronounced  since  mid-2007,  when  the 
turmoil emerged. 
The slowdown has eroded consumer and business confidence. It is already having an impact 
on  the  spending  decisions  of  households  and  firms.  We  are  seeing  signs  that  credit 
conditions  are  tightening,  as  a  consequence  of  the  reappraisal  of  risks  and  changes  in 
macroeconomic and sectoral expectations. 
In  this  context,  we  expect  internal  demand  to  continue  weakening  over  2008.  Indeed,  the 
most recent economic projections released by the Bank of Spain show reduced GDP growth 
in 2008 and 2009. 
At  the  same  time  as  we  face  a  slowdown  in  growth,  we  are  seeing  sharp  increases  in 
headline inflation. These have been driven by large energy and food price rises at the global 
level. 
The price boom has affected Spain to a larger extent than some other countries, partly due to 
the  higher  relative  weight  of  these  items  in  household  expenditure.  And  the  Spanish 
economy may be more vulnerable than other countries to second-round effects due to the 
widespread existence of indexation mechanisms. 
I would like to make a few comments about what economic agents should and should not do 
to face these challenges. 
On inflation, the key issue is how firms and workers respond to the recent shocks. I would 
like to make two points: 
• 
First, firms should not view the shocks as permanent. In other words, they should 
not consolidate price-rises over the longer term. 
Second,  workers  should  understand  that  inflation  cannot  be  offset  by  demanding 
wage increases that are not justified by productivity developments. This would just 
keep inflation persistently high, as the 1970s experience painfully showed. 
 BIS Review 70/2008 
 1
From the perspective of GDP growth, if we are to see a quick return to our potential, we need 
flexibility in supply and demand responses. We need to see increased dynamism, particularly 
in those sectors which are not as directly affected by the current slowdown. 
Other  measures  are  also  necessary,  such  as  liberalisation  and  deregulation  policies,  to 
improve competitiveness. Policies aimed at improving the human capital of our workers and 
increasing labour mobility should also be encouraged. 
Finally,  a  comment  on  fiscal  policy.  The  current  fiscal  situation  in  Spain  is  sound,  having 
ending 2007 with a budget surplus and reduced public debt. Indeed, let me recall that our 
public debt to GDP ratio, at 35%, is the lowest among the big EU countries. It is important to 
maintain  this  stance  in  the  face  of  the  current  slowdown.  Expansionary  demand  policies 
could  prove  counterproductive.  We  should  avoid  a  deterioration  of  the  budgetary  situation 
beyond that implied by automatic stabilisers. 
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  financial  sector.  So  far,  the  impact  of  the  recent  turbulence  on 
financial stability in Spain has been limited. This is largely thanks to the actions of the banks 
themselves, who have not entered into the kinds of business that have been most directly 
affected. Spanish banks have demonstrated that you do not need to turn to the originate-to-
distribute  model  to  become  an  efficient  and  profitable  banking  business.  Plain  vanilla, 
traditional business can be compatible with high returns on equity and efficiency. It also has 
the added value of implying greater stability. But I think that the Bank of Spain’s approach to 
supervision has also had a positive effect. Let me emphasise two key characteristics in this 
respect. 
• 
The first characteristic, which has set us apart from other supervisors, has been our 
strong  role  in  accounting  rule-making  for  the  banking  sector  in  Spain.  This  has 
meant that the accounting rules for the banking sector take into account supervisory 
sensitivities, whilst being also consistent with IFRS. One example of this is the so-
called  “dynamic  provision”,  which  we  introduced  in  2000.  This  allowed  Spanish 
banks  to  build  up  a  significant  provisioning  buffer  in  a  transparent  manner,  to  be 
used  in  bad  times,  when  problem  loans  increase.  In  2005,  the  Bank  of  Spain 
reformed  the  dynamic  provision  when  adopting  International  Financial  Reporting 
Standards. Despite the reform, banks kept the strong provisioning level set by the 
former rules, and today they face the current situation with a sound buffer of loan 
loss provisions (1.3% of total assets at the end of 2007, and this despite bad loans 
being at historically low levels). 
The  second  characteristic  that  has  proved  useful  is  the  Bank  of  Spain’s  prudent 
approach  to  bank  regulation.  One  example  has  been  our  stance  on  off-balance 
sheet investment vehicles. We have not prohibited the development of investment 
vehicles, but we told banks that if they set up  Special Investment Vehicles, these 
should  be  consolidated  with  the  group,  and  therefore  be  subject  to  capital 
requirements and provisions. Under these conditions, no such vehicles were set up. 
As a consequence, the Spanish banking system has not been so seriously hit by the 
de-leveraging  process  as  other  systems  that  have  a  freer  attitude  towards  these 
vehicles. 
 Furthermore,  securitisation  in  Spain  has  mainly  been  used  as  a  financing  tool,  to  raise 
resources on the wholesale financing markets in order to meet the demand for loans from 
households and businesses. Since the element  of credit risk transfer was limited, Spanish 
banks  have  had  little  incentive  to  issue  overly  complex  financial  instruments.  Furthermore, 
we have always required capital to be held against liquidity enhancements to securitizations, 
which we consider may have significant credit risk. 
Let me take this opportunity to make a brief observation on the securitisation sector, which 
some  have  described  as  being  in  “dire  straits”.  I  am  sure  that  this  sector  will  ultimately 
recover.  But  to  do  so,  it  must  distinguish  between  traditional  products  that  are  sound, 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2008
transparent,  standard  and  easy-to-value,  and  “multi-layer”  securitisations  and  complex 
structured products which are difficult to understand and assess. The good news is that the 
market  is  starting  to  differentiate  between  products.  An  example  of  this  is  the  recent 
placement of several Spanish banks’ issues of simple covered bonds. 
In short, our recent experience shows that to be successful supervisors we need to combine 
an  open  attitude  to  financial  innovation  whilst  keeping  at  the  same  time  some  good  old 
fashioned  supervisory  suspicion  towards  it,  especially  when  it  entails  overwhelming 
complexity or elements of regulatory arbitrage. 
The Spanish banking system has faced the recent turmoil from a well-capitalized, profitable 
and efficient position. However, there is no room for complacency. In today’s global financial 
system,  the  Spanish  banking  system  is  not  immune  to  problems  if  serious  global 
macroeconomic imbalances materialise or if the current situation persists. Banks’ managers 
and directors alone are responsible for running institutions and for their results. But central 
banks  and  bank  supervisors  must  rise  to  the  challenge  and  collaborate  closely  with  each 
other so as to help return stability to the global financial system. 
BIS Review 70/2008 
 3
