Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Improving risk management in Bahrain 
Address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain, at the 2nd Annual GCC Regulators’ Summit, Manama, 19 February 2008. 
 Good morning Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure to be here today at the 2nd GCC Regulators’ Summit, which the CBB has 
been  delighted  to  support.  I  am  happy  to  see  so  many  of  our  colleagues  from  the  region 
participating  in  this  important  conference,  which  aims  to  promote  dialogue  and  discussion 
among the region’s financial regulators and the industry. Thank you to Mrs. Jane Diplock and 
to all of you for being here. 
This year’s conference is taking place against a backdrop of fresh challenges being posed by 
a number of global factors and their interplay with regional developments. The US subprime 
crisis and the ensuing credit crunch, as well as the Societe Generale incident compel us to 
proceed with caution, despite the boom all around us here in the region.  
In particular, these incidents underscore the need for good risk management and effective 
internal  controls  by  financial  institutions.  Indeed,  both  these  elements  are  proving  to  be 
critical to ensuring the stability of individual financial institutions and financial systems. 
The  role  of  the  regulator  in  addressing  these  challenges  is  crucial.  We  can  provide  the 
guidance and create the appropriate regulatory framework to enable the sound and stable 
conduct of financial services and financial institutions.  
Improving risk management practices of banks is an important component of the work being 
done by the Central Bank. 
Moreover,  the  CBB  has  introduced  an  innovative  approach  to  the  application  of  Basel  II, 
Pillar One requirements to our Islamic financial institutions. 
Although  Islamic  financial  products  are  not  explicitly  mentioned  in  Basel  II,  the  CBB  has 
introduced, effective this year, a comprehensive Basel II compliant framework which provides 
for  appropriate  capital  treatment  of  products  such  as  Murabaha,  Ijara,  Istisna’a,  amongst 
others.  
This  will  ensure  that  regulations  of  international  standards  are  applied  to  Islamic  financial 
institutions which will further enhance the reputation of what has become such a prominent 
segment of Bahrain’s financial services industry. 
The CBB is also addressing the challenges faced by certain investments made by banking 
institutions, especially banks’ exposure to the real estate market, with a view to encouraging 
banks to maintain a more balanced portfolio.  
We are fully cognizant of the evolving needs of the financial services industry and it is our 
endeavour to proactively adapt to them. Thus it is that, in 2002, Bahrain was the first country 
in the region to adopt a single regulator model for the financial services industry and create a 
one-stop shop for today’s complex and internationally active financial firms, whose product 
offerings are not restricted purely to one type of financial service. 
The  single  regulator  structure  has  also  enabled  the  CBB  to  apply  uniform  standards  of 
regulation  and  supervision  to  all  our  licensees,  be  they  banks,  insurance  firms  or  capital 
market  players.  The  6-volume  CBB  Rulebook  is  at  the  very  core  of  our  regulatory 
development  and  enhancement  programme,  which  is  driving  the  continued  growth  and 
development of Bahrain’s financial sector. 
A  forward-looking,  market-enabling  regulatory  framework  for  the  insurance  and  takaful 
industry has helped attract a critical mass of takaful and retakaful providers in Bahrain. All 
BIS Review 46/2008 
 1
this is providing the momentum for the double-digit growth we are seeing in the insurance 
and takaful sector. 
The CBB is also focusing much attention on upgrading and enhancing regulations governing 
capital  markets,  which  are  central  to  the  functioning  of  a  modern,  sophisticated  financial 
centre. 
The  recent  volatility  in  international  stock  markets  underscores  the  need  for  transparency 
which  the  CBB  has  achieved  through  enhanced  disclosure  standards  introduced  as  of  the 
start of this year. 
Nevertheless,  adapting  and  adopting  new  and  enhanced  regulations  is  not  a  panacea  for 
maintaining sound and stable financial institutions and financial systems.  
We, the regulators, and the industry need to  work together to maintain the integrity of our 
institutions, financial systems and confidence in our jurisdictions.  
I can assure the industry that the CBB strives to be an even-handed, transparent regulator 
and that we are open to suggestions from the industry.  
Finally, I wish you a pleasant stay in Bahrain and a fruitful discussion during the conference. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2008
