Nout Wellink: Banking supervision in Europe – developments and 
challenges 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  36th  Economics  Conference  2008,  held  at  the 
Austrian National Bank, Vienna, 28 April 2008. 
 The  banking  system  has  gone  through  major  changes  over  the  past  years.  Underlying 
factors have been deregulation and liberalisation, as well as technological progress. Three 
main trends can be distinguished.  
• 
in  many  cases  been 
First,  banks  themselves  have  become  increasingly  market-dependent.  That  is,  we 
have  seen  a  transition  from  the  traditional  originate-to-hold  banking  model  to  the 
contemporary  originate-to-distribute  model.  Financial 
innovations,  such  as 
securitisations and credit risk transfer, have enabled banks to disperse their risks to 
the capital markets. However, as the financial turmoil has clearly shown, the transfer 
of  risks  has 
inadequate.  The  currently  ongoing  re-
intermediation  process,  which  is  hampered  by  a  lack  of  market  transparency,  is 
putting strain on banks’ profits, capital and liquidity cushions.  
Second,  banks  have  increasingly  embarked  on  international  operations,  primarily 
through subsidiary companies. As a direct result of a recent surge in cross-border 
banking mergers and acquisitions, the share of foreign banks in domestic European 
markets  has  increased  substantially,  from  26%  of  total  assets  in  2001  to  33%  in 
2006. Furthermore, the share of European banks’ claims on the rest of the world has 
also grown.  
Third, the banking system has become more concentrated. Whereas the number of 
credit  institutions  in  the  European  banking  sector  has  declined,  total  assets  have 
increased,  signalling  the  emergence  of  larger  institutions.  As  a  direct  result  of 
numerous  mergers  and  acquisitions,  Europe’s  largest  banking  groups  have  been 
growing in prominence. Between 2001 and 2005 the largest banking groups’ share 
in total EU banking-sector assets has risen substantially from 54% to 68%.  
  As  regards  the  first  trend  of  more  market-orientation  of  banks,  the  recent  turmoil  has 
revealed  that  the  originate-to-distribute  model  needs  to  be  strengthened.  The  Financial 
Stability Forum has made several recommendations in this respect. Market transparency and 
valuation  should  be  enhanced;  risk  management  practices  should  be  strengthened, 
especially  with  regards  to  liquidity  risk;  and,  more  fundamentally,  incentives  along  the 
securitisation chain must become properly aligned. So, major challenges lie ahead. Let me 
elaborate on how the implementation of Basel II will support the adjustment process. 
Basel II supporting banking system resilience 
As you know, Basel II has only been fully implemented in Europe since the beginning of this 
year. The US is rolling it out more slowly. Even so, there is already strong agreement that 
Basel  II  will  improve  incentives  for  risk  management  and  market  disclosure  and  enhance 
capital regulation and supervision. Let me point out some key enhancements relevant to the 
current crisis. Among other things, Basel II will deliver better risk differentiation. Banks that 
enter upon more risky lending practices will need to strengthen their capital base accordingly. 
Moreover,  under  the  new  capital  regime  all  exposures  will  be  subject  to  regulatory  capital 
charges, whether on or off the balance sheet. Basel II will also create more neutral incentives 
between  retaining  exposures  on  the  balance  sheet  and  transferring  them  to  the  capital 
markets  through  securitisations.  It  will  reinforce  capital  requirements  for  banks’  trading 
BIS Review 53/2008 
 1
books, which are rapidly growing. And last, Basel II will enhance disclosures of banks’ risk 
profiles, notably with regard to structured credit and securitisation activities. 
Given that Basel II is a risk-sensitive framework, there is some concern that it may turn out to 
be too procyclical. However, to achieve more risk sensitivity in minimum capital, there has to 
be  some  fluctuation  in  that  requirement  over  the  cycle.  The  Basel  Committee  has  tried  to 
balance the objectives of risk sensitivity and capital adequacy over the cycle. For instance, 
banks  are  required  to  perform  forward-looking  stress  tests  to  make  sure  that  they  hold 
enough  cushions  above  the  minimum.  Basel  II  will  also  require  much  stronger  firm-wide 
aggregation and management of risk exposures. And  banks that take on more risk will be 
required  to  hold  more  capital  in  the  first  place,  helping  to  prevent  the  build-up  and 
underpricing  of  risk.  We  will  also  be  tracking  the  framework  over  time  and  make  any 
necessary adjustments based on our findings. 
So,  it  is  safe  to  say  that  the  Basel  II  framework  is  a  major  improvement.  But  it  is  not  the 
ultimate  answer  to  the  financial  markets  problems  of  today  and  tomorrow.  In  December 
2006, the Basel Committee had already identified “pressure points” and weak spots in the 
regulatory and supervisory regime that should be addressed. Fortunately, the framework is 
flexible  enough  to  evolve  over  time.  In  light  of  recent  developments,  the  Basel  Committee 
has already begun to evaluate certain aspects of the framework. These include issues such 
as the securitisation of complex products, reputational risk and disclosure. But strong capital, 
though  essential,  is  only  one  aspect  of  a  stable  banking  and  financial  system.  Sound  risk 
management,  strong  supervision  and  robust  liquidity  cushions  are  also  critical.  The  Basel 
Committee’s work agenda seeks to strengthen practice in these areas. It is in the process of 
finalising  global  sound  practice  standards  for  liquidity  risk  management  and  supervision. 
These will address many of the lessons learned from the market turmoil. The Committee will 
also  work  on  stress  testing,  off-balance  sheet  management,  and  valuation  practices. 
Furthermore it is enhancing market discipline through better disclosure. 
Ensuring effective and efficient cross-border banking supervision 
Let  me  now  turn  to  two  challenges  related  to  the  infrastructure  of  supervision  in  Europe, 
namely cross-border supervision and the interplay between central banks and supervisors. 
The former challenge follows from the internationalisation of the banking industry. Over the 
past  decades,  European  banking  groups  have  become  increasingly  international  in 
character. Not only do they move more easily across national boundaries, they also organise 
themselves accordingly. Prompted by these developments, supervision has moved beyond 
its  primarily  national  orientation.  Indeed,  supervisory  rules  and  regulations  are  being 
progressively  internationally  harmonised  –  Basel  II  is  in  this  respect  a  leading  example. 
Nonetheless, internationally active banks are still confronted with a multitude of supervisors 
and  regulators,  which  may  impose  their  own  specific  national  requirements.  As  the 
internationalisation of banks may be presumed to continue in the foreseeable future, further 
steps  are  needed  to  ensure  effective  and  efficient  cross-border  banking  supervision  in 
Europe. 
While a more integrated pan-European supervisory structure is ultimately desirable, how to 
get  there  is  far  from  clear.  Indeed,  legal  frameworks,  deposit  guarantee  schemes,  fiscal 
regimes  and  national  supervisory  arrangements  within  the  European  Union  are  still  very 
diverse.  The  European  Council  agreed  in  December  2007  on  a  Financial  Supervision 
Roadmap.  Important  elements  of  this  Roadmap  are  the  introduction  of  a  European 
dimension into the mandates of national supervisors and the improvement of the functioning 
of EU colleges of supervisors. 
Realistically,  to  promote  more  effective  and  efficient  banking  supervision  in  Europe  in  the 
near term, we should continue to build on the existing institutional structure. Accordingly, the 
challenge of cross-border banking supervision can be addressed in a two-step process. The 
first step is straightforward and can be taken swiftly. In line with the outcome of the latest 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2008
informal  ECOFIN  and  the  recommendations  by  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  so-called 
colleges  of  supervisors  should  be  established  for  all  major  cross-border  groups.  These 
international  colleges  should  include  all  relevant  supervisors  and  would  be  created  to 
enhance cooperation on ongoing supervisory issues. Existing supervisory committees such 
as  CEBS  should  guard  the  coherence  and  consistency  between  the  different  colleges  to 
preserve a level playing field for the industry as a whole.  
The second step towards more effective and efficient cross-border supervision concerns the 
decision-making  process  in  colleges  of  supervisors.  Whereas  decision-making  in  existing 
examples  of  colleges  is  entirely  on  a  consensus  basis,  I  believe  that  the  role  of  the  lead 
supervisor or consolidated supervisor should be strengthened in order to avoid stalemates. 
Both  for  efficacy  and  efficiency  reasons,  decision  making  in  colleges  should  resemble  the 
clauses  on  internal  model  validation  in  the  Capital  Requirements  Directive.  These  call  on 
home  and  host  supervisors  to  agree  but  ultimately,  if  consensus  is  not  reached,  allow  the 
home  supervisor  to  decide.  Let  me  emphasise  that  the  lead  supervisor  model  requires  a 
close  working  relationship  between  the  host  and  the  home  supervisor,  in  which  the  host 
supervisor  is  taken  seriously.  In  practice,  a  distinction  could  be  made  between  general 
colleges  with  broad  information  sharing,  and  core  colleges  with  high  frequency  meetings 
particularly during periods of stress. A formal mediation mechanism could be considered to 
provide host supervisors a way to appeal against decision-making by the college or the lead 
supervisor.  Besides  more  effective  supervision,  lead  supervision  will  also  promote  greater 
efficiency. The financial sector’s strong support for this supervisory model underscores this. 
Ensuring effective interplay between supervisors and central banks 
Besides effective and efficient cross-border supervision, another challenge is to ensure an 
effective interplay between banking supervisors and central banks. As European banks have 
clearly  grown  in  prominence  and  wholesale  markets  have  become  closely  integrated, 
problems  at  individual  banks  are  more  likely  to  have  systemic  effects.  Consequently,  it  is 
difficult to draw a line, in practice, between the responsibility for systemic stability, including 
the  function  of  lender-of-last-resort,  and  that  for  prudential  supervision  of  large  banks. 
Indeed,  in  today’s  increasingly  market-based  financial  system,  disturbances  are  likely  to 
affect core market mechanisms. 
In  my  view,  there  are  two  necessary  conditions  for  effective  cooperation  between  central 
banks and banking supervisors. First, a cooperative and open mindset is required. Second, 
close  and  continuous  information  sharing  is  necessary.  For  the  execution  of  central  bank 
functions, timely access to micro-prudential information on individual banks is relevant. In the 
financial  turbulence,  information  on  the  liquidity  arrangements  of  counterparties,  their 
sources of funding, and on their financial position has proven to be essential to obtaining a 
clear picture of the liquidity pressures influencing banks. Conversely, the information central 
bankers have on the functioning of money and credit markets is indispensable for prudential 
supervisors when assessing the risks to individual banks. These two necessary conditions 
for  effective  cooperation  between  supervisors  and  central  banks  –  cooperative  and  open 
mindsets and adequate information sharing – are most effectively met within “an institutional 
framework in which the Eurosystem’s responsibilities for monetary policy in the euro area are 
coupled  with  extensive  supervisory  responsibilities  of  NCB’s  in  domestic  markets  and  with 
reinforced  cooperation  at  a  euro  area-wide  level”.  The  Twin  Peaks  model  of  financial 
supervision is fully in line with this 2001 conclusion of the Governing Council. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, the financial market turmoil has underscored the importance of resilient, well-
functioning  banking  systems.  The  implementation  of  Basel  II  will  help  banks  and  banking 
supervisors in achieving this. Regarding the infrastructure of supervision in Europe, I believe 
BIS Review 53/2008 
 3
cross-border  supervision  needs  to  be  strengthened.  Indeed,  a  major  step  forward  can  be 
achieved  through  the  lead  supervisor  model.  In  the  lead  supervisor  model,  an  adequate 
representation  of  host country  interests  is  crucial.  Regarding  the  combination  of  prudential 
supervision  and  central  banking,  recent  events  have  shown  there  are  important  synergies 
and reinforced the arguments for bringing both responsibilities as close as possible together. 
To ensure effective interplay between supervisors and central banks, a cooperative and open 
mindset is required, as well as adequate and timely information sharing. 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2008
