Shamshad Akhtar: Islamic finance: authenticity and innovation – a 
regulator’s perspective 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Shamshad  Akhtar,  Governor  of  the  State  Bank  of  Pakistan,  at 
Harvard Law School, Cambridge, 20 April 2008. 
 Introduction 
A.  
It’s a privilege to be addressing the floor of Harvard Law School that is now well recognized 
for its contribution to Islamic Law. Along with others, I have benefited from the rich debate 
among  Shariah  scholars,  academics,  researchers  and  industry  specialists  on  the  topic  of 
“Islamic  Finance:  its  authenticity  and  innovation.”  I  would  like  to  offer  a  regulator’s 
perspective regarding debate on “authenticity and innovation” of Islamic Finance (IF). 
Impetus to Islamic Finance (IF) comes from not only its strong appeal and demand both from 
Muslims and now from Western world but from recognition and reality that IF is indeed an 
alternate  and  viable  financing  mechanism.  If  appropriately  nurtured,  it  has  potential  to 
broaden and deepen financial markets. This is critical for financial markets that suffer from 
(a) low level of financial penetration – level of financial exclusion in developing markets is as 
high as level of financial inclusion in developed markets; (b) high dependence on bank and 
debt  based  systems;  and  (c)  small  and  illiquid  capital  markets.  IF’s  authenticity  lies  in  its 
inherent  characteristics  to  enrich  and  supplement  conventional  finance  by  offering  options 
and  solutions  to  address  these  gaps  in  financial  system,  while  effectively  and  efficiently 
allocating capital and allowing opportunities to optimize firm’s capital structure.  
Triggered  by  growing  knowledge  and  research  undertaken  by  Shariah  scholars  and 
academics, IF is now being nurtured more by the industry experts and the practitioners as 
they  recognize  the  benefit  of  exploiting  synergies  between  IF  and  conventional  finance. 
While IF offers its own ideology, approaches and modalities, legal and contractual structures 
and  risk  management  perspectives,  conventional  finance  has  steered  the  global  financial 
markets for ages backed by the well tested policy, legal and regulatory prescriptions, tools 
and structures etc. It is inevitable that this has resulted in juxtaposition and transposition of 
the two disciplines to foster innovation and benefit the two fields of finance mutually, while 
prompting cross border flows and offering new perspectives on financial stability.  
Provided  developing  interface  and  synergies  between  IF  and  conventional  finance  is 
acceptable to scholars, the debate on authenticity is simplified. In carrying forward this strand 
of thought, I propose to: 
(i) 
Make the case that IF is by design authentic as it offers new ethical and equitable 
perspectives  to  world  of  finance,  while  allowing  flexibility  to  nurture  businesses 
based on partnership and profit and loss sharing (PLS) mechanism based on a fair 
and just contractual frameworks. Application of these IF-guidelines and principles to 
well tested tools of conventional finance itself ought to be treated as innovation. 
Highlight  that  IF  engineering  and  re-engineering  has  facilitated  proliferation  of 
Islamic products which include a range of (a) standalone products that have been 
tweaked to ensure conformity and convergence of returns with conventional finance, 
(b) hybrid Islamic products structured by blending two to three Islamic products that 
suit the financing requirements of businesses, and (c) equity based funds, products 
and indices, and insurance. 
Finally, it has to be recognized that though pace of financial innovation is occurring 
in  IF,  there  is  scope  for  unleashing  its  potential  further  which  in  turn  would  also 
facilitate  financial  stability.  In  this  context,  I  propose  to  offer  few  selective 
perspectives  which  underscore  need  for  enhancing  the  legal,  regulatory  and 
(ii) 
(iii) 
BIS Review 52/2008 
 1
supervisory frameworks for IF to allow for greater diversification both on asset and 
liabilities  side  supported  by  proper  governance  standards  for  PLS  modalities 
including adequate safeguards for investment account holders. Greater appreciation 
and understanding of risk frameworks and development of capacities would facilitate 
adaption  of  complex  Islamic  products  and  would  help  in  enhancing  depth  and 
breadth of IF. 
IF features and its interface with conventional finance  
B.  
Distinguishing features of IF. At one level it is now well established that IF is quite different 
from  conventional  finance  simply  because  former  is  based  on  Quranic  and  Shariah 
injunctions  and  principles.  Islam  prohibits  exploitative  transactions  such  as  (riba),  or 
transactions  involving  uncertainty  (gharar)  or  speculative  behavior  (maisir)  or  trading  of 
debts.  In  conjunction,  IF  advocates  “material  finality”  that  underscores  backing  of  financial 
transaction  with  real  economic  activity/transactions.  The  combination  of  these  prohibitions 
and  IF’s  emphasis  on  backing  transaction  with  real  economic  activity  are  the  two  key 
ideological differences IF has with the conventional finance.  
Also, IF encourages financial relationship between financiers and entrepreneurs (borrowers) 
where lender and borrowers share investment risks in businesses and assets. Under these 
arrangements,  returns  are  not  fixed  but  commensurate  with  the  identifiable  rights  and 
obligations  of  stakeholders.  These  transactions  are  well  anchored  on  an  elaborate 
contractual  framework  which  drives  its  application  and  content  from  IF.  The  ideological 
underpinnings  of  Islamic  economics  and  its  supportive  contractual  framework,  along  with 
wide range of financial and business transaction options permissible under IF, allows a rich 
array of approaches, options and modalities for IF.  
IF  and  conventional  finance  interface.  At  another  level,  to  properly  nurture  IF  it  is 
inevitable that IF relies on conceptual framework of conventional finance and its tools. The 
interface  and  linkages  between  Islamic  and  conventional  finance  will  help  promote 
development of IF, though this process needs to be delicately managed. While IF converges 
and  conforms  to  basic  principles  of  finance,  to  ensure  its  acceptability  and  originality  this 
should  be  achieved  without  compromising  its  ideological  and  spiritual  distinction  and 
uniqueness which is critical to public confidence in the system. Concurrently, there is need to 
recognize that the comparative advantage of IF is rooted in the  risk sharing features of IF 
modalities. 
Financial re-engineering and innovation 
C.  
Generally, IF industry has witnessed explosion and proliferation of Islamic products offering 
close to full-menu of conventional finance industry options and instruments. Today, industry 
offers  standalone  or  hybrid  Islamic  products,  offers  capital  markets  options  for  fund 
management,  insurance  products  via  takaful,  and  meets  requirements  for  sovereign, 
corporate  and  retail  sector.  To  ensure  competitiveness  and  customer  acceptability, 
replication  and  aligning  of  returns  on  Islamic  products  with  conventional  products  has 
generated concerns regarding dilution and excessive concentration of banks on one or two 
products.  Practically,  the  Islamic  industry  currently  is  bank-based.  Product  diversification, 
albeit slow, is emerging but returns are engineered to ensure conformity and convergence 
with conventional industry. Re-engineering and engineering in IF can be grouped as follows:  
Islamic  synthetic  products.  Adopting  reverse  engineering,  a  number  of  Islamic 
(i) 
products  have  been  designed  as  conventional  product  equivalents.1  Three  core 
                                                 
1   Zamir Iqbal and Abbas Mirakhor: “An Introduction to Islamic Finance: Theory and Practice.” 2006. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2008
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
structures are most popular: (i) Murabahah synthetic (debt based) products that are 
backed  by  sale-repurchase  agreements  or  back  to  back  agreement  of  a  borrower 
held  asset  or  lender’s  purchase,  (ii)  Al-ijarah  leasing  (asset  backed)  provide 
financing; and (iii) equity based profit sharing contracts Musharakah or Mudarabah 
or crop sharing (Muazarah).  
Re-engineering  of  Islamic  synthetic  products.  Drawing  from  the  core  products 
identified  above,  re-engineering  has  been  possible  in  some  cases  such  as  the 
reverse Murabahah, diminishing Musharakah to provide housing finance, Sukuk and 
its variants along with Musharakah Term Finance Certificates (MTFCs) which is a 
form  of  Sukuk.  MTFCs  have  greater  appeal  since  these  are  issued  against  the 
strength of issuer’s balance sheet rather than specific assets of the corporate and 
are close to PLS framework. 
Hybrid  Islamic  products.  Supported  by  advancements  in  Islamic  securitization, 
there has been acceptance of Islamic Investment Certificates, i.e. Sukuk bonds that 
are  Shariah  compliant  and  tradable  asset  backed  securities.  Industry  has  floated 
different types of Sukuk with AAOIFI recognizing about 14 different types of Sukuks. 
Most  Sukuks  are  sponsored  by  sovereigns,  both  in  domestic  and  international 
markets,  backed  by  approved  Government  assets.  Although  Ijara  (asset  based) 
Sukuk2 are the most popular, other hybrid-Sukuk’s backed by synthetic loans, sale-
lease  backs  or  head-lease/sublease  ijarah  and  profit  sharing  structure  are  now 
emerging to be quite popular. Underlying pool of assets for some Sukuk comprise of 
Istisna’  and  Murabahah  receivables  as  well  as  Ijarah.3  Another  example  is  the 
convertible Sukuk – whether pure Ijara or hybrid it can have an embedded option 
allowing  them  to  be  converted  into  another  asset  form  depending  on  specified 
conditions.  
Islamic mortgages. These are fast gaining ground and are being structured as: (a) 
the  Ijarah  (lease)  contract  along  the  lines  of  conventional  mortgage;  (ii)  equity 
partnership (diminishing Musharakah), where the mortgagee (lender) and mortgagor 
(borrower) jointly share ownership, which over a period of time is transferred to the 
mortgagor,  who  buys  shares  in  interest  of  ownership  by  contributing  each  month 
toward buying out the mortgagee’s share in the property and return to the lender is 
generated  out  of  the  fair  rental  value  of  the  property;  (iii)  Murabahah  (sales 
transaction),  is  practiced  in  the  United  Kingdom,  where  the  property  transfer  tax 
(stamp  duty)  discriminates  against  the  Ijarah  –  or  Musharakahh-based  mortgage; 
and  (iv)  cooperative  societies,  where  members  buy  equity  (Musharakahh) 
membership and help each other to purchase property from the pool of the society’s 
funds. 
In parallel to these developments, IF has progressed on capital market development. Few 
significant development on this front are: 
(i) 
Islamic  benchmark  has  evolved  to  provide  an  alternate  to  LIBOR  by  introducing 
Islamic sovereign paper. Some initiatives include (a) Sudan Government Investment 
Certificates based on pool of Ijara, Salam, and Murabahah instruments to raise long 
term  financing,  one  year  maturity  Government  Musharakah  Certificates  based  on 
equity  partnerships;  (b) Bay  al-dayn  (debt  trading)  Government  Investment  Issues 
(GII) by Malaysia; and (c) Baharian al-salam Sukuks whereby Government agrees 
to  sell  forward  to  Islamic  banks  a  commodity  (typically  aluminium)  against  spot 
payment.  Islamic  banks  in  turn  designate  the  Government  their  agent  to  sell  the 
                                                 
2  
Ijara  Sukuk  are  financial  obligations,  issued  by  lessor,  and  backed  primarily  by  cash  flows  from  lease 
receivables from a credit lessee. 
3   Arsalan Tariq: “Managing Financial Risks of Sukuk Structures.”  
BIS Review 52/2008 
 3
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
include  Shariah-compliant  equity  and  hedge 
commodity to a third party on delivery and the price of sale determines the price of 
the Sukuk.  
Islamic  investment  indices.  Equity  benchmark  indices  are  designed  to  track  the 
performance  of  leading  publicly  trading  companies  who  are  involved  in  activities 
consistent  with  Islamic  Shariah  law.  Examples  of  this  are  Dow  Jones  and  FTSE 
Islamic  indices  which  focus  on  limited  range  of  companies  excluding  companies 
which are involved in products/businesses not permissible under Islam.  
Islamic  equity  funds 
funds, 
commodity,  leasing  and  trade  related  funds.  Barring  equity  funds,  other  funds  are 
low  risk.  In  the  case  of  leasing,  the  fund  is  a  securitized  pool  of  lease  contracts 
dealing with collateralized assets generating a steady stream of cash flow. Similarly, 
commodity funds have a short-term exposure in markets that are efficient and have 
developed forward markets, thus reducing the level of risk. In contrast, equity funds 
are  similar  to  conventional  mutual  funds  and  are  exposed  to  a  higher  degree  of 
risks. Such funds are designed to ensure that equity stocks included in the fund are 
not only well diversified but also fully compliant with the Shariah’s guidelines.  
Development of derivatives and its equivalents. There is a debate on whether IF 
allows setting price at a future date with some scholars arguing it is not permissible 
and others with flexible interpretation that forward trades are permissible in Islam, if 
structured  to  provide  specific  quantity,  time,  weight  and  date.  Devising  solutions 
which  are  acceptable  to  all  players  are  further  complicated  by  difficulties  in 
structuring  contractual  obligations,  methods  of  eliminating  risk  inherent  in  the 
derivatives contract i.e. counterparty and operational risks, and lack of benchmark 
data. Despite these impediments, few Islamic OTC financial derivatives on the lines 
of  the  conventional  ones  have  been  structured.  For  example:  Standard  Chartered 
and  Bank  Muamalat  Malaysia  structured  Islamic  Cross  Currency  Swap  (US$  10 
million) and Citigroup floated a 5-year US$ 230 million Currency Profit Rate Swap, 
while work is underway to float Forward Rate Agreement (equivalent of conventional 
FRA), Profit Rate Swap (equivalent of interest rate swap) etc.  
Way forward for Islamic financial innovation 
D.  
Industry’s  effort  to  engineer  and  re-engineer  financial  innovation  has  been  impressive,  but 
authenticity demands that industry continues its efforts to innovate. To facilitate this, there is 
need for IF industry and regulators to now consider a change in mind set accompanied by 
enhancement  of  the  legal,  regulatory  and  supervisory  infrastructure  backed  by  proper 
governance framework to allow banks to transact in equity based transactions.  
Traditionally,  banks  main  business  has  been  debt  financing  and  regulators  have  been 
conservative  in  allowing  bank’s  to  indulge  in  equity  products  or  nonbanking  businesses. 
However,  consolidation  and  conglomeration  has  pushed  the  financial  industry  to  universal 
banking  and  other  structures  to  retail  better  different  products.  Among  others,  this  has 
resulted  in  scale  and  efficiency  of  financial  institutions  and  required  regulator’s  to  change 
their  regulatory  frameworks  and  supervisory  approaches.  Given  this,  in  this  section  I  offer 
some  selective  perspectives  which  should  allow  IF  to  move  and  compete  in  tandem  with 
conventional finance.  
Consistent with IF provisions, one concrete way forward is to focus efforts to develop 
right  framework  and  applications  for  PLS-Shariah  compliance  products.  Currently, 
equity  investment  share  in  IF  ranges  from  0%  to  24%  of  the  Islamic  bank’s  books.  PLS 
modalities,  such  as  mudaraba  and  musharaka,  being  driven  by  equity  partnership 
arrangements  offer  interesting  options  for  innovation  but  weaknesses  in  policy,  regulatory 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2008
and  legal  have  impeded  growth  of  such  options.  Some  of  the  constraints  to  its  effective 
application4  include  (i)  equity  holders  and  entrepreneur’s  aversion  to  risk  given  the 
uncertainties with return on businesses in PLS arrangements; (ii) absence in most countries 
of proper property rights which could protect PLS contracts in case of litigation; and (iii) PLS 
does not lend itself for short term financing and equity transactions underlying it are taxed 
more than interest income.  
Nevertheless,  promoting  PLS  modality  would  help  move  financial  system  from  being  bank 
centric to market based and thereby facilitate system-wide financial and risk diversification. 
Workable  solutions  to  reducing  principal-agent  problems  and  built  in  supportive  screening 
and  monitoring  of  projects  upfront  would  go  a  long  way  to  promote  efficiency  in  capital 
allocation as it links returns with actual project. Promoting more equity based products would 
also tackle the mis-match of assets and liabilities which has aggravated since IF has relied 
excessively on short-term, low-profit and fixed-income assets. Moreover, risk-sharing edge of 
IF  products  can  be  neutralized  when  Islamic  banks  pay  investment  account  holders 
benchmark return regardless of the performance and profitability of business venture.  
To  fully  comprehend  complexities  and  dimensions  of  proper  risk  and  reward  sharing 
mechanism  there  is  need  to  enhance  understanding  of  management  and  mitigation  of  the 
specific and multiple risks associated with certain types of Islamic products. This requires a 
mindset  change  of  both  Islamic  banking  industry  and  regulators  whose  primary  focus  has 
been  debt-based  financial  intermediation.  At  the  same  time,  it  requires  development  of 
financial  legal  and  regulatory  infrastructure  which  will  help  manage  principal  agent-
entrepreneur relationships, while catering for investment account holders concerns.  
While  augmenting  regulatory  framework  to  facilitate  IF-innovation,  there  is  need  for 
development  of  the  IF  supervisory  framework.  Currently,  the  process  of  thinking  of  IF 
supervision varies. By and large, Islamic banks are supervised using the same methodology 
and approaches adopted for conventional bank. Suitable modifications are needed to delve 
into  oversight  of  Shariah  compliance,  a  task  daunted  by  the  lack  of  Shariah  expertise  in 
regulators  and  differences  in  fiqh.  A  review  of  Shariah  compliance  will  help  facilitate 
innovation and enhance transparency and disclosure in Islamic banks. 
Another  important  area  where  work  is  underway  but  needs  to  be  accelerated  is  to 
develop  proper  understanding  of  prudential  regulations  and  Shariah  inspection  and 
supervision  of  Islamic  banks.  Guidance  on  prudential  regulatory  framework  should 
incorporate appropriate amendment and refinements to the Basle or other best practices with 
the  objective  of  providing  effective  treatment  of  risks  associated  with  the  Islamic  products 
and  balance  sheets.  An  important  contribution  is  the  introduction  of  profit  equalization 
reserve fund which is created for the PLS modalities to provide a cushion for the associated 
risks  of  businesses,  while  safeguarding  the  investment  account  holders  interests.  Islamic 
banks  have  to  incorporate  interests  of  depositors  who  are  considered  creditors  and  first 
claimants  on  the  banks’  assets  and  the  interest  of  investment  account  holders  has  to  be 
aligned  with  the  Islamic  banks’  owners.  Accompanying  this  is  the  Shariah  corporate 
governance  framework  which  protects  the  interest  of  the  investor  and  customer  by 
underscoring  need  for  compliance  and  ethics  as  well  as  maintaining  high  degree  of 
transparency and disclosures. 
Before  delving  into  the  mechanics  of  Shariah  supervisory  framework,  it  is  pertinent  to 
highlight  the  key  challenges  faced  by  Islamic  banks  with  respect  to  Shariah  governance. 
These challenges are inter-linked and mutually reinforcing and range from:  
• 
Reputational risk arising from lack of or uncertainty on Shariah compliance; 
                                                 
4   Humayon Dar and John R. Presley: Lack of Profit Loss Sharing in Islamic Banking: Management and Control 
Imbalances, 2001. 
BIS Review 52/2008 
 5
 Demarcation and responsibility and accountability between Board, Management and 
Shariah Advisor; 
Investment policies – compliance with Shariah prohibitions; 
Investors’ protection; 
Disclosure and transparency of Shariah rulings; 
Harmonization of Shariah rulings and offerings; and 
Vigilance and Oversight of the supervisor to cater for above factors. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Currently, in absence of well conceptualized framework, Shariah compliance standards and 
their oversight varies across jurisdictions: 
• 
In  Iran,  Council  of  Ministers  and  Regulations  under  the  Usury  Free  Banking  Act, 
1983 serve as the Shariah Board and set guidelines for the IF industry; 
In  Malaysia,  under  Central  Bank  Act,  1958,  Shariah  Advisory  Council  has  sole 
responsibility for IF and court of arbitrator refers disputed cases to this council for 
their position/advice; 
In  Indonesia,  the  National  Shariah  Board  is  responsible  for  Shariah  rulings  on 
Islamic products, with IFIs required to establish a Shariah Division in the institutions 
and NSB approves the Shariah Supervisory Board to oversee the division; 
In  Pakistan,  three  tier  model  of  Shariah  framework  is  put  in  place.  This  includes 
Shariah  Advisory  Board 
that  provides  advise  and  guidance  on  prudential 
regulations,  guidelines,  modes  of  financing,  and  model  agreements  for  Islamic 
industry,  but  the  central  bank  issues  instructions  though  in  case  of  differences  in 
perspectives on Shariah matters the advisory boards notified by central bank is final; 
Shariah Advisor, meeting central bank fit and proper criteria, approve products and 
give  guidance  on  legal  and  tax  matters  etc.;  and  a  mechanism  for  Shariah  Audit 
System  which  inspects  the  Shariah  compliance  of  all  bank  operations.  Shariah 
Advisory Board has Shariah scholars but also industry representatives.  
Bahrain,  Sudan  and  Syria  have  adopted  Shariah  standards  issued  by  the 
Accounting and Auditing Organization for Islamic Financial Institutions (AAOIFI) and 
some others use them as guidelines. 
    Both the prudential regulation and Shariah inspection and supervision are integral elements 
of the check and balances to ensure products and transactions meet the test of authenticity 
and  compliance  with  Shariah.  While  these  systems  may  not  be  in  place  right  away  but 
development  and  implementation  of  this  regulatory  and  supervisory  infrastructure  requires 
build up of capacities both at institution and regulators level and will pave way for building 
confidence in Islamic system.  
Conclusion 
E.  
In conclusion, from a regulator’s perspective development of IF in tandem with conventional 
finance will help broaden and deepen financial markets which will help not only meet diverse 
requirements  but  will  also  infuse  financial  stability.  The  evolution  and  path  pursued  by  IF 
industry has triggered debates regarding the authenticity and innovation. What is critical to 
recognize is that IF by design has to be authentic and brings in additionality both in terms of 
superior corporate governance framework as good ethical practices are embedded in IF, and 
risk sharing structures which along with product diversity that the system offers lend itself to 
innovation.  
Product proliferation and approaches to security markets, development of Islamic exchange 
and fund management will help nurture financial diversification from bank based to market 
6 
 BIS Review 52/2008
centric system. Proper application of PLS system will help provide greater opportunities for 
innovation provided it is backed by the right corporate governance architecture.  
On their part regulators have provided the industry free play. Cooperation among regulators 
has  helped  to  develop  core  and  supportive  IF  infrastructure  which  better  weaves  in  the 
unique  features  and  nuisance  of  the  IF.  Development  of  Islamic  prudential  regulatory  and 
supervisory  framework,  which  subscribes  to  Basel  standards  for  conventional  banking,  will 
pave the way for development of IF, while tweaking the regulations to accommodate special 
risk characteristics of the IF. Institutional framework and evolving approaches for supervision 
systems will help build confidence among investor and customers. It is my belief that proper 
practical  application  of  IF  has  the  potential  of  taking  global  finance  to  new  frontiers  and 
heights. 
BIS Review 52/2008 
 7
