Durmuş Yılmaz: Turkey beyond 2008 
Speech by Mr Durmus Yılmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the  Annual  Investment  Conference  "Turkey  beyond  2008",  organised  by  the  Foreign 
Economic Relations Board (DEIK) and The Turkish-American Business Council (TAIK), New 
York, 17 March 2008. 
 Dear Guests, 
As  you  all  may  know,  the  Turkish  economy  used  to  experience  boom-and-bust  cycles 
throughout the 1990s. The economic crisis in 2001 was the low point of this period, when the 
economy contracted more than 5 percent. Since then, Turkey has put in place a very intense 
and ambitious structural reform agenda, coupled with sound monetary and fiscal policies, to 
establish macroeconomic and financial stability and to improve the business environment. 
Central Bank independence that was granted by Law in 2001 was one of the milestones of 
this  agenda.  The  introduction  of  free-floating  exchange  rate  regime  in  2001  and  inflation-
targeting  regime  in  2002  were  other  key  steps.  The  Central  Bank  of  Turkey  has  also 
experienced  a  comprehensive  institutional  change  towards  a  better  communication  policy 
and clearly defined accountability measures. 
We have experienced a significant disinflation process since 2001. The consumer price index 
came down from 68.5% in 2001 to 8.4% in 2007. I should call your attention to the fact that 
the list of countries that lowered inflation in 2007 was quite short, thanks to global inflationary 
pressures  in  food  and  other  commodities.  In  fact,  the  average  inflation  around  the  world 
increased  from  3.5  percent  in  2006  to  4.8  percent  in  2007  and  to  5.5  percent  in  January 
2008.  In  this  environment  Turkey  was  able  to  reduce  inflation  by  1.3  percentage  points  in 
2007. In fact, this was the sharpest drop among 60 major developed and emerging countries.  
The disinflation process is even more pronounced in core inflation, which excludes energy 
and  food  prices.  It  stood  at  4.36%  as  of  February  2008.  The  favorable  outlook  in  core 
inflation indicators despite the surge in energy and food prices has allowed the Central Bank 
to  cut  policy  rates  since  September  2007.  The  cumulative  rate  cut  reached  to  225  basis 
points as of February 2008 bringing the overnight borrowing rate to 15.25% from 17.50%.  
The  timing  of  further  easing  depends  on  developments  in  global  markets,  demand 
conditions,  fiscal  policy  performance  and  other  factors  affecting  the  medium  term  inflation 
outlook.  According  to  the  forecasts  of  our  January  2008  Inflation  Report,  the  year-end 
inflation  may  stay  above  the  target  in  2008,  but  within  uncertainty  band,  due  to  factors 
outside the control of monetary policy such as energy and food prices. The mid-point of our 
forecast  for  2008  is  5.5%,  whereas  the  year-end  target  is  4%.  However,  inflation  is 
forecasted to converge  to the target in 2009 and come down to 1.8-5.5% range with 70% 
probability at the end of 2009.  
At this point let me say a couple of words about fiscal policy of the last six years and fiscal 
discipline, which has also contributed much to the macroeconomic stability in Turkey. One of 
the main characteristics of the Turkish economy in the 1990s was high budget deficits, which 
was  around  7%  of  GDP  on  the  average.  During  the  2002-2007  period  setting  ambitious 
primary  surplus  targets  and  realizations  of  these  targets,  coupled  with  almost  balanced 
budgets paved the way for significantly improved debt dynamics. Even before recent upward 
revisions in GDP figures, Turkey easily met the Maastricht criteria for the budget deficit and 
debt  stock.  According  to  most  recent  data,  the  ratio  of  net  government  debt  to  GDP  has 
come down to 29%, whereas budget deficit is less than 2%. 
Dear Guests, 
BIS Review 32/2008 
 1
As  you  all  know,  financial  system  plays  a  key  role  in  accumulation  of  savings  and  its 
distribution among productive sectors. Therefore, health and stability of a financial system is 
crucial for economic growth of a country. We attribute utmost importance to financial stability 
as a country that experienced deep financial crises in the past. Price stability is the primary 
objective of the Central Bank. But, we also regard financial stability as our auxiliary objective 
and  monitor  the  system  closely.  The  achievement  on  the  inflation  front  has  significantly 
improved the macroeconomic environment and eliminated the vulnerabilities that put burden 
on the proper functioning of the financial system. The Banking Sector Restructuring Program 
and other measures that were taken following the 2001 crisis, led to the formation of a very 
strong and resilient financial system. This contributed to the high growth rates achieved after 
the crisis. I can comfortably say that today the banking sector in Turkey compares well with 
those of new members of the European Union. The Banking Law enacted in 2005 is in line 
with the best international practices.  
Asset size of the Turkish banking sector increased by more than three-folds in the last six 
years and reached USD 500 billion as of 2007. Still, there is a huge and unexplored potential 
in the sector taking into account the size of Turkey’s young population and low rate of credit 
utilization  among  households  and  private  business.  Capital  adequacy  ratio  (CAR)  of  the 
banking  sector  stood  at  18.8%,  well  above  the  minimum  legal  requirement  of  8%  and  the 
average of the European Union, which is 12.1%. Short-term liquidity ratios comfortably meet 
the  legal  thresholds.  Thanks  to  sound  and  resilient  structure  of  the  sector,  foreign  direct 
investment to the Turkish banking system has surged since 2005 and the share of foreign 
investors  in  the  total  capital  of  the  sector  is  now  more  than  40%.  Rather  than  financing 
government  deficits,  the  banking  sector  has  returned  to  its  core  function,  which  is  being 
intermediary between borrowers and lenders. The ratio of total credits to total deposits, which 
is a proxy for the intermediation function of the banking sector, has increased almost two-
folds since 2001 and reached to 80% as of 2007.  
The strong growth performance of the Turkish economy may be considered as the fruit of 
these structural reforms, fiscal discipline, and cautious monetary policies of the last 6 years. 
Turkey has grown for 23 consecutive quarters since 2002 and has been one of the fastest 
growing countries in the world during this period. The real GDP has grown almost 50% on a 
cumulative basis in that period, bringing the average annual growth rate to 7%. This strong 
growth  performance  was  private  sector  driven  and  supported  by  continuous  productivity 
gains. Along with high economic growth, openness of Turkish economy has also increased 
substantially. Exports, which stood at only USD 31 billion as of 2001, increased by more than 
two-folds and reached to USD 107 billion in 2007. 
Dear Guests, 
There are four distinguishing characteristics of Turkey that set her apart from other emerging 
market countries.  
First, unlike other countries in the Central and Eastern Europe region, Turkey has a young 
population, which is a demographic gift that could accelerate economic growth. Of course, 
having  great  potential  does  not  guarantee  success.  Currently,  the  Turkish  economy  is 
utilizing less than half of its workforce. Improving the state of the labor market, removing rigid 
labor  market  regulations,  reducing  the  tax  wedge,  and  more  importantly  enhancing  the 
human capital through education reforms are essential to accelerate the growth rate of the 
economy on a sustainable basis. 
Second,  Turkey  is  a  net  commodity  importer  in  contrast  to  Latin  American  countries  and 
South Africa. We need to import in excess of 35 billion USD worth of oil and natural gas each 
year, almost 5% of our GDP. Looking at the composition of the foreign trade, you can see 
that our imports are mainly commodities and intermediate goods, whereas industrial goods 
cover more than 90% of our total exports. Therefore, promoting Turkey's competitiveness is 
the key to her future success. 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2008
Third, high domestic savings rate, which is high in emerging countries in Asia, is quite low in 
Turkey. It is around 20%. We need to attract foreign savings to finance investments. It is not 
surprising to observe a strong and direct positive relationship in Turkey between growth rate 
and  current  account  deficit.  Of  course,  the  upward  trend  in  energy  prices  has  also 
contributed  to  the  widening  of  the  current  account  deficit  to  5.8%  in  2007.  The  current 
account deficit is a structural problem and a source of vulnerability. However, Turkey did not 
have difficulty in its financing in the last 6 years. In fact, the quality of foreign capital flows 
has improved sharply. The current account deficit can now be financed through foreign direct 
investments (FDI) and long-term capital inflows. The FDI inflows were in excess of USD 20 
billion in each of the last two years, putting Turkey among the top 5 developing countries in 
FDI inflows.  
Fourth, Turkey is one of the few countries with a “convergence story”. Negotiations with the 
European Union over the full membership status provide a major stimulus to policy makers to 
put Turkey’s huge potential into life and complete the reform agenda. This agenda consists 
of  next  generation  policies  and  reforms  that  focus  on  removing  structural  bottlenecks  and 
improving the economy’s capacity for labor absorption, innovation, and competitiveness.  
Dear Guests, 
Turkey  has  had  a  heavy  structural  reform  agenda  since  2001.  However,  continuation  of 
structural reforms is of vital importance for the sustainability of economic gains achieved in 
recent years and for the resilience of the economy to further shocks in the future. The most 
important  structural  reform  in  the  pipeline  is  the  social  security  reform  that  is  expected  to 
significantly  improve  Turkey’s  fiscal  balances  in  the  medium  and  long  term.  It  is  also 
expected to contribute to our domestic savings rate. Other prominent steps that should be 
taken include reducing the size of the unregistered economy and broadening the tax base, 
reforming the labor market to increase job creation and bringing the business environment to 
a level on par with international competition, re-designing the education system in order to 
make it consistent with labor demand and to raise the quality of labor force, privatizing the 
energy  market  and  ensuring  energy  supply  security.  These  steps 
together  with 
macroeconomic  stability  will  undoubtedly  make  Turkey  a  more  competitive  country  in  the 
international arena.  
Looking  ahead,  our  main  goals  are  to  achieve  and  sustain  price  stability  and  economic 
growth. Prerequisites are macroeconomic stability, structural reforms and adherence to good 
governance  principles  both  in  public  and  private  institutions.  We  recognize  that  economic 
growth at the expense of price stability cannot be permanent. Together with the EU anchor in 
place, we are moving decisively to become a trillion USD economy. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 32/2008 
 3
