Shyamala Gopinath: Launch of currency futures by NSE 
Remarks by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
launch  of  currency  futures  by  National  Stock  Exchange  of  India  (NSE),  Mumbai, 
29 August 2008. 
 Honourable Finance Minister, Chairman SEBI Shri Bhave, Chairman NSE, Shri Mathur, MD 
& CEO NSE, Shri Ravi Narain, DMD, NSE Smt. Chitra Ramakrishnan, ladies and gentlemen.  
We are gathered here to mark an event of great significance in the context of Indian financial 
markets. This event is in fulfillment of the announcement made by the Hon. Finance Minister 
as part of the Budget Speech in February 2008. It may be recalled that the preparatory work 
in this regard had commenced with the setting up of an Internal Group on Currency Futures 
in RBI as announced in the Annual Policy, April 2007. Today is the culmination of a process 
of extensive consultations and deliberations intended to design a framework for introduction 
of currency futures in conjunction with the existing vibrant OTC market.  
Let me say a few words on the impressive growth of forex markets in India in the recent past. 
As  per  the  BIS  Triennial  Survey  on  the  global  foreign  exchange  and  derivatives  market 
activity (2007), the foreign exchange market in India has grown into the 16th largest market 
in  the  world  in  terms  of  total  daily  turnover  which  was  US$34  billion  in  2007.  The  OTC 
derivatives  segment  of  the  foreign  exchange  market  has  also  increased  significantly  to 
register a daily average turnover of USD 24 billion, which is 17th largest among all countries. 
The  daily  turnover  has  increased  to  US$48  billion  in  2007-08.  The  bid-offer  spreads  are 
narrow reflecting the liquidity and efficiency of the market. There is a wide menu of products 
available in the OTC market which serves a distinct economic purpose. 
The biggest challenge in designing a framework for currency futures in India, I may say, was 
the contextual setting in which the foreign exchange market operates in India. There was no 
ready template available internationally that we could draw upon since most of the countries 
that have active currency futures markets are those which are relatively more convertible on 
the  capital  account.  The  endeavour  was  to  have  a  framework  which  genuinely  sought  to 
provide  an  additional  avenue  for  risk  management  while  maintaining  the  integrity  of  the 
existing market microstructure.  
The Report of the Internal Group was discussed extensively in the meetings of the Technical 
Advisory Committee on financial markets which consists of market participants, experts and 
regulators. We have also had the benefit of an array of expert views, including those of the 
Ministry of Finance which were indeed valuable in giving final contours to the framework. The 
operational  aspects  were  commendably  dealt  with  by  the  RBI-SEBI  Standing  Technical 
Committee  and  I  must  highlight  the  exemplary  inter-regulatory  coordinative  approach  that 
has  been  the  hallmark  of  the  entire  process.  A  similar  approach  is  now  being  adopted  in 
respect of interest rate futures as well and we may see a fruition of efforts in this regard in a 
short time. In this regard, I express deep appreciation of the contribution made by SEBI, and 
in particularly the Chairman, in bringing this to fruition.  
I congratulate NSE for putting in place the platform in a short time and ensuring a sizeable 
number  of  members  at  the  initial  start  itself.  I  believe  the  currency  futures  market  will 
seamlessly  complement  the  existing  OTC  market.  As  you  may  be  aware,  in  all  countries, 
including developed markets, OTC segment dominates foreign exchange transactions.  
The introduction of currency futures, I am sure, will provide further depth and breadth to the 
market and fulfill their intended objective as an effective risk management instrument. I would 
also like to take this opportunity to urge all the market participants to leverage this significant 
milestone for skill development within as well as at a broader industry level.  
BIS Review 103/2008 
 1
On  behalf  of  RBI,  I  would  like  to  assure  our  continued  commitment  to  orderly  and  well 
thought  out  development  of  financial  markets,  while  maintaining  financial  stability  and 
integrity. 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2008
