José De Gregorio: Transparency and communications in modern central 
banking  
Keynote speech by Mr José De Gregorio, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, at the 10th 
Annual General Meeting of the Interamerican Economics and Finance Journalist Association 
(AIPEF), Santiago, 17 July 2008. 
 It is a pleasure for me to take part in this event and to have the opportunity of highlighting the 
importance  of  communications  in  modern  central  banking.  Journalists  play  a  fundamental 
role in transmitting our messages to the general public and that is why we are particularly 
interested  in  communicating  with  you  and  making  ourselves  understood  to  the  best  of  our 
ability. The time when central banks were opaque is gone. Today, transparency is the key to 
satisfying  the  demands  that  democratic  societies  make  on  autonomous  institutions  like 
central  banks  and  to  achieving  monetary  policy  efficiency.  So  I  would  like  to  talk  about 
transparency with a special focus on monetary policy. 
Why the need for transparency? 
In  recent  decades,  central  banks  have  become  increasingly  more  transparent.  For  many 
reasons,  which  I  will  not  go  into  today,  they  have  moved  towards  a  greater  degree  of 
autonomy  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  Central  banks  have  been  given  operational 
independence  and  are  able  to  exercise  monetary  policy  using  technical  criteria  with  a 
medium  term  perspective.  Therefore  we  have  the  first  reason  for  central  banks  to  be 
transparent: the legimitimacy required in a democratic regime of an autonomous institution 
whose decisions have important implications for national welfare. 
In  the  case  of  Chile,  this  duty  to  impart  information  is  stipulated  in  the  Central  Bank’s 
Constitutional  Organic  Law  which  mandates  that  once  a  year  the  Bank  must  inform  the 
President  of  the  Republic  and  the  Senate  about  its  deliberations  and  developments.  This 
takes place in September when the Central Bank Board presents its Monetary Policy Report 
to  the  Senate.  Nevertheless,  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile  goes  beyond  this  requirement  and 
reports not only to the Senate in September but also presents a monetary policy report to the 
Senate’s  Finance  Committee  in  January  and  again  in  May.  The  same  happens  with  the 
Financial Stability Report which is published in January and June each year. Similarly, the 
Bank gives an account of its management of international reserves once a year as part of its 
Annual Report. 
However, this is not enough. The legitimacy of the Central Bank is upheld by direct, open, 
and  non-excluding  communication  with  the  general  public  and  so  these  documents  are 
uploaded on the Bank’s website at the same time as they are being presented. Moreover, the 
Bank issues other reports, communications, minutes, specialized studies and statistics, all of 
which are available to the public. There are also press conferences and interviews with Bank 
board members and staff. 
The time when the workings of central banks were something complex and mysterious has 
also passed. We want the community to understand our work since it consists of providing a 
public good – stability – which enables the country to progress. It is our concern that people 
no longer consider us a bunch of technocrats engaged in incomprehensible activities. 
Another  important  reason  for  transparency  has  to  do  with  the  effectiveness  of  monetary 
policy. In recent years, there is a growing consensus towards the idea that monetary policy is 
better when it is carried out with clarity and predictability and is not a source of noise and 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 1
instability. To that end, the monetary authority must communicate clearly its vision of how the 
economy is working and how monetary policy decisions influence inflation. 
With regard to Chile’s inflation targeting regime, we aim at keeping inflation most of the time 
around 3%, with a tolerance range of one percentage point either side. However, given that 
inflation cannot be controlled in the short term, we implement our policy in such a way that 
forecast  inflation  two  years  ahead  is  3%.  This  requires  high  and  constant  degrees  of 
transparency and communication, as I will go on to discuss. 
Transparency in inflation targeting 
In the past, when monetary policy was implemented in a different way, less information was 
required. For example, when there was a fixed exchange rate, the public only needed to look 
at  the  exchange  parity  each  day  to  know  whether  targets  were  being  met.  Similarly,  if  a 
central bank bases its monetary policy on a certain monetary objective, the public only needs 
to  check  the  way  the  figures  for  that  particular  aggregate  are  going  to  be  sure  that  the 
objective is being accomplished. 
However, in the context of inflation targets, where this variable is not controllable in the short 
run – and, as we are currently witnessing, it is subject to many shocks – it is important to 
monitor to what extent targets are met and for that it is not enough to simply monitor inflation 
figures  since  the  scheme  itself  allows  for  deviations.  The  Central  Bank  must  report  these 
deviations and explain its strategy to correct them. 
In an ideal world – without uncertainty and where all agents have the same information and 
also the same chance of protecting themselves from any contingency – transparency would 
be  unnecessary.  However,  it  is  a  good  exercise  to  ask  oneself  what  are  the  frictions  that 
require communication, beyond being accountable to the executive and legisltive. Friction in 
this case is the incomplete information market participants have about the Central Bank so 
transparency is fundamental to generating credibility, and credibility is at the heart of a good 
monetary policy. 
There  are  two  kinds  of  asymmetries  of  information  that  require  communication:  one  is  the 
uncertainty  about  the  preferences  and  objectives  of  central  banks  and  the  other  is  the 
uncertainty  about  the  central  banks’  technical  ability  to  achieve  their  target.  By  publicly 
justifying their decisions, central banks enhance their credibility. Moreover, decision-making 
is  improved  by  ensuring  coherence  between  the  decision  and  the  communication  and  this 
obliges  central  bankers  to  profoundly  think  upon  and  evaluate  their  decisions  thereby 
improving their monetary policy results. Thus, we can claim that greater transparency has led 
to better economic performance. 
As we see in Chile, there is a lot of talk about the decisions and the scenarios of the Central 
Bank and this is good because it strengthens credibility and keeps authorities committed to 
their objectives, not only at the moment of communicating but also at the moment of adopting 
those decisions. 
Effectiveness of monetary policy is reinforced by communication with market participants and 
by some degree of predictability in the Central Bank’s conduct of its policies. 
Monetary  policy  affects  inflation  through  its  effects  on  spending  (consumption  and 
investment)  and  on  asset  prices.  The  Central  Bank  controls  short-term  interest  rates  but 
these  have  only  limited  effects  on  the  economy;  financial  market  participants  base  their 
decisions on the whole term structure. Investment, for example, is fundamentally guided by 
long-term  rates.  Nevertheless,  expectations  about  the  course  of  short-term  rates  naturally 
are  key  determinants  of  the  long-term  rate  and  therefore  do  influence  the  whole  term 
structure.  Thus,  expectations  about  the  evolution  of  monetary  policy  contribute  to  its 
effectiveness.  A  transparent  central  bank  affects  the  market’s  expectations  by  providing 
2 
 BIS Review 92/2008
market  participants  with  information  on  which  they  base  their  vision  of  the  likely  course  of 
inflation and monetary policy actions.  
The Central Bank of Chile’s communication of monetary policy 
In the Chilean case, our main vehicles through which we give account for our objectives of 
price  and  financial  stability  are  the  quarterly  Monetary  Policy  Report  and  the  bi-annual 
Financial Stability Report. 
I would like to describe in more detail our communication strategy for monetary policy. The 
information provided in our Monetary Policy Report is only part of that communication. The 
preparation that leads up to its publication is a vital component of our work, demanding great 
dedication, discussion, interaction and reflection on the current state of the economy and the 
outlook for inflation. The Board and staff meet at least six times in the course of five weeks 
and  there  are  presentations  of  special  topics,  a  great  many  bilateral  meetings  and  draft 
reports are revised and discussed at length prior to publication. Therefore in this process the 
board members form their opinion on the determinants of inflation and how monetary policy 
should evolve. 
This  kind  of  reporting  was  introduced  by  the  Bank  of  England  in  1993  and  is  a  common 
practice  among  central  banks  that  have  inflation  target  regimes.  Today  a  great  number  of 
banks  publish  inflation  reports  and  in  a  survey  carried  out  by  Fracasso  et  al.  (2003)  our 
Monetary Policy Report was classified in 5th place out of a sample of twenty such reports, 
the Bank of England’s being judged the best. 
To provide a basis for discussions on monetary policy, the Board decides which are the key 
variables  of  the  most  likely  economic  scenario.  The  projections  for  these  variables  derive 
from  sources  considered  to  be  the  most  realistic  and  widely  accepted.  For  example,  the 
outlook for world growth is based on the Consensus Forecast and the International Monetary 
Fund’s  projections  published  in  its  World  Economic  Outlook.  The  outlook  for  commodity 
prices generally follows the futures market prices. Of course, these projections are imperfect 
– all projections are inherently uncertain – and the Board places particular emphasis on the 
risks and threats that may cause deviation from the baseline scenario. Thus, while making 
the baseline scenario as realistic as possible, the important discussion centers on analysis of 
the deviations from it and, above all, what are the implications for monetary policy that are 
coherent with our inflation target. 
To  make  this  most  likely  scenario  more  useful,  we  need  to  consider  not  only  the  external 
economy but also discuss the outlook for the key variables of our own economy, particularly 
exchange rate and interest rate.1 
To project the path of exchange rates, we use the interest rates parity, that is, the exchange 
rate varies according to interest rate differentials. If the domestic interest rate is lower than 
the  international  interest  rate  (adjusted  for  risk  premiums),  the  exchange  rate  can  be 
expected to depreciate. Furthermore, we have to make some assumption about where the 
exchange rate will be in the long run. For this purpose, we assume that if at the moment of 
making the forecast the real exchange rate is consistent, within a reasonable margin, with its 
long-term fundamentals, it will remain at the current levels in the long run. On the contrary, if 
it is deviated from fundamentals, we assume that the exchange rate will converge to values 
coherent  with  its  long  run  levels.2  In  this  way,  with  interest  rate  parity  and  certain 
                                                 
1   For  further  details  on  projection  models  and  as  an  example  of  transparency,  see  Banco  Central  de  Chile 
(2003). Also Banco Central de Chile (2007) updates the Board’s vision of monetary policy and its price stability 
objective. 
2  Caputo, Nuñez and Valdés (2008) present the various models normally used to evaluate the real equilibrium 
exchange rate. 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 3
assumptions  about  the  distant  future  it  is  possible  to  have  a  complete  trajectory  for  the 
exchange rate.  
I must point out that, in a floating exchange regime, this is a working assumption made only 
to provide a model consistent with projections, even recognizing that the disclosed interest 
rate parity has little empirical validation. In any case, as our experience early this year has 
shown, a significant deviation from this path can have important implications for the course of 
monetary policy. At the beginning of the year, it was thought that rates could go up in the first 
quarter. However, the Board considered that the downward pressure on inflation generated 
by a pronounced appreciation of the peso relieved pressure on monetary policy. 
One aspect which has received much attention in monetary policy practice and theory is the 
assumption about future interest rates used in the projections. It is an assumption about the 
future conduct of the Board itself, because this is the instrument used by monetary policy. 
When we began publishing the Monetary Policy Report at the beginning of this decade, like 
many other central banks we worked on the assumption that the monetary policy rate would 
remain constant for the whole policy horizon. Even though this was not wholly plausible over 
a horizon of two years, it did seem to be not far off reality since the monetary policy rate was 
thought to be around its neutral level. 
However, this working assumption became extraordinarily unreasonable when, towards the 
end of 2002 and early 2003, the monetary policy rate fell well below its neutral level. That is 
why, since then we have taken as a working assumption a monetary policy rule that adjusts 
the  interest  rate  in  order  to  meet  the  target.3  This  does  not  involve  a  commitment  to  the 
future rate path but it serves to organize our discussions and deliberations. We communicate 
this path by comparing it (saying it is higher or similar, etc) to the implicit path seen in the 
forward curve and the expectations, and in general we indicate what this means in terms of 
possible rate changes during the year.  
For  example,  in  the  latest  Monetary  Policy  Report  we  stated  that  “in  coming  quarters,  the 
monetary policy rate will move along a similar path to the one that can be inferred from the 
different measures of private sector expectations over the two weeks prior to the statistical 
closing of this Report.” and in the presentation to the Senate this was clarified in more detail 
by  stating  that  by  the  end  of  the  year  the  monetary  policy  rate  could  lie  in  the  range  of 
twenty-five basis points more or less than its current level. 
In practice, and only two months after that presentation to the Senate, we have increased the 
monetary policy rate by one hundred basis points. In the Board’s opinion, this is necessary to 
prevent  the  latest  news  on  inflation  –  both  internationally  and  its  passthrough  to  some 
domestic  prices  –  from  delaying  the  adjustment  of  inflation  to  its  target  within  the  policy 
horizon.  The  anchor  for  these  decisions  was  the  baseline  scenario  on  which  the  May 
Monetary Policy Report was drawn up. 
Publication of the Monetary Policy Report is reinforced by the statements released at the end 
of our monthly monetary policy meetings in which we generally refer explicitly to the baseline 
scenario. Additionally, three weeks after each meeting takes place we publish the minutes 
containing  the  board  members’  discussions  which  again  frequently  refer  to  the  most  likely 
scenario. 
With the objective of acting with the greatest independence possible in the monetary policy 
meetings and minimizing the risks of introducing unnecessary noise on financial markets, we 
have a self-imposed period of silence, or purdah, in the days prior to the meeting and to the 
Monetary  Policy  Report  release.  Evidence  shows  that  financial  markets  are  much  more 
sensitive  to  information  in  the  few  days  prior  to  a  monetary  policy  meeting  (Ehrmann  and 
                                                 
3   See  Woodford  (2007)  for  recent  discussion  of  the  alternatives  and  coherence  with  a  framework  of  inflation 
targets implemented through inflation forecast targeting. 
4 
 BIS Review 92/2008
Fratzscher, 2008) and, at the same time, any comment that is misunderstood or confused 
could influence the position of someone in the meeting.  
Are there limits to transparency? The answer is definitely yes. In every democratic society, 
transparency is a duty. But the limit is to what point an excess of transparency might limit the 
Bank in achieving its objective which is price stability. For example, we could televise live the 
monetary  policy  meetings  but  that  would  restrict  the  open,  frank  dialogue  that  goes  on. 
Besides,  the  discussions  could  be  misinterpreted  because  they  involve  much  technical 
jargon and judgments. I imagine that these same reasons prevent court deliberations from 
being broadcast live. 
In other words, since context determines conduct, an excess of transparency can limit the 
freedom  with  which  we  discuss  and  express  our  judgments,  thereby  undermining  the 
capacity to make appropriate decisions on monetary policy. The more transparent, the more 
cautious  board  members  will  be  in  pronouncing  their  judgments.  That  is  why  we  have 
decided not to reveal board members’ names in the minutes, so as not to inhibit an open, 
technical  and  independent  discussion.  In  the  pursuit  of  monetary  policy  effectiveness  and 
predictability, we feel that the discussion itself is more important than names. A recent study 
by  Meade  and  Stasavage  (2008)  compared  the  Fed’s  Federal  Open  Market  Committee 
discussions before and after 1993, at which time it was decided to publish detailed records of 
deliberations of the meetings five years after they had been held. The study concluded that 
knowing  the  transcripts  were  to  be  made  public  had  made  members  of  a  monetary  policy 
committee more reluctant to offer dissenting opinions.  
In general, transparency and its limits depend chiefly on the characteristics of the Board. For 
example, at one extreme we have the European Central Bank which does not keep minutes 
and dissent is very limited; and at the other extreme we have the Bank of England where 
each  board  member  has  individual  responsibility.4  Chile,  like  the  United  States,  takes  an 
intermediate stance. That’s why Blinder (2004) says, there is no “one-size-fits-all” approach 
to communication and transparency. 
Communications policy 
The  Central  Bank  website  carries  a  document  called  “Communications  Policy”  which 
specifies  the  principles  and  norms  governing  the  Bank’s  communication  with  the  public.  It 
states that the Bank communicates with the public by way of official notices and publications, 
minutes,  previously  announced  public  conferences,  interviews  or  public  declarations  made 
by  board  members.  It  also  says  that  the  Governor  is  directly  responsible  for  all  the 
information  the  Bank  puts  out,  except  for  whatever  the  individual  board  members  might 
publish or say in public. 
At  the  same  time,  the  policy  rules  that  the  Bank  must  publish  all  information  or  resolution 
relevant  to  the  market  as  soon  as  it  has  been  validated,  thus  obliging itself  to  give  out  all 
market-sensitive information as quickly as possible. 
Whenever  a  board  member  or  Bank  executive  gives  a  talk  with  information  that  could  be 
relevant for the market, it is published on the website. Any public presentation given by the 
Governor is posted on the web as soon as they begin so that the general public has access 
to the information at the same time as those present. In my own case, and so that there is no 
discrimination between those who attend the presentation and those who do not, I leave a 
written text of my speech which is not an easy task to do, but ensures providing a precise 
message. For you as journalists, this is useful to your work and contributes to avoiding the 
use of the old excuse “I was misinterpreted”, which may occur, but in most cases is the fault 
                                                 
4   See Blinder and others (2008) for more details on communication in central banks and relevant references. 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 5
of the speaker. Some of my presentations are not accompanied by a written speech in which 
case your job is to pick up on the fundamental messages and my job is to know how to best 
transmit them. 
Our communications policy requires a fluid relationship with the press. We can hardly amplify 
our messages if we do not have access to the media. We have a Communications Manager 
who advises the Bank’s board members and executives on the intricacies of this relationship 
with  the  press.  It  is  a  complex  relationship  because  it  has  to  be  carried  on  within  the 
limitations  imposed  by  the  fact  that  we  are  a  technical  institution  and  our  messages  are 
highly sensitive for the market and for the general public. 
One  principle  we  rigorously  uphold  is  that  all  information  that  is  the  product  of  a  Board 
decision or resolution is communicated simultaneously, which means that no media channel 
can obtain a scoop. There are strict internal rules on this matter and all contacts with Bank 
executives and staff must go through the Communications Management before following the 
corresponding course. 
We  are  not  prolific  in  giving  interviews,  statements  or  press  conferences.  We  speak  little, 
maybe less than the press would like and, although some of you might disagree with me, we 
try to maintain equanimity in our dealings with the media. 
Just  as  the  press  requires  us  to  use  clear  language  in  a  transparent,  timely  and  fast 
communication,  we  must  also  stress  the  importance  of  the  media  in  the  economic  agents 
behavior.  We  certainly  do  not  ask  you  to  restrict  or  limit  the  information,  nothing  could  be 
further from the spirit of free speech we adhere to, but we do request you to be rigorous in 
your  reporting.  Overinterpretation  of  decisions  made  by  the  Bank  or  overemphasis  of 
transient economic indicators that do not mark a trend are situations that regularly influence 
public sentiments and even behavior. It only remains to me to recommend professional rigor 
and an adequate appreciation of the evolution of the economy, which are the same demands 
we at the Bank make upon ourselves. 
Chile requires a specialized press that looks at economic events through the perspective of 
time and avoids being led away by sensations or climates. The economy progresses in long, 
slow cycles even though the day-to-day events may at times overwhelm us. 
We  have  seen  tremendous  progress  in  the  Chilean  economic  press.  The  specialized 
journalists have played an outstanding role in contributing to a better informed society, better 
equipped for decision-making. As in all fields, there is always room for further improvement. 
From our side, we are always available to contribute to explaining or advising on complex 
phenomena. 
Final remarks 
I would like to finish with some comments on a matter that has concerned me for some time 
which  is,  on  what  subjects  a  Central  Bank  board  member  can  talk,  and  in  particular  the 
Governor of the Bank who is the official spokesman. There is no formal restriction, but there 
is  a  practical  limit  which  is  that  no  board  member  would  like  to  spoil  his  professional  and 
communicational reputation by speaking without well-founded arguments. It is true that the 
Bank has a limited mission but it also has an excellent group of economists. For example, at 
the request of the Senate Financial Committee, studies have been carried out at the Bank on 
the  long-term  growth  of  the  Chilean  economy  and  both  myself  and  my  predecessor  have 
written  articles  on  the  same  topic  (Corbo  and  Tokman,  2007;  De  Gregorio,  2008).  It  is 
possible to speak and research on relevant topics as long as we do not stray far from our 
fundamental  task.  A  few  weeks  ago,  Ben  Bernanke  gave  a  speech  on  the  challenges  of 
health reform in the United States (Bernanke, 2008) and ten years ago Alan Greenspan gave 
a speech on income distribution (Greenspan, 1998). 
6 
 BIS Review 92/2008
Just as the Central Bank asks that its autonomy is respected, which is far from not accepting 
criticism, the Bank must also respect the decisions of other institutions. Here the balance is 
certainly  tenuous.  In  any  case,  as  a  policy,  the  Central  Bank  at  the  moment  of  making  a 
decision  and  defining scenarios  takes  as  given  what  happens  in  other  spheres  of  national 
life. 
There is no clear rule, but there are some principles. First, the Central Bank must be rigorous 
in  referring  to  all  matters  that  have  macroeconomic  impact  and  consequently  condition  its 
actions.  Secondly,  when  the  connection  is  not  so  straightforward,  we  must  be  particularly 
cautious, especially when politically controversial subjects are involved. The Central Bank is 
a technical and autonomous institution and must take great care that the messages it puts 
out are not used politically. There are some very important subjects requiring discussion in 
our country, such as the educational reform, but it would not be prudent for the Bank to be 
affected  by  approaching  any  matter  in  an  inadequate  or  inopportune  way.  Even  more 
complex would be to discuss a tax reform that changes the composition of taxes or a labor 
reform  that  alters  the  dynamics  of  the  business  cycle.  Subjects  like  these  have  enormous 
implications for economic efficiency, but they also evoke tremendous political passion. 
Since there are no clear rules, and I have no defined position on this matter, I can offer two 
popular recommendations that I tend to follow: “nothing can be rejected out of hand” which 
allows an ample degree of flexibility and “when in doubt, refrain,” which is the best advice to 
prudence. 
of 
de 
Chile 
2003, 
Chile, 
Central 
available 
available 
Santiago, 
of  Chile, 
Inflación,  Santiago,  Central  Bank 
References 
Central Bank of Chile (2003), Modelos Macroeconómicos y Proyecciones del Banco Central 
in 
Bank 
de 
http://www.bcentral.cl/publicaciones/politicas/polit05.htm. 
Central Bank of Chile (2007), La Política Monetaria del Banco Central de Chile en el Marco 
in 
de  Metas 
http://www.bcentral.cl/publicaciones/politicas/polit07.htm.  
Bernanke,  B.  (2008),  “Challenges  for  Health-Care  Reform”,  speech  at  the  Senate  Finance 
Committee Health Reform Summit, Washington, D.C. 
Blinder,  A.  (2004),  The  Quiet  Revolution:  Central  Bank  Goes  Moder,  New  Haven,  Yale 
University Press. 
Blinder,  A.,  M.  Ehrman,  M.  Fratzcher,  J,  De  Haan  and  D-J  Cansen  (2008),  “Central  Bank 
Communication  and  Monetary  Policy:  A  Survey  of  Theory  and  Evidence”,  ECB  Working 
Paper, No. 898, forthcoming in Journal of Economic Literature. 
Caputo,  R.,  M  Núñez  and  R.  Valdés  (2008),  “Análisis  del  Tipo  de  Cambio  Real  en  la 
Práctica”. 
in 
available 
http://www.bcentral.cl/estudios/revista-economia/2008/abr/v11n1abr2008pp61-91.pdf. 
Corbo,  V.  and  A.  Tokman  (2007),  “Latin  America  in  a  Global  World:  Challenges  Ahead”, 
Central Bank of Chile, Documento de Política Económica No. 19. 
De Gregorio, J. (2008), “El Crecimiento Económico de La América Latina: Del Desencanto 
del siglo XX a los Desafíos del XXI”, El Trimestre Económico, Vol. LXXV (1), No. 297, pp. 
4-45. 
Ehrman,  M.  and  M.  Fratzscher  (2008),  “Purdah.  On  the  Rational  of  Central  Bank  Silence 
Around Policy Meetings”, ECB Working Paper, No. 868. 
Greenspan,  A.  (1998),  “Income  Inequality:  Issues  and  Policy  Options”,  speech  at  a 
symposium  sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole, 
Wyoming. 
Economía 
Chilena, 
61-91, 
april, 
pp. 
BIS Review 92/2008 
 7
Meade,  E.  and  D.  Stasavage  (2008),  “Publicity  of  Debate  and  the  Incentive  to  Dissent: 
Evidence form the US Federal Reserve”, The Economic Journal, april, pp. 696-717. 
Woodford,  M.  (2007),  “The  Case  for  Forecast  Targeting  as  a  Monetary  Policy  Strategy,” 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 21, No. 3-24.  
8 
 BIS Review 92/2008
