José Manuel González-Páramo: A strategic vision for statistics – 
challenges for the next ten years 
Concluding remarks by Mr José Manuel González-Páramo, Member of the Executive Board 
of the European Central Bank, at the 4th ECB Conference on Statistics “A strategic vision for 
statistics – challenges for the next 10 years”, Frankfurt am Main, 25 April 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen,1
It is a pleasure for me to have the opportunity to address such distinguished audience on the 
occasion  of  another  stimulating  and  forward-looking  ECB  conference  on  statistics.  As  the 
Executive Board member in charge of the Directorate General Statistics, I would like to begin 
by  thanking  all  the  participants  in  this  conference  for  their  valuable  contributions.  At  this 
stage,  it  is  too  early  to  provide  a  balanced  summary  of  all  the  thoughtful  written  and  oral 
contributions made at this conference. Nevertheless, let me draw from the contributions that 
we have heard over the last two days in order to propose some elements of a strategic vision 
for statistics aiming to master the challenges for the next ten years. 
I would like to highlight three major developments, which I believe to be fundamental for our 
medium- to long-term strategy for statistics.  
(1)   The  first  is  globalisation,  the  term  used  to  describe  the  growing  interdependence  of 
economies  via  trade,  production  and  financial  market  linkages  over  recent  decades. 
Globalisation is a subject of great interest for monetary policy-makers, the reason for such 
interest being that it may – via a number of channels – affect key elements of the monetary 
policy  framework,  such  as  the  inflation  formation  process  and  the  monetary  transmission 
mechanism,2 and ultimately change the way central banks conduct monetary policy.3  
It  has  been  even  argued  that  globalisation  may  undermine  the  ability  of  national  central 
banks  to  control  the  dynamics  of  domestic  inflation,  and  ultimately  lead  central  bankers  to 
relinquish  their  autonomy  in  favour  of  some  mechanism  of  coordination  among  national 
monetary policies. While these concerns may appear rather alarmist,4 our knowledge of the 
different  channels  through  which  globalisation  is  changing  our  economies,  and  thereby 
potentially reducing the validity of the tools that we use to model their behaviour, is still rather 
limited.  
In addition, the events in credit and money markets since last August have reminded us that 
in  a  globalised  world,  disturbances  may  be  transmitted  more  rapidly  and  through  different 
channels than in the past. Indeed, from its origin in the relatively small sub-prime segment of 
the  US  market  for  mortgage  loans  to  its  somewhat  unusual  dynamics  of  transmission  (for 
instance, the fact that the current turmoil initially manifested itself in the difficulty for banks, 
mainly European, to obtain short-term liquidity in the US dollar market), a number of factors 
have set this episode of turmoil apart from previous experiences.  
I thank Werner Bier for valuable contributions to this speech. 
                                                 
1  
2   See Ciccarelli, M. and Mojon, B. (2005), “Global inflation”, European Central Bank Working Paper No. 537. 
3   See González-Páramo, J.M. (2007) “Globalisation and monetary policy”, Lecture at Suomen Pankki, Helsinski, 
15 March (http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2007/html/sp070316.en.html). 
4   See Woodford, M. (2007) “Globalization and monetary control”, NBER Working Paper No. 13329. The author 
analyses  in  detail  the  implications  of  globalisation  in  financial,  final  goods  and  factor  markets  for  monetary 
policy in the context of a new Keynesian model. He concludes that, even under the assumption of significantly 
more complete global integration than experienced in practice, national central bankers are unlikely to lose the 
ability to control the dynamics of inflation. 
BIS Review 51/2008 
 1
The difficulty to (a) rely on standard analytical tools – based on regularities drawn from the 
historical  experience  of  a  less  globalised  world  –  and  on  conventional  information  sets, 
together with (b) the need to analyse and understand economic and financial developments 
in  real  time,  combine  to  produce  an  ever  increasing  demand  for  new,  more  detailed  and 
timely statistics.  
The impact of globalisation on statistics was already the subject of our third ECB conference 
on statistics in 2006 and the events of the last months prove that globalisation will remain on 
our agendas for the foreseeable time. 
(2)   The second major factor of relevance for our medium- to long-term strategy is the IT 
revolution. Let me recall that this factor is not entirely disjointed from globalisation. Indeed, 
one of the main reasons why globalisation has accelerated over the last two decades is the 
boom in the use of information and communication technology, with the ensuing reduction in 
the cost of transporting goods, services and information across the globe.  
The  IT  revolution  has  had  a  dramatic  effect  on  the  work  of  statisticians.  Not  so  long  ago, 
statisticians worked mainly with paper and pencil. Today, modern statistics are unthinkable 
without  strong  IT  support  for  the  collection,  compilation  and  dissemination  of  statistics. 
Statistical procedures that today are considered as either technically impossible or too costly 
to pursue, may tomorrow be widely implemented as best practices.  
(3)   The  third  factor  of  strategic  importance  is  the  existence  of  a  constraint  given  by  the 
response  burden  of  reporting  agents.  The  demand  for  statistics  is  steadily  increasing,  and 
the balance between the benefits and costs of new and existing statistics is not the same 
across  the  various  economic  agents.  While  statistics  are  a  public  good,  they  frequently 
represent a private cost as well as a public one.  
Unfortunately,  we  cannot  think  of  reaching  one  day  a  balanced  steady  state  for  statistical 
development,  in  which  the  requirements  of  the  users  are  fully  satisfied  at  a  relatively 
acceptable cost in terms of the response burden of the reporting agents. Nevertheless, in the 
medium- to long-term we should aim to optimise both the production function of transforming 
collected data into statistical output and the related cost of producing it. 
I will structure my further reflections along the four themes discussed during the conference. 
In the first section, I will summarise the main current and future statistical requirements of 
institutional users of monetary, economic and financial statistics. In the second section, I will 
address the response of the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) and, in particular, 
the Eurosystem, to forthcoming challenges in the area of statistics. The third section refers to 
the necessary and fruitful cooperation of the statistical community at the European level and 
worldwide. The fourth section deals with the natural challenge faced by statisticians in open 
and democratic societies, namely how to explain to both professional users and the public at 
large which statistics match their needs and how to interpret them. Finally, I will conclude by 
outlining elements of a strategic vision for statistics. 
Session 1: The role of harmonised monetary, financial and economic statistics in 
monetary and other economic policies 
Sound monetary and economic policies require the regular monitoring and in-depth analysis 
of  a  broad  set  of  timely  and  high-quality  statistics.  Allan  Meltzer  often  recalls  a  very 
interesting anecdote involving Irving Fisher, the great American economist and statistician, 
and Eugene Meyer, the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve in the 
early 1930s.5  
                                                 
5   Allan  H.  Meltzer  (2000),  “Lessons  from  the  Early  History  of  the  Federal  Reserve”,  Presidential  Address  to 
International Atlantic Economic Society, Munich, March 17. 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2008
In 1931, Fisher – alarmed by the contraction in money growth – called on Meyer and pointed 
out  that  demand  deposits  were  declining  sharply,  signalling  that  monetary  policy  was 
inadequate to address the severe economic contraction. Apparently, Chairman Meyer’s reply 
was to enquire what demand deposits were, but, even after listening to Fisher’s explanation, 
failed to show much interest.  
Some  of  the  members  of  the  audience  may  be  thinking  that  the  choice  of  an  anecdote 
reminding us that central bankers ignore monetary developments at their own risk is not too 
surprising in this house. In fact, this is certainly a main moral of this story, but this anecdote 
also points out to another important fact, namely that sound policies require good analyses, 
and – in turn – good analyses rely on high quality statistics. 
At the ECB, the use of statistics for our analysis and communication is pervasive. One just 
needs  to  listen  to  the  introductory  statement  of  the  ECB  President  at  the  monthly  press 
conference  following  the  Governing  Council  meeting  or  read  the  ECB  Monthly  Bulletin  to 
immediately  realise  how  intensively  we  rely  on  statistical  data.  Indeed,  statistical  data  is  a 
key input into the information set available for a number of important political decisions, from 
the  regular  setting  of  monetary  policy  to  the  assessment  of  the  degree  of  convergence  of 
countries wishing to join the euro area.  
It  should  be  noted  that,  in  this  respect,  there  is  nothing  special  about  the  ECB  relative  to 
other central banks. Indeed, the use of statistics is equally important and pervasive for other 
major central banks. More generally, statistics are of crucial interest to a variety of economic 
agents  in  our  economies.  Financial  market  participants,  multinational  corporations  and 
citizens  at  large,  are  increasingly  interested  in  improving  their  access  to  –  and  their 
understanding of – the existing statistics.  
Globalisation  creates  additional  demand  for  new  and  more  comprehensive  statistics.  For 
instance,  in  a  globalised  world  the  need  for  monetary  and  economic  analyses  in  real  time 
requires comparable key macroeconomic statistics across major economic areas, as well as 
a few worldwide aggregates with appropriate regional breakdowns. Let me just give you an 
illustration of the potential uses of such aggregates.  
As I hinted at earlier, it has been argued that globalisation has affected the inflation formation 
process, specifically by increasing the sensitivity of domestic price developments to foreign 
cyclical conditions (the so-called “global output gap hypothesis”).6 This proposition has been 
accompanied by the recommendation –popularised by The Economist and other important 
media  –  that  central  banks  aiming  to  maintain  price  stability  at  home  should  pay  close 
attention to developments in global output gaps.7  
However,  the  empirical  evidence  on  this  hypothesis  is  fairly  mixed,  possibly  reflecting  to 
some extent the uncertainty surrounding the data on global output.8 And let me stress that 
here the uncertainty does not only relate to the problems of estimating the output gap – an 
issue  on  which  I’m  sure  my  colleague  at  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  Athanasios 
                                                 
6   See for instance, Fisher, R.W. (2005), “Globalization and monetary policy”, Warren and Anita Manshel lecture 
in American foreign policy, Harvard University, 3 November. 
7   See The Economist (2005), “A foreign affair”, Economics Focus, 20 October, and Business Week (2006), “A 
narrow window on the world”, 5 June. 
8   For instance, evidence in support of this hypothesis for sixteen industrialised countries and the euro area has 
been  recently  provided  by  Borio,  C.  and  A.  Filardo  (2007),  “Globalisation  and  inflation:  New  cross-country 
evidence  on  the  global  determinants  of  domestic  inflation”,  BIS  Working  Papers  No.  227.  However,  their 
results for a number of countries have been challenged by Ihrig, J., Kamin, S., Lindner, D. and J. Marquez 
(2007), “Some simple tests of the globalization and inflation hypothesis”, Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 891. Similarly, Calza, A. (2008), “Globalisation, 
domestic inflation and global output gaps: Evidence from the euro area”, ECB Working Paper No. 890, finds 
limited evidence in support of the “global output gap hypothesis” for the euro area.  
BIS Review 51/2008 
 3
Orphanides  would  have  quite  a  few  words  to  say  –  but,  even  more  fundamentally,  to  the 
measure of world output itself.9
A pre-requirement to assess this hypothesis more thoroughly and, more generally, to assess 
how global macroeconomic conditions affect domestic inflation, would be to have quarterly 
world GDP statistics professionally compiled by the statistical department of an international 
organisation  with  a  broad  geographical  membership.  In  particular,  the  priority  would  be  to 
have  a  quarterly  world  GDP  indicator  at  constant  prices,  seasonally  adjusted  and  broken 
down  by  investment,  private  and  government  consumption  (as  world  exports  equal  world 
imports). With a timeliness of 60 days, coverage would account for about 80% of world GDP 
(both in current exchange rates and in purchasing power parities), which typically allows for 
the compilation of sufficiently reliable growth rate estimates at a national level.  
Another area in which there is still room for progress regards the degree of comparability of 
the  Principal  Economic  Indicators  (PEIs)  between  the  European  Union  and  the  United 
States.  
As the Principal European Economic Indicators (PEEIs) were selected with reference to the 
US  PEIs,  there  is  a  relatively  high  degree  of  similarity  between  the  two  indicator  sets,  but 
their comparability is not perfect. An earlier study by the ECB showed that, in many cases, 
methodological differences between the European and the corresponding US PEIs can be 
adjusted for, ultimately enabling the compilation of comparable macroeconomic statistics for 
both economic areas.10  
In  this  context,  “comparability”  means  the  application  of  the  same  statistical  measurement 
concept.  It  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  the  comparative  analysis  of  the  two  economic 
developments  is  straightforward,  because  the  institutional  framework  in  the  countries  may 
differ significantly. The comparison of harmonised household saving rates between countries 
with  predominantly  pay-as-you-go  pension  schemes  and  those  with  predominantly  funded 
schemes is a case in point. Harmonisation in statistics eliminates measurement biases, but is 
not a substitute for thorough economic analysis. 
The PEEIs are a success story for Eurostat and the national statistical institutes. Many of the 
ambitious targets set for the European aggregates about half a decade ago have now been 
achieved.  The  ECOFIN  Council  has  invited  Eurostat  and  the  ECB  to  review  the  scope, 
timeliness  and  quality  of  the  PEEIs  in  the  light  of  the  results  achieved,  the  constraints 
encountered and the evolving needs of users for economic and monetary policy purposes. 
As the work has only just started, I will confine myself to a few preliminary considerations:  
(a) 
The scope of the PEEIs is viewed positively and indeed reflects the main ECB user 
requirements.  
Besides  a  few  fine-tuning  measures,  it  would  be  desirable  to  add  a  section  on 
housing indicators, in particular, residential property prices.  
While the timeliness of the PEEIs has been continuously improved upon in recent 
years,  quick  wins  are  still  possible  by  better  tuning  the  timeliness  of  certain 
indicators  to  the  timetable  of  European  policy-making  processes.  Moreover,  the 
availability and timeliness of certain indicators is still insufficient. This applies mainly 
to statistics on services and the labour market. It also applies to the very valuable 
integrated  euro  area  accounts,  released  jointly  by  Eurostat  and  the  ECB,  which 
(b) 
(c) 
                                                 
9   See Wynne, M.A. and G.R. Solomon, “Obstacles to measuring output gaps”, Economic Letter – Insights from 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Dallas  2(3),  March,  for  a  discussion  of  the  various  challenges  implied  by  the 
calculation of global production capacity and slack. 
10   Article “Comparability of statistics for the euro area, the United States and Japan”, ECB Monthly Bulletin April 
2005, p. 61ff. 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2008
should become available within 90 days following the reference quarter in order to 
enhance their use in real time.  
Finally, I would welcome a serious study on the possibility of releasing a GDP flash 
estimate within 30 days following the reference quarter. 
(d) 
I would like to underline that timeliness is not the only quality criterion for statistics, but yet it 
is  crucial  for  real-time  analyses  and  a  forward-looking  monetary  policy.  Timeliness  has,  of 
course,  to  be  balanced  against  the  reliability  of  the  first  release,  including  the  capacity  to 
identify  the  inevitable  turning  points  in  the  business  cycle.  This  implies  that  also  “flash” 
estimates  should  be  based  on  a  broad  set  of  collected  data,  as  opposed  to  forecasts. 
Moreover,  the  economic  analyses  supporting  monetary  policy  are  preferably  based  on  a 
broad set of statistics which are internally consistent and show a sufficient history of at least 
two  business  cycles.  I  trust  that  the  review  of  the  PEEIs  will  be  carried  out  in  the  same 
forward-looking manner as when the PEEIs were established in the first place. 
Session 2: Future directions for the collection and compilation of statistics 
Earlier contributions at this conference have already referred to the fact that, in September 
2006, the Governing Council of the ECB set up a Eurosystem Task Force to undertake an in-
depth  analysis  of  the  function  of  statistics,  with  an  initial  focus  on  Eurosystem-related 
statistical activities. Its mandate was to identify the potential for exploiting synergies in data 
collection,  compilation  and  dissemination,  and  to  analyse  medium-  to  long-term  strategic 
issues. In November 2007, based on the work undertaken by this Task Force, the Governing 
Council  endorsed  a  strategic  long-term  vision  for  Eurosystem  statistics  with  the  following 
essential features: 
• 
Input  objective:  The  Eurosystem  statistical  function  aims  to  provide  a  reporting 
system  where  reporting  institutions  have  to  supply  any  information  only  once  and 
where the reporting burden is minimised. 
Throughput objective:  The  Eurosystem  statistical  function aims  to  be a  production 
network for the highly efficient and harmonised compilation of both Eurosystem and 
national statistics, reaping economies of scale and using state-of-the-art techniques, 
while respecting the specific set-up of the Eurosystem. 
Output objective: The Eurosystem statistical function strives to providing euro area 
statistics  that  are  fit  for  use  in  the  Eurosystem’s  decision-making,  given  the 
allocation  of  responsibilities  for  European  statistics  between  the  ESCB  and  the 
European Statistical System (as defined in the Treaty, secondary legislation and the 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  on  economic  and  financial  statistics  between  the 
European Commission’s statistical office Eurostat and the ECB). 
  The  Governing  Council  also  requested  to  thoroughly  investigate  the  feasibility  of  a  move 
towards the consolidated or pooled collection and production of various types of Eurosystem 
statistics  in  a  network,  starting  with  new  or  substantially  revised  statistics  and  with  due 
consideration to the fact that different types of statistics may require different approaches. In 
addition,  nineteen  more  specific  recommendations  towards  the  implementation  of  the 
strategic  long-term  vision  were  decided.  The  President  already  referred  to  them  at  the 
beginning of this conference. 
While  the  practical  implications  of  the  Governing  Council’s  decisions  on  the  day-to-day 
operations  of  the  Eurosystem  statistical  function  will  need  to  be  elaborated  gradually  over 
time, I would like to illustrate the direction of developments in this regard by way of example. 
The  Centralised  Securities  Database  (CSDB),  or  more  accurately,  the  common  securities 
database, 
individual  securities  currently  under 
development  by  the  ESCB.  It  contains  several  million  securities,  at  least  those  issued  by 
residents of the European Union and those most likely held by European Union residents. 
reference  micro-database 
is  a 
for 
BIS Review 51/2008 
 5
The  CSDB  will  be  accompanied  by  security-by-security  data  collection  on  the  holdings  of 
securities set up by the national central banks (NCBs). The ECB and all NCBs share the task 
of  guaranteeing  the  quality  of  the  micro-information  contained  in  the  CSDB  for  statistical 
purposes  following  well-defined  procedures.  With  regard  to  securities  issuance,  the  CSDB 
will become the single source for all European and national securities statistics compiled by 
the  ECB  and  the  NCBs.  There  will  be  full  consistency  between  European  and  national 
statistics, in terms of basic sources, statistical concepts and detailed methods. For instance, 
the definition of “securities outstanding at market value” or “securities outstanding at nominal 
value” will be exactly the same across the European Union. The euro area statistics will not 
depend  on  the  availability  of  intermediate  national  aggregates.  Moreover,  as  securities 
issuance statistics are part of a full range of various other statistics, such as monetary and 
financial statistics, balance of payments statistics, financial accounts and government finance 
statistics, the CSDB will also significantly enhance consistency among these statistics. This 
applies as well and with a higher degree of complexity to securities-holding information. All of 
these statistical enhancements require an even closer collaboration within the ESCB and, in 
particular, the Eurosystem. The ESCB Statistics Committee is charged with this pioneering 
task. 
Given the wide range of securities included in the CSDB, this project has attracted attention 
at the international level, including that of the G8. However, first and foremost, it is important 
to demonstrate that the CSDB is fit for use in the production of euro area statistics, where 
balance  of  payments  statistics,  including  the  international  investment  positions,  and 
investment funds statistics have been identified as the highest priorities. In parallel, and in 
order to allow comparable and aggregated securities statistics on a global level in the future, 
the  ECB  also  cooperates  with  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  and  the 
International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  by  participating  in  the  Working  Group  on  Securities 
Databases towards the development of a handbook on securities statistics, which will focus 
initially on debt securities. 
In general, applying standard requirements to statistics may indeed be best dealt with by first 
agreeing on output tables, enshrining the tables in a legal act and afterwards collecting the 
related input data from reporting agents. However, this standard procedure typically does not 
cope with significant financial and structural innovations or with crisis situations. If necessary, 
the  available  set  of  statistics  must  be  promptly  and  regularly  updated  in  the  face  of  rapid 
financial  innovation  and  broader  structural  change.  Simultaneously,  there  is  a  need  for 
sufficiently long time series without statistical breaks. This points to the opportunity of a more 
frequent and intensive recourse to micro-databases.  
Micro-information, such as information on individual securities, individual loans or individual 
statistical  units,  such  as  household  income  and  wealth  surveys,  may  be  aggregated  in 
multiple  ways  to  statistical  outputs  depending  on  the  questions  under  consideration.  This 
allows both a continuity of the standard statistics and a timely statistical response to new and 
unexpected  policy  issues.  The  use  of  micro-databases  for  statistical  purposes  is  also 
becoming  increasingly  feasible  thanks  to  the  IT  revolution.  At  the  same  time,  the 
effectiveness  of  micro-databases  much  depends  on  the  quality  of  the  micro-information 
available and their accessibility to statisticians. 
Session 3: Future coordination and collaboration strategies in the area of statistics 
One of the assets of the statistical community is its close cooperation at the European level 
and  worldwide.  This  significantly  facilitates  agreements  on  harmonised  statistical  concepts 
and methods, and accelerates the distribution of knowledge about best statistical practices. 
In  a  few  cases,  it  even  allows  for  the  joint  compilation  and  dissemination  of  key 
macroeconomic statistics by two or more statistical authorities. 
The  key  partners  of  the  ECB  and  the  NCBs  in  the  area  of  statistics  are  Eurostat  and  the 
national  statistical  institutes.  The  main  institutional  framework  for  European  cooperation  is 
6 
 BIS Review 51/2008
enshrined in the Treaty establishing the European Community and the Statute of the ESCB 
and of the ECB. In addition to this primary legislation, two EU Council Regulations, the first 
on the statistics of the European Statistical System and the second on the statistics of the 
ESCB, govern cooperation in further detail. Both Regulations are currently under review and 
it is the firm intention of the ECB to further intensify cooperation, in particular, with regard to 
the exchange of confidential information. This is demonstrated in the published ECB opinion 
on the proposed Regulation on European statistics. 
Beyond the institutional framework, there are very close operational links between Eurostat 
and  the  ECB,  which  culminate  in  the  joint  preparation  of  the  quarterly  press  releases  on 
balance  of  payments  statistics  and  the  integrated  euro  area  accounts.  The  practical 
modalities of the cooperation in the different fields of economic and financial statistics and 
the  respective  responsibilities  are  described  in  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  with 
Eurostat, which has been recently complemented by a service level agreement. At the ECB 
we attach high importance to the continuation and the enhancement of our excellent working 
relationship with Eurostat. 
Any  successful  cooperation  at  the  European  level  in  the  area  of  economic  and  financial 
statistics must also encompass the NCBs and the national statistical institutes. Cooperation 
has  been  successfully  pursued  for  over  one  and  a  half  decades  in  the  Committee  on 
Monetary,  Financial  and  Balance  of  Payments  Statistics  (CMFB),  which  has  delivered 
remarkable results and built a high credibility despite its less than accessible name. Like the 
cooperation between Eurostat and the ECB, there are a variety of successful and welcome 
cooperation agreements between national statistical institutes and NCBs. These agreements 
strengthen the effective and efficient collection, compilation and dissemination of high quality 
European and national statistics. 
There are two further influential groups in the area of statistics at the European level. First, 
the Sub-committee on Statistics of the Economic and Financial Committee (EFC) discusses 
the annual EFC Status Report on Information Requirements in EMU prepared by Eurostat 
and the Directorate General Statistics. This report is submitted via the EFC to the ECOFIN 
Council,  which  publishes  it  together  with  the  Council  conclusions  that  pave  the  way  for 
substantial initiatives in the area of economic statistics. Second, the Council Working Party 
on  Statistics  deliberates  on  the  details  of  proposed  Community  Regulations  under  the 
responsibility  of  the  European  Parliament  and  the  Council.  The  ECB  is  grateful  to  the 
respective  EU  Presidencies  for  inviting  it  to  the  meetings  of  the  Council  Working  Party  on 
Statistics, when legal acts in the ECB’s field of competence are on the agenda. 
The ECB is also represented in global fora dealing with statistics. It is a member of the inter-
agency  Committee  for  the  Coordination  of  Statistical  Activities  (CCSA)  and  is  among  the 
seven sponsors of the successful Statistical Data and Metadata eXchange (SDMX) initiative. 
The  ECB  contributes  to  the  development  and  coordination  of  external  statistics  in  the  IMF 
Committee on Balance of Payments Statistics. It provides input into a range of monetary and 
financial  statistics  through  its  membership  of  the  BIS  Working  Groups,  and  the  Working 
Groups and Task Forces of the IMF. Moreover, together with Eurostat, the ECB represents 
the European Community in the OECD Statistics Committee and Working Groups, and in the 
United  Nations  Statistical  Commission.  The  ECB  has  also  contributed  significantly  to  the 
recent  review  of  the  System  of  National  Accounts,  for  instance  concerning  the  most 
appropriate recording of all different pensions in these accounts. 
Notwithstanding the above coordination activities, the current coordination arrangements for 
official  financial  statistics,  including  the  contribution  of  central  banks,  continue  to  be 
somewhat  dispersed  at  the  worldwide  level.  For  example,  this  makes  it  difficult  to  draw 
common statistical conclusions about the impact of the ongoing financial turmoil at a global 
level. Therefore, I very much support the initiative of the BIS, the ECB and the IMF, inter alia, 
to establish an international network on financial statistics. Indeed, in a globalised world, the 
governance structure for global financial statistics needs to be strengthened.  
BIS Review 51/2008 
 7
Session 4: How best to communicate European economic and financial statistics 
The ECB operates in a special communication environment. In principle, it has to address as 
a minimum the 320 million citizens in the euro area, if not the almost 500 million citizens in 
the European Union with its 23 official languages. There are no euro area-wide media, but 
over  a  thousand  individual  media  in  the  euro  area  as  potential  counterparts.  In  this 
environment,  the  Internet  is  an  outstanding  communication  medium  for  statistics.  Its 
importance  is  rapidly  increasing  and,  for  most  organisations,  the  website  represents  their 
“first face” to the public. Even more importantly, the Internet is also the primary source for 
journalists  in  their  research  and reporting. Moreover, it permits interactive access to large, 
well-structured databases, such as the ECB Statistical Data Warehouse (SDW). 
Let me illustrate the direction of our efforts in the area of statistical communication by way of 
example.  As  explained  earlier  at  this  conference,  the  ECB  has,  together  with  Eurostat, 
examined  a  medium-  to  long-term  communication  strategy  for  the  Harmonised  Index  of 
Consumer  Prices  (HICP).  As  a  first  step,  a  new  dedicated  section  of  the  ECB  website 
devoted to inflation measurement is under development. It  will include tables with detailed 
breakdowns  of  the  HICP  for  the  euro  area  and  the  euro  area  countries  as  produced  by 
Eurostat  and  the  national  statistical  institutes. Main  aspects  of  the  HICP  for  the  euro  area 
and the individual countries will also be presented in dynamic graphs supported by the most 
recent  IT  visualisation  tools.  The  graphical  presentation  will  make  it  easier  for  the  user  to 
familiarise themselves with the facts and figures. Links to Eurostat’s website will provide easy 
access to further and more detailed information. 
While statistical communication focuses mainly on facts and figures, it must also correct false 
interpretations  of  statistics,  thereby  contributing  to  economic  and  financial  literacy.  A 
prominent  example  is  the  continuous  comparison  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the  HICP 
inflation rate as measured by Eurostat and the national statistical institutes in line with the 
agreed  methodology  enshrined  in  European  legislation  and,  on  the  other,  qualitative  or 
quantitative  opinion  surveys  on  inflation.  The  HICP  and  the  opinion  surveys  on  inflation 
measure  different  phenomena,  or  as  some  may  argue  different  aspects  of  the  same 
phenomenon. In both cases, a direct comparison is not legitimate from a statistical point of 
view and is likely to suggest false interpretations. 
Just to state the obvious, once certain inflation perceptions persist in the public’s opinion they 
will not be corrected by technical explanations of statistical methodologies. A credible track 
record of reliable official statistics – and this applies beyond the measurement of inflation – is 
of utmost importance in this situation. Statistical communication requires a continuous effort 
and is part of a long-term strategy for statistics. 
Conclusion: Elements of a strategic vision for statistics for the next ten years 
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has  decided  on  a  strategic  long-term  vision  for  the 
Eurosystem statistical function. While this strategic vision is designed around the Eurosystem 
governance structure, it entails elements of a strategic vision for statistics that is applicable 
more generally. This is all the more clear if we consider that the most important challenges 
that  we  face  are  common  to  all  statistical  offices:  globalisation,  the  IT  revolution  and  the 
constraint given by the statistical response burden of reporting agents. 
The  recent  financial  turmoil  highlights  the  impact  of  globalisation  on  the  various  areas  of 
competence of central banks. It also illustrates the trade-off between the statistical response 
burden  of  reporting  agents  and  a  lack  of  consistent  information  to  analyse  the  current 
economic  and  financial  situation.  In  particular,  there  is  a  lack  of  sufficiently  harmonised 
statistics  to  accurately  measure  the  allocation  of  credit  risk  within  the  economy  and  the 
impact of cross-sector and cross-border credit risk transfers. Another issue is the recording 
of contingent credit exposures. 
8 
 BIS Review 51/2008
The IT revolution will enable the statistical community to carry out the current procedures for 
collecting, compiling and disseminating statistics more efficiently. However, it is much more 
important to reflect on how the IT revolution can be used to introduce new and more effective 
procedures.  Micro-databases  are  promising  in  this  respect.  They  may  also  mitigate  the 
constraints  imposed  by  the  statistical  response  burden  of  the  reporting  agents.  Moreover, 
micro-databases  will  enable  statistics  to  be  adjusted  more  flexibly  to  financial  and  other 
structural innovations, in many cases, almost in real time. 
It  is  equally  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  more  important  statistics  are  for  policy 
purposes, the greater the need for statistical communication that explains facts and figures in 
real time to professional users and the public at large.  
The Nobel Laureate George Stigler once said: 
“The public has chosen to speak and vote on economic problems, so the only open question 
is how intelligently it speaks and votes” (George Stigler, 1970). 
Effective statistical communication plays an essential role in ensuring that this open question 
is answered satisfactorily and to the benefit of the entire society.  
The fourth ECB conference on statistics is coming to an end. I would like to thank you all 
very  much  for  your  participation  and  for  your  attention.  I  trust  that  the  contributions  and 
discussions  will  inspire  further  reflection  on  a  strategic  vision  for  statistics  for  the  next  ten 
years and possibly beyond. 
BIS Review 51/2008 
 9
