Sheryl Kennedy: Real estate, mortgage markets, and monetary policy  
Remarks by Ms Sheryl Kennedy, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Investment 
Industry Association of Canada, Banff, Alberta, 23 June 2008. 
 Good afternoon. It's great to be in Banff – today especially. On this day in 1887, Parliament 
enacted the Rocky Mountains Park Act, which established Banff as Canada's first National 
Park. Happy birthday, Banff National Park! 
I am delighted to be at this IIAC conference. Just as parks and conservation are vital for our, 
and  our  children's  environmental  and  spiritual  well-being,  sound  investment  is  vital  for  our 
long-term economic and financial well-being. For many Canadians, one of the most important 
investments  they'll  make  is  the  purchase  of  a  house.  And  for  you  as  financial  market 
professionals,  the  links  between  the  housing  market  and  financial  markets  have  important 
consequences. Today, I'd like to speak about housing and how it interacts with the economy, 
financial markets, and monetary policy.  
Over the past 10 years, the Canadian housing market has exhibited a good deal of strength. 
Demand, supply, and prices have increased [chart: Housing Activity in Canada: 1998-2008]. 
But while the Canadian real estate market does not currently exhibit the generalized signs of 
excess we see in some other countries,1 we cannot afford to be complacent. After a fairly 
substantial run-up, real house prices have declined in the United States, the United Kingdom, 
and Spain, and Canadians would be wise to remember that house prices can fall as well as 
rise [chart: Changes in Real House Prices in the U.S., the U.K. and Spain]. It wasn't that long 
ago – in the late 1980s and early 1990s, to be exact – that Canada experienced its own real 
estate  boom  and  bust.  It  took  a  decade  after that  before  we  saw  activity  pick  up  and  real 
prices increase [chart: Changes in Real House Prices in Canada]. More recently, of course, 
we have seen in this part of the country a strong housing market cycle. 
The  current  state  and  likely  future  evolution  of  the  housing  market  in  Canada  have 
implications  for  the  economy,  financial  markets,  and  policy-makers.  I  will  describe  these 
implications later, but first I'd like to set the stage by discussing the role of housing in the 
Canadian economy and some of the factors that drive housing activity and prices. 
Housing, the economy, and financial markets 
Housing plays an important role in the economy, with direct and indirect effects on household 
wealth  and  consumption.  In  Canada,  residential  investment  has,  for  the  past  decade, 
averaged about 6 per cent of GDP – somewhat higher than in the United Kingdom and the 
United  States.  About  a  third  of  residential  investment  is  spent  on  renovations.  Canada's 
home ownership rate of over 68 per cent is similar to that in the United States, a little lower 
than it is in the United Kingdom and Australia, but higher than in European countries such as 
France and Germany. Real estate assets also represent a large stock of wealth – more than 
$2.2 trillion, or 37 per cent of total household assets in Canada.  
Changes in the level of housing activity and in the price of houses have many implications for 
the economy, not only directly, because housing is an important source of economic activity, 
but  also  indirectly,  because  home  equity  is  an  important  source  of  household  wealth  and 
finance. So, what are the main drivers of these changes? Although they overlap and interact 
                                                 
1   For  insight  into  valuations  and  risks  in  international  housing  markets,  see  chapter  3  of  the  International 
Monetary Fund's April 2008 World Economic Outlook, "The Changing Housing Cycle and the Implications for 
Monetary Policy," available at http://www.imf.org/external/pubs/ft/weo/2008/01/pdf/c3.pdf. 
BIS Review 84/2008 
 1
with  one  another,  I  like  to  think  of  them  in  three  groups:  the  fundamentals  of  supply  and 
demand, financial innovation, and policy. Let me say a word about each. 
First, as in most markets, the price of housing is driven largely by the fundamentals of supply 
and  demand.  Over  the  long  term,  of  course,  supply  and  demand  inevitably  balance,  with 
neither  upward  nor  downward  pressure  on  prices.  But  in  the  shorter  term,  supply  (that  is, 
new  houses  and  resale  listings)  can  be  slow  to  adjust,  and  therefore  significant  price 
changes  can  occur  when  there  are  significant  shocks  to  demand.  Such  shocks  can  come 
about with changes in demographics (which include the working-age population, immigration, 
and  migration)  [chart:  Household  Formation  and  Housing  Starts];  changes  in  the  labour 
market,  disposable  income,  wealth,  and  financing  costs  [chart:  Disposable  Income, 
Unemployment, and Mortgage Interest Rates]; and changes in the price and availability of 
alternatives  in  the  rental  market  [chart:  Rental  Vacancy  Rate  and  House  Price  Growth: 
Calgary]. 
Second, financial innovation also plays a role in driving housing demand and prices. Most 
home  buyers  require  financing,  and  therefore  the  mortgage  market  and  its  increasingly 
innovative products can affect when people purchase a house and the type of house they 
buy.  In  recent  years,  several  new  mortgage  and  mortgage-insurance  products  have  been 
introduced  in  Canada.  These  include  the  low  (or  even  zero)  down  payment  mortgage;  the 
longer-amortization mortgage (that is, for an amortization period of longer than 25 years and 
up to 40 years); and, to a small extent in Canada, mortgages for non-prime borrowers.  
Of course, innovations can increase a household's financial flexibility by allowing for reduced 
down payments and mortgage payments. And, because financial innovation often results in 
new means by which savings can be allocated to desired investments, it can also increase 
the efficiency of financial markets.  
But  financial  innovations  can  carry  risks  as  well.  For  example,  if  financial  innovations  are 
introduced when demand is already strong, they can amplify a rising price trend, which, in 
turn,  could  result  in  higher  mortgage  rates  overall.  For  the  home  buyer,  of  course,  some 
innovations can increase the total cost of ownership – significantly in some cases – and can 
thus reduce lifetime savings or spending and investments in other areas of the economy. For 
example, a $200,000 mortgage, serviced with monthly payments on a 40-year mortgage at 5 
per cent, will cost the homeowner about $110,000 more in total than if the mortgage were for 
a  25-year  period  [chart:  Impact  of  Amortization  Period  on  Mortgage  Payments].  Although 
there  are  no  publicly  available  statistics  for  amortization  periods  in  Canada,  anecdotal 
evidence suggests that more than half of new, insured mortgages issued in Canada over the 
past  year  were  for  extended  amortization  periods.  While  many  people  with  longer 
amortization mortgages may choose to make accelerated payments, the potential effect of 
this shift in financing behaviour, when combined with low or zero down payment mortgages, 
can raise concerns, especially if there were also to be an easing of lending standards. 
Furthermore, if financial innovations allow people to buy houses with very little "skin in the 
game," they can, in a rising-price environment, encourage speculation in "quick flip" financial 
investment.  This  additional  stimulus  to  demand  can,  in  a  market  already  characterized  by 
tight  supply  and  rising  prices,  boost  house  prices  further,  and  increase  the  risk  of  a 
correction. 
For investors in innovative mortgage products, there can also be risks – as recent events in 
the United States have so clearly shown. Take securitization, for example. The movement 
from  an  originate-and-hold  model  to  an  originate-and-distribute  model  by  means  of 
securitization,  and  the  creation  of  complex,  synthetic  instruments,  together  diminished  the 
incentive  for  sound  credit  evaluation  in  the  United  States  and  some  other  countries.  Also, 
because  they  were  believed  to  be  off  balance  sheet,  these  securitized  products  were  not 
always properly considered in the liquidity plans and capital structure of sponsoring financial 
institutions.  Because  these  products  were  complex  and  not  fully  transparent,  the  risks 
associated with them were difficult to understand and consequently mispriced.  
2 
 BIS Review 84/2008
Fortunately in Canada, we were not as aggressive in breaking the links between originator 
and  distribution,  nor,  for  the  most  part,  did  we  develop  complex,  synthetic  securitized 
instruments involving Canadian mortgage assets. Furthermore, mortgages with less than a 
20 per cent down payment must be insured in Canada, and most of the securitized mortgage 
market consists of Canada Mortgage Bonds, which carry a government guarantee.  
Overall, then, financial innovation can be helpful when all parties – borrowers, lenders, and 
investors  –  understand  the  risks  and  are  properly  positioned  to  bear  them.  It  can  be 
detrimental  if  it  exacerbates  cyclical  pressures,  leads  people  to  buy  homes  they  cannot 
sustainably afford, encourages speculation, or if the inherent risks are not well understood. 
Now,  in  turning  to  the  third  influence  on  housing  activity  and  prices,  I  should  note  that 
fundamentals and financial innovation don't exist in a vacuum. They are affected – for better 
or worse – by the policy environment. One important element here is monetary policy, but 
other domains of public policy can also have an impact.  
Some  policies  –  whatever  the  intention  –  can  restrict  supply  and  affect  cost  directly  or 
indirectly.  These  would  include  land  use  and  zoning,  development  charges,  and  building 
codes. Other policies can affect demand. They include immigration, housing, and mortgage 
policies, for example. 
The housing market and monetary policy  
Let  me  turn  to  the  policy  area  I  know  best.  Monetary  policy  has  an  important  role  in  the 
housing  market  from  several  perspectives.  It  has  effects  on  more  than  just  the  cost  of  a 
mortgage. I'll elaborate briefly. 
The aim of monetary policy in Canada is to keep inflation low, stable, and predictable, close 
to our 2 per cent target for total CPI inflation. This inflation-control policy has at least two key 
implications for housing activity and prices.  
First, low, stable, and predictable inflation acts as a macroeconomic stabilizer – it tends to 
enhance  the  growth  of  output  and  reduce  its  variability,  while  keeping  interest  rates  lower 
and  less  volatile.  These  outcomes,  in  turn,  tend  to  support  the  housing  market  in  a  very 
general sense, and help to stabilize housing demand. Second, against a backdrop of low and 
stable inflation, both house builders and house buyers can make better-informed decisions. 
Overall, then, monetary policy in Canada is an important element in supporting a sound and 
stable housing market. 
That being said, for a number of years, there has been debate over whether central banks 
can or should take asset prices into account in their decision making. Recently, of course, 
the asset class of primary interest has been housing.  
As  I  just  mentioned,  we  believe  that  the  best  framework  to  achieve  this  end  is  one  that 
focuses on keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable. In this context, changes in housing 
activity and prices are important to the conduct of monetary policy for a number of reasons. I 
will mention three.  
First  is  the  direct  effect  on  inflation,  which  is  captured  in  the  "owned  accommodation" 
component  of  the  consumer  price  index.  Second  is  the  indirect  impact  on  household 
spending. And third is the impact that a rapid change in prices – the inflating or deflating of a 
bubble – can have on the real economy. Let me discuss each of these in turn. 
In  Canada,  unlike  some  countries,  the  CPI  fully  captures  the  direct  effect  on  inflation  of 
changes  in  house  prices  in  the  "owned  accommodation"  component  of  the  CPI,  which 
includes  mortgage  interest  cost,  replacement  cost,  property  taxes,  house  insurance, 
maintenance  and  repairs,  and  "other  owned  accommodation  expenses."  This  component 
represents 16.5 per cent of the CPI basket [chart: Total CPI and Owned Accommodation]. 
BIS Review 84/2008 
 3
Changes  in  the  price  level  of  this  component,  therefore,  have  a  significant  direct  effect  on 
total inflation.  
Changes in house prices can also have an important effect on household spending. Housing 
wealth  is  widely  distributed  –  much  more  so  than  stock  market  wealth,  for  example  –  and 
thus  has  an  important  influence  on  aggregate  demand  which,  in  turn,  has  an  effect  on 
inflation.  Furthermore,  there  can  be  a  "financial-accelerator  effect"  associated  with  rising 
house prices. When the value of a house rises, the owner can typically borrow against this 
increased  equity  to  fund  home  renovations,  a  second  house,  or  other  goods  and  services 
[chart:  Home  Equity  Withdrawal  and  Home  Renovations].2  These  expenditures  can 
"accelerate"  a  rise  in  house  prices,  reinforcing  the  rise  in  collateral  values,  access  to 
additional  borrowing,  and  thus  a  rise  in  household  spending.  Of  course,  this  accelerator 
effect  can  also  work  in  reverse:  a  decrease  in  house  prices  tends  to  reduce  household 
borrowing capacity, and amplify the decline in spending. 
Finally, a significant increase or decrease in house prices from historic norms – that is to say, 
the  inflating  or  deflating  of  a  "bubble"  –  can  have  an  impact  on  the  real  economy.  In  a 
nutshell,  bubbles  are  costly  (in  both  directions)  because  they  distort  decision  making  and 
impede the optimal allocation of resources. As a bubble develops, people tend to build and 
purchase  more  housing  than  would  be  the  case  when  prices  reflect  fundamentals,  and 
lenders  may  divert  investment  to  housing  from  alternative,  more  productive  opportunities. 
When  the  bubble  bursts,  decision  making  is  again  distorted,  and  both  households  and 
lenders  suffer  the  consequences.  This  boom-and-bust  cycle  can  prove  very  costly  to  the 
economy.  The  appropriate  monetary  policy  response  to  these  bubbles  is  the  focus  of 
considerable debate. The Bank of Canada considered this issue in the period preceding the 
renewal  of  the  inflation  targeting  agreement  with  the  government,3  and  we  continue  to 
examine it. 
These three effects – the direct effect on inflation, the effect on consumption, and the effects 
of  an  inflating  or  deflating  bubble  –  carry  important  implications  for  monetary  policy, 
implications we consider when we set policy to achieve our 2 per cent inflation target over 
the  medium  term.  Let me  now  turn  to  some  challenges  for  the  Bank, other  policy-makers, 
lenders and investors, with regard to the promotion of a sound housing market in Canada. 
Challenges for policy-makers and financial markets 
The first challenge is to continue to ensure that policies encourage the right kind of practices 
and  innovation  in  mortgages  and  home  equity  lending.  In  this  regard,  it  is  extremely 
important that sound lending standards be consistently applied – even in "good times." We 
should  be  wary  of  innovations  that  encourage  price  run-ups  beyond  what  fundamentals 
would  justify;  many  such  innovations  will  fail the  test  of  time.  New  products  should  not  be 
dependent upon an assumption of appreciating house prices, and incentives must be aligned 
to  promote  prudence  in  borrowing  and  lending.  Finally,  the  financial-accelerator  dynamics 
                                                 
2   The Bank of Canada has examined the related issue of appropriate time horizons for monetary policy when 
there are financial-accelerator effects triggered by a persistent shock, such as an asset-price bubble. See Don 
Coletti 
at 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/review/summer06/coletti.pdf. The Bank continues to research various aspects 
of the financial-accelerator effect. For further details on home equity borrowing, see Technical Box 2, "Total 
Home  Equity  Borrowing 
the  April  2007  Monetary  Policy  Report,  available  at 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/mpr/pdf/mpr260407.pdf. 
Inflation-Target 
in  Canada," 
available 
"Another 
Horizon, 
Look 
the 
al., 
at 
et 
in 
3   See, for example, J. Selody and C. Wilkins, "Asset Prices and Monetary Policy: A Canadian Perspective on 
at 
the 
http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/review/autumn04/selody.pdf. 
available 
Review, 
Issues," 
Canada 
Autumn 
2004, 
Bank 
of 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2008
that I mentioned, and how innovation affects them, need to be adequately recognized and 
better understood.4  
A  second,  and  related,  challenge  is  to  ensure  that  innovations  in  the  funding  of  mortgage 
finance  do  indeed  make  the  financial  system  more  efficient  and  do  not  threaten  financial 
stability. It is important that investors and financial market participants understand the risks 
they take on so that they can manage these risks effectively. It is also important that there be 
sufficient  transparency  so  that  financial  markets  can  price  the  risks  efficiently  and  allocate 
risk  to  those  who  are  best  positioned  to  bear  it.  Risk  is more  likely  to  be  priced  efficiently 
when  pertinent  information  is  readily  available  and  incentives  are  aligned.  Adequate 
transparency and disclosure help investors to understand the characteristics of the securities 
they are holding, and make it easier for market participants to value assets, which, in turn, 
helps  to  maintain  liquid  markets.  Finally,  incentives  must  be  properly  aligned  to  prevent 
conflicts of interest that can confound and distort the pricing of risk.  
A final challenge I'd like to mention is that of enhancing the financial literacy of potential and 
current mortgage holders, and of investors. One of the best ways to avoid painful outcomes 
in the housing market is to have individuals making well-informed financing decisions. The 
need for financial acumen has increased in recent years, and may continue to increase.5 The 
good news about innovation in the mortgage, mortgage insurance, and home equity markets 
is that people have greater choice in financing. But individuals need the financial literacy and 
all the relevant information from those selling mortgage products to make the choices best 
suited to their circumstances.  
The housing market in Canada 
As  I  said  at  the  outset,  unlike  the  situation  in  many  countries,  conditions  in  the  Canadian 
housing  market  remain  relatively  favourable.  Housing  activity  remains  at  a  high  level,  and 
house prices continue to rise overall. The moderation in activity and price increases that we 
have  seen  in  recent  months  is  both  expected  and  welcome.  Still,  we  cannot  afford  to  be 
complacent. That is the lesson from previous boom-and-bust cycles – a lesson underscored 
by the current problems in the U.S. housing market.  
In  the  first  half  of  this  decade,  the  U.S.  housing  market  underwent  a  boom  as  various 
financial innovations were introduced, some of which encouraged the buying of houses by 
those who clearly could not afford them. The emergence of subprime mortgages as a means 
of  financing  the  purchase  of  a  house  played  a  significant  role  in  this  boom.  At  the  end  of 
2007, about 14 per cent of total residential mortgage loans outstanding in the United States 
were subprime. From 1998 to the peak of the boom in 2007, real house prices appreciated 
by,  depending  on  the  measure  used,  about  45  per  cent  (OFHEO)  or  even  105  per  cent 
(Case-Shiller). However, since the peak, real house prices have fallen by between 7.4 per 
cent  and  22.3  per  cent  (OFHEO  and  Case-Shiller,  respectively).  This  decline  has  had 
                                                 
4   The  Bank  of  Canada  puts  a  good  deal  of  effort  into  monitoring  and  assessing  the  state  of  the  Canadian 
housing market, as well as analyzing the impact of changes in activity and pricing on credit markets, the real 
economy, and the financial system. Some of this analysis is reported in the Bank's Monetary Policy Report 
and Financial System Review. In the past few years, we have tried to improve our understanding of the links 
between house prices, credit growth, and spending, and we will publish research in this area as it bears fruit. 
5   The  Bank  of  Canada  informs  the  public  about  financial  system  issues  in  reports,  in  speeches  and  on  its 
website. For practical information on mortgages and mortgage default insurance, individuals can refer to the 
Financial  Consumer  Agency  of  Canada's  website  http://www.fcac-acfc.gc.ca/eng/default.asp.  The  FCAC's 
goal is to provide consumers with "objective information about financial products and services," and to inform 
Canadians of their "rights and responsibilities when dealing with financial institutions." Of course lenders not 
only  have  a  responsibility,  but  they  also  have  a  stake  in  helping  borrowers  to  make  informed  decisions. 
Defaults are not generally in their interest. 
BIS Review 84/2008 
 5
deleterious  effects  on  the  real  economy  and  the  financial  system,  and  has  caused  real 
hardship for many individuals.  
Largely  because  of  Canada's  more  conservative  mortgage  culture  –  with  fairly  prudent 
lending  standards,  and  with  most  mortgage  lending  to  be  found  on  commercial  banks' 
balance  sheets  or  financed  by  sound  securitized  vehicles  –  the  housing  market  in  this 
country has not demonstrated the same excesses seen in the United States. The strength of 
the Canadian housing market over the past decade can be seen in home sales and housing 
starts, which have increased by about 55 per cent. Real prices for existing houses increased 
by 52 per cent over this period, while real prices for new houses increased by about 27 per 
cent. Of course, these averages mask regional variations. In Western Canada, strong labour 
markets, sustained income growth, and demand resulting from the migration of Canadians 
from other provinces have resulted in house price increases that are higher than the national 
average. 
Much of the growth over this period was the result of pent-up demand following the housing 
downturn of the late 1980s and early 1990s.6  
In  examining  the  current  situation,  our  most  recent  Financial  System  Review  notes  that 
income  growth,  low  unemployment  rates,  and  relatively  good  financing  conditions  have 
supported  rising  house  prices,  although  the  pace  of  increase  has  slowed  somewhat.  This 
deceleration has been most noticeable in markets (such as Alberta) that have posted very 
steep  price  increases  over  the  past  two  years.  The  slower  price  growth  is  the  result  of 
increased supply combined with some softening in demand, which can be attributed to the 
previous  run-up  in  the  hottest  markets,  and  some  slowing  in  economic  growth.  This 
moderation in housing activity has been expected and is welcome. 
The Canadian housing market does not appear to be characterized by excess supply at this 
time.  The  proportion  of  unoccupied,  newly  built  dwellings  in  most  cities  remains  below 
historical averages, suggesting that a major widespread reversal in house prices is unlikely in 
the  near  term.  The  recent  downward  trend  in  building  permits  suggests  that  supply  is 
adjusting  to  softening  demand.  And  importantly,  the  Canadian  mortgage  market  is  in 
reasonably good shape. The Canadian "subprime" mortgage market accounts for less than 5 
per cent of the residential mortgage market, and might be better characterized as a "near-
prime" market, with quite different lending standards than appear to have been applied in the 
United States [chart: Percentage of Subprime Mortgages in Arrears for More Than 90 Days 
or in Foreclosure]. 
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude.  
The  housing  market  plays  an  important  role  in  the  national  economy.  And  changes  in 
housing  activity  and  prices  can  have  far-reaching  effects.  The  turbulence  of  the  past  12 
months emanating from the U.S. housing market has posed risks and challenges for many 
people – and for the conduct of monetary policy. Although the Canadian economy has not 
escaped  the  effects  of  financial  market  dislocations  or  the  weakening  U.S.  economy,  the 
Canadian financial system and the housing market have shown considerable resilience, in 
part reflecting prudent practices. 
Canada's  monetary  policy  framework  continues  to  play  an  important  role  in  anchoring 
inflation  expectations,  and  thus  in  supporting  sustainable  economic  growth  and  a  sound 
                                                 
6   Growth in housing activity and prices over the past decade was underpinned by a number of factors including 
regional migration; income growth from strong employment, rising wealth from financial assets, and relatively 
low interest rates; as well as, in recent years, innovations in the mortgage market. 
6 
 BIS Review 84/2008
housing  market.  Macroeconomic  stability  cannot  eliminate  asset-price  run-ups,  but  it  does 
help a good deal when financial decisions are made, and it helps to mitigate the impact when 
run-ups and reversals do occur.  
A foundation of low, stable and predictable inflation will continue to prove valuable in helping 
Canadians  to  make  informed  decisions  about  housing  –  and  indeed  about  many  forms  of 
spending and investment. 
  BIS Review 84/2008 
 7
  8 
   BIS Review 84/2008
    BIS Review 84/2008 
 9
 10 
   BIS Review 84/2008
    BIS Review 84/2008 
 11
 12 
 BIS Review 84/2008
