Donald L Kohn: Lessons for central bankers from a Phillips Curve 
Framework 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston's  Annual  Economic  Conference 
“Understanding  Inflation  and  the  Implications  for  Monetary  Policy:  A  Phillips  Curve 
Retrospective”, Chatham, Massachusetts, 11 June 2008. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 An economic model of inflation is an indispensable input to monetary policy deliberations. A 
model in the Phillips curve tradition remains at the core of how most academic researchers 
and  policymakers  –  including  this  one  –  think  about  fluctuations  in  inflation;  indeed, 
alternative frameworks seem to lack solid economic foundations and empirical support. But 
the  modern  Phillips  curve  differs  substantially  from  versions  in  use  several  decades  ago; 
policymakers  and  academics  alike are  now  attuned  to  the  importance  of  expectations,  the 
possibility of structural change, and the uncertainty that surrounds our understanding of the 
dynamics of wage and price adjustment. Moreover, the link between inflation and resource 
utilization often emphasized in a Phillips curve framework accounts for only a modest part of 
inflation fluctuations. My comments today will focus on how the lessons from recent research 
on the Phillips curve are helping me think about the influence of fluctuations in the prices of 
commodities, such as oil, on the outlook for inflation and the appropriate policy responses to 
such developments.1  
Policy objectives and a framework for analyzing inflation fluctuations 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  been  charged  with  the  pursuit  of  price  stability  and  maximum 
employment. Price stability is uniquely in the control of the central bank over long periods, 
and it is a prerequisite for the economy performing efficiently over time. The welfare costs of 
inflation result from many factors: the potential costs to households and firms that result from 
efforts to insure themselves against inflation or from confusion regarding real and nominal 
prices;  distortions  to  the  financial  system  related  to  inflation;  imperfect  indexation  of  the 
taxation, especially of capital income, and the related distortions to economic activity; and the 
costs associated with a slow adjustment of nominal prices and wages. The costs of inflation 
imply that central banks should aim for low measured inflation. Moreover, many of the costs 
of  inflation  –  such  as  those  associated  with  misconceptions  regarding  inflation,  efforts  to 
insure against inflation, and distortions to the financial system – are associated with the rate 
of  change  in  the  entire  set  of  prices  of  goods  and  services  facing  households  or  firms, 
suggesting that measured inflation should be gauged by the rate of change in a broad set of 
prices.  Accordingly,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  has  been  emphasizing 
that  it  gauges  price  stability  over  the  long-term  by  the  behavior  of  the  overall  personal 
consumption expenditures price index. 
The economic framework that helps me think about fluctuations in inflation is based on the 
substantial body of research on models of price dynamics that has been developed over the 
past  five  decades.  At  its  heart,  the  framework  is  based  on  the  importance  of  sluggish 
adjustment  in  (some)  nominal  wages  and  prices  to  changing  economic  conditions.  This 
sluggishness undoubtedly reflects a number of factors, which include the costs of adjusting 
                                                 
1   Michael Kiley, of the Board's staff, contributed to these remarks. The views expressed are my own and not 
necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee. 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 1
some  nominal  prices  and  wages,  imperfect  information  regarding  shifts  in  economic 
conditions,  and  learning  by  firms  and  households  about  the  structure  of  the  economy, 
including the setting of monetary policy. 
Regardless  of  its  source,  the  presence  of  sluggish  nominal  adjustment  brings  to  the  fore 
three key elements driving wage and price dynamics: inflation expectations, supply shocks, 
and  resource  utilization.  Because  some  prices  and  wages  are  adjusted  only  infrequently, 
both  firms  and  households  anticipate  the  future  erosion  of  real  prices  and  wages  by 
incorporating  the  expectations  they  have  for  inflation  into  their  current  price  settings  and 
wage  demands.  As  a  result,  inflation  expectations  play  a  critical  role  in  the  formation  of 
monetary policy. Moreover, the tendency of some prices to adjust very quickly to changing 
circumstances in conjunction with sluggish adjustment in other prices and wages implies that 
large,  sharp  price  movements,  such  as  a  change  in  the  price  of  oil,  lead  to  relative  price 
distortions throughout the economy; these distortions imply that relative price shocks have 
important  implications for  the  functioning  of  the  economy.2  Finally,  fluctuations  in  resource 
utilization, through their effects on the costs of production and on firms' desired markups over 
these  costs,  are  a  significant  determinant  of  price  and  wage  decisions.  The  link  from 
resource  utilization  to  inflation  provides  a  major  channel  through  which  monetary  policy 
settings  influence  inflation:  Adjustments  in  the  policy  interest  rate  bring  about  changes  in 
resource utilization, which then influence current and expected inflation.  
Inflation forecasting and commodity price shocks 
The economic outlook is the prime focus of monetary policy. Because the stance of policy 
influences economic activity and inflation only with a lag, policymakers must adjust policy to 
minimize the costs from fluctuations in activity and inflation in the future. The Phillips curve 
framework is an important input into the forecast for inflation. I will focus specifically on how a 
shock  to  the  price  of  oil  affects  the  inflation  outlook  within  this  framework.  This  topic  is 
especially  salient  of  late  –  commodities  prices  in  general,  and  perhaps  most  glaringly  the 
price of oil, have risen sharply over the past year; indeed, oil prices have risen sharply for 
more than four years. 
Consider a sharp rise in the price of oil that primarily reflects a shift in the balance between 
demand and supply in the global market for oil.3 In the first instance, higher oil prices lead to 
an  increase  in  the  overall  level  of  consumer  prices.  When  thinking  about  the  outlook  for 
future inflation, it is useful to distinguish between oil and other prices. The most significant 
factor  determining  oil  prices  is  the  current  and  prospective  balance  between  demand  and 
supply.  The  aggregate  behavior  of  most  other  prices,  consisting  of  a  large  set  of  nominal 
prices and wages that adjust slowly, is driven by the factors that enter the Phillips curve – 
inflation  expectations,  resource  utilization,  and  supply  shocks  (in  this  case,  a  shock  to  the 
price of oil). 
In a forecasting context, the Phillips curve framework motivates reduced-form regressions of 
the rate of inflation for consumer prices excluding food and energy against proxies for each 
                                                 
2   Relative price shocks act like supply shocks in the Phillips curve framework for two reasons. First, some prices 
are sluggish and others are flexible, and the Phillips curve framework focuses on the adjustment of sluggish 
prices. Second, prices are more likely to adjust to very large shocks, and the skewness on the distribution of 
relative  price  disturbances  can  fluctuate  substantially,  giving  rise  to  shocks  to  the  Phillips  curve.  Ball  and 
Mankiw (1995) discuss these issues and argue that the second type of relative price shock is quantitatively 
very important. 
3   The rise in a broad range of commodity prices, as has occurred from time to time recently, would not affect the 
basic analysis which rests on the contrasting behavior of flexible and sluggishly adjusting prices. However, the 
simultaneous rise in many commodity prices might suggest that strong global aggregate demand is playing an 
important role, which would affect the appropriate setting for monetary policy. See the section below on Global 
Demand, Trending Commodity Prices and Monetary Policy. 
2 
 BIS Review 76/2008
key factor. Lagged values of inflation typically proxy for inflation expectations. The deviation 
of output from potential or of the unemployment rate from its sustainable rate serves as a 
proxy for resource utilization. And changes in relative prices for energy, food and imports are 
traditionally included as measures of supply shocks.4 This type of regression is among the 
most  useful  tools  for  forecasting  inflation.  Nonetheless,  its  forecast  record  is  far  from 
spotless,  and  hence  I  consider  the  forecasts  from  such  regressions  as  just  one  input  that 
helps inform my outlook for inflation. 
The  results  of  such  exercises  imply  that,  over  recent  history,  a  sharp  jump  in  oil  prices 
appears  to  have  had  only  modest  effects  on  the  future  rate  of  inflation.  This  result  likely 
reflects  two  factors.  First,  commodities  like  oil  represent  only  a  small  share  of  the  overall 
costs of production, implying that the magnitude of the direct pass-through from changes in 
such prices to other prices should be modest, all else equal. Second, inflation expectations 
have been well anchored in recent years, contributing to a muted response of inflation to oil 
price shocks. But the anchoring of expectations cannot be taken as given; indeed, the type of 
empirical exercises I have outlined reveal a larger effect of the price of oil on inflation prior to 
the last two decades, a period in which inflation expectations were not as well anchored as 
they are today.5  
Of course, oil prices have jumped repeatedly in recent years. The (relatively) continuous rise 
in energy prices since 2003 has been a surprise to me and to most others, as least as best 
as I can gauge by looking at prices that have been embedded in futures contracts over this 
period.  These  contracts  currently  suggest  that  the  price  of  oil  will  flatten  out  in  the  period 
ahead. 
Nonetheless, repeated increases in energy prices and their effect on overall inflation have 
contributed to a rise in the year-ahead inflation expectations of households, especially this 
year. Of greater concern is that some measures of longer-term inflation expectations appear 
to have edged up since last year. Any tendency for these longer-term inflation expectations 
to drift higher or even to fail to reverse over time would have troublesome implications for the 
outlook for inflation. 
The structural Phillips Curve, commodity price shocks, and monetary policy  
The  central  role  of  inflation  expectations  implies  that  policymakers  must  look  beyond  this 
type  of  reduced-form  exercise  for  guidance.  After  all,  the  lags  of  inflation  in  reduced-form 
regressions are a very imperfect proxy for inflation expectations. As emphasized in Robert 
Lucas's critique of reduced-form Phillips curves more than 30 years ago, structural models 
are  needed  to  have  confidence  in  the  effect  of  any  shock  on  the  outlook  for  inflation  and 
economic activity.6  
                                                 
4   The amount of related literature is large. The article by Robert Gordon (1998) represents a good example and 
is relevant when considering the notion of supply shocks generally. Stock and Watson (1999) present a broad 
interpretation of the empirical Phillips curve in which a large number of macroeconomic indicators are used to 
forecast inflation. 
5   These  factors  are  not  the  only  two  that  have  contributed  to  a  lower  effect  of  oil  prices  on  inflation.  For 
example, the energy intensity of the economy has fallen over time. Research like that in Hooker (2002) and 
subsequent work has discussed various possibilities in more detail. Blanchard and Gali (2007) suggest that 
the seemingly muted affect of changes in the price of oil and inflation in recent years has been the result of 
falling energy intensity, more flexible labor markets, better monetary policy, and good luck.  
6   See  Lucas (1976). Robert  Lucas had  emphasized the importance of structural models  of the Phillips  curve 
well before his 1976 article; for example, see his contribution at the conference on wage and price dynamics 
held at the Federal Reserve in 1970 (Lucas, 1972). Michael Woodford (1994) presented an important critique 
of some research on commodity prices, inflation, and monetary policy in which the role of the Lucas critique 
was central: In particular, he re-emphasized that a tendency of commodity prices to forecast inflation may not 
be  structural  and  could  break  down  under  alternative  policy  regimes  –  a  tendency  that  seemed  to  be 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 3
The importance of structural relationships as inputs to the monetary policy process poses a 
challenge;  for  instance,  there  are  many  "structural"  models  of  nominal  price  and  wage 
adjustment,  each  of  these  models  emphasizes  different  frictions  or  imperfections  and 
therefore  can  have  different  policy  implications,  and  empirical  work  has  reached  different 
conclusions regarding the merits of alternative models.7 As a result, policymakers must look 
to lessons that are common across alternative specifications and base policy on our current 
understanding of the most likely important structural factors. Fortunately, I think that many of 
the  models  of  nominal  price  and  wage  adjustment  imply  similar  conclusions  regarding  the 
influence  of  commodity  prices  on  the  inflation  outlook  and  the  appropriate  response  of 
monetary policy.  
I  will  again  focus  on  a  sharp  jump  in  the  price  of  oil,  reflecting  supply  and  demand  in  the 
market for oil. Because many nominal prices and wages are costly and slow to adjust, the 
efficient allocation of resources is impeded during a transition period in which relative price 
signals are distorted. For example, the prices of energy-intensive goods need to rise relative 
to  those  of  less-energy-intensive  goods,  but  this  adjustment  follows  a  gradual  and 
asynchronous pattern. Similarly, the equilibrium real wage – the relative price of labor – will 
tend to be depressed by an oil price shock due to the accompanying adverse movements in 
the  terms  of  trade  and  reduction  in  labor  productivity,  but  the  needed  wage  or  price 
adjustments proceed gradually.8 An efficient monetary policy should attempt to facilitate the 
needed  economic  adjustments  so  as  to  minimize  distortions  to  economic  efficiency  on  the 
path to achieving, over time, its dual objectives of price stability and maximum employment.9
In particular, an appropriate monetary policy following a jump in the price of oil will allow, on 
a  temporary  basis,  both  some  increase  in  unemployment  and  some  increase  in  price 
inflation.  By  pursuing  actions  that  balance  the  deleterious  effects  of  oil  prices  on  both 
employment  and  inflation  over  the  near  term,  policymakers  are,  in  essence,  attempting  to 
find their preferred point on the activity/inflation variance-tradeoff curve introduced by John 
Taylor 30 years ago.10 Such policy actions promote the efficient adjustment of relative prices: 
Since  real  wages  need  to  fall  and  both  prices  and  wages  adjust  slowly,  the  efficient 
adjustment of relative prices will tend to include a bit of additional price inflation and a bit of 
additional unemployment for a time, leading to increases in real wages that are temporarily 
below the trend established by productivity gains. 
I  should  emphasize  that  the  course  of  policy  I  have  just  described  has  taken  inflation 
expectations as given. In practice, it is very important to ensure that policy actions anchor 
inflation expectations. This anchoring is critical: As demonstrated by historical experiences 
around  the  world  and  in  the  United  States  during  the  1970s  and  1980s,  efforts  to  bring 
inflation and inflation expectations back to desirable levels after they have risen appreciably 
involve costly and undesirable changes in resource utilization.11 As a result, the degree to 
                                                                                                                                                      
confirmed by Mark Hooker (2002) in his work documenting a break in the link between oil prices and inflation 
in recent decades. 
7   For example, Rudd and Whelan (2007) and Kiley (2007) review a number of models and empirical studies as 
well as conduct their own empirical analyses; these two studies reach quite different conclusions on the merits 
of alternative specifications.  
8   For example,  see the  article by  Chao Wei  (2003) illustrating the  effects of a rise  in oil prices in  a dynamic 
equilibrium model. 
9   Erceg, Henderson, and Levin (2000) discuss the importance of relative price adjustments in the presence of 
sluggish  nominal  prices  and  wages  in  a  general  context;  Mankiw  and  Reis  (2003)  present  related  results. 
Bodenstein, Erceg, and Guerrieri (2007) apply this reasoning to oil price shocks.  
10   See Taylor (1979). 
11   Ball (1994) presents estimates of the costs of disinflation for a variety of countries, including the United States. 
Kiley (2008) provides evidence on how survey measures of inflation expectations in the United States have 
responded to economic developments and presents a model that attempts to explain the patterns in the data. 
4 
 BIS Review 76/2008
which any deviations of inflation from long-run objectives are tolerated to allow the efficient 
relative price adjustments that I have described needs to be tempered so as to ensure that 
longer-term inflation expectations are not affected to a significant extent. 
Global demand, trending commodity prices, and monetary policy 
My remarks so far have concentrated on the factors guiding the monetary policy response to 
a shock in the prices of commodities like oil that stems from a shifting balance of supply and 
demand  in  the  specific  market  for  these  commodities.  Some  might  think  that  this  focus 
misses the point in the current context, for at least two reasons. First, it has been suggested 
that  the  run-up  in  the  prices  of  a  broad  range  of  commodity  prices  reflects,  in  part,  global 
excess demand rather than sector-specific forces. And second, some have suggested that 
important commodity prices, like that of oil, may be on a more significant upward trend than 
is currently embedded in futures prices. 
It  seems  highly  likely  that,  over  the  period  since  2003,  the  rise  in  commodity  prices  has 
reflected  strong  global  economic  growth  as  well  as  some  sector-specific  factors,  such  as 
geopolitical tensions and other disruptions to the supply of oil.12 In this regard, I share the 
views  expressed  by  Chairman  Bernanke  at  this  conference  two  days  ago  in  which  he 
discussed a range of factors that have likely influenced relative commodity prices.13  
However,  the  fact  that  rising  relative  commodity  prices  have  likely  reflected  many  factors 
does not, by itself, change the analytical framework that I used to frame policy deliberations. 
As I highlighted at the beginning of my remarks, the most important drivers of inflation in the 
model  of  inflation  dynamics  I  use  are  relative  price  shocks,  inflation  expectations,  and  the 
balance between aggregate demand and supply in the United States, as measured by some 
notion of resource utilization. If a shift in global demand affects both commodity prices and 
the  demand  for  U.S.  goods,  the  model  I  have  in  mind  accounts  for  these  influences  on 
inflation through relative price shocks and resource utilization. For example, the rise in the 
price of oil this year has lowered consumption demand by pinching households' real incomes 
and likely damped the growth in labor productivity by trimming energy input; both of these 
factors have probably contributed to a lower equilibrium real wage, as I described earlier. If 
the impact on demand from these factors was accompanied by stronger global demand that 
boosted demand for U.S. goods generally, the forecasts of inflation would need to take this 
into account. In any event, resource utilization has been slackening, judging from the rise in 
the  unemployment  rate  and  the  slow  pace  of  economic  growth  in  the  United  States,  on 
average, over the past six to nine months. 
Some  have  suggested  that  the  price  of  oil  is  on  a  more  significant  upward  trend  than 
currently appreciated.14 Such an unanticipated shift in trend would not be embedded in the 
anticipated  rate  of  change  in  slowly  adjusting  nominal  prices  and  wages,  implying  that  an 
adjustment period with distortions to relative prices would follow. Moreover, there would likely 
                                                                                                                                                      
Orphanides and Williams (2005) present a model in which perpetual learning leads to fluctuations in inflation 
expectations  at  various  horizons  and  provide  examples  of  how  alternative  monetary  policy  settings  can 
influence  the  course  of  inflation  expectations,  thereby  illustrating  the  importance  of  the  interaction  between 
expectations formation and efficient monetary policy.  
12   With regard to oil prices, Bodenstein, Erceg, and Guerrieri (2008) discuss the effects on the price of oil and the 
U.S.  economy  from  shocks  to  various  factors  in  a  theoretical  model;  Kilian  (2007)  provides  an  empirical 
analysis. More generally, this area remains a fertile field for future research. 
13   See Bernanke (2008). 
14   One might question whether significant price trends can reasonably be anticipated for a storable commodity 
like oil. The price of such a commodity should reflect expected demand and "anticipated" increases should be 
limited to approximately the cost of storage, including the nominal interest rate. Still, the following discussion 
would also apply to a shift in the trend in any important subset of consumer prices.  
BIS Review 76/2008 
 5
be upward pressure on overall inflation during this period, reflecting the slow response of the 
rate of change in some nominal prices to the new trend in the price of oil. This tendency for 
higher overall inflation could risk a rise in inflation expectations. 
An  appropriate  monetary  policy  response  would  share  many  of  the  characteristics  I 
discussed  earlier.  In  particular,  bringing  overall  inflation  immediately  back  to  the  low  rate 
consistent with price stability could be associated with a much higher rate of unemployment 
for  a  short  time.  It  may  be  efficient  to  allow  some  adjustment  period  in  which  both  overall 
inflation exceeds its desired low level and the unemployment rate is higher than its long-run 
sustainable level; as before, setting policy in a manner that balances the undesirable effects 
of a shock to the system on both inflation and employment will tend to be more efficient than 
setting policy so as to deliver more extreme outcomes in either inflation or unemployment.15
However, two additional considerations are likely important when considering a shift in trend. 
First, developments in inflation expectations following a significant shift in the relative price 
trend of a commodity like oil should be monitored carefully, as our understanding of changes 
in  long-run  inflation  expectations  is  limited  and  shifts  in  trends  are  infrequent,  potentially 
implying  a  greater  chance  of  confusion  between  relative  price  trends  and  overall  inflation. 
Second, it is very important to remember that the costs of inflation in excess of the low rate of 
measured inflation consistent with price stability over any extended period are significant and 
reflect a broad range of factors. As I emphasized earlier, economic research into the many 
costs of inflation has suggested that these costs are associated with the rate of change in a 
broad set of prices. As a result, a trend in any individual relative price should not, in itself, 
lead to a change in the desirable rate of measured inflation over the long run. 
Summary 
To reiterate, the Phillips curve framework is one important input to my outlook for inflation 
and provides a framework in which I can analyze the nature of efficient policy choices. In the 
case of a shock to the relative price of oil or other commodities, this framework suggests that 
policymakers  should  ensure  that  their  actions  balance  the  deleterious  economic  effects  of 
such a shock in the short run on both unemployment and inflation. 
Of course, the framework helps to define the short-run goals for policy, but it doesn't tell you 
what path for interest rates will accomplish these objectives. That's what we wrestle with at 
the FOMC and is perhaps a subject for a future Federal Reserve Bank of Boston conference. 
References  
Ball, Laurence M. (1994). "What Determines the Sacrifice Ratio?" in N. Gregory Mankiw, ed., 
Monetary Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 155-82. 
Ball,  Laurence,  and  N.  Gregory  Mankiw  (1995).  "Relative-Price  Changes  as  Aggregate 
Supply Shocks", Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 110 (February), pp. 161-93. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2008). "Outstanding Issues in the Analysis of Inflation", speech delivered 
at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston's  52nd  Annual  Economic  Conference,  Chatham, 
Mass., June 9. 
                                                 
15   An  example  of  a  change  in  the  trend  of  other  consumer  prices  could  be  seen  in  the  relative  prices  of 
computers and other high-technology goods and services in the second half of the 1990s, which declined at 
an unexpectedly rapid rate as productivity accelerated. This shock placed downward pressure on inflation and 
raised both employment and the equilibrium real wage. In the presence of nominal price and wage rigidities, 
an efficient policy response would facilitate the rise in the real wage by allowing some downward drift in price 
inflation and upward drift in employment and wage inflation, which is, in fact, about the result observed over 
this period.  
6 
 BIS Review 76/2008
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Jordi Gali (2007). "The Macroeconomic Effects of Oil Shocks: Why 
Are  the  2000s  So  Different  from  the  1970s?"  NBER  Working  Paper  Series  13368. 
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September.  
Bodenstein, Martin, Christopher Erceg, and Luca Guerrieri (2007). "Optimal Monetary Policy 
in  a  Model  with  Distinct  Core  and  Headline  Inflation  Rates,"  unpublished  paper,  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
_________ (2008). "Oil Shocks and U.S. External Adjustment," unpublished paper, Board of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
Erceg, Christopher J., Dale W. Henderson, and Andrew T. Levin (2000). "Optimal Monetary 
Policy with Staggered Wage and Price Contracts", Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 46 
(October), pp. 281-313. 
Gordon, Robert J. (1998). "Foundations of the Goldilocks Economy: Supply Shocks and the 
Time-Varying NAIRU",  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 1998 (no. 2), pp. 297-
333. 
Hooker,  Mark  A.  (2002).  "Are  Oil  Shocks 
Inflationary?  Asymmetric  and  Nonlinear 
Specifications  versus  Changes  in Regime",  Journal  of  Money,  Credit and  Banking,  vol.  34 
(May), pp. 540-61. 
Kiley, Michael T. (2007). "A Quantitative Comparison of Sticky-Price and Sticky-Information 
Models of Price Setting", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking , vol. 39 (February), pp. 101-
25. 
_________ (2008). "Monetary Policy Actions and Long-run Inflation Expectations", Finance 
and Economics Discussion Series 2008-03. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, February. 
Kilian, Lutz (2007). "Not All Oil Price Shocks Are Alike: Disentangling Demand and Supply 
Shocks in the Crude Oil Market", unpublished paper, University of Michigan. 
Lucas, Robert E., Jr. (1972). "Econometric Testing of the Natural Rate Hypothesis", in Otto 
Eckstein,  ed.,  The  Econometrics  of  Price  Determination.  Washington:  Federal  Reserve 
Board. 
_________  (1976).  "Econometric  Policy  Evaluation:  A  Critique",  Carnegie-Rochester 
Conference Series on Public Policy, vol. 1, pp. 19-46. 
Mankiw, N. Gregory, and Ricardo Reis (2003). "What Measure of Inflation Should a Central 
Bank  Target?  Journal  of  the  European  Economic  Association,  vol.  1  (September,  25th 
International Seminar on Macroeconomics), pp. 1058-86. 
Orphanides, Athanasios, and John C. Williams (2005). "Inflation Scares and Forecast-Based 
Monetary  Policy",  Review  of  Economic  Dynamics,  vol.  8  (April,  Monetary  Policy  and 
Learning), pp. 498-527. 
Rudd, Jeremy, and Karl Whelan (2007). "Modeling Inflation Dynamics: A Critical Review of 
Recent Research", Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol. 39 (February), pp. 155-70. 
Stock, James H., and Mark W. Watson (1999). "Forecasting Inflation", Journal of Monetary 
Economics, vol. 44 (October), pp. 293-335.  
Taylor,  John  B.  (1979).  "Estimation  and  Control  of  a  Macroeconomic  Model  with  Rational 
Expectations", Econometrica, vol. 47 (September), pp. 1267-86. 
Wei,  Chao  (2003).  "Energy,  the  Stock  Market,  and  the  Putty-Clay  Investment  Model", 
American Economic Review, vol. 93 (March), pp. 311-23. 
Woodford,  Michael  (1994).  "Nonstandard  Indicators  for  Monetary  Policy:  Can  Their 
Usefulness  Be  Judged  From  Forecasting  Regressions?"  in  N.  Gregory  Mankiw,  ed., 
Monetary Policy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 95-116. 
BIS Review 76/2008 
 7
