Svein Gjedrem: From oil and gas to financial assets – Norway’s 
Government Pension Fund – Global 
Speech by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
conference “Commodities, the Economy and Money” in Calgary, Canada, 20 June 2008. 
 Introduction 
Good morning and thank you for the invitation to this highly topical conference. I have been 
asked to talk about the “objectives and experience of the Norwegian oil fund”. In doing so, I 
will try to explain the set-up and purpose of the Fund and draw some preliminary conclusions 
about the outcome so far. 
Since Norway became an oil nation some 40 years ago, the petroleum sector has grown to 
become an important part of our economy. Today, petroleum accounts for approximately 25 
per cent of Norway’s gross domestic product (GDP). 
And  even  though  the  production  of  oil  is  declining  after  peaking  around  the  turn  of  the 
millennium, total petroleum production will remain high for many years to come. 
The economic challenges posed by petroleum extraction were widely recognised early on. 
As early as in 1974, the Norwegian parliament discussed these challenges in depth, and in 
the  early  1980s,  the  idea  of  a  fund  that  would  stabilise  petroleum  revenue  spending  was 
launched. Due to domestic economic turmoil and financial crisis in the late 1980s and early 
1990s, it took time before the idea of a fund was turned into actual savings.  
Why a Pension Fund? 
The Government Petroleum Fund was formally established in 1990. In 2006, the name was 
changed to the Government Pension Fund – Global. In spite of the name change, the Fund 
is more similar to an endowment than to a pension fund.  
Since  the  first  transfer  of  some  USD  400  million  was  made  in  1996,  the  Fund  has  grown 
rapidly  in  size.  Its  assets  are  currently  valued  at  around  USD  400  billion.  One  third  of  the 
portfolio, about USD 130 billion is invested here in North America. The Fund is expected to 
grow rapidly in coming years, and may double in 5-10 years. 
The Fund was established as a tool to support prudent management of Norway’s petroleum 
wealth. One purpose is to shield the non-oil economy from price fluctuations (see Chart 3). 
The  Fund  is  also  a  long-term  savings  instrument.  It  will  help  to  cope  with  future  financial 
commitments linked to an ageing population.  
Accumulation of capital in the Fund reflects the depletion of a non-renewable resource, which 
is exchanged for financial assets through the Fund’s investments. By setting up the Fund, it 
became possible to establish a path for production of oil and gas that is independent of the 
profile for petroleum revenue spending.  
Furthermore, to effectively shield the non-oil economy, and to make sure that private sector 
investment decisions could be made independently of the public sector’s saving of petroleum 
wealth,  the  Fund  is  only  invested  abroad.  This  also  enhances  the  expected  return  on 
government wealth and reduces the risk. 
The  alternative  to  a  fund  would  have  been  to  directly  regulate  production  by  putting  a 
conservative upper limit on annual extraction. This was attempted in the 1970s and -80s. At 
that  time,  we  had  a  production  ceiling  of  90  million  standard  cubic  metres  per  year.  This 
approach was abandoned in the 1980s. Today, the government steers exploration activities 
BIS Review 81/2008 
 1
and awards production licenses, but has no explicit production target. Since the mid-1990s, 
total petroleum production has been around 250 million standard cubic metres per year. 
The Fund mechanism 
The Fund is by law fully integrated with the government budget, and the same priorities are 
imposed on spending from the Fund as on any other government spending. This means that 
the entire petroleum revenues are transferred to the Fund. An amount equal to the non-oil 
budget  deficit  is  then  transferred  to  the  fiscal  budget.  The  mechanism  ensures  that  the 
accumulation of capital in the Fund is equal to government net financial savings. There is no 
corresponding increase in liabilities. 
Furthermore,  legislation  prohibits  use  of  Fund  money  for  purposes  not  prioritised  in  the 
regular  budget  processes.  There  is  no  hidden  use  of  oil  money,  or  any  use  for  special 
purposes. The Fund is strictly and effectively “out of bounds” to special interests.  
In 2001, the Norwegian parliament approved new fiscal policy guidelines stipulating that the 
annual transfer from the Fund to the fiscal budget – that is annual spending of oil money – 
should  correspond  to  the  expected  real  return  on  the  Fund.  The  expected  real  return  is 
estimated  at  4  per  cent.  The  point  of  reference  for  the  spending  rule  is  a  normal  cyclical 
situation. In the event of particularly high capacity utilisation, spending should be lower than 
4 per cent, whereas in a cyclical downturn, somewhat higher spending may be appropriate. 
The  intention  is  for  this  wealth  to  be  transferred  to  future  generations,  and  that  each 
generation should only spend the returns. The rule gives weight to long-term considerations 
when addressing current economic policy challenges. The rule also helps stabilise exchange 
rate expectations. 
The fiscal rule has the advantage of having intuitive appeal, and it is easy to check whether it 
is being followed over the business cycle.  
In line with the rule, the transfer from the Fund was higher than the expected real return of 4 
per cent in the cyclical downturn in 2003 and the following two years. Since 2006, however, 
the transfer has been lower. It should also be noted that the target for the rule is the cyclically 
adjusted  transfer,  shown  by  the  solid  line  in  Chart  6.  Automatic  stabilisers  are  allowed  to 
work,  thereby  reducing  actual  transfers  during  upturns  and  increasing  them  during 
downturns, as illustrated by the broken line in Chart 6. 
Governance structure and management model 
Now, let me turn to the Fund management model. The governance structure is based on a 
clear  division  of  responsibilities  between  the  political  authorities  and  the  operational 
management.  
• 
The Ministry of Finance is the owner of the Fund. The Ministry defines the mandate 
and monitors and evaluates performance.  
The management of the Fund is delegated to Norges Bank. The Bank’s task is to 
implement the investment strategy and exercise ownership rights. Norges Bank also 
provides professional advice to the Ministry on investment strategies. 
 The Fund’s investment strategy is to maximise financial return with moderate risk. The long-
term  strategic  allocation  is  defined  in  terms  of  a  benchmark  portfolio,  which  consists  of 
equities  and  fixed  income  instruments.  Equities  account  for  60  per  cent  of  the  Fund's 
strategic benchmark portfolio. The size of the Fund implies that it currently owns about 1 per 
cent of listed European equities and ½ per cent of listed equities on a global basis. Fixed 
income instruments account for 40 per cent.  
2 
 BIS Review 81/2008
Furthermore, the Ministry has recently decided that the Fund should prepare the ground for 
investing  in  real  estate  at  5  per  cent  of  the  strategic  benchmark  portfolio.  In  time,  this  will 
reduce the fixed income share to 35 per cent. 
Norges Bank has built an organisation with emphasis on investment returns and based on 
three fundamental principles: Accountability, transparency and professional standards. 
Norges  Bank  manages  parts  of  the  funds  internally,  while  parts  are  managed  by  external 
managers appointed by the Bank on a commercial basis. Active management has become 
an important part of our investment operations. We believe that the search for excess return 
has had a strong disciplinary effect on the organisation.  
Transparency  and  disclosure  of  information  is  a  key  feature  of  the  Fund.  All  investment 
principles and guidelines as well as strategic advice and second opinion reports are made 
public.  We  publish  quarterly  reports  on  Fund  performance,  which  are  presented  at  press 
conferences. The Fund’s annual report discloses a list of every single investment held at the 
end  of  the  year,  and  also  provides  an  overview  of  corporate  governance  work,  including 
voting at general meetings.  
Initially,  transparency  was  aimed  at  building  confidence  among  Norwegians,  but  we  have 
also seen that our policy of transparency is highly appreciated internationally. 
The challenges for the Norwegian economy 
The risk of “Dutch disease”1 is often cited when discussing the impact of natural resource 
windfalls.2  Dutch  disease  occurs  when  the  basis  for  internationally  exposed  industries  is 
eroded and fluctuations in economic activity are amplified. 
In our case, we can say “so far so good”. The economy has been fairly stable and oil price 
fluctuations have only had a moderate impact on our currency. 
Furthermore, while it is difficult to know how the economy would have developed without oil, 
we  have  a  sort  of  “control  group”.  The  other  Nordic  countries  –  Denmark,  Finland  and 
Sweden – are comparable in size and structures, but are mainly non-oil economies.3 Three 
indicators may be relevant in this context. 
First, there is no evidence that our productivity growth has been eroded. In fact, Norway has 
generally managed to sustain high productivity growth compared with most other advanced 
countries.  
Second, there is no evidence that labour force participation has been impaired. In fact, labour 
force participation is now high, after having lagged behind our neighbouring countries up to 
the mid-1980s. 
A third indicator is welfare spending. Here, there is evidence that developments have been 
less  favourable.  Norway  has  seen  a  sharp  increase  in  sickness  absence  and  a  steadily 
higher share of the working-age population is on disability benefit or rehabilitation schemes. 
Over the past decade, Norway has underperformed on this score compared with the other 
                                                 
1   The expression ”Dutch disease” originates from the Netherlands, where the government rapidly spent large 
revenues from extraction of gas in the 1960s. 
2   The  economic  literature  includes  many  studies  that  look  at  the  relationship  between  income  from  natural 
resources  and  economic  growth,  see  for  example  Jeffrey  D.  Sachs  and  Andrew  M.  Warner,  “The  curse  of 
Natural Resources”, European Economic Review 45 (2001) and Thorvaldur Gylfason, “Natural Resources and 
Economic Growth: From Dependence to Diversification”, Discussion paper No. 4804, CEPR. 
3   Denmark has also been producing oil and gas since the early 1970s, but on a smaller scale than Norway. The 
impact on the Danish economy has therefore been more limited. 
BIS Review 81/2008 
 3
Nordic countries. The growing number of people outside the labour force and on benefits is 
increasingly becoming the Achilles’ heel of the Norwegian economy. 
On balance though, the picture is fairly positive: We have managed to keep macroeconomic 
developments on a steady course, we have avoided dramatic changes in industry structure, 
and  we  use  our  resources  fairly  efficiently.  It  is,  however,  too  early  to  draw  definite 
conclusions. We probably have to wait another generation or two to see the long-term impact 
of this huge windfall. 
The debate on sovereign wealth funds 
Let me wind up with a few words on the sovereign wealth funds debate.  
Typical features of many sovereign wealth funds are long investment horizons, no leverage 
and no claims for the imminent withdrawal of funds. This differentiates such funds from for 
instance the rising number of leveraged funds and investors with short time horizons. Hence, 
sovereign wealth funds have a strong risk-bearing capacity and an ability to accommodate 
short-term  volatility.  Sovereign  wealth  funds  may  reduce  volatility  in  asset  prices  and 
increase efficiency. Again, transparency and disclosure of information is an important tool in 
building confidence. This runs both ways, of course.  
It  should  also  be  noted  that  the  separation  of  spending  of  petroleum  revenues  from  the 
current revenue stream through a fund mechanism allows oil producers to extract petroleum 
at a higher rate than would be appropriate if all the proceeds were to be redeployed in the 
domestic  economy.  Hence,  the  petroleum  funds  do  not  just  offer  an  attractive  way  of 
recycling  oil  producers’  revenues  in  international  financial  markets,  they  can  also  have  an 
indirect stabilising effect on the oil market. 
In my view, sound management of oil-producing countries’ petroleum wealth is in everyone’s 
interest.  
Thank you for your attention. 
 
4 
   BIS Review 81/2008
    BIS Review 81/2008 
 5
    6 
 BIS Review 81/2008
    BIS Review 81/2008 
 7
    8 
 BIS Review 81/2008
 BIS Review 81/2008 
 9
