Andres Sutt: Emerging energy markets – key issues 
Introductory remarks by Mr Andres Sutt, Deputy Governor of Eesti Pank (Bank of Estonia), at 
the GIC/MKM/Eesti Bank Conference on emerging energy markets, Tallinn, 21 August 2008. 
 Mister Minister, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Dear Guests, 
It is a great honor to welcome you here in Tallinn.  
The issues of our conference on emerging energy markets are of great importance in today's 
world. We are very lucky to have an excellent lineup of highly distinctive speakers from both 
the public and the private sector, so our discussions will no doubt be interesting and useful. I 
also  have  to  admit  that  that  interest  in  the  conference  exceeded  the  organizers'  most 
optimistic expectations. 
Energy  issues  and  related  policy  choices  have  come  forward  forcefully  and  en  masse  for 
policy makers and public at large. Indeed, there is hardly any other area where choices that 
are made today will have a direct impact on the way of life of the generations to come. In this 
regard, I would like to briefly outline the key issues that will be discussed also today. 
First  and  foremost,  human  activity  and  energy  consumption  are,  in  all  likelihood,  having  a 
direct impact on climate and, ultimately, on living conditions on the Planet Earth. While the 
direct effects of climate change on growth and prosperity vary, it is beyond any doubt that the 
challenges ahead are formidable. Rich countries can and will adjust more smoothly to these 
challenges, but it will be the poor in the developing world who are going to have to bear the 
heaviest  burden.  Naturally,  changes  in  energy  production  and  consumption  as  well  as  in 
energy markets structure have a special contribution to global action for coping with climate 
change. 
Second, surging energy demand worldwide makes us see the issues of energy security from 
a new perspective. A frantic search for energy sources by Asia's emerging economies, and 
the increasing concentration of production in the hands of sometimes unpredictable regimes, 
has deep ramifications for energy security in the advanced world, including and most notably 
in the European Union. Here, a forceful united approach is called for, based on integrated 
and well-functioning markets and European solidarity. 
Third,  high  and  volatile  energy  prices  constitute  a  challenge 
for  macroeconomic 
management.  Energy  price  developments  have  pushed  up  inflation  in  the  advanced  world 
with adverse effect on private demand and growth. On the other hand, windfall due to high 
energy prices poses challenges to fiscal, monetary and exchange rate management in the 
countries exporting energy. 
I  am  happy  that  the  excellent  list  of  speakers  allows  us  to  touch  upon  all  these  key 
challenges today.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  before  giving  the  floor  to  Mr.  David  Kotok  from  the  Global 
Interdependence Center, the co-organizer of today's event, I would like to speak briefly about 
our cooperation with the Global Interdependence Center. The GIC is a Philadelphia-based 
nonprofit think tank with the mission to "encourage the expansion of global dialogue and free 
trade in order to improve cooperation and understanding among nation states, with the goal 
of reducing international conflicts and improving worldwide living standards." This is indeed a 
noble goal in today's changing world full of new challenges and, unfortunately too often also 
conflict.  Eesti  Pank  is  honored  to  have  been  included  in  the  GIC  list  of  cooperating 
institutions for a number of years already. Our people have participated in GIC events both 
as  speakers  and  members  of  the  GIC  delegation.  We  have  first-hand  experience  in  how 
dedicated the GIC is in fostering the cause of free markets, cooperation and liberty. 
BIS Review 104/2008 
 1
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you once again for coming here today. I am now most pleased 
to invite David to say a few words of welcome on the behalf of the GIC. 
2 
 BIS Review 104/2008
