Njuguna Ndung’u: Mobile phone banking services in Kenya 
Address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Launch of 
Equity Bank Mobile Phone Banking Service, Nairobi, 3 September 2008. 
 Mr. Peter Munga, Chairman of the Board of Directors of Equity Bank Ltd.; 
Dr. James Mwangi, Managing Director and Chief Executive Officer of Equity Bank Ltd.; 
Board Members here present; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  this  afternoon  on  the  occasion  of  the  launch  of  Equity  Bank’s 
mobile phone banking service. Today indeed marks yet another landmark event on Equity’s 
chequered path. I am therefore grateful for the invitation to share in this occasion. 
Let me at this early juncture commend the Board, management and staff of Equity on the 
introduction of the mobile phone banking service that I will be launching shortly. The service 
provides  an  EAZZY  24/7  Mobile  Phone  Banking  solution  to  your  customers  as  they  shall 
literally be carrying their accounts in their hands (“Benki Yangu Mkononi”). This is indeed a 
revolutionary solution that will provide the following four key benefits: 
1. 
Convenience:  The  launch  of  mobile  phone  banking  is  a  step  towards  making 
financial  services  accessible  to  all  Kenyans  who  have  access  to  a  mobile  phone. 
This  is  a  revolutionary  mobile  solution  that  delivers  mobility,  convenience  and 
security to the bank’s existing as well as prospective customers. It will leverage on 
the  strong  mobile  penetration  both  locally  as  well  as  globally  and  essentially  the 
affinity of mobile devices to the consumer. Customers will be able to generate value 
from wireless transactions anytime anywhere. 
Banking the unbanked: With 11 million Kenyans having access to a mobile phone, 
and  only  approximately  4.5  million  banked,  the  new  solution  offers  an  avenue  to 
push forward the access frontier in Kenya. This effort will bring more Kenyans into 
banking solutions. 
Beyond banking; financial solution: This banking solution will allow for the use of 
a mobile phone to perform various other services beyond funds transfer. Customers 
will be able to pay for services, manage their accounts, provide airtime top-ups and 
execute other service requests. 
Opening new economic frontiers and supporting Vision 2030: This service will 
contribute  to  economic  expansion  for  Kenyans,  especially  the  small  and  medium 
enterprises. By accessing financial services easily and affordably, Kenyans will be 
better equipped to support their enterprises. The success of the small and medium 
enterprise sector undoubtedly lies at the heart of the realisation of Vision 2030. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
The four benefits provide us with a solution to Kenyans who view banks as expensive, have 
barriers  to  entry  and  have  high  transaction  costs  of  maintaining  accounts.  What  Kenyans 
need  is  access  to  bank  accounts  where  they  can  save  and  transact  easily.  This  move  by 
Equity indeed answers to that challenge. 
The Central Bank welcomes such innovations by the banking sector and is committed to the 
creation of an enabling regulatory environment towards this end. I would therefore urge the 
banking  sector  to  seek  innovative  ways  of  leveraging  on  existing  technologies  and 
infrastructures to provide affordable and inclusive financial services to Kenyans. 
Mr. Chairman, Kenya can not develop, or even realize the aspirations of vision 2030, if the 
majority of Kenyans at the bottom of the economic pyramid lack access to financial services 
BIS Review 108/2008 
 1
such  as  savings,  credit,  payment/remittance  systems,  money  transfers,  insurance  and 
pension. The example Equity Bank has shown here today takes us steps towards realization 
of  this  goal.  These  are  steps  to  emulate  for  the  growth  and  development  of  our  financial 
sector. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: It is now my honour and pleasure to declare the Equity Bank Mobile 
Phone Banking Service Officially Launched. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 108/2008
