Mary C Nkosi: Mobile banking in Malawi 
Address  by  Mrs  Mary  C  Nkosi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Malawi,  at  the 
official  launching  of  Mobile  Banking  Services  by  Opportunity  International  Bank  Malawi 
(OIBM), Lilongwe, 27 March 2008. 
 The Chairman, Mr Francis Pelekamoyo, and your fellow Board members 
The Chief Executive of OIBM, Mr Rodger Voorhies 
Invited guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am very honoured to be here this morning to witness yet another milestone in the history of 
Opportunity  International Bank Malawi (OIBM) – the official launching of a  Mobile Banking 
Service.  
First of all, on behalf of the Governor of Reserve Bank of Malawi, and indeed on my own 
behalf,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  OIBM  for  its  visible  effort  in  making  banking  services 
available to all people, particularly the rural masses in a manner that is convenient to them. 
This  is  evidenced  by  the  increasing  number  of  customers  and  retail  outlets  it  has  opened 
since commencing banking operations a few years ago. Statistics show that OIBM is one of 
the  largest  private  sector  microfinance  providers  in  Malawi.  Over  the  years,  we  have 
witnessed  great  innovation  by  OIBM  through  its  focus  on  small  scale  saving,  salary  and 
wage payment systems and focus on paperless banking.  
Today, I am pleased yet again to witness another great drive by OIBM to further deepen the 
financial sector in Malawi. Mobile Banking will provide a mechanism through which financial 
services will be penetrated to sectors not currently being served by traditional banking. I have 
been informed that the bank will serve over 10,000 customers through its three mobile units. 
I  am  further  informed  that  some  mobile  units  will  have  mounted  Auto  Teller  Machines 
(ATMs). This, I must say, is quite commendable and in line with Government’s objective of 
empowering rural masses by bringing financial services to their door-step. I therefore would 
like  to  applaud  both,  the  Board  and  Management  for  their  efforts  and  hard  work  in  this 
regard. 
As regulators, our primary objective is to safeguard the interests of the depositors and the 
general  public  by  among  other  things  constantly  monitoring  the  safety  and  soundness  of 
banks. This is why we take keen interest in banking facilities or projects that aim to serve the 
public  better.  I  am  glad  to  acknowledge  here  this  morning  the  efforts  OIBM  has  made  in 
complying  with  our  requirements  in  this  area.  I  am  also  pleased  to  note  the  satisfactory 
financial performance of the bank in the year ended 2007. 
With these few remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you all for your time and attention. I 
now have the pleasure to declare the Mobile Banking Service officially launched. 
Thank you and God bless you all.  
BIS Review 48/2008 
 1
