Mark Carney: Reflections on recent international economic 
developments 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canadian  Club  of 
Montreal, Montréal, Quebec, 25 September 2008.  
 As  always,  it  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Montréal,  and  I  would  like  to  thank  the 
Canadian Club for inviting me to address its members this afternoon. I would like to take this 
opportunity to speak in some depth about international economic developments. 
The events of the past few weeks in global financial markets have been dramatic. Money and 
credit markets seized up. There was a massive flight to the safety of the highest quality of 
government debt. Equity markets convulsed and some of the most storied names in finance 
succumbed. Fortunately, even this ferocious storm has a silver lining: its cathartic nature and 
the  decisive  policy  response  it  is  prompting  could  mark  the  beginning  of  the  end  of  a  14-
month  crisis  that  has  gripped  the  global  financial  system.  A  restructuring  that  for  some 
countries took a decade is now likely to take only a few years in total in the United States. 
This will greatly reduce the cost in terms of lost output and employment in that country, as 
well as the negative spillovers to the rest of the world. Nonetheless, the months ahead will 
bring  more  financial  losses,  significant  consolidation  in  the  financial  industry  and  further 
increases  in  the  cost  of  capital.  The  eventual  reordering  of  the  financial  system  will  be 
historic.1
To  some  extent,  we  are  experiencing  the  inevitable  correction  of  a  period  of  unbalanced 
growth. These are the famous global imbalances, which are characterized by excess savings 
and  underconsumption  in  major  emerging  markets,  and  by  negative  savings,  rapid  credit 
expansion and asset-price booms in many western economies. This correction has not been 
pretty. The world is now grappling with three major shocks, which have had important effects 
on the Canadian economy. The U.S. economy is undergoing its first consumer-led slowdown 
in  almost  two  decades.  Global  financial  turbulence  is  increasing  the  cost  of  capital  and 
decreasing its availability. Finally, commodities have been in a supercycle, with the prices of 
agricultural  commodities  nearly  doubling,  base  and  precious  metals  nearly  tripling  and 
energy  products  more  than  quadrupling  since  2002.  In  the  face  of  these  developments, 
global inflationary pressures have risen even as the global economy has begun to slow. 
I would like to address each of the three in more detail. 
Commodity-price volatility 
The  increase  in  a  broad  range  of  commodity  prices  over  the  past  few  years  suggests  a 
combination of very favourable and mutually reinforcing factors. These include robust global 
economic  growth  and  the  slow  increase  in  supply  of  many  commodities.  Importantly, 
emerging-market demand has been strong, reflecting sustained growth in per capita income, 
rapid industrialization and a more intensive use of commodities in production. 
The  outlook  for  commodity  prices  matters  to  Canada  for  a  number  of  reasons.  Primarily, 
higher  commodity  prices  increase  national  income  by  improving  our  terms  of  trade.  The 
roughly 25 per cent rise in our terms of trade since 2002 is responsible for about two-thirds of 
the  14  per  cent  gain  in  real  per  capita  disposable  income  over  the  same  period.  Higher 
                                                 
1   J.  Lipsky,  "The  Global  Economy  and  Financial  Turmoil:  Finding  Our  Footing"  (speech  to  the  Center  for 
Strategic and International Studies, Washington, D.C., 18 September 2008). 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 1
commodity  prices  have  other  benefits,  such  as  increased  investment,  portfolio  gains  for 
Canadians  and  our  pension  funds  and  a  contribution  to  the  appreciation  of  our  currency, 
which in turn lowers the cost of imported goods and services. These benefits are felt across 
Canada – not just in resource-heavy sectors and regions.  
Some  of  these  effects  are  now  being  unwound  owing  to  the  recent  sharp  fall  in  some 
commodity prices, particularly those for energy. In our July Monetary Policy Report Update, 
we  highlighted  this  possibility  as  a  downside  risk  for  the  outlook  for  inflation  in  Canada. 
Slower economic growth in emerging markets, as well as in Europe and Japan, appears to 
be the primary factor behind declines such as the roughly one-third fall in the price of oil from 
its peak in the summer. Even with this decline, oil prices are back around levels of only six 
months  ago  and  are  still  one-quarter  higher  than  a  year  ago.  With  both  supply  of  and 
demand  for  commodities  highly  inelastic  in  the  short  term,  inventories  remaining  tight  and 
emerging-market  growth  prospects  more  uncertain,  we  can  expect  continued  volatility  in 
commodity prices.  
Let me turn now to the renewed weakness in the U.S. economy. 
Weakness in the U.S. economy 
As the effects of the U.S. government's spring fiscal stimulus package wear off, a fall in U.S. 
domestic demand seems likely. Household credit growth has slowed sharply and will likely 
slow further. Indeed, credit conditions faced by U.S. households have tightened despite the 
cumulative 3.25-percentage-point reduction in policy interest rates. The most recent survey 
of  U.S.  senior  loan  officers  showed  an  expectation  of  still  tighter  credit  conditions  for 
business and consumers in the months ahead as banks reduce their tolerance for risk and 
react  to  the  unfavourable  economic  outlook.  Recent  financial  market  events  will  reinforce 
these tendencies. 
The U.S. housing sector is central to that country's economic and financial outlooks. Housing 
has been contracting since the end of 2005, with steep declines in the construction of new 
homes, the sales of existing homes and the prices of both. There are reasons to expect that 
housing will continue to act as a drag on the U.S. economy for a few quarters yet. Inventories 
of unsold new and existing homes remain well above historical averages, both in terms of 
actual  units  and  months  of  supply  remaining,  with  existing-home  inventories  near  all-time 
highs.  At  the  same  time,  the  availability  of  mortgages  has  become  increasingly  restricted, 
and mortgage costs have fallen only marginally despite the sharp reductions in policy interest 
rates. Most importantly, even if residential construction stops shrinking later next year, as we 
now  expect,  the  usual  sharp  rebound  in  housing  activity  is  unlikely.  The  overhang  of 
inventories and tight financial conditions will restrain the housing recovery for some time. 
Any slowdown in the U.S. economy would have consequences for Canada, but the current 
situation  poses  particular  problems.  The  prolonged  housing  slump  has  affected  Canadian 
exports of lumber and building materials. In addition, the fall in U.S. motor vehicle sales – by 
35 per cent at annual rates in the second quarter for vehicles assembled in North America – 
has  adversely  affected  our  auto  sector.  Even  the  spring  fiscal  stimulus  package  does  not 
appear  to  have  boosted  consumption  in  the  areas  that  matter  most  for  Canada.2  We  will 
continue  to  monitor  closely  both  the  composition  as  well  as  the  rate  of  U.S.  growth  for  its 
overall impact on Canada. 
The Bank is currently revisiting its projection for the U.S. economy as part of our preparations 
for our October Monetary Policy Report. In our interest rate announcement earlier this month, 
we  identified  the  possibility  of  a  negative  feedback  loop  between  a  weaker  U.S.  economy 
                                                 
2   Data for the second quarter show declines in areas that have a large impact on Canadian exports, including 
industrial production, investment in machinery and equipment and automobile sales. 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2008
and tighter credit markets as the main risk to a modest U.S. recovery next year. Subsequent 
events have further weakened the U.S. financial sector, making this risk more probable.  
Global financial turmoil 
After 14 months of turmoil, global financial markets are at a critical juncture. Risk aversion 
across  the  system  has  risen  to  unprecedented  levels,  and  an  aggressive  deleveraging 
process  is  under  way.  Many  foreign  financial  institutions  need  to  raise  significantly  more 
capital  at  a  time  when  their  ongoing  earning  power  appears  to  have  been  permanently 
reduced.  These  dynamics  could  intensify  the  current  global  slowdown  and  will  have  an 
impact  on  the  cost  of  capital  in  Canada,  despite  the  relative  strength  of  our  financial 
institutions. In  order  to  illustrate  the  potential  magnitude  of  these  concerns,  I  would  like  to 
emphasize three points. 
First, the deleveraging process in the global system is far from finished. There are only three 
ways for a financial institution to reduce leverage: raise capital, sell assets (at a price at or 
above their carrying values) or restrain the rate of credit growth. Over the past year, financial 
institutions in many countries have raised over US$350 billion of new equity, which covered 
only  70  per  cent  of  announced  losses.  As  a  result,  leverage  has  actually  increased.  With 
virtually all of these shares now trading below issue price, the ability of firms to raise capital 
appears very constrained. Similarly, private asset sales have been limited by the complexity 
of  the  underlying  assets,  the  ongoing  impairment  of  securitization  markets,  difficulties  in 
supplying financing to leveraged buyers and the desire of investors to "time the market." In 
sum, banks have an increasing need for capital, but it has become more difficult to raise it. 
In  this  environment,  the  U.S.  government's  initiative  to  buy  distressed  assets  is  critically 
important. The plan announced by Treasury Secretary Paulson and being developed through 
discussions  in  the  U.S.  Congress  is  bold  and  timely.  The  size  and  breadth  of  support 
provided  by  this  measure  will  help  firms  "rightsize"  their  balance  sheets,  re-liquefy  closed 
markets  and  establish  market  prices  for  these  distressed  assets.  This  should  eventually 
encourage private buyers to re-enter the market and complete the deleveraging process. A 
well-executed  program  will  undoubtedly  speed  the  resolution  of  this  crisis  and  limit  its 
economic cost. 
Asset sales alone will be insufficient, and additional capital will still be needed. Over time, 
acquisitions of the weak by the strong will play an important role. At the moment, valuation 
uncertainties,  some  accounting  standards  and  investor  caution  are  all  restraining  mergers 
and  acquisitions  in  the  sector.3  In  the  end,  reflecting  the  likely  scale  of  the  shortfall,  it  is 
possible that, in countries other than Canada, public capital may be necessary to complete 
the deleveraging process in an orderly and timely manner.  
The second point regarding the current financial situation is that while the Canadian financial 
system  does  not  need  to  reduce  leverage,  we  are  not  immune  from  the  fallout  from  this 
process  elsewhere.  Canadian  institutions  are  in  considerably  better  shape  than  their 
international peers. Their losses on structured products have been relatively modest.4 More 
importantly,  their  absolute  leverage  is  markedly  lower.  As  a  simple  illustration,  major 
Canadian banks have an average asset-to-capital multiple of 18. The comparable figure for 
U.S.  investment  banks  is  over  25,  for  European  banks  is  in  the  30s,  and  for  some  major 
                                                 
3   For  example,  changes  to  purchase-accounting  rules  for  goodwill  would  be  welcome  in  the  current  unique 
environment. 
4   Losses for Canadian financial institutions are roughly 10 per cent of total capital, compared with 28 per cent so 
far in the United States. 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 3
global banks is over 40.5 While foreign banks are in the process of moving towards Canadian 
levels, our banks obviously face no such pressures. Indeed, Canadian banks could modestly 
increase leverage by growing their lending relative to their current capital base.  
This  flexibility  gives  our  economy  a  rare  advantage.  Reflecting  better  domestic  credit 
conditions,  there  are  few  signs  that  Canadian  financial  institutions  are  restricting  the 
availability of credit to households. In fact, such growth has remained surprisingly robust to 
date. While growth in Canadian business credit has slowed in recent quarters to rates around 
historical norms, there is no evidence at this point that our corporations are facing unusual 
credit restrictions. That said, especially in light of the intensified global financial strains, we 
will continue to watch closely the evolution of credit availability in Canada, through analysis 
of monetary and credit aggregates, industry visits, and surveys. 
While the globalization of financial markets and services has led to a more efficient allocation 
of capital on a global scale, it has also made it easier for financial difficulties to spread across 
national borders.6 The absolute borrowing costs for U.S. and other financial institutions has 
risen  significantly,  and  this  has  put  upward  pressure  on  borrowing  costs  for  Canadian 
financial institutions.  
All else being equal, this would have increased the financing costs for our businesses and 
households. However, all else is not equal. The stronger financial position of Canadian banks 
means  that  they  now  borrow  at  rates  considerably  lower  than  those  of  many  of  their 
international peers. In addition, the Bank of Canada has eased its overnight rate substantially 
since  the  onset  of  the  crisis.  As  a  result,  the  effective  borrowing  costs  faced  by  banks, 
businesses  and  households  are  estimated  to  have  fallen  over  the  past  year.  This  decline 
contrasts with the experience of most other developed countries.7 In its upcoming Monetary 
Policy Report and in light of recent events, the Bank will revisit its current assumption that 
borrowing spreads will begin to narrow in 2009.  
My  third  point  regarding  the  current  financial  situation  is  that  market  liquidity  becomes 
strained  during  times  of  acute  financial  distress.  The  Bank  of  Canada  has  taken  several 
actions  over  the  past  months  to  maximize  the  effectiveness  of  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  mechanism.  When  necessary  (such  as  on  Monday  of  last  week),  we  have 
reinforced our target rate through overnight operations. Over the past week, in response to 
exceptional circumstances, the Bank has also provided term liquidity and expanded our list of 
eligible  collateral.  The  Bank  will  continue  to  provide  additional  term  liquidity  as  long  as 
conditions  in  financial  markets  warrant.  We  will  then  withdraw  term  liquidity  as  conditions 
normalize, as we did in the spring of this year.8  
In  addition,  as  part  of  an  unprecedented  US$180  billion  coordinated  action  by  the  world's 
major central banks, the Bank of Canada entered into a US$10 billion reciprocal currency-
swap arrangement with the U.S. Federal Reserve. This is a prudential move during a volatile 
                                                 
5   One  of  the  advantages  of  the  Canadian  regulatory  system  is  that  the  banks'  asset-to-capital  multiple  is 
generally limited to 20. 
In  the  case  of  Canada  and  the  United  States,  an  IMF  study  found  that  "while  trade  linkages  are  sizeable, 
financial conditions – broadly defined as changes in U.S. bond yields, equity prices, and short-term interest 
rates  –  are  the  largest  source  of  U.S.  spillovers  to  Canada."  See  International  Monetary  Fund,  "Canada: 
Selected Issues" (Country Report No. 08/70, 2008). 
6  
7   Since August 2007, absolute all-in borrowing rates are about 60 basis points higher for AA- and AAA-rated 
U.S. banks and about 250 basis points higher for BBB- and A-rated U.S. banks, while all-in borrowing costs 
for non-financial U.S. corporations  are about 50 basis points higher. By comparison, effective all-in funding 
costs for major Canadian banks have declined by about 50 basis points, and all-in borrowing costs for non-
financial firms are about 60 basis points lower. 
8   A list of the types of indicators that the Bank will look at in deciding when to stop the provision of extraordinary 
liquidity can be found in M. Carney, "Principles for Liquid Markets" (speech to the New York Association for 
Business Economics, New York, New York, 22 May 2008). 
4 
 BIS Review 116/2008
period. The facility would be activated in the event of an acute shortage of U.S. dollars in 
Canada.  The  agreement  provides  the  Bank  with  additional  flexibility  to  address  rapidly 
evolving developments in financial markets. 
Last  week's  coordinated  action  was  a  public  demonstration  of  the  extraordinary  degree  of 
communication  and  co-operation  among  the  G-10  central  banks  that  has  taken  place 
throughout this crisis. This is a testament to a shared recognition of the interdependence of 
the  global  financial  system.  I  am  convinced  that  this  dialogue,  and  concerted  action  when 
appropriate, has led to better policy outcomes and helped contain the negative international 
spillovers from this series of financial shocks. I also believe that rapid implementation of the 
measures proposed by the Financial Stability Forum9 to enhance the resilience of the global 
financial system will help create a more stable international financial order. 
The message, as expressed in this week's communiqué of G-7 finance ministers and central 
bank  governors,  is  clear:  the  G-7  is  ready  to  take  whatever  actions  may  be  necessary, 
individually and collectively, to ensure the stability of the international financial system. 
Conclusion 
The  global  economy  is  undergoing  a  difficult  period.  Moreover,  in  recent  days,  several 
articles of faith in the financial system have been shaken. These include: that good collateral 
can always be used to raise liquidity; that certain institutions are too big or too interconnected 
to fail; or that this was merely a liquidity crisis.  
However, there is one constant on which Canadians can rely. The Bank of Canada will not 
deviate from its relentless focus on its monetary policy mandate to achieve low, stable and 
predictable inflation. Events beyond our borders have important influences on the outlook for 
inflation in our country. They must be considered in tandem with domestic factors, including 
the  strength  of  domestic  demand,  the  evolution  of  potential  growth,  and  the  health  of  our 
financial system. 
As we prepare to publish our Monetary Policy Report in October, we will continue to monitor 
carefully  economic  and  financial  developments  in  the  Canadian  and  global  economies, 
together with the evolution of risks. Most importantly, we will continue to set monetary policy 
consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term. This remains 
the best contribution that monetary policy can make to sustained growth. 
                                                 
9   Available at http://www.fsforum.org/publications/r_0804.pdf. 
BIS Review 116/2008 
 5
