Kazumasa Iwata: Transparency and communication policy in Japan  
the  Panel  Session  "Recent  and  Prospective  Developments 
Summary of a speech given by Mr Kazumasa Iwata, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, 
at 
in  Monetary  Policy 
Transparency  and  Communications:  A  Global  Perspective,"  at  the  Allied  Social  Science 
Associations Annual Meeting, New Orleans, 5 January 2008. 
 Introduction 
1.  Following  the  introduction  of  the  new  Bank  of  Japan  Law  in  1998,  the  Bank's  de-jure 
independence has been significantly strengthened. The Board members can be confident of 
making decisions independent of interference from outside the Bank, although the rationale, 
the process and the consequences of those decisions are exposed to the critical eye of the 
media, the BOJ-watchers and the politicians.  
The  independence,  together  with  the  long-term  tenure,  allows  the  decision  making  of  the 
BOJ  a  longer  time  horizon.  This  should  enable  the  BOJ  to  carry  out  its  tasks  with  both 
transparency and flexibility. At the same time, in a democratic society, the responsibility to 
fulfill  the  mandate  of  policy  objectives  is  increased;  that  is  to  say,  this  independence  is 
accompanied by accountability. A lack of transparency in the decision-making process may 
easily lead to a deficit of accountability.  
In  addition  to  the  clarification  of  monetary  policy  objectives,  central  banks  provide  the 
framework for communication about the justification for their decision. Moreover, to gain the 
benefits  of  providing  an  anchor  for  expectations  regarding  the  future  inflation  rate,  some 
central banks are even willing to clarify the future course of monetary policy based on their 
economic forecast. Transparency is needed not only for achieving accountability, but also to 
make the effect of monetary policy more efficient through market expectation channels. The 
communication policy, if it is managed successfully, serves to enhance transparency.  
Objectives 
2.  For  today's  panel  discussion,  let  me  take  up  some  issues  of  transparency  and 
communication  policy  in  the  light  of  recent  experience  in  Japan.  While  the  issues  cover 
several aspects including (1) objectives, (2) procedures, (3) economic analyses, (4) actions 
and  (5)  policy  instruments,  I  will  focus  on  two  of  them,  namely,  the  objectives  and 
instruments.  
3. The new Bank of Japan Law states that, "currency and monetary control shall be aimed at, 
through the pursuit of price stability, contributing to the sound development of the national 
economy" (Article 2). The dual mandate of sustainable growth under price stability is similar 
to  the  "maximum  employment  and  price  stability"  mandate  of  the  Federal  Reserve.  It  is 
different from the hierarchical or lexicographic ranking of the ECB which attaches overriding 
importance to maintaining price stability (Papademos(2006)).  
Quantitative easing policy 
4.  Despite  the  dual  mandate,  under  the  quantitative  easing  policy  regime  of  the  period 
covering March 2001 to February 2006, the primary objective was focused on the restoration 
of price stability or the exit from the deflation which had persisted since late 1998. The other 
important objective was to stabilize the financial system.  
The Bank of Japan made a commitment to continue the zero interest rate policy unless the 
rate of change in consumer prices moved above zero in a stable manner. More precisely, the 
BIS Review 1/2008 
 1
Monetary Policy Committee in October 2003 made the conditions for exit more transparent. 
Namely,  the  following  three  conditions  must  be  satisfied  before  ending  the  quantitative 
easing policy: (1) the current rate of change in consumer prices moves up above zero (2) the 
rate of change in consumer prices does not return to negative territory, (3) there may be a 
case  that  the  BOJ  will  judge  it  appropriate  to  continue  the  zero  interest  rate  policy,  even 
though the first two conditions are satisfied.  
The explicit commitment on the duration of zero interest rate policy worked to lower longer-
term interest rates. Increasing bank reserve targets strengthened the "time duration effect" 
which  relied  solely  on  market  expectations  of  future  developments  in  policy  rates  in  the 
absence of any actual change in policy rates (Iwata(2005)).  
New policy framework 
5. After confirming the development of an above-zero inflation rate, the BOJ exited from the 
quantitative easing policy in March 2006. At the time of the exit, the Bank announced a new 
policy framework. In this framework we provided the "understanding of medium- to long-term 
price stability" in a numerical form conceived by the Board members. It ranges from 0% to 
2%  with  the  distribution  above  and  below  the  median  value  of  1%.  This  longer-run  price 
stability  concept  can  be  regarded  as  a  natural  consequence  arising  from  the  second 
condition under the quantitative easing policy.  
This  "understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability"  is  common  knowledge  among 
the  Board  members.  It  is  not  only  shared  knowledge,  but  also  everybody  knows  that  the 
others know it. Provision of common knowledge serves as a focal point to coordinate human 
action.  
6. Thomas Schelling (1960) illustrated the role of focal points using the following situation as 
a  whimsical  example:  "When  husband  and  wife,  separated  in  a  department  store,  gaily 
traipse  off  to  the  "Lost  and  Found".  Likewise,  if  we  can  correctly  communicate  the  Board 
members' common knowledge to market participants and the general public, then we might 
expect that it can be also shared among market participants, and thus as a result, we can 
presume that market expectations will converge on the longer-run price stability.  
7.  If  we  look  at  the  fan  chart,  we  can  see  that  our  "understanding"  is  different  from  the 
"inflation  target"  adopted  by  the  Bank  of  England,  which  seems  to  aim  at  achieving  a  2% 
target after 8 quarters. We have no specific time horizon attached to our "understanding".  
Furthermore our "understanding" is also different from the ECB's numerical definition of price 
stability  over  the  medium-term  ("below  2%,  but  close  to  it")  in  the  sense  that  the  Board 
members' opinions determine the numerical range. If there is a change in the membership of 
the Board, then the range also changes. Further, it is also possible that our "understanding" 
changes  to  reflect  changes  in  the  structure  of  the  economy.  Within  our  framework  it  is 
possible to revise the numerical range regularly. So far there has not been any change in the 
numerical range of our "understanding", despite routine changes in Board membership.  
Two perspectives approach 
8. The new policy framework is entitled the "two perspectives approach", in contrast to the 
"two  pillars  approach"  advocated  by  the  ECB.  The  first  perspective  examines  whether  the 
outlook  deemed  most  likely  by  the  BOJ  follows  a  path  of  sustainable  growth  under  price 
stability within the forecast period, while the second provides an assessment of various risks, 
including  low-probability  events  which  can  cause  serious  damage  to  the  economy  beyond 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2008
the  forecast  time  horizon.  The  latter  perspective  shares  features  in  common  with  the  "risk 
management approach" urged by former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan1.  
Transparency and flexibility 
9.  Keeping  in  mind  the  "understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability",  we  make 
policy decisions by examining the plausibility of our scenario presented in the semi-annual 
outlook and by assessing the various risks and the uncertainty ahead for our economy. As 
the  plausibility  of  forecasts  and  the  examination  of  risks  play  a  key  role,  the  new  policy 
framework can be broadly described as a "forecast-based policy" which is inherently forward-
looking  (Bernanke(2004)).  The  publishing  of  projections,  and  the  related  explanations  and 
reasoning, contributes to enhancing the transparency of decision procedures.  
By  adopting  the  new  policy  framework  we  have  restored  the  flexibility  of  monetary  policy 
management,  while  enhancing  the  transparency  both  of  policy  objectives  and  decision 
procedures.  Under  the  quantitative  easing  policy  regime,  the  flexible  management  of 
monetary policy was seriously undermined; developments in real economic activity mattered 
only to the extent that they cause upward/downward pressure on prices. There was also the 
risk  of  financial  imbalance  and  resource  misallocation  due  to  the  mounting  market 
expectation of permanently low interest rates.  
10. Given the institutional framework of consensus formation at the Monetary Policy Meeting, 
our  "understanding",  which  reflects  the  opinions  of  the  Board  members,  is  suitable  for 
maintaining democratic order and supporting individual accountability. In addition, the longer-
run time horizon of price stability allows more flexibility in monetary policy management. On 
the other hand, this practice may raise the issue of dynamic (inter-temporal) inconsistency or 
self-consistency. If the communication policy fails to achieve its role of transmitting the Board 
members'  common  knowledge  correctly  to  market  participants  and  the  general  public,  the 
role of transparency may be significantly eroded.  
Before  discussing  the  role  of  communication  policy,  I  would  like  to  take  up  the  issue  of 
transparency of policy instruments, namely the announcement of the future development of 
policy  rates,  because  this  practice  is  presumed  to  enhance  transparency  significantly,  and 
several countries have adopted it, for instance, New Zealand, Norway and Sweden.  
Instruments: policy rate projections 
11. Under the quantitative easing policy regime, transparency in regard to policy instruments 
was extremely high, as was expressed by the above-mentioned three conditions. Moreover, 
the  assumption  of  the  constant  policy  interest  rate  in  providing  forecast  could  be  easily 
justified, as long as the inflation rate was expected to remain below zero.  
12. But the  assumption of the constant policy rate is no longer adequate since exiting the 
quantitative  easing  policy.  We  have  added  the  footnote  to  the  Forecast  Table,  as  of  April 
2006, that we take into account market expectations on future policy rates. In other words, 
we have adopted the approach that each individual Board member assumes the appropriate 
path of future policy interest rates in providing the figures for forecast (real GDP, core CPI 
and CGPI over a two-year time horizon), thereby taking into account market expectations on 
the future development of policy rates.  
It  seems  reasonable  to  pay  due  attention  to  market  expectations,  because  current  asset 
prices  reflect  market  expectations  on  the  future  development  of  policy  rates.  In  my 
understanding,  the  decision  at  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  is  made  when  the  majority 
                                                 
1   On the relation between the asset price bubble and the second perspective, see Iwata (2007). 
BIS Review 1/2008 
 3
view is formed on the appropriate timing of policy interest rate changes after examining the 
plausibility of the scenario embodied in the forecast and assessing the various risks both in 
the  short-  and  longer-run.  Whether  it  is  desirable  or  not  to publish  the appropriate path  of 
future policy rates in achieving the goals of the mandate depends on judgments regarding 
noise 
the  possibility  of  distorted 
communication and our limited knowledge about structural changes in the economy.  
transparency, 
information, 
in  public 
limits  of 
the 
Communication policy 
13.  Monetary  policy  becomes  more  effective,  if  the  communication  policy  succeeds  in 
coordinating  market  expectations  by  providing  the  public  information  as  a  signal.  Yet,  it  is 
possible that the public information is imperfect and contains noise.  
Take the example of focal points illustrated by Schelling. If the focal point is unique, then it is 
easy to bring expectations into convergence. But if there are several focal points, it may not 
be  easy  to  stabilize  market  expectations2.  In  addition,  there  may  be  cases  where  market 
participants  find  it  difficult  to  delineate  the  consensus  view  and  the  minority  view  which  is 
expressed to demonstrate individual accountability.  
Furthermore, if the common knowledge shared by Board members or the public information 
is imprecise, as compared with the private information, the signaling by the central bank can 
have an adverse effect on welfare. There may be a limit to transparency, if the provision of 
public information can cause an overreaction in market participants (Morris and Shin(2002)). 
It  is  also  possible  that  the  public  information  contains  noise  or  the  precision  of  public 
information  is  significantly  lower  than  the  private  information3.  Nobody  would  recommend 
broadcasting Monetary Policy Meeting discussions.  
14.  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Swedish  Riksbank,  Lars  Svensson  (2007)  proposed  the 
announcement of the loss function of central banks and making voting on the relative weight 
attached to two objectives; namely the deviation of the inflation rate and the GDP gap on the 
future  path  of  economic  development.  He  recommends  preannouncement  of  the  path  of 
policy rates to minimize the present value of the loss function. Yet it seems to be premature 
to put preannouncement into practice at the present time in conducting Japanese monetary 
policy.  
First  of  all,  there  are  doubts  as  to  whether  communication  with  the  general  public  can  be 
carried  out  in  an  undistorted  way4;  specifically,  it  may  not  be  easy  to  convince  market 
participants that the announced path of policy rates is conditional, and is not a promise.  
Second, there is a measurement problem. In addition to the GDP gap, there is uncertainty 
over  the  measurement  of  the  relevant  parameters.  There  are  two  critical  parameters  for 
minimizing future loss; namely, the relative weight in the loss function and the sensitivity of 
price  changes  to  changes  in  the  GDP  gap.  The  ratio  of  these  parameters  is  equal  to  the 
marginal rate of transformation between the two objectives (inflation rate and the GDP gap) 
                                                 
2   For instance, we could mention the entrance of the department store through which husband and wife passed. 
Or there may  be several "Lost and Found" offices. Then  the power to bring  expectations into convergence 
weakens. If some market participants perceive that the desired inflation rate set by the BOJ is the lower limit of 
the price stability range, namely 0%, while others regards the upper limit as the desired one, then the signal to 
stabilize expectations may be muted. 
3   Svensson  (2006),  commenting  on  Morris  and  Shin's  paper,  argued  that  the  provision  of  public  information 
diminishes welfare only if the precision of public information is eight times lower than the private information, 
or the  amount of noise is more than  eight  times the  amount of  noise in the  private information. Otherwise, 
more transparency increases the welfare. 
4   Habermas  (1992)  argued  that  the  validity  of  the  political  decision-making  process  can  be  secured  by 
democratic discourse under circumstances facilitating "undistorted communication" among voters. 
4 
 BIS Review 1/2008
on the policy possibility frontier. The value of the former parameter is determined by voting, 
while the value of the latter parameter can be gauged from the instantaneous sacrifice ratio, 
by  which  I  mean  the  inverse  of  the  slope  of  the  aggregate  supply  function  in  the 
macroeconomic  analysis.  One  of  the  problems  is  the  fact  that  the  slope  of  the  aggregate 
supply curve can change, partly reflecting the effect of globalization, as shown in Figure 15.  
 An  alternative  way  to  derive  the  ratio  is  to  estimate  the  elasticity  of  demand  faced  by 
monopolistically competitive producers, as pointed out by Woodford (2007)6. Yet the values 
obtained from the two approaches, macro- and micro-economic analysis, can differ widely. 
Given the limited knowledge about the key parameters and the uncertainty of measurement, 
I would hesitate to preannounce the path of future policy rates, although I do not deny the 
usefulness of examining the intertemporal consistency and the robustness of policy decisions 
by employing different parameters.  
15. Finally, communication can be made through action. The power of action can be stronger 
than words in persuading market participants. Schelling once noted that "to communicate a 
commitment  requires  more  than  the  communication  of  words...One  has  to  communicate 
                                                 
5   Borio  and  Filardo  (2007)  argue  that  the  changes  in  GDP  gap  in  foreign  countries  make  the  slope  of  the 
aggregate supply function flatter, while a study by staff of the Federal Reserve does not support the evidence 
on the effect of globalization (Ihrig, Kamin, Lindner, Marquez(2007)). 
6   We  need  to  collect  more  microeconomic  empirical  evidence  in  assessing  the  price  setting  behavior  of 
Japanese firms, including the issue as to whether Calvo-type or Taylor-type staggered price adjustments are 
made. 
BIS Review 1/2008 
 5
evidence  that  commitment  exits".  It  is  important  to  implement  monetary  actions  in  a 
consistent manner based on the fundamental framework notably under the circumstances of 
imperfect public information.  
Conclusion 
16.  The  new  policy  framework  of  the  BOJ  has  improved  both  transparency  and  flexibility. 
There  is  room  for  further  improvement  in  transparency  and  communication  policy.  Yet,  we 
should be mindful of the limits of our knowledge and of transparency, as well as of the liability 
to distortion of communication in the process of consensus formation on decision making. 
References 
[1] Bernanke, B.S., "The Logic of Monetary Policy," remarks before the National Economists 
Club, December 2004. 
[2] Borio, C., and A. Filardo, "Globalisation and Inflation: New Cross-Country Evidence on the 
Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation," Working papers No. 227, Bank for International 
Settlements, 2007. 
[3] Habermas, J., "Between Facts and Norms: Contribution to a Discourse Theory of Law and 
Democracy," MIT Press, 1992. 
[4]  Ihrig,  J.,  Kamin,  S.  B.,  Lindner,  D.,  and  J.  Marquez,  "Some  Simple  Tests  of  the 
Globalization  and  Inflation  Hypothesis,"  International  Finance  Discussion  Papers,  No.  891, 
Federal Reserve Board, April 2007. 
[5] Iwata, K., "The Role of the Price Stability Anchor in Extricating Japan from Deflation," at 
the Symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August 2005. 
[6] Iwata, K., "Housing and Monetary Policy in Japan," at the Symposium sponsored by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, September 2007. 
[7]  Morris,  S.,  and  H.S.  Shin,  "Social  Value  of  Public  Information,"  American  Economic 
Review, Vol. 92, No. 5, 2002. 
[8] Papademos, L., "Central banks in the 21st century," speech at a conference on "Central 
banks in the 21st century" organized by the Bank of Spain, Madrid, 8 June 2006. 
[9] Schelling, T.C., "The Strategy of Conflict," Harvard University Press, 1960. 
[10] Svensson, L.E.O., "Social Value of Public Information: Comment: Morris and Shin (2002) 
Is Actually Pro Transparency, Not Con," American Economic Review, Vol.96, No. 1, 2006. 
[11]  Svensson,  L.E.O.,  "Optimal  Inflation  Targeting:  Further  Developments  of  Inflation 
Targeting,"  in  Frederic  Mishkin  and  Klaus  Schmidt-Hebbel,  eds.,  Monetary  Policy  under 
Inflation Targeting, Santiago: Central Bank of Chile, 2007. 
[12]  Woodford,  M.,  "Forecast  Targeting  as  a  Monetary  Policy  Strategy:  Policy  Rules  in 
Practice,"  paper  prepared  for  the  conference  "John  Taylor's  Contributions  to  Monetary 
Theory and Policy," Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, October 2007. 
6 
 BIS Review 1/2008
