Emsley D Tromp: Regional integration – a policy agenda towards 
prosperity 
Address by Dr Emsley D Tromp, President of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles (Bank van 
de  Nederlandse  Antillen),  on  the  occasion  of  the  seminar  “Is  Curaçao  economically  truly 
Caribbean?”, Willemstad, 24 April 2008.  
 Good evening, ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me start by thanking the Department of Economic Affairs of Curaçao and the Faculty of 
Social Sciences and Economics of the UNA for inviting me today. The topic of this seminar is 
a  timely  and  important  one  for  several  reasons.  First,  regional  integration  has  proven  an 
important  contributor  to  economic  growth,  especially  in  the  case  of  small  open  economies 
such  as  ours,  and  second,  Curaçao  will  become  an  autonomous  country  within  the  Dutch 
Kingdom in the near future. The ongoing constitutional changes provide a unique opportunity 
to design an economic policy that is aimed at sustainable economic growth by focusing on 
the  development  of  key  sectors  of  the  economy.  I  believe  that  regional  integration  and 
cooperation should be included in this policy agenda. 
The Curaçao economy shares many characteristics with other economies in the Caribbean 
basin. Similar to most economies in the region, our economy is small and open and has to 
deal  with  diseconomies  of  scale.  Consequently,  we  are  very  vulnerable  to  international 
developments and external shocks. Moreover, like many islands in the Caribbean, tourism 
and international financial services are the main pillars of our economy. 
Interestingly,  despite  sharing  several  characteristics  with  the  neighboring  economies,  in 
terms  of  trade,  our  island  is  not  really  integrated  into  the  Caribbean.  The  main  trading 
partners of the Netherlands Antilles – of which the Curaçao economy represents 75 percent 
–  are  North  America,  Europe,  and  South  and  Central  America.  According  to  our  trade 
statistics,  trade  with  the  Caribbean  averaged  only  8  percent  of  our  total  trade  during  the 
period  2000-2006.  Despite  our  geographic  proximity  with  Caribbean  islands,  the  share  of 
goods  and  services  exported  from  the  Netherlands  Antilles  to  the  Caribbean  was  11.5 
percent of total exports. Meanwhile, imports of goods and services from the Caribbean were 
only 4.3 percent of our total imports.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  trade  flows  are  determined  by  the  comparative  advantage  of  a 
country vis-à-vis its trading partners. A country’s comparative advantage is determined by, 
among  other  things,  factor  endowments  and  relative  prices.  Trade  flows  are  negatively 
affected  by  trade  barriers,  which  can  be  either  tariffs,  such  as  import  duties,  or  non-tariffs 
including quotas, unfair customs procedures, and import licenses. These barriers affect trade 
in  merchandise.  Trade  in  services  also  is  hampered  by  barriers,  such  as  licensing 
procedures,  nationality  and 
treatment 
advantaging  domestic  companies  over  foreign  ones.  To  stimulate  trade  flows,  countries 
usually engage in free trade agreements with other countries. As you may know, free trade 
agreements  reduce  trade  barriers  considerably  and  ultimately  may  result  in  trading  blocks 
with unrestricted trade among the members of the block. 
Currently, there are several trading blocks based on free trade agreements among groups of 
countries  in  the  Western  Hemisphere.  So  far,  the  Netherlands  Antilles  has  no  full 
membership affiliation with any of the regional trading blocks. Furthermore, we lack bilateral 
free trade agreements with individual countries in the region. Hence, the Netherlands Antilles 
– and consequently Curacao – is faced with high trade barriers in the region. I believe that 
these  barriers  have  a  negative  impact  on  our  trade  flows  in  the  Caribbean.  As  a 
consequence, we are not seizing the opportunities the Caribbean market place has to offer.  
requirements,  and  discriminatory 
residency 
BIS Review 53/2008 
 1
Our  failure  to  take  advantage  of  these  opportunities  is  unfortunate  given  that  economic 
growth  in  our  region  has  been  particularly  buoyant  in  recent  years.  According  to  the 
International  Monetary  Fund,  the  Caribbean  economy  grew  by  4.2  percent  last  year,  the 
fastest  pace  in  the  last  two  decades.  For  2008,  the  IMF  expects  economic  growth  in  the 
Caribbean  to  decelerate  due  to  the  global  economic  slowdown.  Nevertheless,  an  above-
average economic growth of 4 percent is projected for the region. By increasing cooperation 
within  our  region,  the  Netherlands  Antilles,  and  consequently  Curaçao,  could  benefit  more 
from the ongoing economic expansion in the region.  
Regional cooperation and integration are now imperative. Besides the classical benefits of 
trade  creation  and  diversion,  regional  integration  provides  a  platform  for  more  effective 
integration  into  the  world  economy.  This  integration  is  crucial  given  the  fast  pace  of 
globalization  today.  Globalization  provides  great  opportunities,  but  it  also  leads  to  more 
competition. And globalization brings with it new risks and vulnerabilities.  
Greater regional integration, if carried out correctly, can complement the process of global 
integration, both by taking advantage of the opportunities presented by globalization and by 
guarding  against  the  vulnerabilities.  This  is  especially  important  for  small  open  economies 
such as ours. 
With greater regional integration, economies of scale in the production of goods that are not 
attainable for individual islands due to their small size may be feasible for the region as a 
whole.  Through  regional  agreements,  politically  challenging  policy  changes  often  can  be 
realized.  Furthermore,  gains  from  specialization  within  the  region  can  be  achieved  by 
pursuing  different  strands  of  the  value-added  chain.  Regional  integration  also  strengthens 
the ability of countries to deal with negative shocks, both external and country-specific. This 
ability is particularly relevant in our region, where the impact of shocks can be devastating for 
any  single  economy.  Finally,  combining  forces  through  regional  cooperation  is  the  most 
effective way to proceed in international trade negotiations because it increases the power of 
small states. 
Given these benefits, Curaçao must become more economically integrated within the region. 
Therefore,  the  barriers  that  are  currently  hampering  trade  between  our  economy  and  the 
region  should  be  removed.  I  do  realize  that  regional  integration  in  the  case  of  the 
Netherlands Antilles is very complex as our country is not autonomous in matters related to 
international  affairs  and  trade.  The  government  of  the  Dutch  Kingdom  is  the  authority 
responsible for international treaties and agreements. Because the Netherlands Antilles, and 
consequently Curaçao, are not sovereign with respect to international negotiations, regional 
integration achieved by joining a trading block is very difficult or even impossible. However, 
this  challenge  should  not  discourage  us  from  making  alliances  or  cooperating  more 
intensively  with  regional  trading  blocks  or  individual  countries  in  areas  of  interest.  Such 
negotiations should take place, of course, with the support of the government of the Dutch 
Kingdom.  
Ladies and gentlemen, the policy agenda towards more regional integration should include a 
thorough  assessment  of  our  comparative  advantages  and  disadvantages  vis-à-vis  our 
neighboring economies. In this context, we must realize that cooperation and integration will 
be  effective  only  if  countries  complement  each  other  in  terms  of  trade.  By  assessing  our 
advantages and disadvantages, we will be able to select those areas and industries where 
regional cooperation will be most likely to stimulate trade.  
Closer regional cooperation in such areas as tourism, transportation, telecommunication, and 
financial  services  will  greatly  facilitate  the  business  development  and  economic  growth  of 
both  Curaçao  and  its  regional  partners.  Our  tourism  industry  would  benefit  from  more 
regional cooperation in marketing and promoting the Caribbean as a tourist destination. In 
addition,  the  sector  would  also  gain  from  regional  collaboration  in  tourism  education  and 
training programs.  
2 
 BIS Review 53/2008
In  the  area  of  transportation,  we  would  benefit  from  more  intra-regional  shipping  routes  to 
promote the growth of intra-regional trade and business links. Furthermore, increased intra-
regional air connections would support the further growth of our tourism industry. 
In  the  area  of  telecommunication,  our  authorities  could  pursue  regional  collaboration  to 
promote the further liberalization of the telecommunication services market and adequately 
regulate  market  monopolies,  which  tend  to  develop  in  this  sector.  This  approach  will 
stimulate  the  provision  of  state-of-the-art  equipment  and  services  at  competitive  prices.  In 
addition, removal of barriers to trade in the telecommunications industry will provide our local 
companies with opportunities to expand their activities in the region.  
Finally, more intensive collaboration is needed to promote the free flow of capital between 
our island and the region. Such collaboration will contribute to broader and deeper financial 
markets and the development of regional financial institutions, resulting in a wider range of 
financial  instruments  at  lower  costs.  We  already  have  had  positive  experiences  with 
Caribbean  banks  and  insurance  companies  that  have  expanded  their  activities  toward  our 
island.  
Ladies and gentlemen, successful regional integration requires more than just the removal of 
trade  barriers.  Economic  policy  coordination  and  cooperation  are  also  important  in  this 
context. Such coordination should include the following goals: 
1. 
Fostering  of  a  stable  macroeconomic  environment.  Macroeconomic  policy 
instruments,  such  as  fiscal  policy  and  monetary  policy,  should  be  applied  in  a 
consistent and sustained manner, complemented by supporting policies in the fields 
of, for example, education and infrastructure, and a stable institutional framework. 
Harmonization  of  regulatory  frameworks  towards  a  system  of  best  practices.  This 
goal  comprises  a  wide  range  of  policy  areas,  such  as  standards  for  prudential 
regulation  and  supervision  of  the  financial  sector,  foreign  investment  regulations, 
labor  standards,  product  and  professional  standards,  and  tax  harmonization,  to 
mention  just  a  few.  Tax  harmonization  should  include  a  regional  code  on  fair  tax 
competition  and  limiting  the  extension  of  tax  holidays  to  attract  foreign  direct 
investment to prevent the erosion of our tax bases.  
Development of human capital. A well-educated and skilled labor force is a critical 
success  factor  for  regional  integration  and  effective  competition  in  a  globalizing 
world.  Regional  cooperation  between  universities  and  training  and  research 
institutes can create economies of scale and attract high-quality staff to produce a 
labor  force  that  meets  the  skills  demanded  by  the  business  sector  and  the 
government.  
Improvement  of  productivity.  This  goal  comprises  not  only  labor  productivity,  but 
also  managerial  capacity,  adaptation  to  new  technologies,  and  improvement  of 
infrastructure. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Through  regional  integration,  alliances,  and  cooperation,  we  can  overcome  our  inherent 
weaknesses  and  ultimately  be  able  to  compete  successfully  in  the  global  market.  Many 
countries in the region have already realized that regional integration is crucial to seizing the 
opportunities  of  globalization,  and  overcoming  the  risks  and  challenges  of  this  irreversible 
process.  
I  am  convinced  that  progress  towards  more  integration  in  the  region  will  foster  the 
performance of the Curaçao economy. For that reason, I sincerely hope that the question is 
not whether to integrate or not integrate, but rather, how integration can be realized in the 
most effective way. Therefore, integration into the region should be given a prominent place 
on the economic policy agenda of the new country of Curaçao. I thank you for your attention! 
BIS Review 53/2008 
 3
