Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The economic governance of the European Union 
in the light of the Treaty of Lisbon – harmonisation or competition 
between countries? 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the conference on ”The European Central Bank: a new actor on the international 
scene”, Milan, 24 January 2008. 
 Introduction1  
It is a great pleasure for me to speak at this conference, which gives us the opportunity to 
take stock – some ten years since the start of the Economic and Monetary Union – of the 
institutional framework for the governance of the European economy.  
The  book  entitled  “The  Law  of  the  European  Central  Bank”  by  Chiara  Zilioli  and  Martin 
Selmayr, which looks at the legal framework of the European Central Bank, is a good place 
to start. Ten years on, it is possible to question whether this framework is still valid.  
I should specifically like to focus on an area of particular interest, especially in the light of 
recent  events.  The  new  Treaty  of  Lisbon,  which  was  signed  by  the  Heads  of  State  or 
Government  and  the  Finance  Ministers  of  the  27  European  Union  Member  States  last 
December,  did  not  make  any  substantial  changes  to  the  governance  structure  of  the 
European  economy.  There  continues  to  be  a contrast  between  a  fully-integrated monetary 
system, with a single monetary policy decided by the European Central Bank, and a financial 
market  that  is  only  partially  integrated,  since  regulatory  and  supervisory  policies  are 
implemented  at  national  level.  This  issue,  which  is  quite  complex,  has  been  studied  by 
various  commentators,  academics  and  officials.2  The  question  is  whether  the  current 
institutional framework is adequate given the accelerating process of market integration and 
the  market  turmoil  experienced  in  recent  months,  or  whether  it  should  instead  be 
strengthened in order to ensure an effective regulation of the markets. 
I intend to address these issues mainly from an economic perspective, leaving to the legal 
experts the task of outlining their legal-institutional vision in this regard. 
The new Treaty: innovation and continuity 
1.  
I  do  not  intend  to  discuss  either  the  controversy  or  the  difficulties  encountered  during  the 
process of revising the Treaty, which took seven years: from the Presidency Conclusions of 
the  Nice  European  Council  at  the  end  of  2000,  through  the  draft  European  Constitution 
outlined  in  2004  and  the  negative  referenda  on  the  Constitution  in  France  and  the 
Netherlands in 2005, to the signing of the Treaty of Lisbon in December 2008. I should only 
like to point out that, despite the discussions which took place in various quarters in parallel 
to  the  institutional  debate  and  the  positions  taken  by  academics,  commentators  and 
politicians, all the official documentation drawn up during that time, from the Constitution to 
the Treaty of Lisbon, underlines the political will to grant a strong independent status to the 
ECB and the national central banks (NCBs). 
                                                 
1   The  points  of  view  expressed  are  solely  those  of  the  author.  I  would  like  to  thank  Nicola  de  Giorgi,  Fabio 
Recine, Inigo Arruga Oleaga and Livio Stracca for their comments. 
2   See  Louis  (1995),  Banking  Supervision  in  the  European  Community:  Institutional  Aspects,  Editions  de 
l’Université de Bruxelles (Brussels); and T. Padoa Schioppa (2004), Regulating Finance: Balancing Freedom 
and Risk, Oxford, p.75. 
BIS Review 10/2008 
 1
The  Treaty  of  Lisbon  strengthens  the  ECB’s  position  in  several  ways:  i)  it  establishes  the 
principle according to which the ECB is independent in the exercise of its powers; ii) explicit 
reference is made to the financial independence of the ECB; iii) the primacy of the objective 
of price stability for the Eurosystem, which is included as one of the Union’s objectives, is 
confirmed, together with the (new)  objective for an “economic and  monetary union, whose 
currency  is  the  euro”;  iv)  the  ECB  is  recognised  as  an  institution  of  the  European  Union, 
joining  the  Council  of  the  European  Union,  the  European  Commission  and  the  European 
Parliament, even though it has legal personality. 
It  can  sometimes  seem  as  through  central  banks  are  obsessed  with  the  question  of 
independence, which, now that it has been laid down in the Treaty, would appear to have 
been  achieved.  Yet,  it  is  surprising  how  often,  ten  years  after  the  start  of  Economic  and 
Monetary  Union,  measures  continue  to  be  proposed  at  national  level  that  in  some  way  or 
another threaten the independence of the central banks, in particular, with respect to their 
functional, institutional, personal and financial independence.3  
I refer to two very recent examples, concerning two countries – Italy and Germany – where 
draft  legislation  introduces  measures  that  risk  contravening  the  principle  of  independence 
established in the Treaty. 
In  Italy,  the  2008  Financial  Law,  which  was  approved  by  the  Parliament  on  24  December 
2007,  provides  for  measures  to  reform  the  Banca  d’Italia aimed  at  reviewing  “in a  general 
manner  [its]  means  of  financing,  expenditure  control,  and  payment  of  salaries  and 
emoluments”.  These  provisions  do  not  take  into  account  the  (functional,  institutional  and 
legal) specificities of the Banca d’Italia, in particular, as a member of the Eurosystem, and 
therefore risk being contrary to the principle of independence.  
In Germany, the draft law amending the Law on public employees, which would also apply to 
the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  risks  undermining  the  functional  independence  of  the  German 
central  bank,  denying  it  the  capacity  to  manage  independently  its  legal  and  professional 
relations with its own employees. 
The ECB will finalise its response to these two laws in the coming days. 
The governance of the European economy is another aspect which has not been modified by 
the  Treaty  of  Lisbon.  Despite  the  ongoing  debate  and  calls  from  several  quarters  to  the 
contrary, economic policy remains substantially a national competence. However, it is true 
that the Treaty has introduced some changes to the economic governance of the euro area. 
Firstly, the roles played by the European Commission and the euro area countries have been 
strengthened in two ways. It provides for the capacity of euro area countries to adopt laws 
which reinforce the coordination and monitoring of budgetary discipline and which lay down 
specific economic policy guidelines. Furthermore, it falls to the euro area countries to adopt 
the Recommendation for another Member State to join the euro (until now this power was 
exercised by the European Council meeting comprising all of the Member States, rather than 
just  the  euro  area  countries).  Moreover,  the  recognition  of  the  Eurogroup  as  an  informal 
group,  and  the  extension  of  the  mandate  of  its  President  to  two  and  a  half  years  both 
strengthen the governance of the euro.  
However,  the  political  will  has  not  developed  to  achieve  a  high  level  of  harmonisation  or 
coordination of the economic policies, even if a few improvements have been made to the 
procedures  for  increased  cooperation.  In  short,  despite  the  occasional  calls  by  some 
governments for the creation of a real and genuine “European governance” of the economy, 
economic  policy  (with  the  exception  of  monetary  policy)  has  remained  the  preserve  of 
                                                 
3   For more details, see L. Bini Smaghi (2008), “Central bank independence in the EU: from theory to practice”, 
European Law Journal, forthcoming. 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2008
national  governments  or,  at  the  most,  a  task  that  is  performed  by  the  Member  States 
concurrently. 
The Treaty of Lisbon recognises the principle of subsidiarity as a founding principle of the 
European Union, even though it does so as a counterweight to the principle of superiority of 
European  law  over  national  legislation.  In  essence,  the  principle  of  subsidiarity  leads  to  a 
situation whereby legislative and regulatory autonomy are deemed “normal”. A high degree 
of coordination or complete harmonisation is only allowed if this leads to better results. The 
burden of proof weighs heavily on the side of harmonisation and centralisation. 
Financial regulation and supervision 
2.  
The  European  system  of  supervision  and  regulation  is  characterised  by  a  combination  of 
regulatory harmonisation and autonomy – and to some degree also of competition. No single 
Community  body  bears  overall  responsibility.  The  legal  instruments  typically  used  in  this 
regard take the form of Directives rather than Regulations. This gives the national authorities 
considerable room for manoeuvre when transposing the Directives into national law. 
The  system  of  cooperation  and  coordination  among  the  national  authorities  is  based  on  a 
four-level approach known as the “Lamfalussy process”. To summarise, this consists of: 
1. 
2. 
a few framework principles laid down in Community legislation (Level 1); 
a series of technical implementing measures defined by the European Commission 
(Level 2); 
a system of committees through which cooperation takes place among the national 
authorities  for  implementation  of  the  legislation  and  convergence  of  supervisory 
practices (Level 3); 
under  Level  4,  the  European  Commission  is  given  the  task  of  monitoring  the 
application of European Law, with the help of the national authorities and the private 
sector. 
3. 
4. 
Although this system has borne some fruit over recent years, the question remains whether 
financial  market  developments  necessitate  substantial  improvements  in  the  quality  of  the 
European regulatory set-up. There are at least four arguments that support this hypothesis. 
First,  there  is  no  doubt  that  the  banking  and  financial  systems  of  the  various  countries 
continue to be diverse. However, the recent market turmoil has highlighted the vulnerability 
of various national systems to shocks originating elsewhere, underlining how, today, banking 
and financial activity knows no boundaries. 
Second, until a few years ago, cross-border financial activity was somewhat limited, above all 
as  far  as  retail  banking  services  were  concerned.  The  distortionary  effects  of  the  various 
national regulations did not seem to be overly pronounced. Recently, the process of financial 
integration within Europe, and in particular within the euro area, has accelerated significantly. 
We have seen a large number of cross-border mergers and acquisitions and today in Europe 
there is a group of large banks that operate in various countries of the EU.4 Moreover, the 
recent market turmoil has shown that, in an integrated monetary system such as the euro, 
the  monetary  market  can  constitute  a  conduit  for  the  transmission  of  financial  shocks 
originating elsewhere. There is no longer any need for a cross-border structure for a country 
to be infected by an external shock.5  
                                                 
4   L. Bini Smaghi (2007), “Consolidamento bancario, innovazione e accesso al credito, CESIFIN, Florence, 10 
December 2007, available at http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2007/html/sp071210.it.html. 
5   See also Bruegel (2007): “Coming of age: report on the euro area”, Bruegel Blueprint 4. 
BIS Review 10/2008 
 3
Third, although it is not in principle an optimal model of financial regulation, the recent market 
turbulence has revealed structural weaknesses in some supervisory systems. In particular, it 
has shown the need to ensure that the central banks, which are responsible for supplying the 
markets with liquidity, especially in emergency situations, have all the necessary information 
at their disposal in order to assess the capital adequacy and sound balance sheets of their 
counterparties. The ECB had drawn attention to this in the past.6  
Finally,  the  supervisory  authorities  appear  less  protected  than  the  central  banks  from 
external  pressures,  which  aim  to  reduce  their  decision-making  autonomy.  The  concept  of 
independence,  which  has  been  developed  for  monetary  policy,  is  however  not  easily 
extendable, merely via regulations, to the supervisory authorities. This, however, also applies 
to the problem of accountability.7 In a financial market in which there is room for a certain 
degree  of  regulatory  competition  and  in  which  the  supervisory  authorities  have  a  mandate 
and a predominantly national system of accountability, there may be incentives to utilise the 
margins  for  manoeuvre  that  European  legislation  leaves  for  protectionist  purposes.  There 
may  also  be  disincentives  for  a  proper  exchange  of  information,  necessary  in  order  to 
guarantee the stability of the market. The risk of harming the financial institutions of one’s 
own  country  and  of  exposing  them  to  possible  acquisitions  may  discourage  a  timely 
transmission of the information to other authorities, especially in periods of financial turmoil.  
In  brief,  the  developments  under  way  in  the  financial  markets  are  causing  two  types  of 
problem  to  emerge.  First,  the  continual  integration  of  markets  increases  the  inefficiencies 
resulting from a variety of laws, or applied in different ways in different countries. Second, the 
possibility of applying the laws in various ways reduces the incentives for proper coordination 
between national supervisory authorities in respect of the prevention and resolution of crises.  
The approach taken up to now to tackle these problems has been to strengthen the current 
institutional system (the Lamfalussy system). But much remains to be done. The ECB has 
recently published its proposals for improving the system, notably:  
i) 
strengthening the role of the Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS, a 
level 3 committee that brings together the banking supervisory authorities) in order 
to improve convergence and cooperation in supervisory activities. In particular, it is 
deemed  necessary  to  reinforce  the  legal  basis  of  the  CEBS  (that  at  present  is  a 
network of national authorities) and both its accountability and that of its members, 
in relation to cooperation and convergence in supervisory practices.  
a greater convergence of the laws, by means of a clearer distinction between level 1 
principles and the implementing measures by the Commission at level 2 (to which 
more attention should have been paid in the "Capital Requirements Directive") and 
the  elimination  of  those  laws  in  the  said  directive  that  leave  options  and 
discretionary assessments to the national authorities.8  
ii) 
In  my  opinion,  the  reasons  for  justifying  differences  in  legislation,  and  differences  in  the 
applications  of  European  laws,  are  getting  weaker  by  the  day.  Rapid  progress  is  needed 
towards  a  single  regulatory  approach,  applied  in  the  same  way  throughout  the  single 
European market. This is what the market wants, what the banking and financial institutions 
                                                 
6   See, for example, the speech by Jean-Claude Trichet at  the Committee of European  Securities Regulators 
(CESR) conference, “Europe’s Single Market in Financial Services: under construction or fully  integrated?”, 
Paris,  6  December  2004;  and  at  the  EUROFI  conference,  “Achieving  the  Integration  of  European  Financial 
Markets in a Global context”, Brussels, 3 December 2007. 
7   L.  Bini  Smaghi  (2006):  “Independence  and  accountability  of  supervision  in  the  European  financial  market”, 
speech at conference entitled “Financial Regulation and Supervision in Europe”, Milan, Università Bocconi, 9 
March 2006; available at http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2006/html/sp060309.en.html. 
8   European Central Bank, “Contribution to the review of the Lamfalussy framework”, 30 November 2007. 
4 
 BIS Review 10/2008
want  and  what  their  customers  want.  This  is  also  necessary  in  order  to  remove  the 
disincentives to closer cooperation between the national supervisory authorities.  
Two examples  
3.  
I would like to illustrate two examples of fields where it is necessary to progress quickly, also 
in the light of the recent financial turbulence: deposit insurance and management of liquidity 
risk.  
Banks are typically among the financial intermediaries which, on the one hand, have liquid 
liabilities  and,  on  the  other  hand,  illiquid  assets.  Transformation  of  liquidity  is  part  of  their 
raison  d’être.  However,  it  is  also  the  basis  of  their  vulnerability.  Doubts  felt  by  creditors, 
particularly  by  depositors,  about  the  quality  of  the  bank’s  assets  (whether  justified  or  not), 
can  lead  to  a  hasty  withdrawal  of  the  liquid  liabilities  of  the  bank  and  therefore  to  its 
insolvency  (bank  run).  In  order  to  prevent  this  scenario,  the  authorities  have  provided  for 
liquidity  requirements  (ex  ante)  and  deposit  insurance  schemes  (ex  post).  The  latter  also 
have, if not above all, a consumer protection function.  
In Europe deposit insurance schemes are still very diverse. The relevant Directive only calls 
for minimal harmonisation.9 Such diversity can complicate the resolution of crises. It has to 
be  noted,  however,  that  there  are  no  harmonised  procedures  to  follow  in  the  case  of  a 
banking crisis. In some countries the general law is applied to insolvency and there are no 
specific procedures for the failure of a banking enterprise as such; while in others countries 
(such as ours) there are appropriate procedures. The European Commission is studying a 
review of the Directive on the reorganisation and winding up of credit institutions.10  
It is interesting to note how the funding difficulties of the British bank Northern Rock have 
forced the UK Treasury, the Bank of England and the Financial Services Authority to review 
some  fundamental  aspects  of  the  regulatory  framework  for  managing  banking  crises.  As 
Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, has also observed, the Northern Rock crisis 
has highlighted the need to reform the system of banking supervision in order to include (i) a 
special insolvency regime for banks, (ii) a credible deposit insurance scheme with sufficient 
cover  able  to  refund  depositors  quickly.  These  remarks  may  be  useful  for  reflection  at 
community level.  
Another  example  of  the  impact  of  the  legislative  divergence  on  financial  stability  concerns 
legislation on liquidity risks, which is not harmonised at European level and is applied non-
uniformly to cross-border bank groups internally, at the very time when banking activity, in 
terms  of  stability  and  profitability,  depends  increasingly  on  the  flow  of  liquid  financial 
instruments between the various countries. The legislative discrepancy prevents an efficient 
cross-border use of collateral. This applies in particular to securitised credits and bank loans 
in general, which are not covered by the specific Directive.11 Even though problems of this 
kind have not yet emerged, these conflicts could hinder the good functioning of the money 
markets and interventions by the central banks to restore appropriate liquidity conditions.  
Faster progress is needed towards a single law at European level, at least as far as deposits 
insurance and liquidity management are concerned. 
                                                 
9   Directive 1994/19/EC. 
10   Directive 2001/24/EC. 
11   Directive 2002/47/EC. 
BIS Review 10/2008 
 5
Conclusions  
In conclusion, the European institutional framework continues to be based on a fundamental 
asymmetry,  with  a  single  monetary  policy  and  decentralised  systems  of  supervision  and 
financial  regulation,  subject  to  coordination  that  has  increased  over  time  but  must  be 
strengthened. If full advantage is to be taken of the economies of scale of the Single Market, 
also in the banking and financial sector, of which it forms the backbone, it is necessary to 
reinforce the common bases of European legislation, in order to ensure at the same time the 
development and stability of the market.  
The  progress  achieved  so  far  in  this  field  is  undeniable.  But  it  is  also undeniable that  this 
progress  is  still  insufficient  to  meet  the  demands  for  stability  and  efficiency  in  Europe’s 
financial market. Experience shows that in times of relative stability it is very difficult to put 
into effect regulatory reforms of supervisory systems. Institutional changes often take place 
after  turbulence  and  financial  crises.  However,  experience  also  shows  that  hasty  changes 
made under the pressure of an emergency are not always the best.  
In  my  opinion,  it  is  possible  and  necessary  to  work  inside  the  current  system  to  adopt,  in 
reasonable times, a common rulebook at European level which constitutes a clear point of 
reference  for  financial  institutions  when  performing  cross-border  services  and  which  is 
applied uniformly by the national authorities. If sufficient progress were not to be made within 
the current system, the trends under way in the markets could determine a situation in which 
the only alternative, in order to safeguard the integration and stability of the market, would be 
a radical review of the European institutional framework in favour of a greater concentration 
of powers.  
It  is  in  the  interest  of  those  who  prefer  a  decentralised  –  but  coordinated  –  approach  to 
supervision that rapid progress is made towards the harmonisation of European legislation 
on financial affairs. 
6 
 BIS Review 10/2008
