Ben S Bernanke: Reducing preventable mortgage foreclosures 
Speech  of  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Independent  Community  Bankers  of  America  Annual  Convention, 
Orlando, Florida, 4 March 2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Over  the  past  year  and  a  half,  mortgage  delinquencies  have  increased  sharply,  especially 
among  riskier  loans.  This  development  has  triggered  a  substantial  and  broad-based 
reassessment  of  risk  in  financial  markets,  and  it  has  exacerbated  the  contraction  in  the 
housing sector. In my remarks today, I will discuss the causes of the distress in the mortgage 
sector and then turn to the key question of what can be done in this environment to reduce 
preventable foreclosures.  
Although I am aware, as you are, that community banks originated few subprime mortgages, 
community  bankers  are  keenly  interested  in  these  issues;  foreclosures  not  only  create 
personal  and  financial  distress  for  individual  homeowners  but  also  can  significantly  hurt 
neighborhoods  where  foreclosures  cluster.  Efforts  by  both  government  and  private-sector 
entities to reduce unnecessary foreclosures are helping, but more can, and should, be done. 
Community  bankers  are  well  positioned  to  contribute  to  these  efforts,  given  the  strong 
relationships you have built with your customers and your communities. 
The rise in mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures 
Mortgage  delinquencies  began  to  rise  in  mid-2005  after  several  years  at  remarkably  low 
levels. The worst payment problems have been among subprime adjustable-rate mortgages 
(subprime  ARMs);  more  than  one-fifth  of  the  3.6  million  loans  outstanding  were  seriously 
delinquent  at  the  end  of  2007.1  Delinquency  rates  have  also  risen  for  other  types  of 
mortgages, reaching 8 percent for subprime fixed-rate loans and 6 percent on adjustable-rate 
loans securitized in alt-A pools. Lenders were on pace to have initiated roughly 1-1/2 million 
foreclosure  proceedings  last  year,  up  from  an  average  of  fewer  than  1  million  foreclosure 
starts in the preceding two years.2 More than one-half of the foreclosure starts in 2007 were 
on subprime mortgages. 
The recent surge in delinquencies in subprime ARMs is closely linked to the fact that many of 
these borrowers have little or no equity in their homes. For example, data collected under the 
Home  Mortgage  Disclosure  Act  suggest  that  nearly  40  percent  of  higher-priced  home-
purchase loans in 2006 involved a second mortgage (or "piggyback") loan. Other data show 
that more than 40 percent of the subprime loans in the 2006 vintage had combined loan-to-
value ratios in excess of 90 percent, a considerably higher share than earlier in the decade.3 
Often,  in  recent  mortgage  vintages,  small  down  payments  were  combined  with  other  risk 
factors,  such  as  a  lack  of  documentation  of  sufficient  income  to  make  the  required  loan 
payments. 
                                                 
1   Based  on  servicer  data  from  First  American  LoanPerformance.  Serious  delinquencies  include  loans  ninety 
days or more past due or in foreclosure. 
2   Historically, more than half of foreclosure starts resulted in sale of the property. 
3   Based on information about loans in securitized pools from First American LoanPerformance. 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 1
This weak underwriting might not have produced widespread payment problems had house 
prices continued to rise at the rapid pace seen earlier in the decade. Rising prices provided 
leveraged  borrowers  with  significant  increases  in  home  equity  and,  consequently,  with 
greater financial flexibility. Instead, as you know, house prices are now falling in many parts 
of  the  country.  The  resulting  decline  in  equity  reduces  both  the  ability  and  the  financial 
incentive of stressed borrowers to remain in their homes. Indeed, historically, borrowers with 
little  or  no  equity  have  been  substantially  more  likely  than  others  to  fall  behind  in  their 
payments. The large number of outstanding mortgages with negative amortization features 
may exacerbate this problem. 
Delinquencies  and  foreclosures  likely  will  continue  to  rise  for  a  while  longer,  for  several 
reasons.  First,  supply-demand  imbalances  in  many  housing  markets  suggest  that  some 
further declines in house prices are likely, implying additional reductions in borrowers' equity. 
Second, many subprime borrowers are facing imminent resets of the interest rates on their 
mortgages.  In  2008,  about  1-1/2  million  loans,  representing  more  than  40  percent  of  the 
outstanding stock of subprime ARMs, are scheduled to reset. We estimate that the interest 
rate on a typical subprime ARM scheduled to reset in the current quarter will increase from 
just above 8 percent to about 9-1/4 percent, raising the monthly payment by more than 10 
percent, to $1,500 on average. Declines in short-term interest rates and initiatives involving 
rate  freezes  will  reduce  the  impact  somewhat,  but  interest  rate  resets  will  nevertheless 
impose stress on many households.  
In the past, subprime borrowers were often able to avoid resets by refinancing, but currently 
that avenue is largely closed. Borrowers are hampered not only by their lack of equity but 
also  by  the  tighter  credit  conditions  in  mortgage  markets.  New  securitizations  of  nonprime 
mortgages  have  virtually  halted,  and  commercial  banks  have  tightened  their  standards, 
especially for riskier mortgages. Indeed, the available evidence suggests that private lenders 
are originating few nonprime loans at any terms.  
This  situation  calls  for  a  vigorous  response.  Measures  to  reduce  preventable  foreclosures 
could help not only stressed borrowers but also their communities and, indeed, the broader 
economy. At the level of the individual community, increases in foreclosed-upon and vacant 
properties  tend  to  reduce  house  prices  in  the  local  area,  affecting  other  homeowners  and 
municipal  tax  bases.  At  the  national  level,  the  rise  in  expected  foreclosures  could  add 
significantly to the inventory of vacant unsold homes – already at more than 2 million units at 
the end of 2007 – putting further pressure on house prices and housing construction.4
Helping distressed borrowers 
Policymakers  and  stakeholders  have  been  working  to  find  effective  responses  to  the 
increases  in  delinquencies  and  foreclosures.  Steps  that  have  been  taken  include  initiating 
programs designed to expand refinancing opportunities and efforts to facilitate and increase 
the pace of loan workouts. Troubled borrowers will always require individual attention, and 
the most immediate impacts of foreclosures are on local communities. Thus, the support of 
counselors, lenders, and organizations with local ties is critical. 
Of course, care must be taken in designing solutions. Measures that lead to a sustainable 
outcome are to be preferred to temporary palliatives, which may only put off foreclosure and 
perhaps increase its ultimate costs. Solutions should also be prudent and consistent with the 
safety and soundness of the lender. Concerns about fairness and the need to minimize moral 
hazard add to the complexity of the issue; we want to help borrowers in trouble, but we do 
                                                 
4   As  already  noted,  foreclosure  starts  likely  increased  by  roughly  50  percent  to  1-1/2  million  last  year,  and 
foreclosure  starts  are  on  track  to  rise  further  this  year.  Lender  reports  suggest  that  well  over  half  of  these 
foreclosure starts could result in property sales. 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2008
not want borrowers who have avoided problems through responsible financial management 
to feel that they are being unfairly penalized.  
Let  me  turn  now  to  some  recent  efforts  to  help  distressed  borrowers  refinance.  The 
FHASecure  plan,  which  the  Federal  Housing  Administration  (FHA)  announced  late  last 
summer, offers qualified borrowers who are delinquent because of an interest rate reset the 
opportunity  to  refinance  into  an  FHA-insured  mortgage.  Recently,  the  Congress  and 
Administration  temporarily  increased  the  maximum  loan  value  eligible  for  FHA  insurance, 
which  should  allow  more  borrowers,  particularly  those  in  communities  with  higher-priced 
homes, to qualify for this program and to be eligible for refinancing into FHA-insured loans 
more  generally.  These efforts  represent  a step in  the  right direction.  Not  all borrowers  are 
eligible for this program, of course; in particular, some equity is needed to qualify. In addition, 
second-lien holders must settle or be willing to re-subordinate their claims for an FHA loan, 
which  has  sometimes  proved  difficult  to  negotiate.  Separately,  some  states  have  created 
funds to offer refinancing options, but eligibility criteria tend to be tight and the take-up rates 
appear to be low thus far.  
In cases where refinancing is not possible, the next-best solution may often be some type of 
loss-mitigation  arrangement  between  the  lender  and  the  distressed  borrower.  Indeed,  the 
Federal Reserve and other regulators have issued guidance urging lenders and servicers to 
pursue such arrangements as an alternative to foreclosure when feasible and prudent.5 For 
the  lender  or  servicer,  working  out  a  loan  makes  economic  sense  if  the  net  present  value 
(NPV) of the payments under a loss-mitigation strategy exceeds the NPV of payments that 
would be received in foreclosure.6 Loss mitigation is made more attractive by the fact that 
foreclosure costs are often substantial. Historically, the foreclosure process has usually taken 
from a few months up to a year and a half, depending on state law and whether the borrower 
files for bankruptcy. The losses to the lender include the missed mortgage payments during 
that  period, 
fees,  real  estate  owned  (REO)  sales 
commissions, and maintenance expenses. Additional losses arise from the reduction in value 
associated with repossessed properties, particularly if they are unoccupied for some period. 
A  recent  estimate  based  on  subprime  mortgages  foreclosed  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2007 
indicated  that  total  losses  exceeded  50  percent  of  the  principal  balance,  with  legal,  sales, 
and maintenance expenses alone amounting to more than 10 percent of principal. With the 
time period between the last mortgage payment and REO liquidation lengthening in recent 
months,  this  loss  rate  will  likely  grow  even  larger.  Moreover,  as  the  time  to  liquidation 
increases,  the  uncertainty  about  the  losses  increases  as  well.  The  low  prices  offered  for 
subprime-related  securities  in  secondary  markets  support  the  impression  that  the  potential 
for  recovery  through  foreclosure  is  limited.  The  magnitude  of,  and  uncertainty  about, 
expected  losses  in  a  foreclosure  suggest  considerable  scope  for  negotiating  a  mutually 
beneficial outcome if the borrower wants to stay in the home.  
Unfortunately, even though workouts may often be the best economic alternative, mortgage 
securitization and the constraints faced by servicers may make such workouts less likely. For 
example, trusts vary in the type and scope of modifications that are explicitly permitted, and 
these differences raise operational compliance costs and litigation risks. Thus, servicers may 
not  pursue  workout  options  that  are  in  the  collective  interests  of  investors  and  borrowers. 
Some  progress  has  been  made  (for  example,  through  clarification  of  accounting  rules)  in 
legal  and  administrative 
taxes, 
                                                 
5   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007), "Working with Mortgage Borrowers," Division of 
Banking Supervision and Regulation, Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 07-6 (April 17); and "Statement 
on Loss Mitigation Strategies for Servicers of Residential Mortgages," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 
07-16 (September 5). 
6   By comparing these NPVs, servicers can fulfill their obligation to investors under many pooling and servicing 
agreements, which is to maximize the return from all loans in the trust, including those that are in default or 
are reasonably likely to default. 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 3
reducing  the  disincentive  for  servicers  to  undertake  economically  sensible  workouts. 
However,  the  barriers  to,  and  disincentives  for,  workouts  by  servicers  remain  serious 
problems  that  need  to  be  part  of  current  discussions  about  how  to  reduce  preventable 
foreclosures. 
We now have more information about the recent pace of loss-mitigation activity than we did 
just a few months ago, thanks to surveys of servicers by the Mortgage Bankers Association, 
the  Conference  of  State  Bank  Supervisors,  the  Hope  Now  Alliance,  and  others.  These 
surveys generally indicate that servicers substantially increased the number of loan workouts 
in the latter part of last year. The Hope Now Alliance estimates that workouts of subprime 
mortgages  rose  from  around  250,000  in  the  third  quarter  of  2007  to  300,000  in  the  fourth 
quarter,  while  workouts  of  prime  mortgages  rose  from  150,000  to  175,000  over  the  same 
period. The pace of workouts picked up a bit more in January. 
Despite this progress, delinquency and default rates have risen quickly, and servicers report 
that they are struggling to keep up with the increased volumes. Of course, not all delinquent 
subprime  loans  can  be  successfully  worked  out;  for  example,  borrowers  who  purchased 
homes as speculative investments may not be interested in retaining the home, and some 
borrowers  may  not  be  able  to  sustain  even  a  reduced  stream  of  payments.  Nevertheless, 
scope remains to prevent unnecessary foreclosures. 
Lenders  and  servicers  historically  have  relied  on  repayment  plans  as  their  preferred  loss-
mitigation technique. Under these plans, borrowers typically repay the mortgage arrears over 
a  few  months  in  addition  to  making  their  regularly  scheduled  mortgage  payments.  These 
plans are most appropriate if the borrower has suffered a potentially reversible setback, such 
as a job loss or illness. However, anecdotal evidence suggests that even in the best-case 
scenarios,  borrowers  given  repayment  plans  re-default  at  a  high  rate,  especially  when  the 
arrears are large.  
Loan  modifications,  which  involve  any  permanent  change  to  the  terms  of  the  mortgage 
contract,  may  be  preferred  when  the  borrower  cannot  cope  with  the  higher  payments 
associated with a repayment plan. In such cases, the monthly payment is reduced through a 
lower interest rate, an extension of the maturity of the loan, or a write-down of the principal 
balance. The proposal by the Hope Now Alliance to freeze interest rates at the introductory 
rate for five years is an example of a modification, in this case applied to a class of eligible 
borrowers. 
To date, permanent modifications that have occurred have typically involved a reduction in 
the interest rate, while reductions of principal balance have been quite rare. The preference 
by servicers for interest rate reductions could reflect familiarity with that technique, based on 
past  episodes  when  most  borrowers'  problems  could  be  solved  that  way.  But  the  current 
housing  difficulties  differ  from  those  in  the  past,  largely  because  of  the  pervasiveness  of 
negative  equity  positions.  With  low  or  negative  equity,  as  I  have  mentioned,  a  stressed 
borrower has less ability (because there is no home equity to tap) and less financial incentive 
to  try  to  remain  in  the  home.  In  this  environment,  principal  reductions  that  restore  some 
equity for the homeowner may be a relatively more effective means of avoiding delinquency 
and foreclosure.  
Lenders tell us that they are reluctant to write down principal. They say that if they were to 
write down the principal and house prices were to fall further, they could feel pressured to 
write  down  principal  again.  Moreover,  were  house  prices  instead  to  rise  subsequently,  the 
lender  would  not  share  in  the  gains.  In  an  environment  of  falling  house  prices,  however, 
whether  a  reduction  in  the  interest  rate  is  preferable  to  a  principal  writedown  is  not 
immediately  clear.  Both  types  of  modification  involve  a  concession  of  payments,  are 
susceptible to additional pressures to write down again, and result in the same payments to 
the lender if the mortgage pays to maturity. The fact that most mortgages terminate before 
maturity either by prepayment or default may favor an interest rate reduction. However, as I 
4 
 BIS Review 26/2008
have noted, when the mortgage is "under water," a reduction in principal may increase the 
expected payoff by reducing the risk of default and foreclosure.  
In my view, we could also reduce preventable foreclosures if investors acting in their own self 
interests  were  to  permit  servicers  to  write  down  the  mortgage  liabilities  of  borrowers  by 
accepting a short payoff in appropriate circumstances. For example, servicers could accept a 
principal writedown by an amount at least sufficient to allow the borrower to refinance into a 
new loan from another source. A writedown that is sufficient to make borrowers eligible for a 
new  loan  would  remove  the  downside  risk  to  investors  of  additional  writedowns  or  a  re-
default. This arrangement might include a feature that allows the original investors to share in 
any  future  appreciation,  as  recently  suggested,  for  example,  by  the  Office  of  Thrift 
Supervision. Servicers could also benefit from greater use of short payoffs, as this approach 
would simplify the calculation of expected losses and eliminate the future costs and risks of 
retaining the troubled mortgage in the pool.  
A potentially important step to facilitate greater use of short payoffs is the modernization of 
the  FHA,  which  I  have  supported.  Going  beyond  the  current  proposals  for  modernization, 
permitting the FHA greater latitude to set underwriting standards and risk-based premiums 
for mortgage refinancing – in a way that does not increase the expected cost to the taxpayer 
– would allow the FHA to help more troubled borrowers. A concern about such an approach 
is  that  servicers  might  refinance  only  their  riskiest  borrowers  into  the  FHA  program.  A 
combination  of  careful  underwriting,  the  use  of  risk  premiums,  and  other  measures  (for 
example, a provision that would allow the FHA to return a mortgage that quickly re-defaults 
to the servicer) could help mitigate that risk.  
There  are,  no  doubt,  tax-related,  accounting,  and  legal  obstacles  to  expanding  the  use  of 
principal  writedowns.  For  example,  investors  in  different  tranches  of  mortgage-backed 
securities  may  not  benefit  equally,  securitized  trusts  may  not  be  permitted  to  acquire  new 
equity warrants, and principal writedowns may require a different accounting treatment than 
interest rate reductions. But just as market participants, with the help of regulators, obtained 
greater clarity on the use of interest rate freezes through guidelines issued by the American 
Securitization Forum, industry and regulator efforts could also help clarify how this alternative 
type of workout might be effectively applied. 
Federal Reserve System efforts  
I  would  like  to  comment  briefly  on  Federal  Reserve  System  efforts  to  reduce  preventable 
foreclosures and their costs on borrowers and communities. The Federal Reserve can help 
by  leveraging  three  important  strengths:  our  analytical  and  data  resources;  our  national 
presence; and our history of working closely with lenders, community groups, and other local 
stakeholders.  A  major  thrust  of  our  efforts  is  sharing  relevant  and  timely  data  analysis  of 
mortgage  delinquencies  with  community  groups  and  policymakers  to  efficiently  target 
resources to areas most in need. For example, we recently assisted NeighborWorks America 
in identifying regions and neighborhoods that are at risk of higher rates of foreclosure and 
could  benefit  from  increased  mortgage  counseling  capacity.  On  the  basis  of  this  analysis, 
NeighborWorks  recently  distributed  $130  million  in  newly  granted  funds  from  Congress  to 
thirty-two  state  housing  finance  agencies,  eighty-two  community-based  NeighborWorks 
organizations, and sixteen counseling intermediaries around the country.  
The Federal Reserve System also is supporting efforts to reach troubled borrowers and to 
raise  awareness  in  communities  about  ways  to  prevent  foreclosures.  Since  July,  the 
community  affairs  groups  across  the  Federal  Reserve  System  have  sponsored  or 
cosponsored  more  than  fifty  events  related  to  foreclosures,  reaching  more  than  4,000 
attendees 
lenders,  counselors,  community  development  specialists,  and 
policymakers. 
including 
BIS Review 26/2008 
 5
We  are  also  concerned  about  the  challenges  of  neighborhoods  that  have  seen  large 
increases in foreclosures and vacant properties and have begun to work with policymakers, 
lenders (including community banks) and community groups to address these problems. In 
particular,  we  have  undertaken  a  joint  effort  with  NeighborWorks  America  to  help 
communities develop strategies for neighborhood stabilization. 
Conclusion 
Reducing  the  rate  of  preventable  foreclosures  would  promote  economic  stability  for 
households, neighborhoods, and the nation as a whole. Although lenders and servicers have 
scaled up their efforts and adopted a wider variety of loss-mitigation techniques, more can, 
and should, be done. The fact that many troubled borrowers have little or no equity suggests 
that greater use of principal writedowns or short payoffs, perhaps with shared appreciation 
features, would be in the best interest of both borrowers and lenders. This approach would 
be  facilitated  by  allowing  the  FHA  the  flexibility  to  offer  refinancing  products  to  more 
borrowers. 
Ultimately,  though,  real  relief  for  the  mortgage  market  requires  stabilization,  and  then 
recovery, in the nation's housing sector. Modernization of the FHA would be of help on this 
front  as  well.  I  am  sure  that  the  FHA  and  the  Department  of  Housing  and  Urban 
Development,  given  the  appropriate  powers  by  the  Congress,  will  make  every  effort  to 
expand their operations and to help improve the functioning of the market for home-purchase 
mortgages.  For  community  bankers,  FHA  modernization  and  expansion  would  provide  an 
important  opportunity  –  of  which  I  urge  you  to  take  advantage  –  to  better  serve  your 
customers and community.  
The  government-sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs),  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac,  likewise 
could do a great deal to address the current problems in housing and the mortgage market. 
New  capital-raising  by  the  GSEs,  together  with  congressional  action  to  strengthen  the 
supervision of these companies, would allow Fannie and Freddie to expand significantly the 
number  of  new  mortgages  that  they  securitize.  With  few  alternative  mortgage  channels 
available today, such action would be highly beneficial to the economy. I urge the Congress 
and  the  GSEs  to  take  the  steps  necessary  to  allow  more  potential  homebuyers  access  to 
mortgage credit at reasonable terms.  
6 
 BIS Review 26/2008
