Ben S Bernanke: Remarks on Class Day 2008 
Speech  of  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 4 June 2008. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 It  seems  to  me,  paradoxically,  that  both  long  ago  and  only  yesterday  I  attended  my  own 
Class Day in 1975. I am pleased and honored to be invited back by the students of Harvard. 
Our  speaker  in  1975  was  Dick  Gregory,  the  social  critic  and  comedian,  who  was  inclined 
toward the sharp-edged and satiric. Central bankers don't do satire as a rule, so I am going 
to have to strive for "kind of interesting".  
When I attended Class Day as a graduating senior, Gerald Ford was President, and an up-
and-coming  fellow  named  Alan  Greenspan  was  his  chief  economic  adviser.  Just  weeks 
earlier,  the  last  Americans  remaining  in  Saigon  had  been  evacuated  by  helicopters.  On  a 
happier  note,  the  Red  Sox  were  on  their  way  to  winning  the  American  League  pennant.  I 
skipped  classes  to  attend  a  World  Series  game  against  the  Cincinnati  Reds.  As  was  their 
wont  in  those  days,  the  Sox  came  agonizingly  close  to  a  championship  but  ended  up 
snatching defeat from the jaws of victory. On that score, as on others – disco music and Pet 
Rocks come to mind – many things are better today than they were then. In fact, that will be 
a theme of my remarks today. 
Although 1975 was a pretty good year for the Red Sox, it was not a good one for the U.S. 
economy. Then as now, we were experiencing a serious oil price shock, sharply rising prices 
for  food  and  other  commodities,  and  subpar  economic  growth.  But  I  see  the  differences 
between the economy of 1975 and the economy of 2008 as more telling than the similarities. 
Today's situation differs from that of 33 years ago in large part because our economy and 
society  have  become  much  more  flexible  and  able  to  adapt  to  difficult  situations  and  new 
challenges. Economic policymaking has improved as well, I believe, partly because we have 
learned well some of the hard lessons of the past. Of course, I do not want to minimize the 
challenges we currently face, and I will come back to a few of these. But I do think that our 
demonstrated  ability  to  respond  constructively  and  effectively  to  past  economic  problems 
provides a basis for optimism about the future. 
I will focus my remarks today on two economic issues that challenged us in the 1970s and 
that still do so today – energy and productivity. These, obviously, are not the kind of topics 
chosen  by  many  recent  Class  Day  speakers  –  Will  Farrell,  Ali  G,  or  Seth  MacFarlane,  to 
name a few. But, then, the Class Marshals presumably knew what they were getting when 
they invited an economist. 
Because the members of today's graduating class – and some of your professors – were not 
yet born in 1975, let me begin by briefly surveying the economic landscape in the mid-1970s. 
The economy had just gone through a severe recession, during which output, income, and 
employment fell sharply and the unemployment rate rose to 9 percent. Meanwhile, consumer 
price inflation, which had been around 3 percent to 4 percent earlier in the decade, soared to 
more than 10 percent during my senior year.1  
The  oil  price  shock  of  the  1970s  began  in  October  1973  when,  in  response  to  the  Yom 
Kippur  War,  Arab  oil  producers  imposed  an  embargo  on  exports.  Before  the  embargo,  in 
1972, the price of imported oil was about $3.20 per barrel; by 1975, the average price was 
                                                 
1  
Inflation  is  calculated  as  the  percent  change  from  four  quarters  earlier  in  the  price  index  for  personal 
consumption expenditures (PCE), published by the U.S. Department of Commerce. 
BIS Review 70/2008 
 1
nearly $14 per barrel, more than four times greater. President Nixon had imposed economy-
wide  controls  on  wages  and  prices  in  1971,  including  prices  of  petroleum  products;  in 
November  1973,  in  the  wake  of  the  embargo,  the  President  placed  additional  controls  on 
petroleum prices.2
As  basic  economics  predicts,  when  a  scarce  resource  cannot  be  allocated  by  market-
determined prices, it will be allocated some other way – in this case, in what was to become 
an iconic symbol of the times, by long lines at gasoline stations. In 1974, in an attempt to 
overcome  the  unintended  consequences  of  price  controls,  drivers  in  many  places  were 
permitted to buy gasoline only on odd or even days of the month, depending on the last digit 
of their license plate number. Moreover, with the controlled price of U.S. crude oil well below 
world prices, growth in domestic exploration slowed and production was curtailed – which, of 
course, only made things worse. 
In addition to creating long lines at gasoline stations, the oil price shock exacerbated what 
was already an intensifying buildup of inflation and inflation expectations. In another echo of 
today, the inflationary situation was further worsened by rapidly rising prices of agricultural 
products and other commodities. 
Economists generally agree that monetary policy performed poorly during this period. In part, 
this was because policymakers, in choosing what they believed to be the appropriate setting 
for monetary policy, overestimated the productive capacity of the economy. I'll have more to 
say  about  this  shortly.  Federal  Reserve  policymakers  also  underestimated  both  their  own 
contributions to the inflationary problems of the time and their ability to curb that inflation. For 
example,  on  occasion  they  blamed  inflation  on  so-called  cost-push  factors  such  as  union 
wage pressures and price increases by large, market-dominating firms; however, the abilities 
of unions and firms to push through inflationary wage and price increases were symptoms of 
the  problem,  not  the  underlying  cause.  Several  years  passed  before  the  Federal  Reserve 
gained a new leadership that better understood the central bank's role in the inflation process 
and that sustained anti-inflationary monetary policies would actually work. Beginning in 1979, 
such policies were implemented successfully – although not without significant cost in terms 
of  lost  output  and  employment  –  under  Fed  Chairman  Paul  Volcker.  For  the  Federal 
Reserve, two crucial lessons from this experience were, first, that high inflation can seriously 
destabilize  the  economy  and,  second,  that  the  central  bank  must  take  responsibility  for 
achieving price stability over the medium term. 
Fast-forward now to 2003. In that year, crude oil cost a little more than $30 per barrel.3 Since 
then, crude oil prices have increased more than fourfold, proportionally about as much as in 
the 1970s. Now, as in 1975, adjusting to such high prices for crude oil has been painful. Gas 
prices around $4 a gallon are a huge burden for many households, as well as for truckers, 
manufacturers, farmers, and others. But, in many other ways, the economic consequences 
have been quite different from those of the 1970s. One obvious difference is what you don't 
see: drivers lining up on odd or even days to buy gasoline because of price controls or signs 
at gas stations that say "No gas." And until the recent slowdown – which is more the result of 
conditions in the residential housing market and in financial markets than of higher oil prices 
– economic growth was solid and unemployment remained low, unlike what we saw following 
oil price increases in the '70s. 
For  a  central  banker,  a  particularly  critical  difference  between  then  and  now  is  what  has 
happened to inflation and inflation expectations. The overall inflation rate has averaged about 
3-1/2 percent over the past four quarters, significantly higher than we would like but much 
less  than  the  double-digit  rates  that  inflation  reached  in  the  mid-1970s  and  then  again  in 
                                                 
2   See Energy Information Administration (2002). 
3   See Energy Information Administration (2008a). 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2008
1980.  Moreover,  the  increase  in  inflation  has  been  milder  this  time  –  on  the  order  of  1 
percentage  point  over  the  past  year  as  compared  with  the  6  percentage  point  jump  that 
followed the 1973 oil price shock.4 From the perspective of monetary policy, just as important 
as the behavior of actual inflation is what households and businesses expect to happen to 
inflation  in  the  future,  particularly  over  the  longer  term.  If  people  expect  an  increase  in 
inflation to be temporary and do not build it into their longer-term plans for setting wages and 
prices, then the inflation created by a shock to oil prices will tend to fade relatively quickly. 
Some indicators of longer-term inflation expectations have risen in recent months, which is a 
significant concern for the Federal Reserve. We will need to monitor that situation closely. 
However,  changes  in  long-term  inflation  expectations  have  been  measured  in  tenths  of  a 
percentage point this time around rather than in whole percentage points, as appeared to be 
the case in the mid-1970s. Importantly, we see little indication today of the beginnings of a 
1970s-style wage-price spiral, in which wages and prices chased each other ever upward. 
A good deal of economic research has looked at the question of why the inflation response to 
the oil shock has been relatively muted in the current instance.5 One factor, which illustrates 
my point about the adaptability and flexibility of the U.S. economy, is the pronounced decline 
in the energy intensity of the economy since the 1970s. Since 1975, the energy required to 
produce a given amount of output in the United States has fallen by about half.6 This great 
improvement in energy efficiency was less the result of government programs than of steps 
taken  by  households  and  businesses  in  response  to  higher  energy  prices,  including 
substantial  investments  in  more  energy-efficient  equipment  and  means  of  transportation. 
This improvement in energy efficiency is one of the reasons why a given increase in crude oil 
prices does less damage to the U.S. economy today than it did in the 1970s. 
Another  reason  is  the  performance  of  monetary  policy.  The  Federal  Reserve  and  other 
central banks have learned the lessons of the 1970s. Because monetary policy works with a 
lag, the short-term inflationary effects of a sharp increase in oil prices can generally not be 
fully  offset.  However,  since  Paul  Volcker's  time,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  been  firmly 
committed  to  maintaining  a  low  and  stable  rate  of  inflation  over  the  longer  term.  And  we 
recognize  that  keeping  longer-term  inflation  expectations  well  anchored  is  essential  to 
achieving  the  goal  of  low  and  stable  inflation.  Maintaining  confidence  in  the  Fed's 
commitment to price stability remains a top priority as the central bank navigates the current 
complex situation. 
Although our economy has thus far dealt with the current oil price shock comparatively well, 
the United States and the rest of the world still face significant challenges in dealing with the 
rising  global  demand  for  energy,  especially  if  continued  demand  growth  and  constrained 
supplies maintain intense pressure on prices. The silver lining of high energy prices is that 
they  provide  a  powerful  incentive  for  action  –  for  conservation,  including  investment  in 
energy-saving technologies; for the investment needed to bring new oil supplies to market; 
and  for  the  development  of  alternative  conventional  and  nonconventional  energy  sources. 
The  government,  in  addition  to  the  market,  can  usefully  address  energy  concerns,  for 
example,  by  supporting  basic  research  and  adopting  well-designed  regulatory  policies  to 
promote important social objectives such as protecting the environment. As we saw after the 
                                                 
4   Total  PCE  inflation  (four-quarter  change)  went  from  5  percent  in  1973:Q2  to  11.4  percent  in  1974:Q4,  an 
increase of 6.4 percentage points. If we take 1972:Q4, in which inflation was 3.4 percent, as the starting point, 
the increase in inflation to the 1974 peak was 8 percentage points. 
5   See, for example, Blanchard and Gali (2007) and the references therein. 
6  
In 1975, roughly 17,000 Btu of energy were required, on average, to produce a dollar's worth of output, with 
output being measured in chained (2000) dollars. In 2007 the corresponding figure was 8,800 Btu (see Table 
1.7, "Energy Consumption per Real Dollar of Gross Domestic Product," in Energy Information Administration, 
2008b). 
BIS Review 70/2008 
 3
oil price shock of the 1970s, given some time, the economy can become much more energy-
efficient even as it continues to grow and living standards improve. 
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  other  economic  challenge  that  I  want  to  highlight  today  –  the 
productivity performance of our economy. At this point you may be saying to yourself, "Is it 
too  late  to  book  Ali  G?"  However,  anyone  who  stayed  awake  through  EC  10  understands 
why this issue is so important.7 As Adam Smith pointed out in 1776, in the long run, more 
than  any  other  factor,  the  productivity  of  the  workforce  determines  a  nation's  standard  of 
living. 
The decades following the end of World War II were remarkable for their industrial innovation 
and creativity. From 1948 to 1973, output per hour of work grew by nearly 3 percent per year, 
on average.8 But then, for the next 20 years or so, productivity growth averaged only about 
1-1/2 percent per year, barely half its previous rate. Predictably, the rate of increase in the 
standard of living slowed as well, and to about the same extent. The difference between 3 
percent and 1-1/2 percent may sound small. But at 3 percent per year, the standard of living 
would double about every 23 years, or once every generation; by contrast, at 1-1/2 percent, 
a doubling would occur only roughly every 47 years, or once every other generation. 
Among the many consequences of the productivity slowdown was a further complication for 
the monetary policy makers of the 1970s. Detecting shifts in economic trends is difficult in 
real time, and most economists and policymakers did not fully appreciate the extent of the 
productivity  slowdown  until  the  late  1970s.  This  further  influenced  the  policymakers  of  the 
time  toward  running  a  monetary  policy  that  was  too  accommodative.  The  resulting 
overheating of the economy probably exacerbated the inflation problem of that decade.9
Productivity  growth  revived  in  the  mid-1990s,  as  I  mentioned,  illustrating  once  again  the 
resilience  of  the  American  economy.10  Since  1995,  productivity  has  increased  at  about  a 
2-1/2 percent annual rate. A great deal of intellectual effort has been expended in trying to 
explain the recent performance and to forecast the future evolution of productivity. Much very 
good work has been conducted here at Harvard by Dale Jorgenson (my senior thesis adviser 
in 1975, by the way) and his colleagues, and other important research in the area has been 
done at the Federal Reserve Board.11 One key finding of that research is that, to have an 
economic  impact,  technological  innovations  must  be  translated  into  successful  commercial 
applications. This country's competitive, market-based system, its flexible capital and labor 
markets, its tradition of entrepreneurship, and its technological strengths – to which Harvard 
and  other  universities  make  a  critical  contribution  –  help  ensure  that  that  happens  on  an 
ongoing basis. 
While private-sector initiative was the key ingredient in generating the pickup in productivity 
growth,  government  policy  was  constructive,  in  part  through  support  of  basic  research  but 
also to a substantial degree by promoting economic competition. Beginning in the late 1970s, 
the federal government deregulated a number of key industries, including air travel, trucking, 
telecommunications,  and  energy.  The  resulting  increase  in  competition  promoted  cost 
reductions  and  innovation,  leading  in  turn  to  new  products  and  industries.  It  is  difficult  to 
                                                 
7   EC 10 is Harvard's introductory course in principles of economics. 
8   Output  per  hour  worked  reflects  data  from  the  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  for  the  private  nonfarm  business 
sector. 
9   See Orphanides (2003). 
10   One of the earlier papers that was used by many observers to suggest the possibility of a mid-1990s inflection 
point in productivity growth was Corrado and Slifman (1999). The initial version of this paper was posted on 
the Federal Reserve's web site on November 18, 1996. 
11   Some of the important papers include Oliner, Sichel, and Stiroh (2007), Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2007), and 
Corrado and others (2007). 
4 
 BIS Review 70/2008
if 
the 
today 
retailing 
that  we  would  have  online 
transportation  and 
imagine 
telecommunications industries had not been deregulated. In addition, the lowering of trade 
barriers  promoted  productivity  gains  by  increasing  competition,  expanding  markets,  and 
increasing the pace of technology transfer.12
Finally,  as  a  central  banker,  I  would  be  remiss  if  I  failed  to  mention  the  contribution  of 
monetary policy to the improved productivity performance. By damping business cycles and 
by  keeping  inflation  under  control,  a  sound  monetary  policy  improves  the  ability  of 
households and firms to plan and increases their willingness to undertake the investments in 
skills, research, and physical capital needed to support continuing gains in productivity. 
Just  as  the  productivity  slowdown  was  associated  with  a  slower  growth  of  real  per  capita 
income, the productivity resurgence since the mid-1990s has been accompanied by a pickup 
in  real  income  growth.  One  measure  of  average  living  standards,  real  consumption  per 
capita, is nearly 35 percent higher today than in 1995. In addition, the flood of innovation that 
helped spur the productivity resurgence has created many new job opportunities, and more 
than a few fortunes. But changing technology has also reduced job opportunities for some 
others – bank tellers and assembly-line workers, for example. And that is the crux of a whole 
new set of challenges. 
Even though average economic well-being has increased considerably over time, the degree 
of  inequality  in  economic  outcomes  over  the  past  three  decades  has  increased  as  well. 
Economists continue to grapple with the reasons for this trend. But as best we can tell, the 
increase in inequality probably is due to a number of factors, notably including technological 
change that seems to have favored higher-skilled workers more than lower-skilled ones. In 
addition,  some  economists  point  to  increased  international  trade  and  the  declining  role  of 
labor unions as other, probably lesser contributing factors. 
What  should  we  do  about  rising  economic  inequality?  Answering  this  question  inevitably 
involves difficult value judgments and tradeoffs. But approaches that inhibit the dynamism of 
our economy would clearly be a step in the wrong direction. To be sure, new technologies 
and increased international trade can lead to painful dislocations as some workers lose their 
jobs or see the demand for their particular skills decline. However, hindering the adoption of 
new technologies or inhibiting trade flows would do far more harm than good over the longer 
haul.  In  the  short  term,  the  better  approach  is  to  adopt  policies  that  help  those  who  are 
displaced by economic change. By doing so, we not only provide assistance to those who 
need  it  but  help  to  secure  public  support  for  the  economic  flexibility  that  is  essential  for 
prosperity. 
In  the  long  term,  however,  the  best  way  by  far  to  improve  economic  opportunity  and  to 
reduce inequality is to increase the educational attainment and skills of American workers. 
The productivity surge in the decades after World War II corresponded to a period in which 
educational attainment was increasing rapidly; in recent decades, progress on that front has 
been far slower. Moreover, inequalities in education and in access to education remain high. 
As we think about improving education and skills, we should also look beyond the traditional 
K-12 and 4-year-college system – as important as it is – to recognize that education should 
be  lifelong  and  can  come  in  many  forms.  Early  childhood  education,  community  colleges, 
vocational  schools,  on-the-job  training,  online  courses,  adult  education  –  all  of  these  are 
vehicles of demonstrated value in increasing skills and lifetime earning power. The use of a 
wide range of methods to address the pressing problems of inadequate skills and economic 
inequality would be entirely consistent with the themes of economic adaptability and flexibility 
that I have emphasized in my remarks. 
                                                 
12   For example, see Doms and Jensen (1998), Corrado, Lengermann, and Slifman (2007), and Kurz (2006). 
BIS Review 70/2008 
 5
I will close by shifting from the topic of education in general to your education specifically. 
Through  effort,  talent,  and  doubtless  some  luck,  you  have  succeeded  in  acquiring  an 
excellent  education.  Your  education  –  more  precisely,  your  ability  to  think  critically  and 
creatively  –  is  your  greatest  asset.  And  unlike  many  assets,  the  more  you  draw  on  it,  the 
faster it grows. Put it to good use. 
The poor forecasting record of economists is legendary, but I will make a forecast in which I 
am very confident: Whatever you expect your life and work to be like 10, 20, or 30 years from 
now, the reality will be quite different. In looking over the 30th anniversary report on my own 
class, I was struck by the great diversity of vocations and avocations that have engaged my 
classmates. To be sure, the volume was full of attorneys and physicians and professors as 
well as architects, engineers, editors, bankers, and even a few economists. Many listed the 
title "vice president," and, not a few, "president." But the class of 1975 also includes those 
who  listed  their  occupations  as  composer,  environmental  advocate,  musician,  playwright, 
rabbi,  conflict  resolution  coach,  painter,  community  organizer,  and  essayist.  And  even  for 
those of us with the more conventional job descriptions, the nature of our daily work and its 
relationship to the economy and society is, I am sure, very different from what we might have 
guessed in 1975. My point is only that you cannot predict your path. You can only try to be as 
prepared  as  possible  for  the  opportunities,  as  well  as  the  disappointments,  that  will  come 
your way. For people, as for economies, adaptability and flexibility count for a great deal. 
Wherever  your  path  leads,  I  hope  you  use  your  considerable  talents  and  energy  in 
endeavors  that  engage  and  excite  you  and  benefit  not  only  yourselves,  but  also  in  some 
measure your country and your world. Today, I wish you and your families a day of joyous 
celebration. Congratulations. 
References 
Blanchard, Olivier J., and Jordi Gali (2007). "The Macroeconomic Effects of Oil Shocks: Why 
Are  the  2000s  So  Different  from  the  1970s?",  NBER  Working  Paper  13368.  Cambridge, 
Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, September. 
Corrado,  Carol,  and  Lawrence  Slifman  (1999).  "Decomposition  of  Productivity  and  Unit 
Costs", American Economic Review, vol. 89 (May, Papers and Proceedings), pp. 328-32.  
Corrado,  Carol,  Paul  Lengermann,  J.  Joseph  Beaulieu,  and  Eric  J.  Bartelsman  (2007). 
"Sectoral  Productivity  in  the  United  States:  Recent  Developments  and  the  Role  of  IT", 
German Economic Review, vol. 8 (May), pp. 188-210. 
Corrado,  Carol,  Paul  Lengermann,  and  Larry  Slifman  (2007).  "The  Contribution  of 
Multinational Corporations to U.S. Productivity Growth, 1977-2000", Finance and Economics 
Discussion  Series  2007-21.  Washington:  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, November. 
Doms,  Mark  E.,  and  J.  Bradford  Jensen  (1998).  "Productivity,  Skill,  and  Wage  Effects  of 
Multinational Corporations in the United States", in D. Woodward and D. Nigh, eds., Foreign 
Ownership and the Consequences of Direct Investment in the United States: Beyond Us and 
Them. Westport, Conn.: Quorum Books, pp. 49-68. 
Energy Information Administration (2002). "Petroleum Chronology of Events 1970-2000". 
_________ (2008a). "Cushing, OK WTI Spot Price FOB", (accessed May 27, 2008). 
_________  (2008b).  "Table  1.7:  Energy  Consumption  per  Real  Dollar  of  Gross  Domestic 
Product", Monthly Energy Review (May). 
Jorgenson, Dale W., Mun S. Ho, and Kevin J. Stiroh (2007). "A Retrospective Look at the 
U.S. Productivity Growth Resurgence", Staff Report 277. New York: Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York, February. 
6 
 BIS Review 70/2008
Kurz, Christopher J. (2006). "Outstanding Outsourcers: A Firm- and Plant-Level Analysis of 
Production  Sharing",  Finance  and  Economics  Discussion  Series  2006-04.  Washington: 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March. 
Oliner,  Stephen  D.,  Daniel  E.  Sichel,  and  Kevin  J.  Stiroh  (2007).  "Explaining  a  Productive 
Decade", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2007 (no. 1), pp. 81-152. 
Orphanides,  Athanasios  (2003).  "The  Quest  for  Prosperity  Without  Inflation",  Journal  of 
Monetary Economics, vol. 50 (April), pp. 633-63. 
BIS Review 70/2008 
 7
