Lucas Papademos: Economic outlook in the euro area 
Statement  by  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
2008 Asia-Europe (ASEM) Finance Ministers’ Meeting, Jeju, Korea, 16 June 2008. 
 Introduction  
It is a great pleasure for me to participate in the ASEM Finance Ministers’ Meeting. In my 
statement, I will focus on the economic outlook in the euro area, with special emphasis on 
inflation prospects and risk, the monetary policy stance of the European Central Bank (ECB), 
recent  financial  market  developments  and  our  assessment  of  the  outlook  for  financial 
stability. 
Economic outlook 
The pace of economic activity in the euro area is expected to decelerate in 2008 and 2009 
from the robust 2.7% GDP growth rate recorded last year. The Eurosystem staff projections, 
published on 5 June 2008, foresee annual real GDP growth in the range between 1.5% and 
2.1% in 2008, and between 1.0% and 2.0% in 2009. Recent growth forecasts for the euro 
area  by  the  European  Commission,  international  institutions  and  organisations  and  the 
private sector are broadly in line with the Eurosystem staff projections. 
All in all, our latest assessment, based on the macroeconomic projections produced by the 
staff  of  the  Eurosystem,  and  our  analysis  of  the  most  recent  information,  from  data  and 
survey indicators, confirms the expectation of moderate but ongoing economic growth. 
Both  domestic  and  foreign  demand  are  expected  to  support  GDP  growth  in  2008.  The 
resilience  of  global  economic  growth,  which  benefits  from  the  robust  economic  activity  in 
emerging market economies, should support euro area exports. Domestic factors, however, 
are  expected  to  contribute  the  largest  part  of euro  area  growth  in  both  2008  and  2009.  In 
particular,  non-residential  private  investment  is  expected  to  provide  support  to  economic 
activity, as capacity utilisation remains high and profitability has been sustained in the non-
financial corporate sector. 
This outlook for economic growth is surrounded by continuing high uncertainty and downside 
risks  prevail.  The  financial  market  turmoil  could  have  a  more  adverse  impact  on  the  real 
economy  than  currently  anticipated.  In  addition,  further  unanticipated  increases  in  energy 
and food prices could have dampening effects on consumption and investment. There are 
also risks stemming from the possible emergence of protectionist pressures and from the still 
large, though declining, global imbalances.  
Turning to price developments, the outlook for price stability in the euro area has deteriorated 
and the risks to this outlook remain on the upside and they have increased. Annual inflation 
has remained above 3% over the past seven months and it is estimated to have increased to 
3.6%  in  May  2008,  reaching  again  the  ten-year  peak  recorded  in  March.  These 
developments  confirm  the  persistence  of  strong  upward  pressures  on  euro  area  inflation, 
which are largely the result of the sharp increases in energy and food prices at the global 
level in the previous months. 
Domestic inflationary pressures have also intensified. They partly reflect the accumulation of 
price pressures, also driven by higher energy and commodity prices in the initial stages of 
the production chain that have not yet reached the consumer level. Producer price inflation 
rose  to  a  new  peak  at  6.1%  in  April.  Moreover,  after  a  period  of  contained  labour  cost 
increases, an acceleration of wage growth was visible in the first quarter of 2008. The pick-
up of wage growth could continue in 2008 in an economic environment characterised by tight 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 1
labour  markets,  high  capacity  utilisation  and  persistently  high  inflation  involving  the  risk  of 
second-round effects.  
According to the June Eurosystem staff projections, average annual inflation is expected to 
be between 3.2% and 3.6% in 2008 and between 1.8% and 3.0% in 2009. These projections 
are based on the assumptions that external price pressures will diminish over the projection 
horizon, in line with futures prices for oil and agricultural commodities, and that there will be 
no broad-based second-round effects on wages. Given these assumptions, it is likely that the 
annual inflation rate will remain above 3% for a protracted period of time before it moderates 
only gradually in 2009. 
The  medium-term  outlook  for  prices  continues  to  be  subject  to  a  number  of  upside  risks. 
These  risks  include,  on  the  external  side,  possible  further  increases  in  energy  and  food 
prices beyond those foreseen thus far, and, on the domestic side, the risk of broad-based 
second-round effects in wage and price setting. This latter risk is greater in market segments 
with low competition, such as parts of the services sector, where the pricing power of firms 
may  prove  stronger  than  currently expected.  Moreover,  higher-than-expected  wage  growth 
may emerge, taking into account high capacity utilisation, tight labour market conditions and 
the elevated inflation perceptions and expectations of consumers. In addition, the continuing 
very vigorous money and credit growth confirms the assessment that upside risks to price 
stability prevail over the medium and longer term. 
Monetary policy 
Against  this  background  –  the  prospect  of  stronger  and  more  protracted  inflationary 
pressures  than  previously  envisaged  and  the  assessment  of  the  increased  upside  risks  to 
price stability over the medium term – the Governing Council indicated that it is in a state of 
heightened alertness and ready to act in a firm and timely manner to prevent second-round 
effects and ensure that risks to price stability over the medium term do not materialise. The 
Governing Council also emphasised its commitment to maintain price stability in the medium 
term  and  its  strong  determination  to  secure  a  firm  anchoring  of  medium  and  long-term 
inflation expectations in line with price stability. 
Financial markets 
Let me now turn to financial market developments and the financial stability outlook in the 
euro area. The financial system of the euro area is still undergoing further adjustment as the 
processes of risk repricing and de-leveraging continue. The stresses on the financial system 
have  persisted  longer  and  they  have  become  broader  and  deeper  than  anticipated  six 
months ago.  
Although there have been some signs of easing tensions in certain markets since mid-March, 
elevated pressures remain in others, notably in the term money markets of major currencies. 
Moreover, high uncertainty surrounds the future dynamics of property prices, the magnitude 
of possible further asset valuation write-downs by financial institutions and the effects of the 
market turmoil on the broader economy.  
Over the past two months, money, credit and other financial markets appear to be sending 
mixed  signals.  The  term  money  market  spreads  between  euro  deposit  and  EONIA  swap 
rates  have  remained  high  and  close  to  record  levels,  for  maturities  from  three  to  twelve 
months. Tensions in the term money market continue to be a global phenomenon. Currently, 
the spreads between three-month deposit and overnight-indexed swap rates are virtually the 
same in the euro, US dollar and pound sterling money markets. 
In  the  credit  markets,  greater  risk  awareness  by  banks  and  increased  bank  funding  costs 
have been reflected in the significant and general further tightening of lending standards in 
the euro area, the UK and the US. At the same time, credit default swap (CDS) indices in 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2008
Europe  and  the  US  have  declined  since  mid-March  (though  recently  they  have  increased 
somewhat), the availability of bank credit to households and non-financial corporations in the 
euro  area  has  not  been  significantly  affected  by  the  financial  market  turbulence,  and 
corporate  bond  spreads  have  narrowed  Moreover,  the  functioning  of  the  leveraged  loan 
market is showing some tentative signs of improvement.  
With regard to the impact of the market correction on bank profits, the write-downs disclosed 
by many euro area financial institutions went far beyond the expectations of late last year. 
Although  major  euro  area  banking  groups  did  report  large  write-downs,  these  were 
significantly smaller than the income losses disclosed by their European peers from outside 
the  euro  area  and  by  large  US  banking  groups.  More  write-downs  are  expected  to  be 
revealed  in  2008  and  these  expectations  have  been  broadly  confirmed  by  the  financial 
results reported for the first quarter of 2008. 
The  disclosure  of  the  full-year  2007  financial  results  of  euro  area  major  banking  groups 
revealed that the subprime-related turmoil has had a material impact on their profitability, but 
their capital buffers remained largely intact in 2007. Looking ahead, it can be expected that 
the profitability of these institutions will be adversely affected this year as the process of de-
leveraging continues and as spillovers to asset markets and the real economy materialise. 
The  expected  slowdown  in  profit  growth  is  a  consequence  of  possible  further  valuation 
losses, increased funding costs, as well as declining non-interest income from securitisation 
and capital market activities.  
Financial stability outlook 
With  regard  to  the  outlook  for  financial  stability,  according  to  our  assessment  (recently 
published in the June 2008 edition of the ECB Financial Stability Review) the risks to euro 
area financial system stability, on balance, have increased in 2008. And, indeed, since the 
beginning of the year, some of the risks previously identified have materialised. Conditions in 
the US housing market have further deteriorated, valuations losses endured by large banks 
were  larger  than  anticipated  at  the  end  of  2007,  and  banks  have  tightened  their  lending 
standards significantly.  
Looking  ahead,  the  risk  of  de-leveraging  by  euro  area  large  banks  of  sufficient  severity  to 
induce  a  significant  shortage  of  credit  in  the  economy  appears  rather  low.  However,  the 
financial stability outlook remains highly uncertain and depends, among other things, on the 
following three factors: First, how conditions in the US housing market develop; second, how 
banks respond to a much more challenging operating environment; and third, the extent to 
which  initiatives  and  measures  aimed  at  restoring  confidence  and  strengthening  financial 
system resilience are eventually implemented. 
It  is  probable  that  the  adjustment  process  within  the  financial  system will  be  protracted  as 
banks  continue  to  strengthen  their  liquidity  and  capital  positions.  This  means  that  balance 
sheet expansion is likely to be somewhat curtailed in the period ahead. So far, however, the 
availability  of  bank  credit  to  households  and  non-financial  corporations  has  not  been 
significantly affected by the financial market turbulence.  
Given  the  heightened  uncertainty  and  an  environment  in  which  balance  sheet  conditions 
could  change  unexpectedly,  vigilance  by  financial  institutions  and  market  participants  is  of 
the essence and those with relevant exposures will need to step up their efforts to effectively 
manage the risks that may lie ahead. I would like to conclude on a positive note by recalling 
that the losses disclosed so far by the financial institutions affected by the turmoil are mostly 
mark-to-market  losses  on  hard-to-value  assets.  If  the  outturns  for  implied  credit  losses 
ultimately prove less severe than currently expected, then it cannot be ruled out that those 
financial  firms  still  holding  these  assets  will  see  some  offsetting  valuation  gains  in  their 
portfolios. 
BIS Review 77/2008 
 3
