Ben S Bernanke: Addressing weaknesses in the global financial markets 
– the Report of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  World  Affairs  Council  of  Greater  Richmond's  Virginia  Global 
Ambassador Award Luncheon, Richmond, Virginia, 10 April 2008. 
 In recent months, the Federal Reserve has been intensely focused on the continuing strains 
in financial markets. Healthy, well-functioning financial markets are essential to sustainable 
growth.  In  particular,  much  experience  shows  that  economies  cannot  perform  at  their  full 
potential  when  financial  conditions  are  such  as  to  restrict  the  supply  of  credit  to  sound 
borrowers.  We  are  addressing  these  financial  strains  and  their  potential  economic 
consequences with a number of tools, including the provision of extra liquidity to the system 
and reductions in our target for the federal funds rate.  
Even  as  we  have  worked  to  resolve  the  current  crisis,  however,  the  Federal  Reserve  has 
also  been  part  of  a  national  and  international  effort  to  draw  at  least  some  preliminary 
conclusions  about  the  sources  of  the  current  turmoil  as  well  as  the  implications  for  public 
policy.  In  my  remarks  today  I  will  discuss  some  of  these  conclusions  and,  in  the  process, 
identify some measures that should be taken to strengthen the global financial system in light 
of the recent experience. 
In the United States, policymakers' efforts to identify the sources of the financial turmoil and 
the  appropriate  public-  and  private-sector  responses  have  been  coordinated  through  the 
President's  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets  (PWG),  chaired  by  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury.  The  group's  other  principals  include  the  heads  of  the  Securities  and  Exchange 
Commission  (SEC),  the  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission,  and  the  Board  of 
Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System.  With  the  support  of  the  staff  of  the  respective 
agencies, the PWG began to address these issues last fall, as the severity of the financial 
turmoil  became  increasingly  apparent;  in  mid-March,  we  issued  a  brief  statement  outlining 
our  tentative  conclusions  and  policy  recommendations.1  At  the  international  level,  the 
Financial Stability Forum (FSF), whose membership consists of central bankers, regulators, 
and  finance  ministers  from  many  countries,  including  the  United  States,  will  also  soon 
release  a  report  on  the causes  of  and  potential  responses to  the  turmoil.  I  describe  these 
policy development processes to underscore the cooperative nature of the enterprise, both 
among  the  U.S.  authorities  and  between  the  United  States  and  other countries.  Given  the 
global nature of our financial markets and institutions, international cooperation is essential to 
making the regulatory and supervisory structure more effective. As I will discuss, many of our 
recommendations involve actions to be taken by market participants, and so their buy-in and 
cooperation is essential as well. We have consulted extensively with market participants on 
these issues and will continue to do so. 
As you may know, the Department of the Treasury recently issued a blueprint for regulatory 
reform in the United States. The focus of the Treasury's work is on the appropriate design 
principles for our regulatory system – including the system's structure and governance, the 
appropriate  scope  of  regulators'  responsibilities,  and  how  those  responsibilities  should  be 
allocated across agencies – rather than on the specific issues raised by the current crisis. 
Given its focus on fundamental reform, the recommendations of the Treasury blueprint are 
mostly intended to be undertaken in the longer term. In that respect, it is an important first 
                                                 
1   President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments 
(1.36 MB PDF)," March. 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 1
step,  and  we  look  forward  to  working  with  the  Congress  and  others  in  developing  a 
framework  that  modernizes  our  financial  and  regulatory  architecture.  The  analysis  of  the 
PWG  that  I  will  be  discussing  today  is  more  sharply  focused  on  recent  events,  and  its 
recommendations are intended to be part of the near-term and medium-term effort to restore 
more  normal  functioning  of  financial  markets  and  to  improve  the  operation  of  the  current 
system. 
Diagnosis 
Let me begin with the diagnosis of the causes of the crisis, focusing primarily on the U.S. 
case and the conclusions drawn by the PWG. 
Although many factors played a role, to a considerable extent the current problems arose in 
the implementation of the so-called originate-to-distribute approach to credit extension. The 
originate-to-distribute model breaks down the process of credit extension, from origination to 
the  ultimate  financing,  into  component  parts,  or  stages,  in  a  manner  reminiscent  of  how 
contemporary manufacturers distribute the stages of production across firms and locations. 
This  approach  has  had  considerable  benefits,  including  increased  access  of  small  and 
medium-sized borrowers to the broader capital markets, but pitfalls in its implementation are 
now evident.  
To  describe  how  the  originate-to-distribute  model  works,  let's  consider  a  simplified 
description of how a mortgage loan is made and financed within this framework. In the first 
stage  of  the  process,  the  originator  –  a  lender  or  a  broker  serving  as  a  lender's  agent  – 
extends  the  mortgage  loan  to  a  potential  homebuyer.  The  originator  is  responsible  for  the 
underwriting – that is, for ensuring that the borrower is creditworthy and that the terms of the 
mortgage appropriately reflect the risks of the transaction. In the next stage, the originator 
sells the mortgage to another financial institution, let's call it the packager, which combines 
the mortgage with many other loans to create a marketable security. (This process usually 
involves the creation of a separate legal vehicle, which holds the underlying mortgages or 
other assets and issues claims against itself. I will skip the technical details here. Sometimes 
the  originator  and  what  I  have  called  the  packager  are  the  same  institution.)  The  most 
straightforward  case  involves  combining  the  mortgage  with  other  mortgages  to  create  a 
mortgage-backed security (MBS); the owner (or owners) of an MBS has claims on the cash 
flows arising from the underlying mortgages. MBS are familiar financial instruments; indeed, 
the  government-sponsored  enterprises  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  have  been  creating 
and selling MBS for a long time, as have a number of other financial institutions. 
However, much more complex securities can also be created, backed for example by a mix 
of different types of loans or other assets combined with various guarantees or hedges; in 
recent  years  the  issuance  of  these  so-called  structured  credit  products  increased  sharply. 
Importantly, the newly created securities may be broken into pieces, or tranches, of varying 
seniority  and  credit  quality.  In  the  third  stage  of  the  originate-to-distribute  process,  these 
tranches are rated separately by one or more credit rating agencies, then sold to investors 
with  differing  preferences  for  risk  or  retained  by  the  lender.  In  principle,  the  originate-to-
distribute model spreads risk and reduces financing costs while affording borrowers greater 
access to capital. 
In  practice,  however,  problems  arose  in  recent  years  throughout  the  originate-to-distribute 
chain, resulting ultimately in a broad retreat from this model late last summer. First, at the 
point  of  origination,  underwriting  standards  became  increasingly  compromised.  The  best-
known  and  most  serious  case  is  that  of  subprime  mortgages,  mortgages  extended  to 
borrowers  with  weaker  credit  histories.  To  a  degree  that  increased  over  time,  these 
mortgages  were  often  poorly  documented  and  extended  with  insufficient  attention  to  the 
borrower's ability to repay. In retrospect, the breakdown in underwriting can be linked to the 
incentives that the originate-to-distribute model, as implemented in this case, created for the 
originators. Notably, the incentive structures sometimes often tied originator revenue to loan 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2008
volume, rather than to the quality of the loans being passed up the chain. Investors normally 
have the right to put loans that default quickly back to the originator, which should tend to 
apply  some  discipline  to  the  underwriting  process.  However,  in  the  recent  episode,  some 
originators had little capital at stake, reducing their exposure to the risk that the loans would 
perform poorly. 
So long as house prices were rising, subprime borrowers saw their home equity increase and 
were often able to refinance into more-sustainable mortgages. However, when house prices 
began  to  fall,  borrowers'  refinancing  options  disappeared  and  the  problems  with  subprime 
mortgage  underwriting  were  exposed.  Delinquency  rates  soared,  particularly  on  subprime 
mortgages with adjustable rates. Because subprime mortgages were frequently securitized, 
often  as  part  of  complex  structured  credit  products,  the  losses  associated  with  these 
delinquencies spread throughout the system.  
Although  subprime  mortgages  were  the  most  obvious  example,  the  loosening  of  credit 
standards and terms occurred more broadly, reflecting a general boom in credit markets that 
peaked and then reversed last summer. This boom was characterized by a general erosion 
of market discipline, underpricing of risk, and insufficient attention by investors to the quality 
or  riskiness  of  the  instruments  they  purchased.  For  example,  in  the  market  for  so-called 
leveraged loans, used to finance mergers or buyouts, investors showed themselves willing to 
purchase debt with few covenants or other protections.  
The PWG also concluded that investors often took insufficient care in evaluating the risks of 
structured credit products, in part because they over-relied on the evaluations provided by 
the credit rating agencies. Unfortunately, the methodologies and assumptions the agencies 
used  to  rate  many  credit  products  proved  faulty,  and  their  data  were  inadequate  (in  part 
because of the lack of extensive experience with these products). When rising delinquencies 
and losses on mortgages forced the agencies to sharply downgrade many structured credit 
products,  investors  lost  confidence  in  those  ratings  and  became  unwilling  to  provide  new 
funds. As financing disappeared, the markets for these products and for related investments, 
such as asset-backed commercial paper, seized up.  
Another factor that the PWG identified as contributing to the financial turmoil was weakness 
in the risk-management practices of large global financial institutions that created and held 
complex  credit  products.  As  demonstrated  by  comparative  studies  of 
institutions' 
performance, which we at the Federal Reserve conducted in concert with regulators both in 
the United States and abroad, some firms fell short in identifying and managing the risks they 
were taking. For example, some firms had not developed adequate capacity to measure their 
aggregate exposures to subprime credit risk across business lines, leaving them vulnerable 
to significant losses at the level of the entire firm. Thus, the spreading of risk that was one of 
the supposed benefits of the originate-to-distribute model proved to be much less extensive 
than many believed. The pullback of investors from structured credit products also imposed 
significant  liquidity  pressures  on  many  of  the  largest  financial  institutions,  which  were  left 
scrambling to fund instruments they could not sell or to meet contingent funding obligations 
for which they had not adequately planned. These weaknesses were particularly evident with 
respect  to  managing  risks  from  exposures  related  to  collateralized  debt  obligations,  off-
balance-sheet  conduits  that  issued  asset-backed  commercial  paper,  and  leveraged  loan 
syndications.  The  combination  of  unanticipated  losses,  which  reduced  capital,  and  severe 
liquidity pressures has significantly reduced the ability and willingness of some large financial 
institutions to extend fresh credit or to make markets, with adverse effects for the broader 
markets and for the economy. 
The originate-to-distribute model thus broke down at a number of key points, including at the 
stages  of  underwriting, credit  rating,  and  investor  due  diligence.  Financial  institutions  were 
caught,  in  some  cases,  by  inadequate  risk  management  and  liquidity  planning.  These 
problems notwithstanding, the originate-to-distribute model has proven effective in the past 
and with adequate repairs could be so again in the future. 
BIS Review 43/2008 
 3
Recommendations 
The PWG's recommendations flow logically from the problems that we identified. First, the 
weaknesses in the origination stage of the originate-to-distribute model must be corrected; 
no matter how elaborate and sophisticated, credit instruments can be no stronger than the 
underwriting that supports them. Market participants will not easily forget the lessons of the 
recent period, and so market discipline will help in this respect. I expect that, in the future, 
investors  will  be  eager  to  ensure  that  their  own  interests  and  those  of  the  originators  are 
better aligned, which should lead to more conservative and careful underwriting.  
But better consumer protections and disclosures, as well as greater supervisory scrutiny of 
the processes that originators follow and the incentives they face, are also needed. In the 
mortgage area, the PWG recommended action at both the federal and state levels, including, 
for  example,  stronger  nationwide  licensing  standards  for  mortgage  brokers  and  more 
consistent government oversight for all originators. In particular, the PWG recommended that 
the Federal Reserve use its authority to strengthen consumer protection rules and enhance 
required disclosures for mortgage originations.  
I  strongly  support  this  recommendation,  and  its  implementation  is  well  under  way. 
Specifically,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  used  its  authority  under  the  Home  Ownership  and 
Equity Protection Act to propose and seek comment on new rules that, for higher-cost loans, 
would  strengthen  consumer  protections.  The  rules  would  restrict  the  use  of  prepayment 
penalties  and  low-documentation  lending,  require  the  use  of  escrow  accounts  for  property 
taxes and homeowner's insurance, and ensure that lenders give sufficient consideration to 
borrowers'  ability  to  repay.  In  addition,  for  all  mortgage  loans,  we  have  proposed  rules 
regarding broker compensation methods and the ability of appraisers to provide judgments 
free  of  undue  influence,  as  well  as  rules  regarding  the  accuracy  of  advertisements  and 
solicitations for mortgage loans and the timeliness of required disclosures. We also plan to 
propose a revised set of required mortgage disclosures based on the results of a program of 
consumer testing already under way. We will monitor the effectiveness of the new rules and 
take  additional  steps  as  necessary.  To  strengthen  enforcement,  we  have  initiated  a  pilot 
program to improve the coordination among federal and state authorities in the examination 
of nonbank mortgage lenders. 
Another  problem  identified  by  the  PWG  was  the  inadequate  care  by  investors  in  their 
evaluations  of  securitized  credits,  particularly  the  more  complex  structured  securitizations. 
More transparency about the risks and other characteristics of securitized credits on the part 
of their sponsors would obviously help. But more generally, investors must take responsibility 
for  developing  independent  views  of  the  risks  of  these  instruments  and  not  rely  solely  on 
credit  ratings.  Some  investors,  such  as  public  pension  funds,  are  subject  to  government 
oversight,  and  in  these  instances,  the  PWG  will  look  to  their  government  overseers  to 
reinforce  implementation  of  stronger  due  diligence  practices.  When  investors  employ 
advisers, the mandates and incentives given to these advisers should be structured so as to 
induce  a  more  careful  and  nuanced  evaluation  of  the  risks  and  returns  of  alternative 
products. 
Improving  the  performance  of  the  credit  rating  agencies  is  another  key  priority.  As  I 
mentioned,  analytical  weaknesses  and  inadequate  data  underlay  many  of  the  problems  in 
the  ratings  of  structured  finance  products.  Beyond  improving  their  methods,  however,  the 
credit rating agencies would serve investors better by providing greater transparency. Credit 
rating  agencies  should,  for  example,  publish  sufficient  information  about  the  assumptions 
underlying  their  rating  methodologies  and  models  so  that  users  can  understand  how  a 
particular rating was determined. It is also important for the credit rating agencies to clarify 
that a given rating applied to a structured credit product may have a different meaning than 
the  same  rating  applied  to  a  corporate  bond  or  a  municipal  security.  Indeed,  some  have 
suggested  that  the  agencies  use  different  rating  nomenclatures  for  different  types  of 
products. Transparency about methods should also help to reduce concerns about conflicts 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2008
of interest that might arise from the fact that issuers of securities pay the rating agencies for 
their work in rating those securities.  
The credit rating agencies themselves clearly appreciate that concerns about the quality of 
ratings and potential conflicts of interest represent a fundamental challenge to their business 
model,  and  they  have  begun  to  address  these  issues.  The  SEC,  which  has  regulatory 
responsibility for the credit rating agencies, is conducting a broad review of issues regarding 
potential conflicts of interest at the rating agencies and is likely to identify further measures 
that should be implemented.  
As I noted earlier, the turmoil in financial markets has also revealed significant weaknesses 
in the risk-management practices of some large, globally active financial institutions; these 
weaknesses have exacerbated the problems in the markets by compromising the abilities of 
these  key  firms  to  absorb  risk  and  serve  as  intermediaries.  Prudential  supervisors  in  the 
affected financial markets began joint work late last summer to identify common deficiencies 
on  which  they  and  the  firms  should  focus.  The  supervisors  concluded  that  the  firms  that 
suffered  the  most  significant  losses  tended  to  exhibit  common  problems,  including 
insufficiently  close  monitoring  of  off-balance-sheet  exposures,  inadequate  attention  to  the 
implications for the firm as a whole of risks taken in individual business lines, dependence on 
a narrow range of risk measures, deficiencies in liquidity planning, and inadequate attention 
to  valuation  issues.  To  be  sure,  firms  varied  in  the  degree  to  which  they  were  subject  to 
these weaknesses, with better performance on these dimensions generally being reflected in 
better financial performance. 
Correcting  these  weaknesses  is,  first  and  foremost,  the  responsibility  of  the  firms' 
managements  and  they  have  powerful  incentives  to  do  so.  But  prudential  supervisors, 
including  the  Federal  Reserve,  must  also  review  their  existing  policies  and  guidance  to 
identify areas where changes could help firms strengthen their risk management – a process 
that is already under way. Two areas of focus in this review will be capital and liquidity, the 
principal  buffers  that  firms  have  against  unexpected  shocks.  Regulators  should  adopt 
policies  that  lead  financial  institutions  to  hold  capital  and  liquidity  cushions  commensurate 
with their firm-wide exposures to adverse market events. The PWG also will be asking U.S. 
regulators, working together and through international groups such as the Basel Committee 
on  Banking  Supervision,  to  enhance  their  guidance  in  a  variety  of  areas  in  which 
weaknesses were identified. I expect, for example, to see work forthcoming on liquidity risk 
management, concentration risk management, stress testing, governance of the risk-control 
framework, and management information systems. 
Off-balance-sheet vehicles have been singled out for attention because of the pressures they 
have put on financial firms' capital and liquidity during the current episode. The PWG made a 
number  of  recommendations  on  this  topic,  including  urging  regulators  to  require  financial 
institutions to provide more detailed and comprehensive disclosures about off-balance-sheet 
commitments. The PWG also recommended that the Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(FASB)  evaluate  the  need  for  further  modifications  to  accounting  standards  related  to 
consolidation and securitization, and that FASB and the International Accounting Standards 
Board achieve more rapid international convergence of accounting standards in this area. 
Implications and conclusions 
This  quick  review  of  the  recommendations  of  the  President's  Working  Group  on  Financial 
Markets does not do justice to the many issues we considered in our discussions and in the 
work of the staff. But I think it does give you a flavor of the diagnosis and recommendations. 
Implementing these recommendations here in the United States, as well as working with our 
international  partners  to  implement  compatible  and  complementary  measures  abroad,  will 
have many benefits.  
BIS Review 43/2008 
 5
Narrowly,  these  recommendations  should  help  to  improve  and  strengthen  the  originate-to-
distribute  model,  which,  despite  recent  problems,  seems  likely  to  remain  an  important 
component of our system of credit provision. In the vision set forth by the PWG, however, 
this model will be rebuilt on a foundation that includes higher standards of underwriting and 
due  diligence,  a  closer  alignment  of  the  incentives  of  originators  and  investors,  greater 
transparency  and  simplicity  in  the  design  of  credit  instruments  and  in  the  determination  of 
credit ratings, and better risk and liquidity management by financial institutions that develop 
and  hold  these  instruments.  More  broadly,  these  recommendations  should  moderate  the 
likelihood  and  severity  of  future  financial  shocks  and  enable  market  participants  to  better 
withstand shocks when they occur. 
Importantly, the PWG's approach relies on both market and regulatory discipline, not just one 
or  the  other.  With  respect  to  market  discipline,  in  light  of  recent  experience,  investors  are 
unlikely to rely solely on credit ratings in the future but will instead require more and better 
information from originators and sponsors of credit products. Credit rating agencies will also 
be  tougher about  the information  they  demand  from  securitizers,  and  I expect  they  will  be 
more skeptical about especially complex and opaque instruments. To support these efforts to 
strengthen  market  discipline,  the  PWG  called  for  the  private  sector  to  establish  several 
working groups to make recommendations concerning best practices in key areas. 
Regulation  complements  market  discipline  –  for  example,  by  requiring  disclosures  that 
improve  the  ability  of  consumers  to  shop  and  of  investors  to  evaluate  risks,  by  providing 
protections 
less-sophisticated  market  participants  (such  as  subprime  mortgage 
borrowers),  and  by  requiring  that  financial  institutions  meet  high  standards  in  their 
management  of  risk.  We  regulators  must  act  to  ensure  that  our  policies  and  supervisory 
procedures are consistent with the objectives of improving the originate-to-distribute system 
and  strengthening  risk  management  more  broadly.  We  will  review  some  aspects  of  our 
regulations  and  strengthen  our  supervisory  guidance  and  disclosure  requirements  in  key 
areas,  such  as  those  relating  to  securitizations  and  off-balance-sheet  vehicles.  We  will 
review  our  own  use  of  credit  ratings  as  a  risk  metric.  And  we  must  be  sure  that  we  are 
working  effectively  with  both  the  private  sector  and  other  domestic  and  international 
regulators to help the system function better. 
The  process  of  implementing  the  PWG's  implementations  will  be  challenging,  in  no  small 
measure because of the continuing pressures of short-term crisis management. However, we 
do not have the luxury of waiting for markets to stabilize before we think about the future. 
Indeed,  many  of  the  necessary  changes  that  have  been  identified,  including  increasing 
transparency, 
improving  risk  management,  and  attaining  better  coordination  among 
regulators,  could  provide  important  support  to  the  process  of  normalizing  our  financial 
markets. 
to 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2008
