Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Dinner speech at the 8th meeting of the 
T2S Advisory Group 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  8th  meeting  of  the  T2S  Advisory  Group,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
15 May 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Before I start my speech, let me thank Clearstream for hosting the 8th meeting of the T2S 
Advisory  Group  and  Deutsche  Bundesbank  for  providing  a  splendid  dinner  tonight.  Two 
years ago we were in a position which was described by Hermann Hesse, a favourite poet of 
my youth. “In order to achieve what is possible, you have to try the impossible.” 
I am very pleased to be invited to speak tonight because it gives me the opportunity to thank 
the  AG  and  its  sub-groups  for  the  extraordinary  work  you  have  done.  A  year  ago  my  first 
speech at the AG meeting in July 2007 was entitled “T2S – A long way to go”. Although there 
still is a long way to go, a lot has been achieved since July 2007 and a concrete solution is 
presented on the drawing board.  
I think that we largely owe this success to you; let me therefore focus my remarks tonight on 
the AG and its sub-groups, and express my gratitude to all of you, whether or not present in 
this room. And let me also tell you how privileged we feel in the Governing Council to have 
such an outstanding group of experts as our advisors – this is extremely re-assuring when 
we  have  to  take  decisions  on  the  future  design  of  TARGET2-Securities.  Therefore,  I  am 
confident that each Member of the Governing Council would be happy that I offer my thanks 
also on his behalf. 
My thanks are threefold. First, I want to thank the institutions represented in the AG or the 
Technical  Groups  for  delegating  some  of  their  best  people  to  help  to  shape  the  future  of 
securities settlement in Europe. Second, my thanks go to the members of the AG, the TGs 
as well as the National User Groups, for all their time and effort devoted to this project. I think 
that it is no exaggeration to say that without their valuable input provided under a very tight 
timetable,  the  delivery  of  the  URD  would  not  have  been  possible!  Third,  I  am  particularly 
grateful  to  the  less  visible  people,  the  staff  and  colleagues  in  the  background  that  have 
analysed  and  prepared  the  sometimes  very  complex  issues  and  mass  of  technical  detail 
involved in the T2S user requirements. 
If  I  were  to  issue  an  employer’s  reference  for  members  of  the  Advisory  Group  –  which 
fortunately  I  do  not  have  to  do  because  I  expect  you  to  continue  to  support  our  work!  –  I 
would  write  that  the  AG  has  fulfilled  its  mandate,  which  is  the  delivery  of  the  user 
requirements, to our complete satisfaction. The same holds true for the six Technical Groups 
which  were,  and  here  I  quote  from  their  mandate,  “responsible  for  preparing  proposals  on 
specific aspects of the user requirements”. Thinking about the 800 pages of the URD, this is 
a  bit  of  an  understatement!  Among  the  respondents  to  the  public  consultation,  there  were 
many that congratulated the Eurosystem on the quality of the user requirements. Obviously 
the compliment should mainly go to the AG and it shows that the satisfaction with the URD is 
not just our own impression but that it is widespread in the market. 
My  special  thanks  go  to  the  EC  which  shares  with  us  the  same  objective  –  a  better 
integrated, more efficient and safe infrastructure. 
BIS Review 64/2008 
 1
Many  of  you  have  attended  the  post-trading  conference  in  April  2008.  There  the  image  of 
“plumbing” was heavily used. To be honest, I like the other part in the title of Peter Norman’s 
book  much  better,  which  is  about  “visions”.  What  we  need  are  indeed  people  that  are 
“Plumbers and Visionaries” at the same time, and I think that without this ability to have a 
clear vision of the future T2S world, which I feel is strongly represented in the AG, the user 
requirements  would  not  have  been  possible.  Therefore  I  am  very  confident  that  as  we 
undertake the specification phase, the AG will live up to our expectations, which is mainly to 
be a guardian of the URD, to steer the work on T2S-related harmonisation and to advise us 
on a host of other important issues, such as pricing. 
Before that, there are big challenges ahead of us. As you all know this is a key period, with 
the FSC, the EFC and the ECOFIN discussing T2S and then the CSDs and the Governing 
Council “taking their decisions”. Here I want to express my special thanks to the CSDs, which 
have shown a constructive attitude despite the fact that they are challenged by this project 
and that on some topics some tension might remain. Time will help to improve our common 
understanding, and to achieve mutual recognition of how best to deliver efficient, safe and 
cheap settlement solutions for Europe. 
Let me close my remarks by telling you a little story from China that might be good to keep in 
mind for future phases of the T2S project:  
Once  upon  a  time  there  was  a  host  who  offered  his  guests  a  pot  of  wine.  As  there  didn’t 
seem  to  be  enough  for  everyone,  one  guest  suggested  that  each  of  them  should  draw  a 
snake on the ground and the first guest to finish the snake should drink the pot. One guest 
finished his snake and was about to start drinking, when he said: “I can add some feet to it.” 
While he was still drawing, another guest finished his snake, grabbed the pot and drank the 
wine, whereas the guest who had added feet to the snake didn’t get any wine at all. 
To come back to T2S, I believe that a big challenge in the next phase will be to resist the 
temptation to “add feet” to T2S in the sense of too much specific features and thereby spoil it 
all. Let us take the Chinese story as a warning and let us continue to keep T2S lean, even if 
this implies compromises and sacrifices! This is the only piece of advice I want to give to “my 
advisors”, with whom I am very, very satisfied. 
I hope that all the pieces of the puzzle of opinions, letters of intents and decisions will be put 
together in the next few weeks so that we get the “green light” for our future cooperation with 
you. 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2008
