George Provopoulos: International financial turmoil and its impact on the 
Greek economy 
Key remarks by Mr George Provopoulos, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the meeting 
with  the  Presidency  and  Members  of  the  Hellenic  Federation  of  Enterprises,  Athens, 
14 July 2008. 
 The international financial system 
It will take some time until normality is fully restored... 
1.  The  international  financial  turmoil,  which  began  almost  a  year  ago,  is  still  ongoing  and 
continues  to  affect  financial  markets  and  macroeconomic  aggregates.  Extreme  situations 
have been avoided, thanks to the action taken by major central banks (in the form of fine-
tuning  operations  to  restore  normal  liquidity  conditions)  and  by  governments,  in  particular 
those of the United States and the United Kingdom, aimed at averting the risk of a broader 
systemic crisis. 
2. However, it remains uncertain how long it will take before credit markets return to 
normal  conditions.  Τhis  continued  uncertainty  is  reflected  in,  at  times,  strong  tensions  in 
money and credit markets (which are more sensitive to risk factors– whenever these appear) 
and  in  equity  markets  (where  there  are  occasional  swings  of  investors'  risk  aversion  and, 
thus,  liquidity  preference,  as  well  as  of  their  uncertainty  regarding  the  macroeconomic 
outlook of the United States or other countries). 
3. Due to globalisation, uncertainty in the global economy also affected the Greek economy 
and the economies of the wider SE European region, although these economies have proved 
quite resilient. 
Impact on the real economy: 
Despite the slowdown, the economic fundamentals of the euro area are sound. 
Greece needs to intensify, rather than simply not relax, efforts to address structural 
weaknesses and macroeconomic imbalances… 
1.  The  uncertainty  surrounding  the  global  economic  outlook  remains  higher  than  usual.  It 
seems that the adverse effects of the financial turmoil on world economic activity will 
be stronger and more protracted than initially thought. This is the case in particular with 
the US economy (where the housing crisis is serious and is spilling over to other sectors). 
Any prolongation or deepening of the economic slowdown in the United States could have 
repercussions on the euro area and thereby on the Greek economy. 
2. I should clarify that by "uncertainty" I mean the possibility that downside risks to the growth 
projections  made  until  recently  could  materialise.  According  to  these  projections  made  by 
international  organisations,  the  growth  rates  of  the  global  economy  and  of  the  European 
economy are slowing down, but growth is continuing, despite the fact that a small number of 
euro area countries recorded zero or negative GDP growth in the first or the second quarter 
of 2008. 
3.  According  to  available  projections,  while  some  downward  revision  during  the  next  two 
months cannot be excluded, growth rates should remain positive in 2008, of the order of 
1.5-2.1% in the euro area and 3.4-3.5% in Greece. In both cases, exports and domestic 
demand will remain the main drivers of growth, although their contribution to growth will be 
smaller than in 2007. However, in spite of the shocks experienced during the last twelve 
months, the economic fundamentals of the euro area as a whole remain sound. 
BIS Review 93/2008 
 1
4.  As  far  as  Greece  is  concerned,  the  adverse  international  environment  makes  it 
imperative  to 
intensify,  rather  than  simply  not  relax,  efforts  to  address  the 
macroeconomic imbalances and structural weaknesses which are reflected in: 
- 
- 
- 
- 
the large current account deficit; 
the still high public debt-to-GDP ratio; 
the persistent inflation differential vis-à-vis the euro area as a whole; and 
the unemployment rate, which despite its decline remains relatively high. 
The increase in the world prices of oil and food commodities 
This increase presents a major, but not unprecedented, challenge. 
This time we have to deal with the challenge in a correct and, above all, timely manner, 
ensuring that it does not trigger a second round of endogenous, broadly-based 
inflationary pressures. 
Targeted relief of economically weaker groups must be prioritised. 
This will require a brave effort from all parties involved, enterprises and households 
alike, to adapt to the new conditions. 
We must not repeat the painful mistakes of the past. 
from 
the  households  and  enterprises  of  commodity-importing  countries 
1.  Adding  to  the  credit-related  macroeconomic  uncertainties  are  those  that  arise  from  the 
possibility of further increases in the world prices of oil and other raw materials as well as 
food. 
2. All of us, i.e. policy makers and social partners, have a duty to make sure that the 
fundamentals  of  the  Greek  economy  improve  and  that  heightened  macroeconomic 
risks do not materialise. As our economy now faces the effects of exogenous and to some 
extent temporary shocks, it is of the utmost importance to ensure that the adverse effects of 
domestic  factors  –  i.e.  the  macroeconomic  imbalances  and  structural  weaknesses  that  I 
mentioned earlier – on our medium-term prospects of output, employment and incomes are 
contained.  Should  we  fail,  hard  times  for  all  of  us  will  last  longer,  while  most  of  the 
burden will be shouldered by the most vulnerable, economically weaker social groups. 
3. Increases in the world prices of oil and other commodities (in particular food) are, 
for  the  countries  importing  these  commodities,  a  type  of  compulsory  levy  or  tax  in 
favour of commodity-exporting countries. In other words, it is an unavoidable transfer of 
income 
to 
commodity-exporting  countries.  This  transfer  reflects  a  shift  in  relative  prices  at  the  global 
level.  Neither  households  nor  enterprises  can  ever  make  up  for  this  loss  of  income, 
therefore efforts to pass the cost on to each other only serve to ultimately aggravate 
the adverse consequences for all parties involved. This is the lesson we have learnt from 
the  oil  shocks  of  the  1970s  and  from  the  ensuing  adventures  of  countries  that  failed  to 
recognise this hard reality in time. 
4. The mistakes made when we were facing the first two oil shocks (i.e. the relaxation, 
of  fiscal,  monetary  and  incomes  policies  in  the  1970s  and  the  1980s)  must  not  be 
repeated.  Let  me  recall,  for  those  who  have  not  experienced  or  have  forgotten  those 
episodes,  that  inflation  (in  Greece)  had  exceeded  33%  by  early  1974  and  remained  at 
double-digit levels throughout the next twenty years (until 1994). During that period, the fiscal 
deficit also reached double-digit levels as a percentage of GDP, and debt, which has been 
accumulating ever since, will take a long time before it can be repaid. Lending rates, which at 
the time of the first oil shock were administratively set, soared during the gradual interest rate 
liberalisation (1984-1993) to almost 30% (specifically, interest rates on short-term lending to 
businesses ranged between 27.5% and 29.5% in 1990-1994). These facts should be kept in 
mind when we decide on our actions and responses today. 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2008
5.  Priority  should  initially  be  given  to  alleviating  the  impact  of  the  oil  shock  on  the 
more  vulnerable  social  strata.  In  Greece,  this  can  and  must  be  achieved  through 
targeted interventions and in a manner that would not jeopardise fiscal prospects. At 
the same time, business firms and households should realise that the irrecoverable losses of 
purchasing power entailed by higher oil and other commodity prices can be effectively offset 
in the long run only through policy interventions and initiatives, mainly by the government and 
by  businesses,  aimed  at  strengthening  productivity  and  the  forces  of  competition  in  all 
markets. 
6.  Of  course,  apart  from  the  structural  factors  that  determine  the  growth  prospects  of 
productivity  and  of  real  incomes,  the  establishment  of  conditions  of  price  stability  in  the 
medium  term  can  also  make  a  crucial  contribution.  Actually,  achieving  and  securing  price 
stability over the medium term is the primary objective of the monetary policy conducted by 
the ECB, according to its Statute. 
Monetary policy in the euro area 
Monetary policy in the euro area will remain fully committed to the mandate, the 
institutional responsibilities and the primary objective entrusted to the ECB by the 320 
million of European citizens. 
Following the recent increase in the ECB interest rates, the rise in medium-term 
inflation expectations among credit market participants came to a halt. 
Business firms and consumers can be assured that the ECB will not allow second- 
round inflationary pressures to threaten price stability in the medium term. The ECB 
does not make a pre-commitment on the future level of its interest rates. It takes into 
account a comprehensive set of information available at any given time and decides on 
the basis of its current assessment of prevailing risks to price stability over the medium  
term. 
1. In an economic environment like the present one, the only effective contribution that 
monetary  policy  can  make  to  the  cause  of  economic  growth  is  through  its  firm 
commitment  to  the  objective  of  price  stability  in  the  medium  term.  I  emphasise  the 
words  "in  the  medium  term",  given  that  monetary  policy  cannot  offset  the  short-term 
fluctuations  of  inflation  around  its  medium-term  trend  level  which  are  due  to  exogenous 
factors such as developments in world prices of oil and other commodities. 
2. What monetary policy can and must do is ensure that inflation in the medium term 
remains  consistent  with  promoting  economic  growth  and  job  creation.  To  ensure 
achievement of this goal, monetary policy must above all ensure that exogenous inflationary 
pressures do not trigger second-round effects, through firms' price-setting behaviour, wage 
agreements or other developments that anticipate a rise in inflation over the medium term. 
Such phenomena turn what is a temporary problem into a permanent one, aggravate short-
term rises in inflation and strengthen medium-term inflation dynamics. 
3. The Governing Council of the ECB decided the recent increase in interest rates for a dual 
purpose:  first,  to  prevent  broadly  based  second-round  effects  on  inflation  as  those  I  just 
described; and second, to counteract the increasing upside risks to price stability over the 
medium term, evidenced by the facts summarised below: 
- 
Between  the  autumn  of  last  year  and  June  2008,  inflation  rates  have  risen 
significantly.  June  data  showed  clearly  that  inflation  in  the  euro  area  as  a  whole 
would  be  above  the  medium-term  target  of  2%  for  a  more  protracted  period  than 
previously thought. 
Moreover, the continuation of vigorous money  and credit growth and the absence 
thus  far  of  significant  constraints  on  bank  loan  supply  in  a  context  of  ongoing 
financial  market  tensions  confirm  the  assessment  of  upside  risks  to  price  stability 
over the medium term. 
 BIS Review 93/2008 
 3
 At the same time, while the assessment is made that real GDP growth weakened 
over the first half of this year (despite satisfactory figures for the first quarter which 
reflected  temporary  factors),  the  economic  fundamentals  of  the  euro  area  remain 
sound. 
4. In the first few days after the recent increase in the ECB interest rates, the signals coming 
from credit markets indicated that the upward trend of inflation expectations has come to a 
halt.  Last  week's  indications  were  that  expectations  have  started  to  decline.  These  are 
encouraging  signs,  which,  however,  should  not  lead  to  complacency.  Indeed,  headline 
inflation  rates  of  around  4%  in  the  euro  area  and  4.9%  in  Greece  are  disconcerting. 
According to recent surveys, both in Greece and in the euro area, citizens cite inflation as 
their number one problem and source of concern. 
5. Let me assure you that the ECB, as it has always done, will stand ready to achieve its 
primary objective and fulfill the mandate entrusted to it by 320 million European citizens. That 
is,  it  will  continue  to  take  any  action  necessary  to  ensure  the  firm  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations at sufficiently low levels and to safeguard price stability over the medium term. 
4 
 BIS Review 93/2008
