Yandraduth Googoolye: Payment and settlement systems in Mauritius  
Address by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at 
the  Opening  Ceremony  of  the  COMESA  Regional  Payment  and  Settlement  System 
(REPSS), Bank of Mauritius, Port Louis, 14 April 2008. 
 It is a great pleasure and privilege for me to welcome you all to the Bank of Mauritius on this 
opening  ceremony  of  the  COMESA  Regional  Payment  and  Settlement  System  (REPSS) 
Pilot  Training  Workshop  which  the  Bank  is  indeed  very  pleased  to  host.  This  training 
programme  is  a  joint  effort  of  the  COMESA  Clearing  House  and  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  in 
conjunction  with  CMA  Small  Systems  AB,  the  service  provider  selected  by  the  COMESA 
Council of Ministers for the delivery of a turnkey operation for REPSS, and Fin-X, COMESA’s 
SWIFT  Service  Bureau and  responsible  for  the  Regional  Payment  and  Settlement  System 
Operations Centre at Orange in Johannesburg and the SWIFT Representative. 
The Governor would have very much wished to be here but he had to attend the IMF Spring 
Meetings  which  is  attended  by  Governors  around  the  world.  In  that  context,  the  Governor 
met the Chairman of the SADC Central Banks Governors, Governor Tito Mboweni and in the 
light  of  the  political  problems  which  the  Comoros  is  now  facing,  it  has  been  decided  in 
common accord with the Governor of the Central Bank of Comoros and other Governors that 
the next meeting of the AACB will be held in Mauritius in June this year. 
May I also extend a very warm welcome to participants from member states of the COMESA 
who  are  all  concerned  and  committed  to  bring  about  improvements  in  cross-border  retail 
payments  in  the  COMESA  region.  A  special  welcome  to  Mr  Alexey  Nazarov  –  Managing 
Director of CMA Small Systems AB; Mr Willie Stoman – Managing Director of Fin-X and Mr 
Ekkehard Starck – Senior Business Manager, Market Infrastructures & Payments at SWIFT 
Brussels. Our distinguished visitors will also address you during this ceremony. 
We should recall that in its efforts to modernise the financial infrastructure for the benefits of 
free trade to flow in the region, this project, originally named as the COMESA Payment and 
Settlement Systems – COMPASS was initiated in 1999 and saw the active participation of Mr 
Ali Mansoor, the present Financial Secretary who was seconded by the World Bank to the 
COMESA  Clearing  House  for  two  years.  During  his  tenure  at  the  COMESA  and  in  the 
context of the restructuring of the Clearing House, Mr Mansoor designed and moved forward 
the process of setting up three main facilities that would greatly assist in the promotion of 
intra-regional  trade  and  included  a  cross-border  payment  system  to  replace  the  COMESA 
Clearing  House  System  that  no  longer  met  the  needs  of  the  region,  as  a  result  of  the 
liberalization  of  most  of  our  economies.  After  having  moved  back  to  the  World  Bank  in 
August 1999, Mr Mamood Mansoor took over the responsibility of coordinating the regional 
efforts towards implementation of this project. 
Payment  systems  play  a  pivotal  role  in  the  soundness  of  all  economies  and  as  such  the 
safety and efficiency of payment and settlement systems have always been a major concern 
for central banks around the world as one of their principal functions is to be the guardian of 
public  confidence  in  money.  This  confidence  depends  crucially  on  the  ability  of  economic 
agents to transmit money and financial instruments smoothly and securely through payment 
and settlement systems. 
Cross-border  trade  is  growing  rapidly  as  more  companies  source  goods  and  services 
globally.  International  trade  has  doubled  over  the  past  decade.  Most  crossborder  trade 
payments  are  handled  through  correspondent  banking  relationships,  whereby  a  series  of 
banks  and  domestic  payment  systems  are  typically  linked  together  to  move  funds.  While 
volume continues to grow pressure is being exerted on both banks and payment systems to 
improve the cross-border payment process. 
BIS Review 46/2008 
 1
Today,  cross-border  payments  are  time-inefficient  and  costly  for  banks  and  businesses. 
Increase in global trade and improvements in physical supply chain efficiencies are creating 
demand for process improvements. Improvement in the efficiency and effectiveness of cross-
border payments is likely but all stakeholders are being required to increase investments to 
change the processes and systems of corporates, banks and payment systems. 
International  experience  suggests  that  even  in  a  liberalised  environment,  a  regional 
payments  system  can  facilitate  trade  and  payments  by  lowering  risk,  reducing  costs  and 
expediting payments. In that respect, the COMESA Clearing House has been mandated to 
implement  a  system  to  facilitate  cross-border  payment  and  settlement  between  Central 
Banks  in  the  COMESA  region.  This  system,  named  "Regional  Payment  and  Settlement 
System – REPSS" will provide a single gateway for Central Banks within the Region to effect 
payment and settlement of trades. It will be a complete real-time online system with an open, 
published interface based on S.W.I.F.T standards. The COMESA Clearing House acts as the 
agent  of  the  Central  Banks  and  bilateral  limits  would  be  set  by  each  Central  Bank  at  the 
Clearing House. Bilateral agreements between Central Banks would be formulated to further 
ensure that settlement would be a successful event each day. 
The  cornerstone  of  the  REPSS  operational  model  is  a  settlement  agent  which  will  hold 
accounts  of  participants  and  carry  out  end  of  day  procedures.  REPSS  is  expected  to 
stimulate  and  increase  intra-regional  trade  by  enabling  importers  to  pay  for  goods  and 
services in their local currencies, whilst exporters will be able to be invoiced for their products 
in  their  local  currency.  Local  banks  will  access  the  payment  system  through  their  central 
banks.  Any  participating  bank  will,  therefore,  be  able  to  make  payments  to,  and  receive 
payments from, any other participating bank. The linkages through central banks will avoid 
the  payment  chains  that  can  sometimes  occur  in  correspondent  bank  arrangements.  The 
system  will  be  operational  through  the  use  of  the  infrastructure  of  each  member  country’s 
central bank and commercial banking payment system. Each country will, however, need to 
put in place adequate enabling legislation. It is further intended to establish a Trust Fund to 
assure  daily  settlements  in  the  event  of  an  inability  to  settle  by  one  or  more  participating 
banks.  REPSS  is  expected  to  bring  about  multiple  benefits  namely  a  reduction  in  (i) 
settlement  transactions;  (ii)  liquidity  requirements  to  secure  settlement;  (iii)  exposure  to 
foreign counter-parties; (iv) foreign correspondent banking charges; and (v) transactional and 
operational  costs.  These  benefits  would  immediately  be  passed  on  to  traders  and  other 
stakeholders and give everyone the needed comfort to expand their trade within the region. 
The setting up of a COMESA Clearing House Closed User Group and the admission of all 
Participating Central Banks and commercial banks into the Closed User Group will greatly 
facilitate interactions amongst all members of the group and get all our commercial banks to 
have  their  cross-border  transactions  carried  out  securely  through  their  respective  Central 
Banks, without having to go through third parties outside our region. 
At the Twelfth Meeting of the COMESA Committee of Governors of Central Banks held in 
Tripoli on 8 and 9 November 2007, it was decided that a REPSS participating Central Bank 
acts as the Settlement Agent for the COMESA Clearing House and opens a US Dollar and a 
EURO account for the COMESA Clearing House at its Central Bank. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  is  committed  to  mark  its  presence  in  the 
Region and the REPSS is yet another step in the commitment of the Bank towards regional 
cooperation,  in  our  commitment  to  consolidate  our  relationship  with  the  COMESA,  I  am 
pleased to announce, that the Bank of Mauritius has, on an initiative of the Governor of the 
Bank, decided to act as Settlement Agent for the COMESA Clearing House. We have, in this 
context opened a US Dollar and a EURO account at the Bank of Mauritius for the COMESA 
CLEARING HOUSE, pending the opening of these Accounts at the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New  York  and  the  European  Central  Bank  respectively.  We  shall  also,  for  settlement 
purposes, request all participating Central Banks to open a EURO and a US Dollar Account 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2008
with  us  at  the  Bank.  In  order  to  familiarise  our  stakeholders  with  the  System,  we  have 
organised a brief Information Session on REPSS just before the tea break. 
In an increasingly global marketplace, the COMESA  Clearing House’s REPSS was a bold 
initiative to fulfil the funds transfer requirements of corporates, the financial institutions that 
serve them, and the payment systems that enable the payments. The project will also require 
a  regional  approach  to  structural  reforms  in  such  key  areas  as  reducing  and  harmonising 
tariffs legal and regulatory reform, modernising and rationalising domestic payment systems, 
harmonising tax systems and labour market reforms. 
This project is the result of collective efforts from all our Central Banks in coming up with a 
cross border payment and settlement system appropriate for our region and possibly for the 
African continent. We are indeed pleased to see that our hard work is now bearing fruit and 
the  system,  which  will  contribute  immensely  towards  the  expansion  of  intra-regional  trade 
and  towards  COMESA’s  Regional  Integration  Agenda,  will  soon  be  operational  in  all 
COMESA  countries,  as  per  decisions  of  the  COMESA  Authority  of  Heads  of  State  and 
Government. Allow me, Ladies and Gentlemen, to briefly comment on a couple of issues that 
are on the minds of everybody these days. 
In one of his recent speeches, US Federal Governor Frederic Mishkin said, and I quote, “The 
ultimate purpose of a central bank should be to promote the public good through policies that 
foster economic prosperity”. Unquote. This is specifically what is also required for the Bank of 
Mauritius.  The  primary  objective  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  as  laid  down  in  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius  Act  is  to  maintain  price  stability  and  to  promote  orderly  and  balanced  economic 
development. 
These  two  objectives  are  obviously  connected  since  preserving  price  stability  encourages 
stronger economic activity in the long run. This obviously implies that we do need to keep an 
eye on inflation. However, I rather view that the fight against inflation should be a cause of 
concern not only for the central bank but also for all economic players and each individual in 
the society. 
The ongoing global financial market turmoil as well as the rising global commodity prices is 
reminiscent of the fact that nowadays, no economy is sheltered from shocks stemming from 
outside  its  territory.  While  we  all  recognise  that  globalisation  has  provided  for  great 
opportunities, well, it has also brought with it challenges. Right now, as you are all aware and 
as  being  widely  broadcast,  food  and  other  commodity-driven  pressures  which  also  include 
the high oil prices are impacting on headline inflation across the world. Mauritius does not 
stand immune to these developments. 
Being a net food importer, the high food bill is already impacting on our current account. In 
addition,  over  half  of  the  domestic  inflation  rate  results  from  food  inflation.  The  situation 
which  we  are  facing  is  not  unique  to  Mauritius.  Other  economies  are  also  witnessing  this 
phenomenon.  In  such  an  environment,  it  is  vital  that  all economic  players  in  our  economy 
tune in their concerted efforts and it is expected that the gains from the recent appreciation of 
the Mauritian Rupee be fully passed on to consumers. 
As you are aware, we have since November 2007 been purchasing a large amount of foreign 
currencies on the domestic foreign exchange market. Simultaneously we have been issuing 
our  own  instruments,  BoM  Bills,  to  sterilise  the  Rupee  counterparts.  You  will  realise  that 
these  foreign  currencies  are  invested  abroad  at  interest  rates  currently  prevailing  on 
international markets. The BoM Bills are issued at a much higher rate. 
Recently some enterprises have been complaining of lesser profits being realised. We, at the 
Bank  of  Mauritius,  are  very  much  concerned  about  the  performance  of  the  enterprises 
operating  in  the  real  sector.  You  will  recollect  our  first  meeting  with  Mauritius  Export 
Association  (MEXA)  in  the  first  week  of  January  2008  where  in  an  attempt  to  help  those 
enterprises, we offered to buy foreign exchange from them. We had a second meeting with 
them in the first week of April 2008 and we reiterated our support. Our decision to reduce the 
BIS Review 46/2008 
 3
key Repo Rate at our last MPC meeting was also, to some extent, to alleviate the costs of 
funds of exporting enterprises. It may be reminded that all our foreign transactions are not 
denominated  in  one  currency  only.  We  also  gain  when  we  deal  in  a  currency  which  is 
depreciating vis-à-vis the Rupee. 
With the restructure and re-engineering which has taken place at the Bank, the Bank is now 
more apt to meet those challenges. 
We  thank  you  very  much  indeed  for  your  presence  this  morning  and  wish  you  a  very 
pleasant  stay  in  Mauritius.  May  I  now  request  Dr  Moyana,  Executive  Secretary  of  the 
COMESA Clearing House, to say a few words. 
4 
 BIS Review 46/2008
