Emsley D Tromp: Developmental challenges in a small economy – the 
case of St Maarten 
Address by Dr Emsley D Tromp, President of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles (Bank van 
de  Nederlandse  Antillen),  on  the  occasion  of  The  State  of  the  Economy  Presentation, 
Philipsburg, St Maarten, 20 March 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good evening, 
With pleasure I accepted the invitation from Commissioner Buncamper-Molanusn to speak to 
you  on  the  relevant  theme  “Developmental  Challenges  in  a  Small  Economy”  at  this  event 
surrounding  the  presentation  of  the  Economic  Outlook  2008.  St.  Maarten  is  a  very  small 
economy, but a highly successful one as I shall demonstrate later. I shall begin my address 
this evening with an analysis of St. Maarten’s economy, which is growing at an impressive 
speed. In the second part of my address, I shall discuss with you some of the challenges of 
the  constitutional  changes  that  are  ahead  for  the  island.  If  managed  well,  these  changes 
create enormous opportunities for high sustainable growth in the coming years. 
St. Maarten is the second largest economy of the Netherlands Antilles with a 20% share of 
total  Gross  Domestic  Product,  approximately  1.2  billion  guilders.  Although  Curacao’s  70% 
share is considerably bigger, St. Maarten’s economy has performed much better. Since the 
end of the economic recession in 2001, the economy of St. Maarten has grown by an annual 
average rate of 3.8% in real terms, compared to 1.8% for Bonaire, and a marginal 0.3% for 
Curacao. A preliminary estimate by the Central Bureau of Statistics indicates a real growth 
rate  of  4.5%  for  St.  Maarten  for  2007.  The  island’s  strong  economic  growth  has  been 
accompanied  by  a  moderate  rate  of  inflation,  averaging  1.8%,  but  increasing  to  2.3%  in 
2007. The higher- than- average inflation rate can be explained mainly by the impact of rising 
world oil prices. 
St.  Maarten’s  robust  economic  growth  contributed  to  a  decline  in  the  unemployment  rate, 
which reached 10.6% in 2007. This rate is better than the 12.0% in Curacao, but Bonaire’s 
unemployment  rate  was  even  lower  at  7.8%.  Youth  unemployment  still  contrasted  sharply 
with overall unemployment. With 26.0% of St. Maarten’s labor force in the age group of 15-
24  unemployed,  the  island  has  the  highest  rate  in  the  Netherlands  Antilles;  this  figure 
compares to 24.2% in Curacao and 20.5% in Bonaire. 
Tourism is the dominant sector in St. Maarten’s economy and can be illustrated in various 
ways. In the National Accounts, tourism activities encompass the following sectors: Trade; 
Hotels  &  Restaurants;  Transport,  Storage  &  Communication;  and  Real  Estate,  Renting  & 
Business  Activities.  Gross  value  added  by  these  sectors  comprises  56%  of  total  business 
activities  and  42%  of  Gross  Domestic  Product  for  the  island.  St.  Maarten  welcomes  an 
impressive number of visitors each year. The number of stay-over visitors is approaching the 
500,000 limit, and the number of cruise passengers has exceeded 1.4 million. In 2007, St. 
Maarten  accounted  for  56%  of  stay-over  tourism  and  76%  of  cruise  tourism  in  the 
Netherlands  Antilles.  Tourism  activities  in  St.  Maarten  generate  approximately  1.2  billion 
guilders in foreign exchange revenues annually, representing 64% of total foreign exchange 
revenues from tourism in the Netherlands Antilles. 
However, these impressive figures are somewhat overshadowed by the disappointing visitor 
growth rates during the last two years. The number of stay-over visitors has remained about 
the same since 2005, while the number of cruise passengers declined in 2006 and remained 
almost  unchanged  in  2007.  I  think  the  main  explanation  for  this  development  is  that  St. 
Maarten‘s utilization of its tourism infrastructure has reached full capacity. Therefore, further 
growth  can  be  attained  only  by  expanding  the  tourism  infrastructure.  Investors  seem  to 
believe  in  the  potential  for  further  growth,  as  evidenced  by  the  continued  robust  growth  in 
BIS Review 36/2008 
 1
construction activities indicated in a press release from the Central Bureau of Statistics and 
the Department of Economic Affairs of St. Maarten last month. Hotel room and time share 
capacity as well as cruise pier capacity are expanding, creating prospects for the resumption 
of  growth  in  the  number  of  visitors  in  the  near  future.  Another  explanation  for  the  weak 
growth  in  tourism  may  be  the  weakening  economy  of  the  United  States,  from  which  more 
than half of St. Maarten’s tourists originate. 
In  line  with  the  weak  tourism  performance,  the  airport  and  the  harbor  of  St.  Maarten  also 
showed  weak  growth  in  2007.  Nevertheless,  the  Princess  Juliana  International  Airport 
remained  the  busiest  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles  airports,  with  1.7  million  passengers 
handled,  half  of  all  passengers  handled  in  the  Netherlands  Antilles.  With  the  recent 
modernization  and  expansion  of  St.  Maarten’s  airport,  its  capacity  has  increased  to  2.5 
million  passengers  per  year.  Thus,  this  part  of  St.  Maarten’s  infrastructure  is  capable  of 
absorbing the anticipated recovery in tourism growth without any problems. 
Harbor growth is expected to resume once the expansion of the cruise pier and the container 
and freight handling facilities have been completed. I support the vision behind the expansion 
of the container and freight handling facilities to develop the harbor as a transit point for the 
distribution  of  goods  to  the  neighboring  islands.  This  is  a  step  towards  the  necessary 
diversification of the economy. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I am an optimist who worries a lot. Therefore, allow me now to draw 
your  attention  to  some  of  the  weaknesses  of  St.  Maarten’s  economy.  The  most  obvious 
weakness  is  the  heavy  reliance  on  one  principal  economic  activity,  namely,  tourism.  This 
characteristic is typical of most small island economies. However, such heavy reliance on a 
single  activity  enhances  the  business  cycle  and  makes  the  economy  more  susceptible  to 
external shocks.  
Reducing  reliance  on  one  main  economic  activity  requires  diversification.  A  small  island 
economy like St. Maarten has, of course, only limited possibilities for diversifying its economy 
given, among other things, its lack of natural resources, scarcity of land, and small domestic 
market. This situation should not, however, prevent its policymakers and the business sector 
from  coming  up  with  creative  ideas.  Enhancing  the  regional  distribution  function  of  St. 
Maarten  is  a  viable  policy  to  pursue.  The  current  expansion  of  the  harbor  and  the  recent 
expansion  of  the  airport  fully  support  this  policy.  I  also  note  the  idea  of  developing  an 
international  financial  and  business  services  sector  on  the  island,  an  activity  worth  further 
exploration.  However,  a  word  of  caution  is  at  order:  the  daunting  list  of  challenges  that 
surround  the  creation  of  a  world  class  international  financial  and  business  services  sector 
requires a world class regulatory infrastructure and the institutional capacity to implement it, 
which may prove to be overly ambitious given your resource constraints. 
Another major weakness in St. Maarten’s economy is that the public infrastructure has not 
kept  up  with  the  expansion  of  the  economy,  either  physically  or  socially.  The  physical 
dimension can be illustrated by the insufficient capacity of the road infrastructure, which has 
resulted  in  structural  congestion  most  of  the  day.  Electricity  and  water  production  cannot 
keep up with demand, causing frequent power outages and water shortages. The increasing 
amount  of  solid  and  liquid  waste  generated  by  businesses  and  the  public  cannot  be 
processed  effectively,  which  has  created  a  growing  burden  for  the  environment.  Some 
examples  of  the  social  dimension  are  shortages  of  schools,  daycare  facilities,  and  social 
housing,  an  understaffed  police  force,  and  an  inadequate  penitentiary  system.  These 
shortcomings  have  resulted  in  a  rising  crime  rate  and  increasing  social  imbalances, 
aggravated by the illegal immigration issue. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I mention these weaknesses since they are a good starting point for 
discussing with you the challenges of the constitutional changes for the future country of St. 
Maarten. One of the many tasks in preparing the island for its new constitutional status is 
addressing  effectively  the  observed  economic  and  social  imbalances  to  create  a  sound 
social-economic basis for durable balanced growth in the years ahead. With the new status 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2008
comes  the  responsibility  to  govern  the  new  country  with  a  population  anxious  to  reap  the 
benefits of the new status. It is not a question of survival, but a challenge of leadership. Like 
inheritance,  success  can  be  invested  productively  or  not.  The  question  therefore  to  be 
answered is whether you are investing in what it takes to continue to build on the existing 
foundation while using the new status to meet the challenges that will await you as a new 
country within the Kingdom. 
According  to  the  current  thinking,  St.  Maarten  is  scheduled  to  become  a  country  on 
December  15  of  this  year.  However,  almost  all  stakeholders  realize  that  this  date  is  not 
attainable. I strongly believe that a thorough preparation with all the laws and institutions in 
place is crucial for a viable start as a country. Until this process is completed, assumption of 
the new constitutional status is bound to create more issues than it solves for Sint Maarten. 
The number of issues that must be addressed before St. Maarten can become a country are 
quite overwhelming, but they also create unique opportunities to correct the administrative, 
economic,  and  social  ills  on  the  island  with  broad  technical  and  financial  support  from  the 
Dutch government. Given the time constraint, I have selected a few to discuss with you in 
more detail. These are the design of an effective and efficient government apparatus, sound 
government finances, and the future of the monetary system and financial supervision. 
Let  me  start  with  the  design  of  the  government  apparatus.  The  present  dual  layer  of 
government  has  created  numerous  inefficiencies,  promoted  tensions  between  the  central 
and  island  administrations,  and  frequently  undermined  the  effective  implementation  of 
policies. Now that St. Maarten is becoming a country and the central government is being 
dismantled,  a  unique  opportunity  is  created  for  the  design  of  a  new  effective  and  efficient 
government apparatus. First, the government tasks must be defined, including the tasks that 
are  taken  over  from  the  central  government.  Second,  legislation  on  which  to  base  the 
implementation  of  the  government  tasks  must  be  prepared  and  approved.  I  think  current 
legislation will generally be adequate, complemented with the necessary amendments. Third, 
the government apparatus must be adequately staffed in accordance with the requirements 
in the job description of each position. The positions can be filled from the current pool of civil 
servants of the island as well as from the central government, if necessary complemented 
with  additional  training.  Positions  that  remain  open  should  be  advertised  and  filled  with 
external candidates. Current civil servants who do not meet the job requirements and cannot 
be properly retrained should seek employment in the private sector after receiving adequate 
redundancy payments. Finally, the principles of good governance should be embedded in the 
new government apparatus to guarantee effective and responsible spending of the citizens’ 
tax money, efficient high quality services to the public, and effective sanctions for misconduct 
and abuse. 
The second issue that must be addressed and about which I would like to share my views 
with you is sound public finances. Based on the relatively few occasions that St. Maarten has 
approached the central government for financial assistance, it appears that it has been able 
to bring expenditures in line with revenues. However, its budgetary process has been rather 
murky. The government has operated quite a few times without an approved budget for part 
of the year. Regular progress reports on the implementation of the budget have been absent. 
Budget audits have been delayed for years. Although the government is legally not allowed 
to  borrow,  St.  Maarten  has  built  up  a  considerable  debt,  sometimes  created  because  of 
creative financing constructions. I do not want to suggest that St. Maarten has a monopoly 
on  weak  fiscal  discipline  and  deviation  from  the  budget  legislation.  The  other  islands  and 
even the central government also have failed in this area. I only mention it as an illustration 
that a drastic change is necessary in how we approach the public finances in preparing for 
the island’s future status as a country. 
In  the  agreement  between  the  central  government,  the  governments  of  Curacao  and  St. 
Maarten,  and  the  Dutch  government  of  November  2,  2006,  better  known  as  the 
“Slotverklaring”,  the  parties  explicitly  underscored  the  importance  of  starting  the  new 
BIS Review 36/2008 
 3
constitutional  status  with  a  financially  sound  position.  To  arrive  at  this  position,  the  Dutch 
government is prepared to take over a substantial part of the debt of the entities. In the new 
situation,  St.  Maarten  will  be  granted  the  long  desired  authority  to  borrow  but  within  strict 
limits.  The  maximum  allowed  outstanding  debt  will  be  bound  to  an  interest  burden  rule, 
prescribing  that  the  interest  expenses  in  the  budget  may  not  exceed  5%  of  the  average 
revenues  of  the  preceding  three  years.  It  is  still  not  very  clear  what  this  means  for  St. 
Maarten. First, the interest burden must be calculated from an estimated revenue base of the 
country  of  St.  Maarten.  Second,  the  room  for  borrowing  depends  also  on  the  loans  that 
remain the responsibility of St. Maarten after the debt relief. But I think it is safe to conclude 
that there will be some opportunity to borrow. 
The  debt  relief  and  authority  to  borrow  are  bound  by  strict  conditions  and  control  that  will 
substantially  enhance  fiscal  discipline  and  transparency.  First,  the  current  account  of  the 
budget may not have a deficit and must be presented in a multi-annual framework. Second, 
interest expenses may not exceed the 5% rule. Third, the recommendations of the Financial 
Position  working  group  on  improvement  of  the  financial  management  and  control  must  be 
implemented as planned. Fourth, the entire budgetary process from preparation of the draft 
budget to the accountability of its implementation is subject to supervision by an autonomous 
supervisory  authority  that  will  monitor  whether  the  budget  rules  and  other  agreements  are 
met,  suggest  corrective  actions  in  case  of  deviations,  and  report  its  findings  on  a  regular 
basis. 
I can imagine that this new approach to the public finances will be a culture shock for the 
island.  In  the  beginning,  it  will  create  frequent  tensions  with  the  supervisory  authority;  the 
recent experiences of Bonaire, Saba, and St. Eustatius serve as an example here. It is for 
this  reason that  I  have  always  been  a  strong  proponent  of  a  complete  debt  relief  with  the 
simultaneous elimination of the authority to borrow. But be as it may, we have to go through 
this period of adaptation to arrive at lasting sound public finances, a conditio sine qua non for 
building up a viable country with a prosperous future for its citizens. 
The third issue I’d like to bring forward, and one which I keep particularly close at heart as a 
central banker, is the future of our monetary system and financial sector supervision in the 
new  constitutional  arrangement.  The  “Slotverklaring”  explicitly  states  that  there  will  be  one 
central bank for Curacao and St. Maarten responsible for monetary, financial, and integrity 
supervision  based  on  one  set  of  laws.  Rationally  considered,  I  fully  subscribe  to  this 
statement. It means that the current central bank will be broadly maintained, continuing its 
good  reputation  and  credibility  in  safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  monetary  and  financial 
system. I believe this is very important in light of the uncertainties surrounding the numerous 
changes that will take place on the road toward the new constitutional status of the islands. 
In addition, with a common central bank, economies of scale can be maintained with regard 
to  the  high  costs  of  highly  educated  staff  and  modern  information  and  communication 
infrastructure.  Moreover,  a  common  central  bank  will  provide  a  larger  common  economic 
area  with  broader  economic  diversification,  which  may  dampen  the  impact  of  a  shock 
occurring on one of the islands. 
If  Curacao  and  St.  Maarten  as  autonomous  countries  share  a  common  central  bank  and 
currency,  they  join  a  monetary  union.  Since  autonomous  countries  have  their  own  policy 
responsibilities, a monetary union requires a high degree of policy coordination and harmony 
to ensure a balanced and effective monetary policy. In addition, a well functioning monetary 
union requires free movement of goods, services, capital, and labor between the countries. 
These  requirements  may  be  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  desire  for  more  autonomy  by 
Curacao  and  St.  Maarten  since  this  desire  was  the  main  driving  force  behind  opting  for 
country status. Ladies and gentlemen, I do not like to sound like the rooster who claims credit 
for  the  sunrise.  We  must  begin  however,  with  the  understanding  that  strong  political 
commitment is required to give up some of the newly won policy autonomy in the interest of a 
stable  and  effective  monetary  union.  If  we  fail  to  comprehend  this,  we  will  not  be  able  to 
create  a  stable  monetary  environment  conducive  to  growth  and  stability.  We  will  need  to 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2008
financing,  which  will  undermine 
work  well  together  because  we  have  a  great  challenge  before  us.  It  is  our  own  incredible 
success that we face. 
As mentioned, like inheritance the new found opportunities can be exploited successfully or 
be squandered. Though not far from inconceivable, the inevitable question becomes; if the 
politicians cannot come to an agreement on a common central bank, what will be the next 
best  alternative?  Given  the  current  financial  architecture,  Curacao  will  likely  continue  the 
current central bank, although its revenue base will shrink as a result of the division of the 
foreign exchange reserves with St. Maarten and the omission of income from the issuance of 
banknotes and currency transactions with banks in St. Maarten.  
With respect to St. Maarten, it is the question whether it will be able to sustain a full- fledged 
central  bank  in  a  profitable  way.  The  smallness  of  the  economy  simply  hampers  the 
generation  of  enough  income  to  cover  the  operational  costs.  This  means  that  the  central 
bank  will  become  dependent  on  government 
its 
independence and, hence, credibility. In general, a central bank contributes to government 
revenues, not the other way around.  
Actually, St. Maarten does not need its own monetary policy. An own monetary policy and 
consequently an own central bank is needed only if you have your own currency. Because 
the US dollar is used so widely, official dollarization is an efficient and feasible alternative. 
Hence,  dollarization  eliminates  the  need  for  a  central  bank.  In  effect,  you  will  elect  to 
distribute  the  seignorage  profit  to  the  public  at  large  rather  than  having  it  accrued  to  the 
central bank. 
The other question which we cannot deflect is:  
What  about  the  supervision  of  the  financial  sector?  Since  most  financial  institutions  in  St. 
Maarten  are  subsidiaries  or  branches  of  foreign-based  institutions,  the  central  bank  of  the 
respective parent company continues to include them in its supervision. Instead of setting up 
its own supervisory authority, which will suffer from large diseconomies of scale, it would be 
much more efficient and effective for St. Maarten to outsource the supervision of the financial 
sector to the central bank of the parent institution. 
Ladies and gentlemen, St. Maarten’s economic development can be considered a success 
story. However, it is accompanied by increasing imbalances in the public domain, which will 
eventually undermine the sustainability of the current growth. The preparations for the new 
constitutional  status  provide  a  unique  opportunity  to  address  these  imbalances  effectively, 
helped  by  financial  and  technical  support  from  the  Dutch  government.  An  efficient  and 
effective  government  apparatus,  sound  public  finances,  a  stable  monetary  system,  good 
governance, and adequate financial sector supervision are essential elements for building a 
viable  and  prosperous  country.  The  road  towards  this  goal  is  marred  with  obstacles  and 
setbacks.  
You  have  to  be  careful  not  to  devote  too  much  energy  to  achieve  the  new  status  while 
neglecting to strengthen the foundation and creating the institutional capacity to govern the 
new country. Our history is too simple and the facts, as they are commonly understood, not 
so  clear.  Governing  a  country  is  a  matter  of  no  little  importance.  It  requires  skills  different 
than those for governing an island territory. Dismissing this may prove to be more disruptive 
than  helpful.  You  will  be  leading  a  nation  in  a  world  riven  with  economic,  financial  and 
environmental challenges. What happens anywhere can matter everywhere. But, the people 
of St. Maarten have proven resilient when the going gets tough, and I am convinced that they 
are tough enough to get going. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 36/2008 
 5
