Rundheersing Bheenick: All change now 
Address by Mr Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, on the occasion 
of the re-branding of South East Asian Bank Ltd as Bramer Banking Corporation Ltd, Port 
Louis, 29 August 2008. 
 A very good evening to all of you. 
I always like to open a new bank – 
• 
It is good for aspiring staff 
It encourages others to do better 
• 
It is good for competition in the high street 
• 
• 
It is good for customers 
• 
And it is good for the country 
There is much goodness in new banks. Let’s have more of them. Competition is at the heart 
of good governance. A new bank forces us all to re-examine our credentials, our levels of 
service, our standards, and our performance in this highly competitive and unforgiving world. 
I heard recently of a case where someone wanted to open a new account with a large sum of 
money  –  one  established  bank  proposed  one  week  to  complete  the  procedures  to  do  so 
while a new bank, just a couple of yards up the road, did it on the spot within five minutes. 
Such is the nature of the market – continued renewal. An upstart can take on a giant ……….. 
and win! 
A new bank is like “the gentle rain from heaven upon the place beneath” – “it brings fresh 
showers to the thirsting flowers from the seas and the streams”. It is a refreshing breeze. 
So, I am delighted to be here on the occasion of the refreshing of South East Asian Bank Ltd 
as  Bramer  Banking  Corporation  Ltd.  It  is  indeed  becoming  quite  a  refreshing  season, 
especially as this event today signals the entry into the domestic banking scene of the British 
American Investment Group – a Mauritian conglomerate with a well-established presence in 
other segments of the financial sector, both locally and overseas and, which, based on total 
assets, ranked 9th in the local business league in 2007.1 So, on this new breeze, we have 
insurance, foreign exchange, leasing, and much else. I therefore see this event having more 
far-reaching consequences going well beyond the domestic financial sector and reflecting the 
broader economic ambitions of the country. For we need banks, not just in the business of 
money lending, but at the heart of sustained economic and social development. 
In  this  specific  case,  the  brand  change  brings  with  it  the  promise  of  a  fresh  focus  for  its 
business and the type of customers it will target. In this new spring, we need our banks to be 
promoting fresh growth and enhanced customer services.  
The confidence of the customer has to be won, retained and constantly refreshed. Quality of 
service  is  key,  as  are  financial  strength,  good  corporate  governance,  customer-friendly 
practices and trust. I am confident that this bank, now under a new name, new ownership 
and  new  management,  will  lead  to  a  fresh  flowering  of  innovation  and  quality  in  all  these 
areas.  
As  the  banking  sector  literally  explodes,  driven  by  new  players  and  relentless  financial 
innovation, the central bank, which is here to oversee and regulate, cannot remain static in 
                                                 
1   Source: ‘The Top One Hundred Companies’, Business Publications Ltd 2007 Edition, Mauritius. 
BIS Review 104/2008 
 1
the way it is organised and discharges its responsibilities. We at the Bank of Mauritius must 
rise to the challenge. My colleagues and I, we must be prepared to leave our comfort zone. 
We must question our rules, our regulations, our practices, our processes, indeed ourselves. 
That is the price to pay to achieve our ambition of graduating to the status of a well-regarded 
international financial centre. That is a price we are prepared to pay. The ambition drives our 
action. But, as always, some want the end but would deny us the means to achieve it. There 
are  pockets  of  resistance  which  are  building  up  steam  in  an  overheated  and  misguided 
attempt to cling to the past and derail us from this shared national vision. I have also taken 
up  the  challenge  of  promoting  Mauritius  as  a  friendly  international  financial  centre.  As  we 
must, we are refreshing our core services to confront the new challenges and to tap the new 
opportunities that beckon. But change-management is never easy. Change-management is 
post-doctoral  studies,  often  conducted  under  withering  and  concentrated  fire,  by  kamikaze 
supporters.  Doing  good  by  doing  better  is  what  ultimately  drives  these  supporters  and 
myself, not any suicidal instinct to commit collective hara-kiri. 
Mr Bruno Julie, whose feat in the boxing ring in Beijing we now celebrate as a nation, well 
demonstrates the spirit of achievement and the determination which we need to galvanize 
us. With his bronze medal, Bruno Julie has got tiny Mauritius a coveted place in the Hall of 
Fame among the giants of the global sports world. But his incomparable performance led me 
to a wry reflection which I would like to share with you. On a distinctly less celebratory note, 
the Bank of Mauritius and the South East Asian Bank which we bury tonight, have a common 
in-house culture of anonymous letters. If poison-pen letters and anonymous tracts were also, 
like field and track events, an Olympic discipline, the Bank of Mauritius would have won a 
gold  medal  a  long  time  ago!  Well  before  the  current  avalanche  of  sleaze  allegations  and 
malpractices targeting my person. It pains me to see the time and resources spent by some 
disgruntled staff in tarring management’s image. But I must say that I often admire the fertile 
imagination and creative instincts behind some of these concerted attacks. It is sadder still to 
see some of these smear reports being taken up by the mainstream press. Your bank would 
probably  have  got  home  with  a  bronze  medal  for  the  preposterous  allegation  that  an 
unnamed high official of the Bank of Mauritius has bribed your CEO for some unfathomable 
reason. You must be wondering what happened to the silver medal. Let me tell you that this 
would  go  to  an  equally  nasty  piece  of  work  alleging  that  a  senior  member  of  the  political 
establishment  and  one  family  member  are  involved  in  money  laundering.  Now  all  these 
crossed my desk in the last four weeks. This must have been the kind of thing which Malcolm 
De Chazal, a famous Mauritian artist, writer, philosopher – and the closest we have had to a 
polymath – was referring to when he said that “A Maurice on cultive la canne à sucre et les 
préjugés”. Now, there’s a culture that we could do without. 
But  these  are  mere  diversions.  They  may  detract  us.  But  they  certainly  do  not  distract  us 
from  the  mission  and  the  mandate  that  are  ours.  We  at  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  have  been 
advocating  a  culture  of  transparency  for  greater  accountability.  We  have  been  canvassing 
the  idea  of  establishing  a  Select  Committee  of  the  National  Assembly  for  hearings  of  the 
Governor and his associates on the Bank’s policies and strategies. We believe this will help 
to clear the air and expose the sensational headlines to more rational debate. 
Indeed, we have plenty of reason to be satisfied with our record so far. This is not the time or 
the  place  to  give  you  chapter  and  verse  of  all  the  changes  that  we  have  brought  since 
assuming office in February last year. It will have to wait for another day. Despite the gloomy 
tales from abroad of the demise of the banking sector here, in Mauritius we can take some 
pride  and  comfort  that,  in  the  past  year,  our  banking  sector  in  particular,  and  the  financial 
sector  in  general,  have  registered  consistent  growth,  profitability  and  strength.  We  are  all 
delighted that the Mauritius Commercial Bank now figures among the Top 20 banks in Sub-
Saharan  Africa:  this  sets  a  new  standard  in  the  field.  I  am  mentioning  this  en  passant  to 
encourage the new bank to be ambitious and set its sights high. We look forward to the day 
when the Bramer Banking Corporation will pass this post too. Just don’t take that long to get 
there!  
2 
 BIS Review 104/2008
The fresh wind of Islamic banking is also keeping us all on our toes. We have moved fast 
from idea to action. We have consulted far and wide. We have issued guidelines. We have 
joined  the  international  standard-setting  body  for  Islamic  Banking.  We  have  invited 
applications. We have processed them. And, tonight, I am pleased to announce that a few 
days  ago  we  issued  our  first  two  “in  principle”  approvals  for  full-fledged  Islamic  banking 
licences. As they say, watch this space for a further announcement! In the meantime, we are 
pressing ahead with our plans to roll out Sharia-compliant Treasury products before these 
first  two  banks  open  their  doors  –  and  others  open  their  windows  –  for  Islamic  banking 
business. 
Very often, when we discuss the performance of the banking industry, whether conventional 
or Islamic, we tend to focus on issues of profitability, capital adequacy, asset quality and so 
forth. We tend to forget the “people” issues. Do you know, for example, that our banks have 
a combined total of 2 million deposit accounts? That is an average of 1.55 accounts by head 
of  population,  man,  woman  and  child  included.  Do  you  know  that  we  have  180,185  credit 
cards in issue? That makes 150 cards per 1,000 inhabitants. Do you know that everyday, we 
issue  an  average  of  21,160  cheques?  And  did  you  know  that  at  last  June,  the  sector 
employed 6,100 people? And that was mostly in white-collar jobs? And that employment has 
been growing at a compound rate of nearly 15 per cent per year over the last two years? 
That makes it one of the fastest growing sectors in the country. The Bank of Mauritius keeps 
a watchful eye over all this and makes sure that it keeps ticking over nicely, oiling the wheels 
of trade, commerce, and financial transactions. Consumers, borrowers, lenders, depositors, 
importers, exporters can all sleep in peace knowing that the Bank is on the job. 
On a recent occasion, I expressed my satisfaction at the profitability of our banks and the 
buoyant economic environment generally. I also expressed my concern about the excessive 
growth of credit which we were witnessing. I had at the back of my mind the truism that bad 
loans  are  made  in  good  times.  I  was  determined  to  ensure  that  we  do  not  rediscover  this 
through bitter experience. I am happy to report that the situation is firmly under control. So 
much  so  that  we  are  actually  envisaging  repo operations, for  the  first time  in  more  than  a 
year, to inject liquidity in the system. The determination of the Central Bank to press ahead, 
in spite of criticism, has paid off. 
If we are happy with the profitability of our banks, we remain concerned about their efficiency 
and the affordability of their services. For instance, the average return on assets (ROA) of 
banks in Mauritius last year was 1.8 per cent,2 as compared to an ROA of 1.3 per cent in our 
neighbourhood giant, South Africa. While strong earnings are important and the higher ROA 
could point to greater operational efficiency, it could also reflect higher costs being levied on 
the customer. No doubt more competition leads to better price discovery. We have 19 banks 
operating in Mauritius. Although, there is a high degree of market concentration, we do not 
believe that there is any active collusion among them. To stimulate greater competition and 
enable customers to make informed choices, we are working with banks to devise a common 
template for displaying applicable fees, charges and commissions in a comparable manner 
on  their  respective  web  sites.  A  better-informed  customer  is  the  best guarantee  of  greater 
efficiency in financial intermediation and the sustainable profitability of our banks. 
It is a fact of life that some banking transactions will go sour, lead to recrimination, and result 
in costly and protracted lawsuits. If we are keen to reduce transaction costs, and the cost of 
doing business generally in Mauritius, we must address these issues in a more efficient and 
timely manner. 
The  provision  relating  to  the  Ombudsperson  for  banks  in  the  Banking  Act  of  2004  still 
remains to be implemented. You may reasonably ask why. And we owe an explanation on 
this score. It is my firm conviction that our jurisdiction is too small to have a multiplicity of 
                                                 
2   Source: Annual Report 2007: Bank Supervision Department, Reserve Bank of South Africa, Pretoria. 
BIS Review 104/2008 
 3
bodies with overlapping jurisdiction in this area. We have the Financial Services Commission 
which has some parts under its purview. We also have a Commissioner for the Protection of 
Small Borrowers, an Office instituted after the Banking Act 2004. We have the Ombudsman 
as well. We thought that it would be more efficient for all those institutions to provide a one-
stop-shop  to  address  all  complaints  relating  to  the  banking  and  financial  sector.  We  have 
unfortunately  not  been  unable  to  make  much  headway  in  this  direction.  We  will  therefore 
appoint  an  Ombudsperson  for  banks  as  provided  by  law  and  we  shall  work  towards 
harmonising our position with the other players. 
I take this opportunity to reiterate our resolve to be transparent in our operations and pursue 
a  consultative  approach  to  decision-making,  while  scrupulously  observing  all  the  laws  and 
regulations applicable to our activities. 
So, with my powers as Governor, I formally revoke the licence of South East Asian Bank and 
I  now  officially  announce  the  issue  of  a  fresh  new  banking  licence  to  the  Bramer  Banking 
Corporation  Ltd.  With  these  words,  may  I  once  again  convey  my  best  wishes  to  the 
Management  and  staff  of  Bramer  Banking  Corporation  Ltd  and  wish  the  owners  and 
shareholders every success as they take on the established players on the domestic banking 
scene. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 104/2008
