John Hurley: Recent economic developments in Ireland and the outlook 
for the economy 
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services 
Authority of Ireland, at the presentation of the Annual Report 2007, Dublin, 10 July 2008. 
 You are all very welcome to this press briefing to mark the publication of the Annual Report 
of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland.  
I will briefly introduce my colleagues who join me today. Tony Grimes, our Director General, 
Deputy  Director  General  Brian  Halpin,  and  Tom  O’Connell,  Assistant  Director  General, 
Economics.  
The Annual Report describes in detail our activities in 2007, which proved to be a challenging 
year for the Bank, both in terms of our domestic and our euro area responsibilities.  
In my statement today, I will begin by reviewing current developments in the Irish economy. 
We  have  seen  a  substantial  adjustment  in  the  domestic  housing  market,  international 
financial market turbulence and, more recently, the effects of higher oil and food prices. This 
has led to a greater-than-anticipated slowdown in growth and higher-than-expected inflation. 
Notwithstanding the challenging short-term outlook, we continue to believe that the medium-
term outlook is favourable and that growth should gradually recover and inflation moderate. 
However, such an outcome is not guaranteed and will require concerted action.  
Current developments in the Irish economy 
The latest CSO National Accounts data, which were released after the Annual Report was 
finalised,  indicate  that  growth  in  the  domestic  economy  remained  robust  in  2007  with  real 
GDP and GNP increasing by 6.0 per cent and 4.1 per cent respectively, in line with average 
output growth over the previous five years. While the performance of the Irish economy was 
strong  in  2007  as  a  whole,  there  was  a  significant  moderation  in  growth  as  the  year 
progressed. This slowdown has accelerated considerably this year.  
While  the  emergence  of  a  slowdown  in  the  economy  was  not  unanticipated,  the  loss  of 
momentum has been greater than expected this year. This has arisen from a sharper than 
expected  adjustment  in  the  housing  sector  alongside  a  deterioration  in  the  international 
environment. 
Growth prospects for the next 18 months or so are now significantly less favourable and we 
will be revising our forecasts to reflect this. Overall, it seems likely that both GNP and GDP 
growth will remain positive this year, albeit significantly less than 1 per cent. Although some 
improvement is in prospect, growth is likely to remain below potential in 2009 at about 2 per 
cent. 
The downturn in the housing market and the consequent reduced employment in that sector 
will  contribute  to  a  sharp  slowdown  in  the  overall  rate  of  job  creation  and  a  rise  in  the 
unemployment rate to about 6 per cent on average this year. 
Although  the  weakness  in  economic  activity  is  being  reflected  in  some  moderation  in 
domestic  inflationary  pressures,  Ireland,  in  common  with  other  developed  economies,  is 
facing significant inflationary pressures arising from very elevated levels of energy and other 
commodity prices.  
BIS Review 88/2008 
 1
Residential housing market 
The housing market weakened significantly during 2007 with sharp declines in both output 
and  prices.  An  adjustment  in  the  housing  market  had  been  envisaged  by  most  economic 
commentators since housing output was well above the sustainable rate taking account of 
underlying housing needs for a number of years. Housing investment peaked at around 13 
per cent of GDP in 2006, which was well in excess of international norms. This is likely to 
reduce  to  about  7½  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2008,  which  represents  a  very  substantial  scaling 
back  of  activity.  The  significant  weakening  in  the  housing  sector  is  going  to  detract 
considerably from growth this year. 
Housing output should broadly stabilise during the course of next year, but clearly risks are to 
the  downside.  In  general,  however,  the  declines  in  both  output  and  prices  represent  a 
movement  towards  a  more  sustainable  position  in  the  long  term.  Unfortunately  the 
adjustment process is a difficult, if unavoidable, one. 
in 
International economy 
There are two fairly distinct sets of events driving developments in the global economy at the 
moment.  Firstly,  there  are  housing  market  adjustments  in  the  major  economies  and  the 
associated difficulties in international financial markets and, secondly, the more recent sharp 
increases in food and energy prices. As a result, growth in the global economy has slowed 
while inflation has picked up. Unfortunately we are more exposed than most to countries, like 
the US and the UK, where the slowdown in growth has been particularly marked and where 
changes 
the  exchange  rate  raise  competitiveness  problems.  The  US  economy 
experienced  a  significant  slowdown  in  the  final  months  of  2007  and  economic  activity 
remained  subdued  in  the  first  half  of  2008.  Over  the  past  year,  growth  has  also  slowed 
noticeably in the UK economy. Economic activity in the euro area has remained stronger, but 
an easing in the growth rate is expected in the next few quarters before a recovery towards 
its potential growth rate. The risks to the growth outlook are, however, on the downside in our 
main trading partners.  
More recently, the sharp rise in energy and commodity prices has added to the challenging 
situation,  driving  up  headline  inflation  rates  globally,  prompting  concerns  about  a  possible 
broadening out of these increases into higher inflation generally. In discharge of its primary 
duty to control inflation, the ECB Governing Council last week decided to raise rates by 25 
basis points. Our approach is to take action now to keep inflation expectations in line with the 
definition  of  price  stability,  preserve  purchasing  power  in  the  medium  term  and,  thereby, 
support employment and growth across the euro area. It was also made clear, following the 
increase in rates, that the Governing Council has no bias regarding future monetary policy 
decisions, which will be determined by the incoming data. In addition, we pointed to the need 
to  avoid  behaviour  that  might  exacerbate  the  difficulties  of  the  situation,  for  instance,  by 
attempts to compensate ourselves for a change in the relative price of imported commodities.  
Financial market developments 
I would like to turn now to financial market developments. As you know, over the past year, 
there has been a generalised disruption in normal money market operations between banks 
resulting  mainly  from  uncertainty  regarding  the  extent  of  losses  on  complex  financial 
instruments linked to sub-prime mortgages in the US. Central banks responded strongly to 
counteract  these  adverse  conditions  in  money  markets.  The  ECB,  in  particular,  was  in  a 
position to take effective action in the light of the pre-existing arrangements whereby banks 
had  an  extensive  range  of  collateral  that  could  be  used  to  access  central  bank  liquidity. 
These  arrangements  effectively  addressed  the  problems  at  the  short-end  of  the  money 
market.  However,  with  questions  of  transparency  and  asset  valuation  remaining,  term 
interest rates continue to be elevated with higher than normal spreads remaining between 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2008
longer-term rates and official rates. This will only change when confidence is restored among 
financial market participants. In the medium term, the assessments by ECOFIN and by the 
Financial  Stability  Forum  have  provided  roadmaps  for  strengthening  the  resilience  of  the 
international financial system. 
The Irish financial sector is not immune to these global developments. Medium- to long-term 
funding is not as readily available on wholesale markets and this has increased the need for 
banks to focus on liquidity management. While the share prices of Irish banks have fallen, it 
is important to point out that the direct and indirect exposure of Irish banks to US sub-prime 
mortgages  is  negligible,  and  there  is  no  sign  of  a  material  increase  in  loan  arrears. 
Accordingly, the banking sector here has not experienced the write-down of assets that has 
required some of their international peers to raise additional capital, thus Irish banks are well 
capitalised  with  good  asset  quality.  In  line  with  the  results  of  previous  exercises,  the 
preliminary results of our latest macroeconomic stress tests on the banking sector, which are 
designed to test the financial position of banks in the face of a serious economic downturn 
suggest that the banking sector’s shock absorption capacity remains strong. This strength is 
an essential prerequisite for the more challenging times that have arisen. 
Outlook and assessment 
The  Central  Bank  continues  to  believe  that  the  medium-term  outlook  for  the  economy  is 
favourable and that growth will return to stronger levels. Growth should pick up next year on 
the  basis  of  a  bottoming  out  in  domestic  housing  output  and  some  improvement  in  the 
external environment. Beyond that, growth in the Irish economy could begin to move towards 
its  long  run  sustainable  potential  rate  of  about  4  per  cent.  However,  this  recovery  is  not 
guaranteed  without  concerted  action.  To  ensure  a  sustainable  recovery  in  growth  back 
towards potential, it is important to focus on some key areas under our own control. These 
include the public finances, the efficiency and effectiveness of public spending, particularly in 
relation to increasing the productive capacity of the economy, and overall competitiveness. 
The  slowdown  in  economic  activity  is  impacting  on  the  fiscal  position.  Exchequer  data 
indicate a decline in tax revenue in the first half of 2008, primarily reflecting a slowdown in 
property related taxes, but also indicative of a sharp slowdown in consumer spending. On the 
expenditure side, emerging weakness in the labour market is increasing social expenditure. 
This  points  to  significant  deterioration  in  the  fiscal  deficit  for  2008  relative  to  earlier 
projections. I note that the Department of Finance has revised its estimate for the full year 
General  Government  Balance  to  a  deficit  of  about  2¾  per  cent  of  GDP.  Our  own  internal 
estimates are broadly in line with this assessment. 
Given the sensitivity of Irish public finances to economic developments (evident during the 
2000 to 2002 period), the slowing of growth coupled with the external risks facing the Irish 
economy  highlight  the  need  to  adopt  a  prudent  approach  to  fiscal  policy.  Ireland’s 
commitments  under  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  further  stress  the  need  for  such  an 
approach. On the basis of current trends, it will be a major challenge to remain within the 
terms of the Stability and Growth Pact next year. It should be emphasised, however, that the 
targets  set  under  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  represent  a  prudent  approach  to  the 
management of the public finances.  
Within  these  constraints,  it  will  be  necessary  to  carefully  manage  the  allocation  of  scarce 
public  funds  and  examine  measures  to  increase  the  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of 
government  spending,  both  current  and  capital.  A  particular  priority  within  the  capital 
programme should be the maintenance of expenditure on key infrastructural projects, which 
contribute to the productivity performance of the economy and enhance the potential for the 
economy to grow in the future. 
Policies that promote productivity and competitiveness can help the economy to weather the 
effects of adverse developments and of lower growth in the global economy. They also serve 
BIS Review 88/2008 
 3
to increase the medium-term performance of the economy, protect employment and allow for 
sustainable  increases  in  living  standards.  For  these  reasons,  boosting  productivity  growth 
and promoting flexibility in response to short-term shocks is particularly important. In addition 
to  enhancing  the  efficiency  of  public  spending  and  continuing  to  address  the  country’s 
infrastructure deficit, a number of other measures can be identified which would promote this 
goal.  These  include  greater  competition  in  the  more  sheltered  sectors  of  the  economy, 
continuing  to  encourage  innovation  and  R&D  activity  and  enhancing  the  skill  level  of  the 
labour force. 
There  is  an  ongoing  challenge  to  Ireland’s  competitiveness  position  arising  from  the 
combination of exchange rate appreciation and the sharp rise in energy and other commodity 
prices.  Ireland’s  competitiveness  position  had  already  weakened  in  recent  years  because 
wage and other cost inflation have been higher in Ireland than in our main trading partners. 
Given  a  lower  domestic  impetus  to  growth,  a  sustained  recovery  in  export  performance  is 
essential and will require a concerted effort to improve competitiveness. While recognising 
that competitiveness in its broadest sense encompasses a wide range of factors, a realistic 
approach  to  wage  determination  by  everyone  is  nevertheless  an  essential  element  in 
improving competitiveness. I would like to re-emphasise the point that I made earlier that we 
cannot compensate ourselves for commodity price rises over which we have no control. If we 
attempt to do so, then we risk repeating the mistakes of the past, from which the economy 
took so long to recover. 
Activities and financial accounts 
The Annual Report gives a full and detailed account of the Bank’s activities in 2007. I will just 
refer here to our financial accounts. The Bank’s profits for 2007 amounted to €228 million. 
Surplus  income  of  €193  million  will  be  paid  to  the  Exchequer.  In  addition,  a  total  of  €59 
million, in respect of the net proceeds of coin issued, was also paid to the Exchequer. 
This concludes my opening remarks. My colleagues and I are now on hand to answer any 
questions you may have. 
4 
 BIS Review 88/2008
