Emsley D Tromp: Towards a country status for Curacao – financial and 
social-economic implications 
Speech by Dr Emsley D Tromp, President of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles (Bank van 
de  Nederlandse  Antillen),  on  the  occasion  of  VBC’s  2008  L  B  Smith  Lecture,  Willemstad, 
Curacao, 30 May 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, good afternoon, 
It  is  with  a  great  deal  of  pleasure  that  I  accepted  the  invitation  of  the  Curacao  Business 
Association to deliver the 2008 L.B. Smith lecture. I was asked to share my views with you 
on the financial and social-economic implications of the constitutional changes for the future 
country of Curacao. This topic is very timely because we all are confronted daily with news 
about  the  progress,  drawbacks,  complications,  and  differences  of  opinion  related  to  this 
change of historical proporcions we are preparing for that will shape our future prosperity and 
welfare. 
An overwhelming amount of work has to be done to get our island ready for its future status 
as a country. Along the way, we are confronted with numerous threats and challenges that 
we must address to keep the process going. Despite the many differences that exist between 
our  politicians,  employer  and  employee  associations,  and  other  groups  in  our  society,  we 
share  the  common  goal  of  Curacao  as  an  autonomous  country  in  the  Kingdom  of  the 
Netherlands. If we all focus on this common goal that binds us, we will be able to overcome 
our  differences  and  reach  the  desired  country  status  within  a  reasonable  period  of  time. 
Although target dates are important to keep the processes of change going, I strongly believe 
that having all the essential legislation and institutions in place, sound public finances, and 
approval  and  funding  for  programs  for  structural  reform  and  poverty  relief  are  in 
indispensable for Curacao to successfully assume its country status.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I have structured my address around three broad areas: (1) public 
finances; (2) structural reform and poverty alleviation; and (3) monetary and financial sector 
supervision.  However,  before  I  go  into  more  detail  on  these  areas  with  respect  to  the 
constitutional  changes,  I  would  first  like  to  discuss  with  you  the  current  state  of  Curacao’s 
economy and the challenges emitting from the international environment we are part of. 
The economy of Curacao is finally picking up after a marginal annual average growth rate of 
0.3%  in  real  terms  since  the  end  of  the  economic  recession  in  2001.  Economic  growth 
increased to 1.4% in 2006 and a further acceleration to approximately 3.5% is estimated for 
2007. The inflation rate remained stable at 3.0%, which is relatively high as a result of the 
impact of the rising world oil prices. The stronger growth was translated into an improvement 
in  the  labor  market.  The  unemployment  rate  declined  from  its  peak  of  18.2%  in  2005  to 
12.0% in 2007. Youth unemployment also declined during this period from 44.0% to 24.2%. 
Although  this  decline  is  more  than  welcome,  more  progress  is  needed  if  we  are  to  make 
durable inroads in our quest to eradicate poverty.  
The  improved  economic  performance  has  been  led  primarily  by  the  private  sector.  In 
particular,  private  investments  grew  strongly,  but  private  consumption  also  contributed 
significantly  to  the  expansion.  The  high  investment  growth  was  due  largely  to  the 
construction of new hotels and the expansion of existing ones. This wave of new investment 
projects  was  triggered  by  the  remarkable  recovery  in  the  number  of  tourists  since  2006. 
During  the  previous  three  years,  the  number  of  stay-over  visitors  remained  stagnant, 
reflected  by  an  average  annual  increase  of  only  a  half  percent.  However,  2006  posted  a 
growth  of  6%  and  2007  28%,  the  highest  growth  figures  in  the  Netherlands  Antilles. 
Consequently, the occupancy rate rose rapidly and has now surpassed the 90% limit. The 
rising occupancy rate created confidence among the existing hotels that the time was right to 
BIS Review 71/2008 
 1
expand their room capacity. In addition, the potential for further strong growth in the number 
of  tourists  attracted  new  investors  and  the  attention  of  large  international  hotel  chains. 
Moreover,  cruise  tourism  is  also  performing  well  after  its  recovery  in  2005,  although  the 
growth rate is decelerating. 
Most other sectors also performed well. The airport handled 19% more passengers in 2007 
than in 2006, owing to the strong growth in tourism. The harbor recorded an 8% growth in 
freight  handled  and  5%  more  ship  calls.  Moreover,  the  oil  industry  noted  increases  in 
refining,  storage,  and  transshipment.  In  contrast,  activities  in  ship  repair  and  international 
financial & business services declined, the latter perhaps partly the result of the international 
financial turbulence. 
The great volatility in international financial markets originating from the crisis in the US sub-
prime  mortgage  market  since  mid-2007  and  the  continuing  increases  in  the  prices  of  oil, 
other raw materials, and food cast dark clouds over the world economic climate. Due to our 
small and open economy, Curacao relies heavily on international trade, which is affected in 
various ways by these international developments. Import prices are rising rapidly, resulting 
in a higher inflation rate. We estimate an acceleration in the inflation rate to 3.5% in 2008, 
due  primarily  to  higher  food  costs  and  domestic  gasoline  and  utility  prices.  In  light  of  the 
stringent budget rules concerning eligibility for the debt relief, the government cannot absorb 
the rising oil prices anymore and has started a gradual increase of the gasoline and utility 
prices. Consequently, private demand is expected to be tempered, slowing economic growth.  
The  weaker  groups  in  our  society,  such  as  persons  relying  on  government  support 
(“onderstand”) or a state pension (AOV), will suffer most from the price increases because 
they  have  no  means  to  absorb  them.  Therefore,  I  support  the  efforts  made  by  the 
government  to  compensate  these  groups  for  the  impact  of  the  rising  prices.  However,  the 
compensating measures must not jeopardize the budget target or cause a disproportionate 
burden for other groups in our society. 
It is expected that the US economy will go through a brief recession in 2008, which is likely to 
affect  the  number  of  American  visitors  to  our  island.  However,  with  a  20%  share  in  total 
visitors and the favorable outlook for European visitors related to the strong euro, the overall 
impact should be moderate. Finally, the foreign investments of our local financial institutions 
will be affected by the declining international interest rates and securities prices in the wake 
of the financial crisis. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the fundamental changes in relative prices of commodities (the so-
called  silent  tsunami)  and  their  consequent  impact  on  our  cost  of  living,  the  volatility  and 
turmoil in the international financial markets which greatly impacted capital flows and hence 
investment projects and the recession in the United States are all tantamount to an increase 
in taxation on our economy. This will impact our economic growth negatively and will bring its 
pressure to bear on our standards of living if no timely and appropriate policy measures are 
put  in  place.  I  therefore  call  for  the  institution  of  a  blue  ribbon  committee  on  the 
national level if not on the Kingdom level to address these trying issues. The primary 
objective of this committee must be to devise ways and means to address the fundamental 
changes that are taking place in the world economy to mitigate their deleterious effect on our 
economies.  Prominent  among  their  recommendations  should  be  policies  to  decrease  our 
dependence on imported energy by looking for alternative energy sources consistent with a 
sustainable economic development.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  in  addition  to  the  threats  emanating  from  the  current  international 
developments,  preparing  Curacao  for  its  new  constitutional  status  will  dominate  our  policy 
agenda in 2008 and the years ahead. The constitutional change brings many uncertainties, 
but  it  also  creates  unique  opportunities  to  correct  the  many  financial-economic  and  social 
imbalances on our island with the support of the Dutch government. The main objective is to 
prepare the island adequately for its status as a country with a sound financial position and a 
solid social-economic foundation, crucial conditions for a sustainable growth of our economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2008
The  sound  financial  position  has  everything  to  do  with  Curacao’s  public  finances.  The 
accumulation  of  annual  budget  deficits  resulted  in  an  unsustainable  debt  level  of  NAf.2.5 
billion in 2005, the year earmarked for the application of the debt relief, and it grew further to 
NAf.2.9 billion at the end of 2007. These debt levels correspond to 59% and 63% of GDP, 
respectively.  The  annual  interest  payments  on  the  debt  have  reached  NAf.150  million, 
absorbing  20%  of  tax  revenues  and  15%  of  expenditures.  Given  the  initial  2008  deficit  of 
NAf.170 million, it can be concluded that without this high interest burden, Curacao’s budget 
would  have  been  nearly  in  balance.  In  addition,  high  interest  expenses  crowd  out  funds 
needed  for  important  policy  areas,  such  as  crime  control,  education,  health  care, 
infrastructure, and poverty alleviation. Moreover, a high debt burden substantially constrains 
our  capacity  to  raise  funds  and  hence  our  ability  to  grow.  These  results  have  significantly 
eroded the policy autonomy of our decision makers. 
To reduce the high level of debt to a sustainable level requires a long and painful adjustment 
process. Given the current erosion in public infrastructure and services due to a lack of funds 
and  the  prevailing  poverty  in  Curacao,  I  do  not  think  this  is  a  viable  approach.  The  only 
realistic solution for the debt problem is a swift and significant reduction of the debt burden. 
This solution is included in the agreement between the central government, the governments 
of Curacao and St. Maarten, and the Dutch government of November 2, 2006, better known 
as the “Slotverklaring”.  
In the “Slotverklaring”, the Dutch government agreed to take over the debt of the entities up 
to  the  level  corresponding  with  an  interest  burden  rule.  In  the  case  of  Curacao,  this  rule 
prescribes  that  the  interest  expenses  in  the  budget  may  not  exceed  5%  of  the  average 
revenues of the preceding three years. Since the experts are still busy calculating the exact 
amount  and  composition  of  the  debt  to  be  assumed,  the  final  outcome  is  not  yet  known. 
However,  based  on  some  broad  assumptions,  let  me  try  to  shed  some  lights  on  these 
figures.  The  average  revenues  of  Curacao  as  a  country  are  estimated  at  approximately 
NAf.1.6 billion per year, resulting in maximum allowed interest expenses of NAf.80 million per 
year. Assuming an average interest rate of 7.5% on the debt results in a maximum allowed 
debt level of approximately NAf.1.1 billion, corresponding with a debt-to-GDP ratio of 25%. 
Compared with the actual debt of NAf.2.5 billion at the end of 2005, the Dutch government 
would take over 56% of Curacao’s debt. I did not include Curacao’s share in the unallocated 
central  government  debt  in  my  calculation.  Because  Curacao’s  own  debt  already  exceeds 
the level corresponding with the interest burden rule by a substantial amount, its share in the 
central government debt will be taken over by the Dutch anyway. 
The debt relief and authority to borrow are bound by four strict conditions and control that will 
substantially  enhance  fiscal  discipline  and  transparency.  First,  the  current  account  of  the 
budget may not have a deficit and must be presented in a multi-annual framework. Second, 
interest expenses may not exceed the 5% rule. Third, the recommendations of the Financial 
Position  Working  Group  on  improvement  of  financial  management  and  control  must  be 
implemented as planned. Fourth, the entire budgetary process from preparation of the draft 
budget to the accountability of its implementation is subject to supervision by an autonomous 
supervisory authority. I fully support this rules-based supervisory framework because it will 
guarantee lasting sound public finances. However, this framework is quite a change from the 
current rather loose implementation of the budgetary rules. So, especially in the beginning, 
this  new  approach  is  bound  to  create  frequent  tensions  with  the  supervisory  authority;  the 
recent experiences of Bonaire, Saba, and St. Eustatius serve as an example here. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  would  like  to  share  my  thoughts  with  you  on  a  number  of  issues 
regarding the debt relief. First, when will the debt relief start for Curacao? After the Island 
Council finally ratified the “Slotverklaring” at the end of August 2007, expectations were high 
that the debt relief would go into effect in 2008. The island government even amended its 
budget to take into account the interest savings. Together with a set of measures, it would be 
possible  to  present  a  balanced  budget  for  2008.  However,  the  preparations  for  the 
constitutional  changes,  including  the  debt  relief,  are  taking  much  longer  than  initially 
BIS Review 71/2008 
 3
anticipated.  Recent  information  suggests  that  the  “Algemene  Maatregel  van  Rijksbestuur” 
regulating the supervision of Curacao’s budgetary process will be approved by the end of this 
year,  meaning  that  the  debt  relief  will  not  become  effective  until  2009.  In  a  worst  case 
scenario, Curacao will end up with a deficit of NAf.170 million in 2008 instead of a balanced 
budget, contributing to a further increase in the debt. 
This brings me to a second issue: what do we do with the debt accumulated after the end of 
2005? If the debt relief starts in 2009, the deficits accumulated after 2005 will have added 
approximately NAf.550 million to Curacao’s outstanding debt. This means that the maximum 
allowed debt will be exceeded by 50%. Clearly, if this amount is left out, we will not attain a 
sound  financial  starting  position,  the  main  objective  of  the  debt  relief.  This  issue  must  be 
resolved for successful debt relief. 
The  final  issue  I’d  like  to  mention  concerning  the  debt  relief  is  its  impact  on  our  capital 
market.  The  entire  debt  relief  for  all  entities  will  result  in  NAf.3.5  billion  flowing  into  the 
economy in the next 10-15 years from the settlement of payment arrears and the repayment 
of loans. Although part of this amount will end up abroad, a substantial amount will remain in 
our  economy,  increasing  the  availability  of  funds  for  the  private  sector  and  thereby 
contributing to a further decline in domestic interest rates. Borrowing at lower rates of interest 
will  promote  higher  domestic  consumption  and  investment  leading  to  higher  economic 
growth. On the other hand, our financial institutions have to deal with lower interest income, 
which  should  be  compensated  for  by  increasing  efficiency  and  tapping  other  sources  of 
revenue.  Our  institutional  investors  are  a  special  case  because  they  are  subject  to 
restrictions on investing abroad. They hold about 75% of the local government bonds, which 
will  largely  be  redeemed.  Since  there  are  insufficient  local  investment  alternatives  at  a 
comparable  risk/return  rate,  the  Bank  has  announced  a  special  provision  allowing  these 
funds to be invested abroad. 
In  addition  to  the  debt  issue,  another  major  issue  regarding  the  public  finances  is  the 
government  apparatus.  Curacao  is  becoming  a  country,  which  implies  new  tasks  and 
responsibilities.  This  change  of  status  provides  a  unique  opportunity  to  design  a  new 
effective  and  efficient  government  structure.  To  do  so  requires  several  things.  First,  the 
government  tasks  must  be  defined,  including  the  tasks  being  taken  over  from  the  central 
government.  I  understand  that  this  exercise  is  almost  completed  with  the  assistance  of 
consultancy company KPMG. Second, legislation on which to base the implementation of the 
government tasks must be prepared and approved. I believe current legislation generally will 
be  adequate,  complemented  by  the  necessary  amendments.  Third,  the  government 
apparatus must be adequately staffed in accordance with the requirements listed in the job 
description of each position. The positions can be filled from the current pool of civil servants 
of the island as well as from the central government; if necessary, additional training can be 
provided.  Positions  that  remain  open  should  be  advertised  and  filled  with  external 
candidates.  Current  civil  servants  who  do  not  meet  the  job  requirements  and  cannot  be 
properly retrained should seek employment in the private sector. I think it is inevitable that 
setting  up  a  new  government  apparatus  from  two  existing  entities  will  result  in  involuntary 
layoffs.  Otherwise,  the  perceived  benefits  from  the  elimination  of  the  present  dual  layer  of 
government  can  never  be  realized.  We  have  to  focus  on  two  major  objectives  in  this 
exercise: (1) an efficient and effective government apparatus for the country of Curacao, and 
(2)  adequate  compensation,  counseling,  and  training  for  the  civil  servants  who  become 
redundant to create opportunities for them to secure a job in the private sector. Finally, the 
principles  of  good  governance  should  be  embedded  in  the  new  government  apparatus  to 
guarantee effective and responsible spending of our tax money, efficient high quality services 
to the public, and effective sanctions for misconduct and abuse.  
Ladies and gentlemen, to sustain the current economic recovery and to make our economy 
more resilient to external shocks, we must implement our structural reform agenda with much 
more  vigor  than  has  been  the  case  so  far.  I  have  discussed  this  issue  on  many  previous 
occasions, but given the lack of progress, allow me to repeat the necessary reforms briefly. 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2008
Let’s  start  with  the  labor  market.  Reform  in  this  area  concerns  two  major  aspects: 
(1) flexibilization  of  rules  and  regulations,  and  (2)  reduction  of  the  qualitative  mismatch 
between demand and supply. Despite some improvements, rules on hiring and firing are still 
considered too rigid, while mandatory benefits and overtime compensation are high. Bolder 
steps  towards  more  flexibility  are  needed  to  improve  our  competitiveness  and  create  new 
jobs more easily, provided that individual protection against abuse is preserved. To reduce 
the  qualitative  mismatch  between  labor  demand  and  supply  education  is  the  key.  Our 
institutions that provide education should take into account to a much greater degree the skill 
needs in the private sector. Closer cooperation between the public and private sectors can 
help  accomplish  this  goal.  Although  education  is  primarily  a  government  task,  the  private 
sector should not hesitate to take its own initiatives. Companies could support education and 
training in their specific industry financially and/or provide internships and training. I heartily 
welcome  the  initiative  of  the  Curacao  Hospitality  and  Tourism  Association  to  start  a  Hotel 
Academy, which will deliver properly trained staff for the many jobs that are being created in 
the booming tourism sector. 
A second area for reform is the further development of our capital market, promoting more 
financing  opportunities  for  entrepreneurs  and  more  local  investment  opportunities  for 
investors. The latter has become even more relevant as a result of the declining significance 
of government bonds as an investment instrument in light of the debt relief. The development 
of private debt instruments and equity-based financing should especially be promoted. These 
types of financing are still rarely used on our island, but they are significantly cheaper than 
bank financing. Specifically for start-ups, the establishment of a venture capital fund could be 
crucial to raise the necessary financing for a promising investment project. The development 
of  these  instruments  also  can  stimulate  the  development  of  a  securities  exchange.  In 
summary,  a  well-functioning  capital  market  will  promote  the  realization  of  promising 
investment opportunities leading to faster growth in productivity and output. 
The reduction of administrative barriers for doing business is the third area of reform I would 
like to mention. One of the most common complaints from the business sector is the number 
and  complexity  of  government  formalities  and  paperwork  that  frustrate  new  investment 
initiatives and, hence, the opportunity for stronger economic growth. The elimination of the 
double layer of government on the island is certainly a step in the right direction. However, it 
should be complemented by streamlining administrative procedures aimed at eliminating all 
unnecessary bureaucracy, and simplifying the procedures for obtaining business and work 
permits  and  business  visas.  In  addition,  the  creation  of  a  one-window  agency  to  serve 
potential  investors  as  well  as  to  provide  aftercare  services  to  existing  investors  is  long 
overdue. Moreover, when we begin our new constitutional status, we must be cautious not to 
implement any new measures that might adversely impact our investment climate. What we 
should  do  is  to  embrace  the  possibilities  offered  by  the  new  status  by  making  our 
administrative system more transparent and efficient. 
A  final  area  of  reform  that  must  not  be  neglected  is  tax  reform.  With  the  new  status 
approaching, Curaçao will have the opportunity to include all the necessary reforms in a new 
tax system, contributing to the improvement of the investment climate. In my view, the new 
tax  system  of  Curacao  should  be  simple  and  transparent.  Direct  tax  rates  should  be 
competitive  compared  to  other  countries,  especially  in  our  region,  to  encourage  consumer 
spending  and  investment  by  raising  disposable  income.  The  result  will  lead  to  more 
economic activities, broadening the base of the sales tax. In addition, a more effective and 
efficient  assessment  and  collection  system  should  also  be  an  important  component  of  the 
new tax system, since it can ensure budget neutrality in the face of the reduction in direct tax 
rates.  In  this  regard,  I  welcome  the  initiative  of  the  Minister  of  Finance  to  put  in  place  a 
mechanism  to  ensure  the  swift  implementation  of  the  recommendations  made  by  the  Ellis 
committee. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  higher  economic  growth  that  can  be  attained  by  implementing 
these reforms will ultimately also result in poverty reduction, but I do not think that the poor 
BIS Review 71/2008 
 5
can  wait  any  longer.  Therefore,  the  reforms  must  be  accompanied  by  targeted  social 
programs for the poor that alleviate their immediate needs. The funds that become available 
with  the  recently  signed  Social  Economic  Initiative,  which  contains  programs  targeted  at 
economic  as  well  as  social  progress,  will  greatly  facilitate  the  implementation  of  the 
necessary reforms and support for the poor. 
The  third  area  I  would  like  to  discuss  with  respect  to  the  constitutional  changes,  and  one 
which  is  particularly  close  to  my  heart  as  a  central  banker,  is  the  future  of  our  monetary 
system  and  financial  sector  supervision  in  the  new  constitutional  arrangement.  The 
“Slotverklaring”  explicitly  states  that  there  will  be  one  central  bank  for  Curacao  and  St. 
Maarten  responsible  for  monetary,  financial,  and  integrity  supervision  based  on  one  set  of 
laws.  Rationally  considered,  I  fully  subscribe  to  this  statement.  It  means  that  the  current 
central  bank  will  be  broadly  maintained,  continuing  its  good  reputation  and  credibility  in 
safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  monetary  and  financial  system.  I  believe  this  is  very 
important in light of the uncertainties surrounding the numerous changes that will take place 
on the road toward the new constitutional status of the islands. In addition, with a common 
central bank, economies of scale can be maintained with regard to the high costs of highly 
educated  staff  and  modern  information  and  communication  infrastructure.  Moreover,  a 
common central bank will provide a larger common economic area with broader economic 
diversification, which may dampen the impact of a shock occurring on one of the islands. 
If  Curacao  and  St.  Maarten  as  autonomous  countries  share  a  common  central  bank  and 
currency,  they  form  a  monetary  union.  Since  autonomous  countries  have  their  own  policy 
responsibilities, a monetary union requires a high degree of policy coordination and harmony 
to ensure a balanced and effective monetary policy. In addition, a well functioning monetary 
union requires free movement of goods, services, capital, and labor between the countries. 
These  requirements  may  be  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  desire  for  more  autonomy  by 
Curacao  and  St.  Maarten  since  this  desire  was  the  main  driving  force  behind  opting  for 
country status. Ladies and gentlemen, autonomy dies from suicide and not murder. We must 
begin, however, with the understanding that strong political commitment is required to give 
up some of the newly won policy autonomy in the interest of a stable and effective monetary 
union. In addition, the central bank’s independence should not be subject to discussion. The 
Bank  should  be  managed  by  persons  with  a  high  degree  of  professional  standing  and 
integrity, irrespective of nationality or place of birth. With regard to the supervisory board of 
directors,  the  governments  of  the  two  countries  could  be  allowed  to  nominate  candidates 
according to a predetermined number for each country and provided that certain professional 
and integrity standards are met. If we fail to comprehend this, we will not be able to create a 
stable monetary environment conducive to growth and stability. A deviation from those basic 
tenets  for  a  common  central  bank  will  render  this  objective  meaningless.  We  will  need  to 
work  well  together  because  we  have  a  great  challenge  before  us.  It  is  our  own  incredible 
success that we face. 
As mentioned, like an inheritance the new found opportunities can be exploited successfully 
or be squandered. Though not far from inconceivable, if our politicians cannot come to an 
agreement on a common central bank, what will be the next best alternative? Curacao will 
likely  continue  the  current  central  bank  with  the  existing  monetary  and  supervisory 
infrastructure.  Keep  in  mind  that  Curacao  comprises  70%  of  the  Antillean  economy,  while 
most financial institutions have their local headquarters on the island. However,  Curacao’s 
central  bank  will  start  with  a  lower  revenue  base  as  a  result  of  the  division  of  the  foreign 
exchange  reserves  with  St.  Maarten  and  the  omission  of  income  from  the  issuance  of 
banknotes  and  currency  transactions  with  banks  in  St.  Maarten.  The  decline  in  revenues 
should be compensated by increases in other sources of revenues and cost reductions. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we have opened an important new chapter in Curacao’s history that 
will result in an autonomous country within the Kingdom of the Netherlands. This chapter is 
being  written  by  many  authors  and  consists  of  many  sub-plots.  Together  we  are  all 
responsible  for  preserving  the  main  storyline  and  finishing  the  chapter  in  time.  It  is  my 
6 
 BIS Review 71/2008
earnests  hope  that  when  we  achieve  our  country  status  we  do  not  lose  our  people.  Let’s 
demonstrate  that  we  are  ready  to carry  out  this  responsibility  and  work  tirelessly  toward  a 
strong and prosperous country.  
Thank you for your attention!  
BIS Review 71/2008 
 7
