Ben S Bernanke: Economic outlook 
Testimony of Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Joint  Economic  Committee,  US  Congress,  Washington  DC, 
24 September 2008. 
 Chairman Schumer, Vice Chair Maloney, Representative Saxton, and other members of the 
committee, I appreciate this opportunity to discuss recent developments in financial markets 
and  to  present  an  update  on  the  economic  situation.  As  you  know,  the  U.S.  economy 
continues  to  confront  substantial  challenges,  including  a  weakening  labor  market  and 
elevated inflation. Notably, stresses in financial markets have been high and have recently 
intensified  significantly.  If  financial  conditions  fail  to  improve  for  a  protracted  period,  the 
implications for the broader economy could be quite adverse.  
The  downturn  in  the  housing  market  has  been  a  key  factor  underlying  both  the  strained 
condition  of  financial  markets  and  the  slowdown  of  the  broader  economy.  In  the  financial 
sphere, falling home prices and rising mortgage delinquencies have led to major losses at 
many  financial  institutions,  losses  only  partially  replaced  by  the  raising  of  new  capital. 
Investor  concerns  about  financial  institutions  increased  over  the  summer,  as  mortgage-
related assets deteriorated further and economic activity weakened. Among the firms under 
the  greatest  pressure  were  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac,  Lehman  Brothers,  and,  more 
recently,  American  International  Group  (AIG).  As  investors  lost  confidence  in  them,  these 
companies saw their access to liquidity and capital markets increasingly impaired and their 
stock prices drop sharply.  
The Federal Reserve believes that, whenever possible, such difficulties should be addressed 
through  private-sector  arrangements  –  for  example,  by  raising  new  equity  capital,  by 
negotiations  leading  to  a  merger  or  acquisition,  or  by  an  orderly  wind-down.  Government 
assistance should be given with the greatest of reluctance and only when the stability of the 
financial  system,  and,  consequently,  the  health  of  the  broader  economy,  is  at  risk.  In  the 
cases of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, however, capital raises of sufficient size appeared 
infeasible and the size and government-sponsored status of the two companies precluded a 
merger with or acquisition by another company. To avoid unacceptably large dislocations in 
the financial sector, the housing market, and the economy as a whole, the Federal Housing 
Finance Agency (FHFA) placed Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac into conservatorship, and the 
Treasury  used  its  authority,  granted  by  the  Congress  in  July,  to  make  available  financial 
support  to  the  two  firms.  The  Federal  Reserve,  with  which  FHFA  consulted  on  the 
conservatorship  decision  as  specified  in  the  July  legislation,  supported  these  steps  as 
necessary  and  appropriate.  We  have  seen  benefits  of  this  action  in  the  form  of  lower 
mortgage rates, which should help the housing market. 
The Federal Reserve and the Treasury attempted to identify private-sector solutions for AIG 
and Lehman Brothers, but none was forthcoming. In the case of AIG, the Federal Reserve, 
with the support of the Treasury, provided an emergency credit line to facilitate an orderly 
resolution.  The  Federal  Reserve  took  this  action  because  it  judged  that,  in  light  of  the 
prevailing market conditions and the size and composition of AIG's obligations, a disorderly 
failure of AIG would have severely threatened global financial stability and, consequently, the 
performance of the U.S. economy. To mitigate concerns that this action would exacerbate 
moral  hazard  and  encourage  inappropriate  risk-taking  in  the  future,  the  Federal  Reserve 
ensured  that  the  terms  of  the  credit  extended  to  AIG  imposed  significant  costs  and 
constraints  on  the  firm's  owners,  managers,  and  creditors.  The  chief  executive  officer  has 
been  replaced.  The  collateral  for  the  loan  is  the  company  itself,  together  with  its 
BIS Review 115/2008 
 1
subsidiaries.1  (Insurance  policyholders  and  holders  of  AIG  investment  products  are, 
however, fully protected.) Interest will accrue on the outstanding balance of the loan at a rate 
of three-month Libor plus 850 basis points, implying a current interest rate over 11 percent. 
In  addition,  the  U.S.  government  will  receive  equity  participation  rights  corresponding  to  a 
79.9  percent  equity  interest  in  AIG  and  has  the  right  to  veto  the  payment  of  dividends  to 
common and preferred shareholders, among other things.  
In  the  case  of  Lehman  Brothers,  a  major  investment  bank,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the 
Treasury  declined  to  commit  public  funds  to  support  the  institution.  The  failure  of  Lehman 
posed risks. But the troubles at Lehman had been well known for some time, and investors 
clearly recognized – as evidenced, for example, by the high cost of insuring Lehman's debt in 
the market for credit default swaps – that the failure of the firm was a significant possibility. 
Thus,  we  judged  that  investors  and  counterparties  had  had  time  to  take  precautionary 
measures. 
While perhaps manageable in itself, Lehman's default was combined with the unexpectedly 
rapid  collapse  of  AIG,  which  together  contributed  to  the  development  last  week  of 
extraordinarily  turbulent  conditions  in  global  financial  markets.  These  conditions  caused 
equity prices to fall sharply, the cost of short-term credit – where available – to spike upward, 
and liquidity to dry up in many markets. Losses at a large money market mutual fund sparked 
extensive withdrawals from a number of such funds. A marked increase in the demand for 
safe assets – a flight to quality – sent the yield on Treasury bills down to a few hundredths of 
a  percent.  By  further  reducing  asset  values  and  potentially  restricting  the  flow  of  credit  to 
households and businesses, these developments pose a direct threat to economic growth. 
The  Federal  Reserve  took  a  number  of  actions  to  increase  liquidity  and  stabilize  markets. 
Notably,  to  address  dollar  funding  pressures  worldwide,  we  announced  a  significant 
expansion  of  reciprocal  currency  arrangements  with  foreign  central  banks,  including  an 
approximate  doubling  of  the  existing  swap  lines  with  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the 
Swiss National Bank and the authorization of new swap facilities with the Bank of Japan, the 
Bank of England, and the Bank of Canada, among others. We will continue to work closely 
with colleagues at other central banks to address ongoing liquidity pressures. The Federal 
Reserve  also  announced  initiatives  to  assist  money  market  mutual  funds  facing  heavy 
redemptions and to increase liquidity in short-term credit markets.  
Despite the efforts of the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, and other agencies, global financial 
markets  remain  under  extraordinary  stress.  Action  by  the  Congress  is  urgently  required  to 
stabilize the situation and avert what otherwise could be very serious consequences for our 
financial  markets  and  for  our  economy.  In  this  regard,  the  Federal  Reserve  supports  the 
Treasury's  proposal  to  buy  illiquid  assets  from  financial  institutions.  Purchasing  impaired 
assets will create liquidity and promote price discovery in the markets for these assets, while 
reducing investor uncertainty about the current value and prospects of financial institutions. 
More generally, removing these assets from institutions’ balance sheets will help to restore 
confidence in our financial markets and enable banks and other institutions to raise capital 
and to expand credit to support economic growth.  
I will now turn to a brief update on the economic situation. 
Ongoing  developments  in  financial  markets  are  directly  affecting  the  broader  economy 
through  several  channels,  most  notably  by  restricting  the  availability  of  credit.  Mortgage 
credit  terms  have  tightened  significantly  and  fees  have  risen,  especially  for  potential 
borrowers  who  lack  substantial  down  payments  or  who  have  blemished  credit  histories. 
Mortgages  that  are  ineligible  for  credit  guarantees  by  Fannie  Mae  or  Freddie  Mac  –  for 
                                                 
1   Specifically,  the  loan  is  collateralized  by  all  of  the  assets  of  the  company  and  its  primary  non-regulated 
subsidiaries. These assets include the equity of substantially all of AIG's regulated subsidiaries. 
2 
 BIS Review 115/2008
example,  nonconforming  jumbo  mortgages  –  cannot  be  securitized  and  thus  carry  much 
higher  interest  rates  than  conforming  mortgages.  Some  lenders  have  reduced  borrowing 
limits on home equity lines of credit. Households also appear to be having more difficulty of 
late in obtaining nonmortgage credit. For example, the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer 
Opinion  Survey  reported  that  as  of  July  an  increasing  proportion  of  banks  had  tightened 
standards for credit card and other consumer loans. In the business sector, through August, 
the  financially  strongest  firms  remained  able  to  issue  bonds  but  bond  issuance  by 
speculative-grade firms remained very light. More recently, however, deteriorating financial 
market conditions have disrupted the commercial paper market and other forms of financing 
for  a  wide  range  of  firms,  including  investment-grade  firms.  Financing  for  commercial  real 
estate projects has also tightened very significantly.  
When worried lenders tighten credit, then spending, production, and job creation slow. Real 
economic activity in the second quarter appears to have been surprisingly resilient, but, more 
recently, economic activity appears to have decelerated broadly. In the labor market, private 
payrolls shed another 100,000 jobs in August, bringing the cumulative drop since November 
to 770,000. New claims for unemployment insurance are at elevated levels and the civilian 
unemployment rate rose to 6.1 percent in August. Households' real disposable income was 
boosted  significantly  in  the  spring  by  the  tax  rebate  payments,  but,  excluding  those 
payments,  real  after-tax  income  has  fallen  this  year,  which  partly  reflects  increases  in  the 
prices of energy and food.  
In  recent  months,  the  weakness  in  real  income  together  with  the  restraining  effects  of 
reduced credit flows and declining financial and housing wealth have begun to show through 
more clearly to consumer spending. Real personal consumption expenditures for goods and 
services  declined  in  June  and  July,  and  the  retail  sales  report  for  August  suggests  that 
outlays for consumer goods fell noticeably further last month. Although the retrenchment in 
household  spending  has  been  widespread,  purchases  of  motor  vehicles  have  dropped  off 
particularly  sharply.  On  a  more  positive  note,  oil  and  gasoline  prices  –  while  still  at  high 
levels, in part reflecting the effects of Hurricane Ike – have come down substantially from the 
peaks they reached earlier this summer, contributing to a recent improvement in consumer 
confidence.  However,  the  weakness  in  the  fundamentals  underlying  consumer  spending 
suggest that household expenditures will be sluggish, at best, in the near term.  
The recent indicators of the demand for new and existing homes hint at some stabilization of 
sales, and  lower  mortgage  rates  are  likely  to provide  some  support  for  demand  in  coming 
months. Moreover, although expectations that house prices will continue to fall have probably 
dissuaded some potential buyers from entering the market, lower house prices and mortgage 
interest rates are making housing increasingly affordable over time. Still, homebuilders retain 
large  backlogs  of  unsold  homes,  which  should  continue  to  restrain  the  pace  of  new  home 
construction. Indeed, single-family housing starts and new permit issuance dropped further in 
August.  At  the  same  time,  the  continuing  decline  in  house  prices  reduces  homeowners' 
equity and puts continuing pressure on the balance sheets of financial institutions, as I have 
already noted. 
As  of  midyear,  business  investment  was  holding  up  reasonably  well,  with  investment  in 
nonresidential  structures  particularly  robust.  However,  a  range  of  factors,  including 
weakening  fundamentals  and  constraints  on  credit,  are  likely  to  result  in  a  considerable 
slowdown  in  the  construction  of  commercial  and  office  buildings  in  coming  quarters. 
Business outlays for equipment and software also appear poised to slow in the second half 
of this year, assuming that production and sales slow as anticipated. 
International trade provided considerable support for the U.S. economy over the first half of 
the year. Economic activity has been buoyed by strong foreign demand for a wide range of 
U.S. exports, including agricultural products, capital goods, and industrial supplies, even as 
imports declined. However, in recent months, the outlook for foreign economic activity has 
deteriorated  amid  unsettled  conditions  in  financial  markets,  troubled  housing  sectors,  and 
BIS Review 115/2008 
 3
softening sentiment. As a consequence, in coming quarters, the contribution of net exports to 
U.S. production is not likely to be as sizable as it was in the first half of the year.  
All  told,  real  gross  domestic  product  is  likely  to  expand  at  a  pace  appreciably  below  its 
potential  rate  in  the  second  half  of  this  year  and  then  to  gradually  pick  up  as  financial 
markets return to more-normal functioning and the housing contraction runs its course. Given 
the extraordinary circumstances, greater-than-normal uncertainty surrounds any forecast of 
the pace of activity. In particular, the intensification of financial stress in recent weeks, which 
will  make  lenders  still  more  cautious  about  extending  credit  to  households  and  business, 
could  prove  a  significant  further  drag  on  growth.  The  downside  risks  to  the  outlook  thus 
remain a significant concern.  
Inflation rose sharply over the period from May to July, reflecting rapid increases in energy 
and  food  prices.  During  the  same period,  price  inflation  for  goods  and  services other  than 
food and energy also moved up from the low rates seen in the spring, as the higher costs of 
energy, other commodities, and imported goods were partially passed through to consumers. 
Recently,  however,  the  news  on  inflation  has  been  more  favorable.  The  prices  of  oil  and 
other  commodities,  while  remaining  quite  volatile,  have  fallen,  on  net,  from  their  recent 
peaks, and the dollar is up from its mid-summer lows. The declines in energy prices have 
also led to some easing of inflation expectations, as measured, for example, by consumer 
surveys and the pricing of inflation-indexed Treasury securities. 
If not reversed, these developments, together with a pace of growth that is likely to fall short 
of  potential  for  a  time,  should  lead  inflation  to  moderate  later  this  year  and  next  year. 
Nevertheless,  the  inflation  outlook  remains  highly  uncertain.  Indeed,  the  fluctuations  in  oil 
prices in the past few days illustrate the difficulty of predicting the future course of commodity 
prices. Consequently, the upside risks to inflation remain a significant concern as well. 
Over time, a number of factors should promote the return of our economy to higher levels of 
employment and sustainable growth with price stability, including the stimulus being provided 
by monetary policy, lower oil and commodity prices, increasing stability in the mortgage and 
housing  markets,  and  the  natural  recuperative  powers  of  our  economy.  However, 
stabilization of our financial system is an essential precondition for economic recovery. I urge 
the Congress to act quickly to address the grave threats to financial stability that we currently 
face. For its part, the Federal Open Market Committee will monitor economic and financial 
developments carefully and will act as needed to promote sustainable economic growth and 
price stability. 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2008
