Davíð Oddsson: Economic and financial developments in Iceland 
Address by Mr Davíð Oddsson, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Central Bank of 
Iceland, at the Bank's Annual Meeting, Reykjavik, 28 March 2008.  
 Mr. Chairman, Mr. Prime Minister, honourable Ministers, Ladies and Gentlemen:  
The Board of Governors of the Central Bank of Iceland welcomes you all to the Bank’s 47th 
Annual  Meeting.  At  the  recently  concluded  meeting  of  the  Supervisory  Board,  the  Prime 
Minister  ratified  the  Bank’s  annual  accounts,  which  are  available  here,  together  with  the 
Annual Report for the year 2007.  
Here in Iceland there are various cliffs that people scale in order to gain a better overview of 
the surroundings than they would have on the level ground below. From this vantage point, 
the Central Bank at Arnarhóll, the telescope points, in all weathers, at inflation – at how it 
develops and how it behaves. It focuses both on the components that are measured with the 
officially required tools and on those that lie beneath the surface, not least on the indicators 
and  expectations  concerning  how  these  components  of  inflation  are  likely  to  manifest 
themselves in the near future. As is well known, this guardianship and scrutiny constitutes 
the core of the Central Bank’s legally mandated role, and the fact that the Bank should be 
assigned  the  task  of  containing  inflation  is  not  absurd,  nor  is  it  a  function  of  obsession  or 
blind fundamentalist belief that a particular aspect of economic policy implementation should 
take absolute priority over all others.  
Both  in  Iceland  and  in  most  other  countries,  there  is  abundant  experience  to  support  the 
conviction that inflation is extremely harmful if it becomes immoderately high. It becomes a 
serious  problem  if  deviations  persist,  and  it  will  cause  important  damage  if  it  continues  to 
grow  and  the  Central  Bank  cannot  contain  it  through  conventional  measures  within  a 
reasonable period of time. It is possible to advance theoretical support for the idea that the 
Central Bank alone could hold inflation down, but in order to do so the Bank would have to 
implement its measures with such force and rigidity that its actions might have an extremely 
negative effect on many other aspects of people’s lives. It is therefore vital that those who 
are  most  influential  in  determining  Iceland’s  financial  and  economic  development  pull 
together  as  one  in  order  to  fight  rising  inflation.  Short-term  interests  and  viewpoints  must 
yield  in  favour  of  the  greater  goal.  To  be  sure,  the  Central  Bank  is  assigned  the  task  of 
containing inflation with particular acuity on behalf of the public and the authorities, and the 
Bank is required to wield the weapons in its arsenal whether people like it or not. The Bank 
attempts to carry out that task as well as it possibly can. In the service of that task, the Bank 
is granted more independence than are most government-owned institutions. One could ask 
why this is so. What makes it necessary?  
The explanation lies not least in the fact that the legislature – in Iceland as elsewhere – has 
realised  that  the  battle  against  the  disease  called  inflation  could  be  lengthy  and 
uncomfortable. As time passes, the treatment of the disease could generate unpleasant side 
effects, and it might be tempting to do away with those side effects in the vain hope that the 
illness will somehow cure itself. Indeed, we have heard this irresponsible notion expressed in 
various  quarters  recently.  Anyone  who  has  come  down  with  a  persistent  illness  is  familiar 
with the physician’s demand that the patient complete the course of treatment prescribed to 
him. If he does not, he runs the risk that the bacteria attacking him will become resistant to 
the medicine best suited to fight them, with the result that the medicine will work poorly or not 
at  all  the  next  time  it  is  needed.  The  tactic  of  last  resort  under  such  circumstances  is  to 
prescribe a much stronger dose, which inevitably produces much more dire side effects. If a 
central bank, either the one located in this building or another one, should change its course 
in mid-stream because of escalating pressure stemming from painful side effects, it is hardly 
BIS Review 36/2008 
 1
likely that such a bank would be taken seriously when it next attempted to mount a campaign 
against  inflation.  The  independence  of  the  Central  Bank  exists  not  least  to  guarantee  that 
those wishing to take the line of least resistance, hoping that the illness will cure itself, cannot 
bring  undue  pressure  to  bear.  The  Central  Bank’s  independence  also  provides  the 
government a buffer against such pressure.  
The fact is that the Central Bank neither can nor wants to ignore the figures that tell us that it 
is far from having achieved its goal of bringing inflation down to targeted levels. There are 
many explanations for this – or excuses, perhaps – but as has always been the case, many 
excuses are usually worse than one. And of course, the main explanation is that growth, and 
demand have been greater and more enduring than economic indicators – and therefore the 
Bank’s forecasts – suggested. This has required lengthier and more invasive treatment than 
was previously intended. And while the Central Bank does not consider this a desirable state 
of affairs, it is convinced that this treatment is inevitable and necessary.  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
The  twelve  months  that  have  elapsed  since  the  Bank’s  last  Annual  Meeting  have  been 
eventful in many ways. As regards the economy and the financial markets in particular, the 
season has been harsh and often stormy, and now, on March 28th, when the vernal equinox 
is past and the days are lengthening visibly with every week that passes, there are few signs 
that  spring  is  near  for  the  economy.  And  despite  the  fact  that  this  rather  pessimistic 
statement is anything but an exaggeration, it is surprising to realise how many people are still 
convinced that things have seldom been better than they are now, and that Icelanders are 
enjoying boom times in most respects. But is this really as astounding as it might seem at 
first? Our employment levels are very high, excess demand for labour is considerable, public 
access to credit institutions has been subject to few limitations until very recently, and though 
credit  has  not  exactly  been  cheap,  terms  have  not  been  as  unfavourable  as  one  might 
expect, thanks to high levels of employment and rising disposable income. The Treasury has 
been operated with an acceptable surplus and is well able to meet the demands made of it. 
As  a  result,  there  is  considerable  pressure  to  increase  government  expenditure,  though 
neither the labour market nor other economic conditions have yet required such increases. 
The government must be steadfast in resisting the pressure to increase expenditure at a time 
when  it  cannot  honestly  be  said  that  the  money  doesn’t  exist.  But  this  steadfastness  is 
nonetheless necessary, for it is virtually certain that there will be a genuine and growing need 
for that money at some stage, and the damage done will be considerable indeed if we are 
short-sighted  enough  to  forget  ourselves  in  the  expansiveness  that  accompanies  an 
economic boom and then cannot meet the demands of the lean years quickly and reliably.  
There  was  a  time  when  growing  debt  accumulation  by  the  government  posed  a  genuine 
threat, and it was promised that this would cease. Those promises were fulfilled, and it is a 
welcome relief to see how much conditions have improved. As a result, Iceland has garnered 
the respect of international credit rating agencies and has been placed on a par with some of 
the most powerful nations on the globe, which has not only strengthened the government but 
has also enhanced the position of Icelandic corporations and institutions in the international 
markets.  The  positive  credit  rating  enjoyed  by  the  Republic  of  Iceland  has  most  certainly 
been  worth  its  weight  in  gold  for  all  those  connected  with  the  country.  Recently  there  has 
been a bit of tension in this regard; credit default swap spreads have become wider than they 
were previously, and more unfavourable for the Icelandic government. This development is 
utterly  out  of  context  with  the  position  of  the  Republic  of  Iceland  itself.  It  has  occurred 
primarily  for  two  reasons.  Iceland’s  overall  level  of  debt  has  grown  to  an  uncomfortable 
degree, and the CDS spreads of Icelandic banks have reached exceptional heights despite 
their  excellent  capital  adequacy  ratios,  their  steady  history  of  profitability,  and  the 
improvements they have made in their funding procedures relative to, for example, two years 
ago.  The  present  credit  crunch  and  difficulties  in  the  market  are  far  from  being  uniquely 
Icelandic; they are a global phenomenon, and the recent turnaround seems to have taken 
everyone  by  surprise.  When  the  current  problems  reared  their  heads  in  mid-2007,  many 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2008
clung to the hope that these headwinds would be short-lived and soon pacified. The general 
feeling seems to have been that there was still a glut of capital around the world, and that the 
temporary distrust in the market –  even a sort of misunderstanding of the market – would 
vanish as soon as it became clear that the sub-prime mortgage market in the United States, 
despite its scope and size, was only a drop in the proverbial ocean of international finance, 
and that cheap capital must surely be unleashed anew and the Utopian dream would take 
the  market  in  its  arms  once  more.  At  which  point,  all  would  be  happy  once  again  and  all 
unpleasantness a forgotten dream. But the sub-prime mortgage market did not stand alone, 
and various events directly or indirectly related to it delayed expectations of a recovery, and 
the  new  lines  of  defence  were  drawn  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  and  in  the  weeks  that 
followed. According to the Utopians, when annual results began to show after the first of the 
year and the genuinely positive state of events was revealed, the phantom problem would 
wash away on the outgoing tide.  
There is the danger that those who placed their trust in such a beneficent outcome used their 
time far less well than they should have from August 2007 onward. The CEO of one of the 
largest banks in the world said, “While the band plays, we dance.” He was forced to resign 
shortly thereafter, when the bank demonstrated a shocking operating loss, but with a fat fund 
in  his  pockets  as  a  reward  for  his  foresight  and  progressive  thinking.  For  similar  reasons, 
many will have more difficulty waiting for better times. Of course, it is far from inconceivable 
that strong gusts of wind could come from any direction, dispersing pitch-black storm clouds 
in  a  moment’s  time,  bringing  leveraged  buyouts  of  heavily  indebted  companies  under  the 
aegis  of  credit  institutions  offering  minimum  terms  and  slick  collateral,  and  bright,  sunny 
morning  would  smile  on  markets  in  Iceland  and  elsewhere.  But  even  though  this  is  not 
inconceivable,  and  though  history  shows  that  the  market  is  living  proof  of  the  most 
improbable  outcomes,  the  likelihood  is  that  the  probability  of  winning  the  wait-and-hope 
game  is  measurably  poorer  than  that  accompanying  the  purchase  of  a  Lotto  ticket. 
Therefore, it is appropriate to assume that the situation will not right itself very much in the 
short term, and if it does right itself to any measurable degree, it will hardly return to its prior 
state. If people haven’t prepared themselves already, there is no reason to wait. We must 
seek all possible ways to strengthen the liquidity position of companies – particularly financial 
companies  –  and  at  the  same  time  we  must  re-examine  market  models.  In  athletic  terms, 
one  could  say  that  this  means  that  now  is  the  time  to  consolidate  our  defences  and  be 
content  with  a  goal  if  opportunities  emerge  in  spite  of  all  odds.  Though  exaggerated 
pessimism  is  obviously  unnecessary,  it  is  as  bad  or  worse  to  paint  the  situation  in  rosy 
colours  for  the  benefit  of  ourselves  and  the  public  and  imply  that  there  is  some  sort  of 
magical  solution  to  the  problem  that  faces  us.  As  the  saying  goes,  “Lying  to  others  is  a 
wicked bent; lying to oneself breeds a lethal event.”  
The fact that the past few months have seen dubious conduct in the international markets is 
another matter altogether. Recent examples include a rumourmongering campaign against 
the British bank HBOS, causing substantial, though temporary, damage. That case is now 
being  investigated.  There  is  also  an  example  from  Ireland,  which  suggests  that  the  same 
took place there. And it cannot be denied that the attacks that have been made on Iceland’s 
bank and central government – which was subjected to CDS spreads of up to an absurd 400 
basis  points  –  give  off an  unpleasant  odour  of  unscrupulous  dealers who  have  decided  to 
make a last stab at breaking down the Icelandic financial system. They won’t get away with 
it.  But  it  must  be  a  logical  next  step  to  consider  an  international  investigation  on  such 
attempts to bring a healthy economic system to its knees.  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
Just  a  year  ago,  at  the  Bank’s  Annual  Meeting  early  in  2007,  I  warned  against  tempting 
people with foreign loans when they didn’t have the income to support the risk. I have done 
the  same  on  many  other  occasions.  My  colleagues  here  on  the  Board  of  Governors  have 
also stressed this point repeatedly. But the thing that we have been most on the defensive 
BIS Review 36/2008 
 3
against got us in the end. People set little store by our words of caution, and now many of 
them are licking their wounds as a result of recent developments.  
Even though it is fashionable at present to badmouth our local currency – even among those 
who ought to see it as their duty to refrain from indulging in such calumny – most currencies, 
large and small alike, have fluctuated wildly in the recent market turbulence; and it can easily 
happen  that  as  soon  as  the  króna depreciates,  the  yen  and  the  Swiss  franc,  for  example, 
appreciate even  more,  and  borrowers  who  have  been  following  the  Pied  Piper  of  Hamelin 
along the path of foreign loans end up trapped by their own gullibility.  
Despite  the  headwinds  that  face  us  now,  not  least  in  connection  with  the  international 
financial markets and the profound impact that they could have on business here in Iceland, 
it is not necessarily a given that the Icelandic nation is careening headlong into a recession. 
It is much more likely that we will experience a slowdown and, at worst, a sharp economic 
dip that need not be long-lasting. We have experienced the like before and have been quick 
to  shake  off  the  effects  of  it  with  the  adaptability  that  the  Icelandic  nation  has  so  often 
demonstrated. It is reasonably clear, however, that the national economy will not achieve any 
real equilibrium unless there is a contraction in demand.  
But it is right to keep in mind that, if we drag our heels and delay furling our sails, it is not 
impossible that it will take very little in the way of rough seas to tumble us into something that 
could accurately be called a recession. And in that case, we would have only ourselves to 
blame. We must not let such a thing happen.  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
We  welcome  the  interest  and  amicability  that  you  show  in  attending  this  meeting.  In  older 
times, it was considered appropriate for central banks to keep their distance, to be silent and 
even somewhat inscrutable, for that standoffishness was thought conducive to creating the 
image  that  the  persons  behind  the  banks  had  quasi-supernatural  powers,  that  they 
possessed information available to no one else and could avail themselves of preternatural 
tricks and stratagems to address a wide variety of problems. But times have changed – and 
that is for the better. Central banks must not let down their guard. Their policies and aims 
should  be  clear,  and  their  actions  should  be  consistent  with  those  policies  and  aims.  The 
independence of the Central Bank of Iceland remains a cornerstone of its operations, and 
any  responsible  person  should  protect  and  fortify  that  independence.  This  does  not  mean 
that the Central Bank is above all criticism, of course. Actually, there are solid reasons for 
claiming  that  the  independence  enjoyed  by  the  Bank  justifies  its  being  subjected  to  more 
incisive criticism than it should otherwise tolerate. The Central Bank itself takes the view that 
criticism of its work is desirable. Within the Bank, all are aware that, for every decision made, 
several  options  were  possible,  and  the  decision  to  embrace  one  option  over  all  others  is 
accompanied by a variety of consequences. In making decisions under such circumstances, 
there must be ample room for comment, contrasting viewpoints, and criticism. And – thank 
goodness  –  the  Central  Bank  has  not  been  free  of  such  comments  and  criticism.  Indeed, 
most  comments  have  been  presented  in  a  responsible  and  appropriate  manner  and  have 
been  both  helpful  and  useful  in  the  broadest  sense.  That  is  not  to  say  that  there  aren’t 
exceptions  –  predictable  canting  litanies  that  are  of  little  use  to  anyone  –  but  valuable 
comments have nonetheless been salient and they are heard and considered.  
Last  Tuesday,  after  the  Easter  holidays,  the  Bank  announced  several  amendments  to  its 
internal  rules  and  terms.  Those  amendments  were  designed  to  grease  the  wheels  of  the 
financial markets, which must now tolerate deteriorating operating conditions. The Icelandic 
government  has  also  announced  a  bond  issue  that  is  launched  with  the  same  objective. 
Though the Central Bank does not wish to make too much of these changes, the purpose is 
to pave the way for easier operation of the financial system during at time of difficulty on the 
global front. But at the same time as these changes were reported, the Bank announced the 
Board of Governors’ decision to raise the policy interest rate by 1.25 percentage points – to 
15% – the largest single increase to date. That decision was the tangible manifestation of the 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2008
serious  message  that  the  Bank  considered  it  appropriate  and  necessary  to  communicate 
under  the  current  conditions.  The  Board  of  Governors  supported  this  decision  by  showing 
that the four-month-old inflation forecasts assuming an unchanged policy rate until the latter 
half of 2008 were not delivering the intended results. Inflation was higher than forecasts had 
projected, and inflation expectations were rising as well. In the same manner, demand was 
greater despite the more difficult operating environment faced by the banking system and the 
announcement  that  the  credit  supply  was  on  the  wane.  The  króna  also  depreciated  more 
than was assumed in the forecasts in the November issue of Monetary Bulletin. That forecast 
assumed that such a development  would be met with a policy rate hike, and though such 
forecasts  are  in  no  way  binding  for  the  Board  of  Governors,  the  Board’s  message  can  be 
interpreted as implying a similar message. It pointed out that the real exchange rate of the 
króna was close to the lowest it has been in several decades. Such a low real exchange rate 
has never persisted for any length of time. The Board of Governors’ policy statement said the 
following:  “If  the  decrease  does  not  reverse,  it  is  clear  that  inflation  will  rise  sharply,  and 
persistent inflation will be imminent if nothing is done, with the accompanying upward spiral 
of  prices,  wages,  and  exchange  rates  against  foreign  currencies.  The  depreciation  of  the 
króna  in  recent  weeks  is  also  harmful  to  the  balance  sheets  of  indebted  households  and 
companies and undermines the stability of the financial system over the long term. Thus it is 
critical that the depreciation of the króna be reversed as soon as possible.”  
The market’s response to the Board of Governors’ decision was favourable, and that is well, 
but at this point it is not possible to assert whether this decision will generate the results the 
Board  of  Governors  intended.  The  next  edition  of  Monetary  Bulletin,  the  Bank’s  principal 
publication on economic issues, is in the final preparatory stages and will be published on 
April  10.  It  will  include  an  appraisal  and  forecasts  by  the  Bank’s  experts  as  regards  the 
current economic climate and the likely developments in the near future. Because this next 
issue of Monetary Bulletin is forthcoming in such a short time, I have chosen not to discuss 
current issues at length today, though it was tempting to do so.  
The media discourse on the size of Iceland’s foreign reserves and the strength of the Central 
Bank  and  the  Icelandic  government  is  often  misleading.  It is  admitted  that  the  Treasury  is 
actually free of foreign debt and virtually debt-free domestically, if one takes into account its 
deposit  balance  in  the  Central  Bank.  The  Bank’s  foreign  reserves  and  equity  have  never 
been larger than they are today. However, it has been said that Iceland’s banks have grown 
substantially,  which  makes  the  foreign  reserves  proportionally  smaller.  It  is  appropriate  to 
remember that banks in Iceland, as elsewhere, are responsible for their own operations, and 
they must demonstrate prudence and sound risk management. According to the banks’ own 
declarations, to which the Financial Supervisory Authority has not commented, their financing 
status is at least comparable to that of comparable foreign banks. Therefore, they need not 
rush into disadvantageous credit markets ahead of others. However, it cannot be denied that 
the Icelandic economy’s total debt is too high, which can be traced to the decisions made by 
financial institutions and other companies in the market.  
If the Central Bank’s foreign reserves are compared with those of several countries outside 
the  largest  currency  zones,  it  can  be  seen  that,  according  to  information  from  the 
International  Monetary  Fund,  Iceland’s  reserves  as  a  percentage  of  per  capita  income  are 
equal  to  or  greater  than  those  in,  for  instance,  Australia,  Sweden,  Canada,  and  New 
Zealand.  In  terms  of  importation  of  goods,  Iceland’s  position  is  also  excellent.  Only  New 
Zealand  is  stronger  overall.  In  terms  of  importation  of  goods  and  services,  Iceland  is  well 
above  average.  But  if  the  foreign  reserves  are  evaluated  as  a  percentage  of  foreign  debt, 
Iceland is relatively weak.  
On behalf of the Board of Governors, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the many 
people  and  institutions  whose  representatives  are  here  today  for  a  very  satisfying 
collaborative relationship. 
BIS Review 36/2008 
 5
