Radovan Jelašić: Future of the capital market in the Balkans 
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, to participants of 
the  Economist  Media  Group  conference  “Future  of  the  Capital  Market  in  the  Balkans”, 
Belgrade, 24 June 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
Eight years into the transition of the Serbian economy, we may safely say that our financial 
sector has become and, judging from how things stand now, shall remain bankcentric. Such 
observation is based on the following two facts: 
1. 
The  share  of  the  banking  sector  in  total  assets  of  the  financial  sector  (banks, 
insurance  companies,  leasing  providers  and  voluntary  pension  funds)  remained 
more or less constant at around 90% throughout the period from 2003 to 2007!  
Legislative activities on faster development of the capital market have been stuck in 
the  doldrums  for  almost  two  years  now!  To  illustrate,  Securities  Act,  Law  on 
Compulsory  Motor  Vehicle  Insurance,  Law  on  the  Market  of  Securities  and  Other 
Financial  Instruments,  Law  on  Personal  Income  Tax  and  Law  on  Corporate  Profit 
Tax are all either in the final phases of completion or were completed and sent off to 
the Assembly of the Republic of Serbia for adoption only to be placed on the long 
waiting list of issues to be discussed!  
2. 
There is no denying that voluntary pension funds and insurance companies are still hoping 
for a chance to invest in high-quality listed securities. They, however, remain in very short 
supply. Let us remember that there are only four listed securities in Serbia at the moment: 
besides bonds issued against frozen foreign currency savings deposits, we only have Tigar, 
Energoprojekt  and  Soya  Protein  securities.  What  is  happening  with  the  remaining  1800 
shares quoted on the stock market? Why aren’t they listed? Could it be that somebody has 
turned them down – which I doubt, does not want to list them – which is also highly unlikely 
as they represent a good investment, or is unable to list them – which is most likely! One 
thing is for sure, it does not only take a law to create a capital market. And Serbia is a very 
good  illustration  of  the  fact.  Enactment  of  adequate  legislation  is  a  necessary,  but  not  a 
sufficient prerequisite for setting up the capital market. 
One of the key links in the chain of development of the capital market should be the pension 
system  reform.  Last  week  we  were  visited  by  Mr.  Klaus  Schmidt  Hebbel  from  the  Central 
Bank of Chile. He will be working as Chief Economist of the OECD in Paris from September 
this year. He visited Belgrade on route to Macedonia where he has been working for several 
years on the pension system reform, that is, on setting up the second and the third pension 
pillars.  Currently,  35%  of  all  contributions  for  pension  insurance  are  paid  into  the  second 
pension pillar and such payment is made compulsory for all first time employed in Macedonia 
since 1 January 2003. Hence the decrease in the volume of current payments into the state 
pension  fund  and  the  increase  in  the  volume  of  contributions  from  the  budget  to  the  state 
pension  fund.  However,  this  new  pension  scheme  will  cut  future  budgetary  expenditures. 
Saying  “let  us  first  develop  capital  market  and  then  consider  the  pension  system  reform” 
reminds me of people saying “I will work harder once you pay me better”. 
To  conclude,  the  pension  system  reform  would  provide  a  substantial  contribution  to  the 
development  of  the  capital  market.  The  reverse  scenario  would  simply  take  too  long,  the 
luxury of which Serbia can no longer afford! 
In a fable “The butcher and the dog” Dositej Obradovic makes a reference to an old Serbian 
saying: “Do me a favour – cheat me early in the game”. I think that the latest incidence of 
“cooling off” of the Belex 15 and Belex line indices has had a positive effect. If nothing else, it 
BIS Review 84/2008 
 1
has been a sobering experience to many market players – I received letters from some of 
them – which made them rethink the meaning of the market, the amounts to be invested on 
the stock exchange, sources of funds, maturity of investment, etc. 
Regardless of the fact that the NBS is in charge of supervision of the banking sector, it is well 
known  that  we  are  very  much  in  favour  of  the  development  of  the  capital  market  as  such 
development can, not only contribute to the strengthening of the overall financial sector but 
also  to  making  the  banking  sector  more  profitable,  i.e.  more  efficient!  The  KFV  project 
designed at the request of the German Ministry of Finance is the best proof that there is hope 
for  us.  This  project  came  up  as  a  result  of  discussions  at  the  meeting  of  G8  Ministers  of 
Finance in May 2007 where a decision was taken to provide assistance to the development 
of capital markets in two countries, Serbia and Ukraine. This assistance will take the form of 
technical  support  with  a  special  emphasis  on  “the  development  of  the  securities market  in 
local currency to support the development and stability of the financial sector”. 
At the moment efforts are being made to set up the action plan which includes issues related 
to securities, such as a) cutting costs of the securities issue, b) tax treatment, c) development 
of the regulatory framework, etc. 
I  sincerely  hope  that  this  project  will  be  completed  soon  after  the  summer  break  since,  in 
addition to foreign assistance, we shall also have a new government in place by then. The 
new government will, hopefully, place faster development of the capital market high on its list 
of priorities. 
Thank you for your attention! 
2 
 BIS Review 84/2008
