Nout Wellink: Wim Duisenberg, financial turmoil, fit and proper, need for 
financial education 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  Opening  of  Duisenberg  School  of  Finance, 
Amsterdam, 15 September 2008. 
 Introduction 
Allow me to start with a short anecdote regarding Wim Duisenberg. As you know, Wim was 
professor in macro-economics at the University of Amsterdam. He obtained his PhD in 1965 
on  “The  economic  consequences  of  disarmament”.  The  evening  before  the  promotion 
ceremony his friend Jan Pen called him. After having a general discussion on the topic, he 
pointed  out  that  Wim  had  made  a  rather  severe  mistake  on  page  so  and  so.  As  Pen  had 
spotted the mistake, he informed Wim that he would question him during the day to come. 
Pen persisted and indeed, the next day, during the ceremony he pointed out the mistake to 
Wim and asked him what he was going to do about it. Wim was summoned to answer to this 
accusation – and calmly replied: “Thank you, we will take this into account in the next print”. 
Wim Duisenberg 
Wim was, as this story points out, a man of science AND of practicality. He cherished the 
high arts of financial theory as an IMF advisor, but simultaneously relished the speed and 
actions  that  the  financial  system  demanded,  as  Minister  of  Finance  and  as  Central  Bank 
President. 
It  was  in  his  position  as  President  of  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  that  Wim  made  clear 
statements  on  his  ambition  to  combine  theoretical  knowledge  with  practical  expertise.  He 
adamantly  supported  the  transfer  of  the  Bank’s  research  department  out  of  the  dark  and 
dusky vaults, shaping it into a more vibrant and policy oriented department. Wim wanted to 
have the best minds within the Bank at the disposition of those that had to take stands on 
practical policy decisions. The forged alliance could tackle any issue at hand. 
This was few decades ago, but Wim was ahead of his time and quickly came to realize that 
having the best minds does not offer a singe packet solution to financial institutions, including 
to De Nederlandsche Bank itself. Keeping your best people rooted in financial practice and 
education – one not without the other – was his core policy. 
Current events & black swans 
Wim was not on his own in wanting to have the best minds for his organisation. Nowadays, 
many companies keep stressing that they themselves have the “best and brightest”, taken 
from high class universities all over the world. Yet, the turmoil in financial markets spurs me 
to occasionally ask a board member of any of these institutions if they do not feel too big to 
be managed. 
The general reply is that simply because the “best and brightest” are part of the company, 
there is no further need to enhance the management structure, or even look into additional 
safeguards.  It  is  these  companies  that  tend  to  ignore  that  knowledge  needs  to  be  applied 
sensibly.  If anything,  it  is  exactly  the  current  turmoil  which  stresses  not  to  single-handedly 
focus on those among us that excel in their financial, theoretical skills, if this implies that we 
fail  to  open  our  eyes  to  external  developments.  Developments  such  as  risk  management, 
corporate  governance  and  social  responsibility,  all  of  which  shape  the  way  the  financial 
system works on a day to day basis. 
BIS Review 111/2008 
 1
“Our blindness with respect to randomness”, as skilfully narrated by Taleb in his Black Swan, 
clearly  underlines  this  point.  As  all  of  us  tend  to  have  limited  to  no  knowledge  at  all  of 
unexpected events, the proposition “we know” is an illusion. Science of risk management, for 
instance,  adds  knowledge,  but  does  not  uncover  the  full  veil  of  the  world  and  its  events, 
which  leaves  us  with  Knightian  uncertainty.  As  such,  the  value  of  experts  can  also  be 
questioned, if this implies that experts do not take empirical evidence into account, but base 
themselves  merely  on  their  own,  by  nature  limited,  expertise.  What  a  globalized  world 
requires is continuous education, discussion and peer to peer stimulation to keep up with the 
pace of exactly these unexpected events. 
Fit and proper 
This emphasis on up-to-date financial knowledge is also reflected in our own focus on fit and 
proper  requirements  of  financial  institutions  in  the  Netherlands.  Starting  at  the  top, 
knowledge and expertise at a board level is a prerequisite. The Bank as supervisor has the 
task to monitor and uphold these. To ensure the proper discharge of their responsibilities, it 
is  important  that  board  members  have  the  skills  to  run  the  company.  They  should  have 
personal  qualities  such  as  honesty,  diligence,  independent-mindedness  and  fairness,  in 
order to ensure that the company is run ethically, in compliance with relevant legislation and 
in a manner that treats its customers fairly. “Propriety” requires that they are of good repute 
and  integrity.  “Fitness”  requires  that  a  person  appointed  as  a  director  or  manager  has  the 
necessary  professional  qualifications,  knowledge  and  experience  to  enable  sound  and 
prudent management. In Dutch law regarding pension funds – Pension Fund Governance – 
further elaboration has led to extensive overviews from within the pension sector on specific 
fitness  issues.  The  ability  to  manage  an  organisation  is  an  obvious  one,  as  is  having 
knowledge of applicable laws and regulations. 
Financial education 
Having  said  that,  even  if  at  the  board  level  these  issues  are  tackled  properly,  this  is  not 
sufficient enough. It is throughout the organisation that adequate knowledge and expertise 
has to be available; the capacities of a board member on its own cannot be used to sign off 
for an organisation as a whole. Financial education provides the means to realize fitness and 
propriety on every essential level in financial organisations and having a clear understanding 
of risks involved, of the need of integrity, structure and governance. 
Conclusion 
Concluding, this brings me back to Wim Duisenberg. Wim was, as I mentioned, ahead of his 
time. His wish to combine financial theory and practice is reflected even more than ever in 
the current times, where uncertain events of differing magnitude force us to reconsider our 
own  validation  methods.  The  Duisenberg  school  of  finance  bares  witness  to  that.  Our 
partners, as we have seen and heard today, have given the clear commitment to invest in 
financial  education,  in  future  students  and  in  a  manner  of  education  and  research  that 
outstretches the current limitations on financial knowledge. 
I  cannot  imagine  anyone  more  suited  than  Wim  to  lend  his  name  to  the  institution  that  is 
officially opened here today. 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2008
