Seong-Tae Lee: Household debt – implications for monetary policy and 
financial stability  
Opening address by Mr Seong-Tae Lee, Governor and Chairman of the Bank of Korea, at 
the  Bank  of  Korea/Bank  for  International  Settlements  Seminar,  Bank  of  Korea,  Seoul, 
28 March 2008. 
 Opening remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I bid a sincere welcome to central bankers participating in this seminar held jointly by the BIS 
and  the  Bank  of  Korea.  Let  me  also  express  my  deep  gratitude  to  our  keynote  speaker, 
Dr. Eric Rosengren, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. 
This  seminar,  a  part  of  the  Asian  Research  Programme  of  the  BIS,  is  held  to  allow  the 
exchange of each central bank's experience and opinions concerning major monetary policy 
issues. 
The theme of this seminar, "Household Debt: Implications for Monetary Policy and Financial 
Stability",  should  be  of  great  interest  to  us  all.  It  is  very  closely  related  to  the  current 
international financial market turmoil generated by the US sub-prime mortgage meltdown. 
Background to the increase of household debt 
As  you  are  all  well  aware,  household  debt  in  many  countries  has  increased  quite  sharply 
since the early 2000's. 
In the US, the ratio of household debt to GDP rose from 75% in 2000 to 104% in 2007. This 
was led largely by an expansion in mortgage lending. 
According to an analysis by the IMF, household debt in some 12 Asian countries including 
Korea, Japan and China grew by an average 15% per year between 2002 and 2006. About 
two-thirds of this growth consisted of increased mortgage debt. 
The reasons for this rapid buildup of household debt are to be found to a certain extent in 
demographic changes. The aging of the baby boom generation, together with urbanization, 
fueled a steady increase in housing demand. To my mind, however, an even greater factor 
behind the increased household debt was the continuation of low inflation and low interest 
rates. 
Over the last few years, heightened productivity based on the IT revolution and the progress 
of globalization served to keep prices more stable. In line with this, central banks in every 
country maintained their policy rates at low levels. This resulted in low lending rates, which 
subsequently led to even greater demand for household loans. 
As anticipations of real estate price increases formed owing to the abundant global liquidity, 
mortgage lending for the purpose of speculative housing purchases also expanded sharply. 
In the US and other advanced countries, moreover, mortgage securitization and the transfer 
of credit risk were made easier thanks to the development of advanced financial techniques. 
This acted as an additional factor boosting household debt. 
Assessment of the increase in household debt 
This great increase in household debt did bring positive effects to the macro economy, as 
well as household welfare and financial institutions business. 
BIS Review 35/2008 
 1
The expanded borrowing opportunities of households helped to improve their qualities of life, 
by making life-cycle consumption-smoothing and house purchases easier. 
Financial  institutions  were  able  to  enjoy  a  wider  range  of  profit  opportunities,  through 
household lending and through transactions in credit derivatives with household loans as the 
underlying assets. 
The  total  outstanding  volume  of  credit  derivatives  worldwide  is  estimated  to  have  swollen 
more than 110 times from 180 billion US dollars in 1997 to 20 trillion US dollars in 2006. 
In Korea, the share of household lending in banks' total loans rose from 28% in 1996 to 50% 
in  2006.  With  corporate  demand  for  funds  greatly  blunted  after  the  1997  financial  crisis, 
Korean banks instead increased their profit bases through household lending. 
This  increased  household  lending  helped  to  heighten  housing  market  vitality,  to  stimulate 
consumption and to enhance banks' profitability. In these respects, it is evaluated as having 
contributed  to  the  improvement  of  the  macro  economy  in  terms  of  the  trends  of  business 
activities and of employment. 
Having  said  this,  however,  I  should  point  out  that  if  household  debt  rises  to  an  excessive 
level,  there  is  a  greater  likelihood  of  households  being  unable  to  repay  the  principal  and 
interest on their loans when interest rates rise or housing prices fall. 
This, of course, generates financial institution insolvency and financial market turmoil, which 
in  turn  has  a  negative  impact  on  the  real  economy.  This  possibility  has  been  dramatically 
demonstrated by the US sub-prime mortgage meltdown. 
In the case of the sub-prime mortgages, strict screening of borrowers' redemption capacities 
was often neglected at the time of loan extension. Credit risk was then passed through to the 
financial system as a whole by way of MBSs and CDOs. 
For these reasons, when economic conditions weakened, it aggravated the seriousness of 
the problems of non-performing mortgages with corresponding severe impact on the financial 
market. 
In case of Korea, however, there has been no signs of household debt turning sour so far, 
although  it  has  increased  very  rapidly  since  the  early  2000's.  The  delinquency  rates  on 
banks' household loans stood at only 0.6% at year-end 2007. 
Future policy tasks 
In many countries, a large proportion of household debt is made up of housing finance loans. 
To maintain household debt soundness, therefore, the absolutely crucial thing is to avoid a 
housing boom and bust cycle. 
To  ensure  this,  policy  initiatives  are  naturally  required  from  the  micro  angle  targeting  the 
supply and demand of housing and the tax regime. An even more important task, however, is 
to carry out macro economic policies that keep the overall economy on a stable course. 
What is more, given that financial innovation can amplify financial unrest, central banks and 
financial supervisory authorities should redouble their efforts to construct effective systems 
for monitoring and supervision of financial derivatives. 
Closing remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I expect this seminar will be a forum for a policy debate, involving in-depth and constructive 
discussions about household debt issues. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2008
In closing I should once more like to voice my deep thanks to all of you taking part. Although 
you have a crowded and hectic schedule, I hope you will be able to spare some time to gain 
a taste for Korean culture and the beauty of spring here. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 35/2008 
 3
