Nicholas C Garganas: The ageing of Europe’s population: consequences 
and reforms – with particular reference to Greece 
Address  by  Mr  Nicholas  C  Garganas,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the  conference 
“The ageing of Europe’s population – consequences and reforms”, organized by the Bank of 
Greece, Athens, 17 January 2008. 
 I am very pleased to welcome to the Bank of Greece two distinguished colleagues from the 
Governing Council of the European Central Bank and good friends – Yves Mersch, Governor 
of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, and Erkki Liikanen, Governor of the Bank of Finland – to 
participate  in  a  Public  Discussion  on  the  subject  “The  Ageing  of  Europe’s  Population: 
Consequences and Reforms”. 
We  chose  this  subject  in  part  because  it  is  widely  recognised  that  the  ageing  of  Europe’s 
population  in  the  coming  decades  will  have  serious  economic,  budgetary  and  social 
implications  for  all  European  countries.  Nevertheless,  there  is  often  strong  opposition  to 
policy changes aimed at addressing those implications. In part, this situation reflects the fact 
that  the  costs  of  inaction  are  not  borne  immediately,  making  it  easy  to  postpone  the 
necessary  adjustment.  At  the  same  time,  the  longer  that  adjustment  is  postponed,  the 
greater the costs of failing to act today will be. An open discussion, especially a discussion 
that  compares  the  reform  experiences  of  various  countries,  can  therefore  help  improve 
understanding  of  these  matters.  As  such,  it  is  a  prerequisite  to  reaching  a  broad  social 
consensus on the needed reforms.  
I would now like to introduce our distinguished guests:  
Yves  Mersch  became  the  first  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  upon  its 
creation  in  1998.  He  began  his  professional  career  as  a  lawyer,  following  postgraduate 
studies in law and political science at the University of Paris. After joining the civil service in 
1975, he was seconded to the International Monetary Fund and the United Nations. In 1989, 
he became “Director of the Treasury” in Luxembourg. In that capacity, he was the personal 
representative of the Finance Minister in the negotiations that led to the Maastricht Treaty. 
He has also served on the boards of major private and public companies.  
Erkki Liikanen’s distinguished record of public service predates his becoming Governor of the 
Bank of Finland in 2004. He was a member of the Finnish parliament for almost 20 years 
(1972-90),  Finland’s  Minister  of  Finance  between  1987  and  90,  and  a  Member  of  the 
European  Commission  for  almost  10  years  (1995-2004).  During  his  service  at  the 
Commission,  he  was  initially  responsible  for  “budget  and  personnel  administration”  and,  in 
his second term, for “enterprise and information society”.  
I  will  open  the  discussion  by  outlining,  in  broad  terms,  the  key  projected  demographic 
developments  in  the  coming  decades  in  the  EU,  with  particular  reference  to  Greece;  the 
economic and budgetary implications of these developments; the related policy challenges; 
and the extent to which progress has been made in addressing these challenges. Governor 
Mersch,  drawing  on  the  experience  of  other  European  countries,  will  discuss  the  ways 
demographic,  social  and  political  factors  have  influenced  the  implementation  of  pension 
reforms in various countries as well as the key features of these reforms. Governor Liikanen 
will share with us Finland’s experience in dealing with the challenges posed by population 
ageing. 
Issues related to population ageing have been studied in recent years both at the national 
and  the  EU  levels  by  the  Economic  Policy  Committee  at  the  request  of  the  Council  of 
Economics and Finance Ministers, or ECOFIN Council. An effort has been made to produce 
results that are comparable across countries by relying, to the extent possible, on common 
BIS Review 16/2008 
 1
assumptions,  data  definitions  and  methodologies.  Building  on  demographic,  labour  market 
and  GDP  projections  for  each  country  in  the  EU25,  in  2006  the  EPC  published  long-term 
projections  of  age-related  spending  –  covering  pensions,  health  care,  long-term  care, 
education  and  unemployment  transfers  –  as  a  basis  for  assessing  the  risks  to  the 
sustainability of public finances. The projections are based on the assumption of “no-policy 
change” – i.e., they reflect only enacted legislation. They also take into account the current 
behaviour  of  economic  agents  –  for  example,  participation  rates  in  the  labour  market  are 
based on the most recently observed trends by age and sex. It is important to note that the 
projections do not constitute forecasts. Rather, they indicate the potential timing and scale of 
economic  and  budgetary  challenges  that  would  result  from  ageing  populations  if  present 
trends continue.  
Demographic projections 
As  I  noted  earlier,  the  age  structure  of  the  population  in  the  EU25  is  expected  to  change 
dramatically between now and 2050. Increasing life expectancy will tend to raise the elderly 
population (ages 65+) by about 77% in the EU25; and by 80% in Greece.1 At the same time, 
the low fertility rates – i.e., fertility rates below natural replacement levels – will contribute to a 
decline  in  the  working  age  population  (ages  15-64)  by  16%  in  the  EU25,  and  by  21%,  in 
Greece.2  As  a  result,  the  old-age  dependency  ratio  –  defined  as  the  ratio  of  the  elderly 
population to the working age population – is projected to double to 51% in 2050 in the EU25 
and to more-than-double, to 61%, in Greece. 
The  population  of  the  EU25  in  2050,  projected  at  roughly  454  million,  will  be  only  slightly 
(less than 1 percent) below that of 2004 as the negative influence of the low fertility rates in 
all countries will be largely offset by the positive influences of the continuous increase in life 
expectancy and net inward migration. By comparison, the Greek population is projected to 
decline by 3% notwithstanding continued net inward migration.3
Employment projections  
With the working-age population projected to decline significantly between now and 2050, it 
is clear that the level of employment can be sustained only if the employment rate – i.e., the 
proportion of population of working age that is employed – were to rise sufficiently to offset 
the fall in the working-age population. The following two factors are expected to contribute to 
a rise in the employment rate. First, the female employment rate will rise as older women 
with low employment rates retire and are gradually replaced by younger women, who have 
higher  employment  rates  –  the  so  called  “cohort  effect”.  Second,  the  employment  rate  of 
older  people  is  likely  to  increase,  in  part  because  of  already  adopted  pension  reforms. 
However, the projected increase in the employment rate in the EU25 will not be sufficient to 
prevent  a  5%  decline  in  the  level  of  employment  between  2004  and  2050.  In  Greece,  the 
projected decline in employment is even larger, 13% over the same period, reflecting both 
demographic developments and a more modest increase in the employment rate.  
                                                 
1   The projections of life expectancy are based on extrapolations observed over the previous 17 years. 
2   The fertility rate is assumed to rise gradually during the projection period from 1.5% to 1.6% in the EU25 and 
from 1.3% to 1.5% in Greece 
3   Non-nationals reached 7.3% of the population of Greece according to the 2001 Census and more than 8% of 
the population in 2004 (Eurostat estimates); on average during 2006, 15% of workers who paid contributions 
to the main employee social security fund (IKA) were foreigners and accounted for more than 10% of IKA's 
contribution revenues. 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2008
GDP projections 
As  a  result  of  these  employment  trends,  and  on  the  basis  of  consistent-across-countries 
assumptions  on  productivity  growth,  potential  GDP  growth  is  projected  to  decline  in  the 
decades to come. For the EU15, the annual average potential GDP growth rate will fall from 
2.2% in the period 2004-2010 to 1.3% between 2031 and 2050. An even steeper decline is 
foreseen  in  the  new  member  states  (EU10),  because  of  both  demographic  developments 
and the underlying assumption that productivity growth rates in these countries will converge 
to  those  of  the  EU15.  In  Greece,  that  convergence  is  also  expected  to  lead  to  a  fall  in 
productivity growth, contributing to a decline in potential GDP growth from an annual average 
rate at 2.2% in the period 2004-2010 to below 1% per year in the 2030s and 2040s.  
Public spending projections  
Population ageing is projected to lead to increases in public spending in most EU member 
states  by  2050  on  the  basis  of  current  policies  although  there  is  wide  disparity  in  those 
increases  across  countries.  In  more  than  one  third  of  the  Member  States,  the  long-term 
budgetary  impact  of  the  projected  increases  will  be  at  least  5%  of  GDP.  These  countries 
have  so  far  made  only  limited  progress  in  reforming  their  pension  systems  or  are 
experiencing maturing pension systems.  
For the new member states (EU10) as a whole, the increase is projected to be much smaller, 
but this situation reflects mainly institutional changes. A switch to private pensions scheme in 
Poland is expected to make a substantial contribution to a decline in public pension spending 
in the new member states.4 Excluding Poland, age-related spending is subject to increase by 
more than 5% of GDP. Most of the projected increase in public spending will be on pensions, 
health care and long-term care. Offsetting savings in areas as education and unemployment 
benefits are likely to be limited.  
With  respect  to  Greece,  data  on  public  spending  projections  are  not  available  as  such 
projections  have  not  yet  been  submitted.  However,  according  to  projections  prepared  in 
2002, pension expenditures will rise from 12.4% of GDP in 2005 to 22.6% of GDP in 2050.5 
The net increase in total old age-related expenditure (excluding spending on long-term care, 
for which no official figures are available) is projected to be 11.5 percentage points of GDP, 
reaching 32.7% of GDP in 2050. This compares with rises in pension expenditures by slightly 
more  than  2  percentage  points  of  GDP  in  both  the  EU-25  and  the  EU15  over  the  same 
period, reflecting the implementation of important pension reforms in many of these countries 
                                                 
4   According to ESA95, defined-contribution funded pension schemes are not considered as part of the general 
government sector. 
5   These  projections  were  first  published  in  the  Greek  Report  on  Pension  Strategy  (Ministry  of  Economy  and 
Finance-Ministry of Labour and Social Security, September 2002) and reproduced in the 2004 Update of the 
Hellenic Stability and Growth Programme 2004-2007 – Revised (March 2005). Initially, pension expenditure 
had been projected to reach 24.8% of GDP in 2050 (see: Ministry of Labour and Social Security, Actuarial 
Report  on  the  Greek  social  security  system  –  Report  of  the  Government  Actuary  Department  UK,  19  April 
2001;  also:  European  Commission,  Economic  Policy  Committee,  Budgetary  Challenges  Posed  by  Ageing 
Populations, EPC/ECFIN/655/01, Brussels, 24 October 2001). The downward revision in 2002 reflected the 
more  favourable  demographic  data  obtained  from  the  2001  census,  estimates  and  assumptions  of  a  faster 
decrease  in  rural  population,  assumptions  of  a  faster  reduction  in  unemployment,  more  conservative 
assumptions  with  regard  to  annual  increases  in  pensions,  and  the  parametric  changes  introduced  by  Law 
3029/2002.  The  new  data  affected  the  projection  in  more  than  one  way.  For  instance,  the  presence  of 
immigrant workers and the migration of rural populations to urban centers imply higher current IKA revenues, 
but also higher future expenditure. 
BIS Review 16/2008 
 3
since  the  1990s.  Total  old  age-related  expenditures  are  projected  to  rise  by  about  3½ 
percentage points of GDP in both the EU-25 and the EU15.6
Long-term fiscal sustainability 
Population ageing will have a significant impact on economic growth and lead to pressures to 
increase public spending. In order to gauge the magnitude of this challenge, the assessment 
of long-term sustainability of public finances has become part of the regular EU budgetary 
surveillance.  
According  to  the  Commission,  in  the  absence  of  reform  measures  and  budgetary 
consolidation, a considerable “sustainability gap” of about 3.5% of GDP, i.e., a gap between 
the structural budgetary position in 2005 and a sustainable fiscal position, emerges in both 
the  EU  and  the  euro  area.7  Unless  measures  are  taken  to  fill  this  gap,  the  government 
debt/GDP ratio is projected to remain above 60% over the coming decades for the EU as a 
whole and, from around 2020, to start rising considerably, reaching almost 200% of GDP in 
2050. The debt/GDP ratio would exceed 60% – the Maastricht debt criterion – in more than 
two thirds of the Member States. In about one half of the member states, the initial budgetary 
position  illustrates  that  the  public  finances  are  on  an  unsustainable  path  even  without 
considering the long-term budgetary impact of ageing populations.  
With  respect  to  the  effects  of  ageing  on  the  sustainability  of  public  finances  in  Greece, 
European Commission projections of the general government debt-to-GDP ratio indicate that 
this ratio would more than triple between 2005 and 2050, reaching 346.0%, though the ratio 
would be somewhat lower if the recent GDP revision were taken into account.  
Policy challenges for Greece 
The  projections  presented  so  far  highlight  the  fact  that  demographic,  economic  and  fiscal 
prospects are more unfavourable for Greece than for the EU as a whole. As projections – 
rather  than  forecasts  –  they  can  be  useful  in  identifying  specific  areas  where  Greece 
compares unfavourably with other EU countries and, therefore, improvement is presumably 
feasible  with  the  adoption  of  appropriate  policies.  Demographic  changes  will  have  major 
implications  for  the  pension  and  healthcare  systems  and,  hence,  for  the  sustainability  of 
public finances. The implications are particularly unfavourable for Greece, in light of its initial 
fiscal position, the second highest debt/GDP ratio in the EU. This circumstance underscores 
the  need  of  a  comprehensive  set  of  policies  to  change  demographic  prospects,  enhance 
employment and its productivity through reform of the product and labour markets, reform the 
pension and healthcare systems, and pursue sustained fiscal consolidation. 
A number of measures can help boost employment rates. These include improving child-care 
and  introducing  flexible  working  time  and  leave  arrangements,  implementing  reforms  that 
would  attract  more  youth,  women  and  older  persons  to  the  labour  market  (thereby  also 
helping to raise the effective age of retirement), and facilitating the integration of immigrant 
workers.  
                                                 
6   Economic  Policy  Committee  and  European  Commission,  "The  impact  of  ageing  on  public  expenditure: 
projections  for  the  EU25  Member  States  on  pensions,  health  care,  long-term  care,  education  and 
unemployment transfers (2004-2050)", European Economy, special report no. 1/2006 (February). 
7   To understand the challenge that policy-makes face, the Commission has estimated the size of the budgetary 
imbalance on the basis of the so-called “sustainability gap indicators”. These indicators measure the size of a 
required permanent budgetary adjustment that permits one of the following conditions to be met: i) reaching a 
target of 60% of GDP for the Maastricht debt in 2050 or ii) fulfilling the intertemporal budget constraint over an 
infinite horizon.  
4 
 BIS Review 16/2008
In addition, greater labour productivity growth in the long run should be achievable through 
accelerated  structural  reforms  in  the  product  and  labour  markets,  increased  productive 
investment in physical capital, and the upgrading of human capital. 
The projected very large increase in Greek pension expenditures over the long term – much 
larger than in most other EU countries – clearly suggests that, in the absence of an early and 
major  pension  reform,  fiscal  consolidation  measures  by  themselves  (e.g.,  tax  increases  or 
reductions  in  non-pension  public  spending)  would  not  be  able  to  eliminate  the  projected 
budgetary  imbalances  without  jeopardising  the  provision  of  essential  public  services.  The 
pension reforms should aim to ensure the long-term viability of the public pension system, 
which should nevertheless continue to function as an important social safety net.  
Finally, the sooner the fiscal consolidation is undertaken and the reforms are implemented, 
the better, for both fiscal sustainability and for long-term growth. The primary fiscal balance 
required to stabilise public debt on a sustainable basis is significantly higher in the long run 
than in an early adjustment scenario. Moreover, delayed adjustment entails lower economic 
growth because of increasing crowding out effects and the economic disincentives stemming 
from rising taxes. These results are confirmed by work done at the Commission and the IMF. 
In  sum,  population  ageing  will  have 
fiscal 
consequences for Europe. Moreover, these consequences will be especially pronounced in 
the case of Greece. Many countries in the EU have already undertaken reforms that should 
cushion  them  from  population  ageing  and  its  consequences.  In  the  case  of  Greece,  it  is 
essential  that  appropriate  policies  be  adopted.  These  policies  should  aim  at  improving  the 
fiscal position, safeguarding the viability of the pension and healthcare systems, alleviating 
the  demographic  prospects,  and  enhancing  productivity  through  reform  of  the  product  and 
labour markets.  
important  demographic,  economic,  and 
Table comparing the projections of the main variables for the EU25 and Greece 
 
 Greece 
2050: 61% 
Now-2050: +80% 
Now-2050: -21% 
  
  
Elderly population (ages 65+) 
Working age population (ages 15-64)
Old-age dependency ratio 
Total population 2004-2050 
Employment 2004-2050 
  
Rise in public spending as % of GDP 
2005-2050 
-- Spending on pensions 
-- Total ageing-related spending 
 
Government debt/GDP: projection 
2050 
  
 
Source: Economic Policy Committee and European Commission projections. 
+10.2% 
+11.5% 
-3% 
-13% 
346% 
     BIS Review 16/2008 
 EU 25 
 Now-2050: +77% 
Now-2050: -16% 
2050: 51% 
-1% 
-5% 
  +2.2% 
+3.4% 
 almost 200% 
     5
