Masaaki Shirakawa: The recent economic and financial developments 
and their outlook, and the conduct of monetary policy in Japan 
Summary of a speech given by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, to 
the Naigai Josei Chousa Kai (Research Institute of Japan), Tokyo, 18 July 2008. 
 Introduction 
I am honored to be invited to speak here today to the Naigai Josei Chousa Kai. As you are all 
aware, the outlook for the world economy is currently extremely uncertain and policy making 
has  become  increasingly  difficult.  The  recent  upsurge  in  energy  and  materials  prices  is 
increasing inflationary pressures globally and, at the same time, putting downside pressures 
on the economy in many countries consuming these resources. In addition, turmoil in global 
financial markets stemming from the subprime loan problem in the United States has in no 
way  subsided.  Central  banks  are  facing  the  difficult  challenges  of  maintaining  stability  in 
economic activity and prices and also in financial markets. 
The Bank of Japan is also facing these challenges. Confronted with downside risks to the 
economy  and  upside  risks  to  prices  at  the  same  time,  which  is  unusual,  the  Bank  must 
appropriately  steer  monetary  policy.  In  addition,  given  the  difficult  situation,  it  is  becoming 
increasingly  important  for  us  as  policy  makers  to  accurately  communicate  to  market 
participants  and  to  the  general  public  our  assessment  of  the  situation  and  issues  facing 
Japan's economy. In the first half of my talk today, I would like to discuss the Bank's view on 
the  current  situation  and  the  outlook  for  Japan's  economy  and  then  to  elaborate  on  the 
thinking behind our monetary policy under such circumstances. In the latter half of my talk, I 
would like to discuss how we are trying to convey our assessment of the economic situation 
and  the  thinking  behind  our  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  in  other  words,  the  role  and  the 
framework of communication regarding the conduct of monetary policy. 
1. 
Outlook for economic activity and prices and the conduct of monetary policy 
Current economic situation and the outlook 
I  would  first  like  to  discuss  the  current  situation  of  Japan's  economy.  Since  2002,  Japan's 
economy has enjoyed a moderate but prolonged period of economic expansion. The basic 
background  for  the  expansion  has  been  the  high  growth  of  the  world  economy,  mainly  of 
emerging  economies,  and  the  efforts  of  Japanese  firms  to  restructure  their  businesses. 
Although  an  average  of  around  2  percent  GDP  growth  between  2002  and  2007  does  not 
seem  remarkable,  it  was  somewhat  above  the  potential  growth  rate  and  has  closed  the 
output gap. Since the end of last year, however, the pace of economic growth has gradually 
slowed. Initially, this was mainly due to the sudden fall in housing investment reflecting the 
revision  of  the  Building  Standard  Law.  Subsequently,  however,  the  growth  in  domestic 
private  demand  moderated  due  to  weaker  corporate  profits  and  a  decline  in  the  real 
purchasing  power  of  households  against  the  background  of  the  upsurge  in  energy  and 
materials prices. Given that the sharp rises in energy and materials prices continue to date, it 
is judged that economic growth is slowing further. 
Since  Japan  relies  for  various  resources  heavily  on  imports,  increases  in  energy  and 
materials prices imply an outflow of income to overseas. For example, relative to early 2002, 
Japan's export prices have decreased by around 5 percent whereas import prices have risen 
by around 60 percent, causing a deterioration in Japan's terms of trade. The deterioration in 
the  terms  of  trade  has  been  especially  acute  recently.  Corporate  profits  have  started  to 
decrease and the growth in corporate fixed investment is slowing. In the household sector, 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 1
real purchasing power has decreased since prices are rising while growth in wages remains 
moderate, and private consumption is becoming somewhat sluggish. 
What is the outlook for the future then? As I said at the outset, the environment surrounding 
domestic and overseas economies is quite uncertain and to make economic forecasts, it has 
become necessary, more than usual, to carefully consider the most likely outlook, the main 
scenario, as well as various factors causing uncertainty.  
The outlook that we have as the main scenario is that, while Japan's economic growth will 
likely  remain  slow  for  the  time  being,  it  is  expected  to  gradually  return  onto  a  moderate 
growth  path  thereafter  without  experiencing  a  deep  adjustment  phase.  There  are  three 
reasons for this outlook. First, the robustness of Japan's economy against external shocks 
has  been  remarkably  strengthened  compared  with  the  past.  As  a  result  of  restructuring 
efforts during the prolonged adjustment phase after the burst of the bubble, Japanese firms 
currently face no pressure to adjust production capacity, inventory, or employment. For this 
reason, the likelihood of any shock triggering a large-scale adjustment seems small. Second, 
with respect to the financial system, losses incurred by Japanese financial institutions due to 
the  subprime  loan  problem  are  limited  compared  to  those  of  U.S.  and  European  financial 
institutions  and  financial  markets  remain  stable.  Third,  the  growth  in  the  world  economy, 
which is providing a favorable environment for Japanese exports, is likely to be maintained. 
The  economic  growth  rate  in  emerging  economies  and  countries  that  export  natural 
resources will likely remain high and it is also relatively likely that the current phase of slow 
growth  in  advanced  economies  will  come  to  an  end  and  the  growth  rate  will  gradually 
recover. 
What are the risk factors that may hamper the realization of this main scenario? Two major 
risk factors could be pointed out. The first is the upsurge in commodity prices and the global 
increase  in  inflationary  pressures.  The  second  is  the  developments  in  global  financial 
markets and in the U.S. and European economies under the influence of the subprime loan 
problem. 
I will first discuss the upsurge in commodity prices, such as prices of energy, materials, and 
food, and the global increase in inflationary pressures. 
The upsurge in commodity prices seems attributable mainly to the sharp increase in demand 
reflecting  high  growth  in  emerging  economies  and  countries  that  export  natural  resources, 
and  to  the  slower  growth  in  production  capacity  relative  to  the  increase  in  demand.  In 
addition,  speculative  or  financial  factors  have  been  pointed  out.  Although  various  factors 
could be thought to have contributed to the actual rise in commodity prices, it seems possible 
to  attribute  the  trend  increase  since  2002  basically  to  the  fundamental  factor,  which  is  the 
condition of supply and demand. 
In  the  1990s  and  in  the  early  2000s,  the  inflation  rates  in  advanced  economies  gradually 
declined with the formerly planned and emerging economies joining the world of the market 
economies. During this period, the world economy enjoyed favorable economic conditions of 
high  growth,  low  inflation,  and  low  interest  rates  with  some  differences  between  countries 
and times. As the process advanced, however, formerly planned economies and emerging 
economies increased their presence not only as production bases of labor intensive goods 
but as huge consumers of materials and consumer products. In fact, in 2007 the demand for 
crude oil declined 0.8 percent for OECD countries, which are advanced economies, whereas 
it increased 3.9 percent for non-OECD countries. 
What  began  as  an  upsurge  in  commodity  prices  including  energy  and  materials  is  now 
leading to an increase in overall inflationary pressures. The headline consumer price inflation 
rates, which include energy and food, are currently around 4 percent in the United States and 
the euro area, and have increased around 2 percent relative to a year earlier. The U.S.-type 
core inflation rate, which excludes energy and food, is over 2 percent. In emerging countries, 
the  inflation  rates  are  much  higher:  in  China,  it  is  around  7  to  8  percent  and  there  are  a 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2008
In 
fact, 
taken? 
number of countries with double-digit inflation rates, such as Russia, Indonesia, and Saudi 
Arabia. 
The  fact  that  inflation  rates  are  increasing  worldwide  gives  rise  to  the  following  questions. 
Was  the  high  world  growth  during  the  past  several  years  sustainable?  Were  sufficient 
macroeconomic  policy  measures 
the  continuance  of  an  extremely 
accommodative financial environment worldwide has often been referred to as global excess 
liquidity  or  a  savings  glut.  However,  since  the  turn  of  the  year,  especially  during  the  past 
several  months,  an  increasing  number  of  countries  are  shifting  their  monetary  policy  in  a 
more restrictive direction. Whether sustainable world growth with price stability is attainable 
through appropriate macro-economic policy measures applied in various parts of the world 
has  much  bearing  on  the  ability  of  Japan's  economy  to  realize  the  outlook  which  I  have 
referred  to  earlier.  But,  I  must  say,  every  country  is  confronted  with  difficult  tasks.  In  the 
United States, the economy faces with the difficult issues of stagnation, inflationary risks, and 
the problem in the financial system. In the case of emerging countries, an increasing number 
of countries are facing the issue of balancing their policy objectives such as sustained high 
growth and price stability with the management of a de facto fixed foreign exchange system. 
In any event, the key issue is whether a sustainable pace of world growth can be achieved 
though with some moderation in the rate of growth. 
I  will  now  turn  to  discuss  developments  in  global  financial  markets  and  in  the  U.S.  and 
European  economies,  which  are  the  second  factor  casting  uncertainty  over  Japan's 
economy.  Global  financial  markets  have  been  unstable  as  a  result  of  the  subprime  loan 
problem.  The  nature  of  this  problem,  however,  seems  to  have  evolved  over  time.  In  the 
beginning,  the  values  of  various  securitized  products,  including  those  packaged  with 
subprime  mortgage  loans,  declined.  As  a  result  of  this,  financial  institutions  incurred  large 
losses and their capital decreased. Confronted with this situation, financial institutions have 
tightened  their  credit  standards  and  this  has  exerted  downward  pressure  on  economic 
activities.  Currently,  the  stage  of  realizing  losses  on  securitized  products  has  almost  been 
completed.  However,  reflecting  sluggishness  in  the  economy,  rates  of  delinquency  on 
housing  loans  as  well  as  commercial  property  loans  and  consumer  loans  have  been 
increasing,  and  the  effects  of  the  decline  in  financial  institutions'  asset  quality  on  the 
economy are becoming a concern. It is still not clear when and how the negative feedback 
loop between capital markets, asset prices, and the real economy will start to move toward 
resolution in the United States. Apart from the subprime loan problem in the United States, 
there are cases in other advanced economies where fluctuations in asset prices are exerting 
adverse effects on the financial systems. With turmoil in global financial markets continuing, 
downside risks to the U.S. and the world economy continue to be high. 
The current state of inflation and its outlook 
I will now turn to the topic of developments in prices in Japan. The twelve-month increase in 
the  CGPI  recorded  5.6  percent  in  June  due  mainly  to  the  rises  in  prices  of  steel  and 
petroleum products. This was the highest rate of increase since February 1981. CPI inflation 
excluding fresh food had remained around zero until around the fall of last year but started to 
increase  thereafter,  mainly  due  to  the  rises  in  petroleum  products  and  food,  reaching  1.5 
percent in May. Excluding fiscal 1997, when CPI inflation increased reflecting the increase in 
the rate of consumption tax, this was the largest increase since March 1993. Although it is 
still low relative to other countries I have mentioned, this is a big change considering the long 
trend of price stability experienced in Japan. 
To examine the outlook for inflation, I would now like to analyze the situation in terms of the 
three  most  important  factors  affecting  prices,  which  are  domestic  supply  and  demand 
conditions, import prices, and inflation expectations of firms and households. 
The first factor, domestic supply and demand conditions, is currently more or less balanced. 
Assuming  that  the  economic  outlook  to  which  I  just  referred  is  realized,  the  situation  will 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 3
remain  roughly  the  same  going  forward.  This  indicates  that  domestic  supply  and  demand 
conditions are unlikely to be a factor causing a large fluctuation in prices. 
The  second  factor,  import  prices,  has  already  affected  the  CGPI  and  the  CPI  to  a 
considerable degree through increases in energy and material prices and passing on of such 
cost increases to sales prices, and it will likely continue to be an important influence. 
The  third  factor,  inflation  expectations,  is  theoretically  an  important  factor  affecting  the 
inflation rate. The key is whether the increases in energy and materials prices will bring about 
a "second-round effect" of further increases in wages and prices through heightening of the 
inflation expectations of firms and households. In fact, after the first oil shock in the 1970s, 
this "second-round effect" significantly increased prices and led to the situation often called 
"runaway inflation." So far, the annual increase in wages has remained at around 1 percent 
and, even considering other data, there seems to be no sign that the "second-round effect" is 
taking hold in Japan. 
Therefore, it is likely that future inflation will depend mainly on developments in energy and 
materials prices and the degree of pass-on of these cost increases to sales prices. As the 
main scenario, we assume that CPI inflation is likely to become somewhat elevated in the 
coming months but gradually moderate thereafter. 
However, for the time being, this scenario is not without upside risks that we must be aware 
of. The major risk is developments in energy and materials prices. We also cannot rule out 
the  possibility  of  changes  in  economic  agents’  inflation  expectations,  which  so  far  have 
remained stable. With recent increases in prices of daily necessities such as food, the rate of 
inflation actually felt by households seems to have shifted upward. According to the Bank’s 
quarterly  Opinion  Survey  on  the  General  Public's  Views  and  Behavior  conducted  in  June, 
more than 90 percent felt that prices have gone up. Since the public's perception of inflation 
affects the actual inflation rate through inflation expectations and changes in the price-setting 
behavior of firms, it needs to be monitored carefully along with developments in energy and 
materials prices. 
The conduct of monetary policy 
With this outlook for economic activity and prices as well as the risk factors in mind, I would 
now like to turn to the subject of the conduct of monetary policy. 
Since the termination of the so-called quantitative easing monetary policy in March 2006, the 
Bank had been conducting monetary policy based on the idea that the level of the policy rate, 
the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate,  should  be  raised  gradually  in  accordance  with 
improvements  in  the  economic  and  price  situation.  Since  the  end  of  last  year,  however, 
economic  growth  has  entered  a  phase  of  deceleration  while  the  rate  of  inflation  has 
increased.  In  addition,  uncertainties  in  global  financial  markets  and  overseas  economies 
have heightened. In view of these developments, the Bank is currently taking the stance that 
future monetary policy should not be predetermined and should be implemented in a flexible 
manner through careful assessment of the outlook for economic activity and prices, closely 
considering  the  likelihood  of  the  Bank’s  projections  as  well  as  factors  posing  upside  or 
downside risks. 
In the current circumstances, what is important is how monetary policy should deal with the 
so-called  "supply  shocks,"  or  increases  in  energy  and  materials  prices.  There  are  two 
orthodox  principles  shared  by  central  banks  in  advanced  economies  based  on  their 
experience  of  such  problems,  particularly  oil  shocks.  First,  a  temporary  increase  in  import 
costs due to a supply shock should not be dealt with by increases in interest rates. Second, if 
there is a risk of a "second-round effect" being induced by increases in inflation expectations, 
it  should  be  dealt  with  by  increases  in  interest  rates.  With  respect  to  the  ongoing  rise  in 
commodity prices, it cannot be taken as "temporary" since it has been continuing for some 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2008
time.  In  addition,  the  ongoing  rise  in  commodity  prices  is  not  only  caused  by  supply-side 
factors but also influenced strongly by the increases in global demand I referred to earlier. 
Therefore, what needs to be assessed in the conduct of monetary policy under the situation 
of  rising  import  costs  could  be  summarized  in  the  following  three  points.  First  is  how  the 
influence  of  two  forces  working  in  different  directions  --  the  decrease  in  domestic  demand 
caused by the outflow of income due to the upsurge in materials prices, and the increase in 
exports  against  the  background  of  stronger  global  demand  mainly  in  emerging  economies 
and countries that export natural resources -- is affecting Japan's economy. Second is how 
such  developments  in  economic  activities  will  affect  price  situations.  And  third  is  how  the 
increase  in  commodity  prices  and  the  resulting  increase  in  actual  inflation  is  affecting  the 
inflation expectations of households and the price-setting behavior of firms. The conduct of 
monetary policy in an economic situation like today’s is often referred to as "keeping an eye 
on  both  the  economy  and  prices."  However,  this  is  not  a  compromise  approach  of  simply 
balancing  both  sides.  There  needs  to  be  a  basis  of  judgment  on  the  conduct  of  monetary 
policy when economic activity and prices are displaying irregular developments, and many 
central banks including the Bank of Japan attach great importance to the third point above, 
which is whether the stability in the expected rate of inflation is maintained. 
The Bank, in light of the monetary policy objective of attaining sustainable growth with price 
stability,  will  assess  not  only  the  main  scenario  referred  earlier  but  also  the  risks  of  it 
deviating either to the upside or the downside and conduct monetary policy in an appropriate 
manner. 
Central bank communication on monetary policy 
2. 
So  far,  I  have  discussed  the  outlook  for  economic  activity  and  prices  and  the  conduct  of 
monetary  policy.  What  is  important  in  conducting  monetary  policy  is  the  appropriate 
assessment  of  economic  conditions.  If,  however,  the  content  of  policy  decisions  and  their 
background  are  not  accurately  communicated,  there  is  a  risk  of  monetary  policy  not  fully 
achieving its intended aims. In addition, independent central banks should be accountable for 
the basis of their policy decisions as well as actual decisions. Central banks worldwide have 
been making efforts to improve communication on monetary policy, giving due consideration 
to the situation in each country, to improve the effectiveness of monetary policy and to be 
accountable. 
At  the  most  recent  Monetary  Policy  Meeting,  the  Bank  decided  to  adopt  several 
enhancements to its communication strategy on monetary policy. In the latter part of my talk 
today, I would like to expand a little on the topic of central bank communication. 
The contents of communication on monetary policy 
I  would  first  like  to  discuss  three  important  elements  on  which  the  communication  on 
monetary policy is based. The first of these is the objective or the aim of monetary policy. 
The second is the assessment of the current situation of the economy and prices and the 
outlook for both. And third is the thinking behind the future conduct of monetary policy.  
The first element, the objective of monetary policy, is, in many countries, stipulated in the law 
governing the central bank as contributing to sustainable economic growth through stability in 
prices. In Japan, Article 2 of the Bank of Japan Act clearly states that it is "achieving price 
stability,  thereby  contributing  to  the  sound  development  of  the  national  economy."  On  the 
other hand, the ways price stability is numerically expressed differ notably from country to 
country. In the case of the Bank, the level of inflation rate that each Policy Board member 
understands as being consistent with price stability over the medium to long term is compiled 
and  published  as  the  "understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability."  The  current 
understanding  falls in  the  range  approximately  between  0  and  2  percent,  with most  Policy 
Board members' median figures at around 1 percent. 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 5
The  second  important  element  is  to  communicate  the  assessment  of  not  only  the  current 
situation of the economy and prices but also their outlook. This is because it takes some time 
for  monetary  policy  to  actually  affect  economic  activity  and  prices.  In  addition,  since  the 
outlook for economic activity and prices always entails uncertainties, it is necessary, when 
communicating it, to not only present a single scenario, but also to clarify the risks that might 
result in an upside or downside deviation. 
In  the  case  of  the  Bank,  economic  and  price  situations  are  communicated  through  means 
such as the Monthly Report of Recent Economic and Financial Developments and the press 
conference  held  after  each  Monetary  Policy  Meeting.  Also  in  the  semiannual  Outlook  for 
Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (Outlook  Report),  which  is  published  in  April  and  October, 
projections  for  the  current  and  the  next  fiscal  year  as  well  as  risk  factors  are  published. 
Starting  this  April,  Risk  Balance  Charts  were  introduced  to  visually  express  future 
uncertainties  by  means  of  aggregated  probability  distributions  of  forecasts  of  economic 
growth and inflation by individual Policy Board members. 
The third important element is explaining the thinking behind the future conduct of monetary 
policy.  How  much  this  should  be  explained  depends  on  the  economic  situation.  What  is 
important is that the thinking behind the future conduct of monetary policy depends on the 
economic  and  price  situation  of  the  time  and  this  should  be  communicated  along  with  the 
outlook for economic activity and prices and its risk factors. 
In March 2006, the Bank adopted the idea of outlining its assessment of economic activity 
and prices, which forms the basis of monetary policy conduct, from "two perspectives." In the 
first perspective, the Policy Board members examine whether the outlook deemed most likely 
is  consistent  with  the  objective  of  monetary  policy,  which  is  the  attainment  of  sustainable 
growth with price stability, whereas in the second, risk factors that are not captured in the 
outlook  deemed  most  likely  are  examined.  The  Bank,  in  the  light  of  deliberations from  the 
"two  perspectives"  described  above,  outlines  its  view  on  future  monetary  policy,  and 
discloses it in the Outlook Report. 
Issues for central bank communication 
In recent years, ways of communicating monetary policy have been actively discussed from 
the viewpoint of improving the transparency of monetary policy. I would like to discuss a few 
of these issues facing central banks in the context of the current economic situation. 
First  is  the  issue  of  harmonizing  the  diversity  and  transparency  of  the  monetary  policy 
committee. Many central banks, including the Bank of Japan, have the system of decision 
making by a committee. The final decision on the level of the policy interest rate is made by a 
majority  vote  but,  in  the  process,  diverse  views  are  expressed  on  the  situation  of  the 
economy and prices and the basic thinking behind the conduct of monetary policy. Although 
this  diversity  of  views  is  one  of  the  advantages  of  a  committee  system,  how  the  central 
bank's view should be drawn together and released is an important issue. 
Second  is  the  issue  of  how  risks  and  uncertainties  should  be  communicated.  Since  the 
transmission lag of monetary policy is long and variable, it is necessary to reveal the outlook 
for  a  certain  time  horizon.  Needless  to  say,  uncertainty  increases  as  the  time  horizon 
lengthens. In addition, with complex interactions between the monetary and the real sides of 
the economy, it is usually difficult to anticipate when risks will actually materialize even if they 
are qualitatively recognized. In the case of the current subprime loan problem, for example, 
excesses in financial activities and the risk of their reversals had been pointed out quite early 
by many central banks in their publications such as financial system reports. However, it was 
impossible  to  anticipate  when  it  would  actually  happen.  How  qualitative  and  quantitative 
assessments of the outlook and risk factors should be communicated is an important issue 
facing central banks. 
6 
 BIS Review 95/2008
Third  is  the  issue  of  how  central  banks'  rationale  behind  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy 
should be communicated. Some argue that a transparent monetary policy should signal an 
impending decision to market participants before the next Monetary Policy Meeting. I do not 
think  so.  De  facto  announcement  of  the  future  level  of  the  policy  interest  rate  means 
disregarding  the  changes  in  economic  conditions  after  such  an  announcement.  It  seems 
important  to  communicate  the  basic  rationale  behind  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  with 
regard to the economic situation of the time. 
This also applies to the discussion of inflation rate targeting. Japan not long ago experienced 
a period of some years of decline in consumer prices. At the time, there was an argument 
that  all  available  monetary  policy  tools  should  be  mobilized  to  achieve  the  rate  of  inflation 
that  deemed  desirable  no  matter  what  the  reasons  for  the  decline  in  prices  were.  On  the 
other hand, there is an argument today that, confronted with an increase in prices, monetary 
policy  should  be  conducted  disregarding  the  effects  of  increases  in  energy  and  materials 
prices.  Although  there  are  complex  mechanisms  behind  both  increases  and  decreases  in 
prices,  it  is  an  immovable  objective  of  a  central  bank  to  assess  the  basic  trend  of  price 
developments and achieve sustainable growth through long term stability in prices. If this is 
not fully understood, the targeted inflation rate will become its own goal and consequently 
makes the attainment of sustainable growth with price stability difficult. 
The recent enhancements to the communication strategy 
As  discussed  above,  there  are  various  issues  in  terms  of  improving  central  banks’ 
communication regarding monetary policy, many of which also apply to the Bank of Japan. 
With these in mind, the Bank has just gone over its communication strategy to enhance the 
framework which I described earlier. 
The first enhancement is to release the assessment from the "two perspectives" immediately 
after each Monetary Policy Meeting in the form of a statement. Although we have previously 
been releasing our basic understanding of the economic situation in the form of "The Bank's 
View"  immediately  after  the  meeting,  communication  regarding  monetary  policy  had  only 
been an announcement of the decision of "no change" in cases when there was no change 
in  policy.  Hereafter,  following  each  meeting,  whether  or  not  there  is  a  policy  change,  a 
summary of the assessment of the economic and price situation from the "two perspectives," 
and the Bank's thinking on the future conduct of monetary policy will be published along with 
the policy decision. 
Of  course,  even  under  the  previous  arrangements,  the  background  for  the  policy  decision 
and the thinking behind the conduct of monetary policy had been communicated very fully at 
the press conference after the Monetary Policy Meetings. However, from now on the main 
points will be communicated after each meeting in the form of a statement agreed upon by 
the Policy Board through discussion followed by a vote during the Monetary Policy Meeting. 
The second enhancement is to provide each quarter the forecasts of Policy Board members 
on  the  economic  growth  rate  and  the  inflation  rate,  and  the  Risk  Balance  Charts.  Various 
shocks  are  always  impacting  the  economy,  and  there  are  times  when  the  outlook  for  the 
economy and prices needs to be altered. However, if forecasts are revised frequently on the 
basis  of  every  new  item  of  economic  data  that  becomes  available,  this  will  confuse  the 
market.  The  Bank  determined  that  quarterly  publication  of  forecasts  and  the  Risk  Balance 
Charts is appropriate. 
What I must stress here is that forecast numbers and charts are references that supplement 
the  qualitative  descriptions  in  the  Outlook  Report  and  the  statement  that  follows  each 
meeting. It would be simple if economic forecasts, which form the basis of policy decisions, 
could  be  expressed  in  one  or  two  figures,  but  this  is  not  the  case,  as  in  all  other  central 
banks.  The  outlook  for  the  economy  and  prices  is  too  complicated  to  be  expressed  in 
quantitative  forecasts  and  risks.  In  this  sense,  qualitative  evaluation  of  the  mechanisms 
behind  changes  in  the  economy  and  prices,  and  the  risks  of  the  deviation  from  the  main 
BIS Review 95/2008 
 7
scenario  are  important.  In  the  Bank's  publications,  figures  should  always  be  read  together 
with the written explanations to obtain a proper understanding. 
The third enhancement is to extend the forecast horizon for projections. The forecast horizon 
for projections in the Outlook Report published in April and October was for two fiscal years, 
the current and the next fiscal year. Starting from this October, however, the projections in 
the  October  Outlook  Report  will  extend  to  the  fiscal  year  after  next.  In  the  case  of  other 
central banks, shorter forecast horizons are 1 to 2 years but some extend to around 3 years. 
The  Bank  determined  that  in  view  of  the  transmission  lag  of  monetary  policy  and  the 
uncertainty in the economic outlook, it is appropriate to extend the forecast horizon as above. 
I  have  explained  the  recent  enhancements  to  our  communication  strategy.  Even  if  the 
framework of communication policy is adequate, what decides the quality of communication 
is the appropriateness of economic analysis and policy decisions. We will continue to make 
steady efforts to provide appropriate economic analyses, conduct monetary policy based on 
them, and communicate them carefully.  
Closing remarks 
In my remarks today, I have explained the situation of Japan's economy and the conduct of 
monetary policy, and also our views on central bank communication. My presentation today 
dealt mainly with monetary policy, but the Bank also plays an important role in an area that 
may be referred to as banking policy. In the United States, since last summer, the Federal 
Reserve has been undertaking various liquidity provision measures to maintain stability in the 
financial system. From our standpoint as a central bank that undertook unusual measures in 
the  face  of  financial  system  turmoil  from  the  1990s,  it  is  surprising  that  the  Bank  and  the 
Federal Reserve adopted very similar ways of addressing the situation. Recalling that central 
banks are originally established to achieve stability in the financial system, however, this is 
no  surprise.  It  is  important  for  a  central  bank  to  actually  grasp  the  situation  of  individual 
banks  since  it  is  providing  credit  for  them.  Also  there  are  various  issues  regarding  actual 
operation.  Credit  extension  through  cross-border  collateral,  which  is  currently  being 
discussed  among  central  banks,  is  one  of  them.  We  would  like  to  contribute  to  the 
development  of  Japan's  economy  by  utilizing  the  full  range  of  functions  of  a  central  bank 
such  as  stabilizing  the  financial  system  and  the  payment  system  in  addition  to  conducting 
monetary policy. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 95/2008
