Lucas Papademos: Financial integration, financial innovation and 
development 
Opening remarks by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at 
the  Second  Symposium  of  the  ECB-CFS  Research  Network  on  “Capital  Markets  and 
Financial Integration in Europe”, Frankfurt am Main, 13 February 2008. 
 Introduction  
I.  
Welcome to the ECB for the Second Symposium of the ECB-CFS Research Network. As you 
may know, the word symposium was originally used to refer to a convivial discussion after a 
banquet or drinking party (among fellows who had gathered to “drink together” as denoted by 
the Greek noun sympotes). But Plato’s philosophical dialogue entitled “Symposium” (written 
sometime  after  385  BC)  brought  the  meaning  of  the  word  closer  to  its  contemporary  use, 
since  it  involved  a  serious  discussion  on  an  important  theme.  In  modern  times,  Wikipedia 
pointedly states that symposium “has come to refer to any academic conference, whether or 
not drinking takes place.”  
It is too early in the day to raise a glass to the ECB-CFS Research Network, even though we 
would have plenty of reasons to do so, as this symposium marks the end of the second stage 
of  this  initiative.  The  programme  of  this  meeting  aims  at  providing  a  synthesis  of  the 
Network’s research activities over the past three years. The European Central Bank and the 
Centre  for  Financial  Studies  launched  the  ECB-CFS  Research  Network  in  April  2002  to 
promote research on “Capital Markets and Financial Integration in Europe”. Since then, the 
Network  has  co-ordinated  and  stimulated  top-level  and  policy-relevant  research  and  has 
significantly contributed to our understanding of the structure and integration of the financial 
system in Europe and its linkages to the financial systems of the United States and Japan. 
During  the  second  stage  of  this  research  initiative,  which  started  in  2004,  five  research 
conferences were organised in Brussels, Vienna, Berlin, Madrid and Dublin. At these events, 
always  hosted  by  a  Eurosystem  central  bank,  leading  European  and  US  academics  and 
practitioners in the field of finance came together to address the main research priorities of 
the network which included a broad array of themes: bank competition, international portfolio 
choices,  European  bond  markets,  European  securities  settlement  systems,  and  new 
European markets.  
This  second  symposium  will  deal  with  a  fairly  wide  range  of  topics  concerning  the  role  of 
financial  markets  in  determining  economic  performance,  in  particular  the  economy’s 
efficiency  and  stability.  A  closer  inspection  of  the  programme  shows  that  the  topics  to  be 
addressed  are  related  to  two  processes  that  have  affected  the  functioning  of  the  financial 
system  and  its  impact  on  the  economy:  first,  financial  integration,  and  second,  financial 
innovation and development. 
During the first day, the focus is on the increasing financial integration both globally and in 
Europe:  its  measurement,  its  determinants,  its  effects  on  the  real  economy  –  notably 
productivity growth, capital accumulation, income divergence – and its impact on the lending 
practices of financial institutions. The policy implications of European financial integration for 
supervisory structures will be addressed by the panel at the end of the first day. 
During the second day, we will concentrate on issues pertaining to financial development and 
innovation, including the role of institutions and legal frameworks, the contribution of venture 
capital  and  private  equity,  and  the  broader  effects  of  financial  innovation  on  economic 
performance. The consequences of highly developed and sophisticated financial systems for 
the distribution of risk will be the subject of discussion in the second panel tomorrow. 
BIS Review 17/2008 
 1
Financial integration, financial innovation and economic performance 
II.  
Let me now briefly raise a few issues concerning the role of financial integration and financial 
innovation in influencing the economy’s performance. I will do so from a policy-maker’s point 
of view and in the light of the ongoing market adjustment. I will suggest some areas where 
research can provide useful pertinent analysis. Over the past decade, a growing volume of 
research  has  examined  some  of  these  issues,  but  there  is  still  a  lot  to  learn  about  the 
mechanisms  through  which  increasing  financial  integration  and  continuous  financial 
innovation have been affecting the efficiency and stability of our economies, as well as about 
their potential impact on the conduct of monetary policy and the performance of supervisory 
and financial stability tasks. 
There  is  little  doubt  in  my  mind  –  and  economic  research  provides  solid  theoretical 
arguments  and  ample  empirical  support  –  that  both  financial  integration  and  financial 
innovation  have  beneficial  effects  for  the  efficiency  of  both  financial  and  real  markets. 
Accordingly, they have affected positively long-term economic growth and have contributed 
to  the  moderation  of  aggregate  output  volatility.  The  findings  of  some  of  this  research  are 
included in the “Handbook of European Financial Markets and Institutions”, to be released 
tomorrow in the context of this symposium.  
What about the potential impact of financial integration and innovation on the stability of the 
financial  system  and,  more  generally,  on  macroeconomic  stability?  Conceptually,  the 
analysis  of  this  question  is  less  straightforward  and  the  answers  given  have  been  either 
ambiguous or nuanced. Moreover, developments since the summer of 2007 and the ongoing 
market  adjustment  have  highlighted  the  role  of  financial  integration  and  innovation  in  the 
propagation and – in certain cases – the amplification of shocks and have raised questions 
about  their  overall  contribution  to  financial  stability  and  macroeconomic  volatility.  So  what 
answer can we give to the question I raised and what are the policy implications? 
At a theoretical level, the impact of financial integration and innovation on stability could be 
ambiguous. The main effects of these processes, such as improved risk-distribution and risk-
sharing, should reinforce stability; but they also involve mechanisms and effects that might 
amplify  instability,  for  instance  by  increasing  the  probability  of  contagion.  However,  these 
latter effects cannot be looked independently of the influence of other factors, such as the 
prevailing risk management practices, or the incentives embedded in the business models of 
banks  and  other  financial  market  participants  that  have  a  bearing  on  the  distribution, 
accumulation and containment of risks in the financial system.  
The key issue – which is not only of academic interest, but also of policy relevance and of a 
sensitive political nature – is this: are the processes of financial integration and innovation to 
be blamed, at least in part, for the recent market volatility? Or other factors or elements of the 
financial  system  are  the  main  culprits  because  they  have  helped  build  up  the  imbalances, 
triggered  the  turmoil,  contributed  to  the  amplification  of  shocks  and  account  for  the 
uncertainty surrounding the likely duration and magnitude of the adjustment process.  
The  underlying  causes  and  other  contributing  factors  to  the  financial  market  turmoil  have 
been  analysed  and  discussed  extensively  by  policy-makers  and  market  participants. 
Recently, the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) submitted an interim report to the G7 Financial 
Ministers and Central Bank Governors which includes an analysis of the causes of the recent 
events and of weaknesses in the functioning of the financial system that have been revealed 
by  the  market  turmoil.  It  is  useful  to  distinguish  between,  on  the  one  hand,  general  and 
underlying  factors  that  have  contributed  to  the  emergence  of  imbalances  and  the 
accumulation of risk exposures and, on the other hand, specific factors and system features 
that played a role in this process and which triggered the turmoil and amplified its effects. 
The  general  and  underlying  causes  include  the  exceptionally  benign  macroeconomic, 
financial and monetary conditions over the past four years – until the summer of 2007 – that 
had contributed to reducing risk aversion and market volatility and had fostered a “search for 
yield”  and  rising 
the 
innovation  also  played  a  role  because 
leverage.  Financial 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2008
unprecedented  growth  of  the  securitisation  of  bank  loans,  of  credit  risk  transfer  (CRT) 
instruments and of complex structured finance products resulted in the distribution of risks 
and  the  creation  of  risk  exposures  that  could  not  be  managed  effectively  by  financial 
institutions  and  other  market  participants.  And  the  international  integration  of  financial 
markets and the repackaging and transfer of credit risk made possible by financial innovation 
partly explain how the shock to a relatively small segment of the US financial market spread 
globally across borders and across other markets. 
But this is only part of the story, because a number of other factors played a crucial role in 
triggering  the  turmoil  and  in  propagating  and  amplifying  its  effects.  Let  me  emphasise  five 
such contributing factors or weaknesses in the financial system from a larger list: 
• 
First, inadequate risk assessment and management, especially of funding liquidity 
risk, concentration risk, the risk embedded in complex structured finance products, 
and the risks associated with the off-balance sheet exposures of banks. 
Second,  shortcomings  and  uncertainties  in  the  valuation  of  structured  finance 
products, due to their complexity, imperfect information about the underlying asset 
characteristics  and  excessive  reliance  on  the  ratings  of  such  products  by  credit 
rating agencies. 
Third, distorted incentives that, inter alia, adversely affected the implementation of 
the  “originate  and  distribute”  model  by  banks  and  other  market  participants  in  the 
chain of origination, distribution and acquisition of credit risks; 
Fourth, the emergence of new financial entities – the off-balance sheet conduits and 
structured investment vehicles – which were sponsored by banks and which were 
characterised  by  excessive  leverage  and  maturity  mismatches  on  their  balance 
sheets, because they held illiquid structured finance products and financed them by 
issuing short-term asset-backed commercial paper; 
Fifth, and last on my list, imperfect information about the quality and performance of 
underlying  assets,  inadequate  transparency  about  the  characteristics  and  risks  of 
structured finance products and insufficient disclosure about the risk exposures of 
financial institutions as a result of their on- and off-balance sheet holdings. 
    This list of other contributing factors and system weaknesses – and it is not an exhaustive list 
– shows that it was not the processes of financial integration and innovation per se that were 
responsible  for  the  market  turmoil.  Other  specific  factors  such  as  inadequate  risk 
management,  valuation  problems  and  uncertainties,  distorted 
imperfect 
information, insufficient transparency and disclosure played a crucial role in the propagation 
and  amplification  of  shocks.  Put  differently,  the  rapid  advances  in  financial  innovation  and 
integration  had  not  been  accompanied  by  adequate  appreciation  of  risk,  effective  risk 
management  and  sufficient  market  discipline.  The  turmoil  partly  reflects  this  divergence 
between  financial  innovation  and  integration,  on  the  one  hand,  and  effective  risk 
management and sufficient market discipline, on the other. Needless to say, this gap should 
be bridged, but in an appropriate manner. 
incentives, 
Policy initiatives to strengthen the resilience of the financial system 
III.  
Significant  steps  have  been  taken  and  several  initiatives  are  underway  to  address  the 
identified weaknesses. And the G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors agreed 
on a number of key issues that be tackled. The FSF, building on the work programmes of 
international  bodies  and  national  authorities,  will  make  concrete  and  specific 
recommendations on actions to strengthen the resilience of the financial system. In the light 
of  my  previous  remarks,  the  actions  of  market  participants  and  policy-makers  should  aim, 
among other things, at: 
BIS Review 17/2008 
 3
  Improvements  in  transparency  and  disclosure  practices,  notably  disclosures  by 
financial institutions of the valuation of their structured finance products and of their 
losses;  disclosures  of  off-balance  sheet  risks;  disclosures  of  risks  embedded  in 
structured finance products. 
Enhancements of risk management practices and internal control systems 
Ensuring appropriate incentive structures and addressing the revealed shortcomings 
in the implementation of the “originate and distribute” model; 
The necessary actions should be taken by financial institutions and other market participants 
that  have  clear  incentives  to  improve  confidence  and  restore  the  normal  functioning  of 
markets. The authorities should provide both encouragement and appropriate guidance and 
monitor  developments  closely.  The  full  implementation  of  the  Basel  II  capital  adequacy 
framework will help to improve risk management and transparency. Ultimately, the authorities 
will have to decide whether and where greater guidance and more specific prescription will 
be  required  to  ensure  appropriate  incentive  structures,  adequate  risk  management  and 
sufficient  transparency.  The  general  objective  of  the  actions  of  market  participants  and 
policy-makers should be to strengthen the resilience of the financial system and safeguard its 
stability  in  order  to  preserve  the  benefits  of  financial  integration  and  innovation  for  the 
economy’s efficiency and dynamism and its long-term growth. 
The contribution of research 
IV.  
The appropriate actions to be taken by market participants and policy-makers to strengthen 
the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  and  to  safeguard  its  stability  are  numerous  and 
challenging. In this effort, economic research can make an important contribution. Significant 
progress  has  already  been  made  in  enhancing  our  knowledge  about  the  implications  of 
financial integration and innovation for economic performance. And this symposium offers an 
opportunity to present and discuss a number of recent advances. Yet, the financial market 
turmoil has shown that the world – our economies and financial systems – is more complex 
and  more  interdependent;  that  underlying  factors,  processes,  risks  and  vulnerabilities  can 
interact  in  a  ways  that  have  not  been  previously  envisaged.  It  is,  therefore,  essential  to 
pursue  specific  research  topics  and  to  bring  the  various  strands  of  work  more  closely 
together. This symposium with its varied programme provides a great forum for advancing 
this objective. 
With  regard  to  the  policy  issues  I  previously  highlighted,  it  would  seem  to  be  particularly 
useful if economic research could further contribute in four specific areas:  
• 
the  development  of  models  and  indicators  that  help  identify  growing  financial 
imbalances and emerging vulnerabilities and provide early warning signals; 
the  analysis  and  improvement  of  incentive  structures,  especially  those  associated 
with the various stages of the securitisation process; 
the  construction  of  effective  models  for  stress-testing  of  tail  and  correlated  risks, 
including  funding  liquidity  risk,  as  well  as  more  realistic  models  for  macro  stress-
testing; 
the  further  elaboration  of  the  interactions  between  the  real  economy  and  the 
financial  system,  with  greater  emphasis  on  the  role  of  financial  frictions,  the 
determination of risk, and their effects for the dynamic and stochastic properties of 
the economy.  
   This  list  of  research  topics  is  not  complete,  but  it  is  policy-relevant  and  analytically 
challenging. 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2008
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  make  one  final  and  general  point.  In  pursuing  a  research 
agenda, it is important to maintain a broad perspective – to keep in mind and look at the “big 
picture”  –  as  defined  by  the  main  policy  objectives  and  key  policy  functions  and  by  the 
interconnections of ongoing processes, such as financial integration and innovation, and their 
implications  for  economic  performance  and  the  attainment  of  the  policy  goals  of  efficiency 
and  stability.  Precisely  because  these  interconnections  and  effects  are  complex,  manifold 
and  evolving,  a  deeper  understanding  of  the  fundamental  processes  is  essential.  This 
Network,  with  its  theoretical  contributions  and  empirical  analysis,  can  undoubtedly  provide 
valuable and highly appreciated input into the deliberations and decisions of policy-makers. 
I wish you all the best and an enriching and successful symposium.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 17/2008 
 5
