Ewart S Williams: Leveraging our strength for an international financial 
centre 
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the International Financial Center (IFC) Symposium, Port-of-Spain, 2 April 2008. 
 Early last month, I attended a conference hosted by the Institute of International Finance in 
Rio  de  Janeiro,  and  I  sat  next  to  a  young  man  who  was  an  official  from  the  Dubai 
International  Financial  Center.  After  exchanging  call  cards,  I  indicated  that  I  was  from 
Trinidad and Tobago and was thinking about establishing an international financial center.  
The  young  man  was  very  pleasant  but  made  the  interesting  remark  that,  in  recent  years, 
many  developing  countries  were  trying  to  enter  the  field  which  was  now  becoming 
very crowded. He noted that Dubai was now getting competition from other up-and-coming 
centers in the Middle East and Asia, and that even the industrial economies with developed 
financial centers now had to work aggressively to protect their traditional advantage etc. 
While he did not specifically say it, the question in his eyes was, why Trinidad and Tobago? 
And, why would Trinidad and Tobago think that it could be an international financial center? 
The question prompted me to try to articulate all the things that we had going for us and to 
identify what, from my vantage point, would be some of the challenges that we are likely to 
face in the establishment of an international financial center. 
Yesterday,  many speakers touched on this very issue. I would go over some of the same 
ground but hopefully from my particular perspective. 
My thesis is that we have much more going for us than we tend to realize, in which case the 
issue is, how do we leverage our considerable advantages to achieve our objective? 
The point was made yesterday that the reality of integrated markets and the IT revolution is 
reducing  the  need  to  be  in  a  specific  place  to  conduct  financial  business.  However,  some 
IFC’s  are  thriving,  suggesting  that  if  you  get  a  niche  and  if  you  provide  value-added  you 
could be in business. 
The  Minister,  in  her  speech  yesterday,  and  many  other  speakers  noted,  that  successful 
international financial centers all had a number of characteristics, which could be viewed as 
prerequisites.  First,  you  needed  to  be  a  vibrant  economy  with  strong  banks;  you  need  a 
credible  legal  system,  good  financial  and  physical  infrastructure  and  modern  financial 
legislation. But while these are necessary, they are not sufficient conditions. 
A  survey  of  the  available  literature  on  IFCs  suggest  that  almost  all  successful  financial 
centers have used the strength of their domestic financial sector as a base to be leveraged 
first for expansion regionally, and thereafter internationally. Thus, Dubai has thrived as the 
gateway  to  the  Middle  East.  Hong  Kong  has  become  the  financial  services  gateway  for 
Mainland  China.  Over  the  past  few  years,  TT  has  established  itself  as  the  pre-eminent 
financial  center  in  the  region.  We should  therefore  seek  to  consolidate  our  position  as  the 
financial hub for the greater Caribbean region and as a financial services gateway for Latin 
America.  
What are those achievements on which we could leverage? 
Figure 1: Table on Selected Economic Indicators - We have established an enviable record 
of solid economic performance. 
Figure 2: Shows that the financial sector has contributed importantly to the growth in the non-
energy sector: even currently it employs some 12 per cent of the labour force.  
BIS Review 49/2008 
 1
Figure 3: Financial System Soundness indicators point to a solid financial sector. The table 
shows that banks are well-capitalised, have low delinquency rates etc. all of which points to 
generally prudent management and effective supervision. 
Figure 4: Our financial sector has made important in-roads into the regional market. Our local 
banks  account  for  about  60  percent  of  total  bank  assets  in  the  region.  Our  insurance 
companies  account  for  a  similar  share  of  total  regional  insurance  business  and  our  banks 
have about 15 percent of their portfolio in offshore loans, the bulk of which is in the region. 
1. Strong Macroeconomic Fundamentals
1. Strong Macroeconomic Fundamentals
Real GDP (%)
Energy (%)
Non-Energy (%)
2003
2004
2005
14.4 
31.4 
6.7 
7.8 
8.2 
6.7 
6.1 
8.4 
5.0 
2006
12.2 
21.4 
6.6 
2007p
5.5 
4.4 
6.7 
GDP per capita (US$)
8,860 
10,234 
11,762 
14,788 
16,090 
Unemployment Rate (%)
Public Sector Debt/GDP
External Debt/GDP (%)
Current Account Surplus/GDP (%)
10.5 
49.9 
13.2 
8.9 
8.4 
44.6 
9.9 
13.4 
8.0 
37.6 
8.4 
23.7 
6.2 
30.5 
6.3 
25.5 
5.9 
28.3 
5.6 
16.2 
Gross Official Reserves (US$ Mn)
2,007.5 
2,539.1 
4,014.9 
5,134.1 
6,673.5 
International Ratings
Standard & Poor's
BBB-
BBB+
A-
A-
A-
Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago
2. Macroeconomic Fundamentals
2. Macroeconomic Fundamentals
Non-Energy GDP
/per cent/
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007p
Non-Energy GDP
of Which:
6.7
6.7
5.0
Agriculture
Manufacturing
Construction
Finance, Insurance & Real Estate
-15.3
12.0
23.4
7.3
-34.2
5.2
8.1
21.7
-9.2
12.6
13.4
0.4
6.6
-0.9
9.4
4.3
1.2
6.7
-5.9
8.0
5.2
10.5
Memo: Contribution of Financial 
Sector to Total Employment
8.4
8.3
7.8
8.2
8.3
Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago
  BIS Review 49/2009
  2 
 3. Financial System Soundness Indicators 
3. Financial System Soundness Indicators 
Total Assets (TT$Bn)
62.8
71.2
82.9
92.9
103.9
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
Annual Growth in Total Assets (%)
11.2
12.9
16.5
11.9
11.8
Asset Quality:
Nonperforming Loans to Gross Loans (%)
Earnings and Profitability
Return on Assets (%)
Return on Equity (%)
Capital Adequacy:
Core Capital to Risk Adjusted Assets (%)
2.6
3.7
2.7
2.7
1.4
4.0
29.9
5.2
36.1
3.6
25.0
4.6
31.8
4.8
33.9
19.1
18.3
18.8
18.6
17.9
 Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago
4. Banking System Credit::
4. Banking System Credit
Domestic and Offshore
Domestic and Offshore
Trinidad & Tobago
/per cent/
Domestic
CARICOM
of which: Barbados
Dominican Republic
Grenada
Jamaica
St. Lucia
Suriname
Belize
Guyana
Rest of the World
of which:  United States of America
Total
Dec-05
76.0
20.0
2.8
0.6
0.6
4.6
5.0
0.5
0.6
0.5
4.0
3.0
100.0
Dec-06
75.3
16.3
2.3
0.4
0.5
2.9
4.7
0.5
0.5
0.4
8.4
6.0
100.0
Dec-07
79.3
14.6
2.5
0.3
0.4
2.0
4.5
0.4
0.1
0.4
6.1
4.4
100.0
Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago
  BIS Review 49/2008 
 3
In addition to banking and insurance, we also provide regional leadership in other segments 
of the financial sector. For example, with increasing incomes, a vibrant wealth management 
industry has been emerging, centered on deferred annuities by the insurance industry and 
mutual funds, which has expanded significantly in recent years. Funds under investment in 
the industry have reached TT$34.5 billion, of which about TT$8.5 billion is denominated in 
foreign currency.  
Yesterday  someone  put  the  question,  where  could  we  start  with  the  TTIFC?  Let  me  offer 
some suggestions. It’s my view that even as we launch a search for middle and international 
bank partners … we can start with what we have. Thus, 
• 
It would be useful to have an international bank as anchor… what about RBC? 
If  my  understanding  is  correct,  RBC  has  already  committed  to  use  Trinidad  and 
Tobago as its headquarters in the region – just as Deutsche Bank was important for 
Dubai’s IFC, RBC could play the same role for Trinidad and Tobago. If RBC is not a 
possibility … is Citibank a candidate … notwithstanding current fortunes, they are a 
strong bank with a long history in Trinidad and Tobago and in international reach. 
The Mutual Funds industry would provide a convenient regional niche. We can be a 
centre  for  mutual  funds  and  collective  investment  vehicles  in  the  region.  UTC  is 
leading the way, mobilizing savings up and down the Caribbean and even in the US. 
And  there  are  other  mutual  funds  that  are  operating  regionally  and  involved  in 
worldwide investments : Canada, India. 
And  what  about  institutionalizing  in  the  IFC  a  center  for  regional  bond  issuance. 
Even without an IFC, we are doing some of that already. Bond issues for regional 
sovereigns and corporates have amounted to close to US$1 billion over the last five 
years. And this industry has spawned a rudimentary derivative market for strips and 
participations.  The  investment  funds  are  coming  from  savings  in  Trinidad  and 
Tobago as well as from institutional investors throughout the region. It is a question 
of organizing the industry with appropriate legislation.  
Yesterday,  it  was  mentioned  that  the  stock  exchanges  of  Jamaica,  Barbados  and 
Trinidad and Tobago had agreed to establish an integrated platform known as the 
Caribbean  Exchange  Network.  The  next  step  will  be  a  common  platform  with  a 
single order book i.e. a regional stock exchange. Since IFCs are about clusters of 
financial  services,  the  TTIFC  would  seem  to  be  the  natural  home  for  the  regional 
stock exchange. And as the SEC will explain in greater detail, there are proposals 
for increasing the range of offerings, through the introduction of depository receipts. 
Yesterday,  a  few  speakers  suggested  leveraging  our  high  reserve  levels  and  the 
HSF to lure external fund managers to the IFC. If I am asked, I would urge great 
caution in making that link. In my view, you select Fund managers for their ability to 
deliver  target  returns  given  the  country’s  risk  tolerance.  A  Fund  Manager’s 
preparedness  to  have  an  office  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  should  not  be  given  too 
great a weight in the selection decision. 
    If the herd instinct works at all, the success in consolidating Trinidad and Tobago’s position 
as  the  regional  financial  center  could  pave  the  way  for  extra-regional  institutions  to 
acknowledge Trinidad and Tobago as the gateway to the Caribbean, and perhaps to Latin 
America where the possibilities are even greater. 
Data  from  the  IMF’s  portfolio  investment  survey  show  that  portfolio  investment  into  Latin 
America from the US, amounted to about US$258 billion in 2006. Credit from US banks to 
Latin  America  amounted  to  US$68  billion.  Is  there  a  role  for  TTIFC  intermediating  some 
small  part  of  these  sizable  cross-border  flows?  I  think  the  challenge  is,  will  we  be  able  to 
make  it  attractive  for  recognized  investment  houses  to  make  TTIFC  a  base  for  these 
transactions rather than Colombia or Chile or Brazil or Argentina as is currently the case. To 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2009
make such inroads we will need, inter alia, to improve transportation links and IT connectivity 
between TT and Latin America.  
What about the Central Bank’s role in all this? 
As the Minister of Finance noted yesterday, the Bank has already taken important steps to 
upgrade our supporting financial infrastructure, in line with the requirements of an IFC. Our 
infrastructural framework now comprises electronic clearance and settlement systems, a 
regional  credit  rating  agency  and  an  online  auction  system  and  integrated  securities 
depositories. 
I  should  note  that  we  also  have  a  good  base  in  terms  of  the  availability  and  quality  of 
supporting services such as law firms with experience in financial law, and accountancy and 
auditing practices. 
We are now upgrading our financial sector legislation and bringing our regulatory regime in 
line with international best practices. We have completed drafts of new legislation to combat 
money-laundering and the financing of terrorist activities as well as new flagship legislation 
governing banks and non-banks – the Financial Institutions Act (FIA). My understanding is a 
new  draft  Securities  Industries  Act  (SIA)  has  also  been  completed.  We  are  also  well 
advanced in the preparation of a new Insurance Act and a Credit Union Act. We plan to 
accelerate our work on the preparation of new Pensions legislation. 
In all cases, the new legislation will aim at adapting well-accepted international best practices 
to our local situation. Thus for example, 
Anti-Money  Laundering  Legislation  is  critical  to  any  IFC.  No  large  overseas  financial 
institution  will  come  without  it.  The  Anti-Money  Laundering  Act  will  provide  legally 
enforceable means for the application of best practices governing Record Keeping, Retention 
of  Records,  and  Know-Your-Customer  Reporting  and  Compliance  requirements.  The 
passage into law of these Regulations will also ensure that Trinidad and Tobago is compliant 
with the relevant international benchmarks established by the Financial Action Task Force. 
The FIA would now provide for the consolidated supervision of groups in order to effectively 
assess and address the risks to regulated entities within a group. It would also place greater 
emphasis  on  risk  management  and  improve  corporate  governance  practices.  These 
principles would also be applicable to those companies wishing to operate under the aegis of 
the international financial centre. 
The  new  Insurance  Act  will  broaden  the  investment  rules  and  give  more  flexibility  to  the 
companies to make investments including foreign investments. 
The Pensions Act is also likely to provide greater scope for foreign investment and a more 
open approach to equity investments. 
The  establishment  of  an  IFC  will  require  the  strengthening  and  upgrading  of  our  financial 
supervision capability.  
Yesterday, there was the question on whether the IFC and the domestic financial services 
industry  should  be  on  the  same  regulatory  footing.  The  Bank’s  preliminary  view  is  that  all 
financial  institutions  should  be  subject  to  consistent  regulatory  oversight.  If  companies 
operating within the International Financial Centre are also engaged in domestic lending and 
investment and are therefore competing with local institutions, they should be subject to the 
same rules. 
In  our  view,  the  existence  of  an  IFC  does  not alter  the  basic  objectives  of  financial  sector 
supervision which are, preserving financial stability, protecting depositors’ and policyholders’ 
interest,  and  the  promotion  of  a  competitive  and  efficient  financial  system  to  support 
economic growth. Given the fact that companies in the IFC will receive tax advantages, we 
would need to consider what steps could be taken in order to minimize regulatory arbitrage. 
BIS Review 49/2008 
 5
As the IFC expands, the need for a Single Regulator, as distinct from the Central Bank will 
have to be faced. The Government has indicated that over the medium term it is prepared to 
consider the establishment of a Single Regulator. In this regard, the Irish example may be 
instructive.  
I thought I should end by going back to my conversation I had with my friend from the Dubai 
Financial Center. To be fair, he did underscore that there were considerable benefits to be 
derived from the establishment of an International Financial Center. But he was careful to 
remind me that there are costs; and some of the costs that he mentioned would loom even 
larger in our society, given our set of political and social institutions. 
I was reminded that, a major challenge for a developing or emerging market country with an 
International  Financial  Center  is  the  need  to  avoid negative contagion between the IFC 
and the domestic economy. And this can happen in several ways; it could come from the 
extensive use of domestic savings to finance offshore lending; it could come from the use of 
capital inflows to finance domestic lending. The point is that once you have an IFC operating 
in both the domestic economy and offshore, there could be negative consequences from a 
sudden reversal of capital; obviously regulation would need to mitigate these risks. 
Second,  in  a  small  country  like  ours,  there  is  always  the  risk  that  the  IFC  increases 
competition for the scarce technical and managerial resources,  draining  the  domestic 
financial center; we do not yet have an IFC and already there is aggressive competition for 
talent in the financial sector. So that’s something that we should be mindful of – the need for 
accelerated training. 
One potential cost of an IFC that is often cited is this; it is argued that attaining IFC status 
and successfully maintaining it effectively constrains the economic and financial policies of 
the  home  country  to  those  that  are  consistent  with  this  status:  policies  such  as  financial 
sector  openness,  an  open  capital  account;  the  absence  of  exchange  controls  and  non-
discrimination between domestic and foreign institutions. 
And perhaps one can mention one other potential spillover that needs to be watched and it’s 
the  tendency  for  IFCs  to  produce  a  new  high-wage  elite,  many  of  whom  are  part-time 
residents but, who like the oil sector expatriates, could add to the upward pressure on real 
estate  values  and  high-end  rentals.  This  is  an  issue  that  many  financial  capitals  and  new 
IFCs like Dubai have had to deal with.  
The Bank strongly supports the introduction of an IFC since there are significant benefits to 
be  derived  therefrom.  We  think  that  there  is  sufficient  to  start  with,  utilizing  some  of  our 
domestic institutions which have already made their mark regionally and internationally.  
We  should  be  prepared  to  start  with  small  gains  and  build  as  we  go  along.  If  we  get  the 
policies right, over the long run Trinidad and Tobago could emerge as an important financial 
hub not only for the Caribbean and Latin America, and perhaps even further afield. 
6 
 BIS Review 49/2009
