Denny H Kalyalya: Management development at the Bank of Zambia 
Opening remarks by Dr Denny H Kalyalya, Deputy Governor Operations, Bank of Zambia, at 
the opening of the Management Development Programme for Assistant Managers, Lusaka, 
27 May 2008. 
 • Director – Human Resources 
• The Consultants 
• Participants 
• Ladies and Gentlemen 
I wish to begin by thanking the Human Resources Department for organising and inviting me 
to officially open this important management development programme. I am therefore, happy 
to welcome you all to this Management Development Programme. You are the fifth group to 
benefit from this important initiative aimed at enhancing skills in the Bank. 
I am also pleased that this programme is taking place shortly after the adoption of the Bank 
of Zambia Strategic Plan for 2008-2011. As you are aware, the Bank of Zambia Vision under 
the recently approved Strategic Plan for 2008-2011, “is to be a modern, dynamic, credible, 
and effective central bank”. 
The  new  vision  calls  for  our  total  commitment  to  creating  an  environment  that  promotes 
productivity  and  innovation  and  enhances  stakeholder  confidence  in  the  Bank’s  ability  to 
achieve price and financial system stability, in line with our mission statement. Therefore, this 
programme is an indication of the importance that Senior Management attaches to the role 
that you, the middle managers, play in attaining the Bank’s vision and mission. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am informed that over the next 9 days you will be going through a unique programme, one 
that has been specifically designed for you, in order to meet the Bank’s needs. In this regard, 
experienced resource persons, led by PMDC Consultancy Services, have been assembled 
to guide you through this important programme. 
This  programme  is  part  of  our  efforts  aimed  at  equiping  you  with  managerial  skills,  which 
should significantly improve your job performance. You should also realise that in doing this, 
we  are  not  only  providing  you  with  the  tools  that  will  enable  you  to  contribute  effectively 
towards  the  management  of  the  Bank,  but  we  are  also  preparing  you  for  management 
succession as and when opportunities arise. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am aware that most of you do possess relevant qualifications. However, please note that 
technical and academic qualifications on their own and by themselves are not sufficient to 
equip someone with managerial skills. Being a good and effective manager comes through 
experience and appropriate management development training, such as this one. 
As alluded to earlier, this programme was designed specifically for the Bank. As such there 
are a number of modules in the programme which have been included specifically to meet 
our needs. 
The  first  is  the  module  on  the  Functions  of  the  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia.  This  was 
included to provide you with an understanding of the role and importance of the Board to our 
strategic plan management process and ultimately to your job. You need to understand that 
the  Board  is  responsible  for  formulation  of  policies  for  the  Bank  and  therefore  ultimately 
responsible  for  strategic  actions  taken  and  policies  implemented  by  Management.  It  is 
important that you understand the functions of the Board and how your job contributes to the 
policy making and strategic management processes. 
BIS Review 72/2008 
 1
Second, you will have a module on good corporate governance. Without wishing to pre-empt 
the  presentation,  may  I  just  say  that  good  corporate  governance  is  one  of  our  strategic 
objectives and its inclusion as a strategic objective reflects our commitment to aligning our 
operations with international best practices. 
Finally, the inclusion of a module on the Core Functions of the Bank of Zambia is designed to 
provide you with knowledge on the operations for which the Bank was established for and its 
primary responsibility. This is important for a number of reasons including the following: 
i. 
improve  your 
to  have  a  cadre  of  enlightened  and  well  informed  managers  who  will  portray  a 
positive image of the Bank. As employees, especially as assistant managers, you 
are  expected  to  have  a  good  understanding  of  how  the  Bank’s  core  activities  are 
organised  and  undertaken.  This  will  also 
inter-departmental 
relationship and enable you to appreciate how, when and where your job affects the 
Bank’s core activities; 
as managers, you are also expected, by the public, to have a reasonable grasp of 
issues pertaining to the core operations of the Bank. This may sound pretty obvious, 
but I know that there are many of our managers who have no idea how some of our 
core departments function and cannot intelligently explain our role in the economy. 
This reflects badly on the Bank with regard to the calibre of its staff; and 
your understanding of the core and other departments’ operations for that matter will 
facilitate staff  rotation,  a  policy  to  which  the  Bank  is  committed.  Finally,  and  most 
importantly, an understanding of core functions will enable you to better understand 
and appreciate the mission of the Bank. 
ii. 
iii. 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
During the programme, you will certainly have an opportunity to interact with colleagues in a 
closer manner and therefore be able to share notes on a number of issues relevant to the 
effective  operations  of  the  Bank.  You  are  therefore,  encouraged  to  open  up  and  make 
proposals which address identified problem areas or indeed possible areas of innovation(s). 
In a nutshell, you are encouraged to actively participate in the programme. 
Conclusion 
With  these  few  remarks,  Chairperson,  it  is  now  my  honour  and  privilege  to  declare  the 
Management Development Programme for Assistant Managers officially open. 
I thank you all for your attention and wish you all a successful workshop. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2008
