Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The growing significance of rural banking in the 
Philippines 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the 
Philippines  (Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  inaugural  reception  of  RBAP  Board  of 
Directors and Officers, Manila, 8 July 2008. 
 Secretary  Arthur  Yap,  Mr.  Tomas  Gomez  IV,  board  of  directors  and  officers  of  the  Rural 
Bankers Association of the Philippines (RBAP), our friends in rural banking, good evening.  
I am delighted to have this opportunity to keynote the inauguration of the new directors and 
officers  of  the  RBAP.  It  is,  indeed,  an  auspicious  new  day  for  the  rural  banking  industry. 
Seeing  the  new  set  of  directors  and  officers  at  RBAP’s  helm,  I  am  certain  that  you  will 
provide the impetus needed for the rural banking sector to once again forge ahead.  
Rural banks have an important and challenging role in our country’s economic development. 
In the law that created rural banks, they were envisioned to be catalysts for comprehensive 
rural development, channels of equitable distribution of opportunities and wealth, and support 
for expanded productivity in rural communities. The end goal was to raise the quality of life 
for  all,  especially  the  underprivileged.  This  task  of  great  magnitude  is relevant  today,  as  it 
was then. In fact, with the shifts in the economic landscape, the increasingly changing needs 
of the market, the advent of new technologies and channels, it may be said that the demand 
on  rural  banks  today  is  even  greater  than  it  was  then.  Rural  banks  must  commit  to 
continuously upgrade their capacity, efficiency and sustainability. Rural banks must uphold 
good  governance  and  management  practices  to  ensure  that  they  are  sound  and  well 
managed. Finally, rural banks must be dynamic and progressive to keep in step with these 
changes and developments.  
I am happy to note, that by all measures, the rural banking sector has geared up to face the 
challenges and to seize the economic opportunities they present. Year on year, rural banks 
are exhibiting robust asset growth and strong capital build-up. As of end 2007, the sector’s 
total assets reached PhP 149.5 Billion, an 18% increase from the previous year. Total capital 
accounts have also shown double digit growth of 13.4% from PhP 18.4 Billion in 2006 to PhP 
20.9 Billion in 2007. The Capital Adequacy Ratio (CAR) has remained above the minimum 
10% required by the Bangko Sentral at 15.7%.  
The  business  of  rural  banking  has  also  continued  to  show  viability  and  profitability.  Net 
Income After tax (NIAT) increased by 20% from PhP 2.3 Billion in 2006 to PhP 2.8 Billion in 
2007. Return on Assets and Equity also continue to increase.  
Savings mobilization and lending activities have also been on an uptrend. Deposit liabilities 
in 2007 were at PhP 108.1 Billion, a 21.5% increase from the previous year. Similar double 
digit increases were seen in the sector’s lending activities. Total loan portfolio of rural banks 
increased  to  PhP  93.3  Billion  from  only  PhP  77.1  Billion  in  2006.  While  lending  activities 
expanded, the high quality of the portfolio was maintained. As of the 4th Quarter of 2007, the 
Non Performing Loans (NPL) Ratio was 9.67% which is an improvement from the 11.11% for 
the same period for the previous year.  
Using  these  indicators,  rural  banks  are  faring  equally  or  even  better  than  its  universal, 
commercial and thrift bank counterparts while remaining true to its core mission of serving 
the needs of the countryside. Rural banks alone cover around 80% of the total municipalities 
in the Philippines with nearly 730 banks and over 2,000 branches nationwide. The real value 
added of rural banks, however, does not lie solely on their broad geographical presence but 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 1
just as importantly on their deep understanding of the character, peculiarities and needs of 
the rural customers.  
At  the  Bangko  Sentral,  we  have  no  doubt  that  rural  banks  are  the  ideal  partners  in 
invigorating local economies. Toward this end, we are working assiduously to ascertain that 
abundant  opportunities  are  available  for  rural  banks  to  ensure  their  institutional  viability, 
expand their businesses and more importantly improve their products and services.  
The issuance of the revised branching guidelines last December 2005 (Circular 505) aimed 
to enhance competition in the banking system and maximize the delivery of financial services 
especially  in  underserved  areas.  The  new  guidelines  enable  existing  banks  to  further 
increase  the  depth  and  breadth  of  their  outreach  and  better  serve  more  and  more  clients 
both in the rural and urban areas. The benefits of such policy to the rural banking sector are 
immediately evident. As of end 2007, number of rural and cooperative bank offices increased 
to 2,133 offices from 2,075 in the previous year. While the number of banks decreased by 
12, the number of branches and other offices increased by 58 from end 2006 to end 2007. 
What  we  are  seeing  is  a  consolidation  of  the  sector  where  we  are  seeing  stronger  rural 
banks confidently expanding their operating networks. 
To  complement  the  liberalized  branching  regime,  the  Bangko  Sentral  has  provided  further 
opportunities for rural banks to expand their outreach beyond the brick and mortar structure 
of  their  head  offices  and  branches.  In  2007,  we  issued  Circular  563  which  granted  rural 
banks the authority to invest in ATM networks. As of end 2007, the number of rural banks 
with ATMs reached 83 from 73 units in 2006 and just five ATMs in 2005. In addition, rural 
banks  may  provide  electronic  banking  services,  particularly  mobile  phone  banking.  As  a 
result, a number of rural banks have already ventured into electronic banking to beef up their 
delivery  of  financial  services.  As  of  end  2007,  a  total  of  46  rural  banks  started  offering  e-
banking services such as cash card and mobile banking. Again, this is a significant increase 
from no rural banks with electronic banking in 2005.  
What  I  am  happy  to  see  is  that  rural  banks  are  not  just  simply  using  these  new  virtual 
networks and branches, as they are now available to them. They are going the extra mile in 
finding  ways  that  are  practical,  as  they  are  innovative,  to  make  these  new  channels  more 
attuned  to  the  needs  of  their  rural  clients.  Some  banks  are  using  available  technology  to 
place  ATMs  in  hard  to  reach  areas  that  do  not  even  have  telephone  lines.  Other  banks, 
through a partnership with RBAP-Microenterprise Access to Banking Services (MABS) and 
G-Cash, have taken mobile phone banking to another level. The participating rural banks are 
now  using  the  electronic  cash  platform  in  delivering  financial  services  like  deposits, 
withdrawals and loan payments. Indeed, mobile phone banking has the unique opportunity to 
reach  a  wider  spectra  of  clients  and  tap  those  who  are  traditionally  marginalized  and 
“unbanked” – the lower income segments of the population. The successful experience, thus 
far, of the rural banks, mobile phone companies and the BSP have caught the attention of 
the  international  community  who  are  lauding  our  efforts  in  using  technology  to  increase 
access to finance. The BSP will continue to keenly monitor and support these innovations 
with a dynamic regulatory environment. 
The  Bangko  Sentral  is  also  expanding  the  products  and  services  that  rural  banks  can 
competitively  provide.  In  2006,  through  Circular  522,  the  BSP  granted  rural  banks  the 
authority  to  operate  FCDUs.  Rural  banks  have  a  distinct  advantage  to  compete  in  the 
remittance  business  at  the  final  mile  by  virtue  of  their  close  contact  with  countryside 
customers.  
In  addition,  recent  product  approvals  of  the  BSP  such  as  the  Micro-Agri  Product  and  the 
Housing Microfinance Product provide rural banks with opportunities to expand the range of 
services  they  can  provide  to  their  clients.  In  particular,  rural  banks  with  microfinance 
operations are now provided with the opportunity to complement their present microfinance 
operations by offering these new products, to further diversify portfolios and reduce the risk 
of  business  loans  being  applied  to  agriculture  or  housing.  Further,  by  recognizing  the 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2008
microfinance  component  of  these  loans,  they  will  now  enjoy  the  same  benefits  of 
microfinance such as no collateral requirements or the acceptance of collateral substitutes, 
cash flow and character based lending, small and frequent amortizations as well as simple 
documentary requirements.  
In the last two years, qualified rural banks were further granted the authority to engage in a 
wider range of activities. Through Circular 583, issued in 2007, rural banks may engage in 
limited trust activities. Just this year, rural banks have been allowed to participate in selected 
derivative  activities.  With  the  revised  rules  governing  derivative  activities  of  banks  under 
Circular 594, rural banks that want to transact as end-user may apply for a Type 3 or Limited 
User Authority. Meanwhile, those rural banks that wish to facilitate derivative transactions of 
customers may apply for a Type 4 or Special Broker Authority. 
Just two weeks ago, the Monetary Board approved the abolition of some fees charged for the 
participation in the Philippine Payments and Settlements System (PhilPaSS). The abolition of 
the  annual  license  fee  collected  from  the  non-SWIFT  members  banks  for  the  use  of  the 
Philippine Payment System – Front End System (PPS-FES) and the monthly access fee for 
the third party systems providers will allow free and open participation in PhilPaSS, by rural 
banks.  By  inter-connecting,  rural  banks  may  more  readily  participate  in  clearing  with  the 
Philippine  Clearing  House  Corporation  (PCHC),  managing  its  government  securities 
investments, participating in the exchange market, as well as participating in ATM networks 
and in the interbank market. Rural banks will also be able to instruct their depository bank to 
augment  their  demand  deposit  accounts  (DDA)  maintained  in  the  BSP  through  PhilPaSS. 
Truly  the  potential  for  rural  banks  to  be  mainstreamed  in  the  country’s  payment  system  is 
being realized.  
Our policy stance is a clear indication that we consider rural banks to be ready, effective and 
important channels for economic development. We also recognize the crucial role that rural 
banks  play  in  building  a  truly  inclusive  financial  system.  A  system  where  there  is  not  just 
universal access to financial services, but one where financial institutions provide responsive 
and competitively priced products and services to all, including those who were previously 
unbanked. Access to such services can invigorate local economies and improve the overall 
quality  of  life.  This  cuts  to  the  heart  of  why  rural  banks  were  established.  It  is  indeed  a 
gargantuan  task.  But  with  an  enabling  policy  and  regulatory  environment,  strong  rural 
banking  fundamentals,  and  a  new  and  vibrant  RBAP  board  of  directors  and  officers,  I  am 
confident that it can be achieved.  
Good evening and more power! 
BIS Review 89/2008 
 3
