Ben S Bernanke: Outstanding issues in the analysis of inflation 
Speech  of  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Boston’s  52nd  Annual  Economic 
Conference, Chatham, Massachusetts, 9 June 2008.  
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 foundation  provided  by  extensive 
Good  evening.  I  am  pleased  to  be  able  to  participate  in  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Boston's 52nd annual economic conference, on the topic of inflation and the Phillips curve. 
Forecasting  and  controlling  inflation  are,  of  course,  central  to  the  process  of  making 
monetary  policy.  In  this  respect,  policymakers  are  fortunate  to  be  able  to  build  on  an 
intellectual 
research  and  practical  experience. 
Nonetheless,  much  remains  to  be  learned  about  both  inflation  forecasting  and  inflation 
control. In the spirit of this conference, my remarks this evening will highlight some key areas 
where  additional  research  could  help  to  provide  a  still-firmer  foundation  for  monetary 
policymaking.  
Before turning to those issues, however, I would like to provide a brief update on the outlook 
for the economy and policy, beginning with the prospects for growth. Despite the unwelcome 
rise in the unemployment rate that was reported last week, the recent incoming data, taken 
as a whole, have affected the outlook for economic activity and employment only modestly. 
Indeed,  although  activity  during  the  current  quarter  is  likely  to  be  weak,  the  risk  that  the 
economy  has  entered  a  substantial  downturn  appears  to  have  diminished  over  the  past 
month  or  so.  Over  the  remainder  of  2008,  the  effects  of  monetary  and  fiscal  stimulus,  a 
gradual  ebbing  of  the  drag  from  residential  construction,  further  progress  in  the  repair  of 
financial and credit markets, and still-solid demand from abroad should provide some offset 
to  the  headwinds  that  still  face  the  economy.  However,  the  ongoing  contraction  in  the 
housing market and continuing increases in energy prices suggest that growth risks remain 
to the downside. 
One of the most effective means by which the Federal Reserve can help to restore moderate 
growth over time and to reduce the associated downside risks is by supporting the return of 
financial markets to more-normal functioning. We have taken a number of actions to promote 
financial stability and remain strongly committed to that objective.  
Inflation has remained high, largely reflecting sharp increases in the prices of globally traded 
commodities.  Thus  far,  the  pass-through  of  high  raw  materials  costs  to  the  prices  of  most 
other  products  and  to  domestic  labor  costs  has  been  limited,  in  part  because  of  softening 
domestic  demand.  However,  the  continuation  of  this  pattern  is  not  guaranteed  and  future 
developments in this regard will bear close attention. Moreover, the latest round of increases 
in  energy  prices  has  added  to  the  upside  risks  to  inflation  and  inflation  expectations.  The 
Federal  Open  Market  Committee  will  strongly  resist  an  erosion  of  longer-term  inflation 
expectations, as an unanchoring of those expectations would be destabilizing for growth as 
well as for inflation. 
Turning  now  to  the  principal  topic  of  my  remarks,  I  will  briefly  touch  on  four  topics  of 
particular interest for policymakers: commodity prices and inflation, the role of labor costs in 
the price-setting process, issues arising from the necessity of making policy in real time, and 
the  determinants  and  effects  of  changes  in  inflation  expectations.  Economists  within  the 
Federal Reserve System and at other central banks have made and will continue to make 
important  contributions  in  these  areas.  However,  researchers  in  academia  and  elsewhere 
have long been essential partners in building the intellectual foundations for the conduct of 
monetary policy. One of my objectives today is to encourage the continuation of this fruitful 
collaboration. 
BIS Review 74/2008 
 1
Commodity prices and inflation 
Rapidly  rising  prices  for  globally  traded  commodities  have  been  the  major  source  of  the 
relatively  high  rates  of  inflation  we  have  experienced  in  recent  years,  underscoring  the 
importance  for  policy  of  both  forecasting  commodity  price  changes  and  understanding  the 
factors that drive those changes. 
Policymakers  and  other  analysts  have  often  relied  on  quotes  from  commodity  futures 
markets to derive forecasts of the prices of key commodities. However, as you know, futures 
markets quotes have underpredicted commodity price increases in recent years, leading to 
corresponding  underpredictions  of  overall  inflation.  The  poor  recent  record  of  commodity 
futures  markets  in  forecasting  the  course  of  prices  raises  the  question  of  whether 
policymakers should continue to use this source of information and, if so, how. 
Despite this recent record, I do not think it is reasonable, when forecasting commodity prices, 
to  ignore  the  substantial  amounts  of  information  about  supply  and  demand  conditions  that 
are aggregated by futures markets. Indeed, the use of some simple alternatives – such as 
extrapolating recent commodity price trends – would require us to assume that investors in 
commodity  futures  can  expect  to  earn  supernormal  risk-adjusted  returns,  inconsistent  with 
principles of financial arbitrage. However, it does seem reasonable – and consistent with the 
wide  distributions  of  commodity  price  expectations  implied  by  options  prices  –  to  treat  the 
forecasts of commodity prices obtained from futures markets, and consequently the forecasts 
of aggregate price inflation, as highly uncertain.  
These considerations raise several questions for researchers: First, is it possible to improve 
our forecasts of commodity prices, using information from futures markets but possibly other 
information as well? For example, the markets for longer-dated futures contracts are often 
quite illiquid, suggesting that the associated futures prices may not effectively aggregate all 
available information. Second, what are the implications for the conduct of monetary policy of 
the  high  degree  of  uncertainty  that  attends  forecasts  of  commodity  prices?  Although 
theoretical analyses often focus on the case in which policymakers care only about expected 
economic  outcomes  and  not  the  uncertainty  surrounding  those  outcomes,  in  practice 
policymakers  are  concerned  about  the  risks  to  their  projections  as  well  as  the  projections 
themselves. How should those concerns affect the setting of policy in this context?  
Whatever the forecasting value of futures market quotes, these and other financial market 
prices  provide  limited  information  about  the  structural  relationships  between  commodity 
prices  and  their  determinants.  Absent  a  specification  of  those  structural  relationships,  one 
cannot analyze the effects of alternative monetary policies or the implications of other shocks 
to the economy. 
Empirical  work  on  inflation,  including  much  of  the  classic  work  on  Phillips  curves,  has 
generally  treated  changes  in  commodity  prices  as  an  exogenous  influence  on  the  inflation 
process,  driven  by  market-specific  factors  such  as  weather  conditions  or  geopolitical 
developments. By contrast, some analysts emphasize the endogeneity of commodity prices 
to  broad  macroeconomic  and  monetary  developments  such  as  expected  growth,  expected 
inflation, interest rates, and currency movements. Of course, in reality, commodity prices are 
influenced  by  both  market-specific  and  aggregate  factors.  Market-specific  influences  are 
evident in the significant differences in price behavior across individual commodities, which 
often  can  be  traced  to  idiosyncratic  supply  and  demand  factors.  Aggregate  influences  are 
suggested  by  the  fact  that  the  prices  of  several  major  classes  of  commodities,  including 
energy, metals, and grains, have all shown broad-based gains in recent years. In particular, it 
seems clear that commodity prices have been importantly influenced by secular global trends 
affecting the conditions of demand and supply for raw materials. We have seen rapid growth 
in  the  worldwide  demand  for  raw  materials,  which  in  turn  is  largely  the  result  of  sustained 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2008
global growth – particularly resources-intensive growth in emerging market economies.1 And 
factors including inadequate investment, long lags in the development of new capacity, and 
underlying  resource  constraints  have  caused  the  supplies  of  a  number  of  important 
commodity  classes,  including  energy  and  metals,  to  lag  global  demand.  These  problems 
have  been  exacerbated  to  some  extent  by  a  systematic  underprediction  of  demand  and 
overprediction of productive capacity for a number of key commodities, notably oil. Further 
analysis of the range of aggregate and idiosyncratic determinants of commodity prices would 
be fruitful. 
I have only mentioned a few of the issues raised by commodity price behavior for inflation 
and monetary policy. Here are a few other questions that researchers could usefully address: 
First, how should monetary policy deal with increases in commodity prices that are not only 
large but potentially persistent? Second, does the link between global growth and commodity 
prices imply a role for global slack, along with domestic slack, in the Phillips curve? Finally, 
what  information  about  the  broader  economy  is  contained  in  commodity  prices?  For 
example,  what  signal  should  we  take  from  recent  changes  in  commodity  prices  about  the 
strength of global demand or about expectations of future growth and inflation? 
The role of labor costs in price setting 
Basic microeconomics tells us that marginal cost should play a central role in firms' pricing 
decisions.  And,  notwithstanding  the effects  of changes  in  commodity  prices  on  the  cost  of 
production, for the economy as a whole, by far the most important cost is the cost of labor.  
Over  the  past  decade,  formal  work  in  the  modeling  of  inflation  has  treated  marginal  cost, 
particularly the marginal cost of labor, as central to the determination of inflation.2 However, 
the  empirical  evidence  for  this  linkage  is  less  definitive  than  we  would  like.3  This  mixed 
evidence  is  one  reason  that  much  Phillips  curve  analysis  has  centered  on  price-price 
equations with no explicit role for wages.4
Problems  in  the  measurement  of  labor  costs  may  help  explain  the  absence  of  a  clearer 
empirical relationship between labor costs and prices. Compensation per hour in the nonfarm 
business sector, a commonly used measure of labor cost, displays substantial volatility from 
quarter to quarter and year to year, is often revised significantly, and includes compensation 
that is largely unrelated to marginal costs – for example, exercises (as opposed to grants) of 
stock options. These and other problems carry through to the published estimates of labor's 
share in the nonfarm business sector – the proxy for real marginal cost that is typically used 
in  empirical  work.  A  second  commonly  used  measure  of  aggregate  hourly 
labor 
compensation, the employment cost index, has its own set of drawbacks as a measure of 
marginal  cost.  Indeed,  these  two  compensation  measures  not  infrequently  generate 
conflicting signals of trends in labor costs and thus differing implications for inflation. 
The interpretation of changes in labor productivity also affects the measurement of marginal 
cost.  As  economists  have  recognized  for  half  a  century,  labor  productivity  tends  to  be 
procyclical,  in  contrast  to  the  theoretical  prediction  that  movements  along  a  stable, 
                                                 
1   According  to  one  study,  if  the  share  of  world  trade  and  world  gross  domestic  product  for  non-industrial 
countries had remained at its 2000 levels, then by 2005, real oil prices would have been 40 percent lower, and 
real  metals  prices  10  percent  lower,  than  they  actually  were  (Pain,  Koske,  and  Sollie,  2006).  Since  2005, 
continued strong growth in the demands for resources of emerging market economies have likely put further 
considerable  upward  pressure  on  commodity  prices.  For  contrast,  the  demand  for  oil  by  members  of  the 
Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD) has been essentially flat since 2004. 
2   Gali and Gertler (1999). 
3   Rudd and Whelan (2007), Kiley (2007). 
4   Gordon (1988). 
BIS Review 74/2008 
 3
conventional production function should generate countercyclical productivity behavior. Many 
explanations for procyclical productivity have been advanced, ranging from labor hoarding in 
downturns  to  procyclical  technological  progress.  A  better  understanding  of  the  observed 
procyclicality of productivity would help us to interpret cyclical movements in unit labor costs 
and to better measure marginal cost. 
The relationship between marginal cost, properly measured, and prices also depends on the 
markups that firms can impose. One important open question is the degree to which variation 
over time in average markups may be obscuring the empirical link between prices and labor 
costs.  Considerable  work  has  also  been  done  on  the  role  of  time-varying  markups  in  the 
inflation process, but a consensus on the role of changing markups on the inflation process 
remains elusive.5 More research in this area, particularly with an empirical orientation, would 
be welcome. 
Real-time policymaking 
The measurement issues I just raised point to  another important concern of policymakers, 
namely,  the  necessity  of  making  decisions  in  "real  time,"  under  conditions  of  great 
uncertainty – including uncertainty about the underlying state of the economy – and without 
the benefit of hindsight.  
In  the  context  of  Phillips  curve  analysis,  a  number  of  researchers  have  highlighted  the 
difficulty of assessing the output gap – the difference between actual and potential output – 
in  real  time.6  An  inability  to  measure  the  output  gap  in  real  time  obviously  limits  the 
usefulness of the concept in practical policymaking. On the other hand, to argue that output 
gaps are very difficult to measure in real time is not the same as arguing that economic slack 
does  not  influence  inflation;  indeed,  the  bulk  of  the  evidence  suggests  that  there  is  a 
relationship, albeit one that may be less pronounced than in the past.7 These observations 
suggest two useful directions for research: First, more obviously, there is scope to continue 
the search for measures or indicators of output gaps that provide useful information in real 
time.  Second,  we  need  to  continue  to  think  through  the  decision  procedures  that 
policymakers  should  use  under  conditions  of  substantial  uncertainty  about  the  state  of  the 
economy  and  underlying  economic  relationships.  For  example,  even  if  the  output  gap  is 
poorly  measured,  by  taking  appropriate  account  of  measurement  uncertainties  and 
combining information about the output gap with information from other sources, we may be 
able  to  achieve  better  policy  outcomes  than  would  be  possible  if  we  simply  ignored  noisy 
output  gap  measures.  Of  course,  similar  considerations  apply  to  other  types  of  real-time 
economic information. 
Inflation itself can pose real-time measurement challenges. We have multiple measures of 
inflation, each of which reflects different coverage, methods of construction, and seasonality, 
and each of which is subject to statistical noise arising from sampling, imputation of certain 
prices, and temporary or special factors affecting certain markets. From these measures and 
other information, policymakers attempt to infer the "true" underlying rate of inflation. In other 
words,  policymakers  must  read  the  incoming  data  in  real  time  to  judge  which  changes  in 
inflation  are  likely  to  be  transitory  and  which  may  prove  more  persistent.  Getting  this 
distinction  right  has  first-order  implications  for  monetary  policy:  Because  monetary  policy 
works  with  a  lag,  policy  should  be calibrated  based  on  forecasts  of  medium-term  inflation, 
which  may  differ  from  the  current  inflation  rate.  The  need  to  distinguish  changes  in  the 
inflation  trend  from  temporary  movements  around  that  trend  has  motivated  attention  to 
                                                 
5   Rotemberg and Woodford (1999). 
6   Orphanides (2002). 
7   For a counterargument, however, see Atkeson and Ohanian (2001). 
4 
 BIS Review 74/2008
various measures of "core," or underlying, inflation, including measures that exclude certain 
prices (such as those of food and energy), "trimmed mean" measures, and others, but other 
approaches are certainly worth consideration.8 Further work on the problem of filtering the 
incoming data so as to obtain better measures of the underlying inflation trend could be of 
great value to policymakers. 
The  necessity  of  making  policy  in  real  time  highlights  the  importance  of  maintaining  and 
improving the economic data infrastructure and, in particular, working to make economic data 
timelier and more accurate. I noted earlier the problems in interpreting existing measures of 
labor compensation. Significant scope exists to improve the quality of price data as well – for 
example,  by  using  the  wealth  of  information  available  from  checkout  scanners  or  finding 
better ways to adjust for quality change. I encourage researchers to become more familiar 
with the strengths and shortcomings of the data that they routinely use. Besides leading to 
better analysis, attention to data quality issues by researchers often leads to better data in 
the  longer  term,  both  because  of  the  insights  generated  by  research  and  because 
researchers are important and influential clients of data collection agencies.  
Inflation expectations 
Finally,  I  will  say  a  few  words  on  inflation  expectations,  which  most  economists  see  as 
central  to  inflation  dynamics.  But  there  is  much  we  do  not  understand  about  inflation 
expectations, their determination, and their implications. I will divide my list of questions into 
three categories.  
First,  we  need  to  understand  better  the  factors  that  determine  the  public's  inflation 
expectations.  As  I  discussed  in  some  detail  in  a  talk  at  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research  last  summer,  much  evidence  suggests  that  expectations  have  become  better 
anchored than they were a few decades ago, but that they nonetheless remain imperfectly 
anchored.9  It  would  be  quite  useful  for  policymakers  to  know  more  about  how  inflation 
expectations are influenced by monetary policy actions, monetary policy communication, and 
other economic developments such as oil price shocks.  
The growing literature on learning in macroeconomic models appears to be a useful vehicle 
to address many of these issues.10 In a traditional model with rational expectations, a fixed 
economic structure, and stable policy objectives, there is no role for learning by the public. In 
such  a  model,  there  is  generally  a  unique  long-run  equilibrium  inflation  rate  which  is  fully 
anticipated; in particular, the public makes no inferences based on central bankers' words or 
deeds. But in fact, the public has only incomplete information about both the economy and 
policymakers'  objectives,  which  themselves  may  change  over  time.  Allowing  for  the 
possibility of learning by the public is more realistic and tends to generate more reasonable 
conclusions about how inflation expectations change and, in particular, about how they can 
be influenced by monetary policy actions and communications.  
The second category of questions involves the channels through which inflation expectations 
affect actual inflation. Is the primary linkage from inflation expectations to wage bargains, or 
are  other  channels  important?  One  somewhat  puzzling  finding  comes  from  a  survey  of 
business pricing decisions conducted by Blinder, Canetti, Lebow, and Rudd, in which only a 
small share of respondents claimed that expected aggregate inflation affected their pricing at 
all.11 How do we reconcile this result with our strong presumption that expectations are of 
                                                 
8   Rich and Steindel (2007) provide a recent analysis of alternative measures of core inflation. 
9   Bernanke (2007). 
10   Orphanides and Williams (2007) and Kiley (2008) are good examples, but there are many others. 
11   Blinder and others (1998). 
BIS Review 74/2008 
 5
central  importance  for  explaining  inflation?  Perhaps  expectations  affect  actual  inflation 
through  some  channel  that  is  relatively  indirect.  The  growing  literature  on  disaggregated 
price setting may be able to shed some light on this question.12
Finally, a large set of questions revolve around how the central bank can best monitor the 
public's  inflation  expectations.  Many  measures  of  expected  inflation  exist,  including 
expectations taken from surveys of households, forecasts by professional economists, and 
information  extracted  from  markets  for  inflation-indexed  securities.  Unfortunately,  only  very 
limited  information  is  available  on  expectations  of  price-setters  themselves,  namely 
businesses. Which of these agents' expectations are most important for inflation dynamics, 
and how can central bankers best extract the relevant information from the various available 
measures?  
Conclusion 
This evening I have touched on only a few of the questions that confront policymakers as we 
deal with the challenges we face. The contributions of economic researchers in helping us to 
address these and other important questions have been and will continue to be invaluable. I 
will conclude by offering my best wishes for an interesting and productive conference. 
References 
Atkeson,  Andrew,  and  Lee  E.  Ohanian  (2001).  "Are  Phillips Curves  Useful  for  Forecasting 
Inflation?"  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis,  Quarterly  Review,  vol.  25  (Winter),  pp. 
2-11. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2007). "Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting", speech delivered 
at  the  Monetary  Economics  Workshop  of  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research 
Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 10. 
Bils, Mark, and Peter J. Klenow (2004). "Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices", 
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 112 (October), pp. 947-85. 
Blinder,  Alan  S.,  Elie  R.  D.  Canetti,  David  E.  Lebow,  and  Jeremy  B.  Rudd  (1998).  Asking 
about Prices: A New Approach to Understanding Price Stickiness. New York: Russell Sage 
Foundation. 
Gali, Jordi, and Mark Gertler (1999). "Inflation Dynamics: A Structural Econometric Analysis", 
Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 44 (October), pp. 195-222. 
Gordon, Robert J. (1988). "The Role of Wages in the Inflation Process", American Economic 
Review, Papers and Proceedings, vol. 78 (May), pp. 276-83. 
Kiley, Michael T. (2007). "A Quantitative Comparison of Sticky-Price and Sticky-Information 
Models of Price Setting", Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 39 (February), pp. 101-
25.  
Kiley,  Michael  T.  (2008).  "Monetary  Policy  Actions  and  Long-Run  Inflation  Expectations", 
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2008-03. Washington: Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, February. 
Orphanides, Athanasios (2002). "Monetary-Policy Rules and the Great Inflation", American 
Economic Review, vol. 92 (May), pp. 115-20.  
Orphanides,  Athanasios,  and  John  C.  Williams  (2007).  "Robust  Monetary  Policy  with 
Imperfect Knowledge", Journal of Monetary Economics, vol. 54 (July), pp. 1406-35. 
                                                 
12   For example, see Bils and Klenow (2004). 
6 
 BIS Review 74/2008
Pain, Nigel, Isabell Koske, and Marte Sollie (2006). "Globalisation and Inflation in the OECD 
Economies", OECD Economics Department Working Paper Series 524. Paris: Organisation 
for Economic Co-operation and Development, November. 
Rich, Robert W., and Charles Steindel (2007), "A Comparison of Measures of Core Inflation", 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, vol. 13 (December).  
Rotemberg,  Julio  J.,  and  Michael  Woodford  (1999).  "The  Cyclical  Behavior  of  Prices  and 
Costs", in John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Macroeconomics, vol. 
1B. New York: Elsevier Science, North-Holland.  
Rudd, Jeremy, and Karl Whelan (2007). "Modeling Inflation Dynamics: A Critical Review of 
Recent Research", Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, vol. 39 (February), pp. 155-70. 
BIS Review 74/2008 
 7
