Mugur Isărescu: Hard landing unlikely for Romania  
Interview with Dr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, by Mediafax 
news agency, Bucharest, 8 September 2008. 
 Mr.  Governor,  foreign  analysts  have  placed  Romania  along  with  four  other  states  – 
Lithuania,  Latvia,  Estonia  and  Bulgaria  –  in  a  group  of  countries  heading  to  a  hard 
landing.  In  fact  the  economies  of  Estonia  and  Latvia  have  contracted  sharply,  with 
growth plunging from levels of around 10 percent into negative territory; inflation has 
reached  two-digit  levels  and  the  external  deficit  exceeded  15  percent  of  gross 
domestic  product.  Is  it  possible  for  Romania  to  witness  similar  negative  growth 
dynamics? Is it fair to include Romania in that group? 
Reading what those foreign analysts said, I have hardly found a solid rationale that would 
justify Romania's being placed within the hard-landing risk zone. On the contrary.  
Turning  now  to  comments,  I  will  underline  that  there  are  some  similarities  among  the 
countries  in  this  group:  GDP  per  capita  is  below  the  EU  average,  they  all  have  registered 
high  growth  rates  in  the  catching-up  process.  However,  there  are  also  fundamental 
differences, among which the most important in my view is the monetary policy mechanism. 
Three of the four countries mentioned in the group have currency boards in place, and the 
fourth, i.e. Latvia, has a mechanism close to a currency board. Of course, currency board 
has its clear benefits. Let us remember that, for example, in Bulgaria the inflation rate had 
topped 1,000 percent and the economy was in shambles. The introduction of the currency 
board was the solution which, at unavoidable social costs, brought the Bulgarian economy 
afloat, with inflation falling steeply and staying close to EU levels for a good couple of years. 
But the currency board has its limits and constraints. The BNR has constantly opposed the 
adoption of such a system by Romania given these limits and constraints. Actually, a country 
adopting  the  currency  board  is  deprived  of  monetary  policy  and  thus  the  central  bank 
becomes a sort of an institute for statistics. Instead of a two-pedal vehicle – monetary and 
fiscal policies – the economy of currency board countries has only one pedal left, namely the 
fiscal policy. Assuming the risk of an extended comment, let us look at what happened in the 
four  countries  and  what  happened  in  Romania  in  the  past  few  years  in  a  rather  unusual 
international context, with the euro appreciating simultaneously with the increases in farming 
products and energy prices.  
The  appreciation  of  the  euro  triggered  a  slide  of  output  competitiveness  in  the  countries 
having  their  exchange  rate  pegged  to  the  euro  and  the  rises  in  global  prices  boosted 
domestic inflation. Currency board countries could change neither the exchange rate, nor the 
interest rates which are linked to euro area levels, currently standing at 4.25 percent a year. 
Therefore, with inflation running at 16-20 percent in the Baltic States, interest rates became 
strongly  negative  in  real  terms  and  the  monetary  policy  procyclical,  boosting  consumption, 
while the fixed exchange rate has discouraged production. Basically, the main weakness of 
the currency board, namely the inability to respond to exogenous adverse factors, pushed 
the economies of those countries towards a hard landing.  
Let's  look  now  at  the  picture  in  Romania.  Our  exchange  rate  regime,  featuring  a  flexible 
exchange  rate  in  a  managed  floating  system,  allowed  the  market  to  correct  the 
overappreciation the leu had registered at a certain point via its own mechanisms, and the 
BNR  was  able  to  raise  interest  rates  –  which  it  did  seven  times  already  over  the  past  10 
months – in order to permanently keep them in real-positive territory and curb inflation which 
had  been  triggered  by  the  same  external  factors  that  affected  the  countries  you  have 
mentioned  before.  The  BNR  has  even  moved  forward  in  order  to  slow  down  consumption 
and  maintain  a  healthy  portfolio  for  commercial  banks  via  the  recent  prudential  measures 
BIS Review 113/2008 
 1
regarding  loans  to  households.  All  these  have  significantly  contained  the  risk  of  a  hard 
landing  for  the  Romanian  economy,  even  if  such  a  risk  still  lingers  as  long  as  the  gap 
between the current account deficit and its financing via FDI remains significant.  
Nevertheless,  the  foreign  analysts  that  included  Romania  in  the  group  of  the  five 
countries  exposed  to  a  hard  landing  had  substantiated  their  opinion.  Are  they 
completely wrong?  
Let us make an assessment. One of the reasons they brought forward was that Romania's 
fiscal  policy  is  procyclical.  Well,  although  we  are  in  an  election  year,  we  have  reasons  to 
believe that the 2008 budget deficit will stay below 3 percent. Moreover, the central bank has 
additionally tightened its monetary policy in order to offset the insufficient restrictiveness of 
the fiscal policy.  
Another reason is that income policy is much too expansionary, and this too is our concern 
here at the BNR. We have sent repeated warnings in this respect, the more so as a possible 
offsetting  via  further  tightening  of  the  monetary  policy  could  not  only  prove  ineffective,  but 
also  counterproductive,  both  leading  to  a  deterioration  of  external  competitiveness.  Re-
establishing  a  long-term  balance  between  income  growth  and  productivity  dynamics  is 
therefore a must.  
Finally, I saw in some papers that Romania would be downgraded because of its external 
liquidity  position.  This  indicator  is  computed  as  a  ratio  between  the  country's  international 
reserves  and  its  overall  foreign  debt,  both  public  and  private,  in  the  short-run.  We  have  a 
sub-par ratio in Romania, as short-term external debt is higher than reserves. I believe this is 
also an overstatement, as Romania's international reserves are close to the upper limit of the 
optimal level if we take into account the other indicators, such as the ratio between reserves 
and  imports.  The  short-term  external  debt  is  high  indeed,  but  the  bulk  of  it  belongs  to  the 
private  sector.  And  out  of  this,  loans  taken  by  foreign-based  banks  operating  in  Romania 
from  their  parent  undertakings  abroad  account  for  the  largest  share.  We  have  started  to 
address this issue by taking measures aimed at discouraging foreign currency-denominated 
loans. If that risk materialised and parent banks diminished their flows to Romania, the effect 
would  be  rather  beneficial  as  it  would  remove  the  base for  an  unsustainable  expansion  of 
foreign currency-denominated credit which has been a headache for so many years.  
Therefore,  I  do  not  consider  these  arguments  that  solid  to  place  Romania  in  a  group  of 
countries with high likelihood of witnessing hard landing.  
Do you think, therefore, that high economic growth in Romania will go on?  
I believe that Romania will see further economic growth in the coming years. A growth much 
closer to the potential which our experts had  estimated at around 6 percent annually. It is 
true that, with weakening economic activity worldwide, especially in the EU which is our main 
trade partner, economic growth might be a bit slower than 6 percent. No doubt that economic 
growth will be affected by several factors next year, placing it over or below 6 percent: the oil 
price,  the  farming  year,  heightened  efforts  to  develop  the  infrastructure  and  also  to  create 
conditions  to  boost  labour  productivity,  the  level  of  foreign  investments,  and  so  on.  In  any 
case,  a  6  percent  annual  economic  growth  in  the  present  context  is  a  remarkable 
achievement. That would not prevent some analysts from saying that, if GDP growth slows to 
6 from 9 percent, the growth rate plunged by 33 percent.  
An 8-9 percent growth means overheating? What is your opinion?  
I have never ventured to say that one figure alone would mean the economy is overheated. I 
usually  present  things  in  a  more  nuanced  manner,  just  like  they  are  in  reality.  What  does 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2008
overheating actually mean? A development that substantially exceeds the growth potential, 
leading to an overheating of output factors, especially to a chronic lack of labour force and a 
fast increase of wages and prices. For this year, I believe we need a sectoral approach. On 
the one hand, we have a significant rise in farming output due mainly to natural factors. And 
there is no overheating there. On the contrary, prices of most agricultural products are falling 
and  production  factors  –  especially  land,  but  also  labour  force  –  are  obviously  under-
exploited. Romania's great farming potential has yet to be turned to account. On the other 
hand, in construction, another major contributor to this year's growth, there are visible signs 
of  overheating:  scarce  labour  force,  substantial  increases  of  prices  for  building  materials, 
higher  wages,  etc.  Of  course,  a  wise  policy  should  stimulate  only  the  sectors  where  the 
potential is not fully exploited (such as agriculture) or where we have bottlenecks, as it is the 
case of road infrastructure in Romania.  
However,  there  are  numerous  opinions  according  to  which  rating  agencies  could 
downgrade  Romania.  Which  would  be  the  main  risk  factors  that  could  lead  to  a 
downgrade?  
So  far,  rating  agencies  have  only  changed  the  outlook,  not  the  rating.  To  answer  your 
question – although I do not believe that Romania will be downgraded to below "investment 
grade" – the main risk factor remains the current account deficit. We have implemented tight 
monetary  policies  to  tackle  this  issue.  I  believe  that  at  the  end  of  this  year  we  will  see  a 
containment of this indicator to its 2007 figure of 14 percent of GDP as compared to some 
analysts' expectations of 15-16 percent. This is a positive thing for a start but we should not 
stop here. Romania needs policies that would allow a gradual and predictable reduction of 
the current account deficit to levels almost entirely covered by direct capital investments to 
regain  confidence  of  the  rating  agencies  and  ensure  an  improvement  of  external 
creditworthiness.  We  will  be  thus  forced  to  implement  a  gradual  correction  of  this  deficit, 
even by a few percentage points in the next two to three years, and it is desirable that this 
happens  in  the  context  of  sustainable  economic  growth,  close  to  the  potential,  while 
consolidating disinflation which will resume this autumn after a few quarters of considerable 
efforts.  In  this  respect,  the  BNR  opinion  has  been  repeatedly  expressed  in  public,  namely 
that such a correction can only be made via a balanced mix of monetary, fiscal and income 
policies, coupled with faster structural reforms that would lead to higher productivity.  
What would be the effects of a downgrade for Romania?  
Let me stress this again, I do not believe in a downgrade. As I have already mentioned, we 
may see a change in the outlook. If there is a downgrade, its consequences would be rather 
serious. It would primarily be reflected by the marked increase in external financing costs, but 
also by deterring FDIs, which would limit the country's rapid growth potential.  
Why do you think rating agencies are more cautious about Romania than about other 
countries?  
It may be because of an insufficient clarity regarding the real economic and financial situation 
of Romania, which may derive also from the inconsistent signals that sometimes come from 
inside the country.  
Thank you very much, Mr. Governor.  
BIS Review 113/2008 
 3
