Jean-Claude Trichet: The successful entry of Cyprus into the euro area 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Conference “Welcoming Cyprus to the euro area”, Nicosia, 18 January 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to attend this conference celebrating your adoption of the euro. 
Let  me  first  congratulate  all  parties  involved  in  the  successful  cash  changeover  that  took 
place at the beginning of the year. It has been going smoothly. None of this would have been 
possible without the excellent performance of the Cypriot economy during the convergence 
process.  
Cyprus’s economic achievements on the way to the euro1  
1.  
Today’s euro celebrations are the result of the successful macroeconomic policies that the 
Cypriot  authorities  have  pursued  in  recent  years.  Cyprus  has  made  significant  progress  in 
both  nominal  and  real  convergence,  owing  to  successful  policies  –  namely,  well-managed 
monetary and exchange rate policies combined with a range of structural reforms. In the last 
decade, HICP inflation in Cyprus has been contained, averaging 2.2% in 2007, with the only 
exceptions  being  in  2000  and  2003,  when  inflation  rose  mainly  because  of  increases  in 
energy prices as well as VAT harmonisation. Short-term as well as long-term interest rates 
have followed a declining trend in recent years to levels in line with those of the euro area as 
a whole. This suggests that market participants have confidence in Cyprus’s macroeconomic 
and fiscal developments as well as in its monetary and exchange rate policies.  
The  process  of  nominal  convergence  has  been  accompanied  by  robust  economic  growth. 
Real GDP growth in Cyprus has been well above that in the euro area in recent years. Real 
output growth has been underpinned by domestic demand, and in particular by strong private 
consumption and, importantly, by strong fixed capital formation. Cyprus’s GDP per capita (in 
PPP  terms)  progressed  from  around  74%  of  the  1996  average  of  the  12  countries  which 
initially joined the euro area to around 84% in 2006: this is a significant improvement, and 
may it continue that way.  
In spite of its remarkable progress towards nominal and real convergence, Cyprus has not 
experienced  major  imbalances:  price  and  cost  competitiveness  developments  have  been 
favourable since 2004. The fiscal balance (the deficit-to-GDP ratio) has been improving since 
2004  and  stood  at  -1.2%  of  GDP  in  2006.  Looking  at  the  financial  side,  Cyprus  is 
experiencing  substantial  financial  deepening,  which  has  been  reflected  in  robust  credit 
activity. Although this process accompanies and supports economic development, it should 
be carefully monitored, particularly because it is taking place at a very rapid pace.  
Membership of the Exchange Rate Mechanism II (ERM II) was another element in Cyprus’s 
successful convergence. The pound-euro exchange rate at which Cyprus joined the ERM II 
in  May  2005  remained  very  stable  throughout  the  period  of  ERM  II  participation.  The  EU 
Council decided that the central parity should also become the final conversion rate of the 
pound to the euro. 
                                                 
1  
I should like to thank Malin Andersson and Olivier Radelet for their input into this speech, Nick Vidalis and 
Hans-Joachim Klöckers for their helpful comments, as well as David Clarke for his additional contributions. 
BIS Review 7/2008 
 1
Cooperation between the Central Bank of Cyprus and the ECB 
2.  
Let me also say that the ECB has established excellent working relations with the Central 
Bank of Cyprus over the last couple of years. The Governor of the Central Bank of Cyprus 
has been a member of the General Council of the ECB since May 2004. As from mid-2007, 
Governor Orphanides attended the meetings of the Governing Council as an observer, and 
on 1 January 2008 he became an official member of that decision-making body for monetary 
policy in the euro area.  
The ECB and the Central Bank of Cyprus, together with the National Changeover Board, the 
European Commission and national and international authorities cooperated closely in many 
ways to prepare the introduction of the euro. The euro information campaigns played a vital 
role  here.  The  ECB  together  with  the  Central  Bank  of  Cyprus  made  sure  that  Cypriots 
became familiar with the euro banknotes and coins.  
The  information  campaigns  consisted  of  an  optimal  communication  mix  that  drew  on  the 
experience of the communication campaign in 2002, when euro cash was introduced in 12 
countries, as well as the campaign for Slovenia prior to its joining the euro area in 2007. It 
included  public  opinion  polls,  advertising  and  direct  marketing.  Over  900,000  copies  of 
different publications were distributed by the Central Bank of Cyprus – this is more than one 
copy  per  Cypriot!  The  aim  was  to  enable  everyone  in  Cyprus  to  check  their  new  euro 
banknotes: every household received euro banknote “cards”, the same size as a credit card. 
They show the three main security features of the €50 and €20 banknotes and how to check 
them. 
As a result of these efforts, today we can celebrate a successful cash changeover. I am sure 
that  the  excellent  relationship  between  the  Central  Bank  of Cyprus  and  the  ECB  will  grow 
even stronger, now that the central bank is a member of the Eurosystem. Indeed, intimate 
cooperation  between  the  members  of  the  team,  the  national  central  banks  of  the 
Eurosystem, and the ECB is the key for the success of the single monetary policy in the euro 
area. 
Ensuring the sustainability of convergence as a euro area country  
3.  
The entry of Cyprus into the euro area implies that the benefits of the Single Market will be 
further  enhanced  by  the  single  currency.  The  euro  offers  a  credible  framework  for  price 
stability in an environment characterised by the absence of exchange rate uncertainty within 
the euro area. Cyprus will benefit from the stability-oriented policy of the ECB, which will help 
anchor inflation expectations. Furthermore, for a small open economy such as Cyprus, the 
euro  adoption  provides  protection  against  international  financial  turmoil,  which  often  has  a 
disproportionate effect on smaller economies. 
Now,  almost  three  weeks  after  the  introduction  of  the  new  currency,  I  would  like  to  stress 
that,  in  the  short  term,  the  conversion  of  prices  into  euros  should  not  be  taken  as  an 
opportunity to make unjustified price rises. This is especially important considering that food 
and energy prices are already exerting upward pressure on inflation in the euro area as a 
whole.  Against  this  background,  measures  taken  by  the  Cypriot  government  together  with 
retailers, importers and manufacturers in order to avoid such adjustments are commendable. 
Looking  further  ahead,  in  order  to  fully  reap  the  advantages  of  the  euro  and  to  ensure 
sustainable convergence, additional efforts with structural reform should be undertaken and 
appropriate policies implemented. The Cypriot economy needs to continue on a sustainable 
and credible path of fiscal consolidation based on structural measures, to improve its fiscal 
performance  by  reducing  its  debt  ratios  and  to  comply  with  the  medium-term  objective 
quantified  in  the  convergence  programme.  In  particular,  public  finances  should  have 
sufficient room for manoeuvre in order to better cope with the expected substantial increase 
in  age-related  public  expenditures.  Moreover,  wage  settlements  need  to  remain  moderate, 
taking into account labour productivity growth, labour market conditions and developments in 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2008
competitor countries. For example, the indexation mechanism for wages and for some social 
benefits  (cost-of-living  allowances)  should  be  reviewed  in  order  to  reduce  risks  associated 
with  inflation  inertia  and  losses  in  competitiveness.  Such  measures  will  not  only  make 
Cyprus’s  economy  more  resilient  to  shocks  but  also  create  the  best  conditions  for 
sustainable economic expansion, employment growth and price stability. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  me  again  congratulate  you  on  your  successful  adoption  of  the 
euro and extend my very, very warm welcome to the new member of the Eurosystem family. 
Warmest welcome Cyprus!  
BIS Review 7/2008 
 3
