Durmuş Yılmaz: Current issues in economic governance 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Durmuş  Yılmaz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Republic  of 
Turkey, at the Conference on Current Issues in Economic Governance, organised by Bilkent 
University, Ankara, 2 April 2008. 
 Ministers, Academicians, Bureaucrats and Guests, 
Thank  you  all  for  accepting  the  invitation.  It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  address  such  a 
distinguished audience. I would like to thank Bilkent University for organizing this conference 
at  this  juncture.  In  fact,  the  timing  could  not  be  any  better.  The  recent  global  financial 
turbulence  has  put  good  governance  principles  at  the  center  of  public  debate.  I  hope,  the 
conference  will  strengthen  our  understanding  of  the  subject  by  building  on  the  lessons 
derived from the conference last year. 
Let me start with reviewing the recent developments in financial markets. 
You may have heard about a proverb attributed to the Chinese: “May you live in interesting 
times!”  Here,  "interesting"  means  dangerous  or  turbulent;  therefore,  the  whole  phrase  is 
something of a curse. It turned out that the phrase was not of Chinese origin, but ascribed to 
them to make it sound wiser. Whatever the origin, it is certain that we are experiencing such 
a spell right now. 
We  have  been  witnessing  a  global  financial  turbulence  since  mid-2007.  Its  magnitude, 
measured by the volatility index (VIX), is larger than that of the turbulence in 2006. It was 
triggered  by  the  falling  house  prices  and  subsequent  problems  in  the  sub-prime  mortgage 
market and mortgage based securities. Over time, investors have become nervous about the 
valuations of financial instruments. Banks took large write-downs on mortgage-related assets 
and  other  risky  securities.  Major  financial  institutions  reported  huge  losses.  Some  of  them 
even came to on the brink of default and some of the hedge funds liquidated their positions in 
order to match the increasing withdrawals of the investors. The sharp decline in risk appetite 
and concerns about the counter-party credit risk has led to a significant deterioration in short-
term  credit  and  money  markets  leading  to  a  major  liquidity  squeeze.  Liquidity  problems, 
coupled with solvency crisis, have tested the resilience of global financial markets, and we 
are still waiting for the light at the end of the tunnel. 
The big losses of financial institutions and deep plunge in consumer confidence due to sharp 
fall  in  house  prices  and  declining  personal  income  have  increased  the  possibility  of  a 
recession in the US economy, which may have already started as we speak. Deterioration in 
risk perceptions has increased the risk premia of developing countries, including Turkey. So 
far,  the  rise  in  Turkey’s  risk  premium  was  in  line  with  that  of  other  developing  countries, 
although  more  recently  the  current  political  uncertainty  has  started  to  put  Turkish  financial 
markets under considerable strain. I believe Turkey’s risk premium would be even higher in 
the  absence  of  improvements  in  macroeconomic  conditions  and  institutional  reforms 
implemented in recent years. 
Dear Guests, 
One  can  label  the  last  two  decades  as  the  era  of  globalization,  deregulation,  and 
privatization. It is not a coincidence that this period has overlapped with the rise of attention 
paid  to  good  governance.  One  may  just  look  at  the  number  of  occurrences  of  the  word 
“governance” in academic search database (Econ-Lit) over time. It occurred just five times 
from 1970 to 1979, 100 times in the 80s, 4000 times in 1990s, and more than 10000 times 
since 2000. 
Globalization  of  economic  activity  and  greater  reliance  on  private  sector  in  economic 
decisions has created an environment in which the pursuit of efficiency has acquired utmost 
BIS Review 38/2008 
 1
importance.  Globalization  has  increased  the  likelihood  of  international  financial  crisis  in 
countries where the governments do not function properly. Economic crisis in South Eastern 
Asia  in  late  1990s  showed  that  even  countries  with  considerable  success  in  economic 
development  may  easily  collapse  into  turmoil  if  they  do  not  follow  good  governance 
practices. Quite paradoxically, as the control of governments over the economy decreases, 
the  quality  of  governance  becomes  more  critical  and  decisive.  With  greater  mobility  of 
capital, countries have become more vulnerable to negative assessment of investors. 
Today, financial markets are facing the most acute crisis they have experienced since the 
emergence  of  globalization.  It  is  not  surprising  that  good  governance  is  once  again  at  the 
center of public debate at this juncture. The seeds of current problems may be traced to past 
governance  practices  of  governments,  monetary  authorities,  financial  institutions,  and 
corporate sector. 
But before that, let me first introduce some conceptual issues. This may help us understand 
how we ended up here. 
It is not easy to give a short and comprehensive definition for economic governance. For the 
sake  of  our  discussions,  let  me  define  it  simply  as  the  nature  and  practice  of  economic 
management, regulation and development. Economic governance is in fact part of a larger 
picture  that  combines  political  governance,  corporate  governance  and  legal  governance, 
which continuously interact with each other. 
The  term  “economic  governance”  is  explained  as  “the  study  of  arrangements,  and 
organizations that arise and evolve to govern economic activity.” These institutions underpin 
economic transactions by protecting property rights, enforcing contracts, and organizing the 
physical  and  regulatory  infrastructure  to  facilitate  economic  activity.  Good  governance 
provides a very important set of pillars, which are critical in the design of an economy. The 
most widely cited ones are transparency, accountability, rule of law and participation. 
Let me go over these four principles rather quickly. 
Transparency  ensures  that  the  necessary  information  is  freely  available  and  directly 
accessible to those who will be affected by decisions and their enforcement. 
Accountability  is  a  mirror  image  of  the  authority.  It  is  critical  for  decision  makers  to  be 
responsible  for  the  consequences  of  their  decisions  and  actions  to  those  who  will  be 
affected. In democracies, every independent institution or organization is accountable to the 
public and to its institutional stakeholders. 
Participation is the cornerstone of democracies, where every person in the system, in one 
way or the other, has a voice in the decision-making process. 
And  last  but  not  least,  good  governance  requires  a  fair  legal  framework  and  impartial 
enforcement of this legal system that protects property and individual rights and constitutes a 
strong base for prudent policy-making. The rules need to be preset, predictable and applied 
equally  regardless  of whether  the  parties  in  dispute  are  domestic  or  foreign,  individuals  or 
state.  Enforcement  of  rules  in  speedy  and  impartial  manner  would  create  a  self-fulfilling 
environment,  where  adhering  to  contracts  voluntarily  becomes  the  norm  and  there  is  little 
need to formally recourse to the legal system. 
How can we match governance practices with the current financial turbulence? It is too early 
to  make  a  judgment  about  the  institutional  failures  that  have  led  to  current  financial 
turbulence,  but  we  have  a  few  clues  on  what  went  wrong.  Lack  of  transparency  and 
accountability is at the top of the list. In retrospect there were some important gaps in the 
U.S. regulatory structure that caused poor underwriting and some fraudulent practices in the 
sub-prime mortgage sector. Parties in the originate to-distribute chain did not have incentives 
to generate and provide information on the quality of assets. We can add poor investor due-
diligence  practices  and  poor  performance  of  credit  rating  agencies  to  that  list.  Public 
disclosures  required  of  financial  institutions  were  not  enough  to  shed  light  to  the  risks 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2008
associated  with  their  on-  and  off-balance  sheet  exposures.  Public  authorities  were  way 
behind  in  assessing  and  regulating  the  complex  financial  instruments  created  by  financial 
engineers. 
Of course, accommodating global monetary and financial conditions also contributed to high-
risk appetites, high leverage and search for high yields. 
At  this  point  we  do  not  know  the  scale  of  economic  fallout  from  the  ongoing  financial 
turbulence, nor its duration. It is, however, conceivable to expect some regulatory backlash 
by  major  industrialized  countries.  For  example,  just  a  few  days  ago  the  U.S.  Treasury 
Department announced a new plan to overhaul existing financial regulatory structure to make 
it  compatible  with  modern  financial  instruments.  This  is  of course  just a  beginning  and  we 
should not be surprised to witness similar steps by other countries. 
Distinguished guests, 
Let me turn to the Turkish case and discuss recent developments in Turkey. 
As  you  may  remember,  throughout  1990s  the  Turkish  economy  was  shaped  by  high  and 
chronic fiscal deficits, high inflation rates and a weak institutional environment. The economic 
crisis in Turkey in 2001 was not only the lowest point of this period, but also a major turning 
point for our economy. Since then we have witnessed a very ambitious reform agenda taken 
towards  reaching  better  economic  governance.  I  classify  these  steps  under  four  main 
categories:  (1)  Monetary  policy,  (2)  Fiscal  policy,  (3)  Financial  stability  and  (4)  Structural 
reforms. 
Taking into consideration the fact that I am a central banker, I think it will not be surprising if I 
start with the topic of monetary policy. 
Central  Bank  independence  that  was  granted  by  Law  in  2001  was  the  key  step  on  the 
monetary policy side. In the absence of independence, the Central Bank of Turkey would not 
be  able  to  focus  on  its  primary  objective  of  price  stability.  Introduction  of  the  free-floating 
exchange rate regime in 2001 and formal inflation targeting regime in 2006 can be classified 
as the other two key steps. The inflation targets became the new anchor instead of exchange 
rates and the Central Bank has started using overnight interest rates as the main policy tool 
to reach these targets. 
Communication  tools  of  the  central  bank  have  played  a  key  role  in  explaining  the  price 
developments  and  the  monetary  policy  outlook  to  the  public  and  also  in  managing 
expectations.  The  Bank’s  communication  policy  has  become  more  effective  over  time  with 
the  introduction  of  new  communication  tools,  such  as  the  quarterly  inflation  reports  since 
2006, the bi-annual financial stability report since 2005 and the monthly price development 
reports since July 2006. In addition, a summary of Monetary Policy Committee meetings are 
published  on  our  website  within  8  business  days  following  the  Committee  meeting, 
simultaneously in English and Turkish. I believe all of these instruments have contributed to a 
more transparent monetary policy. 
After briefly touching upon the main features of the monetary policy in the context of good 
economic governance, I will continue with the fiscal side. 
The  prudent  fiscal  policy  that  has  been  implemented  since  2002  has  made  significant 
contributions  to  the  disinflation  process  and  the  economic  growth.  The  ambitious  primary 
surplus targets are at the center of the improvement in fiscal policy. However, I should also 
underline  the  progress  in  institutional  and  legal  framework,  such  as the  introduction  of  the 
Public Fiscal Management and Control Law, the Public Procurement Law and the multi-year 
budgeting  framework.  Three  year  inflation  targets  that  are  compatible  with  the  three-year 
budgeting  practice  are  also  one  of  the  good  examples  of  coordination  between  fiscal  and 
monetary policies. 
Another  pillar  of  better  economic  governance  is  financial  stability.  A  stable  and  healthy 
financial system is the key to sustainable growth through allocating savings to the real sector 
BIS Review 38/2008 
 3
in a country. Law defines financial stability as the auxiliary objective of the Central Bank of 
Turkey. 
Establishment  of 
the  Banking  Regulation  and  Supervision  Agency,  successful 
implementation of The Banking Sector Restructuring Program and the New Banking Law that 
brought  the  legal  framework  with  best  international  practices  were  the  milestones  of  legal 
and  institutional  reform  in  the  financial  sector.  No  need  to  say  that  the  improved 
macroeconomic  framework  through  successful  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  implementations 
also contributed much to financial stability. Last but not least, I should say that there is also 
an  effective  cooperation  among  the  Central  Bank  of  Turkey,  the  Banking  Regulation  and 
Supervision Agency, the Undersecretariat of Treasury, the Capital Markets Board and other 
public authorities and also with private sector representatives. 
The  fourth  and  the  final  set  of  actions  that  has  been  undertaken  towards  better  economic 
governance is structural reforms. 
Turkey has achieved significant progress in this front, but today, I would like to put a special 
emphasis on the role of regulatory and supervisory institutions without getting into details. 
Establishment and effective implementations of institutions such as the Banking Regulation 
and Supervision Agency, the Turkish Competition Authority, the Energy Market Regulatory 
Authority,  the  Telecommunications  Authority  and  many  others  have  contributed  to  the 
development of a competitive, resilient and efficient economy in Turkey. It is not surprising 
that  manufacturing,  retail,  energy  and  financial  sectors  have  attracted  the  interest  from 
foreign  investors  in  recent  years,  as  witnessed  by  over  40  billion  USD  foreign  direct 
investment  in  the  last  two  years.  The  good  corporate  governance  practices  have  also 
contributed to the overall economic governance in the country. 
As a result of the steps taken in the four categories that I have just mentioned, Turkey has 
shown  an  impressive  economic  performance  after  2001.  The  consumer  price  inflation 
declined to the single-digit territory. The GDP has continuously grown in the last 24 quarters. 
This  strong  growth  performance  was  private  sector  driven  and  supported  by  continuous 
productivity gains. Along with the high economic growth, openness of the Turkish economy 
has also increased substantially. Exports increased by more than two-folds since 2001 and 
reached to USD 107 billion in 2007. The banking sector has strengthened significantly and 
became resilient to internal and external shocks. Finally, budget deficit and debt stock of the 
public are no longer sources of vulnerability. Even before  recent upward revisions in GDP 
figures, Turkey easily met the Maastricht criteria for the budget deficit and debt stock. 
Turkey  has  demonstrated  significant  improvement  in  the  World  Bank’s  Governance  Index 
since 2000. Thanks to better governance practices, competitiveness of Turkish economy has 
advanced drastically in recent years as well. In the last two years, Turkey moved up a total of 
18  steps  in  the  Global  Competitiveness  Index  prepared  by  the  World  Economic  Forum. 
Turkey  also  moved  up  34  steps  compared  to  the  previous  year  in  the  Ease  of  Doing 
Business Index of the World Bank. 
Distinguished guests, 
I  tried  to  highlight  some  of  the  important  developments  in  Turkey  regarding  economic 
governance  in  recent  years  and  the  resulting  improvement  in  the  economic  structure.  All 
these  led  to  improvement  in  the  confidence,  which  was  instrumental  in  further  confidence 
building and credibility for the economic management. These are all key ingredients of good 
governance. 
These  achievements,  however,  are  not  enough.  We  still  have  much  to  do  in  terms  of 
reaching price stability and securing sustainable high growth rates. There is still much to be 
done  to  improve  economic  governance  and  to  reach  a  level  compatible  with  the  EU-15 
average. As we are going through difficult times both internally and externally, we should not 
lose the momentum gained in institutional capacity building. It is even more imperative at this 
juncture to show and utilize the dexterity that we gained from our past experiences. We have 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2008
to  list  the  things  on  the  reform  agenda  and  share  it  with  the  public  at  large  and  without 
sacrificing the long-term benefits for short-term gains. To ensure that the reform agenda is 
fulfilled in a timely manner, we need to prepare and announce a timetable, thus setting up 
performance criteria and adhere strictly to its implementation. In case any delay occurs in the 
execution  of  the  pre-announced  timetable,  necessary  mechanisms  should  be  in  place  to 
ensure that policy makers face the public and explain why it was not achieved. By doing so, 
we will be able to preserve the gains we have brought about and maintain the medium and 
long-term growth capacity of our economy. 
The  key  word  that  I  would  like  to  underline  here  is  sustainability.  Better  governance  is  of 
great importance for making the gains of recent years permanent and reaching sustainable 
high growth rates. There is a heavy reform agenda waiting for us. Macroeconomic stability, 
structural  reforms  and  adherence  to  good  governance  principles  will  unlock  Turkey’s 
economic potential and achieve her convergence to European Union. Thank you. 
BIS Review 38/2008 
 5
