Ewart S Williams: Understanding the Heritage and Stabilisation Fund  
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at 
the Rotary Club of Port of Spain Central, Port-of-Spain, 8 May 2008. 
 Thanks for inviting me …… it is nice to be invited to talk about something other than inflation 
and it is certainly a delight to talk about, the Heritage and Stabilisation Fund, because it is a 
good  story,  a  very  important  economic  policy  instrument  with  tremendous  upside 
potential. In my view, it is an instrument that could go a long way to helping Trinidad and 
Tobago achieve its Vision 2020. 
There is no doubt that our country is in the midst of a major economic boom, driven by 
the energy sector. 
Our macro-economic performance since the start of the decade has been impressive indeed. 
To quote a few of the statistics: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Real GDP growth has averaged close to 9 percent since 2002; 
per capita income has more than doubled from US$7,000 to US$16,000; 
unemployment has been halved from 10.4 percent in 2002 to under 5 percent; 
the public debt ratio has also been halved to about 30 percent of GDP while; 
our  net  international  reserve  position  has  risen  from  US$1.7  billion  to  US$7 
billion. 
Of course, the current economic success has not been without its downside. Specifically, the 
economic boom has been accompanied by a pick up in inflation to close to double digits; 
real estate prices continue to soar, notwithstanding concerted efforts by the Government to 
increase  the  supply  of  houses;  and  rapid  growth  has  brought  to  the  forefront  serious 
capacity  constraints  ….  in  the  labour  market,  in  the  public  utilities,  and  in  our  road 
network, to cite a few. At the same time, with rising incomes and buoyant domestic demand, 
lagging agricultural production has shown the consequences of unbalanced development. 
But many of you would remember that we passed this way before. 
You would, no doubt, recall the first oil shock in the late 1970’s and early 1980’s when there 
was a significant increase in oil prices and government revenues. 
Some  of  this  windfall  went  to  finance  the  start-up  of  the  petrochemical  platform,  from 
which we are now benefiting. However, the economic boom unleashed enormous demand 
pressures, both private and public, such that when oil prices collapsed, the economy went 
into recession, and we were forced to tighten our belts in a disorderly and painful downward 
adjustment. 
Having learnt our lesson, when oil prices started to rise in the late 1990’s, the Government 
established an Interim Revenue Stabilization Fund. Annual contributions were made to the 
Fund since 2000, but it became a formal legal entity, only in March 2007, with Parliament’s 
approval of the Heritage and Stabilization Fund. 
What is this Heritage and Stabilization Fund? 
It  is  a  Fund  –  where  proceeds  from  energy  sector  revenues  are  set  aside  –  firstly,  to  be 
available  if  there  is  a  sudden  temporary  decline  in  oil  prices;  and  secondly,  to  generate 
savings for future generations. 
BIS Review 58/2008 
 1
The rationale for setting aside funds for a rainy day is rather obvious. Notwithstanding 
the surge in oil prices since the turn of the current decade, oil and gas prices are inherently 
volatile and even the most optimistic projections suggest that, at some time, oil prices will 
revert  to  a  more  normal  long  term  equilibrium  level.  Given  our  economy’s  heavy 
dependence on oil and gas, a sharp fall in prices will affect government revenue and could 
require  a  drastic  cutback  in  government  spending.  By  putting  aside  some  resources  for 
stabilization, the Government would have the ability to cushion the impact on its spending 
and consequently on the level of economic activity. (Recall the cut in civil servants’ salaries 
in the 1980’s.) 
The  rationale  for  setting  up  a  savings  fund  is  a  bit  more  complex  and  incorporates 
both  economic  and  ethical  considerations.  It  says  that  natural  resources  are  an 
exhaustible asset, the benefits of which should be spread over generations. And therefore 
what a savings fund does is to transform the assets under the ground (in our case oil and 
gas)  into  a  diversified  portfolio  of  financial  assets,  which  can  be  managed  to  provide  an 
independent source of foreign exchange income. This income will be available to the budget 
when the oil and gas resources have dwindled or have completely run out. 
Building  up  the  Fund  sufficiently  and  investing  it  wisely  would  allow  us  to  preserve  the 
capital (like keeping the oil in the ground) while living on the interest. 
Future  generations  will  thus  be  able  to  enjoy  the  benefits  of  oil  and  gas  resources,  even 
when the oil and gas resources are gone. 
The flow of investment income from the Fund could go on for a very long time if you have 
built  up  sufficient  assets  and  if  the  country’s  fiscal  position  is  sustainable  over  the 
long term. 
Many  resource-rich  countries  –  both  large  and  small  –  have  seized  on  the  idea  that 
Sovereign Wealth Funds are an important part of economic management. 
The HSF Act approved by Parliament in March of last year, is therefore a most important 
piece of legislation. 
In  line  with  international  best  practices,  the  legislation  provides  for  clear  deposit  and 
withdrawal  rules;  a  governance  structure  that  seeks  to  incorporate  checks  and 
balances  and  provisions 
transparency  and 
accountability in the management of the country’s money. 
Broadly speaking: 
• 
the deposit rule requires that a minimum of 60 per cent of the excess between 
actual and budgeted energy revenues must be credited to the Fund, while; 
the withdrawal  rule  allows  the  Government  to  tap  into  the  Fund  to  cover  60  per 
cent of any revenue shortfalls. There is a cap on the amount of the Fund that could 
be used for stabilization. 
the  highest 
to  ensure 
level  of 
 There are some other significant provisions in the law or in the principles underlying the 
Fund. Thus, for example: 
• 
• 
HSF deposits are to be invested abroad, with a medium to long term focus; 
In principle, the Fund should be invested in assets not directly related to oil and gas 
(so as to avoid contagion); 
The Fund cannot be used to directly finance capital expenditure or as collateral 
for government borrowing; 
The Act comes up for review every five years; and 
BIS Review 58/2008
  2 
  As  I  said  before,  the  Fund  should  be  characterized  by  the  highest  level  of 
transparency of objectives and results, and clear accountability and professionalism 
in its management. 
The  legislation  clearly  outlines  the  roles  for  the  major  players  –  Minister  of  Finance,  the 
Board of the HSF, the Central Bank, and the Parliament, which represents the people, as 
the ultimate authority. 
The Minister of Finance is responsible for approving the deposits and withdrawal from the 
Fund (according to the formula). 
The  HSF  Board  decides  on  the  investment  objectives  of  the  Fund  and  approves  the 
Strategic  Asset  Allocation  –  which  in  effect  is  the  definition  of  the  overall  risk-return 
profile  of  the  portfolio.  In  the  final  analysis,  the  Board  is  answerable  for  the  overall 
performance of the Fund but it delegates this function to the Central Bank, which is given 
responsibility for the day to day management of the Fund. To fulfill its function, the Bank 
will make extensive use of external fund managers which it will help to select and oversee. 
The Bank is also available to give technical advice to the Board as required. 
The  Parliament,  as  representative  of  the  people  has  the  ultimate  oversight  role  of  the 
Fund, exercised through review of the annual reports and the audited financial statements. 
The  Norwegian  Petroleum  Fund  is  recognized  as  the  benchmark  for  transparency  and 
disclosure of information. The Norwegian Ministry of Finance reports to Parliament on all 
important  matters  relating  to  the  Fund  such  as  the  size  of  petroleum  revenues;  the 
outlook for fiscal sustainability, any planned changes in investment strategy and the Fund’s 
performance, risks and costs. 
Ladies and gentlemen, it is extremely important for the population to understand the purpose 
of  the  Fund  and  how  it  is  expected  to  work.  For  example,  it  is  particularly  important  to 
distinguish the management of the HSF from that of the country’s official reserves. 
As you know, the country’s official reserves are managed by the Central Bank, and from time 
to time we are accused of being too conservative: too safe with your money. But that’s the 
mandate. For all central banks one objective of reserve management is to avoid risk of any 
loss, to maintain the capital at all cost, even if you make low returns. 
The HSF, however has a different rationale and consequently a different investment strategy 
or as it is called, a different Strategic Asset Allocation. Basically, the HSF resources are to 
be invested with an eye to maximizing returns, subject to an acceptable level of risk. 
Thus, the strategic asset allocation (or the investment plan) of the HSF calls for some short 
term  investments  –  US  Treasuries  (since  liquidity  is  important  to  meet  any  drawdown  to 
finance stabilization needs); some longer term US fixed income securities and US and other 
developed countries’ equities. 
Through  the  HSF,  the  country  will  be  introduced  to  investing  some  of  its  resources  in 
international  equities  for  the  first  time.  And  why?  Because  empirical  evidence  suggests 
that,  over  the  long  term,  investments  in  stocks  provide  the  highest  rate  of  real  and 
nominal returns. 
Evidence also shows, however, that investments in stocks experience the greatest volatility. 
For example, if we had invested in the US equity market (in Grade A stocks) over the last 20 
years  we  would  have  earned  an  average  annual  return  of  11½  percent  compared  with  an 
8½ percent return we could have earned in US fixed income instruments. 
However, the volatility of the equity portfolio would have greatly exceeded that of the fixed 
income portfolio. In fact, for two or three of the twenty-year period, the portfolio would have 
registered losses because, that’s the nature of the equity market. 
BIS Review 58/2008 
 3
If you are in the market for the long haul, however, the evidence suggests that you will come 
out ahead and substantially so. 
Because  of  the  high  stakes  involved  and  because  of  the  highly  specialized  nature  of 
investing  in  equities,  most  sovereign  funds  outsource  part  of  the  management  of  their 
resources  to  specialized  external  managers.  These  external  managers  are  given  specific 
mandates, with specific targets or benchmarks and their fees are tied to returns in excess of 
the benchmark. 
I should note that since the HSF Act has been approved, much has been achieved: 
• 
• 
• 
As you may know, the HSF Board has been appointed. 
The Board has approved the Strategic Asset Allocation. 
The Central Bank is in the process of selecting the External managers, a process 
that we expect to complete in the next few months. 
The  first  Audited  Annual  Report  of  the  HSF  has  been  prepared  and  has  been 
submitted to Parliament; the Central Bank has also prepared quarterly reports that 
are sent to the HSF Board. 
Pending the appointment of the external managers, the HSF Board has approved a 
transitional investment plan that’s currently being implemented by the Central Bank. 
For  the  record,  the  current  fund  balance  is  US$1.996  million.  From  2002  to  the 
present,  the  Fund  has  increased  by  US$1,500  million,  roughly  US$250  million  a 
year. This represents about 12 per cent of average annual energy tax collections. (I 
note, that this is the figure even though the Government has always deposited more 
than required by the formula.) 
At the current rate of deposit, and assuming no withdrawals and a real rate of return 
of 4 per cent, the total Fund balance would rise to a mere US$11.3 billion in the next 
fifteen (15) years. 
One  can  argue  that  a  more  robust  accumulation  will  be  necessary  to  fulfill  the 
Fund’s  original  objective  over  the  long  term.  "Back  of  the  envelope"  calculations 
suggest  that  it  will  take  an  average  annual  deposit  of  about  US$800  million,  (or 
about 20 per cent of projected annual energy tax collections) to reach a balance of 
around US$25 billion by 2023 (i.e. after 15 years). Of course the increase in savings 
has as its counterpart, expenditure curtailment. 
     Is there a role for the population in the administration of the HSF? 
The answer is without doubt YES. Without doubt, public understanding of the importance of 
the HSF and public buy-in to the programme are critical to the success of the HSF. And the 
HSF Board intends to adopt an active communications strategy. 
For  example,  the  public  should  be  convinced  of  the  need  to  put  aside  savings  for  future 
generations rather than to spend for current consumption. 
• 
The  communication  strategy  is  also  important  to  counter  misinformation  and 
misperceptions, for example, by explaining the rationale behind the transfers to the 
Fund and withdrawals from the Fund, when they become necessary. 
It  is  important,  for  instance,  that  the  public  understand  the  procedures  behind  the 
selection  of  external  managers  so  as  to  underscore  transparency  and  avoid  the 
perception of special deals. 
BIS Review 58/2008
 4 
  We need to manage expectations in line with market realities, since there are going 
to be questions about whether we are taking too little or too much risk, or whether 
the Fund is earning enough. 
Experience elsewhere has shown that open communication could serve to maintain support 
for the Fund and its objectives in good times, but particularly in difficult times. 
The fact is, that this is not the Central Bank’s Fund, it is the country’s Fund – for you and for 
your children’s children. In addition to ensuring that the purpose and the operations of the 
Fund are well understood, it is important that the public feels social ownership for the Fund, 
as this will foster vigilance and ensure accountability, transparency and compliance. 
In the final analysis, this is a pre-condition for the Fund’s success. 
BIS Review 58/2008 
 5
