Thomas Jordan: Funding mortgages – securitisation and pfandbriefe in 
the light of the financial crisis 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National  Bank,  at  the  annual  general  meeting  of  the  Pfandbriefbank  Schweizerischer 
Hypothekarinstitute, Zofingen, 15 May 2008. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The funding of mortgages is the focal point in discussions on the causes of the international 
financial crisis. The massive credit expansion in the US, particularly in the area of sub-prime 
mortgages, reinforced and prolongued the US real estate bubble. From mid-2007, the value 
of financial products backed by sub-prime mortgages declined substantially, leading to heavy 
losses  on  the  part  of  banks  and  investors.  The  problems  encountered  with  these  financial 
products  gave  rise  to  discussions  on  the  future  of  mortgage  funding.  The  danger  of  such 
discussions is that the problems inherent in different instruments could be confused and their 
economic benefits overlooked.  
Three different refinancing instruments can be differentiated: pfandbriefe, mortgage-backed 
securities (MBS) and structured securitized products. Common to all three is that they make 
it possible to refinance mortgages, and ease the process. However, they differ with respect 
to risk transfer. While the credit risk remains with the bank when refinancing via pfandbriefe, 
it is passed on to the investor in the case of MBSs and structured securitized products. 
In mid-2007, serious problems with structured products backed by sub-prime mortgages put 
an  abrupt  stop  to  the  boom  in  securitisation.  False  incentives,  inadequate  control 
mechanisms,  shortcomings  in  the  rating  system  and  insufficient  personal  responsibility  on 
the  part  of  investors  were  the  main  criticisms  aimed  at  securitisation  practices.  What  is 
important  now,  is  to  correct  these  deficiencies,  so  that  the  trust  of  market  participants  in 
these products can be restored. It would be wrong to ban the securitisation of mortgages, 
since  these  refinancing  instruments  generate  substantial  economic  benefit  and  are  an 
indispensable part of our modern financial system.  
The mortgage securitisation weaknesses revealed in the financial market crisis do not apply 
in the case of the Swiss mortgage bond. Consequently, it should definitely have the potential 
to play an even greater role in maturity-matched refinancing of mortgages in Switzerland in 
the  future.  In  addition,  banks  can  improve  their  liquidity  by  holding  portfolios  of  Swiss 
mortgage bonds themselves. Mortgage bonds could be converted into liquidity quickly and 
simply,  as  required,  by  means  of  repo  transactions  –  either  in  the  Swiss  franc  interbank 
market or at the SNB. 
BIS Review 60/2008 
 1
