José Manuel González-Páramo: Financial turmoil, securitisation and 
liquidity 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the Global ABS Conference 2008, Cannes, 1 June 2008. 
 Introduction1
1. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  in  Cannes.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  European 
Securitisation  Forum  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  share  with  you  some  views  on  the 
current financial market turmoil, with a particular focus on the developments in the structured 
finance  market,  both  from  the  perspective  of  market  conditions  and  of  monetary  policy 
implementation.  
The fact that the markets for asset-backed securities (ABSs) have played a key role in the 
current  market  turmoil  shows  the  increasing  importance  of  credit  securitisation  for  global 
financial  markets.  Securitisation,  together  with  financial  innovation  and  technological 
progress  in  the  financial  industry,  has  indeed  changed  the  way  many  banks  operate.  The 
securitisation of their loan portfolios has provided banks with access to an additional funding 
source  and  enabled  them  to  mitigate  some  of  the  risks  intrinsically  related  to  their  core 
business of liquidity transformation.  
However, the market turmoil has also revealed vulnerabilities in the markets for asset-backed 
securities and the related “originate to distribute” model that need to be addressed in order to 
minimise the risk that, instead of contributing to social welfare, securitisation may in practice 
create risks for economic and financial stability.  
The economics of securitisation: benefits and some drawbacks  
2.  
The  role  of  securitisation  in  the  financial  markets  of  developed  economies  has  expanded 
dramatically in recent years. Following a relatively slow start compared with the US market, 
the European market for asset-backed securities grew very rapidly in the past few years as 
entrepreneurs,  bankers  and  investors  increasingly  warmed  up  to  the  advantages  of 
instruments that allowed them to issue bonds backed by the cash flows from pools of asset 
classes as diverse as music royalties from rock stars, rental income from pubs, and soccer 
club ticket sales, as well as more boring stuff such as credit card debt and mortgage loans.2 
Also some European governments were quick to spot the attractiveness from new financial 
instruments  that  enabled  them  to  raise  funds  from  the  securitisation  of  future  government 
revenues  –  whether  from  the  expected  sales  of  real  estate  holdings  and  lottery  tickets  or 
from pension contribution claims – rather than from more traditional mechanisms of financing 
public spending that are usually not very popular with voters. 
There is no sector though more closely involved in securitisation than the banking sector. In 
fact, asset securitisation was introduced in the 1970s in the US precisely for the purpose to 
allow  depository  institutions  to  sell  their  pools  of  mortgage  loans  before  maturity,  thereby 
acquiring  an  additional  source  of  funding.  Banks  subsequently  extended  the  securitisation 
                                                 
1  
I am very grateful to Pontus Aberg, Valia Rentzou and Isabel Von Koppen-Mertes for their valuable inputs and 
contributions, and to David Marqués for useful comments. 
2   See ECB (2008), “Securitisation in the euro area”, Monthly Bulletin, February. 
BIS Review 68/2008 
 1
lending-related  assets, 
together  with  relentless 
model  to  other  forms  of  credit,  such  as  consumer  credit  and  student  loans,  that  were 
historically regarded as highly illiquid. 
In Europe, the market for structured finance products has grown rapidly during the last 5-10 
years,  often  at  double-digit  rates  (See  Chart  1).  This  development  was  maybe  even  more 
pronounced in the euro area compared with other regions due to several factors, including 
the introduction of the single currency, further financial market integration through the use of 
credit  derivatives  and  related  financial  instruments,  and  an  innovative  financial  industry.3 
Growth in structured finance products has also been fuelled by high demand from investors 
stemming from the search for yield and diversification opportunities. Securitisation has also 
been positively affected by the move towards a more market-based financial system.  
Increasing  securitisation  of 
financial 
innovation in credit markets, have led to the diffusion of a new business organisation – the 
“originate  to  distribute”  model  –  among  banks,  particularly  those  of  large  size.  There  is 
certainly no need to explain to this audience how, under this new business model, the loans 
originated by banks are transformed into marketable asset-backed securities.  
However,  it  may  be  worth  recalling  that  this  is  not  the  way  banks  have  historically  done 
business. Under the traditional – perhaps, I should say secular – “originate to hold” business 
model, banks extend loans to firms and households and hold them in their balance sheets 
until they mature or are paid off. Banks finance the provision of loans mainly by collecting 
deposits or issuing debt that have typically shorter maturities. Thus, banks intrinsically face a 
maturity  mismatch  in  their  balance  sheets  that  exposes  them  to  funding  liquidity  risks,  i.e. 
possible difficulties in funding their business activities.4
By allowing banks to transform their illiquid assets into marketable securities and providing 
an  additional  source  of  funding  to  expand  lending,  securitisation  provides  an  effective 
mechanism to mitigate such risks and reduces the role in liquidity transformation traditionally 
performed  by  depository  banks,  with  potential  implications  also  for  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism.5  
An  additional  attraction  is  that,  by  securitising  their  loans,  banks  have  often  in  the  past 
economised on costly capital requirements. In fact, it has been argued that, under the Basel I 
accord,  regulatory  capital  arbitrage  has  been  one  of  the  main  reasons  why  banks  have 
adopted the “originate to distribute” model. Finally, it should be noted that securitisation can 
also  be  a  source  of  fees  and  income  for  banks  with  expertise  in  the  structuring  of  asset-
backed securities.  
Also from the point of view of the economy as a whole, the “originate to distribute” model can 
potentially yield a number of benefits. First, being capital costly, the ability to sustain a given 
level of credit supply with a lower volume of capital enables the banking sector to reduce the 
costs  of  financing  for  borrowers  and  favours  financial  development,  which  is  ultimately 
associated with economic growth. Moreover, securitisation may be seen as representing a 
step towards more complete credit markets, thereby contributing to enhancing the efficiency 
of the economic system.  
                                                 
3   See ECB (2007), Structural Issues Report on “Corporate finance in the euro area”, May. 
4   Funding  liquidity  refers  to  the  ability  of  a  bank  to:  (1)  convert  its  assets  into  cash  by  disposing  of  them  or 
borrowing against their value in order to meet expected and unexpected obligations, or (2) to issue liabilities in 
order to raise funds. 
5   According to some tentative empirical evidence, increasing securitisation may diminish the impact of monetary 
policy  impulses  on  banks’  loans  supply  via  the  so-called  “bank  lending  channel”,  although  the  effect  of 
securitisation seems to depend on the economic cycle and bank risk (see Altunbas, Y., Gambacorta, L. and D. 
Marqués Ibáñez (2007), “Securitisation and the bank lending channel”, ECB Working Paper 838. 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2008
In  addition,  the  securitisation  of  loans  in  principle  could  reduce  a  secular  source  of 
vulnerability of the economies, by taking risk concentrations associated with loan portfolios 
away  from  the  balance  sheets  of  the  banking  sector  and  spreading  them  more  broadly 
across other sectors. As a result, the “originate to distribute” model may potentially diminish 
the  likelihood  of  the  credit  busts  and  banking  crises  that  have  historically  been  a  major 
source of macroeconomic and financial instability in many countries.  
It should be noted though that, even before the outbreak of financial market turmoil, some 
commentators  have  voiced  doubts  about  some  of  the  welfare-enhancing  effects  of  the 
“originate  to  distribute”  model.  For  instance  it  has  been  argued  that,  while  securitisation 
certainly  spreads  existing  risks,  it  may  in  fact  encourage  the  creation  of  further  risks, 
particularly by relaxing the incentives for banks to screen and monitor borrowers in order to 
alleviate  the  informational  asymmetries  associated  with  credit  contracts.6  Incidentally,  it 
should be recalled that, when assets-backed securities were in their infancy, concerns about 
the  risks  for  investors  stemming  from  the  possible  relaxation  of  lending  and  monitoring 
standards by banks were among the main reasons for scepticism about the prospects of the 
market for securitised loans. 
In  addition,  it  has  been  questioned  whether  the  securitisation  of  loans  has  succeeded  in 
ensuring risk diversification. Indeed, for many banks all over the world, risks do not seem to 
have travelled farther away than the balance sheets of their own conduits, and have been 
internalised again once the market turmoil erupted. Besides, some banks turned out to have 
direct exposures through their own investment activity on structured products and secondary 
exposures via some of their customers.  
While this certainly does not mean that securitisation is not potentially welfare-enhancing, it 
suggests that – in the environment of historically low returns on traditional securities and an 
implied  imprudent  hunt  for  yield  that  preceded  the  turmoil  –  the  markets  for  asset-backed 
securities and credit derivatives may have failed to spread risks as effectively as expected 
and  have,  by  contrast,  exacerbated  information  asymmetries,  probably  as  a  result  of  their 
opacity and the complexity of the underlying contracts.  
Overall, the “originate to distribute” banking business model has taken a hit and its survival 
has  been  questioned.  There  is  clearly  a  need  to  reflect  carefully  on  the  model  and  its 
increased reliance on secured and off-balance sheet funding. For example, several types of 
banks involved to varying degrees in the “originate to distribute” business model turned out to 
be  vulnerable  to  the  rapid  re-pricing  on  the  ABS  products,  in  particular  banks  with  small 
deposit bases and strong reliance on wholesale funding.  
Also, as mentioned earlier, the model may have negatively affected origination standards, by 
weakening lenders’ incentives to monitor the quality of the loans they wrote, as the distance 
between borrower and the ultimate bond holder increased. The increasing complexity of the 
instruments  made  it  even  harder  to  understand  the  composition  and  quality  of  underlying 
assets.  
However, despite of these deficiencies, it is clearly not the end of this business model. As 
alluded to before, securitisation is a long-established and broadly used financing technique 
that covers a vast range of asset classes. There is still demand for related financial products 
from certain types of investors. Since the fundamental business idea behind the model is still 
valid, hopefully a more sustainable version of it will evolve.  
                                                 
6   See Rajan, R. (2005), “Has financial development made the world riskier?”, NBER WP 11728 and Sufi A. and 
A. Mian (2008) “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence from the 2007 Mortgage Default 
Crisis”, paper presented at the May 2008 Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Banking Structure Conference. 
BIS Review 68/2008 
 3
Vulnerabilities of securitisation during the turmoil  
3.  
After  an  extended  period  of  ample  liquidity  and  generally  low  credit  spreads  in  many 
economies  and  markets,  sharp  losses  in  the  value  of  US  subprime  mortgages  and  an 
associated  evaporation  of  investor  appetite  triggered  broad  distress  in  structured  finance 
markets  during  the  summer  of  2007.  Losses  were  magnified  by  illiquid  markets  for  many 
types of structured instruments, leading to sharp decreases in secondary market prices.  
When the first downgrades of ABS backed by pools of sub-prime mortgages in the US took 
place,  the  ABS  market  –  which  is  not  very  deep  even  in  normal  times  –  dried-up  nearly 
entirely. Even though the problem arose in the sub-prime market, spreads on ABSs backed 
by corporate bonds, bank loans, credit cards and auto loans increased substantially as well, 
clearly indicating a contagion effect. Thus, from end-July the market turbulence depressed 
securitisation  activity  in  general.  As  a  result,  after  having  reached  record  highs  during  the 
months preceding the summer, the issuance of ABSs declined sharply. 
Some  asset  classes  in  the  structured  finance  markets  have  been  hit  more  severely  than 
others  (Chart  2).  This  concerns  the  most  complex  instruments  such  as  collateralised  debt 
obligations  (CDOs)  squared,  synthetic  CDOs  and  constant  proportion  debt  obligations 
(CPDOs).  Among  the  more  traditional  products,  commercial  mortgage-backed  securities 
(CMBSs) saw a significant decline in issuance activity.  
Indeed,  in  the  latter  part  of  2007,  due  to  lowered  demand  for  structured  credit  products 
coupled  with  an  uncertain  outlook  for  commercial  property  markets,  issuance  of  CMBSs 
came to a halt. Issuance activity in the euro area during the last quarter of 2007 dropped to 
€2 billion from €6.2 billion one year earlier. Also, European CMBS issuance activity during 
the first four months of 2008 was approximately 28% of the level corresponding to the same 
period of the previous year.  
In comparison, residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBSs) have dropped only by 15% 
during the same time period between 2008 and 2007 and the issuance level in March-April 
this year was actually higher compared with the same period last year.  
The sharp re-pricing of credit and liquidity risk in ABS secondary markets had an impact also 
on  supply  and  demand  conditions  in  primary  markets.  Prices,  measured  as  spreads  over 
Euribor rates, started to increase during the summer 2007 and some of the spreads stand 
now above 200 basis points above the 3-month Euribor rate (see Chart 3). Also, potential 
investors such as private banks, investment funds and hedge funds have become reluctant 
to  invest  at  these  levels  and  adopted  a  wait  and  see  attitude,  in  the  hope  of  even  better 
spreads or clearer signs about future directions. As a consequence of this increase in risk 
aversion, the primary market is facing a mismatch between supply and demand: issuers do 
not  want  to  sell  at  current  conditions,  and  investors  do  not  want  to  buy  until  prices  have 
bottomed out. 
4.  
The Eurosystem’s collateral framework and the ABS market during the turmoil  
Let me dwell a bit on the role of our operational and collateral framework during the turmoil. 
Since its inception the operational framework of the Eurosystem has been tested on several 
occasions. The present market turmoil has posed new challenges, and in many aspects even 
more  significant  than  those  faced  in  the  past.  Overall,  the  Eurosystem’s  operational 
framework, including its collateral-related component, has served us well during the market 
turmoil and has proven robust under stressed conditions.  
One  contributing  feature  to  its  resilience  is  the  fact  that  a  broad  range  of  counterparties, 
including  all  types  of  credit  institutions  irrespective  of  their  size  and  the  scope  of  their 
business,  may  access  the  credit  operations  of  the  Eurosystem,  including  the  temporary 
refinancing operations. Moreover, credit is granted against a wide range of collateral. This 
implies that sufficiency of collateral should not become a constraint for counterparties. These 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2008
two  features  of  the  operational  framework  in  combination  with  the  large  scale  temporary 
refinancing operations have certainly helped the Eurosystem to effectively mitigate funding 
liquidity risk for counterparties when interbank markets stopped functioning properly.  
In order to understand better the specific role which ABSs fulfil in the implementation of our 
monetary policy, let me just remind you of some key elements of our collateral framework. 
The Eurosystem has a broad definition of debt instruments and against this background a 
wide range of public and private securities, including asset-backed securities, can potentially 
become  eligible  if  they  fulfil  all  the  other  eligibility  criteria.  Indeed,  compared  with  the 
traditional  concept  of  other  central  banks  in  the  world,  the  Eurosystem  accepts  a  large 
volume  of  high  quality  ABSs,  and  has  done  this  well  before  the  outbreak  of  the  financial 
market turmoil. In addition to the general eligibility criteria, such as the denomination in euro 
and  compliance  with  our  minimum  rating  threshold,  some  specific  requirements  apply  to 
ABSs:  (i)  only  the  most  senior  tranche  of  an  ABS  structure  is  eligible;  (ii)  ABSs  must  be 
backed by assets that have been legally acquired by the special purpose vehicle (SPV) in a 
manner that the Eurosystem considers to be “true sale”, and (iii) the issuing SPV must be 
located  in  the  European  Economic  Area  (EEA).  There  are  no  special  restrictions  on  the 
underlying assets backing the transaction, with one exception, namely that underlying asset 
pools  may  not  consist  of  credit  derivatives.  Hence,  a  broad  class  of  ABSs  may  qualify  as 
collateral,  both  residential-  and  commercial-backed  securities,  all  sorts  of  consumer  credit 
backed  ABSs,  cash-flow  collateralised  loan  obligations  (CLOs)  and  CDOs.  Overall  the 
volume of eligible ABSs constitutes approximately 60% of the entire outstanding European 
securitisation market.  
As regards the developments in the use of collateral since the start of the turmoil (see Chart 
4), they show clearly that counterparties have made active use of the leeway the collateral 
framework  provides.  Quite  understandably,  they  have  economised  on  the  use  of  central 
government bonds, which has been often almost the only collateral counterparties could still 
use in interbank repo markets. Instead they have brought forward less liquid collateral to the 
Eurosystem, including ABSs, for which primary and secondary markets have basically dried 
up. The annual average share of asset-backed securities pledged as collateral increased to 
16 percent in 2007, up from 12 percent in 2006 and 6 percent in 2004. 
However, I would like to issue a note of caution here. The fact that counterparties post ABSs 
as collateral with the Eurosystem does by no means imply that those assets are refinanced 
on a one-to-one basis by us. The majority of national central banks operate with a so called 
“pooling system”, in which much more collateral can be deposited with the central bank than 
counterparties  actually  need  to  cover  their  outstanding  credit  with  the  Eurosystem.  In  fact, 
during the turmoil precautionary buffers have increased very significantly, and there is on an 
aggregate  level  a  large  amount  of  over-collateralisation  in  collateral  pools  held  with  the 
Eurosystem. Hence, only a part of the ABSs deposited as collateral with us are effectively 
refinanced in our temporary operations. Nevertheless it is fair to say that the ability to use 
ABSs as collateral with the Eurosystem helps counterparties to hedge the refinancing risk of 
those assets.  
One phenomenon which shows to what extent the primary and secondary markets for ABSs 
have  become  dislocated  since  the  outbreak  of  the  turmoil  is  the  fact  that  many  ABS 
transactions were not placed in the public market but taken onto the balance sheet of the 
originator and/or privately placed. Indeed, as shown in Chart 5, issuance of publicly placed 
securitised  products  in  Europe  declined  substantially  in  August  last  year  and  has  since 
September hovered around a very low level per month. At the same time, deals that have 
been privately placed or retained by the originator have been consistently higher than public 
issuance since August, reaching a peak of around €90 billion in December 2007. 
The  Eurosystem’s  collateral  rules  may  partly  explain  why  at  least  euro  denominated 
securitisation issuance has not come to a halt notwithstanding the withdrawal of third party 
investors.  As  indicated  before,  we  accept  only  those  ABSs  for  which  the  transfer  of 
BIS Review 68/2008 
 5
underlying  assets  has  been  achieved  via  a  true  sale  and  where  the  issuing  entity  is 
bankruptcy  remote  from  the  originator  of  the  transaction.  These  requirements  should  in 
principle  ensure  the  de-linkage  of  the  issuer  from  the  originator.  Nevertheless,  these 
requirements do not rule out that counterparties may use ABSs as collateral with us which 
they  have  originated  themselves  and  retained  on  their  balance  sheet.  The  possibility  for 
banks to use as collateral ABSs that they have originated themselves may have prevented a 
complete  shut  down  of  primary  markets.  However,  in  the  medium  term  this  cannot  be  an 
alternative  to  the  restoration  of  a  deep  and  orderly  functioning  market  which  offers  true 
secured  funding  possibilities.  I  strongly  believe  that  the  industry  needs  to  make  serious 
efforts to revive the interest of third party investors.  
One  very  telling  development  in  this  context  is  that,  as  a  consequence  of  the  retained 
issuance, the quality of the documentation underlying issuances, such as pre-sale reports by 
rating  agencies  and  prospectuses,  seems  to  have  deteriorated.  Hence,  contrary  to 
expectations  that  issuers  would  enhance  transparency  to  restore  investor  confidence,  we 
witness  signs  or  indications  of  the  opposite  development  towards  ever  more  opaque 
markets. I will come back to this issue of transparency later again. 
Taking stock 
5.  
Let  me  take  stock  at  this  stage.  Overall  the  operational  framework  of  the  Eurosystem  has 
served us well during the ongoing financial market turmoil. In particular, thanks to the built in 
flexibility of its collateral framework, the Eurosystem has been able to step in effectively when 
intermediation  in  interbank  markets  deteriorated,  without  the  need  to  make  changes  to  its 
framework.  As  a  side  effect  of  the  broad  range  of  assets  accepted  as  collateral,  the 
framework helped us also during the turmoil to address liquidity squeezes in some markets, 
including the ABS market, as it mitigated refinancing risks for asset classes that had become 
illiquid. This has contributed to financial stability in the euro area. Other central banks may 
have had those effects in mind when they initiated changes to their operational framework in 
the wake of the turmoil, leading to a significant degree of convergence among the various 
frameworks.  
Of course, the ability of the Eurosystem’s operational framework to respond to the challenges 
for monetary policy implementation posed by the recent period of financial market volatility 
does  not  mean  that  there  is  no  scope  for  further  improvements  and  refinements.  For 
instance,  the  eligibility  criteria  for  marketable  debt  instruments  have  been  kept  general  in 
order  to  ensure  that  the  collateral  framework  of  the  Eurosystem  is  responsive  to  financial 
innovation. There is therefore a concomitant need for the Eurosystem to refine its collateral 
policy, including the risk control measures, and ensure that the collateral continues to meet 
the  Eurosystem’s  risk  tolerance  level  and  allows  the  effective  implementation  of  monetary 
policy.  This  has  already  been  done  in  the  past  from  time  to  time,  with  a  view  to  further 
enhance the collateral framework.  
Let  me  give  you  just  two  examples.  First,  different  liquidity  categories  were  introduced  in 
February 2004 to better mirror the risks associated with different asset classes. More liquid 
central  government  debt  instruments  are  in  category  1,  while  less  liquid  asset-backed 
securities  are  in  category  4  to  reflect  the  limited  secondary  market  liquidity  of  those 
instruments. The second example is the establishment of the previously mentioned specific 
eligibility criteria regarding asset-backed securities, which were inter alia introduced in 2006 
to exclude instruments such as synthetic CDOs and cash CDOs containing other synthetic 
tranches of ABSs. Due to the opaqueness of the market and the product complexity, those 
instruments were not deemed suitable as collateral for central bank credit operations. The 
current developments confirm the appropriateness of the measure. 
The currently ongoing market turmoil has presented us with a wealth of information both on 
how  our  collateral  framework  interacts  with  financial  markets  and  financial  market 
participants  and  on  the  appropriateness  of  our  risk  control  framework.  We  will  continue  to 
6 
 BIS Review 68/2008
assess  carefully  the  collateral  we  receive  and  make  sure  that  the  rules  outlined  in  the 
collateral framework are strictly applied, as well as to study whether there are elements in 
our collateral framework that may need to be refined to make it even more effective.  
Going forward: transparency  
6.  
The recent events have highlighted a number of weaknesses in the financial system, namely 
in  the  areas  of  transparency,  valuation,  risk  management  practices,  the  current  prudential 
framework  and  market 
functioning.  These  weaknesses  as  well  as  related  policy 
recommendations from a wide range of fora and organisations have attracted considerable 
attention over the past months. In my final remarks today, I would like to focus on an area 
with major repercussions for the smooth functioning of markets, namely: transparency . 
There  is  common  agreement  on  the  view  that  a  sound  transparency  framework  based  on 
improved  disclosure,  high-quality  accounting  standards  and  solid  valuation  practices  is 
pivotal for ensuring market confidence and enhancing market discipline. In this respect, the 
financial  market  turmoil  brought  to  the  forefront  a  number  of  shortcomings:  disclosure  of 
information on risk exposures to and valuations of structured products and off-balance sheet 
vehicles  proved  to  be  opaque  and  very  diverse  in  terms  of  scope  and  detail,  complicating 
comparison across financial institutions. Furthermore, at the instrument level, the information 
provided to the market by institutions involved in the securitisation process has been limited, 
especially in relation to the quality of underlying asset pools. This lack of transparency both 
on exposures to instruments and at the level of the instrument itself contributed to the loss of 
market confidence and, as I mentioned earlier, led to disruption in various segments of the 
financial  markets.  The  complexity  and  opacity  in  instruments  supported  also  to  an  over-
reliance on ratings and rating agencies. 
There are various policy initiatives under way to address the aforementioned shortcomings: 
At the EU, in accordance with the Ecofin roadmap, CEBS (in coordination with the industry) 
has  been  mandated  to  review  public  disclosure  of  types  and  amounts  of  securitisation 
exposures,  significant  individual  transactions  and  Special  Purpose  Vehicles  exposures  by 
banks and to consider complementary guidelines.7  
At the international level, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS), following the 
Financial Stability Forum (FSF) recommendations, will issue further guidance to strengthen 
disclosure requirements under Pillar 3 of the Basel II framework.8  
However, the onus of identifying areas of improvement and providing useful disclosures that 
allow investors to assess the risk/return profile of financial institutions rests primarily with the 
industry. In this respect, I would like to make special reference to the European Securitisation 
Forum  that  since  the  early  stages  of  the  turmoil  has  acknowledged  the  importance  of 
enhancing  transparency.  As  you  know,  its  work  addresses  the  pertinent  issues  of  (i) 
developing  guidelines  of  best  practices  concerning  securitisation  disclosures;  (ii)  providing 
periodic aggregate data concerning the securitisation market and (iii) enhancing information 
to investors on the composition and performance of underlying assets at issuance and on an 
on-going  basis.  Availability  of  information  is  critical  to  maintain  incentives  along  the 
securitisation  chain  and  to  enable  market  participants  to  make  informed  decisions.  The 
quality  of  the  documentation  underlying  issuances,  such  as  pre-sale  reports  by  rating 
agencies  and  prospectuses,  should  be  improved.  In  addition,  a  sufficiently  detailed 
disclosure of borrower characteristics and the performance of the loans over time would be 
important to revitalise the market. This is also of critical importance to the central banks in 
                                                 
7   Scheduled to be completed by June 2008. 
8   Scheduled to be completed in 2009. 
BIS Review 68/2008 
 7
the  Eurosystem,  not  only  as  market  watchers  but  also,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  in  the 
performance  of  their  task  of  providing  regular  refinancing  to  the  banking  system  against 
adequate  collateral.  Here  I  would  like  to  echo  the  recommendations  on  transparency  in 
securitisation  markets  made  by  the  Financial  Stability  Forum9  to  have  standardised 
information about the pools of assets underlying structured credit products.  
Supervisors and central bankers are encouraging and monitoring the market-led initiatives by 
the  European  Securitisation  Forum  and  other  international  organisations  and  will  evaluate 
the  adequacy  of  these  measures  as  well  as  their  implementation  to  assess  whether  they 
need to do more. Having said that, I would like to underscore again that the interventions of 
public  authorities  cannot  substitute  the  need  for  the  market  to  enhance  disclosure  by 
providing information that will facilitate the assessment of the situation of financial institutions 
and  financial  instruments.  This  will  eventually  lead  to  reinstatement  of  confidence  in  the 
ability of the financial system to manage risks properly. 
I thank you for your attention and I wish you all very interesting days here in Cannes.  
Chart 1. European securitisation issuance (EUR billion) 
Source: European Securitisation Forum 
 
                                                  
9   See  “Report  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  on  Enhancing  Market  and  Institutional  Resilience”,  FSF,  April 
2008. 
8 
 BIS Review 68/2008
Chart 2. Funded issuance by collateral (EUR billion; by month) 
Source: JP Morgan  
 
Chart 3. European ABS spreads (relative to 3-month Euribor) 
  Source: JP Morgan  
BIS Review 68/2008 
 9
Chart 4. Evolution of collateral held with the Eurosystem by asset type 
Source: ECB 
 
Chart 5. European securitised products: Publicly placed or privately retained? (EUR billion) 
 Source:  Citi.  European  Secutitised  Products.  Strategy  Analysis.  Securitised  Products.  Europe  7  March  2008. 
Secondary  Source:  Bloomberg,  International  Insider,  Informa  GM,  IFR,  Citi.  Note:  Publicly-placed  issuance 
includes only deals that have been publicly marketed. Private/Retained issuance includes deals that have been 
privately-placed or retained by the originator. The Private/Retained issuance figures include all such deals to Citi’s 
knowledge, but may not include such deals where there is no public information available. For some deals priced 
since August 2007 it has not been clear whether the deal has been fully placed.  
 10 
 BIS Review 68/2008
