Shamshad Akhtar: Pakistan – selected perspective on economic 
challenges and outlook 
Speech by Dr Shamshad Akhtar, Governor of the State Bank of Pakistan, at a roundtable 
discussion at receiving the “Best Central Bank Governor of the Year 2008 for Asia”, arranged 
by The Banker, Karachi, 30 April 2008. 
 Irrespective  of  changes  on  political  front,  economic  liberalization  and  reforms  have  helped 
Pakistan  emerge  as  an  open  and  liberal  economy.  Foreign  investment  enjoys  equal 
treatment  with  domestic  players  and  often  assigned  preferential  treatment  to  ensure  swift 
entry.  As  a  result  of  these  policies  Pakistan  has  managed  to  attract  a  number  of  global 
players and significant investment offering a stable and fertile return environment. To quote 
few  success  stories,  though  not  an  exhaustive  list  by  any  means,  today  over  half  of  the 
banking  assets  are  with  global  banks  but  interestingly  they  operate  as  local  subsidiaries. 
Telecom operators are now managing virtually bulk of the mobile businesses and growth of 
mobile  subscribers  has  risen  substantially.  Pakistan  has  managed  to  unbundle  its  power 
sector,  privatized  its  electric  company  operating  in  the  port  and  industrial  city  of  Karachi. 
Incentive regime has been made conducive for energy operators and both generation and 
distribution  sectors  have  been  offered  to  the  private  sector.  Free  entry  in  manufacturing 
sector now for quite some time has helped multinationals to operate freely. The process of 
economic liberalization has been facilitated by the smooth privatization of public enterprises 
that  has  been  a  key  agenda  of  all  the  three  to  four  successive  governments.  This  will 
continue  to  unleash  the  potential  of  companies  under  good  management  with  new 
investments to yield better results. 
Economic potential of the country can be judged based on fairly good trends observed in all 
critical  economic  variables  ranging  from  real  GDP  growth  that  averaged  above  7  percent 
over  last  few  years  to  the  narrowing  of  macroeconomic  imbalances.  Most  of  all  given 
opportunities and high risk premium on all businesses, in recent years, Pakistan did attract 
substantial foreign inflows – foreign direct investment cumulatively was around $ 11.9 billion 
and portfolio flows averaged annually $ 1.04 billion. 
Today, Pakistan has to be judged in the context of the challenging political and international 
economic  environment  it  operates  in.  Despite  growing  political  challenges  as  the  election 
drew closer, FY07 ended with realization of most critical economic targets. Real GDP growth 
turned  out  to  be  reasonable  and  slippages  in  fiscal  and  external  current  deficit  were 
manageable.  Outstanding  was  the  flow  of  FDI  which  reached  over  $  5.14  billion,  portfolio 
flows  were  $  2.3  and  remittances  which  reached  $5.5  billion.  These  flows  combined  with 
Pakistan’s decision to float sovereign bond issues and GDRs for some companies helped to 
build  the  reserves  significantly  that  reached  record  highs  of  $16.4  billion.  Building  up  of 
reserves was a decision taken in anticipation of the emerging difficult domestic and external 
environment. 
It turns out that this served well in preserving the exceptional shocks Pakistan faced in 2007. 
The severity of the shocks Pakistan has faced in recent months has been complicated by the 
multi-dimensional nature of these shocks. Economy has had to deal with series of adverse 
events on the domestic front for instance, episodes of terrorism, which hit political leaders 
and businesses, and protracted the political transition process. Consequently, this to some 
extent resulted in postponement of investment decisions (though these are expected to come 
on line with the new Government now in place). At the same time there has been pressure 
on  spending,  among  others  stemming  from  the  need  to  build  up  security  and  conduct 
election. 
BIS Review 56/2008 
 1
While grappling with domestic shocks, Pakistan, like other developing countries, is dealing 
with the impact of unprecedented hike in global commodity prices which have induced fresh 
vulnerabilities in the balance of payments and fiscal deficit segments of the economy. These 
complications could magnify vulnerabilities since the after affects of financial market turmoil 
is  still  unfolding  even  though  the  present  slow  down  in  advanced  economies  is  already 
impacting demand for Asian exports including Pakistani exports. 
A few important development challenges Pakistan faces today are: 
(i) 
Restoring  macroeconomic  stability  both  by  taking  some  short  term  measures  and 
launching  work  to  develop  a  coherent  macroeconomic  framework  for  the  medium 
term.  Immediately  after  coming  into  power,  the  Government  has  taken  some 
concrete  actions  to  reduce  the  bulge  in  fiscal  deficit;  admittedly  more  will  have  to 
follow.  The  actions  range  from  pass  through  of  the  price  increase  of  strategic 
products  like  wheat  and  oil  products  and  Government’s  belt  tightening  through 
reduction in recurrent expenditures and postponement of non-priority development 
expenditures. 
Reducing inflationary pressures, while a challenge, as Government allows more and 
more  pass-through  of  the  global  commodity  prices,  is  warranted  given  that  it  has 
been rising continuously and have crossed double digits. In this context, improving 
availability  of  products,  using  utility  stores  to  provide  goods  at  proper  prices  and 
ensuring proper availability through appropriate involvement of provincial and district 
administration are some of the measures being taken. Alongside, the Government 
has improved the pricing for procurement of wheat to incentivize farmers not to be 
distracted  by  other  options.  Similarly  on  rice,  efforts  are  underway  to  ensure 
adequate  availability  of  domestic  supplies  without  disrupting  the  private  sector 
initiatives to export. Proper availability of commercial financing for key products and 
curbs  on  hoarding  through  borrowings  is  being  controlled  through  central  bank 
measures. 
On its part the central bank has benefited from its continued pursuance of monetary 
tightening  which  had  yielded  visible  results  in  May  2007  when  core  inflation  fell 
much below the FY07 target of 6.5%. However this trend has been now disrupted by 
an  unabated  rise  in  Government  borrowings  from  the  central  bank  which  has 
magnified risks for inflation. Some short term measures are being contemplated to 
lower  these  borrowings  to  ensure  that  the  end  year  results  show  less  SBP 
borrowings by Federal Government. The impact of the high borrowings has however 
permeated and penetrated in inflation and it will take stronger measures to unwind it 
and results will emerge with lag. 
On its part central bank has continued pursuance of a managed floating exchange 
rate regime. SBP has been quite transparent in its exchange rate management and 
has underscored the mechanics on how the exchange rate is determined. Since the 
central bank does not target a specific level, the exchange rate is market determined 
reflecting the demand and supply dynamics. To avoid spikes and excessive volatility 
on a day to day basis, central bank has been supporting upto 100% of oil payments 
between November 04 to the third quarter of 07 but has since only supported 80% 
of  the  oil  payments  with  20%  being  handled  by  private  sector.  Beyond  this,  the 
interventions  are  minimal.  In  recent  days,  the  central  bank  has  enhanced  its 
vigilance in markets given the broadening of band between inter-bank and kerb rate 
and  this  has  been  narrowed  with  improved  liquidity  in  kerb  markets  and  other 
measures.  All  market  participants  have  been  advised  that  speculators  and  others 
who  violate  market  ethics  will  be  dealt  with  appropriate  actions.  Exchange  rate  of 
Pakistan has enjoyed a high degree of stability as evident from the foreign inflows 
and will continue to do so. SBP will take strict measures to combat any excessive 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2008
(v) 
build  up  of  speculative  tendencies  among  banks  and  exchange  companies  as 
warranted. 
Reserve  build  up  will  be  a  continued  priority  of  this  new  Government  and  central 
bank.  The  reserve  build  up  achieved  during  FY07  was  a  conscious  decision  to 
ensure that Pakistan has adequate reserves to provide cushion for any eventuality 
as it entered into a political transition period. Reserves have served well the purpose 
of acting as a buffer and cushion when there was some slow down in FDI inflows 
which  are  now  waiting  to  enter  into  the  country.  The  stress  on  reserves  however 
was more than expected because of two elements: 
• 
International oil prices have risen beyond expectations and are perhaps still 
volatile and the recent announcement of President of OECD that it may hit 
$ 200 per barrel is discomforting for oil importing countries. This is clearly a 
shock the world was not prepared to bear and/or address but international 
efforts and coordination are required to address this problem and on its part 
Pakistan  will  have  to  move  to  a  new  plateau  of  energy  conservation  and 
launch fast track efforts for substituting oil imports with domestic sources of 
energy  –  an  option  available  to  us  with  gas,  coal  and  hydro  resources 
available on the doorstep of Pakistan; and 
Food imports which had to be lined up to build our strategic reserves and 
meet an unusual decrease in domestic supplies as Pakistan consumption 
levels have risen in the wake of higher incomes and remittances flow. Here 
again Pakistan is blessed with abundant agricultural potential and efforts to 
unleash  this  and  raise  yields  are  critical  to  bring  the  country  back  to  self 
sufficiency given the population size. 
 To wrap up my remarks let me state that in any political transition process one has to further 
recognize  that  there  is  need  for  the  new  Government  to  also  comprehend  the  multiple 
dimensional  challenges  it  faces.  In  this  case  the  nature  and  type  of  political  transition  is 
different from normal election events. Coming in office the new Government has been fast to 
incrementally recognize issues at hand and now various agencies are gearing up to develop 
appropriate policy stance to tackle both short and medium term challenges. Central bank on 
its  part  continues  to  support  the  new  Government  and  is  working  towards  nurturing  more 
effective  demand  management  environment,  while  encouraging  greater  fiscal-monetary 
coordination. 
BIS Review 56/2008 
 3
