Jean-Claude Trichet: Inauguration of the “Euro exhibition” hosted by 
National Bank Slovakia 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
inauguration  of  the  “Euro  exhibition”,  hosted  by  National  Bank  Slovakia  (Národná  banka 
Slovenska), Bratislava, 21 September 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  welcome  you  here  today.  This  is  a  historic  moment  for 
Slovakia,  which  will  become  the  16th  country  to  join  the  euro  area  on  1  January  2009, 
exactly ten years after the euro was set up. Slovakia is the fourth country to join the euro 
area since the cash changeover in 2002: we have so far seen the entry of Slovenia in 2007, 
followed by Malta and Cyprus in 2008.  
When the euro banknotes and coins were first introduced on 1 January 2002, they became 
one of the most visible symbols of Europe. They are now an important and natural part of our 
daily lives and will soon be so for Slovak citizens.  
In preparation for this historic moment, the ECB has greatly appreciated its cooperation with 
the National Bank of Slovakia over the last couple of years. Governor Šramko has been a 
member of the General Council of the ECB since January 2005 and from mid-July 2008 he 
has  also  participated  as  an  observer  to  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.  The  good 
cooperation  between  the  National  Bank  of  Slovakia,  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the 
Eurosystem will make the introduction of the euro in Slovakia a success.  
188  million  banknotes  from  Eurosystem  stocks  will  be  delivered  to  Slovakia  by  the 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank in Austria, given its close proximity. 
The  pre-launch  distribution  of  euro  cash  to  banks  –  what  we  call  “frontloading”  –  and  its 
subsequent  sub-frontloading  to  retailers  and  other  businesses  is  essential  to  make 
banknotes and coins widely available within a short timeframe. In fact, the frontloading of the 
euro has just begun and I understand that an additional 1.2 million coin mini-kits will be on 
sale to the public from 1 December 2008. 
The  ECB  has  been  providing  support  to  the  euro  campaign  in  Slovakia  by  helping  Slovak 
citizens to become acquainted with the visual aspects of the euro and how the changeover 
will work. As part of the joint euro campaign, many seminars and training sessions for bank 
staff  and  cashiers  have  been  held  and  over  seven  million  copies  of  different  publications 
have been produced by the ECB. Over two million public information leaflets and four million 
conversion  cards,  which  show  prices  converted  into  euro  as  well  as  the  most  important 
security features of the 20 euro banknote, will be sent to all Slovak households in December. 
The National Bank of Slovakia will be able to ensure that everyone will be well prepared for 
the euro changeover. I am confident that all of these efforts and activities will make the euro 
introduction a success in Slovakia.  
As  I  arrived  in  Bratislava  I  was  most  impressed  with  the  façade  of  the  National  Bank  of 
Slovakia and its banner showing the euro banknotes and coins, which is clearly visible from 
all  over  the  city.  Governor  Šramko,  it  now  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  invite  you  to 
symbolically unveil what I believe is the biggest banner ever displayed in Slovakia! 
To mark this festive moment, I am also very happy to hand over the traditional euro star to 
Governor Šramko to symbolise Národná banka Slovenska’s joining of the Eurosystem. 
I feel most honoured to open the Euro Exhibition, which houses a presentation of the euro 
banknotes  and  coins  and  contains  interesting  information  about  the  euro  for  people  of  all 
ages. There are also many interactive games for children. 
BIS Review 113/2008 
 1
I now declare the Euro Exhibition open! 
We very much look forward to welcoming Slovakia into the euro area. 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2008
