Michael C Bonello: The adaption of the euro 
Welcome address by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, , during 
the  concert  held  to  mark  Malta's  membership  to  the  euro  area  on  Saturday,  Valletta, 
12 January 2008.  
 You have joined us here today to mark a major milestone in our country’s economic history. 
During more than two millennia the Maltese people have used many different currencies in 
circumstances most often reflective of Malta’s status as a dependency of some larger and 
more  powerful  nation.  The  adoption  of  the  euro,  however,  is  a  change  of  currency  with  a 
difference.  This  time  it  has  taken  place  because  Malta,  out  of  its  own  choice,  has  joined 
fourteen  other  sovereign  Member  States  of  the  EU  in  an  economic  and  monetary  union 
designed to complement the Single Market, a venture that could rightly be described as an 
epoch-making development in the history of our continent. 
For Malta, as for the other new members of the euro area, the euro offers the prospect of 
enhancing the economy’s potential to grow faster. The elimination of exchange rate risk and 
currency conversion costs should result in increased trade, while the low interest rate and 
inflation environment of the euro area should make for reduced business costs and greater 
macroeconomic stability. Combined with the fiscal discipline associated with monetary union, 
this should translate into higher credit ratings and improved investment prospects. 
The significance of having as our own the world’s second most important currency is not lost 
upon  a  central  banker.  For,  beyond  its  proven  economic  benefits,  the  euro  signifies  the 
virtual elimination of the potential risk of an exchange rate crisis to which the currencies of 
small,  open  economies  are  exposed  on  a  daily  basis  in  a  world  characterized  by  the  free 
movement  of  capital. We  have  now  traded  in  this  vulnerability  for  the  greater security  and 
credibility afforded by a major international currency. 
The euro has indeed been a success story in many respects. The disciplines of Economic 
and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  were  intended  to  promote  the  creation  of  a  macroeconomic 
environment in which countries could thrive in an increasingly competitive market place. The 
euro area’s track record in terms of price stability, trade expansion and employment creation 
suggest that these expectations have been largely fulfilled. 
The Central Bank of Malta is, therefore, proud to have become a member of the Eurosystem. 
From  an  institution  charged  with  the  preservation  of  price  stability  in  Malta  and  with 
safeguarding the integrity of our national currency, the Bank now shares responsibility with 
the other members of the Eurosystem for shaping monetary policy in the best interest of 320 
million  people  in  fifteen  countries.  This  is  a  task  which  my  colleagues  at  the  Bank  and  I 
approach with confidence and enthusiasm. 
From a national perspective, the challenge now is to maximize the benefits of participation in 
monetary  union  by  making  further  progress  on  the  path  of  reform.  Three  conditions  in 
particular need to be met: fiscal policy must remain supportive of macroeconomic stability; 
wage increases must be justified by productivity gains; and our product and labour markets 
must become more flexible and competitive. 
The new phase in Malta’s economic history which was ushered in on 1 January, therefore, 
promises to be a challenging one, but it should also be an exciting time. For a country with a 
population  of  400,000,  having  a  major  reserve  unit  as  its  domestic  currency  is  indeed  a 
significant advantage. We thus have good reason to feel reassured now that we are about to 
reinforce our integration in Europe with full economic and monetary union. For, while the EU 
has for fifty years brought peace and stability to the peoples of Europe, the Single Market 
and EMU have created a congenial environment in which economies can grow and people 
prosper.  On  another,  but  no  less  important  level,  the  euro  is  also  a  symbol  of  a  common 
BIS Review 5/2008 
 1
identity  and  of  shared  values  and,  therefore,  a  potential  instrument  for  bringing  peoples 
closer together. 
2 
 BIS Review 5/2008
