Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: The Spanish experience with banking 
system restructuring – some lessons 
Opening address by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 
Bank of Spain Seminar – Spanish Day, ADB Annual Meetings, Madrid, 6 May 2008.  
 Good morning ladies and gentlemen,  
I would like to welcome the participants in the Asian Development Bank Annual Meetings to 
the  Seminar  organised  by  Banco  de  España  on  the  occasion  of  the  Spanish  Day  of  this 
year's Meetings, which conclude today. I hope that you are enjoying your stay in Madrid.  
I  also  hope  that,  after  so  many  interesting  meetings  and  discussions  we  will  be  able  to 
provide  you  with  new  food  for  thought.  The  stakes  are  high,  but  I  think  that  the  topics 
selected for the two sessions of this Seminar and the distinguished panels of participants will 
be up to the challenge.  
Indeed, I am convinced that the discussions this morning will raise a number of interesting 
reflections. They should help us frame a better understanding of the important economic and 
financial challenges facing a region like Asia, which has become increasingly relevant for the 
world economy. Specifically, the aim of the Seminar is to reflect on how the financial system 
can be an instrument to rebalance and foster growth in the region. In this context, I believe 
that the Spanish experience on banking system restructuring – which is widely viewed as a 
success story – can provide some interesting lessons.  
I would like to take this opportunity to make some remarks on these two issues, but let me 
start  first  with  some  considerations  on  the  developments,  outlook  and  challenges  of  Asian 
countries in the context of the present financial turbulence.  
Notwithstanding the cloudy and uncertain outlook we face now, global economic activity held 
up extremely well in the course of 2007. World growth reached almost 5%, completing the 
four-year period of highest growth since the sixties. Industrial economies grew near 3% last 
year,  whereas  emerging  markets  crucially  contributed  to  this  extraordinary  performance 
recording  an  impressive  7.5%  annual  rate  of  growth.  Taking  into  account  their  increasing 
weight in the global economy, this means that emerging markets explained more than two 
thirds  of  the  global  growth  in  2007.  Emerging  Asia  was  a  key  contributor  to  this  buoyant 
performance of emerging markets with an increase of GDP of almost 9%, driven by the two 
largest economies in the region: China and India. China's expansion of over 11% explained 
25%  of  total  world  growth  and  India  close  to  9%.  As  I  will  develop  in  a  few  minutes  the 
growth performance of these two countries is a key factor to assess the global perspectives.  
Where are we now? This year has started on a rather slow motion and the mood is far from 
positive. The economic and financial strains in the US and their spillovers to other advanced 
economies are dragging down global economic forecasts. Even in Japan, where the direct 
impact  of  the  turmoil  has  been  relatively  contained,  the  economy  remains  fragile  and 
prospects have deteriorated.  
The emerging market economies stand in sharp contrast with this gloomy outlook, as their 
growth forecasts have been revised down only marginally. In fact, one of the most surprising 
features of the recent developments in the world economy has been the resilience of most 
emerging market economies to the unravelling of the global turbulence. This feature is even 
more remarkable taking into account their recent history of financial and economic instability.  
If  we  look  at  basic  financial  market  indicators  of  risk  –  such  as  the  sovereign  spreads, 
exchange  rates  or  equity  markets  –  what  we  observe  is  that,  overall,  they  have  behaved 
significantly better than comparative asset classes in the industrial economies over the past 
BIS Review 56/2008 
 1
nine months. In addition, credit has generally continued to be available in these economies –
albeit, admittedly, at a somewhat higher cost – and creditworthy emerging market borrowers 
have not been shut out from international markets, contrary to what used to happen in the 
past.  
It  is  true  that  issuance  abroad  has  been  reduced  notably  since  the  beginning  of  the 
turbulence, and that those borrowers with relatively low credit ratings may have been shut 
out completely from international markets. However, anecdotal evidence indicates that they 
have been able to substitute their sources of finance by shifting into bank loans, something 
that can also be seen as a positive feature of the functioning of financial markets. In fact, the 
limited transmission of the turbulence through the financial channel is the key difference with 
the past.  
More precisely, what has made the emerging markets so resilient this time? The answer is 
the  building  up  of  strengths,  not  only  in  Asia,  but  also  in  Latin  America  and  in  Emerging 
Europe. On the one hand, growth has become more broad-based and with a much stronger 
contribution of domestic demand, in other words, more self-sustainable. In addition, south-
south  and  intra-regional  trade  linkages  among  emerging  economies  have  increased.  This 
has  mitigated  potential  trade  spillovers  from  industrial  economies,  although  it  has  not 
suppressed them, of course. Very importantly, economic policies have been generally sound.  
On  the  financial  front,  the  absence  of  significant  exposures  to  the  subprime  market  or  to 
complex structured products in domestic financial systems has surely helped in this regard, 
but there are more structural reasons. In particular, there has been an important reduction of 
the financial vulnerabilities that were widespread in the past, and which led to costly crisis 
with  important  output  losses  and  poverty  increases,  as  the  Asian  crises  ten  years  ago 
crudely  demonstrated.  Many  emerging  market  economies  have  reduced  their  financing 
needs  and  improved  their  debt  management.  Many  more  run  current  account  surpluses 
which  reduce  their  reliance  on  external  funding.  Most  have  accumulated  massive 
international reserves, well in excess of what would be needed for precautionary reasons.  
All  in  all,  this  paints  a  very  different  picture  as  compared  to  past  episodes  of  global 
turbulence, when these economies used to be not only “influenced” by the ups and downs of 
the  changing  risk  preferences  in  global  financial  markets,  but  simply  “driven”  –  even 
“drowned” – by them, sometimes regardless of their economic fundamentals. In my view, this 
separation from the main stream of the turbulence constitutes an achievement in itself.  
From other stand point, it is certainly striking that in this period of global financial turbulence 
inflation is identified as the key economic challenge for emerging economies. Indeed, the rise 
of  inflationary  pressures  on  food  prices  derived  from  the  commodity  boom,  is  becoming  a 
very  worrying  concern.  The  large  change  in  relative  prices  that  underlies  this  prolonged 
boom  is  having  a  stronger  impact  on  developing  economies,  with  very  negative  and 
substantial effects on the well being of the poorest portions of their populations. Therefore, 
as  inflation  creeps  up  the  concern  of  policymakers  deepens,  not  only  in  the  sphere  of 
macroeconomic stability, but beyond. In connection with this, the fact that monetary policies 
have  remained  focused  on  inflation  stability  in  most  emerging  market  economies  is  an 
additional novelty to mention in the context of the present turmoil.  
Going a step forward, it is also noteworthy that emerging market economies, and in particular 
Asia – with China at its centre – may become some kind of a “spare engine” to world growth, 
buffering  the  impact  of  the  turbulence  on  global  activity.  This  idea  of  a  “second  pillar”  for 
growth relies mainly on the observed strength of domestic demand in Asia, and the key issue 
here is whether this strength could be self-sustaining.  
Maybe,  we  will  not  be  able  to  answer  this  question  thoroughly  until  the  macroeconomic 
impact of the turbulence unfolds completely and the trade channel works itself out. But, one 
aspect that is clear – even now – is that some rebalancing from the current investment-led 
pattern to a more consumption-based model is required. This is not a simple task, since the 
underlying causes of the current growth pattern in some Asian countries – including China – 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2008
are  manifold.  Issues  such  as  the  catching-up  process,  the  need  of  a  large  part  of  the 
population to secure future incomes, or the role of the public sector in providing schooling 
and  pensions,  have  all  a  role  to  play  as  has  been  widely  discussed  in  recent  years  by 
scholars and policymakers in the region. In fact, the recently published Asian Development 
Outlook delves on some of these issues at great length.  
As we will have the opportunity to discuss today, more developed financial systems can also 
greatly  help  to  rebalance  growth.  Financial  systems  are  instrumental  in  mobilizing  savings 
and  helping  smooth  consumption  patterns.  They  are  also  key  in  transforming  risk  and 
allocating capital to its more productive uses. Many of these functions are directly linked to 
some of the problems that Asian countries have been trying to solve over the past decade. 
To name but a few: very high saving ratios, possible investment overcapacity and slow take-
off  of  private  consumption.  Although  the  investment-consumption  patterns  may  already  be 
changing in parts of Asia, there is still a large scope for improvement and more efficient and 
competitive financial systems can provide a fundamental support.  
Ten years after the Asian crises, financial systems in the region have come a long way: asset 
quality has improved, profitability has been on the rise and so have capital ratios. Regulation 
and supervision have been upgraded as a result of the crisis. Financial depth is considerably 
higher in Asia than in Latin America and Eastern Europe, when measured by basic indicators 
such as the ratio of credit to the private sector as a share of GDP. Nevertheless, it is also 
true  that  credit  is  heavily  biased  towards  the  corporate  sector  in  Asia.  In  the  last  years, 
consumer  loans  have  been  on  the  rise  –  along  with  home  mortgage  credit  –  in  emerging 
market regions, such as Latin America or Eastern Europe; in Asia consumer loans have also 
taken off, and this is a positive development. But there are still issues and concerns about 
the real extent of changes in lending standards and the potential problems that rapid credit 
growth  might  pose  if  the  global  economy  were  to  turn  to  a  slower  gear.  Similarly,  Asian 
banking systems remain relatively close to the participation of foreign banking, as compared 
to other emerging market regions, a development which may be foregoing important benefits 
in terms of modernization and competition.  
All  in  all,  I  would  conclude  that  the  financial  sector  in  Asia  is  still  lagging  behind  when 
compared  to  other  very  dynamic  and  exemplary  sectors  in  the  region,  such  as  certain 
industries, education and technology. I believe that this imbalance may eventually become a 
drag  for  the  consolidation  of  a  sustained  growth  path.  Therefore,  the  development  of  the 
financial system is of central importance for the long-term growth perspectives. Under these 
circumstances, banking reform and restructuring is an important challenge that many Asian 
economies are inclined to face.  
Let  me  tell  you  that  in  Spain  we  know  well  this  challenge  and  its  rewards.  The  highly 
successful performance of the Spanish economy over the past 20 years cannot be explained 
without  taking  into  account  the  significant  contribution  by  the  financial  sector  and,  in 
particular, by the banking system.  
In  turn,  the  transformation  –  and  improvement  –  of  our  banking  system  in  this  period  has 
been outstanding. This is evidenced, for example, by its favourable performance in terms of 
profitability, efficiency and solvency, both on an absolute basis and in comparison with other 
countries.  Taking  advantage  of  hindsight,  I  would  like  to  stress  two  chief  lessons  learned 
from this twenty-year process of modernisation.  
The  first  is  that  regulator  and  banks  have  formed  a  “joint  partnership”,  prompting  a  fruitful 
“virtuous cycle” and matching goals and efforts in order to attain efficiency and soundness. 
Close  communication  and  constant  exchanges  of  views  are  the  principles  currently 
governing this relationship.  
The  second  lesson  is  that,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  there  has  been  no  trade-off  between 
profitability and soundness: the competitive capacity of Spanish banks has not been dented 
by supervisory policies. These policies have been oriented towards enhancing the solvency 
BIS Review 56/2008 
 3
and  internal  governance  of  banks,  and  to  increasing  the  confidence  of  the  public  and  the 
markets in the banking sector.  
However, this transformation has not been painless. It has to be recalled that the Spanish 
financial system had to overcome a deep-seated crisis in the mid-seventies to early eighties.  
By the end of the 70s, our banking system was weak, closed, corporatist, old-fashioned and 
highly  regulated.  Such  regulation  affected  many  of  their  operating  areas,  curtailing 
competitiveness. Interest rates were set administratively and credit institutions were obliged 
to meet investment ratios to finance certain economic sectors with maximum interest rates. 
This environment made for weak structures with no incentive to compete and no professional 
teams or systems to accurately identify and manage risk. At that time a range of new banks 
were allowed to set up. Most of them were industry-oriented with special tax advantages, but 
with a fragile financial base and a lack of managerial integrity and experience.  
Against  that  background,  the  system  was  highly  inefficient  and  proved  poorly  effective 
because it was unable to develop its role of channelling saving to the most productive uses 
and,  without  any  doubt,  it  held  back  economic  growth.  At  the  same  time,  the  Spanish 
regulatory and supervisory framework was weak and outmoded, based mainly on a simple 
leverage ratio. In turn, supervision was geared towards formal compliance with administrative 
regulations.  
The  need  for  a  change  in  the  supervisory  framework  to  preserve  the  soundness  of  the 
banking system became apparent when the oil crisis of the early 70s prompted the Spanish 
economy into a profound recession, leading to the deepest crisis of recent Spanish banking 
history. Up to 50 banks went bankrupt, involving 20% of the deposits of the banking system.  
It  is  interesting  to  analyse  the  effect  of  the  crisis  and  the  limitations  of  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory framework at that time, in the light of the framework set by the Core Principles 
[for  effective  Banking  Supervision]  developed  by  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision.  Allow  me  to  summarise  the  main  group  of  principles  that  would  have  been 
breached.  
First, the principles related to licensing criteria would not have been accurately met. Indeed, 
the process of licensing did not consist of a proper assessment of the fitness and propriety of 
Board  members  and  senior  management,  including  their  strategic  and  operating  plan.  As 
mentioned  before,  a  good  number  of  banks  were  established,  in  the  main  with  industrial 
interests, but on a fragile basis, and most of them became insolvent.  
Second,  banks  did  not  follow  prudent  and  appropriate  policies  to  set  in  place  a 
comprehensive  risk  management  process  to  identify  and  control  all  risks  with  proper 
valuation  standards.  At  that  time  the  assessment  of  capital  adequacy,  as  in  many  other 
countries,  was  based  on  a  badly  designed  leverage  ratio  (capital  on  deposits)  which  was 
totally inappropriate in terms of the risk profile of the banks.  
Third,  the  supervisory  system  was  not  equipped  with  appropriate  human,  technical  and 
organisational tools to ensure a thorough understanding of the operations both of individual 
banks  and  banking  groups  and  to  monitor  them.  Additionally,  the  supervisor  did  not  have 
corrective and remedial powers to apply timely and efficient surgical measures.  
Ensuing  this  episode,  the  Spanish  authorities  embarked  on  a  thoroughgoing  process  of 
liberalisation,  modernisation,  de-regulation,  re-regulation  and  promotion  of  competition. 
Although  there  was  much  ground  to  be  covered,  Spain  comprehensively  reformed  the 
regulatory and supervisory framework in a relatively short period, during the 80s. Supervisory 
powers and the more detailed banking regulations were placed within the remit of the Banco 
de España.  
Among the wide array of measures taken I would like to highlight the following:  
• 
Interest  rates  and  fees  for  banking  operations  were  fully  liberalised  and  the 
compulsory investment ratios were gradually lifted.  
4 
 BIS Review 56/2008
       New capital regulations based on the Basel I model were implemented. In the new 
regulation there was a more appropriate relationship between loans granted (risks) 
and capital, instead of deposits and capital.  
Banco de España was empowered to issue accounting regulations for banks. It 
duly  laid  down  new  prudent  accounting  rules,  in  particular  regarding  loan 
classification  and  loan  loss  provisioning.  Since  then,  the  authority  to  establish 
accounting standards for banks has proven to be one of the most powerful tools at 
our disposal.  
Supervisory reporting was established. This is an essential element of supervision 
which allows for proper monitoring of the situation of banks.  
The Central Credit Register was introduced in the sixties, with all credit institutions 
required to report regularly to it. This database is exploited for supervisory purposes 
and  will  play  an  important  role  in Basel  II  supervision.  It can  also  be  used  by  the 
banks for credit risk management purposes.  
Since  the  seventies  Spanish  banking  supervision  has  paid  particular  attention  to 
obtaining  "first-hand"  on-site  assessments  of  developments,  to  complement  its 
continuous and close monitoring of every institution.  
The  growth  of  the  financial  markets  called  for  more  transparency  and  better 
regulation of external auditing. A new law was passed making the external audit of 
the annual accounts compulsory for every company above a certain size, and for all 
financial institutions regardless of their size.  
In  the  area  of  crisis  prevention  and  resolution,  the  crisis  in  the  early  eighties 
revealed the lack of sanctioning powers and tools for crisis management. The list of 
possible infringements was updated. The supervisory authority was also given new 
tools  for  crisis  management  –  as  intervention  measures  or  the  replacement  of 
management –, and an ex-ante Deposit Guarantee Scheme was established, which 
is also prepared to offer help and bail-out plans.  
This  set  of  measures  promoted  and  encouraged  banks  to  adopt  appropriate  risk  control 
systems  and  practices oriented  towards  prudent  performance  and  enhancing  transparency 
with both clients and markets.  
Beyond these changes, Spanish banks also learned direct lessons from the banking crisis, 
and managed to cope with the challenges linked to competing in a liberalised environment. In 
fact, banks realised that they have to make continuous efforts to retain adequate internal risk 
control methods and to invest in technology and human capital. Furthermore, banks have to 
maintain their capacity to adapt to a changing environment and be able to take advantage of 
the new financial landscape.  
The  supervisory  model  will  face  new  challenges  ahead,  as  the  global  banking  system  is 
continuously  evolving.  New  products  of  increasing  complexity  and  new  players  subject  to 
little  or  no  regulation  are  continuously  appearing.  The  model  must  be  flexible  enough  to 
maintain  its  adaptability,  without  losing  its  solid  foundations.  Accordingly,  Spanish  banking 
supervision has recently developed its own methodology based on the continuous monitoring 
of  every  banking 
inspections.  This 
methodology incorporates a risk-focused approach, that enables it to strengthen preventive 
measures without forsaking the objectives of solvency and stability.  
There  are  no  doubts  that  in  the  current  context  of  deceleration  in  the  world  economy, 
distortions and tensions in global financial markets and an increasingly uncertain economic 
outlook, to have a sound and securely managed banking system is of paramount importance. 
Only on that premise will we be firmly placed to meet the fresh challenges arising from the 
new financial environment.  
institution,  complemented  by 
frequent  on-site 
BIS Review 56/2008 
 5
And, in this context, the Spanish experience provides us with final lesson: that any process of 
financial  liberalisation  or  rapid  innovation  has  to  be  accompanied  by  the  application  of 
appropriate regulatory and supervisory measures.  
Thank you for your attention.  
6 
 BIS Review 56/2008
