Toshihiko Fukui: Toward strengthening competitiveness of Japan's 
financial system 
Summary  of  a  speech  given  by  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
Center for Financial Industry Information Systems, Tokyo, 30 November 2007. 
 Introduction 
I am deeply honored to be given the opportunity to speak before many distinguished guests 
in the financial sector on the theme of strengthening the competitiveness of Japan's financial 
system.  
The  financial  system  and  financial  markets  not  only  allocate  funds  from  the  overfunded 
sector to the underfunded sector but also they sort out firms with high profitability and growth 
potential. The efficient and competitive financial system and financial markets are therefore 
vital  to  a  country's  economic  growth.  First  I  will  explain  the  changes  surrounding  Japan's 
financial  institutions,  and  then  assess  their  competitiveness  and  profitability.  I  will  then 
address the steps toward strengthening their competitiveness. Finally I will touch upon the 
lessons learned from the subprime mortgage problems. 
1. 
Changes in the environment surrounding financial institutions 
Changes in firm activity 
Since  the  1990s,  the  world  economy  and  financial  markets  have  undergone  substantial 
changes.  Behind  that  are  various  factors,  among  which  globalization  and  information 
technology (IT) innovation are particularly important.  
The  economic  globalization  has  enabled  diverse  goods  and  services  to  move  across  the 
border, thereby enhanced the division of labor between the countries and the convergence of 
prices  and  wages.  Advances  in  IT  raised  the  efficiency  of  information  processing  and 
communication at a remarkable pace, which in turn eased time and geographical constraints, 
and  led  to  a  large  cutback  on  the  cost  of  remote  business  transactions.  Against  such  a 
background,  notable  changes  emerged  in  firms'  international  activities.  Firms  have  been 
relocating their production sites overseas at a faster pace and global M&A activity has been 
actively  taking  place.  Accordingly,  the  division  of  labor  between  the  firms  has  also 
progressed.  For  example,  in  the  area  of  software  development  and  data  processing, 
outsourcing  has  been  taking  place  across  the  border.  More  recently,  an  open  source 
approach - i.e. releasing an idea for new products and inviting other firms which are in the 
possession  of  competitive  technology  for  possible  joint  production  -  has  gained  popularity. 
Arguably,  the  global  IT  network  has  underpinned  the  information  flows  behind  the  above-
mentioned processes. 
Changes in financial activity 
With the remarkable changes in firm activities, financial transactions have also gone through 
significant changes.  
First, in terms of financial instruments, the derivatives market has grown considerably with 
the help of finance theory and IT development. Transactions have expanded at a rapid pace: 
not only those dealing with assets such as government bonds and foreign exchange whose 
market  prices  are  readily  available,  but  also  those  dealing  with  credit  risk  whose  price  is 
derived from theoretical models. With regard to M&A finance and real estate finance, a new 
financial approach that attaches greater importance to cash flow has been widely accepted. 
BIS Review 14/2008 
 1
In  addition,  progress  in  the  securitization  method  has  created  a  variety  of  securitized 
products.  
Second, in terms of market participants, now many types of investors are playing the market. 
Most notably, hedge funds and private equity funds have begun to play an important role in 
the global financial system. Such funds' strong demand for investment opportunities appears 
to  have  been  the  driving  force  in  creating  a  variety  of  investment  products  including  real 
estate financing and M&A activity.  
Due to such development of financial transactions and an increasing prominence of various 
investment funds, risk money with a diverse risk appetite is racing around the global financial 
markets. The current subprime mortgage problems clearly indicate that this is an era where 
the risks in a certain sector of a country will be distributed and be held widely by financial 
institutions and investors worldwide. 
Changes in financial institutions' business model 
Under such circumstances, the business model for developed countries' financial institutions, 
which  form  the  centerpiece  of  the  global  financial  system,  has  gone  through  substantial 
changes.  In  particular,  innovative  financial  institutions  in  Europe  and  in  the  United  States 
have  increasingly  relied  on  the  so-called  "originate  and  distribute"  business  model,  where 
credit risk inherent in lending is transferred to investors via securitization. Such an increase 
in securitization business stems from the fact that it has become difficult to generate profits 
from  the  traditional  wholesale  transactions  such  as  lending  to  large  firms  in  light  of  the 
development  of  capital markets.  In  addition,  it  reflects  a  diversified  risk  appetite  of  various 
investment funds. Against such a background, financial institutions overseas are striving to 
gain higher returns on capital, taking account of stockholders' demand while securing enough 
capital to maintain high credit ratings. 
Financial institutions in Japan 
Japan has been making efforts to overcome the nonperforming loan problem for more than 
ten  years  since  the  1990s.  Financial  institutions  disposed  of  nonperforming  loans, 
streamlined  the  workforce,  closed  down  domestic  and  overseas  branches,  postponed  IT 
investment,  and  refrained  from  strategically  allocating  new  management  resources.  Such 
efforts paid off. Around 2005, the nonperforming loan problem was largely cleared up. Since 
then, they have been stepping up their efforts into more forward-looking resource allocation 
such  as  recruiting  new  employees,  investing  in  new  businesses  and  re-expanding  their 
overseas sections.  
Meanwhile,  the  last  ten  years  also  witnessed  the  structure  of  Japan's  economy  and  its 
financial system facing major changes, due to globalization and IT innovation. For example, 
Japanese firms including medium sized firms have been actively expanding their business 
overseas, and the number of M&As involving Japanese firms has been on the rise. While the 
corporate sector, on the whole, has become the overfunded sector, the savings rate of the 
household sector has been on a downward trend, due to the declining birthrate and the aging 
population.  Therefore,  it  is  uncertain  whether  the  traditional  financial  intermediation  - 
collecting  funds  from  the  household  sector  and  lending  them  to  the  corporate  sector  -  will 
provide  plenty  of  profit  opportunity.  Moreover,  the  easing  of  regulations  has  allowed  non-
financial industries to enter financial businesses.  
It is good news that Japan's financial institutions are sound again and are able to once again 
implement  a  forward  looking  strategy,  and  I  commend  the  efforts  of  those  concerned. 
Nevertheless,  it  should  be  noted  that  the  circumstances  and  conditions  facing  competition 
have  changed  drastically  during  those  periods,  and  the  business  strategies  need  to  be 
refined accordingly. 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2008
2. 
Profitability of financial institutions in Japan 
Competitiveness of financial institutions 
One may ask what is the best way to gauge the ability of financial institutions to add values, 
when  the  financial  sector's  competitiveness  is  assessed  with  the  amount  of  added  value 
stemming  from  financial  transactions.  Added  value  means  creating  value  that  exceeds  the 
investment cost and it cannot be assessed simply by comparing the quantity of funds and the 
size of assets. It needs to be assessed in light of profitability. In this regard, highly profitable 
banks can be seen as those that have gained support of many customers, who are satisfied 
with the products and services as well as the banks' pricing strategy. I now go on to review 
the profitability of financial institutions in Japan and discuss how to enhance their profitability. 
The current assessment of profitability 
In fiscal 2005, both major banks and regional banks posted an all time high net profit, and 
maintained almost the same profit level in fiscal 2006 as well. The capital adequacy rate at 
the  end  of  fiscal  2006  registered  12%  for  major  banks  and  10%  for  regional  banks. 
Meanwhile, out of 12 trillion yen, the amount of the public funds injected since 1998, 9 trillion 
yen,  which  accounts  for  three  quarters  of  the  total  money  injected,  has  already  been  paid 
back.  In  sum,  profit  and  capital  levels  of  financial  institutions  have  been  recovering 
significantly in recent years.  
Such  recovery  of  profits  has  been  brought  about,  because  credit  costs  have  been  kept  at 
extremely  low  levels  since  provisions  for  loan  losses,  which  increased  drastically  in  the 
process of disposing of nonperforming loans, have become no longer necessary in light of 
improved  business  conditions  and  progress  in  corporate  revitalization.  Indeed,  net  interest 
income and income from fees and commissions have been either decreasing or showing a 
sluggish  growth  and  thus  the  core  profitability  in  the  banking  sector  has  not  necessarily 
improved.  
The  Bank  of  Japan  releases  the  Financial  System  Report  biannually,  presenting  a 
comprehensive  analysis  of  Japan's  financial  system.  The  latest  edition  released  in 
September this year analyzed the long-term profitability of the overall banking sector (i.e. the 
major, the regional and the shinkin banks) since the early 1980s, and the following results 
came  up.  First,  returns  on  assets  (ROAs)  were  at  around  0.5%  even  if  the  periods  were 
excluded when ROAs continued to register below zero, due to large losses incurred by the 
disposal  of  nonperforming  loans.  Looking  at  the  composition  of  ROAs,  the  net  interest 
income  rate  and  the  general  and  administrative  expense  rate  have  been  stable  at  around 
1.3% and 1.0% respectively. That means that net asset profitability was only around 0.3%, 
and it could only remain positive if the credit cost was kept exceptionally low, for example, 
due to the reversals of allowances for loan losses. There is a risk that asset profitability will 
become  negative,  should  the  allowances  for  loan  losses  return  to  normal  and  credit  costs 
rise.  
The low profitability of Japan's banking sector is highlighted, compared with other countries. 
For example, the rate of banking assets to nominal GDP in Japan is 150%, while it is only 
50% in the United States. By contrast, the ROA of the U.S. banking sector has been at about 
1.5% on average since the early 1980s, reaching nearly 2.0% in recent years, whereas it has 
been at around 0.5% in Japan, even if the years with negative ROAs are excluded from the 
sample.  In  terms  of  general  and  administrative  expenses,  Japan's  banking  sector  has  a 
considerable advantage, but the narrow interest margins from assets as well as the low non 
interest income ratio have been pushing down the ROAs of Japan's banking sector. In sum, 
while financial institutions in Japan hold more assets than its U.S. counterparts, their assets 
have lower added values. Moreover, contributions from profitable products and services that 
do not rely on the volume of assets remain meager. 
BIS Review 14/2008 
 3
Factors behind the low profitability 
Let us now discuss why the profitability of Japan's financial sector remains low.  
First, as a business model, many financial institutions still rely heavily on traditional deposit 
taking and lending, which can be provided by any financial institution, as a source of profits. 
In general, it is difficult to sharpen the competitive edge of those products unless their pricing 
is  constantly  being  reviewed.  Moreover,  while  Japanese  firms,  having  learned  the  lessons 
from the bursting of the bubble economy, have become less inclined to borrow even in the 
midst  of  favorable  business  conditions,  bank  loans  still  account  for  more  than  50%  of  the 
total assets of Japan's financial institutions. With sluggish demand for loans, any attempt to 
increase its volume will inevitably lead to narrower profit margins.  
It is interesting to note that there is a clear difference between Japan and the United States 
when  the  number  of  financial  institutions  from  which  small  and  medium  sized  enterprises 
(SMEs) borrow funds are compared. In the United States, 80% of SMEs borrow funds from 
only one financial institution, whereas in Japan a majority of SMEs borrow from more than 
three financial institutions. That illustrates how severe competition is in Japan's loan market 
and  it  implies  that  Japan's  financial  institutions  are  yet  to  build  mutual  trust  between  them 
and their customers by offering unique customer-oriented financial services.  
Second,  in  terms  of  governance,  it  appears  that  most  stakeholders,  shareholders  in 
particular,  have  been  tolerant  of  the  low  profitability  that  has  continued  for  a  long  time  in 
Japan's banking sector. Indeed, cross-shareholdings between financial institutions and firms 
used  to  be  prominent.  Under  such  relationship,  firms  acted  both  as  a  shareholder  and  a 
valued customer for banks. Hence, corporate governance, in its pursuit of higher profitability, 
did not function well: on the one hand firms called for improvement in shareholders' value; on 
the  other  hand  they  pursued  favorable  terms  and  conditions  on  loans.  Recently,  cross-
shareholdings  have  dissipated  and  shareholdings  by  foreigners  and  investment  funds,  to 
whom maximizing shareholders' value is a priority, have been on an increasing trend. And 
legislative  efforts  to  strengthen  internal  control  are  being  taken.  Nevertheless,  looking  at 
Japan's financial sector as a whole, initiatives that are intended to improve banks' profitability 
through stronger governance by shareholders and market participants as well as corporate 
governance within the bank still appear to be limited. 
Problems regarding prolonged low profitability 
I  know  other  views,  too.  One  might  say  that  a  narrow  interest  margin  is  a  result  of  the 
reimbursement  of  profits  to  customers  and  many  stakeholders  are  still  tolerant  of  the  low 
profitability. That view suggests that even if the profitability of financial institutions remains 
low, it may not pose a problem for the time being, and moreover that the low profitability of 
financial institutions may support Japan's economy through low borrowing costs. However, 
should  the  low  profitability  of  Japan's  overall  financial  institutions  continue,  it  could  raise 
concern in the following two respects.  
First, the future vitality of Japan's economy remains concern. The low profitability holds true 
not  only  for  the  financial  institutions  but  also  for  many  other  firms  in  Japan.  Currently, 
however,  it  is  becoming  increasingly  difficult  for  businesses  that  only  provide  low  value-
added  products  and  services  to  survive  in  the  global  economy.  For  a  country's  economic 
development,  the  sectors  with  high  productivity  and  potential  for  growth  need  to  play  an 
active  role.  And  it  is  essential  that  risk  money  is  channeled  to  such  sectors  without 
hindrance, and for that purpose, the limited resources on the part of financial intermediaries 
should  be  allocated  efficiently  and  concentrated  in  the  areas  with  highly  added  value. 
Therefore,  if  financial  institutions  do  not  reinforce  the  provision  of  higher  value-added 
financial  services  and  support  firms  exploring  new  business  opportunities,  the  economy's 
future  may  look  grim.  Of  course,  while  active  overseas  financial  institutions  could  play  a 
complementary  role  in  reinforcing  the  intermediary  function,  they  might  not  be  able  to 
4 
 BIS Review 14/2008
participate  aggressively  in  areas  such  as  SME  financing  where  the  extent  of  disclosure  is 
relatively limited.  
Second, securing Japan's financial stability over a longer period also is an issue. Periodical 
earnings  are  the  fundamental  source  of  strengthening  a  bank's  capital  base.  Raising 
additional  funds  from  the  capital  market  is,  of  course,  an  option,  but  such  funding  can  be 
done  only  if  the  profitability  and  the  potential  of  the  business  are  attractive  to  investors. 
Therefore,  should  the  low  profitability  continue,  there  may  not  be  sufficient  capital  in  the 
medium  to  the  long  term  to  counter  an  increase  in  credit  costs  in  case  of  an  economic 
downturn, and accordingly the stability of the financial system may be put in jeopardy. 
Measures to enhance the profitability of financial institutions 
3. 
Enhancing the profitability of financial institutions is particularly important in ensuring financial 
system  stability  and  economic  growth.  Next,  I  discuss  the  measures  towards  enhancing 
profitability. 
Objective assessment of risk and return balances 
First,  financial  institutions  should  further  improve  the  methods  of  assessing  risk-return 
balances. In order to improve profitability, they must first assess the nature and the size of 
the risks inherent in financial products and services as well as the risks with the related asset 
holdings  and  financial  transactions.  Without  the  accurate  assessment  of  its  risk-return 
balances, specific action plans that contribute to enhancing profitability cannot be taken.  
It has been pointed out that investment banking and overseas business activities need to be 
reinforced at major banks, which currently have a hard time improving profitability via their 
domestic commercial banking business. Looking at the risk taking behavior of major banks 
from the perspective of integrated risk management, both credit risk and the risks associated 
with  long-term  stockholdings  have  increased.  As  such,  overall  risks  including  interest  rate 
risk and operational risk are already reaching an amount equivalent to their core capital. That 
is,  most  of  the  core  capital  has  already  been  used  to  cover  the  risks  associated  with  the 
current  financial  products  and  services.  Therefore,  be  it  investment  banking  or  overseas 
business  activities,  banks  need  to  scrape  together  capital  by  assessing  the  current 
operations' risk-return balances and scale down those with low risk-return balances in order 
to  explore  new  risk  taking  opportunities  through  new  business  operations  with  a  higher 
additional  value.  Efforts  are  being  made  among  major  banks  where  the  so-called  "credit 
portfolio  management"  is  used  to  reduce  concentrated  credit  exposure,  enhancing  the 
efficiency of loan portfolios. Further efforts on this front to improve returns are called for.  
Regional banks allegedly have a mission to provide long-term support to regional customers' 
economic  activity.  For  example,  one  might  say  that  in  dealing  with  a  regional  customer,  a 
long term business relationship is more important than short term profits and the bank has to 
give support to the firm which might face a temporary downturn of its business. If regional 
banks are to take the risks associated with long term commitment to their respective regions, 
it is essential that they have the capability to assess such risks. For example, if the duration 
of loans to a local firm has become long, then it is necessary to quantify the risk by taking 
account  of  the  period  of  loans  extended.  Moreover,  if  part  of  the  loan  is  constantly  rolled 
over, its associated risk should be treated in line with the risk of equity investments. Once the 
risks  associated  with  regional  commitment  are  assessed,  there  is  a  possibility  that  the 
amount  of  risks 
to  secure 
corresponding capital. Many regional banks have already built up capital well exceeding the 
amount  of  risks  they  have  calculated.  That  may  suggest  that  those  banks  have  implicitly 
prepared  for  the  risks  associated  with  regional  commitment.  However,  if  the  risks  remain 
vague,  the  improvement  in  returns  cannot  be  hoped  for.  Clear  recognition  of  the  risks 
associated with regional commitment would in  turn allow regional banks to take measures 
with  respect  to  returns.  For  example,  to  the  firms  with  poor  business  performance,  early 
increases.  Under  such  circumstances, 
is  necessary 
it 
BIS Review 14/2008 
 5
support  for  business  revitalization  can  be  made,  which  could  improve  their  cash  flow  and 
lead to higher net interest income for regional banks. For loans that have become "pseudo-
capital",  regional  banks  can  act  as  an  intermediary  to  invite  external  risk  money  and  thus 
earn fee income. 
Selection and concentration of business operations 
Second,  financial  institutions  should  check  whether  the  services  they  provide  have  a 
comparative  advantage  and  need  to  limit  the  extent  and  to  adjust  the  method  of  resource 
allocation accordingly. As I explained earlier, in the case of financial products and services 
that  are  commonly  provided  by  many  entities,  it  is  difficult  for  the  entities  to  pull  out  from 
unprofitable  price  competition.  The  comparative  advantage  of  each  financial  product  and 
service should be assessed, based on the non-price factors such as the ability for banks to 
reinforce  brand  potential,  to  offer  solutions  to  customers,  to  collect  non-public  information, 
and to judge the growth potential of each product line. It is also necessary to check whether 
the combination of prices and the quality of financial services could be refined and moreover 
to  address  the  most  appropriate  channel  for  providing  such  services.  Having  done  that, 
financial  institutions  need  to  draw  the  line  between  the  operations  where  more  resources 
should  be  allocated  and  those  that  should  be  scaled  down  or  should  be  done  with  higher 
efficiency.  They  then  need  to  come  up  with  a  specific  action  plan  to  carry  out  such 
management decisions.  
It  is  not  easy  to  specify  the  business  areas  that  have  a  big  comparative  advantage  since 
different  financial  institutions  face  different  business  environments  and  have  different 
characteristics.  In  general,  however,  it  is  effective  to  explore  the  possibility  of  the  added 
value by focusing on the nature of management resources.  
For major banks, for example, comparative advantages may arguably lie in a wide branch 
network,  a  large  network  of  payment  and  settlement  systems,  a  solid  customer  base 
centering on large firms, the diversity of affiliate companies and personnel, the strength to 
build large portfolios with diversified risks, and its business strength in the Asian region. In 
response  to  various  needs  such  as  overseas  business  activities  of  firms  including  M&A, 
demand  for  new  risk  hedge  measures,  the  utilization  of  intellectual  property,  and  product 
development according to various life stages of the household sector, each bank should seek 
the  areas  of  great  advantage.  Providing  adequate  products  and  solutions  to  satisfy  such 
needs, banks will secure profits for themselves as well. Also banks are expected to bridge 
the  gap  between  the  investment  needs  of  domestic  investors  and  the  growth  challenges 
faced by Asian firms. There is, however, a limit to banks' capital, and in conducting overseas 
operations, market participants will scrutinize credit ratings and ROEs. Banks therefore need 
to further streamline the areas that do not have a comparative advantage while strengthening 
those with greater advantages. Part of the risks should be taken by banks themselves but it 
is also important to accommodate various types of domestic and overseas risk money.  
As for regional banks, most of the customers are small and medium sized firms. Lending to 
SMEs which provide little information and have limited capability to pledge collateral would 
be a difficult business task for banks. It is hard to assess the creditworthiness and potential 
of  SMEs  through  financial  disclosures  alone,  and  thus  the  ability  to  obtain  unpublicized 
information -- such as firms' actual business conditions and the qualities of the managements 
-- is all the more important. In that respect, regional financial institutions have an advantage 
in  that  they  could  make  daily  and  close  contact  with  regional  customers.  For  example, 
information  on  the  blueprint  of  new  businesses  top  executives  draw  up,  concern  over 
financial and accounting matters, successor related issues, can be obtained through a close 
liaison while having acute awareness of a business opportunity. Such information might lead 
to increased profitability of the regional financial institutions if they could make a proposal to 
improve such firms' cash flow with whatever special skills they have.  
6 
 BIS Review 14/2008
It  is  also  important  to  share,  and  not  to  store  away,  such  "live"  information  within  the 
organization  and  to  construct  a  database  that  enables  concerned  parties  to  use  the 
information from various perspectives. It requires certain costs to maintain a framework that 
collects  non-disclosed  information  based  on  close  contact  with  customers  and  therefore, 
measures to further enhance the efficiency need to be taken, such as the use of outsourcing, 
with respect to the number and the distribution method of products and services with a small 
competitive advantage. 
Merits and pitfalls of mergers and consolidations 
So  far,  I  have  described  that  general  financial  services  offered  by  a  number  of  financial 
institutions  are  difficult  to  differentiate  and  that  it  does  not  necessarily  lead  to  enhanced 
profitability. One might argue that the profitability of such businesses could be enhanced by 
mergers  and  consolidations  of  financial  institutions.  Economic  theory  shows  that  the  scale 
economy can take place and indeed some empirical analysis confirms that the efficiency of 
general  and  administrative  expenses  could  be  improved,  while  another  analysis  suggests 
that  a  mere  increase  in  asset  size  would  push  down  lending  rates,  offsetting  the 
improvement in general and administrative expenses.  
Since  many  analyses  on  mergers  and  integrations  cover  the  period  when  financial 
institutions struggled with the non performing loan problem, the picture may turn out to be 
different  when  financial  institutions  engage  in  M&A  activity  as  part  of  a  forward-looking 
business  strategy.  As  I  mentioned  in  the  beginning,  various  types  of  M&As  are  currently 
taking place in the non-financial industries. Japan's financial industry will naturally engage in 
M&A  activities  in  their  pursuit  of  raising  their  corporate  value.  For  example,  acquiring 
business  operations  that  bring  a  greater  synergy  with  the  current  operations,  or  selling 
business operations with a small competitive advantage are a few means of enhancing their 
corporate  value.  With  respect  to  cross-border  M&As,  the  recent  revision  of  Japanese 
corporate  law  enabled  overseas  firms  to  conduct  a  forward  triangular  merger  through  the 
exchange of shares. In fact, the first case took place in the financial industry, where a large 
U.S.  banking  group  acquired  a  major  securities  firm  in  Japan.  In  summary,  while  mergers 
and  integrations  that  simply  increase  the  asset  size  do  not  necessarily  lead  to  enhanced 
profitability,  M&As  could  be  an  effective  tool  for  improving  profitability  if  they  are  used  to 
strengthen and streamline business operations that have a comparative advantage. 
Measures for legal and accounting infrastructure 
So  far  I  have  outlined  the  measures  taken  and  challenges  faced  by  financial  institutions 
themselves. Improvement in its infrastructure is also imperative in enhancing the profitability 
and  competitiveness  of  Japan's  financial  system.  Now  I  mention  a  few  issues  that  require 
improvement with respect to legal and accounting infrastructure.  
First, the transparency and reliability of financial accounting information should be enhanced. 
In  order  for  financial  institutions  and  investors  alike  to  adequately  assess  the  risks  when 
extending  credit  or  making  an  investment  decision,  further  disclosure  of  firms'  financial 
information  is  necessary.  In  that  respect,  the  Financial  Instruments  and  Exchange  Law 
enacted in September 2007 introduced mandatory quarterly releases of financial information 
to listed companies. And to secure the reliability of the released information, the law obliges 
companies to submit certification of an annual report and an internal control report. Still for 
SMEs  the  scope  of  financial  statements  subject  to  external  auditing  is  relatively  limited  in 
Japan,  compared  with  other  countries  and  further  improvement  in  raising  the  reliability  of 
disclosed information is called for.  
Second, the reform of Japan's financial system should enable financial institutions to provide 
flexible  financial  services  in  response  to  diversified  needs  of  the  corporate  and  household 
sectors.  More  specifically,  consideration  should  be  given  to  easing  the  firewall  regulations 
between banking and securities business, which are somewhat stricter than other developed 
BIS Review 14/2008 
 7
countries. From the financial institutions' perspective, that has an effect of facilitating more 
synergy  within  a  financial  group.  The  major  premise  behind  such  regulation  easing  is  to 
ensure that prevention rules of unfair transactions such as prohibition of insider trading and 
rules to protect retail investors be firmly put in place.  
Third,  the  reform  of  the  public  financial  sector  should  be  carried  out  without  delay.  Japan 
Post has already begun its business and preparations for integrating public sector financial 
institutions  are  currently  underway.  Financial  institutions  due  to  be  privatized  are  to  build 
robust risk management and operational systems and are expected to take part in a sound 
and  fair  competition  with  other  private  financial  institutions.  As  for  government  sponsored 
financial institutions fulfilling government policy objectives, if the areas of overlap with private 
entities  are  large,  it  may  prevent  private  financial  institutions  from  adjusting  risk-return 
balances. The operations of public institutions should be based on the principle that they are 
complementary to the private sector. 
Consideration from overall economy 
So  far,  I  have  talked  about  the  measures  taken  by  financial  institutions  and  the  reform 
strategy  of  the  financial  system  towards  enhancing  the  profitability  of  financial  institutions. 
However,  low  profitability  relative  to  asset  size  and  capital  is  also  applicable  to  many 
Japanese  firms  with  the  exception  of  large  firms  facing  severe  competition  in  the  global 
market.  In  terms  of  risk  taking  towards  new  businesses,  the  amount  of  cash  and  deposit 
against the total asset outstanding in Japan's manufacturing industry is two times as high as 
that of the U.S. counterpart. That may suggest that Japanese companies are more cautious 
about  taking  new  business  risks.  Put  it  another  way,  if  companies  hold  excess  liquidity  at 
hand  against  future  investment  opportunities,  that  may  suggest  that  financial  services 
intending to provide funding in a flexible manner are not functioning well.  
For the future of Japan's economy, it is essential that both the ability of firms to take new 
risks  in  creating  higher  value-added  products  and  the  capacity  of  financial  institutions  to 
provide  risk  money  and  business  solutions  should  develop  hand  in  hand  together. 
Fortunately, Japan has the manufacturing industry with strong international competitiveness 
and moreover it has the world's largest accumulation of financial assets. The IT infrastructure 
such as high-speed telecommunications wire networks is as much developed as in Europe 
and the United States. It is strongly hoped that both the industrial sector and the financial 
sector, taking advantage of their comparative superiority both in stock and flow measures, 
create further added values through technology and knowledge in order to vitalize Japan's 
economy. 
Closing remarks 
4. 
In  closing,  let  me  give  a  few  remarks  on  the  recent  turbulence  in  global  financial  markets 
triggered by the subprime mortgage problems.  
As  the  subprime  mortgage  problems  have  worsened  and  spread  more  widely  in  financial 
markets  abroad,  the  impact  on  Japan's  financial  institutions  has  been felt  at  a  pace  faster 
than  expected.  For  instance,  some  financial  institutions  registered  losses  as  a  result  of  a 
decline  in  the  market  value  of  investment  products,  and  others  posted  losses  from 
revaluation  on  the  unsold  products  arranged  as  part  of  their  securitization  businesses 
overseas. However, since Japan's financial institutions' exposure to the U.S. credit markets is 
relatively low, it appears that so far each financial institution/group has been able to absorb 
the losses within its annual earnings or its capital base. While further developments in the 
U.S. and European financial markets need to be monitored closely, it seems unlikely that this 
particular problem will pose a significant threat to the stability of Japan's financial system.  
8 
 BIS Review 14/2008
Based  on  the  experience  pertaining  to  the  subprime  mortgage  problems,  several  lessons 
could be drawn for the management of financial institutions and the functioning of financial 
markets. And two lessons seem particularly noteworthy.  
The first lesson stems from the difficulty of both transferring and disconnecting the risks from 
financial  institutions.  Subprime  mortgage  loans  are,  indeed,  riskier  than  normal  housing 
loans,  and  most  of  the  risk  was  believed  to  be  transferred  from  financial  institutions  to 
investors via securitization. The outbreak of the subprime mortgage problem made it clear 
that risks in fact manifested themselves among financial institutions in a variety of forms.  
As  it  became  increasingly  difficult  for  financial  institutions  to  resell  securitized  products  to 
investors,  they  were  forced  to  carry  an  unexpected  inventory  of  such  products.  When  the 
market  liquidity  dried  up,  they  had  to  post  a  vast  amount  of  losses  as  well  as  valuation 
losses. Since investment funds with a large amount of securitized product investments found 
it difficult to raise short term funds from the market, some financial institutions --whether they 
set commitment lines or not-- provided a substantial amount of liquidity.  
Those incidents indicate that in an era of highly distributed risks and well diversified financial 
intermediation, financial institutions are involved in risk intermediation in various forms and 
they sometimes have to face unexpected risks once a large shock hits the market.  
Based  on  that  experience,  financial  institutions  and  those  engaged  in  securitization 
businesses  need  to  improve  risk  management  practices,  such  as  revising  the  valuation 
model of securitized products and developing an evaluation model of market liquidity risk. In 
addition,  it  seems  that  the  "originate  and  distribute"  type  of  business  model  still  requires 
further improvement.  
Second, it is important to enhance transparency when developing new financial technologies 
and products. In particular, when a great financial shock occurs, concern spreads over the 
entire market, and it is likely to provoke an excessive response. Ten years ago, during the 
Asian  currency  crisis,  criticism  was  leveled  at  the  opaqueness  of  hedge  funds  in  terms  of 
their investment strategy and scale. As for the current subprime mortgage problem, concern 
over the difficulty in identifying the location of risks has risen since they have been dispersed 
worldwide through securitization. All in all, it should be noted that risk transfer transactions 
such as securitization and credit derivatives have indeed the function to stabilize the financial 
system through diversifying risks. 
Various  innovative  activities  including  the  development  of  highly  sophisticated  financial 
technology should never be hindered, and the fruits of such activities should be used for the 
purpose of stabilizing and developing the global economy. Toward that end, it is of utmost 
importance that financial institutions and relevant parties that endeavor to build a new market 
using the state-of-the-art technology revise the transaction rules and practices and disclose 
information on a voluntary basis. With respect to regulation and supervision, the framework 
needs  to  be  designed  in  view  of  encouraging  private  financial  institutions  to  create  a  new 
added value and accordingly to promote sophisticated risk management.  
In  any  case,  the  issue  faced  by  Japan's  financial  system  remains  to  be  the  over-
concentration of risks in the banking sector and it is still being addressed. The low profitability 
of the banking sector may be a reflection of such a problem, and it is important for Japan's 
financial  institutions  to  further  hone  risk  management  skills  and  enhance  the  value-added 
financial  services  and  profitability.  And  while  it  is  an  ironclad  rule  "not  to  invest  in  the 
products with obscure riskiness", it is necessary to improve the ability to assess the complex 
nature  of  risks  and  to  make  efforts  to  provide  higher  value-added  financial  services.  Such 
prudence and continued efforts towards innovation will contribute to maintaining the stability 
of Japan's financial system and to enhancing its competitiveness.  
The Bank of Japan will continue to support such efforts to enhance risk management and to 
create additional values of financial services through on-site examination, off-site monitoring 
and seminar activities. Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 14/2008 
 9
