Rakesh Mohan: The growth record of the Indian economy, 1950-2008 – a 
story of sustained savings and investment 
Keynote address by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Conference “Growth and Macroeconomic Issues and Challenges in India”, organised by 
the Institute of Economic Growth, New Delhi, 14 February 2008. 
Assistance  of  Michael  Patra,  Janak  Raj,  Dhritidyuti  Bose,  Binod  B.  Bhoi  and  Muneesh  Kapur  in  preparing  the 
speech is gratefully acknowledged. 
 I  deem  it  a  real  privilege  to  visit  the  Institute  of  Economic  Growth  to  deliver  the  keynote 
address at this prestigious conference on growth and macroeconomic issues and challenges 
in India. I am particularly happy that this Conference is being organised by the Institute as a 
part of its Golden Jubilee celebrations. The Institute has established a long and creditable 
track record of contributing to economic research consistently over its 50 years history. Its 
research has greatly enriched the debate on the conduct and formulation of economic policy 
over the years.  
The theme selected for the conference is befitting in the present context as we grapple with 
issues  and  challenges  for  sustaining  the  elevated  growth  momentum  that  we  have  now 
achieved.  This  has  assumed  added  contemporary  significance  in  the  wake  of  expected 
moderation  in  global  growth  due  to  a  projected  slowdown  in  the  US  and  some  other 
advanced  economies.  Whereas  emerging  markets,  including  India  have  so  far  not  been 
greatly  affected  by  the  financial  turbulence  in  advanced  economies,  the  increasing  global 
uncertainties  need  to  be  watched  and  guarded  against  appropriately.  Although  our  growth 
process  continues  to  be  dominated  by  domestic  factors,  we  need  to  recognise  some 
changing global patterns, which could have implications for the macroeconomic prospects of 
the  Indian  economy.  Accordingly,  in  my  address,  I  would  first  review  the  overall 
macroeconomic performance in India since independence, then draw likely prospects for the 
coming  five  years  and  finally  conclude  with  some  issues  that  need  to  be  addressed  for 
sustaining the growth of the Indian economy. 
I.  
A review of the Indian growth process  
Growth acceleration over the decades 
It is widely believed that the Indian economy witnessed near stagnation in real GDP growth 
till  the  late  1970s.  A  closer  review  of  the  performance  of  the  Indian  economy,  however, 
suggests a continuing increase in real GDP growth over each decade since Independence, 
interspersed  with  an  interregnum  during  the  1970s  (Table  1).  Interestingly,  growth  of 
manufacturing production, in terms of decadal averages, was roughly constant at around 5.6-
5.9 per cent in the first five decades after Independence, except for the 1970s. There are two 
other  features  of  our  growth  history  that  are  notable.  First,  agricultural  growth  has  been 
subject to large variation over the decades. The 1970s interregnum is particularly marked by 
the severe deceleration in agricultural growth, followed by a marked recovery in the 1980s, 
and a slowdown thereafter. Second, until the 1990s, little note had been taken of growth in 
the  services  sector.  A  glance  at  the  growth  record  suggests  that  it  is  the  continuing  and 
consistent acceleration in growth in services over the decades, that had earlier been ignored, 
that  really  accounts  for  the  continuous  acceleration  in  overall  GDP  growth,  once  again, 
except for the 1970s interregnum. There is nothing particularly special about service sector 
growth over the last decade. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 1
The  slowdown  of  growth  witnessed  during  the  1970s  was  reversed  during  the  1980s;  the 
pick-up benefited from the initiation of some reform measures aimed at increasing domestic 
competitiveness. Since the early 1990s, growth impulses appeared to have gathered further 
momentum in the aftermath of comprehensive reforms encompassing the various sectors of 
the economy. There was some loss of the growth momentum in the latter half of the 1990s 
which  coincided  with  the  onset  of  the  East  Asian  financial  crisis,  setbacks  to  the  fiscal 
correction process, quality of fiscal adjustment, slowdown in agriculture growth affected by 
lower than normal monsoon years, and some slackening in the pace of structural reforms. 
The slowdown could also be attributed to the excessive enthusiasm and optimism in regard 
to  investment  plans  in  domestic  industry  following  deregulation,  which  was  followed  by 
significant problems experienced in viability and competitiveness. Monetary tightening in the 
face of inflationary pressures is also believed by some to have contributed to the slowdown 
over this period.  
 
Since  2003-04,  there  has  been  a  distinct  strengthening  of  the  growth  momentum. 
Restructuring  measures  by  domestic  industry,  overall  reduction  in  domestic  interest  rates, 
both  nominal  and  real,  improved  corporate  profitability,  benign  investment  climate  amidst 
strong  global  demand  and  commitment  rules-based  fiscal  policy  have  led  to  the  real  GDP 
growth  averaging  close  to  9  per  cent  per  annum  over  the  4-year  period  ended  2006-07; 
growth in the last two years has averaged 9.5 per cent per annum.  
Consistent growth in savings and investment 
In analysing the growth record of the Indian economy, various scholarly attempts1 have been 
made to identify the turning point from the "traditional" low growth to the modern high growth 
since  the  1980s.  The  simple  ordering  of  the  data  presented  here  provides  a  somewhat 
different picture of continued slow acceleration in growth except for the 1970s decade. What 
                                                 
1   See, for instance, DeLong (2003), Panagariya (2004), Rodrik and Subramanian (2004), and Virmani (2004). 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2008
can explain this continued acceleration? The secular uptrend in domestic growth is clearly 
associated with the consistent trends of increasing domestic savings and investment over the 
decades. Gross domestic savings have increased continuously from an average of 9.6 per 
cent  of  GDP  during  the  1950s  to  almost  35  per  cent  of  GDP  at  present;  over  the  same 
period, the domestic investment rate has also increased continuously from 10.8 per cent in 
the 1950s to close to 36 per cent by 2006-07. A very significant feature of these trends in 
savings  and  investment  rates  is  that  Indian  economic  growth  has  been  financed 
predominantly by domestic savings. The recourse to foreign savings – equivalently, current 
account deficit – has been rather modest in the Indian growth process. We may also note 
that  the  two  decades,  1960s  and  1980s,  when  the  current  account  deficit  increased 
marginally towards 2 per cent of GDP, were followed by significant balance of payments and 
economic crisis.  
The long-term upward trends in savings and investment have, however, been interspersed 
with  phases  of  stagnation.  In  particular,  during  the  1980s,  the  inability  of  the  Government 
revenues  to  keep  pace  with  the  growing  expenditure  resulted  in  widening  of  the  overall 
resource gap. Accordingly, the public sector saving-investment gap, which averaged (-) 3.7 
per cent of GDP during the period 1950-51 to 1979-80, widened sharply during the 1980s 
culminating in a high of (-) 8.2 per cent of GDP in 1990-91. The resultant higher borrowing 
requirements  of  the  public  sector  led  the  Government  to  tap  financial  surpluses  of  the 
household sector through enhanced statutory pre-emptions from financial intermediaries at 
below  market  clearing  interest  rates.  As  fiscal  deficits  widened  beginning  in  the  1970s, 
periodic increases in the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) were resorted to to finance the rising 
fiscal gap, indicative of the financial repression regime in place. The SLR was raised from 20 
per cent in the early 1950s to 25 per cent by 1964, and it remained at this level for the rest of 
the  decade.  Beginning  in  the  1970s,  the  SLR  came  to  be  used  more  actively  and  it  was 
raised in phases reaching 34 per cent by the late 1970s. The process continued during the 
1980s as fiscal deficits expanded further, and the SLR reached a high of 38.5 per cent of net 
demand and time liabilities (NDTL) of the banking system in September 1990.  
The growing fiscal imbalances of the 1980s spilled over to the external sector and were also 
reflected in inflationary pressures. Along with a repressive and weakening financial system, 
this  rendered  the  growth  process  of  the  1980s  increasingly  unsustainable.  The  external 
imbalances  were  reflected  in  a  large  and  unsustainable  current  account  deficit,  which 
reached 3.2 per cent of GDP in 1990-91. As the financing of such a large current account 
deficit  through  normal  sources  of  finance  became  increasingly  difficult,  it  resulted  in  an 
unprecedented external payments crisis in 1991 with the foreign currency assets dwindling to 
less than US $ 1 billion. The financing problem was aggravated by the fact that the deficit 
was  largely financed  by  debt  flows up  to  the late  1980s,  reflecting the policies  of  the  time 
which preferred debt flows to equity flows. Indeed, equity flows were almost negligible till the 
early 1990s. Moreover, a significant part of the debt flows during the late 1980s was of short-
term nature in the form of bankers’ acceptances; such flows could not be renewed easily in 
view of the loss of confidence following the balance of payments crisis.  
Growing fiscal imbalance and correction 
With the increase in the SLR being unable to meet fully the fiscal requirements, the burden of 
financing the Government had also to be borne by the Reserve Bank which led to high levels 
of monetized deficit. As Reserve Bank financing is inflationary beyond a limit, the increase in 
the Reserve Bank support to the Central Government was accompanied by an increase in 
cash reserve requirements (CRR). The CRR was raised from 6.0 per cent of NDTL in 1979 
to its peak of 15.0 per cent by 1992 (in fact, 25 per cent if incremental reserve requirements 
are also taken into account). However, even this order of increase in the CRR to impound 
liquidity was insufficient and broad money growth continued to remain high and spilled over 
to inflation. The high order of statutory preemptions in the forms of SLR and CRR along with 
the  direction  of  credit  to  priority  sectors  at  concessional  interest  rates  resulted  in  higher 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 3
the  Fifth  Pay  Commissions’  award.  Furthermore, 
lending rates for the non-concessional commercial sectors and thereby crowded out credit to 
the private sector.  
As  we  all  know,  in  response  to  the  balance  of  payments  crisis,  a  programme  of 
macroeconomic stabilisation and structural adjustment was put in place. Fiscal consolidation 
constituted  a  major  plank  of  the  policy  response  to  the  macroeconomic  crisis;  however, 
public sector savings continued to deteriorate during the 1990s, and even turned  negative 
over the 5-year period 1998-2003 owing to sharp deterioration in savings of the Government 
administration.  
The progress on fiscal correction was mixed during the 1990s, both at the Central and State 
levels (Chart 1 and Tables 2-3). While there was some reduction in the Centre’s fiscal deficits 
upto  1996-97,  the  process  was  reversed  over  the  next  few  years  under  the  impact  of  the 
industrial  slowdown  and 
fiscal 
consolidation,  which  was  envisaged  to  be  achieved  through  revenue  enhancement  and 
curtailment  in  current  expenditure  growth,  was,  however,  brought  about  instead  through 
compression of capital expenditures from 5.6 per cent of GDP in 1990-91 to 3.1 per cent in 
1996-97,  with  consequential  effects  on  growth  and  infrastructure  constraints  in  ensuing 
years.  
A major drag on public finances was the decline in the gross tax-GDP ratio of the Central 
Government from 10.3 per cent in 1991-92 to 9.4 per cent in 1996-97 and further to 8.2 per 
cent in 2001-02. The reduction in tax-GDP ratio over this phase could, inter alia, be attributed 
to the reduction in tax rates. As a part of the reform of the taxation system, indirect taxes – 
excise duties as well as customs duties – were cut substantially from their existing very high 
levels and this had an adverse impact on indirect tax collections. The rationalisation of the 
direct tax structure also did not lead to any positive impact on revenue collections during this 
phase. The compliance response to lower tax rates presumably took some time; and lower 
economic growth also contributed to the lack of growth in direct taxes over this period. It is 
only in the recent years that we have witnessed the beneficial impact of the rationalisation of 
the direct tax structure on the revenues.  
The process of fiscal correction could also not be sustained due to the pressures from the 
Fifth  Pay  Commission  award.  As  a  result,  by  the  year  2001-02,  all  the  major  fiscal 
parameters, viz., revenue deficit, fiscal deficit and public debt rose to levels higher than those 
prevalent  at  the  beginning  of  the  reform  process.  Capital  outlays  continued  to  bear  the 
burden  of  fiscal  adjustment,  with  the  ratio  of  capital  outlays  to  GDP  reaching  their  lowest 
levels during the period 1997-98 to 2002-03, both at the Central and State levels. Reflecting 
the worsening of the fiscal situation, the public sector savings rate deteriorated in the second 
half of the 1990s, culminating into unprecedented dissavings during the period 1998-99 to 
2002-03. This also pulled down the aggregate saving and investment rates in the economy. 
Other  major  components  of  domestic  savings  –  the  household  financial  savings  rate  (at 
around 10 per cent) and the private corporate sector savings rate (around 4 per cent) – also 
stagnated during this period at the levels reached during the mid-1990s. Consequently, the 
investment rate also came down from the peak of about 26 per cent in 1995-96 to around 23 
per cent in 2001-02. Concomitantly, the growth process suffered a setback with the real GDP 
growth decelerating to 3.8 per cent by 2002-03.  
4 
 BIS Review 18/2008
   5
BIS Review 18/2008 
  Public sector savings 
In view of the deterioration in fiscal deficits over the period 1997-98 to 2002-03 and rising 
public debt, and its adverse impact on public investment and growth, a renewed emphasis 
was laid on improving the health of public finances on a durable basis. In order to achieve 
this objective, fiscal consolidation has been guided by the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget 
Management (FRBM) Act, 2003 at the Centre and similar fiscal responsibility legislations at 
the  State-levels.  Since  2002-03,  significant  gains  have  been  witnessed  in  the  fiscal 
consolidation  process,  both  at  the  Centre  and  the  States,  partly  as  a  result  of  the 
implementation of the rule-based fiscal policies at the Centre and the States.  
A major factor contributing to the durability of the fiscal consolidation process underway in 
India  in  recent  years  has  been  the  buoyancy  in  the  revenues  accompanied  by  some 
reprioritisation of expenditure with a focus on outcomes, unlike the expenditure compression 
strategy in most other countries as also the experience in India in the 1990s. The revenue 
augmenting  strategy  encompassed  moderating  the  tax  rates  and  broadening  the  tax  base 
through  expansion  in  the  scope  of  taxes,  specifically  service  tax,  removal  of  exemptions, 
some improvement in tax administration with a focus on arrears recoveries. Reflecting these 
measures, the tax-GDP ratio of the Centre has steadily risen from 8.8 per cent in 2002-03 to 
11.3 per cent in 2006-07(RE) and 11.8 per cent in 2007-08 (BE). The entire increase in tax 
revenues was mainly on account of the buoyancy in direct taxes.  
On  the  expenditure  front,  while  the  total  expenditure  of  the  Centre  declined  from  16.8  per 
cent of GDP in 2002-03 to 14.1 per cent in 2006-07 (RE), the capital outlay rose from 1.2 per 
cent  to  1.6  per  cent  of  GDP.  The  movement  in  key  deficit  indicators  reflects  the  progress 
made so far in fiscal consolidation. Fiscal deficit of the Centre and the States taken together 
has declined from 9.2 per cent of GDP in 2002-03 to 6.4 per cent in 2006-07 led by reduction 
in  revenue  deficit  from  6.7  per  cent  of  GDP  to  2.1  per  cent.  Apart  from  the  quantitative 
improvement,  a  salient  feature  of  the  fiscal  consolidation  underway  has  been  some 
qualitative progress made as reflected in the reduction in the proportion of revenue deficit to 
gross fiscal deficit. As a result, the dissavings of Government administration declined from 
5.2 per cent of GDP in 2002-03 to 1.3 per cent in 2006-07. The savings of the departmental 
6 
 BIS Review 18/2008
enterprises improved marginally from 0.5 per cent in 2002-03 to 0.6 per cent of GDP in 2006-
07.  
The  major  component  of  public  sector  savings, 
i.e.,  savings  of  non-departmental 
undertakings,  has,  interestingly,  exhibited  a  steady  improvement  since  the  1970s  and  this 
process has continued during the reforms period (Table 4). Thus public sector enterprises 
have exhibited continued and steady improvement in their commercial functioning since the 
early 1990s. Consequently, since 2003-04 onwards, total public savings have turned positive 
again. The savings rate of the overall public sector improved from (-) 0.6 per cent of GDP in 
2002-03 to 3.2 per cent of GDP in 2006-07. Notwithstanding the striking improvement over 
the past few years, it may be noted that the public sector savings rate at 3.2 per cent during 
2006-07 was still less than the peak of over five per cent touched in 1976-77. Nonetheless, 
the turnaround of 5.2 percentage points of GDP in public sector savings – from a negative 
2.0 per cent of GDP in 2001-02 to a positive 3.2 per cent of GDP in 2006-07 – has been a 
key factor that has enhanced domestic savings from 23.5 per cent to 34.8 per cent over the 
same period. The public sector investment rate increased from 6.9 per cent of GDP in 2001-
02 to 7.8 per cent in 2006-07, but this level is still significantly lower than the public sector 
investment  rates  of  the 1970s,  1980s  and  early  1990s.  Despite  this  increase,  this  sector’s 
saving-investment gap has narrowed down from 8.9 per cent of GDP to 4.5 per cent during 
2001-2007, reflecting a turnaround in the public sector savings (which rose from (-) 2.0 per 
cent to 3.2 per cent) enabled by the implementation of the fiscal rules.  
 Performance of the private corporate sector 
The reduced requirement by the Centre for meeting budgetary mismatches, and for overall 
public  sector  financing  has  improved  the  availability  of  resources  for  the  private  sector 
considerably.  Furthermore,  the  corporate  sector  has  responded  to  increased  global 
competition  by  improving  its  productivity  and  efficiency  through  increased  application  of 
technology.  The  economic  reform  process  has  helped  greatly  in  making  the  policy 
environment  more  conducive  for  more  efficient  entrepreneurial  activity.  The  corporate  tax 
rate was steadily reduced from 45 per cent in 1992-93 to 30 per cent by 2005-06 and was 
kept stable thereafter. The peak rate of customs duty on non-agricultural goods was reduced 
gradually  from  150  per  cent  in  1991-92  to  10  per  cent  in  2007-08.  Monetary  policy  has 
contributed to the sustained moderation in inflation leading to reduction in nominal interest 
rates. Financial restructuring of firms has also led to the reduction in overall debt equity ratios 
in the corporate sector. The substantial reduction in debt servicing costs has thereby added 
to the corporate sector’s competitiveness and profitability.  
BIS Review 18/2008 
 7
Profits after tax recorded an annual average growth of around 47 per cent per annum over 
the 4-year period ended 2006-07 (Table 5). Profit margins have recorded large gains, while 
the  interest  burden  has  witnessed  a  significant  decline.  In  fact,  the  ratio  of  interest 
expenditure to sales revenues fell from around 6 per cent in the 1990s to about 2 per cent 
now, thereby contributing greatly to the enhanced profit growth. The profit after tax (PAT) to 
net  worth  ratio,  after  declining  from  14.4  per  cent  in  1995-96  to  5.1  per  cent  in  2001-02, 
increased to 16.6 per cent 2005-06 (Table 6). Another notable feature of performance of the 
corporate sector in the recent period is the progressive increase in retained profits, which as 
a share of PAT, increased from 30.9 per cent in 2001-02 to 73.6 per cent in 2005-06. The 
improved  profitability,  reflecting  improved  productivity  and  lowering  of  tax  rates,  enabled 
corporates to deleverage their balance sheets. This was reflected in the sharp decline in the 
debt-equity ratio. The improved corporate financial performance resulted in doubling of the 
private corporate sector saving rate (from 3.9 per cent in 2002-03 to 7.8 per cent in 2006-07), 
which has also contributed to the pick-up in the overall savings rate.  
From  the  long-term  perspective,  it  is  interesting  to  observe  that  the  rate  of  savings  of  the 
private corporate sector has increased from around one per cent in 1950s, 1.7 per cent in 
1980s and 3.8 per cent in 1990s, to almost 8 per cent now. Higher retained profits along with 
availability of resources from the banking sector facilitated by the lower financing requirement 
of  the  Government  and  the  increased  access  to  the  domestic  and  international  capital 
markets led to a sharp increase in the investment rate of the corporate sector from 5.7 per 
cent  of  GDP  in  2002-03  to  14.5  per  cent  in  2006-07.  Thus,  despite  the  increased  savings 
rate, the saving-investment gap of the corporate sector widened from 2.1 per cent of GDP in 
2001-02 to 6.8 per cent in 2006-07.  
 8 
  BIS Review 18/2008
 Household savings 
A remarkable feature of the Indian macroeconomic story since independence has been the 
continuous rise in household savings over the decades (Table 7). As might be expected, this 
rise has been characterised by continuing increases in financial savings as a proportion of 
GDP. The spread of the financial sector, of bank branches in particular, post office savings 
and the like, helped in mobilising household financial savings. Their financial liabilities did not 
grow correspondingly since there were few financial products available for household credit. 
This situation has changed in recent years with the introduction of new private sector banks, 
who  introduced  retail  credit  for  housing  and  for  consumer  durables  in  large  measure.  The 
public sector banks have followed suit. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 9
Hence,  while  gross  financial  savings  of  the  household  sector  have  continued  their  upward 
trajectory in the recent few years, households’ financial liabilities have also been increasing 
rapidly, albeit from a low base. Illustratively, gross financial savings grew from 13.8 per cent 
of GDP in 2004-05 to 18.3 per cent in 2006-07, while their financial liabilities rose from 3.8 
per  cent  of  GDP  during  2004-05  to  6.8  per  cent  during  2006-07.  The  ongoing  financial 
deepening  is  facilitating  larger  access  of  bank  credit  for  the  households.  As  a  result, 
household  financial  savings  (net)  have  increased  only  marginally  in  the  current  decade  – 
from  10.9  per  cent  of  GDP  to  11.3  per  cent  during  2001-2007.  On  the  other  hand,  with 
increased  availability  of  housing  finance,  household  sector’s  investment  rate  (physical 
savings) increased from 10.5 per cent in 1997-2003 to 12.7 per cent in 2003-07. Thus, the 
widening  of  S-I  gaps  of  the  public  and  private  corporate  sectors  combined  was  partly 
financed from household financial savings and partly by foreign savings. This is reflected in a 
widening of the current account deficit from 0.4 per cent of GDP in 2003-04 to 1.1 per cent of 
GDP in 2006-07. Among the major sources of finance from abroad for the corporate sector, 
external  commercial  borrowings  witnessed  a  turnaround  from  (-)  0.3  per  cent  of  GDP  in 
2001-02 to around 1.7 per cent of GDP in 2006-07.  
 
Reflecting the improved finances at the sectoral levels, the gross domestic saving rate, after 
varying in the range of around 21-24 per cent of GDP during the 1990s, has steadily risen to 
34.8 per cent in 2006-07. The investment rate also picked-up significantly from 22.9 per cent 
of GDP in 2001-02 to 35.9 per cent in 2006-07. With the ICOR hovering around 4, the real 
GDP growth accelerated from 3.8 per cent in 2002-03 to 9.6 per cent in 2006-07.  
Estimation of savings and investment 
In view of the key role played by investment in the growth process, it is important to have 
reliable and timely estimates of domestic savings and investment. In India, methodologies of 
estimates  of  savings  and  investment  have  evolved  over  the  years  in  tune  with  the 
international  guidelines  and  improvements  in  the  domestic  statistical  system  in  India; 
nonetheless,  there  is  a  need  to  critically  review  the  available  estimates  of  savings  and 
investment in the Indian economy with respect to data base, methods of estimation, reliability 
and  interpretational  significance.  The  compilation  of  savings  of  the  household  sector 
continues  to  pose  a  challenge  in  view  of  the  heterogeneity  and  residual  character  of  this 
sector in the national accounts. In respect of the household financial savings, there is a need 
to  assess  whether  current  state  of  financial  deepening  is  being  accurately  reflected  in  the 
data across the various financial instruments. In this regard, the timely compilation of the flow 
10 
 BIS Review 18/2008
of funds accounts would go a long way in accurately estimating household financial savings. 
The  feasibility  of  directly  estimating  household  savings  through  integrated  income  and 
expenditure  surveys  also  merits  consideration.  In  respect  of  the  private  corporate  sector, 
there is a need to examine whether it would be appropriate to make their savings estimates 
on marked to market basis or the present value book method. In respect of the public sector, 
the  savings  and  investment  estimates  can  be  further  strengthened  by  improving  the 
coverage  to  include  municipalities,  city  corporations,  gram  panchayats  and  other  local 
governments on the one hand and increased private participation in public investments on 
the  other.  In  recognition  of  these  issues,  the  Government  has  recently  appointed  a  High 
Level Committee on Estimation of Savings and Investment (Chairman: Dr. C. Rangarajan). 
The  Committee,  set  up  in  December  2007,  is  expected  to  critically  review  the  existing 
methodologies to review estimates of saving and investment for the Indian economy. 
Efficiency in the use of resources 
Not  only  has  there  been  a  consistent  upward  trend  in  India’s  investment  rate  since  the 
1950s, there is evidence that capital has been employed productively. Barring the decade of 
the  1970s,  the  incremental  capital  output  ratio  (ICOR)  has  hovered  around  4.  There  are 
some  signs  of  improvement  in  domestic  productivity  in  the  post-reforms  period.  Cross-
country  comparison  indicates  that  ICOR  has  been  amongst  the  lowest  in  India.  This  is 
especially true of the period since the 1980s onwards (Table 8). Various reform measures 
aimed  at  increasing  the  competitiveness  appear  to  be  having  the  desired  impact  on  the 
productivity of the Indian economy. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 11
 As noted above, improvement in public finances and public sector savings has contributed 
significantly to the step-up in domestic savings and investment rates since 2002-03 onwards. 
Higher savings and investment rates, in turn, have led to a higher growth trajectory of the 
Indian  economy.  It  is  apparent  that  fiscal  consolidation  in  the  Indian  context  has  led  to 
acceleration  of  growth.  The  conventional  view  holds  that  fiscal  prudence  might  lead  to 
contraction of domestic demand and growth. However, as the Indian experience suggests, 
fiscal prudence can lead to higher domestic savings and this could increase resources for 
domestic  investment.  Accordingly,  it  is  of  utmost  importance  to  adhere  to  the  fiscal 
consolidation process of the past few years so as to sustain current savings/investment rates 
and the ongoing growth momentum.  
12 
 BIS Review 18/2008
While containment of fiscal deficits is important, the quality of fiscal adjustment is also critical. 
It  is  necessary  to  persevere  with  the  process  of  reprioritising  public  expenditures  towards 
public investment vis-à-vis subsidies. While subsidies may provide short-term benefits, they 
tend  to  hinder  long-term  investments  as  well  as  encourage  inefficiency  in  the  use  of 
resources. These issues are important in the context of agricultural development, especially 
in  the  context  of  domestic  demand-supply  gaps  of  major  crops,  and  elevated  international 
prices. Public investment in agriculture declined from 3.4 per cent of agricultural GDP during 
1976-80 to 2.6 per cent during 2005-06, while budgetary subsidies to agriculture increased 
from three  per cent (1976-80) to seven per cent of agricultural GDP (2001-03). Therefore, 
greater  emphasis  on  stepping  up  public  investment  and  containment  of  subsidies,  while 
adhering to the fiscal consolidation, is likely to pay rich dividends. It would not only engender 
current growth impulses but also contribute to food security and domestic price stability. 
Financial sector reforms 
The higher order of investment activity in the country over the past few years has also been 
mirrored in strong demand for credit from the banking sector since 2003-04 onwards. In this 
context,  reforms  in  the  financial  sector  have  played  a  key  role  (Mohan,  2006a;  2007b). 
Financial sector reforms, initiated in the early 1990s, encompassed introduction of auctions 
in  Government  securities,  deregulation  of  interest  rates  and  reduction  in  statutory  pre-
emption of institutional resources by the Government was carried forward with the phasing 
out of the system of automatic monetisation of fiscal deficits from 1997-98. These measures 
along with developments in the Government securities market, by making the yield market-
determined, formed the backbone of financial market reforms. Apart from making the interest 
rates  largely  market  determined,  reforms  included  a  market-determined  exchange  rate 
(though  accompanied  by  RBI  forex  intervention),  current  account  convertibility,  substantial 
capital  account  liberalisation  and  deregulation  of  the  equity  market.  The  financial  sector 
reforms  designed  to  improve  cost  efficiency  through  price  signals,  in  turn,  facilitated  the 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  through  indirect  market-based  instruments  through  improved 
fiscal-monetary  coordination.  This  process  was 
the 
implementation  of  the  FRBM  Act,  2003,  under  which  the  Central  Government  targets  to 
eliminate the revenue deficit and reduce its fiscal deficit to 3 per cent of GDP by 2008-09 and 
the  Reserve  Bank  was  prohibited  from  participating  in  the  primary  government  securities 
market  from  April  2006.  Overall,  these  reforms  have  led  to  better  price  discovery  in  both 
interest  rates  and  exchange  rate,  thereby  contributing  to  overall  efficiency  in  financial 
intermediation.  The  increase  in  financial  deepening  in  recent  years  and  the  attainment  of 
overall  efficiency  in  the  use  of  resources  suggest  that  financial  intermediation  in  India  has 
been relatively efficient. 
Public investment has started increasing since 2003-04, reversing a long-period of declining 
trend that began in mid-1980s. Since 2003-04, private investment has also witnessed a large 
rise  (Chart  2).  Thus,  it  is  apparent  that  higher  public  investment  may  crowd-in  private 
investment, leading to a virtuous circle. In view of this, it is important that the current fiscal 
consolidation  process  needs  to  be  persevered  with  so  that  higher  public  investment  is 
possible, which may further attract larger private investment.  
further  strengthened 
through 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 13
 to 
favour  excess  holdings 
As  a  part  of  the  financial  sector  reforms  and  in  order  to  reduce  financial  repression,  the 
required  SLR  was  reduced  to  the  then  statutory  minimum  of  25  per  cent  in  1997.  The 
reduction  in  the  required  SLR,  in  the  presence  of  an  auction  system  for  the  Central 
Government’s market borrowings, was expected to facilitate an increasing proportion of the 
fiscal deficit through borrowings at market-related rates of interest. Although the envisaged 
reduction in the required SLR was expected to enable banks to expand credit to the private 
sector, banks continued to  make investments in Government securities much in excess of 
the  statutory  minimum  stipulated  requirements.  The  SLR  holdings  of  commercial  banks 
reached almost 42.7 per cent by April 2004. The relatively lower order of growth in credit flow 
observed during this period, in retrospect, could be partly attributed to reduction in demand 
on account of increase in real interest rates, and turn down in the business cycle. In view of 
the  various  factors,  extension  of  credit  was  perhaps  perceived  as  risky  by  the  banking 
system;  risk-adjusted  returns  appeared 
in 
Government securities vis-à-vis bank credit. Significant business restructuring and corporate 
deleveraging could have also reduced the need for bank credit to some extent.  
Since  2003-04,  there  has  been  a  significant  jump  in  credit  growth,  which  could  be  partly 
attributed  to  the  step-up  in  real  GDP  growth,  decline  in  interest  rates,  intensive  policy 
initiatives to improve flow of credit to sectors like agriculture and, finally, strong demand for 
retail  credit,  particularly  housing.  The  buffer  of  excess  SLR  securities  built  up  by  banks 
during the period 1997-2003 provided the banks an  opportunity to run down these excess 
investments in the period 2003-04 onwards to fund the step-up in credit growth. Thus, even 
though overall M3 growth in the current decade has been broadly unchanged compared to 
the  1990s,  growth  of  bank  credit  has  been  significantly  higher.  Accordingly,  looking  at  M3 
growth  in  isolation  can  be  misleading;  it  is  equally  important  to  look  at  the  underlying 
dynamics  of  money  supply  through  an  analysis  of  the  components  as  well  as  sources  of 
money supply.  
Now, with actual SLR holdings close to the stipulated, growth of bank credit as well as banks’ 
SLR investments, in future, will have to be in line with their deposit growth. Thus, high credit 
growth  is  likely  to  be  accompanied  by  high  growth  in  money  supply.  As  the  accumulated 
empirical  evidence  clearly  suggests,  sustained  periods  of  high  money  supply  growth  are 
eventually  associated  with  higher  inflation,  even  though  in  the  short-run,  the  association 
between money supply and inflation may be weaker. Against this backdrop, we need to be 
cautious of the fact that M3 growth over the past two years has been running above 20 per 
investments 
14 
 BIS Review 18/2008
cent  per  annum.  Continued  high  growth  could  turn  out  to  be  inflationary  in  due  course  of 
time; hence, the Reserve Bank has been putting greater emphasis on analysis of monetary 
and  credit  developments  in  the  recent  past.  It  needs  to  be  reiterated  that  the  reduction  in 
inflation  over  the  past  decade  and  the  lowering  of  inflationary  expectations  enabled  some 
reduction in the overall interest rate structure, which enabled both the Government and the 
private corporate sector to reduce their debt servicing burdens, contributing to a step-up in 
the sectoral savings.  
The  macroeconomic  review  of  the  Indian  economy  does  suggest  a  strengthening  of  the 
fundamentals in terms of movement to a higher growth path in recent years, supported by 
investment,  savings  and  improvement  in  productivity.  Moving  forward,  there  is  a  need  to 
delineate  the  likely  prospects  for  savings  and  investment  in  the  coming  five  years  and 
address some critical issues to sustain the growth momentum.  
Prospects for the next five years 
II.  
Early  indications  on  the  growth  prospects  in  the  coming  five  years  were  set  out  by  the 
Approach  Paper  of  the  Eleventh  Five  Year  Plan  in  terms  of  indicative  projections  on 
sustaining real GDP growth in the range of 8-9 per cent. Subsequently, this was reassessed 
by  the  Working  Group  on  Savings  for  the  Eleventh  Five  Year  Plan  (2007-08  to  2011-12) 
(Chairman: Dr. Rakesh Mohan) (May 2007). This Group projected that sustaining a real GDP 
growth in the range of 8-9 per cent would require investment rate to accelerate to 36-38 per 
cent of GDP and gross domestic savings (GDS) rate to a range of 34-35 per cent of GDP 
based on the then prevailing GDS rate of 29.1 per cent and investment rate of 30.1 per cent 
for 2004-05. The saving-investment gap was projected to be financed through an increase in 
household financial savings rate by around 1 percentage point, i.e., to 11.4 per cent of GDP 
from  10.3  per  cent  in  2004-05.  The  remaining  portion  of  the  saving-investment  gap  was 
projected  to  be  financed  from  the  rest  of  the  world  sector  through  a  widening  of  current 
account deficit by around 1-2 percentage points, i.e., to a range of 2.1-2.8 per cent of GDP 
from 1 per cent in 2004-05.  
Against this backdrop, there is a need to factor in the latest available information to assess 
as  to  what  holds  for  future  prospects.  According  to  the  Quick  Estimates  released  by  the 
Central Statistical Organisation (CSO) in January 2008, the real GDP growth is estimated to 
have accelerated to 9.6 per cent in 2006-07 from 9.4 per cent in 2005-06 and 7.5 per cent in 
2004-05. The acceleration in growth has been supported by rise in investment rate from 32.2 
per cent in 2004-05 to 35.9 per cent in 2006-07, in turn, supported by the rise in domestic 
saving rate from 31.8 per cent to 34.8 per cent. Accordingly, the S-I gap widened from (-) 0.4 
per cent of GDP in 2004-05 to (-) 1.1 per cent in 2006-07.  
As the previous analysis shows, sustenance of the growth momentum would hinge upon the 
continued  progress  in  public  finances,  enhanced  role  of  the  private  corporate  sector  and 
further  deepening  of  the  financial  sector  to  boost  household  financial  savings.  Apart  from 
domestic  factors,  it  is  increasingly  being  recognized  that  global  factors  would  play  a  far 
greater role than before in view of progressive opening up of the Indian economy resulting in 
greater financial integration over and above the traditional trade integration.  
The factors which would merit attention in drawing prospects for the public sector include the 
progress  in  public  finances  in  the  remaining  period  under  the  FRBM  Act  and  beyond,  the 
scope and scale of the likely impact of the Sixth Pay Commission award and streamlining of 
expenditures.  Available  information  for  2007-08  shows  continued  buoyancy  in  taxes  with 
impressive growth shown in respect of income tax, corporation tax, customs duty, service tax 
and new taxes. Assuming that the Central Government meets its FRBM targets by 2008-09 
and the States also adhere to their fiscal responsibility legislations targets, supported by the 
on-going  tax  buoyancy  and  appropriate  expenditure  management,  the  dissavings  of 
Government  administration  could  be  expected  to  reduce  further  from  Rs.55,811  crore  (1.3 
per cent of GDP) in 2006-07 to levels consistent with the achievement of the target of zero 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 15
per  cent  of GDP  in  respect  of  the revenue  deficits  for  both  the  Centre  and  the  States.  As 
noted earlier, the saving rates of the non-departmental undertakings which were maintained 
at  around  4  per  cent  of  GDP  and  that  of  departmental  enterprises  at  around  0.6  per  cent 
during 2002-2007 are likely to prevail in the coming five years. 
Some risks to these prospects, however, can be perceived from the implementation of the 
Sixth Pay Commission (SPC) award. While recommendations of the SPC have not yet been 
finalised,  a  likely  impact  of  SPC  can  be  ascertained  from  the  experience  of  the  Fifth  Pay 
Commission (FPC) award, which was implemented from 1997-98. The liability of the Central 
Government as a result of implementing the FPC award was estimated at Rs.18,500 crore 
up  to  the  end  of  February  1998.  The  impact  was  spread  over  the  period  from  1997-98  to 
2000-01,  rather  than  being  a  mere  one  off  impact  in  1997-98  (Table  9).  The  proportion  of 
wages, salaries and pensions of the Central Government, as a proportion of GDP, which had 
increased  from  2.7  per  cent  in  1996-97  to  3.3  per  cent  for  three  years  up  to  2000-01, 
tapered-off  back  to  about  2.7  per  cent  by  2003-04.  Thus,  the  impact  of  the  FPC 
approximately amounted to about 0.6 per cent of GDP per annum over a four-year period – a 
cumulative  impact  of  2.4  per  cent  –  for  the  Central  Government.  In  respect  of  the  State 
Governments, in the absence of budgetary data on salary expenditure, the impact of FPC 
can  be  ascertained  from  its  proxy  taken  as  the  non-plan  revenue  expenditure  in  social, 
economic and administrative services. The impact was visible from the year 1999-2000 when 
the proxy indicator as a proportion to GDP rose from 6.6 per cent in 1998-99 to 7.0 per cent 
in 1999-2000 and 7.2 per cent in 2000-01, before declining back to 6.7 per cent in 2001-02. 
Thus, the impact of FPC for the States amounted to approximately 0.4-0.6 per cent of GDP 
(a cumulative impact of 1.0 per cent over the two-year period). The combined impact of the 
Centre and States, thus, approximated to around 1.0 per cent of GDP (a cumulative impact 
of 3.4 per cent). In order to absorb the impact of FPC, the Government envisaged to bear it 
through  a  combination  of  additional  resource  mobilisation  and  expenditure  reducing 
measures. However, as alluded to above, there was a decline in the tax-GDP ratio in the late 
1990s, which exacerbated impact on the Government finances.  
 
Looking forward, assuming that the scale of the impact of the SPC to be similar to FPC in 
proportionate  terms,  the  pressures  on  expenditures  may  amount  to  about  1.0  per  cent  of 
GDP per annum for the Centre and States combined, spread over a 3-4 year period. Unlike 
the prevailing situation during the FPC, the SPC implementation would be undertaken when 
the  economy  is  witnessing  high  tax  buoyancy  –  the  tax-GDP  ratio  of  the  Centre  has 
increased  by  2.6  percentage  points  to  11.3  per  cent  in  2006-07(RE)  from  8.8  per  cent  in 
2002-03.  In  the  interest  of  continuing  with  the  growth  momentum,  it  is  essential  that  the 
impact of the SPC be absorbed without impairing the process of fiscal consolidation. In view 
of the buoyancy of direct taxes and service taxes at the Central level, and of VAT at the State 
level, there is an opportunity this time to accomplish this at both Central and State levels. 
Continuation of efforts at improving tax compliance, renewed efforts at containing subsidies, 
and  levy  of  appropriate  user  charges  to  augment  non  tax  revenues,  would  all  need  to  be 
used to comply with the FRBM. 
16 
 BIS Review 18/2008
As regards the prospects for the private corporate sector, there are incipient signs of some 
deceleration  in  the  growth  of  net  profits  from  the  strong  pace  of  the  past  four  years; 
nonetheless,  growth  in  corporate  profitability  still  remains  buoyant  and  is  well-above  the 
nominal  GDP  growth.  At  the  same  time,  cognisance  needs  to  be  taken  of  growing 
competition,  both  internal  and  external,  in  the  domestic  economy.  Furthermore,  the  early 
benefits  of  reforms  reaped  by  the  corporate  sector,  especially  by  deleveraging  of  balance 
sheets,  may  not  be  available  at  the  same  scale  in  future.  Thus,  it  may  be  reasonable  to 
assume that the corporate savings rate, which had doubled to 7.8 per cent of GDP during the 
period 2002-2007, may exhibit some plateauing in the coming few years but should not be 
expected to fall.  
Regarding  the  household  sector,  the  quick  estimates  indicate  that  financial  savings 
stagnated  at  around  11.3  per  cent  of  GDP  during  2006-07,  while  physical  saving  rate 
moderated somewhat, but remained higher than financial savings at 12.5 per cent of GDP in 
2006-07. Bank deposits constitute the largest proportion of household financial savings and 
their share in total, which fell during the 1980s, has been recovering since the 1990s (Table 
10).  The  buoyancy  in  bank  deposits  over  the past  year  –  growth  of around  23.8  per  cent, 
year-on-year, as of January 2008 – partly reflects some migration from small savings; as this 
signifies only a shift in the asset portfolio composition of households, the recent buoyancy in 
bank deposits is not suggestive of an uptrend in overall household financial savings. Looking 
forward,  improvement  in  financial  savings  would  depend  on  the  further  deepening  of  the 
financial  sector,  particularly  through  the  continuation  of  insurance  and  pension  reforms. 
Assuming  the  tax  structure  to  remain  stable  over  the  coming  five  years,  the  growth  of 
financial savings is likely to maintain its pace with the growth in nominal income.  
 
Thus, based on the emerging trends, it is reasonable to expect that both household financial 
savings rate and corporate saving rate would be broadly maintained at around their current 
rates of around 11 per cent and 8 per cent, respectively. On the other hand, improvement in 
the public sector savings rate may be hampered by the impact of the SPC, but it should not 
be expected to fall. On balance, the overall GDS rate may improve somewhat in 2008-09, 
i.e., the terminal year of FRBM, led by the public sector and remain around that level in the 
next three years.  
BIS Review 18/2008 
 17
Issues and challenges  
III.  
What  have  we  learned  from  this  review  of  Indian  economic  growth  and  macroeconomic 
management over the past 50-60 years? How do we go forward to ensure the continuation of 
the growth momentum achieved in recent years? 
First,  Indian  economic  growth  has  been  largely  enabled  by  the  availability  of  domestic 
savings. The continuous acceleration of its growth over the decades has been accompanied 
by a sustained increase in the level of domestic savings, expressed as a proportion of GDP. 
Moreover, interestingly, despite all the shortcomings and distortions that have existed in the 
evolving financial sector in India, the efficiency of resource use has been high with a long 
term  ICOR  of  around  4,  which  is  comparable  to  the  best achieving  countries  in  the  world. 
Hence, in order to achieve 10 per cent+ growth, we will need to encourage the continuation 
of  growth  in  savings  in  each  of  the  sectors:  households,  private  corporate  sector,  public 
corporate sector and the government. 
Second,  the  recent  acceleration  in  growth  has  been  enabled  by  a  surge  in  private  sector 
investment and corporate growth. This, in turn, has become possible with the improvement in 
fiscal  performance  reducing  the  public  sector’s  draft  on  private  savings,  thereby  releasing 
resources to be utilised by the private sector. For the growth momentum to be sustained, it 
will therefore be necessary to continue the drive for fiscal prudence at both the central and 
state government levels. 
Third, the generation of resources by the private corporate sector through enhancement of 
their own savings has been assisted greatly by the reduction in nominal interest rates, which 
has  become  possible  through  a  sustained  reduction  in  inflation  brought  about  by  prudent 
monetary  policy.  Indian  inflation,  though  low  now  by  our  own  historical  standards,  is  still 
higher than world inflation, and hence needs to be brought down further. It is only when there 
is a further secular reduction in inflation and inflation expectations over the medium term that 
Indian  interest  rates  can  approach  international  levels  on  a  consistent  basis.  Hence,  it  is 
necessary for us to improve our understanding of the structure of inflation in India: how much 
can be done by monetary policy and how much through other actions in the real economy so 
that leads and lags in supply and demand in critical sectors can be removed, particularly in 
infrastructure. Sustenance of high levels of corporate investment are crucially conditioned by 
the  existence  of  low and  stable  inflation  enabling  low  and stable  nominal  and  real  interest 
rates. 
Fourth, whereas fiscal correction has gained a credible momentum in recent years, some of 
it has been achieved by reduction in public investment. Whereas a desirable shift has taken 
place  from  public  to  private  investment  in  sectors  essentially  producing  private  goods  and 
services, and there is a move toward public private partnerships in those which have both 
public good and private good aspects, it is necessary to recognise that public investment is 
essential  in  sectors  producing  public  services.  Continued  fiscal  correction  through  the 
restructuring  and  reduction  in  subsidies,  and  continued  attention  to  the  mobilisation  of  tax 
revenues  is  necessary  to  enhance  public  sector  savings  that  can  then  finance  increase  in 
levels of public investment. If this is not done, private corporate sector investment would be 
hampered, and the leads and lags in the availability of necessary public infrastructure would 
also lead to inflationary pressures, and lack of competitiveness. Efficiency in the allocation 
and use of resources would be helped greatly by better basic infrastructure in both rural and 
urban infrastructure: much of it would need enhanced levels of public investment. 
Fifth, a major success story in the Indian reforms process has been the gradual opening of 
the  economy.  On  the  one  hand,  trade  liberalisation  and  tariff  reforms  have  provided 
increased access to Indian companies to the best inputs available globally at almost world 
prices.  On  the  other  hand,  the  gradual  opening  has  enabled  Indian  companies  to  adjust 
adequately  to  be  able  to  compete  in  world  markets  and  with  imports  in  the  domestic 
economy. The performance of the corporate sector in both output growth and profit growth in 
18 
 BIS Review 18/2008
recent years is testimony to this. It is therefore necessary to continue with our tariff reforms 
until we reach world levels, beyond the current stated aim of reaching ASEAN levels.  
As has been mentioned, the India current account deficit has been maintained at around 1 to 
1.5 per cent historically and in recent years. The current level of capital flows suggests that 
some  widening  of  the  CAD  could  be  financed  without  great  difficulty:  in  fact,  the  Eleventh 
Plan envisages a widening to levels approaching 2.5 to 3.0 per cent. This would need to be 
watched carefully if it emerges: we will need to ensure that such a widening does not lead to 
softening of international confidence, which would then reduce the capital flows. 
It  is  interesting  to  note  that  some  empirical  studies  do  not  find  evidence  that  greater 
openness and higher capital flows lead to higher growth (Prasad, Rajan and Subramanian, 
2007).  These  authors  find  that  there  is  a  positive  correlation  between  current  account 
balances  and  growth  among  nonindustrial  countries,  implying  that  a  reduced  reliance  on 
foreign  capital  is  associated  with  higher  growth.  Alternative  specifications  do  not  find  any 
evidence of an increase in foreign capital inflows directly boosting growth. The results could 
be  attributed  to  the  fact  that  even  successful  developing  countries  have  limited  absorptive 
capacity for foreign resources, either because their financial markets are underdeveloped, or 
because their economies are prone to overvaluation caused by rapid capital inflows. Thus, a 
cautious approach to capital account liberalization would be useful for macroeconomic and 
financial stability. 
On  the  other  hand,  Henry  (2007)  argues  that  the  empirical  methodology  of  most  of  the 
existing studies is flawed since these studies attempt to look for permanent effects of capital 
account liberalisation on growth, whereas the theory posits only a temporary impact on the 
growth rate. Once such a distinction is recognised, empirical evidence suggests that opening 
the  capital  account  within  a  given  country  consistently  generates  economically  large  and 
statistically significant effects, not only on economic growth, but also on the cost of capital 
and  investment.  The  beneficial  impact  is,  however,  dependent  upon  the  approach  to  the 
opening of the capital account, in particular, on the policies in regard to liberalisation of debt 
and equity flows. Recent research demonstrates that liberalization of debt flows—particularly 
short-term,  dollar-denominated  debt  flows  –  may  cause  problems.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
evidence  indicates  that  countries  derive  substantial  benefits  from  opening  their  equity 
markets to foreign investors (Henry, op cit).  
Our approach in regard to capital account has made a distinction between debt and equity, 
with  greater  preference  for  liberalisation  of  equity  markets  vis-à-vis  debt  markets  (Mohan, 
2007a).  Equity  markets  provide  risk  capital  and  this  can  be  beneficial  for  growth.  On  the 
other  hand,  opening  up  of  the  domestic  debt  markets  to  foreign  investors  in  the  face  of 
inflation and interest differentials, as is the case in India at present, can lead to large amount 
of arbitrage capital. In view of higher domestic interest rates, open debt markets can attract 
large amount of capital flows and add further to the existing volume of capital flows, which 
are in any case well-above the financing requirement of the country. If the debt markets were 
open, such excess capital flows would have to be necessarily sterilised by the Reserve Bank 
in order to maintain domestic macroeconomic and financial stability. This would further add 
to  the  sterilisation  costs  already  being  borne  by  the  country’s  financial  sector  and  the 
Government. Thus, debt flows into India are subject to ceilings and such ceilings would be 
appropriate till wedges on account of higher inflation and interest rates narrow significantly. 
Finally,  we  need  to  recognise  that  enhanced  levels  of  savings  and  investments,  and 
enhanced  levels  of  capital  flows  and  trade,  all  necessitate  an  efficient  system  of  financial 
intermediation.  For  household  savings  to  grow  further,  households  will  need  to  see  the 
continuation of adequate nominal and real returns. The efficiency of financial intermediation 
is then of the essence so that financial savings are indeed intermediated to their best uses. 
As  in  the  past,  domestic  savings  are  expected  to  finance  the  bulk  of  the  investment 
requirements. In this context, the banking system will continue to be an important source of 
financing  and  there  would  be  strong  demand  for  bank  credit.  Although  bank  credit  has 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 19
witnessed sharp growth since 2003-04 onwards, it needs to be recognised that the credit-
GDP  ratio  still  remains  relatively  low.  Moreover,  a  significant  segment  of  the  population 
remains excluded from banking services. As the growth process strengthens and becomes 
more inclusive, it is expected that demand for financial products could continue to witness 
high growth in the coming years. Thus, it is likely that growth in bank credit and monetary 
aggregates  could  be  higher  than  what  might  be  expected  from  historical  relationships  and 
elasticities in view of ongoing structural changes. This, however, raises critical issues for the 
central bank such as the appropriate order of monetary/credit expansion. In the absence of a 
yardstick,  excessive  growth  in  money  supply  could  potentially  show  up  in  inflationary 
pressures over course of time, given the monetary lags. Indeed, recent inflationary pressures 
across the globe are attributable, in part, to global liquidity glut. In the absence of inflationary 
pressures as conventionally measured, excessive money and credit growth could also lead 
to  asset  price  bubbles,  with  adverse  implications  for  banking  sector  stability  and  lagged 
conventional  inflation.  Thus,  the  Reserve  Bank  will  have  to  face  ongoing  challenges  to 
provide  appropriate  liquidity  to  the  system  so  as  to  ensure  growth  in  non-inflationary 
environment. This raises the critical issues of clarity in reading signs of inflation, asset prices 
and systemic liquidity from monetary/credit expansion. 
On the sectoral phase, a key issue is that of agricultural growth. In fact, the historical review 
suggests strongly that the periods of slow overall growth have invariably been characterised 
by slow agricultural growth, even in recent years when the weight of agriculture in GDP has 
reduced considerably. 
The  Eleventh  Five  Year  Plan  projects  the  sectoral  growth  rates  at  around  4  per  cent  for 
agriculture,  10  per  cent  for  the  services  sector  and  10.5  per  cent  for  industry  (with 
manufacturing growth at 12 per cent). While the targets for industry and services sectors are 
achievable,  sustaining  agricultural  growth  at  around  4  per  cent  for  achieving  the  growth 
target  of  9  per  cent  during  the  Eleventh  Plan  would  be  a  major  challenge,  particularly 
because this sector is constrained by several structural bottlenecks such as technology gaps, 
timely availability of factor inputs, lack of efficient markets for both inputs and outputs as well 
as  continued  policy  distortions.  Notwithstanding  some 
in  agricultural 
performance  in  recent  years,  production  and  productivity  of  major  crops  continue  to  be 
influenced by rainfall during the sowing seasons. Therefore, apart from institutional support, 
the immediate requirement is to improve irrigation facilities through higher public investment 
and  augment  the  cropped  area  as  well  as  yields  through  various  other  methods.  This  will 
need public investment and better management (Mohan, 2006b). 
Improved  agricultural  performance  is  not  only  important  for  sustaining  growth  but  also  for 
maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation.  Volatile  agricultural  production  and  lower  food  stocks 
internationally are beginning to raise growing concerns about rising food prices influencing 
overall inflation both globally and in India. In the medium term, therefore, efforts would have 
to be directed towards not only improving the crop yields but also putting in place a market 
driven incentive system for agricultural crops for a durable solution to address the demand-
supply mismatches and tackle food inflation. Sustained improvement in crop yields requires 
an enhanced focus on the revitalisation of agricultural research, developmental extension.  
Coming  to  infrastructure,  the  Planning  Commission  has  estimated  that  infrastructure 
investment ought to grow from the current levels of around 4.6 per cent of GDP to 8 per cent 
for  sustaining  the  9  per  cent  real  GDP  growth  as  envisioned  in  the  Eleventh  Plan.  Thus, 
investment in infrastructure is expected to rise by over three percentage points of GDP over 
the  Plan  period;  over  the  same  period,  the  Planning  Commission  anticipates  that  overall 
investment rate of the Indian economy should grow by six percentage points. In other words, 
almost one half of the total increase in overall investments is expected to be on account of 
the  infrastructure  requirements.  For  such  an  increase  in  infrastructure  investment  to  take 
place over the Plan period, both public sector and private sector investment will need to grow 
much faster than in any previous period. 
improvement 
20 
 BIS Review 18/2008
Sustained  growth  in  private  sector  infrastructure  investment  can  take  place  in  only  those 
sectors  that  exhibit  adequate  return,  either  on  their  own  or  through  public  private 
partnerships.  The  performance  of  the  telecom  sector  has  exhibited  this  convincingly.  A 
renewed  focus  on  the  levy  of  adequate  user  charges  is  therefore  necessary,  and  policy 
measures that provide stability to the flow of infrastructure revenues (Mohan, 2004). 
In  this  context,  it  needs  to  be  recognised  that  the  use  of  foreign  currency  denominated 
borrowings to fund domestic infrastructure projects runs the risk of currency mismatches in 
view  of  the  fact  that  earnings  of  such  projects  are  in  domestic  currency.  Thus,  large, 
unanticipated currency movements can render unviable such projects, thereby endangering 
future  investments.  Caution  therefore  needs  to  be  exercised  in  the  foreign  funding  of 
infrastructure projects, unless appropriately hedged. 
References: 
De Long, B., 2003, "India Since Independence: An Analytic Growth Narrative," in D. Rodrik 
(ed.)  In  Search  of  Prosperity:  Analytic  Narratives  on  Economic  Growth,  (New  Jersey: 
Princeton University Press). 
Henry,  Peter  Blair  (2007),  "Capital  Account  Liberalization:  Theory,  Evidence,  and 
Speculation", Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XLV, December. 
Mohan,  Rakesh  (2004),  "Infrastructure  Development  in  India:  Emerging  Challenges"  in 
Francois  Bourguignon  and  Boris  Pleskovic  (ed),  "Annual  World  Bank  Conference  on 
Development  Economics:  Accelerating  Development",  Oxford  University  Press  and  World 
Bank. 
---  (2006a),  "Financial  Sector  Reforms  and  Monetary  Policy:  The  Indian  Experience,  RBI 
Bulletin, July. 
---  (2006b),  "  Economic  Reforms  in  India:  Where  Are  We  And  Where  Do  We  Go?",  RBI 
Bulletin, December. 
---  (2007a),  "Capital  Account  Liberalisation  and  Conduct  of  Monetary  Policy:  The  Indian 
Experience', RBI Bulletin, July. 
--- (2007b), "India's Financial Sector Reforms: Fostering Growth While Containing Risk”, RBI 
Bulletin, December. 
Panagariya,  Arvind  (2004),  "India  in  the  1980s  and  1990s:  A  Triumph  of  Reforms",  IMF 
Working Paper WP/04/43. 
Prasad,  Eswar  S.,  Raghuram  G.  Rajan  and  Arvind  Subramanian  (2007),  "Foreign  Capital 
and Economic Growth", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1. 
Rodrik, Dani and Arvind Subramanian (2004), "From "Hindu Growth" to Productivity Surge: 
The Mystery of the Indian Growth Transition", IMF Working Paper WP/04/77. 
Reserve Bank of India (2007), Annual Policy Statement for 2007-08. 
--- (2008), Third Quarter Review of the Annual Statement on Monetary Policy for 2007-08. 
Virmani,  Arvind  (2004),  "India’s  Economic  Growth:  From  Socialist  Rate  of  Growth  to 
Bharatiya Rate of Growth", Working Paper 122, ICRIER. 
BIS Review 18/2008 
 21
