Henrique Meirelles: Challenges for monetary policy – Brazil and the 
international context 
Speech by Mr Henrique Meirelles, Governor of the Central Bank of Brazil, at the Conference 
“The Impact of Brazil on the Global Scenario”, São Paulo, 10 July 2008. 
 to 
linked 
information 
in  productivity 
In  mature  economies,  the  years  from  the  beginning  of  the  1990s  to  mid-2007  were 
characterized  by  low  GDP  volatility  and  low  inflation,  circumstances  that  led  prominent 
economists  to  name  the  period  as  the  era  of  the  “great  moderation”.  That  environment 
resulted  from  better  monetary  policy,  a  fact  that  translated  into  credibility  gains  for  central 
banks,  globalization  and  advances 
technology 
developments. At the time there was a substantial consensus that the emergence of Asia, 
particularly of China and India, would contribute to keep global inflation permanently under 
control. Thanks to cheap labor and the intensive use of new technologies on the production 
process, China – and to a lesser extent India – exported deflation (or at least disinflation) to 
the world economy through a consistent decrease in their export prices.  
There is now growing evidence that this era might have came to an end with the unbalances 
between  the  expansion  of  global  demand  and  supply.  Moreover,  there  are  also  signs  of 
increasing  labor  costs  in  China,  due  to  both  changes  in  labor  legislation  and  increasing 
shortages of specialized workforce. 
In  the  benign  environment  that  prevailed  through  mid-2007,  central  banks  of  mature 
economies  engaged  in  neutral  or  even  expansionary  monetary  policies  for  relatively  long 
periods.  Under  these  circumstances,  the  traditional  pro-cyclicality  of  credit  emerged  once 
again, fuelling asset price inflation (particularly real estate prices in certain regions of the US 
and Europe) rather than consumer price inflation.  
In the past twelve months the scenario changed radically: a severe financial crisis, stemming 
from the US real estate sector, hit mature economies in general, whereas demand pressures 
over the availability of limited production factors led to mounting inflation in a global scale. 
Thus, central banks currently face a much more complex and challenging environment than 
during the years of the great moderation. Monetary responses have been initially diverse due 
to  the  nature  of  the  problems  that  surfaced,  but  the  priority  on  the  need  to  preserve  price 
stability prevails. 
Due  to  both  increases  in  raw  material  prices  and  demand  pressures,  inflation  accelerated 
sharply around the globe. In mature economies in general, marked by broader levels of idle 
capacity,  higher  commodity  prices  probably  explain  the  bulk  of  the  inflation  upsurge.  In 
emerging countries, including Brazil, domestic demand pressures have had a relatively more 
important role in stoking mounting inflation pressures. As a matter of fact, strong domestic 
demand in these economies created conditions that enabled initially isolated price pressures 
to become more widespread. Not surprisingly, monetary policy is currently more and more 
focused in moderating the pace of demand expansion and containing inflation pressures in 
the majority of the emerging world.  
The stance of each central bank will respect local economic conditions, but the absence of a 
coordinated  action  on  a  global  scale  cannot  be  an  excuse  for  a  lenient  stance  on  the 
domestic inflation front. More specifically, the Brazilian Central Bank has not waited and will 
not  wait  for  other  central  banks  to  act  in  order  to  start  fighting  domestic  inflationary 
pressures. Not acting promptly would enable initial specific price pressures to contaminate 
inflation dynamics permanently, due to deteriorated inflation expectations of both price and 
wage setters.  
BIS Review 108/2008 
 1
In the beginning of 2008, the Brazilian Central Bank stressed in its regular publications that 
inflation risks had mounted, a fact that could require an adjustment in its monetary stance. 
This  assessment  surprised  many  analysts  that  expected  inflationary  pressures  to  be 
contained  by  a  spontaneous  slowdown  in  economic  activity,  an  expectation  that  did  not 
materialize.  Other  analysts  seemed  to  believe  that  increases  in  commodity  prices  were 
temporary  and  that  the  Central  Bank  should  wait  for  the  complete  materialization  of 
inflationary  pressures  to  finally  start  acting.  It  is  clear  now  that  this  complacent  approach 
would have had deleterious and long-lasting consequences for the economy. 
As repeatedly stressed by the Central Bank, the balance of risks for inflation became less 
favorable, not only due to external factors, but also – and more importantly – due to domestic 
factors. On the external front, the contribution of imports to sustain a benign inflation scenario 
has become less effective. On the domestic front, fast aggregate demand growth continues 
to be an important source of inflation risks, particularly amid increasing evidence of limits to 
the  expansion  of  supply  –  and  despite  the  robust  behavior  of  fixed-capital  investment. 
Moreover,  it  is  clearer  now  that  additional  increases  in  aggregate  supply  depend  on 
increases in the investment rate of the economy, a process that requires time. In this context, 
the Central Bank evaluates that the consistent reduction of the unbalances between the pace 
of expansion of supply and demand continues to be crucial in the design of monetary policy.  
The  Brazilian  Central  Bank  adopts  a  strategy  aimed  at  avoiding  inflation  volatility.  This 
approach takes into account the time lags in the transmission mechanism and has proved to 
be the most adequate to deal with uncertainties intrinsic in the process of monetary policy 
formulation and implementation. Thus the importance of developing an appropriate analytical 
framework for monetary policy, including forecasts and the balance of risks to inflation, as 
well  as  the  preemptive  stance  in  the  decision-making  process  of  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee.  
In the current circumstances, there is a potential risk that economic agents start to attribute a 
higher probability that inflation increases will become persistent, a fact that would reduce the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  The  Central  Bank  stresses  that  the  performance  of 
monetary policy tends to be more effective when the deterioration of inflation dynamics is in 
the  early  stages,  rather  than  when  it  is  more  established.  Thus,  monetary  policy  should 
respond immediately in order to avoid that initially restricted inflation pressures translate into 
an enduring deterioration in inflation expectations. 
Recent decisions of the Brazilian Central Bank should be understood in that context. Their 
effects over activity and inflation – potentially helped by some liquidity tightening in progress 
since the first months of the year – are cumulative and will undoubtedly produce effects in 
the coming quarters.  
International  evidence,  as  well  as  the  Brazilian  experience  under  inflation-targeting,  shows 
that  there  are  no  advantages  of  sustaining  high  inflation  rates  for  long  periods.  On  the 
contrary,  high  inflation  rates  lead  to  higher  risk  premia,  to  shorter  planning  horizons  and 
consequently  to  lower  potential  growth  of  the  economy.  Its  most  harmful  outcome  is  the 
deterioration  in  income  distribution,  as  low-income  brackets  are  harder  hit  by  the  negative 
effect of inflation on their purchasing power. It is now clearer than ever that fighting inflation 
generates benefits in terms of decreasing poverty and reducing social inequalities. Thus, the 
Brazilian Central Bank has acted and will continue to act in order to bring inflation back to the 
midpoint target of 4.5% promptly, that is, during the course of 2009. This stance is designed 
to avoid the consolidation of a negative inflationary environment, in which monetary policy 
would lose efficiency.  
It  should  be  clear  to  the  public  that  the  Brazilian  Central Bank  will  not  have  a  complacent 
approach regarding inflation. The Bank is committed to act in order to bring inflation to the 
midpoint target during 2009. This is the approach that minimizes costs for economic activity 
and for the society at large, contributing to consolidate a sound, efficient, and fair economic 
structure. Thanks for your attention!  
2 
 BIS Review 108/2008
