Toshihiko Fukui: The Japanese and world economies – looking to the 
future 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Toshihiko  Fukui,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
Kisaragi-kai Meeting, Tokyo, 22 February 2008. 
 Introduction 
Today, I will begin by discussing recent developments in the economy and financial markets 
as well as the thinking behind the Bank of Japan's conduct of monetary policy. I would then 
like to turn to the medium- to long-term issues facing the Japanese and world economies, 
and to present my ideas on how to address them. 
I.  
The current situation and the outlook for Japan's economy 
Developments in overseas economies 
A.  
Let  me  first  touch  upon  recent  developments  in  global  financial  markets  and  overseas 
economies, as a premise to considering the outlook for Japan's economy. 
Global financial markets have been unstable due mainly to the downgrading of securitized 
products  and  heightened  concern  about  possible  further  losses  at  financial  institutions 
stemming  from  the  U.S.  subprime  mortgage  problems.  Toward  the  end  of  2007,  money 
markets  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  came  under  pressure  from  financial  institutions' 
eagerness to secure year-end funds, and this caused interest rates on term instruments to 
surge. To address this situation, from the middle of December onward, central banks in the 
major economies coordinated their implementation of responsive measures such as liquidity 
provision. As a result, interest rates on term instruments have fallen and money markets are 
recovering  their  stability.  On  the  other  hand,  the  functioning  of  markets  for  securitized 
products,  where  the  problem  originated,  remains  impaired,  and  stock  markets  and  foreign 
exchange markets have been volatile globally. Investor risk-aversion persists, and projected 
losses  at  financial  institutions  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  are  greater  than  initially 
expected.  Although  financial  institutions  in  these  countries  have  successively  announced 
measures to boost their capital, underwritten with investment from, among others, sovereign 
wealth  funds  from  emerging  economies  and  oil  producing  countries,  market  participants 
remain  circumspect,  keeping  a  weather  eye  on  future  disclosures  of  losses  at  financial 
institutions and their measures to compensate for these losses. 
The world economy continues to expand as a whole, but the uncertainty regarding its future 
path  is  increasing  due  to  the  aforementioned  volatility  in  global  financial  markets.  In  the 
United  States,  an  economic  slowdown  is  becoming  more  evident.  Housing  investment  is 
down substantially, with the fall in housing sales and the rise in the already-elevated stock of 
unsold homes continuing unabated. Home prices continue to fall, and there is no indication 
that the bottom has yet been reached. Moreover, recently released information suggests that 
employment and production have weakened somewhat and that banks are tightening lending 
standards not only for  housing loans but also for commercial real estate loans, as well as 
loans  to  both  businesses  and  consumers.  A  slowing  of  the  pace  of  increase  in  private 
consumption  is  becoming  somewhat  more  evident,  but  the  trend  remains  moderately 
upward. Business fixed investment, meanwhile, is also continuing its moderate upward trend. 
In  terms  of  macroeconomic  measures  to  address  the  situation,  the  Federal  Reserve  has 
been aggressively lowering its policy interest rate, and the U.S. government has decided on 
a fiscal package to stimulate the economy, including a tax reduction. Although lower growth 
in the U.S. economy may be unavoidable for the time being, it is likely to return to a path of 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 1
growth close to potential, as the housing market correction draws to an end, the tightness in 
financial conditions eases, and the effects of policy measures make themselves felt. The risk 
should,  however,  be  borne  in  mind  that,  if  the  negative  effects  from  the  housing  market 
correction  or  financial  market  developments  are  greater  than  expected,  the  U.S.  economy 
may  slow  further  through  negative  wealth  effects,  credit  tightening,  and  deterioration  in 
business and consumer sentiment. 
The  euro  area  economy  continues  to  expand,  though  the  pace  of  increase  is  moderating. 
Although export growth has recently decelerated and there are causes for concern, such as 
weakness in indicators of private consumption and volatility in financial markets, activity in 
the  corporate  sector,  particularly  business  fixed  investment,  remains  strong  and  it  is  likely 
that  economic  growth  will  continue.  As  for  other  regions,  growth  continues  to  be  robust, 
especially  in  China,  India,  and  Russia,  while  the  NIEs  and  ASEAN  economies  are  also 
maintaining  a  moderate  pace  of  expansion  overall.  Thus,  the  world  economy  taken  as  a 
whole  is  continuing  to  expand.  However,  we  need  to  bear  in  mind  the  possibility  that, 
depending on their extent, future disruptions in global financial markets or a slowdown in the 
U.S.  economy  may  have  adverse  implications  not  only  for  major  economies  but  also  for 
emerging economies.  
At the same time, attention should also be paid to the risk of inflation. In the United States 
and Europe, consumer prices are continuing to rise due to increased energy and food prices. 
In China, there are signs of overheating, visible especially in fixed investment, and inflation is 
rising, with food prices increasing at a faster pace. Meanwhile, given the high prices of grains 
such as wheat and soybeans as well as of crude oil and gold, possible shifts in international 
commodity  prices  may  also  influence  the  outlook  for  the  global  economy  and  the  price 
situation. 
At  the  G-7  Financial  Ministers'  and  Central  Bank  Governors'  meeting  held  recently,  the 
aforementioned  assessment  of  economic  and  global  financial  market  conditions  was 
generally agreed. Moreover, participants reaffirmed that they would address their domestic 
concerns  within  a  cooperative  framework  so  as  to  realize  financial  market  stability  and 
sustainable growth on a global basis.  
The current situation and the outlook for the Japanese economy 
B.  
As for Japan's economy, we expect that, although the pace of growth may remain slow for a 
while,  the  economy  is  likely  to  continue  its  sustained  expansion  under  conditions  of  price 
stability since the virtuous circle of growth in production, income, and spending will remain 
basically  intact.  Careful  attention,  however,  should  be  paid  to  risk  factors  such  as  the 
aforementioned developments in overseas economies and global financial markets as well 
as the effects of high energy and materials prices. 
In  the  corporate  sector,  business  sentiment  is  characterized  by  caution,  because  of  the 
following factors. First, the revised Building Standard Law, which came into force in June last 
year, has been pushing down housing investment significantly. Second, the elevated prices 
of materials such as crude oil have been reducing profits, especially at small firms. And third, 
the  subprime  mortgage  problems  have  been  generating  increased  uncertainty  about  the 
future  course  of  the  world  economy.  However,  since  overseas  economies  as  a  whole 
continue to expand, exports to a broad range of regions, including emerging economies and 
oil  producing  countries,  are  increasing  and  their  overall  trend  remains  upward.  In  this 
situation, production to date has continued to increase. Looking forward, however, production 
is  expected  to  remain  flat  for  a  while,  mainly  because  the  accelerated  production  of 
automobiles to make up for the disruption caused by the Niigata-ken Chuetsu-oki Earthquake 
in  July  2007  is  coming  to  an  end.  Nevertheless,  production  is  likely  to  resume  its  upward 
momentum,  given  that  levels  of  inventories  and  shipments  are  essentially  well  in  balance. 
Business fixed investment is also likely to follow an uptrend, as firms are not under pressure 
to adjust production capacity or employment. 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2008
Let me now turn to developments in the household sector. Nominal wages per worker have 
been somewhat weak, but moderate growth in employee income is continuing, supported by 
an increase in the number of employees. The gradual increase in employee income is likely 
to  continue,  as  it  is  expected  that  firms  will  continue  to  experience  labor  shortages  and 
corporate profits will remain generally high. In this situation, private consumption is expected 
to  follow  a  gradual  uptrend.  However,  as  prices  of  daily  necessities  such  as  food  and 
gasoline have been rising recently, consumer sentiment appears to have deteriorated, and 
this  may  have  adverse  consequences  to  which  attention  will  need  to  be  paid.  Meanwhile, 
housing investment, which has been suffering significant declines as a result of procedural 
changes  accompanying  the  enforcement  of  the  revised  Building  Standard  Law,  is 
nevertheless  expected  to  recover  gradually  as  the  delays  in  the  confirmation  of  building 
applications  are  resolved.  In  fact,  the  number  of  housing starts  has already  been  showing 
signs  of  recovery.  The  pace  of  recovery,  however,  is  still  uncertain,  since  sales  of 
condominiums, whose prices are rising, remain relatively weak. 
Regarding prices, the domestic corporate goods price index (CGPI) has been rising mainly 
due  to  higher  international  commodity  prices.  The  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the 
consumer price index (CPI, excluding fresh food) posted a 0.8 percent increase in December 
due mainly to rises in the prices of petroleum products and food products. This positive trend 
in  the  rate  of  change  is  expected  to  continue:  in  the  short  run,  due  to  the  effects  of  high 
prices of petroleum products and food products; while in the longer run, because supply and 
demand conditions in the overall economy are expected to tighten as the moderate economic 
expansion continues.  
Future conduct of monetary policy 
C.  
I  would  now  like  to  explain  the  Bank's  thinking  regarding  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy 
based on the outlook for economic activity and prices and risk factors I have described. 
In  conducting  monetary  policy,  it  is  important  not  to  be  swayed  too  much  by  short-term 
developments  but  to  make  forward-looking  projections  of  economic  and  price  trends.  As  I 
noted earlier, the growth of Japan's economy, for the time being, seems likely to decelerate 
while  prices  continue  to  rise, although,  looking forward,  the  economy  is  likely  to  resume  a 
moderate expansion under conditions of price stability. Given this, our basic stance on the 
future conduct of monetary policy remains unchanged. We will continue to carefully assess 
the  levels  of  uncertainty  associated  with  the  projected  future  paths  of  the  economy  and 
prices  and  to  remain  attentive  to  both  upside  and  downside  risks,  thereby  ensuring  the 
appropriate conduct of monetary policy.  
II.  
The Japanese and world economies over the medium to long term: issues and 
strategic direction 
I  would  now  like  to  discuss  medium-  to  long-term  issues  facing  the  Japanese  and  world 
economies and what steps should be taken to address them. The key word is "sustainability." 
In other words, we need to consider what we should do to achieve sustainable growth.  
A. 
Issues facing the world economy and basic ideas to address them 
Structural issues affecting the world economy 
1.  
Various problems the world economy is facing today, such as the substantial rises in crude 
oil and food prices, global imbalances, and the turmoil in global financial markets, should be 
understood  in  the  broader  context  of  changes  that  have  taken  place  since  the  1990s  – 
specifically,  the  rapid  ascendance  of  emerging  economies,  the  progress  of  economic 
globalization, and the globalization and increased sophistication of financial markets.  
BIS Review 22/2008 
 3
From the latter half of the 1980s, emerging economies began, one after another, to adopt 
market  economic  systems,  and  since  the  1990s  they  have  been  rapidly  increasing  their 
presence in the global economy. For several years at the beginning of the new century, this 
was a factor contributing to the benign global economic and financial environment. The world 
economy was able to enjoy a period of unusually high growth driven by economic expansion 
in these emerging economies. On the price front, their abundant labor force brought about a 
dramatic increase in the global supply of products along with an accompanying price decline. 
In addition, efforts by central banks to stabilize prices allowed the situation of low inflation to 
continue.  During  the  resultant  period  of  stable  prices,  the  financial  environment  was  kept 
accommodative. The generous inflow of funds from emerging economies and oil producing 
countries  to  leading  economies  such  as  the  United  States  also  acted  to  facilitate  the 
continuation of the accommodative financial conditions. It was against this background that 
rapid  advances  in  financial  technology  were  made.  This  benign  situation,  which  could  be 
characterized as "high growth," "stable prices," and "financial accommodation," lasted for a 
long period in the early 2000s.  
However,  the  reverse  side  of  this  seemingly  benign  structural  situation  has  emerged 
gradually.  In  many  rapidly  growing  emerging  economies  energy  efficiency  is  low,  and  this 
has  increased  demand  for  resources  such  as  crude  oil.  Coupled  with  concerns  over  the 
possible  disruptions  of  supply,  this  has  led  to  sharp  rises  in  the  prices  of  international 
commodities. In addition, increased demand for food, as living standards among workers in 
emerging  economies  have  improved,  has  combined  with  a  growing  interest  in  alternative 
energy  to  generate  substantial  rises  in  prices  of  foods  such  as  grains.  Given  resource 
constraints, questions have begun to emerge as to whether the current robust growth led by 
emerging economies is sustainable in its present form.  
Meanwhile, in financial markets, the benign economic and financial environment had allowed 
market  participants  to  become  lax  in  their  risk  evaluation  and  resulted  in  some  extreme 
positions  being  taken.  Consequently,  last  summer  saw  the  subprime  mortgage  problems 
inducing  a  large-scale  reevaluation  of  risks  in  markets  for  securitized  products,  which  has 
since spread to encompass other markets. In the past six months, various measures have 
been  taken  in  response,  but  global  financial  markets  remain  unstable.  Since  what  we  are 
witnessing is a process of risk repricing within the broad structural context discussed earlier, 
adjustments  may  be  expected  to  take  some  time.  It  is  also  inevitable  that,  during  this 
process, financial institutions will incur losses.  
Basic ideas to address these issues 
2.  
In considering what we should do to realize sustained world economic growth, it is necessary 
to put recent problems into their broader structural context.  
The  ongoing  globalization  of  the  economy  and  financial  markets,  as  well  as  advances  in 
financial  technology,  cannot  and  should  not  be  stopped,  because  they  basically  act  to 
increase  people's  welfare  through  the  efficient  allocation  of  resources.  Rather,  in  the 
globalized  economy,  it  is  important  to  ensure  an  environment  where  various  markets  can 
function  fully,  thus  allowing  resources  to  be  allocated  efficiently.  Furthermore,  this 
environment should be secured swiftly, and should not be permitted to lag behind the pace of 
globalization and the advance of financial technology.  
First,  it  is  becoming  increasingly  necessary  for  emerging  economies,  in  line  with  their 
growing  presence  in  the  world  economy,  to  introduce  more  flexible  foreign  exchange 
systems  and  to  improve  the  functioning  of  their  financial  and  capital  markets.  Global 
imbalances are the result of many factors, including investment and saving behavior across 
different  countries  and  the  systems  that  determine  these,  with  inflexible  foreign  exchange 
systems  being  another.  In  terms  of  the  flow  of  funds,  imbalances  are  maintained  as  the 
abundant  funds  accumulating  in  emerging  economies  and  oil  producing  countries  are 
invested overseas, principally in the United States. To address this problem, it is of course 
essential  that  the  economies  concerned  take  measures  to  improve  the  balance  of  their 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2008
investment  and  saving.  At  the  same  time,  allowing  market  mechanisms  to  operate  under 
more flexible foreign exchange systems will contribute to the balanced and sustained growth 
of the world economy. 
A related problem is that improvements in the functioning of financial and capital markets in 
emerging economies are not keeping up with the pace of globalization. Progress in this area 
will  contribute  to  stable  economic  development  in  these  economies  by  strengthening  their 
ability to withstand disruptions in the flow of funds, as well as further enhancing the efficiency 
of the allocation of funds on a global basis. As an example of efforts in this respect, the Bank 
of Japan, with the cooperation of other central banks in Asia, is promoting a program called 
the Asian Bond Fund to nurture bond markets in Asia.  
Second, areas can be pointed out where the rapid pace of progress in financial innovation 
may  not  necessarily  have  resulted  in  the  improved  functioning  of  financial  markets.  The 
recent turmoil in global financial markets triggered by the subprime mortgage problems has 
highlighted  this  point.  Despite  the  involvement  of  technologically  advanced  financial 
institutions and credit rating agencies applying cutting-edge financial theory at every stage of 
the process from the original disbursement of housing loans to their securitization and sale to 
investors, the end result was still large-scale losses. The task now is to analyze why market 
mechanisms  failed  to  achieve  the  appropriate  risk  evaluation  and  pricing,  and  how  the 
framework can be reconstructed so as to ensure that the incentives to do so operate properly 
in the future. Various parties, including the authorities, should consider what they can do to 
help  achieve  this;  yet,  needless  to  say,  the  primary  role  must  be  played  by  market 
participants themselves. It is in market participants' own interest to strike a proper balance 
between  risk  and  return,  and  ensuring  that  this  intrinsic  incentive  is  allowed  to  operate  is 
fundamental  to  any  reconstructive  efforts.  At  the  recent  G-7  meeting,  the  interim  report 
submitted by the Financial Stability Forum working group toward the construction of such a 
properly  incentivized  framework  was  discussed,  and  its  final  report  is  scheduled  to  be 
submitted at the next meeting in April.  
Third, the issue of energy and resource conservation is important not only in environmental 
terms  but  also  as  the  basis  for  realizing  sustainable  world  economic  growth.  To  be  more 
specific, it is necessary to raise the energy efficiency of countries where efficiency rates are 
low and for resource producing countries to ensure that systems of supply are stable. We 
must  think  how  this  could  be  achieved  under  market  mechanisms  and  how  externalities, 
such  as  the  global-scale  environmental  problem  posed  by  CO2  emissions,  could  be 
addressed. Improving energy efficiency and developing cleaner energy are areas that should 
benefit from technological expertise found in the private sector. Although individual countries 
have  been  trying  to  provide  the  proper  incentives  to  achieve  these  ends,  it  should  not  be 
forgotten  that  this  is  a  global  issue,  and  one  which  would  benefit  from  the  application  of 
market  mechanisms.  For  example,  a  market  for  emission  rights  would  not  only  allow  the 
appropriate  valuation  of  emissions  costs  but  would  also  provide  market  incentives  for  the 
development of advanced technologies to increase energy efficiency.  
There  are,  of  course,  other  problems  that  need  to  be  addressed,  yet  in  terms  of  broad 
strategic  direction,  the  response  is  qualitatively  the  same:  rapid  changes  in  the  social  and 
economic  environment,  such  as  globalization,  should  be  dealt  with  by  making  appropriate 
use of market mechanisms, while adjusting the existing infrastructure as much as necessary. 
Such an approach will establish a basis for sustained world economic growth while avoiding 
the pitfalls of protectionism.  
B.  
Issues facing the Japanese economy and basic ideas to address them 
Demographic change: population aging and the declining birth rate 
1.  
I  will  now  turn  to  the  medium-  to  long-term  issues  facing  Japan's  economy.  The  most 
significant  of  these  in  terms  of  achieving  sustained  economic  growth  is  the  progress  of 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 5
demographic  change,  specifically  the  decline  in  the  birth  rate  and  aging  of  the  population. 
Faced  with  such  demographics,  we  need  to  ask  ourselves  how  Japan  can  make  use  of 
global vitality to boost its own economic strength.  
The  sources  of  economic  growth  are  labor  input  and  accumulated  capital.  Using  these 
efficiently to enhance value added, in other words, to increase productivity, is what generates 
economic growth.  
Looking  first  at  the  labor  situation,  the  size  of  the  labor  force  may  be  expected  to  decline 
along with the decrease in the working-age population. To curb this decline, the labor force 
participation  rates  of  the  elderly  and  women  need  to  be  raised.  This  in  turn  requires  the 
provision of a better working environment for potential workers in these categories.  
Second,  to  accumulate  capital,  Japanese  firms  need  to  remain  an  attractive  target  for 
domestic and overseas investors. The funds that flowed out of U.S. securities markets due to 
the subprime mortgage problems did not necessarily head for Japan. Given that Japanese 
firms  are  world  leaders  in  terms  of  their  technological  prowess,  there  is  no  reason  for 
overseas  investors  to  form  an  unfavorable  evaluation  of  their  profitability  or  other  such 
measures  of  their  corporate  strength.  What  seems  needed,  therefore,  to  attract  inward 
investment  into  Japanese  firms  is  to  improve  areas  such  as  corporate  governance  and 
financing,  consolidating  the  environment  and  infrastructure  of  capital  markets  to  facilitate 
easy access by investors both at home and abroad. Achieving this will require a painstaking 
process of constant review and response.  
Third,  in  order  to  increase  productivity,  it  is  necessary  to  move  forward  with  institutional 
changes,  including  deregulation,  so  that  the  private  sector  may  be  able  to  perform  to  its 
fullest potential. To be competitive in the global economy, trading arrangements, such as free 
trade  agreements,  are  important.  Yet,  it  is  also  important  to  ensure  that  infrastructural 
arrangements,  such  as  adequate  protection  of  intellectual  property  rights  to  facilitate  the 
accumulation of advanced technologies and knowledge, are continually refined and updated 
to accommodate the most recent changes. In the nonmanufacturing sector, in particular, it is 
important  to  accumulate  knowledge  and  enhance  the  innovative  potential  of  Japan  as  a 
whole.  For  this  purpose,  measures  that  take  advantage  of  the  dynamism  of  globalization, 
such  as  measures  to  attract  the  most  talented  minds  from  abroad,  which  have  been 
introduced  in  other  countries  to  strengthen  their  international  competitiveness,  should  be 
pushed forward.  
Even assuming that these necessary efforts are steadily pursued, we must still bear in mind 
that the issue of the declining birth rate and aging population cannot be conceived from a 
purely economic standpoint. Even if various incentives are put in place and the necessary 
infrastructure of day care facilities and so on are provided in an attempt to curb the declining 
birth  rate,  ultimately  the  problem  remains  one  of  personal  choice.  Similarly,  the  issue  of 
immigration,  which  is  often  proposed  as  a  more  direct  means  of  addressing  the  labor 
shortage,  is  a  matter  of  public  choice  that  involves  not  only  economic  but  various  social 
considerations.  A  major  reason  for Japan's low  potential  growth  rate  relative  to  the  United 
States and European countries lies in the fact that it expects fewer immigrants  and this is 
reflected in a lower expected increase in its working population. One way to raise Japan's 
potential  growth  rate  is  evidently  to  ease  restrictions  on  immigration.  I  think  the  time  has 
come  for  us  to  think  very  seriously  about  whether  we  should  accept  more  immigrants,  or 
whether we would prefer to remain a relatively homogeneous society and be satisfied with 
low economic growth. It seems increasingly necessary for Japan to decide how it wants to fit 
in to the global economy.  
Fiscal consolidation 
2.  
Closely related to the problem of the declining labor force is another medium- to long-term 
issue, the consolidation of the fiscal situation. It scarcely needs repeating that Japan's public 
finances  are  in  a  severe  situation.  What  is  crucial  here,  however,  is  that  the  problem  is  a 
6 
 BIS Review 22/2008
medium- to long-term one to which measures with only short-term effects will not provide a 
viable  solution;  moreover,  dealing  with  the  problem  will  require  reconsidering  the  income 
distribution.  
As the nation's demographics continue to shift, the number of retirees will inevitably increase 
relative  to  the  size  of  the  working  population.  From  a  public  finance  perspective,  the 
implication is that the number of those who bear the burden of public finances in the form of 
taxes will decrease while the number of those who benefit from public finances in the form of 
social security payments will increase. If the income distribution remains the same – in other 
words, if relative shares of the total pie are not altered – the public finances will deteriorate 
further.  Reforming  these  will  inevitably  entail  some  pain.  However,  in  the  end  there  is  no 
choice but to construct a sustainable new system, and if the public can be convinced of the 
system's sustainability, then it will go some way to dissipating their anxiety about the future.  
To ease the process of reallocating shares of the pie, it is important to increase the economic 
growth  rate.  With  a  larger  pie,  it  becomes  possible  to  adjust  income  distribution  without 
requiring social security beneficiaries to give up such a large amount in absolute terms. What 
is important is that the pie must become larger in real terms; in other words, real growth must 
rise. Higher inflation alone will not produce the desired effect if the real growth rate does not 
rise.  A  rise  in  the  inflation  rate  without  a  change  in  the  nominal  size  of  pensions  simply 
translates  into  a  decrease  in  the  real  value  of  pensions.  Neither  does  higher  inflation 
represent a quick fix for the public finances. A rise in the inflation rate would indeed result in 
increased tax revenues, but expenditure would also increase, as would interest payments on 
government bonds, which would rise in line with higher interest rates.  
In short, there are no quick fixes or free lunches when it comes to reconstructing the public 
finances.  Constructing a  sustainable  system  of  public  finances  and  social  security  may  be 
painful, but it is the only certain route to travel, and it will require facing up to two necessities: 
first, in response to the declining birth rate and aging of the population, there must be some 
kind of change in the income distribution between generations; and second, this process of 
changing the income distribution can only be accomplished smoothly if real economic growth 
and  economic  strength  are  increased.  The  actual  shape  of  the  sustainable  system  that 
emerges,  whether  it  is  achieved  by  increasing  the  tax  burden  or  by  reducing  public 
expenditure, is a matter for the public itself to determine.  
The role of central banks 
C. 
Lastly, I would like to discuss the role of central banks in addressing the medium- to long-
term issues I have talked about.  
With  the  further  evolution  of  economic  and  financial  globalization,  central  banks  should 
contribute to economic and price stability through the appropriate conduct of monetary policy, 
while  also  ensuring  that  financial  markets  and  the  financial  system  are  both  efficient  and 
stable by providing liquidity and making sure that markets function properly.  
Let me start with the second of these roles, namely, ensuring the efficiency and stability of 
financial markets and the financial system.  
As has become clear during the recent turmoil in global financial markets, liquidity provision 
by central banks plays a significant role in stabilizing financial markets. With the increase in 
the volume and complexity of cross-border flows of funds, coordination among central banks 
in  their  performance  of  this  role  is essential.  Behind  the  coordinated  provision  of  funds  by 
central  banks  in  December,  which  I  have  already  mentioned,  there  lay  discussion  among 
central banks and the attainment of a consensus about the economic situation and measures 
to alleviate it. I believe that the framework for liquidity provision introduced in Japan to deal 
with the past financial crisis has proved instructive to other countries in designing appropriate 
measures.  In  addition  to  their  provision  of  liquidity  to  markets  under  normal  conditions, 
central banks stand ready to provide funds directly to individual financial institutions as the 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 7
Lender of Last Resort in cases, for example, when an institution is experiencing difficulties 
raising funds in the markets. Given the globalization of financial services, such cases now 
require closer communication among the countries involved.  
It is, of course, important to respond ex post to market turmoil or fund-raising difficulties at 
individual  financial  institutions;  however,  it  is  also  vital  to  share  ideas  and  develop 
appropriate  systems  prior  to  such  incidents.  More  specifically,  as  the  financial  business 
becomes increasingly globalized, central banks must rigorously discuss how to ensure the 
international  cooperation  and  communication  needed  to  improve  operational  tools  and 
collateral arrangements as well as to enhance the compatibility of their Lender of Last Resort 
and macro-prudential policies. Taking a longer-term perspective, we must also consider how 
each  country  can  help  improve  the  working  of  progressively  globalized  financial  markets. 
Given that of the various public authorities it is central banks which are closest to financial 
markets, they have a correspondingly important role to play in providing a steady response to 
the rapid globalization and growing technological sophistication of financial markets.  
Next, I would like to turn to monetary policy. As globalization proceeds, assessment of the 
domestic  economic  and  price  situation  increasingly  demands  that  attention  be  paid  to  the 
influence of economic and market conditions overseas. At the same time, it has also become 
apparent that, since monetary policy takes effect via its influence on financial markets and 
the behavior of financial institutions, the globalization of financial markets means that policy 
actions  by  individual  central  banks are  mutually  influential. It  is  for  this  reason  that  central 
banks  have  frequent  and  detailed  exchanges  of  views  about  each  other's  economic  and 
financial situations as well as their respective thinking concerning monetary policy.  
The basic task of central banks, however, remains unchanged. Each central bank, having a 
good  understanding  of  conditions  overseas,  should  assess  its  own  economic  and  price 
situation  in  a  forward-looking  manner  and  carry  out  appropriate  policies  to  ensure  that 
economic  growth  and  prices  remain  stable.  Central  bankers  universally  agree  that  the 
stability  of  the  world  economy  is  achieved  by  economic  and  price  stability  in  each  country 
supported by appropriate monetary policy.  
Although the ultimate goal of monetary policy remains economic and price stability, I must 
add that to achieve this it is not enough to look only at price indices and growth rates. We 
must be attentive to factors likely to affect the economy and prices in the long run, such as 
developments  in  asset  prices  as  well  as  the  financial  market  situation  and  state  of  the 
financial system. Episodes such as the recent subprime mortgage problems or the bursting 
of  the  economic  bubble  in  Japan  indicate  that  changes  in  asset  prices  may  on  occasion 
result in considerable fluctuations in the economy and prices over the medium to long run. To 
achieve  long-run  economic  and  price  stability,  therefore,  we  need  to  be  constantly  vigilant 
concerning  risk  factors  such  as  bubbles  or  financial  system  disruptions  that  cause  large 
losses when they materialize, even though the probability of such materialization may be low. 
In  this  regard,  information  such  as  developments  in  asset  prices  as  well  as  changes  in 
market conditions and the state of financial system stability should be carefully analyzed.  
These  points  of  concern  are  incorporated  within  each  central  bank's  framework  for 
conducting monetary policy. In the case of the Bank of Japan, we examine such long-run risk 
factors  under  the  "second  perspective"  specified  in  the  framework  for  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy introduced in March 2006. The European Central Bank (ECB) crosschecks 
information obtained through its assessment of the economy and prices against that obtained 
from  its  monetary  analysis.  The  Federal  Reserve,  with  its  introduction  last  November  of 
measures to enhance transparency, started to make public Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC)  participants'  views  about  the  level  of  uncertainty  and  risk  factors  affecting  its 
medium-term  outlook.  Even  countries  that  practice  inflation  targeting  do  not  automatically 
adjust policy rates to keep inflation within their predetermined range, but retain a degree of 
flexibility in meeting their targets.  
8 
 BIS Review 22/2008
The Bank of Japan conducts monetary policy so as to achieve long-run economic and price 
stability  by  analyzing  a  wide  range  of  information,  including  indicators  of  global  economic 
trends and financial conditions. By ensuring economic and price stability in the medium to 
long  term,  the  Bank  will  provide  a solid  foundation  upon  which  both  firms  and  households 
can formulate their plans for the future and base their actual economic behavior. I believe 
this will, in turn, allow us to take advantage of global economic vigor to successfully confront 
the issues of demographic change and fiscal consolidation.  
Closing remarks 
Today,  I  have  talked  about  medium-  to  long-term  issues  facing  the  Japanese  and  world 
economies and I have put forward some basic strategies for addressing those issues. There 
are  certainly  a  number  of  issues  that  require  attention.  However,  I  believe  that  the  world 
economy has the potential for further development and that Japan's economy is well capable 
of succeeding in the global market. It is my firm hope that the economies of both Japan and 
the  world  will  realize  sustainable  growth  by  successfully  addressing  each  of  these  issues, 
and the Bank of Japan in cooperation with other central banks will continue to perform its 
supportive part in this process. 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 9
