Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Financial and regulatory developments in 
Bahrain 
Address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain, at the Middle East Financial Services Summit, Manama, 5 May 2008. 
 Good morning Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am delighted to be here today at the Middle East Financial Services Summit, which is being 
held in Bahrain for the second consecutive year. It is indeed my pleasure to welcome you all 
here. I would also like to thank the organizers, FT Global Events, for their efforts in holding 
this event in Bahrain and for inviting me to address this distinguished audience. 
Ladies & Gentlemen, much has changed since we last gathered here for this conference. At 
the  time,  the  economic  boom  in  the  GCC  region,  with  oil  trading  around  US$64,  was  the 
main headline news. 
Today, as you all know, oil has scaled new heights at over $115 a barrel on most days, the 
US  subprime  crisis  has  unleashed  a  global  credit  crunch  and  the  world  stands  on  the 
threshold of a food crisis due to the soaring prices of basic commodities. 
Here, in the GCC, we are indeed fortunate on many fronts. Although we have no desire to 
destabilize international financial markets, the high oil prices have enabled us to embark on a 
new program to further modernize our economies, in order to secure prosperity for the long 
term. 
However,  the  rising  price  of  oil,  while  very  welcome,  has  not  come  without  its  own 
challenges. Along with the rest of the world, we, too, are facing inflationary pressures, which 
need to be carefully managed without compromising the momentum of economic growth. 
The central banks of the GCC, individually and collectively, are giving due attention to the 
issue of inflation and several new measures, such as rent caps and credit controls on banks, 
have  been  announced  to  support  long-standing  programmes  of  food  subsidies  and 
government housing for nationals. 
In  Bahrain,  we  have  been  particularly  fortunate  that  inflationary  levels  have,  so  far,  been 
more modest in comparison with our neighbors and that our financial services industry, which 
is a major component of the Bahraini economy, is enjoying good health. 
As the regulator of the financial services industry, the Central Bank of Bahrain is pleased by 
the continued growth of Bahrain’s financial services sector. 
While the effects of the US subprime crisis and resulting credit crunch have affected a few 
Bahrain banks, as Steve points out in his latest article “Good Show Of Profits” in The Banker, 
Bahrain’s  banking  industry  has  turned  in  record  earnings  of  US$3.3  billion  for  2007  and 
revenue  momentum  is  expected  to  remain  strong  for  the  foreseeable  future.  Unlike  in  the 
West, economies in this region have ample liquidity at hand so we are not as likely to suffer 
from credit worries. 
However,  despite  all  the  good  news,  the  CBB  is  not  taking  a  rest  from  its  regulatory  and 
supervisory role. We continue to take a proactive approach in developing new regulations or 
updating/revising  existing  ones,  as  appropriate,  in  line  with  our  long-standing  policy  of 
implementing international standards.  
A key recent highlight has been the implementation, from the start of this year, of the Basel II 
regulatory  framework,  which  will  significantly  enhance  the  risk  management  practices  of 
Bahrain’s  banks.  And,  given  the  importance  of  Islamic  banking  in  Bahrain,  the  CBB  has 
BIS Review 70/2008 
 1
become  the  first  financial  services  regulator  to  adopt  a  comprehensive  Basel  II  compliant 
framework which provides for appropriate capital treatment of Islamic financial products.  
The CBB is also currently developing new rules to limit banks’ exposure to the real estate 
market. Although regulators cannot possibly micro manage the investment portfolios of their 
licensees,  we  do  have a  role  to  play  in  encouraging  financial institutions  to  maintain  more 
balanced portfolios. 
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  stress  that  the  CBB  has  an  established  policy  of 
consulting with industry prior to implementing new or any upgrades to existing regulations. 
The  CBB  strives  to  be  an  even-handed,  transparent  regulator  and  we  are  open  to 
suggestions from the industry.  
Maintaining  a  regulatory  environment  that  is,  at  once,  business-friendly  and  adheres  to 
international  best  practice  is,  undoubtedly,  one  of  the  success  factors  in  Bahrain’s 
development as an international financial centre of repute over the past 35 years.  
Today, Bahrain hosts the Middle East region’s largest critical mass of financial institutions, 
which represent a good mix of international, regional and local players offering a very wide 
variety of services.  
Within  the  financial  services  industry,  the  CBB  sees  significant  growth  in  Islamic  finance, 
both banking and insurance, as well as private banking and the funds industry. 
In each case, the CBB has moved quickly to provide an enabling regulatory environment for 
the sound and stable development of that segment of the industry.  
Ladies  &  Gentlemen,  I  have  no  doubt  that  Bahrain,  as  the  Middle  East’s  most  mature 
financial  centre,  will  remain  at  the  forefront  of  financial  developments  in  the  Middle  East 
region. Our core model remains strong and we have a clear vision for how we want to go 
forward. 
Thank you for your attention and I look forward to welcoming you again in Bahrain soon. 
2 
 BIS Review 70/2008
