Caleb M Fundanga: Reading towards a sustainable economic future 
Opening address by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, as the guest of 
honour,  at  the  Zambia  Book  Fair  2008,  organized  by  the  Book  Publishers  Association  of 
Zambia, Lusaka, 29 May 2008. 
 • The Master of Ceremonies 
• The Chairman, Book Publishers Association of Zambia 
• Book Sellers Association of Zambia 
• The Director, Lusaka Museum 
• Distinguished Invited Guest 
• Exhibitors 
• Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is a great pleasure and honour for me to have been invited to officially open the Zambia 
Book Fair 2008, which is the largest book event in the country. I am reliably informed that this 
year’s fair has attracted around 23 exhibitors, and I am proud to be able to say that the Bank 
of Zambia is also participating as an exhibitor. 
Mr. Chairman, 
The  decision  to  accept  the  invitation  from  your  Association  to  grace  this  occasion  as  the 
Guest of Honour was a very easy one to make. There are two important reasons for this: 
First of all, I love to read. This love for reading extends beyond academic and professional 
books to fiction, magazines, newspapers, research papers and generally any literature that 
stimulates me to think critically about the world around me and how I view and understand it. 
I believe this has broadened my own horizons and enabled me to interact with many different 
people  from  different  cultures  all  over  the  world  –  creating  and  cementing  many  valuable 
friendships. 
The  second  reason  is  that  the  theme  of  this  year’s  book  fair  –  READING  TOWARDS  A 
SUSTAINABLE  ECONOMIC  FUTURE  –  touches  squarely  on  my  own  professional 
responsibilities as Governor of the Bank of Zambia. Our main pre-occupation at the Bank of 
Zambia  is  to  help  Government  attain  a  sustainable  economic  future  by  working  to  keep 
increases in the average prices of goods and services low, the price of money (i.e. interest 
rates) low, and maintaining a stable exchange rate and financial system. This is the best way 
in which we can assist the Government as it works to advance the welfare of the Zambian 
people. Needless to say, one of the key pre-requisites for the Government in achieving this 
goal  is  the  need  to  develop  an  educated  and  enlightened  citizenry,  which  can  effectively 
contribute to the development process. 
From  the  Bank  of  Zambia’s  own  perspective,  the  experience  of  central  banks  around  the 
world is that effective communication with the public is a very important part of the success of 
central banks in achieving their objectives of price and financial system stability. The written 
word,  although  not  the  oldest  form  of  communication,  is  perhaps  the  most  powerful  and 
enduring form for communicating and exchanging ideas. It is therefore indispensable in the 
work that we do. It is for this reason, for example, that the Bank of Zambia has supported the 
work  of  journalists  in  understanding  economic  issues  and  supported  their  associations  in 
improving the standard of journalism in Zambia. Further, the Bank of Zambia publishes its 
own  inhouse  magazine  “THE  ZAMBANKER”  as  well  as  more  technical  economic  articles 
mainly  written  by  staff on  topical  issues  in  the Zambian  economy  in  “THE  BoZ  READER”. 
Although  most  of  the  articles  have  been  written  by  staff  in  the  Bank,  we  have  always 
encouraged the public to contribute articles on issues relating to the Zambian economy. 
In  this  regard,  I  wish  to  once  more  extend  an  invitation  to  you  all  to  contribute  articles  for 
publication in the ZAMBANKER or indeed the BoZ READER. 
BIS Review 74/2008 
 1
Distinguished Guests, 
In order to effectively address the issue of how to secure a sustainable economic future, the 
first point of call must surely be to address the issue of illiteracy in Zambia. A good number of 
our citizens especially those living in the rural areas are not able to read both in English or 
local  languages.  This  is  a  major  hindrance  to  sustainable  economic  development,  as  it 
makes it very difficult to transfer new technologies and skills to the rural populace – skills that 
are  critical  in  improving  health  and  education  outcomes  and  harnessing  the  tremendous 
potential that this country possesses. 
The scenario in the urban areas, though slightly better than the rural areas, still leaves much 
to be desired. The culture of reading does not exist. In the past, a bookshelf was one of the 
most cherished assets in a typical Zambian home. Today, the picture is very different. Either 
books are not readily available or they are too expensive to buy relative to people’s incomes; 
or they have lost their place of pride in the home – to home entertainment units packed with 
latest  movies,  music  and  Play  Stations,  to  mention  but  a  few.  This  situation  has  been 
compounded by the non-availability of sustainable library services in our schools, colleges, 
universities and public libraries. At the moment the better library services are being provided 
mainly in the urban areas, for instance, by development partners such as the British Council 
in Lusaka. This clearly needs augmentation by all interested stakeholders to set up libraries 
both in the urban and rural areas. 
The other aspect that, therefore, needs to be addressed, in relation to the theme of the Book 
Fair,  is  the  availability  of  appropriate  reading  materials.  Achieving  a  sustainable  economic 
future requires the active participation of a dynamic private sector. Such dynamism requires 
the  availability  of  relevant  and  specialised  reading  materials.  The  agricultural  sector,  for 
example, is an important part of the Zambian economy whose success holds the key to the 
rapid reduction in poverty that must be achieved if Zambia is to take its place amongst the 
community  of  progressive  nations.  Higher  literacy  levels  in  the  rural  areas  will  help  to 
propagate  better  farming  methods  and  conservation  techniques.  These  are  methods  that 
contribute to sustained economic growth and protect the environment. 
Master of Ceremonies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  development  of  a  reading  culture  in  our  nation  should  be  placed high  on  the  national 
agenda if we are to achieve a sustainable economic future as a country. I am aware of the 
initiatives  that  the  government  through  the  Ministry  of  Education  has  come  up  with  to 
encourage  reading  at  an  early  stage.  The  primary  reading  programme  and  the  concept  of 
reading tent by the Zambia Library Service are some of the initiatives aimed at inculcating 
the habit of reading at an early age. Other partners in development such as the private sector 
and  our  cooperating  partners  have  also  been  active.  Important  examples  include  the 
introduction  of  a  reading  bus  by  the  British  Council.  All  of  these  initiatives  will  contribute 
positively  to  the  development  of  the  reading  culture.  They  certainly  are  encouraging,  but 
more  needs  to  be  done.  Particularly,  the  other  key  stakeholders  who  are  parents  and 
guardians  of  our  school  going  children  who  should  take  interest  in  ensuring  that  children 
develop a culture of reading and writing. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
In closing my opening remarks, I wish to point out that currently most Zambian publishers are 
pre-occupied  with  the  development  and  publication  of  core  school  textbooks  where  the 
market is readily available. I wish to challenge publishers to invest some of the profits in the 
publication of more diverse reading materials including Braille, music and physical education 
books.  As  you  may  be  aware,  a  literate  citizenry  is  a  key  prerequisite  for  a  sustainable 
economic future. 
It is now my honour and privilege to declare the 2008 ZAMBIA BOOK FAIR officially open. 
I thank you all for your kind attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 74/2008
