Rachel Lomax: The state of the economy  
Speech by Ms Rachel Lomax, Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, to the Institute of 
Economic Affairs 25th Anniversary Conference, London, 26 February 2008. 
I  am  grateful  to  Gareth  Ramsay  for  his  help  in  preparing  this  speech,  and  to  other  colleagues  at  the  Bank  of 
England for helpful comments. 
 When you met for this event a year ago, the UK economy had just posted its fastest rate of 
growth in nearly two years, buoyed by a strong world economy and ample global liquidity. 
Shoppers had been out in force over Christmas and the New Year, and the housing market 
was booming. The main concern was consumer price inflation, which had just picked up to 
3%. Most forecasters were looking forward to another year of healthy demand growth, with 
the MPC’s central projection at the top end of the range. The consensus view was that the 
surge in inflation would be short-lived.  
And that, broadly, is what happened. CPI inflation fell back to around the 2% target by the 
second half of the year. Output growth for the year as a whole was in line with the MPC’s 
forecast. Short term interest rates now stand where they were a year ago – at 5.25% – after 
briefly touching 5.75% last summer.  
And yet the outlook for 2008 and beyond has changed dramatically. A year ago the prospect 
was for a modest decrease in growth, consistent with inflation staying around target. Now, 
inflation seems set to rise sharply in the near term. And our latest central projection is for 
output  to  grow  at  below  trend  rates  over  the  next  two  years  –  even  on  the  conventional 
assumption that Bank rate follows the market yield curve and falls to 4.5% during the course 
of this year.  
There is still relatively little in the headline macro data to support such a marked change in 
view.  CPI  inflation,  at  2.2%,  remains  close  to  target.  And,  on  the  output  side,  growth 
weakened a touch in the fourth quarter last year, but was still around the post war average. 
Indicators for the first quarter are mixed, but do not suggest that growth has stalled. 
In other words, the change in our Inflation Report projections is a forecast. It is the judgments 
underlying that forecast – and the attendant risks and uncertainties – which will be the main 
focus of my remarks today.  
So why have we changed our view? 
Our latest forecasts reflect judgements about the possible future impact on the UK of two key 
developments. First, the continuing financial crisis in advanced financial markets which has 
been triggered by the slump in the US housing market; and second, the renewed build up in 
global inflationary pressures, associated with soaring energy and food prices. 
These developments are symptomatic of profound changes in the global economy, as world 
growth  has  increasingly  been  powered  by  resource  hungry  emerging  markets,  and  as 
financial markets in developed countries have taken off and, in the process, become more 
tightly linked to one another. 
I will talk about both developments, before coming back to discuss the outlook for inflation 
and growth in the UK, and the implications for policy. 
Financial crisis  
The  crisis  in  financial  markets  last  August  was  triggered  by  a  slump  in  the  US  housing 
market.  This,  of  course,  is  acting  as  a  direct  drag  on  US  activity.  Any  slowing  in  the  US 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 1
economy stands to affect the UK in the traditional way, through influencing trade flows. The 
size  of  this  effect  will  depend  on  how  other  trading  partners  are  affected  and  how  policy-
makers react. 
But the really striking feature of recent experience has been how the US housing crisis has 
reverberated  through  the  highly  integrated  and  sophisticated  financial  markets  of  North 
America and Western Europe.  
Six months after global securitisation markets seized up, in response to uncertainties about 
the  scale  and  location  of  losses  arising  from  rising  defaults  on  US  sub  prime  mortgages, 
some credit markets are still not trading at all, and others remain very illiquid. And each week 
seems to highlight some new dimension of the ensuing disruption to core financial markets.  
The crucial task of valuing and disclosing the impact of losses on core banking institutions is 
still work in progress: important announcements are being made almost daily, and beyond 
them lies the equally important task of repairing banks’ balance sheets. The current shortage 
of liquidity makes the pricing of complex assets even more difficult. At the very least, this re-
inforces the need for transparency in providing estimates of losses, and descriptions of the 
best-efforts processes used to produce these estimates. 
The process of price discovery for many complex asset classes is unlikely to be completed 
quickly.  For  assets  directly  related  to  US  sub-prime,  this  is  unlikely  to  be  before  the  US 
housing  market  stabilises.  Other  structured  credit  markets  are  likely  to  remain  illiquid  until 
confidence in the banking sector has been restored, and large financial institutions are willing 
to take more risk.  
Clearly the situation is still developing. And its impact on the wider economic outlook – global 
and domestic – will depend critically on what happens from now on. Here there are some 
major uncertainties. 
There  is  a  widespread  –  and  in  my  view  largely  correct  –  view  that  the  US  housing  crisis 
acted  as  the  trigger  for  an  overdue  correction  in  financial  markets,  after  a  long  period  of 
plentiful liquidity during which risk premia of all sorts had become unduly compressed, asset 
prices  had  become  detached  from  reality,  financial  innovation  had  run  ahead  of  risk 
management, and unsound business models had led to a deterioration in credit monitoring 
and, in some areas, underlying credit quality.  
Many  people  –  including  the  Bank  of  England  –  foresaw  that  some  form  of  correction  in 
financial markets was highly likely, even inevitable. But it was another matter altogether to 
predict the precise nature and timing of the present crisis. The extent of the reverberations 
across different markets was certainly not fully appreciated. 
But the “accident waiting to happen” description of the current situation, however plausible at 
a general level, lends itself to a wide range of predictions about the possible course of events 
from now on, from the relatively benign to the frankly apocalyptic.  
The interesting question is: where do we go from here?  
Might slowdowns in other housing markets have the same potential to impair loan books and 
dent overall growth as in the US? What is the likely impact of a further falls in global equity 
markets?  What  further  scope  for  amplifying  financial  shocks  lies  buried  in  the  highly 
leveraged and tightly interconnected world created by the heady pace of financial innovation 
over  the  past  decade? And  –  going  to  the  apocalyptic  end  of  the  spectrum  –  if  the  global 
macro economy does turn very sour, at what point might falling asset prices and mounting 
banking losses start to feed on each other to push economies into a deflationary downward 
spiral? 
History does not give a clear steer. There have been financial and banking crises before, but 
not on the present global scale, and this must surely be the largest ever peacetime liquidity 
crisis. To take two extreme possibilities, is what we are seeing closer to a repeat of the US 
Savings and Loans crisis (whose real economy impact was small and shallow) or to Japan in 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2008
the early 1990s (characterised as a “lost decade” of growth)? Or is it something else again? 
How much does it matter that this is one of the first crises where a credit boom has died of 
“natural  causes”,  rather  than  being  choked  off  by  some  external  macroeconomic  or  policy 
shock? 
The substantial equity cushions built up in the years of plenty should act as shock absorbers 
in the years ahead. Even the most pessimistic estimates of the total losses from sub-prime 
mortgages – around $400 billion – compare with total global financial assets of at least $110 
trillion1. But there may be more shocks to come. The focus of current concerns is how far 
other assets may be impaired, as a result of the broader economic impact of this period of 
financial stress. 
This  brings  me  to  the  other  big  uncertainty:  how  far  will  tighter  credit  conditions  affect  the 
wider economy – in the UK and the rest of Europe as well as in North America? It seems 
highly  likely  that  growth  was  supported  by  easier  credit  over  last  few  years.  But  to  what 
extent?  When  it  comes  to  quantifying  the  effect  of  changes  in  credit  conditions,  our  work-
horse economic models still cannot help us very much.  
As far as the UK economic outlook goes, our central judgement is that financial stress will act 
as  a  significant  drag  on  demand  over  the  next  two  years.  But  there  is  a  high  level  of 
uncertainty about this; and, as we now see it, the risks, as they affect output, are tilted to the 
downside. These are two fold: first, that the financial crisis will persist and possibly intensify; 
and second, that over time tighter credit conditions and asset price weakness will combine, 
and in the worst case feed off each other, to sap the strength of overall demand, and put 
downward pressure on inflation in the medium term.  
Higher costs  
Let  me  come  now  to  the  other  major  area  of  risk:  the  upward  pressure  on  inflation  from 
higher external costs.  
The most recent build up of global cost pressures is just the latest episode in a remarkable 
period of soaring commodity prices. Oil prices have more than trebled since the start of 2004, 
and metals and food prices have more than doubled. Strong demand, particularly from China 
has  clearly  been  one  major  factor.  But  there  have  been  supply  side  issues  too.  And  the 
strength of some commodity prices also reflects their status as an investment class at a time 
of low global interest rates.  
Over the past year alone, oil prices have risen by around 60% in dollar terms and agricultural 
food prices by around 50%. Imported cost pressures in the UK will also reflect the fall in the 
effective exchange rate, down by 9% since the beginning of August last year – the largest 
such decline since sterling left the ERM in 1992. There are few reasons to expect this to be 
rapidly  reversed.  As  a  result  of  these  developments,  producer  input  and  output  prices  are 
now increasing faster than at any time since 1990, and import prices have picked up sharply.  
These  cost  pressures  have  not  yet  fed  through  fully  into  consumer  prices,  but  from  next 
month CPI inflation is likely to rise more sharply, in particular reflecting the impact of higher 
utility bills. There is essentially nothing the MPC can do about this immediate impact on the 
inflation  rate.  But  its  implication  for  policy  depends  on  whether  people  recognise  the 
temporary nature of the pick-up in inflation.  
The  MPC’s  remit  in  setting  interest  rates  is  clear  –  to  keep  inflation  at  2%.  But  we  have 
discretion to decide how fast to return inflation to target, if it is thrown off course by a sharp 
shock,  such  as  the  current  surge  in  world  energy  prices.  So  we  are  not  required  to  raise 
                                                 
1   This estimate is taken from the Bank of England Financial Stability Report, October 2007, Box 1 (Mapping the 
financial system). It comprises the estimates of total global securities markets, less bank deposits. 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 3
interest  rates  sharply  to  counteract the  rise  in  inflation  which  we  expect  over  the  next  few 
months.  We  can  decide  what  is  appropriate  in  the  light  of  all  the  circumstances.  And  the 
purpose of the Open Letter regime is to give us an opportunity to explain how we propose to 
use our discretion.  
Over the years the MPC has explained that it seeks to achieve its inflation objective in the 
medium term by varying interest rates to steer overall demand relative to supply. If price and 
wage setters do recognise that the imminent pick-up in inflation will be short-lived, then the 
implications  of  the  spike  for  monetary  policy,  and  for  the  necessary  balance  of  demand 
versus supply, should be limited. 
But if price and wage setters start to expect higher inflation to persist, then the Committee 
will need to restrain demand, and so generate some slack in the economy, in order to bring 
inflation expectations, and inflation itself, back down.  
Clearly therefore it is a matter of intense interest to understand how people form and revise 
their expectations.  
Unfortunately our understanding is very incomplete. One relevant area of active research is 
why inflation expectations seem to have been so stable over the past decade – the period of 
the so-called Great Stability. 
One  supposition  is  that  well  anchored  expectations  reflect  the  introduction  of  credible 
inflation  targeting  regimes  –  people  have  understood  that  central  banks  are  focussed  on 
keeping  inflation  low,  and  will  take  action  to  reduce  it  if  necessary.  Another  view  is  that 
people’s expectations reflect simpler rules-of-thumb based on actual inflation rates: if that’s 
the case stable expectations could simply be due to the fact that, over the past decade and a 
half, inflation itself has been low and stable.  
These alternatives are hard to distinguish empirically, on the track record so far. But it may 
make a great deal of difference which is true when it comes to forecasting what will happen 
to inflation expectations, if we have to deal with a future in which inflation is likely to be much 
more variable. 
If people put their trust in the regime, or a “credible central bank”, they are unlikely to revise 
their expectations about future inflation much, especially if the nature of the current situation 
is well and honestly explained, including how long it will take inflation to return to target. But if 
they forecast future inflation using simple rules of thumb based on past actual inflation rates, 
anything that dislodges inflation from target will affect what people use as their best forecast 
for future inflation.  
Or to put it another way, if the credibility of the monetary policy framework itself has been 
key, then inflation expectations may prove rather resilient to short term shocks.  
But  if  maintaining  an  excellent  track  record  has  been  crucial,  the  situation  may  be  more 
fragile.  
In the context of the current outlook, the real risk facing the Committee is that a further period 
of above target inflation, prompted by a cost shock over which it has no immediate control, 
will lead people to revise their expectations about future inflation, and to act accordingly. This 
will make it more costly to bring inflation back to target. 
What does all this mean for policy? 
The MPC has frequently stressed that policy is not based simply on its central projections of 
the  economic  outlook  –  what  matter  just  as  much  are  the  risks  around  it.  The  Bank  has 
pioneered  the  use  of  fan  charts  to  illustrate  the  probabilistic  nature  of  any  forecasting 
exercise. The fact that these fan charts reflect the Committee’s subjective judgements about 
the uncertainties it faces means that they can be quite revealing about its thinking.  
4 
 BIS Review 22/2008
This is particularly true now. Policy needs to balance two significant risks – first, that financial 
stress will precipitate an unduly sharp slowdown in demand, which will bear down so heavily 
on inflation that it undershoots the target; and second, that temporarily high inflation will lead 
to inflation expectations persisting at too high a level.  
I find it helpful to distinguish between two aspects of uncertainty, both of which are relevant 
to  setting  policy.  First,  the  balance  of  risks  around  the  central  projection,  and  second  the 
general level of uncertainty. 
The Committee regularly comments on the extent to which it believes the risks around the 
central  projection  are  skewed  –  that  is,  tilted  to  the  upside  or  the  downside.  And  it  has 
sometimes explained changes in interest rates by reference to changes in the balance of risk 
rather than changes in the central projection. In the latest Inflation Report, we commented 
that risks on our latest inflation forecasts were balanced, but those around the forecast for 
output were tilted to the downside.  
The width of the fan chart is an indication of the MPC’s level of uncertainty about the outlook. 
It’s  significant  that  the  MPC  widened  the  GDP  fan  charts  in  November,  and  the  CPI  fan 
charts further out, and maintained these wider fans in February. 
Another  way  of  presenting  the  same  information  is  this  bar  chart  (conditioned  on  market 
interest rates as in the February Inflation Report). This brings out the significant probabilities 
ascribed to outcomes which are some way away from the central projections.  
So, for example, there is a less than a one-in-three chance that GDP growth will be in the 
range  containing  the  Committee’s  central  projection  –  between  2  and  3%  –  in  two  years’ 
time.  We  see  a  greater  probability  –  around  two-in-five  –  that  growth  will  be  somewhere 
below 2%. On inflation, there’s only around a one-in-four chance that inflation will lie close to 
the central projection – that is, between 2 and 2.5%, but a more than one-in-three chance 
that it will be above 2.5%, and an almost 1 in 5 chance that it will be below 1.5%.  
As  this  illustrates,  one  implication  of  widening  the  fan  charts  has  been  to  increase  the 
perceived risk of some rather unattractive outcomes – either that growth slows too sharply, or 
that inflation does not return to target following an upward spike. In particular both the upper 
tail of the inflation forecast – where inflation expectations might well come seriously adrift – 
and  the  bottom  tail  of  the  output  forecast  –  where  there  could  be  a  risk  of  setting  off  a 
deflationary spiral – are to be avoided, if at all possible. 
In this situation, it is not unreasonable to suppose that the Committee will be more sensitive 
than usual to changes in the balance of risks. 
Since  neither  of  the  key  risks  to  the  outlook  is  readily  modelled  or  measured,  monitoring 
them is not going to be easy. But we do have a framework for thinking about them, and a 
variety of timely surveys and indicators which can act as early warning signs.  
On the impact of the credit shock, we will be monitoring our new quarterly credit conditions 
survey  of  lenders,  and  special  surveys  from  our  own  Agents,  as  well  as  the  full  range  of 
indicators of the price and quantity of credit.  
On inflation expectations, we pay close attention to a wide range of information drawn from 
surveys, and financial market prices, recognising that they are all, in different ways, tricky to 
interpret. We also need to be mindful of the risk that any further increases in the prices of 
everyday items like food and energy will heighten public perceptions of inflation, and raise 
expectations about the future overall rate of CPI inflation. 
Conclusion 
The outlook for the economy looks very different now from a year ago. We are seeing some 
powerful  global  forces  playing  out,  in  financial  markets,  in  commodity  markets,  and  in  the 
world’s largest economies. Their impact on the UK is highly uncertain, partly because they 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 5
are  hard  to  understand  and  to  predict,  and  partly  because  much  will  depend  on  the  way 
policymakers around the world respond. 
The MPC will need to respond continuously and flexibly to its assessment of the changing 
balance of two key risks. On the one hand, there is a risk that demand will slow too sharply, 
but on the other there is a risk that a temporary shock to inflation will prove persistent. 
A  temporary  pick-up  in  inflation  –  by  itself  –  does  not  mean  that  the  Committee  needs  to 
tolerate  a  significant  weakening  in  demand.  But  if  inflation  expectations  appear  to  be 
persistently elevated, then the Committee will need to tolerate more slack to keep inflation on 
target. And that means it will have less scope to respond to slowing demand – the risk posed 
by the current turmoil in financial markets.  
6 
 BIS Review 22/2008
Chart 2: GDP fanchart from February 
2007 Inflation Report, and outturns 
Percentage change in output on a year earlier
6
GDP outturns
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
5
4
3
2
1
0
-1
 Chart 4: GDP fanchart from February 2008 
Inflation Report 
 
Annex: Charts2 
 
Chart 1: CPI fanchart from February 
2007 Inflation Report, and outturns  
Percentage increase in prices on a year earlier
CPI outturns
02
03
04
05
06
07
08
09
10
4
3
2
1
0
  
Chart 3: CPI fanchart from February 2008 
Inflation Report 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
2   All fan charts and probability bar charts shown are conditioned on market interest rates. 
BIS Review 22/2008 
 7
 
Chart 5: Commodity price developments 
 Chart 6: GDP growth probabilities from 
February 2008 Inflation Report 
250
200
150
100
50
Index, 2000=100
Economist food price index 
(right hand axis) 
US $ per barrel
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1990
1993
Brent dollar oil price (left hand axis)
1996
1999
2002
2005
0
2008
  
Chart 7: CPI inflation probabilities from 
February 2008 Inflation Report 
 8 
   BIS Review 22/2008
