Martín Redrado: Financial turbulence – impact on developed and 
emerging economies (opening address) 
Opening address by Mr Martín Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, at the 
Central  Bank  of  Argentina  2008  Money  and  Banking  Conference  “Financial  turbulence  – 
impact on developed and emerging economies”, Buenos Aires, 1 September 2008. 
 During the last years, we have consolidated this conference as an international forum, which 
includes some of the most renowned academics and monetary policymakers from developed 
and emerging economies. 
I very well understand the effort that many of you have made to be here, so I would like to 
thank  all  participants  and,  very  especially,  those  who,  coming  from  abroad,  join  us  every 
year. 
Organizing this conference is not an isolated effort. This is part of a comprehensive strategy 
of being an active professional member of the international financial community. 
The title of this conference was chosen last year, and it probably is more applicable now than 
then. The financial turmoil of the past year, which very clearly affected some specific sectors 
in the U.S., does not recede, and keeps spreading to other markets and regions in the world. 
There is a general consensus that global economy now poses one of the greatest challenges 
in the post-war period.  
Financial  disruptions,  through  tighter  credit  conditions  and  undermined  confidence,  have 
imbued the real economy  with recession in the main developed countries. The situation is 
worsened  by  renewed  inflationary  pressures,  partly  due  to  an  unprecedented  rise  in 
commodity prices. In this process, there is a convergence of structural factors and cyclical 
forces associated to the prosperity of the global economy in the previous period. 
Due  to  some  of  these  factors  and  to  the  implementation  of  sounder  and  more  prudent 
macroeconomic policies, emerging economies turned out to be relatively resilient. However, 
it  is  not  realistic  to  think  that  they  can  be  completely  “decoupled”  from  the  events  in  the 
developed world, especially if the external context continues to deteriorate.  
A characteristic of crises is that great efforts are devoted to go through them as quickly as 
possible.  This  may  occasionally  sow  the  seeds  for  future  problems.  In  turn,  these  periods 
plainly reveal structural weaknesses. 
Looking  forward,  one  of  the  crucial  issues  to  focus  on  is  how  to  unwind  the  massive 
interventions  and  collaterals  used  by  the  most  important  central  banks.  In  my  view,  the 
extensive liquidity provided was a necessary response. It is arguable whether or not there 
was  a  late  response  and  if  it  would  have  been  better  to  have  had  a  preestablished 
framework.  This  might  have  allowed  better  assessing  the  effects  and  providing  a  more 
predictable scenario by specifying in advance the measures for reabsorbing that liquidity in 
the future.  
In the emerging world, there is no doubt that a structurally growing demand is in place, not 
only for food but also for energy, minerals, metals and all sorts of commodities. Expansion in 
developing  countries  is  mostly  due  to  a  process  by  which  large  emerging  regions  are 
catching  up  with  improved  living  standards.  Against  this  backdrop,  recovery  of  credit  and 
financing is essential to solve the income and price challenges faced by the global economy. 
If there is a clear message to draw from this crisis, it is that there is no such thing as “one 
size fits all”. A few days ago, in Jackson Hole, the focus was on how to prevent the crisis 
from worsening and maintain stability in this new context. The most important lesson I have 
BIS Review 109/2008 
 1
learnt is that there is no optimal solution in abstracto. Especially, when dealing with complex 
economic policy dilemmas. 
This  brings  about  the  existence  of  so-called  “financial  cycles”  and  markets  tendency  to 
instability  that  may  result  in  severe  macroeconomic  disruptions.  The  world  faces  an 
unprecedented  combination  of  negative  economic  events:  financial  crisis,  recession  and 
inflation. This phenomenon is very rare for developed economies. For emerging economies, 
unfortunately,  this  trinity  is  much  more  familiar.  In  our  way,  we  have  a  long  experience  in 
dealing with the consequences of these critical events. 
In  fact,  several  of  the  problems  we  are  currently  discussing  are  surprisingly  recurrent  and 
show  that  there  are  similarities  between  crises.  These  factors,  together  with  some  new 
elements  which  made  recent  adjustments  somewhat  dramatic  (such  as  the  role  of  new 
financial  instruments  and  players),  have  forced  us,  policymakers,  to  implement  original 
solutions. 
During  past  decades,  crises  in  the  emerging  world  have  helped  clarify  the  connection 
between  the  objectives  of  monetary  and  financial  stability.  As  currently  takes  place  in  the 
developed world, it also highlights the importance of liquidity and capital regulation. 
In times of hardship, it is necessary to have in hand criterions to temporarily apply “reduction 
ratios” to adjust capital requirements for the instruments most affected by the crisis resolution 
mechanisms.  This  is  based  on  systemic  factors,  which  are  somehow  involuntary  for 
institutions operating under these conditions. This approach buys the system some time (a 
relatively less scarce resource in times of crisis) and minimizes the need for a government 
capitalization. 
In this new framework, central banks from the main developed economies also had to revise 
their  usual  regulation,  operation  and  intervention  mechanisms.  By  implementing  new 
facilities, they significantly expanded their scope. As a result of the difficulties experienced by 
bear sterns and, despite the fact that the prudential regulation and supervision network was 
focused on the behavior of commercial banks, the fed “throw away the textbook”. Because of 
its  critical  role  in  the  process  of  credit  generation,  and  for  being  involved  in  a  complex 
network of financial transactions, the eventual bankruptcy of an investment bank in a context 
of  generalized  leverage  was  expected  to  cause  systemic  events.  This  new  prominence  of 
market-based  intermediaries  will  have  long  lasting  effect  on  the  creation  of  the  theoretical 
schemes behind monetary policy. 
As  usual,  and  regardless  of  undeniable  costs,  times  of  crisis  are  breeding  ground  for 
creativity,  but  also  for  the  inevitable  revision  of  previously  accepted  principles.  In  times  of 
turmoil, theoretical consensus on “what to do” and “how to do it” tends to vanish. In other 
words,  if  the  relationship  between  economic  theory  and  policy  recommendations  is 
reasonably well defined during “normal” times, in times of turmoil, this relationship becomes 
much weaker.  
Admittedly,  sometimes  this  may  be  due  to  the  relative  complacency  characterizing  boom 
periods,  and  to  the  inadvertent  way  in  which  changes  build  up,  with  consequences  that 
become apparent very vividly when it is perhaps already too late.  
As I see it, “the perfect storm” is revealing us the non linearity of reality, and that our models 
need to be reformulated and surely made more complex. 
In  other  words,  every  crisis  should  be  seen  as  an  opportunity  to  revise  fundamental 
structures.  It  is  now  clear  that  financial  regulation  policies,  with  their  slight  variations  at  a 
global level, were to be revised. The excellent paper recently presented by Adrian and Shin 
of the Federal Reserve of New York is definitely a step in the right direction. This paper has, 
at least, two elements worth considering: first, it reintroduces financial intermediation as an 
essential part of economic models and second, it gives monetary aggregates a role to play in 
the central bank policy function again. 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2008
In  addition,  it  arrives  at  a  conclusion  that  I  have  been  claiming  in  discussions  with  my 
colleagues for some time: far from being disconnected, financial stability objectives and the 
rest of the traditional monetary policy objectives are two sides of the same coin. 
That is, we have reached a point in which economic theory is having a hard time keeping up 
with  praxis.  For  this  reason,  the  costs  and  benefits  of  policies  becomes  blurring,  posing 
significant challenges to central bankers. The difference is that now these challenges are not 
only faced by emerging countries, like in the past, but also haunts the developed world. 
This  highlights  the  importance  of  “the  risk  management  approach”  in  the  design  of 
precautionary  strategies  for  monetary  policy.  In  fact,  the  crisis  afforded  central  banks  of 
developed  economies  some  flexibility  in  their  instruments.  We,  as  monetary  authorities  in 
emerging countries, are much more used to employ diverse tools.  
This reflects the need for a more pragmatic approach, derived from a less linear reality and 
with traditional transmission mechanisms that are not as deep. 
Even  the  emerging  countries  with  inflation  targeting  regimes  were  forced  to  make  their 
systems more flexible to face a new inflationary environment resulting from a changing global 
economic structure. In the end, we all operate under similar principles, but are surrounded by 
different realities, circumstances and idiosyncracies.  
This reminds me of José Ortega y Gasset's expression in Meditations on the Quixote, “I am 
myself plus my circumstance”.  
With this, I am not proposing a return to the classical dilemma of rules versus discretion in 
monetary theory during the 1980s. I believe that Kydland and Prescott, as well as Barro and 
Gordon have been very convincing. In my opinion, we should discuss the possibility of giving 
equal weight to the rules and the need for a flexible response to specific events; these events 
are the ones precisely not considered in the design of those rules due to their low likelihood 
of occurrence. 
In policy design, monetary authorities should explicitly try to avoid ex ante the emergence of 
imbalances that could lead to financial instability. The aim is to “reduce the frequency and 
severity of bouts of financial instability in the future”, as Ben Bernanke argues. 
Recent literature has shown results that are ambiguous or even contrary to those yielded by 
the usual “technology”. As regards the rules implemented via the interest rate channel, in the 
past 15 years the conventional wisdom was that short-term interest rates could be used to 
change the whole yield curve and thus affect economic agents’ decisions. 
Recent work shows that this may not be the case and that the impact of short-term rates on 
real variables is substantially different. In turn, a 2007 paper by Black and Rosen shows that 
the  effect  of  the  interest  rate  policy  varies  according  to  the  bank’s  size  and  that  it  has  an 
asymmetric impact between small and large bank customers. 
My  reading  is  clear:  the  intellectual  stature  and  experience  of  all  players  involved  in  the 
controversy prove that there is no single policy or one optimal approach that could be defined 
in a vacuum. Every policy option has its costs and benefits: there is no such thing as a free 
lunch. The key is to choose whether we want to avoid “going long” or “falling short”. 
Naturally,  beyond  any  attempt  to  mitigate  this  trade-off,  the  strategy  and  policy  choice  will 
crucially depend on the attitudes of the government and its people towards risk.  
It will also depend on their intertemporal considerations, because the profit and loss profile of 
alternative  regimes  will  not  always  coincide.  Furthermore,  past  trends  in  the  relevant 
economy and the starting conditions will naturally affect our policy choice. 
Our Central Bank’s approach to monetary policy in and for the specific circumstances of the 
Argentine economy can be understood in this framework. This approach is three-fold: (1) a 
robust  monetary  policy  that  ensures  the  equilibrium  between  supply  and  demand  (2)  a 
BIS Review 109/2008 
 3
counter-cyclical  scheme  of  foreign  reserve  accumulation  to  mitigate  vulnerabilities  and 
reduce macroeconomic volatility; and (3) a managed floating exchange rate regime.  
Our  economy  has  been  systematically  prone  to  recurring  and  marked  macroeconomic 
instability  episodes.  The  occurrence  of  shocks  (in  terms  of  trade  or  in  the  conditions  to 
access external financing, among others) and the existence of shock-amplifying mechanisms 
have been a source of recurring macroeconomic instability in the past. 
These trends were often underscored by the macroeconomic policy itself, which tended to 
behave procyclically. This explains the preventive approach underlying the current monetary 
policy design and also reveals our asymmetric approach to the shocks affecting the domestic 
economy. 
On numerous occasions we have insisted on the idea that the past haunts us and leads us to 
adopt a prudent and asymmetrical strategy in response to exogenous forces: until enough 
evidence  proves  otherwise,  we  are  forced  to  “dramatically  shift  the  burden  of  proof”  and 
assume  that  every  negative  shock  is  permanent  and  that,  a  priori,  positive  forces  are 
temporary. 
Naturally,  this  has  a  bearing  on  economic  policy  as  a  whole.  Therefore,  a  prudent  fiscal 
strategy of building up excess savings in good times should be a natural consequence of this 
asymmetric approach to shocks. 
The same happens in the monetary and financial field. The buildup of liquidity buffers in good 
times  allows  us  to  weather  the  storm  in  an  unprecedented  way  for  our  history,  both  for 
exogenous and endogenous reasons. 
In the past few months, we took strong measures to ensure monetary and financial stability. 
We noticed a marked mis-alignment in the demand for money which activated the warning 
signs on our control panel. In other words, there was a diversion in one of the variables from 
values provided by our scheme in the base scenario. Private sector deposits experienced a 
temporary decline of 8% in less than a month during may. To put it in perspective, in three 
months, deposits fell by 17% during the Tequila Effect.  
Taking  all  this  into  account,  and  having  assessed  the  costs  and  benefits  of  using  each 
instrument, we focused all our efforts in restoring money market equilibrium. This is no more 
than  a  professional  response  based  on  the  risk  management  approach  applied  to  the 
Argentine monetary policy. 
The Central Bank surgically and sequentially implemented a set of ten measures. First, we 
strengthened the demand for Argentine pesos and once the foreign exchange market was 
relatively calm, we undertook actions to reinstate liquidity, so as to ensure financial stability 
and the well functioning of the payment system. In fact, we adopted the following prudential 
scheme: 
1) 
First,  we  adapted  our  operations  in  the  repo  market:  we  established  a  scheme  to 
offer liquidity at a fixed (up to 3 billion ar pesos) and a variable (badlar) interest rate. 
By  offering  a  wider  variety  of  options,  we  ensured  the  availability  of  resources  in 
appropriate conditions to provide liquidity to the system. 
We  renewed  only  partially  central  bank  securities  coming  due  and  repurchased 
some others with near term maturities. 
We extended the limits to operate in the futures market, both for the Central Bank 
and some of its counterparties.  
We allowed the reference foreign exchange rate for futures and forward transactions 
between  the  Central  Bank  and  its  counterparties  to  be  settled  by  the  Emerging 
Market Traders Association (EMTA). This measure is clearly a vote of confidence in 
our approach. 
2) 
3) 
4) 
4 
 BIS Review 109/2008
5) 
6) 
7) 
8) 
9) 
10) 
We begun to do open market operations through government securities market by 
purchasing instruments that can be liquidated in pesos or dollars in the secondary 
market. This mechanism worked as an additional tool to provide liquidity beyond the 
banking  sector,  and  at  the  same  time,  enabled  the  intervention  on  the  different 
segments of the yield curve, avoiding distortions in its temporal structure. 
To alleviate the seasonal effects on the traditionally illiquid month of July, we unified 
the financial institutions’ minimum cash requirement for June and July in a single bi-
monthly term. This improves the institutions’ liquidity management. 
We developed a mechanism for US dollar-denominated repo supply. This was an 
additional way to ensure dollar supply at times when the dollar increased its share in 
investors’ portfolios and when it was necessary to lower depreciation expectations. 
The Central Bank started to participate in the NDF market with operations up to 12 
months and with counterparties whose credit quality was not lower than A-. 
We opened a new repo window to include as collateral certain instruments (Bogar 
and  guaranteed  loans)  that  cannot  be  used  in  traditional  repo  operations.  This 
enabled institutions that had no significant central bank bills and notes positions in 
their portfolios to access our liquidity provision mechanisms.   
Finally,  we  offered  new  maturity  options  for  reverse  repos,  readjusting  the  cost  in 
line with the new term structure.  
That  is,  the  system  was  adapted  through  a  set  of  ten  measures  to  stabilize  the  foreign 
exchange  market  and  then  correct  the  remaining  monetary  and  financial  variables.  In  a 
nutshell, we have taken all the necessary steps to ensure full systemic liquidity in pesos and 
dollars. And, as a result, fluctuations in financial variables were limited, and the real economy 
was not negatively affected. 
This is not a change on our policies. It is the same framework implemented in the last few 
years but facing a different scenario. The current situation is a stress test for the strength of 
this strategy, and ratifies the consistency and validity of its fundamental pillars.  
To  sum  up,  conferences  such  as  this  one,  featuring  many  dear  colleagues  with  whom  we 
usually  interact  in  seminars  around  the  world  in  a  peculiar  time  like  the  current  one,  are 
breeding ground for analyzing the impact of the crisis and its scenarios. Moreover, given the 
current  international  economic  scenario,  history  is  providing  the  money  and  banking 
conference with a unique opportunity, through a better understanding of reality, to influence 
policy redesign both in the emerging and the developed world. 
Welcome to all of you and thank you very much. 
BIS Review 109/2008 
 5
