Jean-Pierre Roth: Swiss outlook and global developments 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Jean-Pierre  Roth,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Swiss  National  Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, at the Icon Roadshow Euro 2008, Frankfurt am Main, 17 March 2008. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The Swiss economy looks back on a number of successful years during which it was a very 
active participant in the growth of the world economy. The export sector rapidly expanded its 
presence in the new markets, thereby making an important contribution to this development.  
What  was  remarkable  was  that  the  increased  foreign  activities  were  not  detrimental  to 
Switzerland as a production location. On the contrary, the Swiss location benefited overall. 
Reforms  aimed  at  strengthening  and  opening  up  Switzerland  as  a  business  location  have 
also made a substantial contribution to economic prosperity in recent years.  
The  turbulence  on  the  financial  markets  that  erupted  in  mid-2007  is  unlikely  to  leave  the 
Swiss  economy  unscathed.  The  export  sector, including the  banks,  will  be  affected  by  the 
slowdown  in  the  international  economy.  An  additional  factor  is  the  substantial  rise  in  the 
value  of  the  Swiss  franc  over  the  past  few  months  against  the  euro  and  the  US  dollar. 
However, we are already in a position to learn quite a bit from the financial market turmoil. 
First,  because  financial markets  are  so  highly  integrated,  central  banks  need  to  cooperate 
closely in order to master the problems. Second, incentive schemes in banks that have given 
particular priority to rewards for risky behaviour should be changed, and the instruments for 
measuring risks need to be reassessed. The way in which the Swiss National Bank steers 
the  Swiss  franc  money  market,  however,  has  proved  its  worth,  with  the  three-month  Libor 
being  successfully  held  inside  the  target  range.  In  this  way,  the  real  economy  has  been 
protected from the upheaval on the interbank market. 
BIS Review 31/2008 
 1
