Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Start of the ECB/ESCB needs analysis 
programme in Belgrade 
Introductory  statement  by  Ms  Gertrude  Tumpel-Gugerell,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board 
and of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank, at the Press conference on the 
occasion  of  the  signing  of  the  protocol  between  the  European  Central  Bank,  the  National 
Bank of Serbia, the European Agency for Reconstruction and the Delegation of the European 
Commission to the Republic of Serbia, Belgrade, 1 September 2008. 
 Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, 
Mr Ambassador Lloveras, Head of Delegation of the Delegation of the European 
Commission to the Republic of Serbia, 
Mr Daniel Giuglaris, Head of the Belgrade Operational Centre of the European Agency for 
Reconstruction, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a pleasure for me to be here in Belgrade today to mark the start of a programme that – I 
hope – will further the European integration project in the area of central banking. 
I would like to express my gratitude to the European Agency for Reconstruction and to the 
Delegation  of  the  European  Commission  to  the  Republic  of  Serbia  for  supporting  this 
programme, in which the European Central Bank (ECB) and 17 central banks of EU Member 
States will be working closely with our colleagues at the National Bank of Serbia (NBS). 
Speaking also on behalf of our central bank partners, I would like to say that we are very 
much looking forward to these coming nine months. Later during this press conference I will 
confirm the commitment of the ECB and our partner national central banks to implementing 
the programme by signing a protocol which confirms the common goals of all stakeholders in 
the programme. 
The  ECB  and  our  partners  in  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks  have  an  interest  in 
developments in Serbia and in the Western Balkans in general; these countries form what we 
call our neighbouring region. We share a common destiny with all of you, and we are being 
confronted  with  common  challenges,  for  instance  in  the  pursuit  of  monetary  and  financial 
stability. 
In  order  to  achieve  our  common  mandates  of  low  inflation  and  stable  financial  sectors  we 
need  to  make  sure  that  some  prerequisites  are  met,  most  importantly  in  terms  of  the 
complete  independence  of  the  central  bank  from  political  instructions,  in  order  to  permit  a 
firm stability-oriented course of monetary policy. 
We also know that stability-oriented monetary policies need to be accompanied by coherent 
policy-making in other economic areas, above all in fiscal policy. This is universally true, in 
Belgrade and in any of our capitals in the European Union. 
There are many reasons for our interest in engaging in this programme with the NBS. Let me 
highlight some of them. 
Serbia is a country – and more generally the Western Balkans is a region – whose financial 
sector is deeply intertwined with that of Europe and more specifically of the euro area: we 
therefore share the same concerns for the stability of our banks. 
Moreover,  for  a  number  of  reasons  –  ranging  from  the  desire  of  citizens  to  protect  their 
savings from hyperinflation and financial fragility to intense flows of tourists and migrants – 
the European national currencies in the past and the euro today have played a special role in 
this region, including in Serbia. 
BIS Review 103/2008 
 1
This country – and once again, this region – must be commended for its remarkable progress 
in  economic  terms  over  the  past  years.  Growth  has  been  sustained,  confidence  in  the 
currencies  has  strengthened,  the  financial  sector  has  deepened  and  new  investment  has 
been attracted. Private economic agents have started the long march towards catching up 
with their competitors in the single market. 
At the same time, it is of the utmost importance – and I am sure Governor Jelašić will agree – 
to continue monitoring closely the remaining challenges, especially at a time when financial 
and  economic  conditions  worldwide  have  become  less  supportive.  The  fight  for  economic 
stability is never won once and for all. 
Serbia’s status as a potential EU candidate country implies that, once the conditions are met, 
the NBS will join the European System of Central Banks and, upon sustainable compliance 
with conditions of economic convergence, also the Eurosystem. 
We expect the programme that is being launched today to enable us to make advances in 
our  mutual  understanding  of  your  situation  and  to  design  together  the  path  for  your 
adaptation to EU standards. 
To this aim, over a period of nine months we will carry out a needs analysis of the current 
regulatory and operational framework of the NBS, as well as of its policies and practices. All 
of  these  elements  will  be  measured  against  a  benchmark  represented  by  the  standard 
institutional and operational pattern of an EU central bank’s operating policies and practices. 
In practice, experts from the ECB and the other 17 EU national central banks will undertake 
missions here, hold discussions with their colleagues, try to identify the specificities of your 
central  bank,  and  build  an  understanding  with  you  of  where  and  how  you  would  like  to 
achieve progress. Our experts will come as colleagues, not to judge but to support you.  
During  these  nine  months,  the  analysis  will  cover  six  areas:  1)  supervision  of  banks;  2) 
harmonisation of legislation in line with the acquis communautaire under the competence of 
the NBS; 3) liberalisation of capital movements; 4) conduct of monetary policy and foreign 
exchange  rate  regime;  5)  monetary,  financial  and  balance  of  payments  statistics;  and  6) 
financial services consumer protection. 
There will be a need to coordinate these efforts, and to produce a coherent picture of the 
different recommendations. This will be the main task of Mr Thijs Kettenis, policy advisor at 
De Nederlandsche Bank, who will be our Resident Programme Coordinator here in Belgrade. 
He is here today, and I would like to wish him full success in this undertaking. 
The analysis will be carried out by the ECB together with colleagues from the national central 
banks  of  Belgium,  Bulgaria,  the  Czech  Republic,  Denmark,  Germany,  Estonia,  Greece, 
France, Italy, Cyprus, Latvia, Hungary, the Netherlands, Austria, Poland, Romania and the 
United Kingdom. 
It is a long list of countries, but I felt it was absolutely necessary to mention all of them. I 
would  like  to  warmly  greet  the  representatives  from  several  of  these  participating  central 
banks, who have accompanied me here today. 
Of  course,  the  work  which  confronts  all  of  us  in  the  coming  years  goes  beyond  setting 
benchmarks and recommending solutions in these six areas. We are today marking the start 
of  a  strong  strategic  partnership  between  our  central  banks,  through  which  we  intend  to 
support and add to the achievements already attained by the NBS up until now. 
We  will  be  building  this  strategic  partnership  on  strong  foundations.  Many  of  our  central 
banks have already established an intensive dialogue with the monetary authorities of Serbia 
– and in some cases this began several years ago. 
If  I  may  for  one  moment  refer  to  my  personal  experience  at  the  Oesterreichische 
Nationalbank – before I took up the position in the ECB Executive Board in 2003 – I would 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2008
like  to  recall  how  intense  the  cooperation  was  with  the  monetary  authorities  of  all  our 
neighbours. The same is true for many of the other central banks involved in this programme. 
I  am  sure  that  we  will  find  you  highly  motivated  partners.  On  our  side,  you  will  find  both 
commitment and enthusiasm. 
I would like to wish all involved parties the very best of luck. 
BIS Review 103/2008 
 3
