Mario Draghi: The current crisis and beyond 
Remarks by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability  Forum,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Symposium,  Jackson  Hole, 
22 August 2008. 
 More  than  a  year  into  the  most  challenging  financial  crisis  of  our  times  we  now  face  a 
complex  and  interlocking  combination  of  rising  inflation,  declining  growth,  tightening  credit 
conditions, and widespread liquidity tensions pervading the world financial services industry. 
Authorities are using a range of tools at their disposal to address these challenges. But this 
crisis has shown, together with the lack of private sector discipline and weaknesses in the 
regulatory  framework,  some  novel  interrelations  that  call  for  action  on  all  these  fronts 
concurrently, and this further complicates our tasks.  
And  yet,  as  we  develop  responses  to  these  challenges,  we  also  need  to  step  back  and 
consider how we have arrived at where we are. At a very general level it is now becoming 
apparent that the transformation undergone by the financial services industry in the last few 
years  has  not  been  fully  appreciated  in  its  implications  for  monetary  and  regulatory  policy 
making. As was well said by Adrian and Shin in the paper presented this morning, this has 
been the first post-securitization crisis. Low interest rates and volatility have boosted the size 
of  both  regulated  and  unregulated  financial  institutions’  balance  sheets  and  their  leverage 
during a long period of time. But of course not all of them were able to withstand a sudden 
change  in  financial  conditions  amplified  by  the  accumulated  leverage.  Market  participants 
failed  to  soundly  manage,  measure  and  disclose  risks,  with  ignorance,  greed  or  hubris 
playing  their  customary  roles.  But  that  is  where,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  regulators 
should have stepped in responding to the externalities imposed on the financial system by 
weak financial institutions, the agency problems that foster excessive risk-taking by financial 
firms and investors, and the collective action problems in such areas as investment in risk 
management  capacity  and  infrastructure,  in  market  infrastructures,  in  the  maintenance  of 
market liquidity and, above all, transparency.  
Still more broadly, reviewing our experience of the past two or three decades, one is struck 
by the repeated tendency of the financial system to build up risk and leverage over a series 
of years, then turn and shed risk rapidly and indiscriminately. While the assets and agents 
involved  and  the  triggering  mechanisms  differ  from  one  cycle  to  the  next,  the  cycles  have 
tended  to  produce  significant  deadweight  costs  and  distortions  in  the  real  economy,  both 
during the upswing and during the subsequent retrenchment, and this is especially significant 
the more the financial system is leveraged. While we cannot and would not want to eliminate 
the bouts of optimism and pessimism that are part of human nature, we must address some 
of the pro-cyclical implications of our own policy making.  
The conviction of the FSF, called a year ago by the G7 to draft the first report in response to 
the crisis, is that, due in part to a perverse set of incentives, leverage had reached a level 
that  was  both  excessive  for  the  risk  management  capacity  of  many  institutions,  and 
misperceived  in  its  real  entity.  Therefore,  improving  the  incentives  in  the  system  so  that 
risks  are  appropriately  managed  and  risk  control  frameworks  keep  pace  with  financial 
innovation;  improving  the  resilience  of  the  system  to  shocks,  whatever  their  source;  and 
introducing  frameworks  for  dampening  the  cyclicality  of  risk-taking,  have  become  the 
cornerstones of our work plan.  
Our  aim  should  be  to  produce  a  system  more  immune  to  the  perverse  incentives  that  we 
have seen, where leverage is lower, and where the sources of leverage and their associated 
risks are better identified and addressed. Regulatory and supervisory changes will need to 
BIS Review 102/2008 
 1
go  hand-in-hand  with  enhanced  transparency  about  risk  exposures  and  valuations 
throughout the system.  
Let  me  start  with  actions  to  improve incentives.  Under  the  umbrella  of  the  FSF,  and  in  a 
collaborative  effort  of  national  and  international  regulatory  and  supervisory  authorities,  we 
urged prompt implementation of Basel II, which will align capital requirements more closely to 
banks’ risks (and I will have more to say about this in a moment). We also recommended 
strengthening Basel II with respect to capital charges for credit risk in the trading book, for re-
securitised  assets,  and  liquidity  lines  for  off-balance-sheet  vehicles.  We  encouraged  the 
Basel Committee to strengthen liquidity management practices and buffers. We have called 
on  financial  institutions  to  align  compensation  better  with  long-term,  firm-wide  profitability, 
and recommended a range of measures to discipline the practices of credit rating agencies 
and to reduce regulatory reliance on ratings so that investors engage in proper due diligence 
rather than relying exclusively on ratings.  
We also set out several recommendations to enhance transparency and valuation practices. 
We  outlined  “leading  practices”  for  disclosures  by  financial  firms,  and  urged  financial 
institutions  to  use  these  as  part  of  their  financial  reports  starting  in  mid-year  2008.  The 
International  Accounting  Standards  Board,  in  response  to  a  proposal  by  the  FSF,  has 
initiated a process to develop improved guidance on the valuation of illiquid instruments and 
related  disclosures.  We  have  also  called  on  accounting  standards  setters  to  overhaul 
standards for asset de-recognition and consolidation of off-balance sheet vehicles. And we 
recommended  that  securities  market  regulators  address  incentives  problems  in  the 
securitisation chain and work to expand information for investors on securitisation products 
and  their  underlying  assets.  These  measures  should  improve  the  ability  of  investors  and 
others to track the risks taken by financial institutions, and thereby increase the effectiveness 
of market discipline.  
The progress already achieved testifies to the importance we as financial authorities attach 
to  a  stronger  framework  of  regulation.  Not  only  has  a  consensus  been  built  internationally 
and  cross-sectorally  on  what  is  needed,  but  the  process  of  policy  development  and 
implementation is moving forward in coordinated and consistent fashion – and faster than we 
ever experienced in the past. To illustrate:  
• 
for  sound 
Supervisors  proposed  in  July  new  capital  requirements  for  credit  exposures  in 
banks’ and securities firms’ trading books and will set out later this year adjustments 
to capital requirements for “re-securitisations” and short-term liquidity facilities.  
In May, the Basel Committee issued revised guidance on liquidity risk management 
that  materially  raises  standards 
liquidity  risk  management  and 
measurement  –  including  requiring  banks  to  maintain  a  robust  cushion  of 
unencumbered, high quality liquid assets as a safeguard against protracted periods 
of liquidity stress.  
IOSCO and the SEC has set out fundamental changes to its requirements on credit 
rating  agencies  to  address  the  quality  of  ratings,  as  well  as  proposals  concerning 
how ratings are used in regulatory guidelines.  
Regarding transparency, over this summer, the larger banks have been using our 
recommended disclosures to provide expanded information on their risk exposures 
and valuations.  
And the IASB is making good progress on new guidance and revised standards for 
valuations  and  off-balance  sheet  entities,  which  we  expect  to  see  in  the  next  few 
months. 
    There  are  many  other  initiatives  underway,  alongside  complementary  efforts  in  the  private 
sector. We welcome the recommendations, along with accountabilities, that have been set 
2 
 BIS Review 102/2008
out  by  the  Institute  of  International  Finance  (the  IIF),  the  Counterparty  Risk  Management 
Policy Group, and the American and European Securitization Forums.  
The key challenge for us as authorities will be to remain engaged in seeing these and other 
reforms  through,  particularly  given  the  short-term  challenges  we  face.  Regulatory  changes 
will need to be phased in over time to avoid adding to the adjustment challenges the system 
faces  now.  But  there  should  be  no  stretching  of  timetables  for  enhancing  disclosures, 
including of off-balance sheet positions, as this is essential to repairing market confidence.  
Even  if  we  do  succeed  in  rectifying  the  incentive  problems  that  have  tended  to  generate 
excesses,  our  financial  system  will  not  be  spared  risk  management  failures,  shocks  and 
disruptions in the future. This calls for strengthening the system’s resilience, in terms of both 
a better financial infrastructure and stronger shock absorbers in financial institutions.  
At the level of the infrastructure, a resilient system is one that is able to withstand the effects 
of the failure of a large financial institution. By reducing the centrality of any one institution to 
the system’s stability, stronger infrastructure should also contribute to reducing moral hazard. 
A  critical  priority  in  this  area  is  to  address  weaknesses  in  the  operational  infrastructure  of 
over-the-counter derivatives markets, and the work undertaken by the NY Fed to this extent 
should  be  commended  by  all  the  jurisdictions.  It  is  also  imperative  that  we  strengthen 
national  and  cross-border  crisis  resolution  frameworks  so  that  we  can  allow  weakened 
financial institutions, including large ones, to fail without putting the remainder of the system 
at risk. In addition to national reform efforts in a number of countries, work is underway in the 
FSF  and  the  Basel  Committee  to  strengthen  cross-border  cooperation  and  contingency 
planning among authorities in responding to crisis.  
At  the  level  of  individual  institutions,  improving  resilience  means  ensuring  that  capital  and 
liquidity  buffers  are  large  enough  to  enable  firms  to  resist  external  shocks  –  without 
mandating  buffers  at  a  level  that  impedes  efficiency  and  encourages  regulatory  arbitrage. 
The issue is quite complex, because both the actual and the appropriate size of a buffer shift 
over time depending on the market and systemic environment. With regard to capital buffers, 
it is not yet clear how required, desired and actual capital levels will evolve over a full cycle 
under Basel II, but a framework is now in place for tracking and assessing this.  
Regulatory minima are one of several inputs into firms’ capital decisions. Banks have made 
significant efforts to raise new capital to meet anticipated needs relative to regulatory minima 
as  well  as  to  respond  to  the  need  to  reassure  markets.  Banks  clearly  see  a  benefit  to 
maintaining  capital  significantly  above  regulatory  minima,  and  markets  (including  rating 
agencies) reward them for healthy capital levels.  
One  reason,  among  others,  that  banks  maintain  this  margin  is  underlying  uncertainty  over 
risk  exposures,  valuations  and  earnings  prospects.  When  as  at  present  this  uncertainty 
increases, the margin required by the market also rises. To a degree, this is unavoidable. But 
to reduce the tendency that market reaction lead banks to raise capital (or reduce exposures) 
to possibly inefficient levels in a systemic crisis, we need a more robust ex ante framework of 
transparency about risk exposures, along with provisions, margins and reserves for valuation 
uncertainty, than we have at present.  
The  appropriate  size  for  liquidity  buffers  is  even  harder  to  mandate,  or  to  predict,  than  for 
capital buffers, given the unpredictable nature of shocks to market and funding liquidity, and 
the understandable reluctance of monetary authorities to create perfect certainty about when 
and  how  they  will  provide  emergency  liquidity.  But,  as  with  capital,  greater  ex  ante 
transparency about banks’ liquidity risk management frameworks, cushions and supporting 
arrangements  should  help  reassure  investors  and  counterparties  and  reduce  the  risk  of 
sudden drains on liquidity, as well as the uncertainty that, over the past year, has led to wide 
and volatile liquidity premia in interbank funding markets.  
As  we  consider  how  to  strengthen  buffers,  more  thought  needs  to  be  given  to  how  to 
promote higher buffers above the regulatory minimum in good times, and more flexibility for 
BIS Review 102/2008 
 3
the  system  to  make  use  of  these  buffers  when  they  are  comfortably  above  regulatory 
minima. Both the banks themselves and their counterparties should be more confident about 
the banks’ ability to draw on such buffers in bad times. Banks will only be willing to do this if 
they  do  not  fear  they  will  be  punished  by  the  market  –  which  brings  us  back  to  the 
importance  of  transparency  improvements.  If  banks  can  credibly  assure  markets  and  their 
regulators that risks to their asset values and earnings prospects are being soundly managed 
and contained, then they may be able to survive a temporary decline in capital levels, while 
still above their regulatory minimum, during cyclical downturns.  
Authorities will be closely monitoring banking conditions to inform decision on the best timing 
for  introducing  tighter  capital  requirements.  We  will  not  unduly  burden  financial  institutions 
during  the  adjustment  phase,  but  also  not  miss  the  opportunity  of  the  next  calm  phase  in 
financial  markets  to  strengthen  the  structure  of  the  financial  system.  Pacing  regulatory 
changes, but firmly committing to them, will contribute to reducing the potential for cyclicality 
in the system to be deepened by regulatory capital requirements.  
There  is  no  shortage  of  ideas  around  for  how  the  capital  regime  might  be  modified  to 
dampen potential pro-cyclicality. Some have suggested that a regime that adjusts regulatory 
minima with the cycle could help reinforce the message that buffers need to be built up in 
good times and are there to be used when a rainy day arrives. To a degree, this is already 
possible  under  the  second  pillar  of  Basel  II.  However,  too  much  divergence  in  national 
implementation of pillar 2 would raise issues of transparency and consistency in international 
regulatory arrangements and should therefore be constrained. To be credible, a discretionary 
system would need to be limited in its scope, fully transparent, and broadly consistent across 
countries;  ad  hoc,  uncoordinated  reductions  in  required  minima  could  be  viewed  as 
forbearance and could give the wrong signal about authorities’ judgement as to the overall 
strength of the system.  
It may also be possible to give more attention to the mix of capital instruments supporting 
banks’ risk exposures. There may be scope to enhance the quality of capital during strong 
economic conditions. A complementary policy aimed at strengthening buffers could look at 
mechanisms  to  automatically  increase  bank  equity  levels  in  bad  times,  such  as  reverse 
convertible  debentures  proposed  by  Flannery  or  the  insurance  scheme  proposed  by 
Kashyap,  Rajan  and  Stein.  Although  many  issues  of  security  design  would  need  to  be 
addressed for these instruments to effectively discipline banks, generate adequate investor 
demand,  and  to  be  reliably  collected  on  when  bad  states  occur,  these  mechanisms  could 
potentially  reduce  the  bad-signal  problems  associated  both  with  discretionary  changes  in 
minima and with capital-raising efforts by the banks themselves. A necessary complement 
would be a disclosure framework for risk exposures and valuations that prevents the market 
taking conversion events or the resort to insurance as a trigger for a broader downgrade of 
the system’s future prospects.  
Strengthened  capital  and  liquidity  buffers  and  improved  incentives  to  assess  and  manage 
risk  should  all  help  reduce  the  pro-cyclicality  of  the  financial  system,  and,  in  the  new 
configuration of the financial services industry more than ever, help monetary policy to attain 
its traditional objectives. But should monetary policy itself embody in its objective function the 
health of the financial system?  
As  Chairman  Bernanke  and  others  have  noted,  we  cannot  afford  to  ignore  the  health  of 
financial  markets  when  setting  monetary  policy.  It  would  be  difficult  to  disagree  with  this 
statement, and we should try to make it operational considering however that its application 
may  have  different  degrees  of  intensity.  We  should  certainly  use  the  monetary  and  credit 
aggregates that give the best projections of financial conditions for a given structure of the 
financial services industry. But how to go beyond that is a matter of considerable complexity. 
Though I share the importance of the policy goal, it should be clear that how to define the 
objective function is not only analytically difficult, but it would also pose serious institutional 
challenges. For a central bank whose primary mandate is to preserve price stability alone, 
4 
 BIS Review 102/2008
introducing  financial  stability  as  an  additional  objective  could  introduce  a  trade-off  where 
none  exists  today.  Indeed,  at  times  of  extraordinary  volatility  and  dramatic  risk  re-pricing, 
maintaining price stability could be the best contribution that monetary policy could give to 
the  return  to  financial  stability.  The  same  remains  true  during  peaceful  times,  when 
prolonged periods of double digit growth in several credit aggregates should call for action to 
protect future price stability even if in absence of an immediate danger. Second, I can only 
point at the difficulty of having a framework that is as clear and measurable as the one we 
have today for our monetary policies. But where I see the greatest difficulty is in the amount 
of  information  that  would  be  needed  in  order  to  run  a  monetary  policy  having  financial 
stability  among  its  objectives.  In  other  words,  we  would  have  to  know  about  both  the 
regulated and the unregulated parts of the financial services industry as much as we know 
about inflation and output. Of course this would also be the area where, were we to move in 
this  direction,  the  benefits  from  enhanced  transparency  and  interactions  with  regulatory 
policy would be greatest.  
In conclusion, the next few years are likely to be ones of low risk-taking and progressively 
low  leverage,  as  financial  institutions  and  households  repair  their  balance  sheets  and  as 
internal  and  external  macroeconomic  imbalances  are  resolved.  These  adjustments  will  not 
be  painless,  and  ensuring  that  they  take  place  in  an  orderly  manner  will  pose  substantial 
challenges for policymakers: Preserve price stability while supporting growth, and continue 
injecting liquidity as needed by an industry that is still far from having resolved its problems, 
at a time of strong inflationary pressures and tightening credit conditions.  
In such a situation, monetary policy cannot be the only, or even the main tool for reflating the 
economy and the financial system. Fiscal policy will have a key role to play, in its various 
configurations.  But  equally  important  would  be  to  recreate  an  environment  where  banks 
during this current transitional period were both able and willing to use their buffers to lend, 
and  capital  markets  were  able  and  willing  to  fulfil  their  functions.  For  this  to  happen,  the 
uncertainties  about  risk  exposures  and  asset  valuations,  about  developments  in  the  real 
economy, about the strength of financial, corporate and household balance sheets need to 
be adequately addressed. This implies a central role for improved transparency as well as 
action  by  the  private  sector  to  repair  balance  sheets  and  strengthen  the  functioning  of 
markets. 
BIS Review 102/2008 
 5
