Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Financial stability and monetary policy – 
challenges in the current turmoil 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, CEPS joint event with Harvard Law School on the EU-US financial system, New York, 
4 April 2008. 
 Introduction1  
1.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It is an honour and a pleasure for me to speak at this event today.  
It’s now over 7 months since the start of the financial turmoil. People are starting to ask – and 
rightly so – how long it will last and what policy-makers are doing about it. While I will not 
dare  to  answer  the  first  question,  I  will  endeavour  to  address  the  second  one  by  focusing 
primarily on the conduct of monetary policy, which is the main task of central banks.  
What I would like to explain first is that central bankers get little help from the economic and 
financial literature to guide their actions. Indeed, there is little analytical background that can 
give  definite  guidance  for  assessing  the  relationship  between  price  stability  and  financial 
stability, and the impact that monetary policy can have on financial flows and stocks.  
On this basis it is not possible for policy-makers to formulate precise policy rules, rather only 
general considerations and warnings as guidance for their actions. I will elaborate on some 
of these today. 
Finally  I  will  draw  some  general  conclusions  on  how  central  banks  should  behave  in  the 
midst of turmoil, such as the episode we are currently experiencing.  
Models of financial stability  
2.  
To analyse the relationship between monetary and financial issues we should ideally have at 
our disposal a dynamic general equilibrium model containing at least three elements: 
First, forward-looking economic agents who think in an intertemporal manner; 
• 
• 
Second,  a  set  of  non-zero  (gross  and  net)  financing  positions  across  the  main 
sectors of the economy, most of which are based on nominal debt; 
Third, a description of agents’ incentives towards, and capability of, respecting, or 
defaulting on, their financial obligations in the face of different possible shocks. 
 Unfortunately,  the  macro  literature  typically  uses  general  equilibrium  models  that  feature 
highly  stylised  financial  sectors.  The  reason  lies  in  the  steep  trade-off  faced  by  modellers 
between  capturing  an  environment  of  sophisticated  and  constantly  evolving  financial 
products  and  the  complexity  of  embedding  the  financial  structure  in  a  general  equilibrium 
framework.  Only  recently  a  branch  of  the  literature  has  started  integrating  the  banking 
system in DSGE models.2  
                                                 
1   The  views  expressed  in  this  note  reflect  only  those  of  the  author.  I  thank  F.  De  Fiore,  O.  Tristani  and  L. 
Stracca for input and comments. 
2   See, for example, Christiano et al (2007), Goodfriend (2005) and Goodfriend and McCallum (2006). 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 1
One main shortcoming of the macro models currently available for the analysis of financial 
stability  is  that  intermediaries  are  typically  assumed  not  to  face  risks.  Risk  arises  in  firms’ 
production processes (or in households’ ability to earn income) and affects the ability of firms 
(or households) to repay their debt. However, it is generally assumed that intermediaries can 
“diversify away” the risk by lending to an arbitrarily large number of economic agents. Current 
models are thus not able to capture situations in which the financial distress of a subset of 
firms (or households) may lead to bank failures as a result of an inability to repay deposits or 
other types  of bank debt instruments. Paradoxically, this was also the general assumption 
that many market participants had before the start of the turmoil, namely that financial risks 
were  so  well  spread  throughout  the  economy  that  financial  contagion  within  the  industry 
would be minimal.  
Another  failing  of  the  existing  macro  models  is  that  financial  frictions  affect  firms  (or 
households)  and  limit  their  ability  to  raise  external  finance,  but  not  banks’  fund-raising 
activity. Banks are generally assumed to be able to collect deposits from households and to 
distribute  them  without  delay  to  firms  in  the  form  of  loans.  Clearly,  this  assumption  is  a 
simplification of reality. First, it misses out the maturity transformation role of banks. Second, 
banks also need to raise long-term finance in the market, where they face similar financial 
constraints to the ones faced by firms. In addition, they face regulatory constraints, such as 
the Basel requirements, when accessing short-term liquidity on the interbank market. 
With these limitations in mind, what does the existing literature tell us about the relationship 
between financial stability and price stability? 
The conventional view is that there is no conflict between price stability and financial stability. 
The  achievement  of  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  is  sufficient  to  prevent  financial 
crises.3 Historical evidence, however, points to several episodes – in addition to the current 
turmoil  –  where  periods  of  price  stability  have  been  accompanied  or  followed  by  sharp 
financial imbalances.  One  example  is  the  US  Great  Depression  in  the  1930s.  Prices  were 
essentially stable for most of the 1920s in a context of buoyant economic growth, while by 
the end of the decade the economy underwent a period of protracted deflation, massive bank 
losses  as  a  consequence  of  accumulated  debt,  sharp  reductions  in  employment  and  a 
severe recession. Also before the outbreak of the current turmoil the Great Moderation and 
the Great Disinflation had been widely applauded. The lesson one can draw is, maybe, that it 
is better not to be too complacent in good times.  
Some  literature  has  recently  been  published  that  considers  a  potential  trade-off  between 
price  stability  and  financial  stability.4  Price  stability  is  deemed  to  be  the  optimal  target  to 
reduce the misallocation of resources across various goods-producing sectors. However, this 
result holds only in the absence of asset price shocks. If there is a shock to asset prices, 
particularly when the shock is unrelated to fundamentals, stabilising asset prices reduces the 
distortions that may affect investment decisions.  
Recent quantitative studies have shown that price distortions are more damaging than asset 
price distortions; under plausible calibrations of the model, maintaining price stability in the 
goods sector (as opposed to stability in asset prices) is found to be preferable.5  
There  is  no  doubt  that  some  of  the  factors  I  have  just  described  have  played  a  role  in 
determining portfolio allocation and investment trends in advanced economies. In past years 
                                                 
3   See Schwartz (1995). 
4   Dupor (2001 and 2002). 
5   Monacelli and Faia (2006). 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2008
–  and  right  up  to  the  outbreak  of  the  turmoil  –  the  ECB  and  other  central  banks  had 
repeatedly warned of the excessively low pricing of risk.6  
On  the  empirical  side,  recent  ECB  research7  has  analysed  the  role  of  various  indicators 
(such as consumer price indices, residential property prices, asset prices, broad and narrow 
money and credit) in predicting the occurrence of episodes of financial turbulence and their 
output costs. Using quarterly data for 18 OECD countries since the 1970s, the study provides 
evidence  of  a  robust  positive  correlation  between  money  and  those  aggregate  asset  price 
booms that lead to more costly recessions in the bust phase. It is found that liquidity shocks, 
if  defined  with  respect  to  broad  money,  contribute  to  explain  the  size  of  the  post-boom 
recession.  Moreover,  liquidity  shocks  are  the  most  robust  explanatory  factor  of  residential 
property  price  developments  during  boom  episodes.  Interestingly,  the  information  value  in 
broad money is particularly high in episodes of asset price booms, whereas over the entire 
sample liquidity shocks turn out to be significantly less important.  
Monetary policy and financial stability 
3.  
Given the imperfect status of the economic literature, despite notable recent advances, what 
should  monetary  policy  do  with  respect  to  financial  stability?  Experience  suggests  a  few 
general  considerations  that  central  bankers  should  take  into  account  in  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. I will mention four. 
The first consideration is that monetary policy can itself produce negative effects on financial 
stability. As doctors are used to say, first try to do no harm. 
To understand this concept, we need to recognise that monetary policy can, via the interest 
rate,  affect  the  intertemporal  allocation  of  resources  by  influencing  agents’  incentives  to 
borrow. However, there is a limit to this because economic agents cannot go on borrowing 
unlimited  amounts  from  the  future  indefinitely.  Therefore,  it  is  important  to  realise  that  the 
capacity  of  monetary  policy  to  influence  the  intertemporal  allocation  of  resources  is 
constrained, particularly by the situation of agents’ balance sheets. An agent – or a sector of 
the economy – that contracts a net debt has implicitly chosen to bring forward resources to 
the  present,  thus  reducing  them  in  the  future,  in  order  to  pay  off  that  debt  (provided,  of 
course, that it does not intend to renege on its debt obligations!). Financial stability can be 
defined  as  a  situation  in  which  the  intertemporal  allocation  of  resources  is  felt  to  be  “in 
equilibrium” or “sustainable”, which means that it is at the same time in line with the desires 
of individual agents and with the need to keep up with the debt obligations that have been 
subscribed.  
The  central  bank  should  not  create  the  incentives  for  private  agents  to  accumulate  debt 
continuously over time. Such an over-accumulation, especially in good times, may jeopardise 
its  sustainability.  Private  agents  –  no  differently  from  the  public  sector  –  may  experience 
solvency  problems.  We  know  that  low  lending  rates  tend  to  encourage  banks  to  increase 
risk-taking,8  especially  when  low  rates  are  coupled  with  strong  financial  innovation.9  For 
instance, when a financial institution has promised its creditors high rates of return but then 
faces a period of low interest rates that is expected to last for a long time, the only option 
open  is  to  take  on  additional  risk.  Another  example  relates  to  the  typical  compensation 
contract for investment managers, which depends particularly on the annual return achieved 
(in  excess  of  an  agreed  minimum).  When  risk-free  returns  are  high,  compensation  is  also 
                                                 
6   See the ECB’s June 2007 Financial Stability Review. 
7   Adalid and Detken (2007). 
8   Matsuyama (2007). 
9   Rajan (2006). 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 3
adequate when managers take on little risk. However, when these returns are low, managers 
need to take on higher levels of risk to achieve sufficient compensation. Moreover, in times of 
low interest rates, the low cost of funds encourages managers to increase leverage, further 
increasing their exposure to risk.  
In short, what we have learned in the past few years is that by promoting interest rates that 
are too low, monetary policy may create incentives that put at risk financial stability.  
The second consideration is that it is very difficult for central banks to take financial stability 
issues into consideration in the conduct of their monetary policy. A fundamental problem is 
that  the  economics  profession  is  still  far  from  having  a  good  understanding  of  asset  price 
bubbles. Indeed, we still do not know whether they exist at all!10 One can certainly argue that 
they  are  likely  to  occur  in  market economies. It  takes,  at most,  a  couple  of  small,  realistic 
modifications to the standard models of intertemporal optimisation, such as the introduction 
of a subset of agents with a finite horizon, for bubbles to be generated.11 However, there is a 
great  difference  between  suspecting  that  bubbles  exist  and  identifying  them  in  real  time. 
Running  policy  on  something  that  is  essentially  unobservable  is,  for  sure,  not  a  recipe  for 
success.  
Neither do we have a good grasp of the sustainability of the balance sheets of households, 
firms  and  financial  institutions  in  the  same  way  as  we  have  for  the  sustainability  of  public 
finances.  This  is  probably  a  relict  of  a  time  in  which  financial  markets  were  severely 
repressed and only the government was “free” to borrow without limits and, by so doing, to 
push its intertemporal budget constraint to the limits of sustainability. But now we live in a 
completely different financial order, one in which borrowing is open practically to anybody – 
at least in developed countries – with assets being created with a rating similar to that of the 
best public borrower. This could also push private agents’ intertemporal budget constraints to 
the  limits  of  sustainability  and,  in  a  sense,  put  financial  stability  (as  defined  a  little  earlier) 
constantly  at  risk.  If  we  knew,  for  example,  that  net  household  debt  above,  say,  100%  of 
household  income  was  not  sustainable,  then  we  would  have  a  clear  idea  of  its  future 
consequences  and  the  optimal  policy  response  would  flow  naturally  from  this  recognition. 
However, we are certainly not there yet.  
The third general consideration, which is partly contradictory to the previous one, is that a 
monetary  policy  that  neglects  potential  financial  stability  problems  is  likely  to  be  time 
inconsistent.  Indeed,  asset  bubbles  are  generally  easier  to  identify  when  they  burst  than 
when they are forming. Unusual rises in asset prices may often be associated with changes 
in  fundamentals  (much  in  the  same  way  as  the  “new  economy”  type  of  stories),  while 
collapses are typically seen as something pathological. This tendency partly reflects human 
psychology,  which  leads  people  to  believe  more  in  good  events  than  in  bad  ones  –  a 
phenomenon  known  as  “cognitive  dissonance”.12  Therefore,  a  tale  of  fundamental  and 
lasting positive changes in the economy that underpin high asset valuations may be given 
greater  credence  than  a  sobering,  temporary  tale  explaining  a  downturn.  For  instance, 
positive  productivity  shocks  in  the  upturn  tend  to  be  considered  permanent,  whereas 
negative  shocks  linked  to  a  slowdown  are  considered  temporary.  To  the  extent  that  the 
monetary authority shares the current preferences of the private or the government sector, it 
may  hesitate  to  react  to  the  asset  price  bubble  in  the  expansionary  phase  but  will  react 
strongly in the bust phase. Such asymmetric behaviour can be seen as reflecting a higher 
                                                 
10   See S. R. Gurkaynak (2007): “Econometric tests of asset price bubbles: taking stock”, Journal of Economic 
Surveys, 22, 1, pp. 166-186. 
11   For  example,  the  classic  study  of  Tirole  (1985)  shows  how  bubbles  can  arise  in  standard  models  of 
overlapping generations. 
12   See,  among  others,  Kahneman  (2004),  according  to  whom  these  tendencies  should  not  be  labelled  as 
“irrational” at all. 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2008
weight in the central bank’s loss function to negative deviations of (asset price) inflation from 
target than to positive ones. Over time, an asymmetric loss function would lead the central 
bank  to  target  asset  valuations  that  are  above  their  potential  levels,  in  the  same  way  as 
having  an  asymmetric  loss  function  on  output  leads  the  central  bank  to  target  a  level  of 
output that is above potential.13 As is well known in the literature since the seminal work of 
Barro and Gordon in the eighties, if the private sector rationally anticipates this behaviour by 
the central bank, the end result is only a higher rate of inflation.  
The fourth and final consideration is that when financial stability is at risk and markets are in 
turmoil, the behaviour of economic and financial variables may experience a series of non-
linearities  that  may  impair  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  This  means  not  only  that 
monetary policy might become less effective in achieving price stability, but also that it could 
have perverse effects on financial stability itself.  
I will consider two cases.  
The first case occurs when the market turmoil has been caused by excess debt accumulation 
by households and firms, as a result of very low interest rates over a long period. When the 
bubble bursts, and agents are overburdened with a high level of debt, the interest rate tends 
to  loose  its  effectiveness  as  an  instrument  to  smoothen  consumption  and  income.  This  is 
particularly the case when the assets that agents hold against their debts are not very liquid. 
A lowering of interest rates is unlikely to be effective in raising the value of the assets or in 
inducing  agents  to  increase  their  borrowing  and  thus  consume  more.  The  anticyclical 
effectiveness of monetary policy tends to be impaired. This issue tends to be underestimated 
in the literature, although it is widely recognised in the case of fiscal policy. Indeed, it can be 
easily  shown  that,  in  a  public  debt  crisis,  there  is  little  or  no  margin  for  manoeuvre  for 
budgetary  policy  to  stimulate  the  economy.  Given  that  economic  agents  and  financial 
markets have accumulated an excessive amount of public debt, they are no longer willing to 
absorb  more.  When  the  crisis  is  one  of  private  debt,  monetary  policy  can  hardly  induce 
agents to borrow more. This may be the reason why financing costs have recently increased, 
especially at long maturities, in spite of the fall in short-term interest rates.  
The second case of policy ineffectiveness is one where there is an alternative risk-free asset 
in which agents can invest in the midst of a period of turmoil. In a closed economy, cash is 
considered the only risk-free asset. By reducing the rate of return on cash, the incentive to 
hold riskier assets increases. This should contribute towards stabilising money and financial 
markets and asset prices. In an open economy, however, an excessive reduction in interest 
rates can induce agents to shift to foreign currency investments, which reduces the relative 
price of domestic assets compared with foreign asset prices. If confidence in the domestic 
currency is impaired, a policy of reducing interest rates might have perverse effects on the 
stability of the domestic money markets since it leads to an outflow of funds and a sharply 
weaker  exchange  rate.  Ronald  McKinnon  has  recently  explained  that  the  closed  economy 
model traditionally used to analyse the US economy may no longer be entirely valid.  
To sum up, excessively pro-active monetary and fiscal policies may induce the public and 
private  sectors 
to  accumulate  excessive  amounts  of  debt.  When  debt  becomes 
unsustainable,  and  agents  have  to  curtail  their  consumption  to  repay  it  no  matter  what, 
monetary and fiscal policies tend to lose their effectiveness in smoothening consumption and 
income growth. When a debt crisis occurs, the only role that monetary and fiscal policy can 
fulfil is one of redistribution – rather than stabilisation – by “socialising” the debt burden. The 
way in which monetary policy can redistribute the effects of the financial crisis is through an 
inflation tax which reduces the burden of net debtors and the wealth of net creditors. In sum, 
an expansionary monetary policy is successful in reducing the burden of the debt only to the 
                                                 
13   Similar  arguments  have  been  raised  in  the  context  of  central  banks’  asymmetric  preferences  (see,  for 
example, Ruge-Murcia (2003)). 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 5
extent that it generates unexpected inflation. This is evidently not in line with central banks’ 
primary responsibility.  
Policy implications 
4.  
Given  these  considerations,  how  can  central  bankers  best  conduct  monetary  policy  in  a 
period  of  financial  turmoil?  I  believe  that  the  available  literature  and  recent  experience 
suggest three main principles and seven recommendations, which I would like to leave with 
you as food for further thought. 
The three principles are as follows:  
First:  effectiveness.  Monetary  policy  should  aim  to  achieve  what  it  can  do  most  effectively 
with its main tool, the interest rate, and avoid taking on tasks that can be better performed by 
others. 
Second: consistency. In addressing any problem, monetary policy should avoid sowing the 
seeds of the next crisis. In other words, the central bank has to take into account the future 
consequences of its actions, particularly with regard to agents’ incentives. 
Third:  predictability.  In  a  period  of  high  uncertainty,  monetary  policy  should  avoid  creating 
additional uncertainty and contribute to restoring confidence.  
The implementation of these three principles affects not only the way the central bank should 
act  but  also  how  it  communicates  with  financial  markets  and  the  public  at  large.  In  this 
respect the following recommendations can be made.  
First,  since  the  central  bank  has  only  one  instrument  through  which  to  implement  its 
monetary  policy,  it  should  have  one  priority,  which  is  price  stability.  Having  one  objective 
avoids confusion about multiple – shifting – targets, helps anchor expectations and makes 
accountability easier. This is now a broadly established practice, and in nearly all advanced 
economies the central bank has price stability as its primary objective. It is certainly the case 
of the ECB. 
Second,  the  central  bank  should  not  target  asset  prices  but  should  take  asset  prices  into 
account  in  forecasting  inflation  and  in  assessing  whether  the  economy  is  embarking  on 
unsustainable  debt  accumulation.  This  requires  central  banks  to  pay particular  attention  to 
developments  in  the  financial  and  credit  markets  and  to  look  closely  at  firms’  and 
households’ balance sheets. In the ECB’s strategy, these indicators are an integral part of 
the monetary pillar, which complements the economic pillar used to forecast inflation. Recent 
events have shown the importance of looking at monetary and financial indicators with a view 
to  identifying  risks  to  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  This  has  long  been 
underestimated, particularly in the academic world, where monetary analysis is no longer in 
fashion.  
Third,  the  central  bank  should  conduct  its  monetary  policy  with  a  medium-term  horizon. 
There is now ample research showing that, when monetary policy is used to fine-tune the 
economy, there is a high risk of increasing – rather than decreasing – income and inflation 
volatility. There is also a risk of adding to financial instability. A key element in determining 
interest  rate  policy  should  be  the  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations.  The  ECB  has 
repeatedly  stated  that  its  policy  aims  to  prevent  relative  price  increases,  such  as  those 
produced by energy and food price rises, from giving rise to a permanent inflationary trend. 
The  credibility  of  the  ECB’s  anti-inflation  commitment  is  the  best  guarantee  for  keeping 
interest  rates  low  over  the  medium  term,  which  in  turn  contributes  to  growth  and 
employment. 
Fourth, the central bank should have a high degree of independence to achieve its primary 
objective. This is the only way to protect the central bank from the phenomenon of “cognitive 
dissonance”,  which  I  mentioned  previously.  In  particular,  central  bankers  should  have 
6 
 BIS Review 40/2008
adequate security of tenure, so that the horizon for setting their policies is sufficiently long as 
not to be influenced by short-term opportunistic behaviour by the private and public sector 
alike. For example, the mandate of the ECB’s President and Executive Board is for 8 years, 
non renewable. 
Fifth,  whenever  problems  concerning  financial  stability  emerge,  the  central  bank  should 
explicitly identify the limits and confines of its responsibilities. The biggest risk for a central 
bank in case of turmoil is that it is pressed to take over responsibilities that are typically not 
its  own,  particularly  to  address  solvency  problems.  The  central  bank  should  instead  be 
responsible for ensuring an adequate functioning of the money market and for stabilising its 
key  operational  target.  This  is  what  the  ECB  has  done,  by  intervening  with  its  main 
refinancing  operations  with  a  view  to  stabilising  the  overnight  rate  around  the  reference 
policy  rate.  The  ECB  will  continue  this  policy,  which  implies  that  market  participants  with 
adequate  collateral  will  be  able  to  finance  themselves  overnight,  either  with  their 
counterparties  or  directly  with  the  ECB  at  rates  close  to  the  reference  rate.  Banks  do  not 
seem to having fully understood this policy as they continue to bid for liquidity in the weekly, 
three month and six month ECB tenders at much higher interest rates, apparently pricing in a 
risk that does not exist at all. 
Sixth,  the  central  bank  should,  within  the  limits  of  its  competencies,  be  put  in  the  best 
conditions in order to conduct effectively operations that aim to foster liquidity in the money 
market.  This  requires,  in  particular,  the  central  bank  to  have  access  to  any  necessary 
information  concerning  the  liquidity  and  solvency  problems  of  the  markets  and  individual 
institutions.  This  infers  that,  when  the  central  bank  does  not  have  direct  supervisory 
responsibilities,  it  should  receive  such  information  in  a  timely  fashion  from  the  competent 
supervisory  authority.  Furthermore,  banking  supervisors  should  exert  strong  pressure  on 
financial  institutions  to  disclose  in  a  prompt  and  coherent  fashion  their  balance  sheet 
situations. This is key to restoring the confidence of market participants both in themselves 
and  in  the  market.  In  the  European  context,  cooperation  among  supervisors  should  be 
strengthened.  More  important,  those  euro  area  countries  where  there  are  still  legislative 
obstacles  for  the  supervisors  to  provide  information  to  the  ECB  on  specific  banking  and 
financial  institutions  should  act  promptly  to  remove  them  as  soon  as  possible.  These 
obstacles stand in the way of an optimal provision of liquidity to the markets. 
Seventh,  in  addressing  problems  of  financial  stability,  the  central  bank  should  use 
instruments that are clearly distinguished from the instrument used for monetary policy. The 
level of the interest rate is the main instrument for achieving the primary objective of price 
stability and should thus not be used for other purposes. The appropriate functioning of the 
money markets can be achieved through different means, such as the provision of liquidity to 
institutions and markets, against adequate collateral. The exchange against sound collateral 
ensures that the central bank is not directly involved in bailing out banks. This avoids moral 
hazard  and  prevents  the  central  bank  from  distorting  the  process  of  price  determination, 
including loss discoveries. This is a well known principle established by Bagehot in 1872. Let 
me close here with this reference to Bagehot, which suggests that after more than 130 years 
and  despite  several  financial  crises  the  basic  principles  of  central  banking  have  not,  and 
should not be, fundamentally changed. 
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Adalid, R. and C. Detken (2007), “Liquidity shocks and asset price boom/bust cycles.” ECB 
Working Paper No 732.  
Bernanke,  Ben  and  Mark  Gertler  (1989),  “Agency  Costs,  Net  Worth,  and  Business 
Fluctuations.” American Economic Review 79 (1): 14-31. 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 7
Bernanke, Ben , Gertler Mark and Simon Gilchrist (1996), “The Financial Accelerator and the 
Flight to Quality,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 78, No 1, pp. 1-15. 
Bernanke,  Ben  ,  Gertler  Mark  and  Simon  Gilchrist  (1999),  “The  Financial  Accelerator  in  a 
Quantitative Business Cycle Framework” in J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford (eds.), Handbook of 
Macroeconomics, Volume 1. 
Borio, C., B. English and A. Filardo (2003), “A tale of two perspectives: old or new challenges 
for monetary policy?”, BIS Working Paper No 127. 
Borio, C. and P. Lowe (2002), “Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring the 
nexus”, BIS Working Paper No 114. 
Brainard,  W.  (1967),  “Uncertainty  and  the  Effectiveness  of  Policy”,  American  Economic 
Review 57: 411-425.  
Carlstrom,  Charles,  and  Timothy  Fuerst  (1997),  “Agency  Costs,  Net  Worth,  and  Business 
Fluctuations: A Computable General Equilibrium Analysis”, American Economic Review, 87, 
pp. 893-910. 
Christiano, Lawrence, Motto Roberto and Massimo Rostagno (2007), “Shocks, structures or 
policies? A Comparison of the EA and the US”, mimeo, European Central Bank. 
Detken,  C.  and  F.  Smets  (2004),  “Asset  price  booms  and  monetary  policy”,  ECB  Working 
Paper No 364. 
Dupor,  W.  (2001),  “Nominal  Price  versus  Asset  Price  Stabilization”,  Working  Paper.  The 
Wharton School, Pennsylvania.  
Dupor,  W.  (2002),  “Comment  on  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Prices”,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics 49: 99-106. 
Faia,  E.  and  T.  Monacelli  (2006),  “Optimal  Interest  Rate  Rules,  Asset  Prices,  and  Credit 
Frictions,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, Vol. 31, Issue 10, pp. 3228-3254. 
Goodfriend,  Marvin  (2005),  “Narrow  Money,  Broad  Money,  and  the  Transmission  of 
Monetary  Policy”  in  Faust,  J.  and  Orphanides,  A.  Reifschneider,  D.  (Eds),  Models  and 
Monetary  Policy:  Research  in  the  Tradition  of  Dale  Henderson,  Richard  Porter  and  Peter 
Tinsley. Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  
Goodfriend, Marvin and Bennet McCallum (2007), “Banking and interest rates in monetary 
policy analysis: A quantitative exploration”, Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 54(5), pp. 
1480-1507, July.  
Greenspan,  A.  (2002),  Speech  on  economic  volatility  at  a  symposium  sponsored  by  the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 30 August. 
Gurkaynak, S. R. (2007), “Econometric tests of asset price bubbles: taking stock”, Journal of 
Economic Surveys, 22, 1, pp. 166-186. 
International Monetary Fund (2003), “When Bubbles Burst,” World Economic Outlook, Ch.2, 
Washington DC.  
Jiménez,  G.,  S.  Ongena,  J.-L.  Peydró-Alcalde,  J.  Saurina  (2007),  “Hazardous  Times  for 
Monetary  Policy:  What  Do  Twenty-Three  Million  Bank  Loans  Say  About  the  Effects  of 
Monetary Policy on Credit Risk?”, CEPR Discussion Paper No 6514. 
Kahneman,  D.  (2004),  “On  redefining  rationality”,  Journal  of  Socio-Economics,  33,  1, 
pp. 1-14. 
Kohn, D. (2006), “Monetary policy and asset prices,” speech held on 16 March at “Monetary 
Policy:  A  Journey  from  Theory  to  Practice”,  a  European  Central  Bank  colloquium  held  in 
honour of Otmar Issing, Frankfurt, Germany 
8 
 BIS Review 40/2008
Matsuyama,  K.  (2007),  “Credit  Traps  and  Credit  Cycles”,  American  Economic  Review,  97 
(March), 503-516. 
Rajan, R. (2006), “Has Finance Made the World Riskier?”, European Financial Management, 
Vol. 12, No. 4, pp. 499-533. 
Ruge-Murcia,  F.  (2003),  “Inflation  Targeting  under  Asymmetric  Preferences”,  Journal  of 
Money, Credit and Banking 35, 763-785. 
Schwartz,  J.  (1995),  “Why  financial  stability  depends  on  price  stability”,  Economic  Affairs, 
Autumn, pp. 21-25. 
Tirole,  J.  (1985):  “Asset  bubbles  and  overlapping  generations”,  Econometrica,  53,  6,  pp. 
1499-1528. 
BIS Review 40/2008 
 9
