Toshihiko Fukui: Bank of France – Bank of Japan: converging views 
Opening speech by Mr Toshihiko Fukui, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a joint symposium 
of the Bank of France and the Bank of Japan, Paris, 8 January 2008. 
 I am very happy to welcome you today to this conference organised to celebrate the 150th 
anniversary  of  Franco-Japanese  diplomatic  relations.  Indeed,  Franco-Japanese  economic 
relations are of particular interest to all of you. 
The Bank of Japan opened its office in Paris in 1955. Since then, a large number of Bank of 
Japan staff members – including myself – have established strong ties with France thanks to 
the hospitality of the Banque de France and the pleasant atmosphere in Paris. I for one lived 
in Paris for about two years and half in the early 1970s, at the time of the Nixon shock that 
brought  an  end  to  the  Bretton  Woods  system.  The  United  States  suddenly  decided  to 
suspend  the  convertibility  of  the  dollar  into  gold.  It  was  a  Sunday.  I  clearly  remember  the 
efforts  I  expended  during  the  talks  with  the  Banque  de  France.  What  I  learned  in  Paris  is 
invaluable as it was a key experience for a central banker. 
The  Banque  de  France  counts  a  number  of  people  with  an  in-depth  knowledge  of  the 
Japanese  economy.  Amongst  others,  I  would  like  to  mention  Mrs  Denise  Flouzat,  former 
member of the Monetary Policy Council at the Banque de France, who will be chairing the 
afternoon session. In 2002, she published a book entitled “Japan: eternal revival?”, in which 
she assesses the strong potential of the Japanese economy to overcome the economic crisis 
at  what  was  probably  the  worst  time  after  the  bursting  of  the  financial  bubble.  The 
subsequent development of the Japanese economy confirms Mrs Flouzat’s perceptiveness. 
In 2003, the year following the publication of Mrs Flouzat’s book, I became Governor of the 
Bank  of  Japan.  This  book  has  clearly  had  a  considerable  influence  on  the  way  in  which  I 
have conducted monetary policy in Japan. 
Both  France  and  Japan  have  a  very  rich  culture,  underpinned  by  their  long  history.  They 
have  established  a  constructive  relation,  learning  from  each  other  in  many  fields.  For 
example, in the field of art, a considerable number of painters, such as Léonard Fujita, have 
studied  oil  painting  in  Paris.  Conversely,  illustrious  impressionist  painters,  such  as  Claude 
Monet, drew their inspiration from the Japanese etchings. Everyone knows that art in France 
has been strongly influenced by Japanese culture. As regards gastronomy, there are now a 
large  number  of  Japanese  restaurants  in  Paris.  French  cuisine  has  drawn  on  Japanese 
cuisine, and vice-versa. Rather than simply perpetuate their traditions, Japanese and French 
chefs seek to extend the realm of nouvelle cuisine. 
Japan  and  France  have  established  a  particularly  constructive  relation  in  many  economic 
spheres. The two topics of today’s conference are the Banque de France and the Bank of 
Japan:  construction  and  co-operation  and  the  French  and  Japanese  economies  in  a 
globalised  world.  As  an  introduction,  I  will  make  a  few  comments  on  the  co-operation 
between the two central banks in the context of economic globalisation. 
France has played a very important role from the start of the Meiji era in Japan in the mid 
19th century, when the country became a player on the global economic scene. Thanks to 
France’s  financial  and  technological  assistance,  a  major  shipyard  and  port  infrastructures 
were set up in the town of Yokosuka. This is one of the initiatives that marked the start of 
Japan’s co-operation with third countries in the process of industrial modernisation in Japan. 
France  also  played  a  role  at  the  time  of  the  creation  of  the  Bank  of  Japan.  Mr  Léon  Say, 
Minister of Finance at the time, advised Mr Masayoshi Matsukata, an influential member of 
the Japanese government who was studying central banking in Europe, to refer to the newly-
established National Bank of Belgium. His contribution was highly significant. Later, when the 
BIS Review 1/2008 
 1
Bank of Japan was drawing up its statutes, the Japanese government drew on the statutes of 
the National Bank of Belgium and the regulations of the Banque de France. 
Economies have become increasingly globalised over the past century and a half. Recently, 
the pace of globalisation has even accelerated. Borders are melting away and are no longer 
an obstacle to economic activity. Franco-Japanese relations should not be looked at solely 
from the angle of trade and capital flow statistics. It would be wiser to say that France and 
Japan are two major intertwined economic centres on the global stage. 
This  globalisation  process  has  a  significant  impact  on  the  primary  objective  of  a  central 
bank’s  monetary  policy,  which  consists  in  ensuring  price  and  economic  stability.  It  is  now 
impossible  for  all  central  banks  to  assess  the  economic  situation  without  taking  a  look  at 
global  economic  trends.  In  addition,  the  globalisation  process  in  the  area  of  financial 
transactions is much faster and deeper than in trade in goods and services. If a shock occurs 
in one country, it will immediately spill over onto numerous other financial markets. 
In this context, central bank co-operation is becoming increasingly important. In fact, strong 
ties  have  been  established  at  various  levels.  I  myself  have  continued  to  participate  in  the 
Governors’ meetings of the Bank for International Settlements, a discussion forum for central 
banks. It is a pleasure for me to talk to Mr Noyer and other central bank governors at the 
meetings,  which  are  not  only  an  opportunity  to  exchange  information  on  the  state  of  the 
economy and prices, but also to tackle problems specific to each country and international 
topics of common interest. I set great value on my colleagues’ ideas and suggestions and 
feel  solidarity  with  them  because  we  are  bound  by  our  common  objective,  supporting  the 
global economy. 
At the same time, central banks seek to emulate each other, i.e. they seek to draw lessons 
from  each  other’s  experience  and  endeavour  to  always  adopt  the  best  practices.  In  this 
process,  there  is  no  patent.  Actually,  it  is  in  our  interest  that  all  countries  conduct  an 
appropriate monetary  policy  because  it  is  a  guarantee  of  global  economic  stability.  This  is 
why central banks are committed to passing on their own experience. 
For  example,  central  banks  have  been  striving  to  make  their  monetary  policy  more 
transparent. Since the 1990s, central banks have achieved greater autonomy from the State 
in a large number of countries and regions, including Europe and Japan. At the same time, 
central  banks  are  required  to  be  more  transparent  and  accountable  for  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy. Increased transparency is important because it enhances the effectiveness 
of  monetary  policy  by  anchoring  the  expectations  of  households,  companies  and  financial 
market  participants.  Having  acknowledged  the  need  for  greater  transparency,  banks  have 
endeavoured to take the most appropriate measures to better explain their monetary policy 
and better communicate with financial markets, taking into account the economic and social 
situation of their country. To do so, banks have drawn on each other’s experiences. 
One  fundamental  issue  is  how  to  define  price  stability,  which  is  the  primary  objective  of 
monetary policy. This involves striking a balance between the need for clarity and the need 
for  monetary  policy  flexibility.  Each  country  has  worked  out  its  own  solution  to  this  tricky 
problem. 
A  number  of  countries,  including  the  United  Kingdom,  have  adopted  a  policy  of  inflation 
targeting, whereby the central bank sets a target inflation rate. In this case, measures are 
adopted gradually to ensure sufficient flexibility. The European Central Bank, set up in 1998, 
defines  price  stability  in  terms  of  the  year-on-year  increase  in  the  Harmonised  Index  of 
Consumer Prices and relies on a reference value for monetary growth. The Bank of Japan 
adopted a new monetary policy framework in 2006. It publishes an inflation rate that reflects 
the Policy Board members' understanding of medium- to long-term price stability. In line with 
this understanding, we examine the most likely outlook and assess risks most relevant to the 
conduct of monetary policy, which we call the two-perspective approach. In November 2006, 
the  FED  published  a  series  of  measures  aimed  at  enhancing  its  communication  strategy. 
One  of  them  consisted  in  extending  the  economic  and  price  forecasting  horizon  to  three 
2 
 BIS Review 1/2008
years. A three-year inflation forecast shows the inflation rate that the Federal Open Market 
Committee  considers  consistent  with  the  objectives  of  the  FED,  i.e.  price  stability  and 
maximum employment. 
These  frameworks  were  devised  by  taking  account  of  other  countries’  experiences  and 
retaining  the  most  suitable  elements  for  their  own  economy.  I  believe  that,  in  this  area, 
central banks will increasingly draw on the experiences of other countries. 
Countries  share  the  same  understanding  of  problems  but  at  the  same  time  stick  to  their 
uniqueness when taking decisions. This holds true in the area of monetary policy but also in 
numerous other areas within the evolving field of international relations. As in the case of art 
and gastronomy, which I talked about at the start of my speech, mutual influences lead to 
new innovations and blur borders through mutual understanding. This does not mean that we 
lose our uniqueness. 
In today’s conference, we will take a look at the economic and financial growth patterns of 
both  France  and  Japan  and  examines  in-depth  the  economic  problems  with  which  each 
country is faced in the context of globalisation. I hope that it will give rise to a better mutual 
understanding of both economies and foster further emulation. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 1/2008 
 3
