Ardian Fullani: The link between the legal system and financial markets 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  Banking  Law 
Workshop, Tirana, 17 November 2008. 
 Dear everyone, 
The conviction that two monologues do not make a dialogue not only pushed me to study law 
after my economics studies but also to listen to and toss ideas with colleagues from different 
professions. I find it especially pleasing when I do this with lawyers, given that there is one 
particular person I talk to the most – my spouse. 
The dialogue between the banking market and the legal system has always been important 
to any country. Nowadays, it has become extremely vital. For our country to continue sailing 
towards  safe  shores  of  economic  development,  financial  stability  and  prosperity,  I  believe 
these two oars are required: judicial order and the financial market.  
Dwelling  briefly  on  the  legislation  issues,  I  would  highlight  that  the  economic  activity  is 
mutually  dependent  on  the  legal  system  at  home.  As  one  of  the  distinguished  economists 
and  academics,  Mr.  Mishkin,  says  –  ”The  legal  system,  which  as  you  know,  is  not  only 
composed of legislation and rule books, but also of the infrastructure of the civil courts and 
the market regulators, represents a fundamental determinant of economic growth, especially 
in connection to financial development”. 
The link between law and finance is inextricable. The financial instruments do not operate in 
a vacuum. As long as they serve to people, they are based on legal relationships. A financial 
asset is ultimately a claim in the form of paper (contract) or electronic form (account entry). In 
any  credit  relationship,  the  possibility  of  default  is  always  looming  and  this  inherent 
complication  cannot  be  solved  without  a  precise  system  of  norms  that  protects  both  the 
creditors and the debtors.  
As Shakespeare’s Merchant of Venice reminds us, the legal system has to ensure that the 
debtor does not walk away from his obligation. At the same time, the lender cannot be too 
taxing for the debtor. Hence, as anywhere else in life, the balance (that is, the balance of 
justice)  should  provide  for  the  wellbeing  of  the  financial  system,  which  is  based  on  these 
classical relationships, no matter how much modern they are.  
Fundamentally,  the  legal  system  should  ensure  that  contract  and  property  rights  are 
sufficiently clear, protected and predictable.  
In  more  concrete  terms,  the  parties  should  not  only  be  aware  of  these  rights,  but  also 
exercise them freely and fully during the binding of the agreement or in cases of litigations. 
For this reason, the independent role of the court, its perception, the efficiency in judgment 
and the enforcement of the court decision are essential features, whose deformation has a 
direct impact on the functioning of the financial system.  
To better illustrate this idea, worth to note is that the motionless of ownership titles, the delay 
in ownership-related litigations and the non-execution of the collateral have a direct impact 
on the share that mortgage loans in particular and the loans in general have compared to 
other  countries.  This  yet  unsolved  legal  issue  has  yielded  the  discouragement  of  the 
economy support with banking loans. As long as the banking system manages the people’s 
deposits,  it  must  be  safe  and  avoid  any  possible  financial  losses  that  may  arise  from  the 
legally binding loan relationship. Undoubtedly, it is not easy.  
The  risk  elements  that  associate  this  relationship  are  numerous  and  different  in  nature. 
Namely,  there  is  a  risk  which  relates  to  the  type  of  currency,  a  second  one  to  the 
BIS Review 144/2008 
 1
performance of collateral prices, a third one may relate to the operational risk, and so on. 
The materialization of a single or a number of risks would put the bank into a difficult position.  
However,  the  Bank  of  Albania,  in  its  capacity  as  the  supervisory  authority,  compels  the 
banking  system  to  create  reserve  funds  for  any  jeopardized  loans.  The  only  direction  the 
Bank of Albania and the banking system feel powerless relates to the non-execution of the 
collateral and the de facto impossibility to provide the disposition of the collateral, in 
particular when the collateral is in the form of real estate.  
Thus, the banking and financial market need to be built and developed alongside the legal 
system. Unless there is certainty in exercising and protecting contracting rights, there could 
be no domestic or cross-border financial transactions.  
The  perception  and  exercise  of  these  rights,  the  independent  judgement  in  cases  of 
litigations, the reasonable time in solving the conflict, the efficiency and velocity in enforcing 
the court decision are the greatest warranties to offer not only to the domestic and foreign 
investors, but first and foremost to the MARKET itself.  
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  intensified  its  efforts  in  this  context,  in  particular  in  terms  of 
defending  before  the  Constitutional  Court  the  quality  of  banking  and  financial  contracts  as 
executive titles. The same arguments support the legal changes made to the execution of 
mortgages and collaterals. These changes are presently being discussed in the Parliament 
and the market is looking forward to their finalisation. 
Based on this philosophy of market functioning and regulation and believing that the market 
and  the  right  are  dynamic,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  supplied  the  banking  market  and  the 
banking right with a new instrument – the Repurchase Agreement. By means of the Law on 
Repurchase Agreement and the master contract, the Bank of Albania has initiated a process 
which  needs  to  be  further  developed  by  the  specialists  of  the  area.  Personally  and 
institutionally, we are expecting these efforts to be concluded with the execution of the first 
transactions of this kind.  
It is for this purpose that I invite all the participants in this workshop, which for the first time 
has brought together judges, prosecutors and lawyers from the banking market, to be active 
and complement one another.  
With the conviction that our initiative will be followed by other similar activities in the future, I 
wish you good proceedings. 
Thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2008
