Nout Wellink: Financial sector integrity 
Remarks by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  Symposium  about  Integrity,  Amsterdam, 
30 October 2008. 
 Back  in  around  1630,  average  annual  income  in  the  Low  Countries  was  150  guilders,  a 
barrel of butter cost about 100 guilders and eight fat pigs were worth close on 250 guilders. 
But a red and white flamed tulip, the Semper Augustus, cost 6000 guilders, almost as much 
as a house on a canal. That was at the peak of the tulip mania: the frenetic trade in tulips that 
quickly became speculation, an economic bubble. Three years after that climax, the mania 
and the trade came slowly but surely to a halt. The prices began to fall sharply, and many 
traders went bankrupt, at that time a criminal offence that could carry a long prison sentence. 
Fortunes dissolved into thin air and many of those involved lost their jobs. In April 1637, the 
government intervened by invalidating all speculative agreements and capping the price of 
tulip bulbs at 50 guilders. 
But what really triggered the beginning of the end? A simple lack of confidence. In fact, all 
markets are built on confidence. From the Albert Cuyp street market to the stock exchange 
on Beursplein 5, from Amsterdam to Tokyo. Confidence in the quality of the products, in the 
reputation  of  the  seller,  in  the  timeliness  of  delivery.  The  financial  market  is  especially 
dependent on confidence. Confidence in every layer and link in the system. Confidence in 
reliable figures and sound people and in well-enforced laws against fraud and corruption. 
Integrity  and  confidence  are  not  synonymous,  but  they  are  interdependent.  Confidence  is 
obviously  closely  related,  and  interlinked,  to  integrity:  confidence  is  essential  for  economic 
transactions  and  that  confidence  is  based  on  the  integrity  of  market  players.  So  it  goes 
without saying that integrity is not just a matter for sociologists, but for economists too. And 
it’s  also  self-evident  that  integrity  is  a  topical  subject,  which  plays  an  important  role  in  the 
causes  of,  and  the  solutions  for,  the  current  credit  crisis.  That  in  turn  is  why  I  find  it  so 
important to exchange views with you on integrity here today. 
It  is  imperative  that  the  sector,  that  you,  show  that  you  embrace  integrity  as  your 
cornerstone. And that you realise that sound conduct goes beyond strict compliance with the 
letter of the law. Laws and regulations reflect the prevailing social norms and values. Since 
regulations codify norms and values, it is vital that the financial sector keeps in touch with the 
current and changing views in society on what integrity involves and what type of conduct is 
worthy of confidence. As Ien Dales said back in 1992: “It’s no good being just a little honest”. 
Confidence is not just about integrity. The solvency and stability of the financial system are 
also  crucial  for  confidence  in  the  sector.  But  the  sector  still  needs  to  observe  business 
integrity, in a way that we as a society find admissible and acceptable. 
Monitoring  and  safeguarding  business  integrity  is  a  job  for  the  supervisors.  In  the 
Netherlands we apply the Twin Peaks model, for which the US Minister of Finance Paulson 
recently expressed a preference. In this model, we separate market conduct supervision and 
prudential supervision. The Authority for the Financial Markets (AFM) exercises supervision 
on the conduct of financial institutions in the market and towards their customers, and DNB 
targets  the  solidity  of  financial  enterprises.  An  important  component  in  the  supervision  by 
DNB and AFM is the supervision of financial sector integrity. 
How  does  DNB  go  about  it?  By  exercising  supervision  on  the  various  levels  of  integrity: 
supervision  of  personal  integrity,  relationship  integrity,  organisational  integrity  and  market 
integrity. We target the main risks: money laundering, terrorist financing, fraud, harm to third 
parties and insider trading. These risks could affect the activities of financial institutions and 
BIS Review 136/2008 
 1
harm  their  reputation.  DNB  expects  that  institutions  will  act  responsibly  in  identifying  and 
managing such risks. 
For  most  enterprises,  and  particularly  financial  institutions,  the  tone  at  the  top  is  more 
significant  for  business  integrity  than  the  conduct  of  individual  employees.  The  integrity  of 
directors  and  those  who  determine  or  co-determine  policy  at  financial  institutions  has 
traditionally  been  verified  by  the  integrity  test.  The  trustworthiness  of  an  enterprise’s  top 
management  should  be  beyond  doubt.  In  2007,  DNB  conducted  integrity  tests  on  1578 
persons  responsible  for  determining  policy.  Not  one  of  them  failed  the  test,  although  58 
candidates withdrew their application.  
These  tests  sometimes  hinge  on  delicate  considerations.  Is,  say,  Mr  X,  who  threatened  a 
traffic warden after receiving a traffic fine, still a fit and proper director? And how do you deal 
with  the  director  who,  whether  or  not  intentionally,  fails  to  report  previous  offences  on  his 
integrity form.  
Openness plays an important role in such decisions. For DNB, failure to mention a mistake is 
sometimes worse than the mistake itself. I assure you that DNB treats such questions with 
the greatest possible care. 
And  of  course  we  require  the  highest  standards  of  integrity  from  our  own  employees  and 
organisation. For DNB too, a sharp awareness of integrity at all layers of the organisation is 
crucial.  We  work  hard  on  that.  Not  only  through  rules  and  regulations  but  also  through 
training sessions on integrity in the workplace. Such sessions lend DNB employees greater 
insight into the integrity dilemmas that may arise in their work. But more importantly, DNB 
employees  discuss  integrity  and  what  it  means  for  us.  In  addition,  our  central  compliance 
department  continuously  analyses  the  integrity  risks  that  we  run  as  a  central  bank  and 
supervisor, especially in view of our public role. Unsound conduct by DNB or its employees 
could have an immediate impact on public confidence in our organisation.  
The Prevention of Money Laundering and Terrorist Financing Act, which recently came into 
effect,  gives  substance  to  customer  due  diligence.  Financial  institutions  must  at  all  times 
apply the basic criteria: know your customer and know your business. In other words: even if 
an  institution’s  employees  are  sound,  they  may  unwittingly  do  business  with  dishonest 
customers.  Banks  could  be  drawn  into  money  laundering  constructions  engineered  by 
criminal organisations that use complex methods to finance real estate with criminal gains. 
Besides  “know  your  customer”,  there  are  specific  sanctions  regulations  aimed  in  part  at 
preventing terrorist financing. Institutions must also take measures to prevent their misuse for 
financing weapons of mass destruction in countries such as Iran. DNB is obviously not the 
only supervisor of these practices. Under UN resolutions and EU legislation, institutions are 
obliged to have a clear view of their trade financing activities. 
We must always stay alert for new developments. In 2006, for example, an estimated USD 1 
billion  was spent  on  goods  and  services  in  digital  virtual  communities.  The  combination  of 
anonymity and the possibility of channelling profits to the real economy make such websites 
a potential source of terrorist financing. 
In tracking down risks, we sometimes look right through sectors to examine a specific issue. 
The  real  estate  sector  is  a  good  example.  The  real  estate  market  is  often  closed  and 
intransparent, with a select group of players who can act in various capacities. That makes 
the sector vulnerable and exposed to dubious practices. Seeing this as a serious concern, 
DNB has asked the sector to establish a robust framework of control measures. 
Besides  monitoring  the  development  of  risk,  DNB  also  seeks  methods  to  make  integrity 
supervision  more  efficient.  This  is  aptly  illustrated  by  the  so-termed  self-assessments, 
whereby institutions assess their business integrity with the help of questionnaires. 
DNB  subsequently  examines  these  self-assessments.  This  is  an  efficient  way  to  chart  the 
risks  within  a  sector  without  having  to  visit  each  institution  individually.  Self-assessments 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2008
were  introduced  at  small  and  medium-sized  insurers  this  autumn;  they  were  developed  in 
consultation  with  the  sector  in  order  to  accommodate  insurer-specific  features.  We  also 
learnt greatly from the AFM’s experiences with its contribution model. 
DNB’s  operational  supervision  is  obviously  closely  connected  to  the  integrity  issues  of 
concern to the intelligence and security service, the AFM, tax authorities, fiscal and economic 
intelligence  service  and  the  police.  DNB  neither  prepares  nor  continues  the  work  of  the 
investigative  and  prosecution  authorities,  but  we  cooperate  well  with  them  and  share 
information  with  other  supervisors  and  investigative  and  prosecution  agencies,  naturally 
keeping within the statutory bounds of confidentiality. As the chair of the Financial Expertise 
Centrum,  the  FEC,  DNB  is  committed  to  further  intensifying  cooperation  between  the 
services. 
Besides the integrity supervision of persons, business relations and organisations, DNB also 
concerns itself with the integrity of the entire financial sector. Here too, integrity goes beyond 
compliance with statutory rules and provisions. Unsound conduct can damage the sector as 
a  whole,  even  if,  strictly  speaking,  no  violations  occur.  The  wrong  sort  of  incentives  could 
induce  sound  people,  working  in  sound  companies,  to  exhibit  behaviour  that  impacts 
negatively  on  market  integrity  in  general.  Notably  in  this  area,  it  is  up  to  the  sector  to  act 
responsibility.  You  are  responsible  for  making  the  right  choices.  Where  those  choices  are 
difficult, DNB would be glad to discuss them with you. But if you don’t make any choices at 
all,  you  will  find  that  DNB  takes  its  role  as  supervisor  very  seriously  when  it  comes  to 
integrity. 
In  my  view,  this  sector  is  itself  responsible  for  all  aspects  and  manifestations  of  sound 
conduct. Confidence must be earned! And what the sector, or certain players in the sector, 
do  or  do  not  earn,  is  now  a  target  of  much  agitation  and  dissatisfaction  and  a  subject  of 
debate that focuses particularly on transaction-related bonuses. Without going so far as to 
say that the credit crisis is a direct result of such bonuses, we can say that the incentives 
attached to such bonuses could generate irresponsible and socially undesirable behaviour. 
Behaviour that in any case lowers confidence in the reliability of the financial sector. 
Let  me  assure  you  that  DNB  will  keep  a  strict  watch  on  bonus  structures  at  financial 
institutions  that  induce  directors  to  take  irresponsible  risks.  We  do  not  need  to  completely 
prohibit  bonuses,  but  it  is  essential  to  align  the  size  and  the  time  frame  of  bonuses  more 
closely to the longer-term goals of the enterprise itself. As far as I am concerned, bonuses 
could  be  scrapped  altogether.  I  would  prefer  to  see  executives  drawing  good,  competitive 
salaries.  That  salary  should  be  enough  incentive  for  a  good  and  sound  performance  that 
actually  contributes  to  financial  institutions’  long-term  objectives.  I  am  convinced  that  the 
financial sector itself would benefit most from stable pay structures. 
Of course this issue must be tackled internationally. Globalisation has removed the borders 
in the financial sector. Since financial risks have become marketable, and borders between 
countries  have  blurred,  losses  are  spread  more  widely.  We  not  only  reap  the  rewards  of 
globalisation, but the bitter fruits too, because everybody is affected when things go badly 
wrong. That’s why we need international discussion and action on bonus structures, integrity 
and other such matters. 
The  Financial  Stability  Forum,  in  which  I  sit  as  the  chairman  of  the  Basel  Committee, 
published a code of conduct for pay structures in July. It centres on the recommendation that 
pay incentives should be based on actual performance and should be in line with the long-
term interests of shareholders and the profitability of the enterprise as a whole. In addition, 
DNB is supported at national level by the AFM’s serious approach to its integrity task. AFM 
supervises the sound conduct of the sector towards its customers, the consumers. And only 
when the sector deals soundly with consumer interests, will consumers regain confidence in 
the financial sector. 
The first steps have been taken: nationally and internationally, financial sector integrity is on 
the agenda. In the coming period we will join in European and global discussions on sound, 
BIS Review 136/2008 
 3
confidence-inspiring  international  supervision.  Supervisors,  governments  and  enterprises 
together.  Because  if  there’s  one  thing  we’ve  learnt  from  the  credit  crisis,  from  the  loss  of 
confidence  in  the  financial  sector,  it  is  –  in  my  opinion  –  that  we  can  only  regain  that 
confidence through national and international cooperation! 
4 
 BIS Review 136/2008
