Tom Alweendo: Namibia’s monetary policy framework 
Annual address by Mr Tom Alweendo, Governor of Bank of Namibia, Windhoek, 6 November 
2008. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for having accepted our invitation to come and listen to my annual address. This 
year I will focus my address on our monetary policy framework. This year’s choice of topic is 
motivated by our desire to be transparent in our conduct of monetary policy. 
International financial crisis 
Allow me first to make few remarks on the global economic developments. By now we are all 
aware of the financial crisis that is afflicting the world economy and its adverse impact on 
economic growth world-wide. This crisis is made worse by the risk of high price-induced food 
and  fuel  crises.  As  a  result,  many  countries  are  faced  with  the  challenges  of  managing 
worsening balance of payments positions. For example, global economic growth is projected 
to decline this year and during 2009, potentially aggravating the financial crisis and thereby 
the loss of confidence in the financial markets. While the financial crisis is still only confined 
to the advance economies, there are uncertainties as to its impact on developing economies. 
Depending  on  how  long  it  may  last,  there  is  a  greater  risk  that  the  crisis  will  spill-over  to 
developing economies and that we will see further tightening in the commodity markets that 
will pose risks to growth in many commodity-exporting developing countries. 
In sub-Saharan Africa, for example, economic growth is projected to minimally slow from 6.9 
percent in 2007 to 6.3 percent in 2008. In 2009 there is an expectation of a slow recovery to 
6.7  percent,  due  mainly  to  the  relative  macroeconomic  stability  in  many  of  the  SSA 
economies. However, it is likely that the region will be negatively impacted by conditions of 
food  insecurity  and  inflationary  pressure.  In  many  of  our  countries  in  the  region,  the  key 
challenge is therefore how to address the medium to long-term implications of the crisis with 
respect  to  macroeconomic  stability,  fiscal  and  current  account  balance,  and  growth 
sustainability.  It  is  imperative  that  our  policy  should  aim  at  improving  infrastructure  and  to 
increase  investment  that  is  supportive  of  growth,  strengthening  the  macroeconomic 
framework,  and 
loss  of 
competitiveness. 
The advanced economies that are affected by the financial crisis have responded by mainly 
using public funds to provide fiscal stimulus and liquidity support to their financial institutions. 
They  argued  that  the  long-term  potential  cost  to  society  arising  from  the  collapse  of  the 
financial sector will be much larger than the cost to the public of bailing out ailing financial 
institutions.  We  also  now  know  that  these  policy  interventions  have  had  mixed  results  in 
stemming the crisis. 
The main lesson to be learned from the financial crisis is that in the highly globalised financial 
markets,  effective  regulation  is  an  indispensable  tool  to  manage  financial  markets.  It  has 
been proven, on various occasions that the market is not always efficient. We must therefore 
except that there will always be occasions where the market will fail and when that happens 
there  is  a  realistic  expectation  that  governments  should  intervene.  When  markets  are 
functioning as expected, proponents of minimal regulation generally consider regulation as 
an unnecessary constraint to the private sector. My view is that we need to be pragmatic and 
not  wait  until  markets  fail  before  governments  intervene  by  having  effective  market 
regulation. Let me also hasten to add that when governments do intervene to correct market 
failures, such intervention must be temporary and targeted. 
the  business  environment 
improving 
to  avoid 
in  order 
BIS Review 152/2008 
 1
from 
relatively  shielded 
financial  system  has  been 
immediate  negative 
Our 
consequences of the financial crisis. Overall, therefore, there is no immediate concern about 
our  financial  stability.  However,  depending  on  how  long  the  crisis  may  last,  we  are  not 
altogether  immuned  from  the  long-term  effects,  such  as  slow  economic  growth.  Moreover, 
although  inflationary  pressures  have  started  to  abate,  the  outlook  remains  uncertain.  It  is, 
thus, imperative to manage our resources prudently, both at a national and household levels. 
It goes without saying that the financial crisis has created a challenge for monetary policy. A 
number of monetary authorities are faced with the difficult balance between maintaining price 
stability by tightening monetary policy without needlessly jeopardising economic growth. 
the 
Principles of monetary policy framework 
Let me now return to my topic of discussion today, namely our monetary policy framework. 
Before elaborating on the specifics of our monetary policy framework, I would like to highlight 
some  principle  issues  that  guide  monetary  policy  frameworks  world-wide.  Monetary  policy 
has been acknowledged as one of the main tools that central banks and governments use for 
economic management. One can describe monetary policy as the action by the central bank 
to influence short-term interest rates, money supply and credit extension to achieve certain 
objectives.  In  many  countries,  including  Namibia,  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  is  price 
stability. 
In an environment of stable prices, economic actors, both domestic and foreign, are able to 
plan better for the future. For instance, both domestic and foreign investors would be hesitant 
to  invest  in  a  high  inflation  environment  for  fear  of  loss  of  their  investment  values.  Stable 
prices allow market participants to make informed decisions and adjust their decisions about 
spending, saving, and investing in welfare-enhancing ways. High inflation, on the other hand, 
invites  bad  economic  decisions,  which  is  harmful  to  long-term  sustainable  growth.  Stable 
prices  are  also  important  in  protecting  the  purchasing  power  of  consumers,  especially  the 
poor. 
One of the pertinent questions that economists and practitioners alike continue to battle with 
is what monetary policy can do and what it cannot do. In general, there is consensus that 
monetary  policy,  through  low  and  stable  prices,  can  assist  in  creating  a  conducive 
environment  for  sustainable  economic  growth  and  development.  I  would,  however,  like  to 
note that stable prices do not mean that prices of good and services will not change at all. 
Relative prices in a market economy will always change in response to changes in relative 
scarcities. For example, during or after a drought food prices are likely to increase. 
While  monetary  policy  can  succeed  in  maintaining  stable  prices,  it  is  less  successful  in 
controlling real variables, such as the real interest rate or the unemployment rate. 
The point being that price stability is a necessary but not sufficient condition for economic 
growth. Growth in the long-term is determined by a range of factors, including supply side 
factors,  government  policies  and  the  general  macroeconomic  environment  that  monetary 
policy contributes to. 
The transmission mechanism of monetary policy in Namibia 
At  the  heart  of  any  monetary  policy  framework  is  the  transmission  mechanism.  The 
transmission  mechanism  traces  how  monetary  policy  decisions  impact  on  other  economic 
variables,  such  as  prices  and  output  over  time.  For  example,  if  the  objective  of  monetary 
policy  is  to  control  inflation  and  the  instrument  used  is  interest  rate,  the  transmission 
mechanism  describes  how  higher  interest  rates  are  supposed  to  curb  increases  in  the 
general  price  level.  Increases  in  interest  rates  raise  the  cost  of  borrowing  and  depress 
corporate  investment.  Furthermore,  high  interest  rates  reduce  the  value  of  assets,  which 
impacts negatively on wealth and therefore consumption. 
2 
 BIS Review 152/2008
We must, however, be  aware that there are economies that are less market-oriented than 
others, where the behaviour of economic actors may be less sensitive to the price of money 
and where bottom-line considerations may not be of prime importance in business decisions. 
There  is  also  the  possibility  of  the  borrowing  and  lending  rates  of  the  banks  being  less 
sensitive to changes in the key policy rates. For these and other reasons, the transmission 
mechanism, may be less efficient than would otherwise be the case. This may be so to such 
an extent that interest rate as a monetary policy instrument may not be an effective one. 
The mechanism will also differ, depending on whether a country has adopted a fully flexible 
or  pegged  exchange  rate  arrangement.  In  an  open  economy  operating  under  a  fixed 
exchange rate regime, it is not possible to also have monetary policy independence and free 
capital mobility. However, a country with a fixed exchange rate policy could use sterilisation 
operations,  capital  controls  and  prudential  requirements  to  influence,  to  a  certain  degree, 
short-term interest rates, money supply and credit extension to the private sector to control 
domestically induced inflation through expectations and aggregate demand. 
As a consequence of being a member of the Common Monetary Area, Namibia is not in a 
position to set its monetary policy fully independent from South Africa, which is the anchor 
country.  However,  we  still  have  the  ability  to  deviate  to  some  extent  from  South  Africa  by 
using  capital  controls  and  prudential  requirements  that  can  be  imposed  on  our  financial 
institutions. It is therefore possible for the Bank of Namibia to maintain a Repo rate different 
from the Repo rate of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB), when so required, and gives 
us  discretion  to  control  the  domestic  money  supply.  This  discretion  enables  the  Bank  of 
Namibia to control domestically induced inflation, which is estimated to contribute about 35 
per cent to the overall inflation in Namibia. 
The institutional underpinnings of monetary policy in Namibia 
Let  me  now  say  something  about  the  process  of  conducting  our  monetary  policy.  Our 
Executive  Committee,  consisting  of  senior  members  of  management  and  chaired  by  the 
Governor, is responsible for the formulation of monetary policy. In many countries, the setup 
is  to  have  a  legally  constituted  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  where  membership  is  not 
restricted  to  members  of  management.  In  my  view  this  is  a  better  arrangement  and  going 
forward, we should move to a similar arrangement. 
The  key  mandate  of  the  Executive  Committee  in  relation  to  monetary  policy  matters  is 
derived from the Bank of Namibia Act, which requires the Bank of Namibia to ensure internal 
and  external  monetary  stability.  By  law,  the  Bank  enjoys  operational  autonomy  in  its 
decision-making. The main objective that the Committee focuses on is the maintenance of 
the  parity  of  the  Namibia  Dollar  to  the  South  African  Rand.  However,  since  the  ultimate 
objective of monetary policy is stable prices, the Committee also keeps a close watch on the 
inflation rate. 
The  Committee  meets  six  times  a  year  and  at  each  such  meeting,  it  decides  on  the 
appropriate stance of monetary policy for the next two months. Before a decision is taken, 
relevant line departments in the Bank are invited to make presentations to the Committee on 
recent domestic and international economic developments, and on the inflation outlook. All 
decisions are taken by consensus and where consensus does not emerge, the Chairperson 
exercises a casting vote. 
Monetary policy implementation and market operations 
Our  ultimate  monetary  policy  objective,  as  I  noted  earlier,  is  to  maintain  price  stability.  In 
achieving  this  objective,  the  Bank  of  Namibia  has  an  intermediate  target  to  promote  an 
economic  and  financial  environment  that  will  ensure  that  the  parity  between  the  Namibia 
Dollar and the South Africa Rand is not in any way threatened. For example, the parity could 
BIS Review 152/2008 
 3
be  threatened  when,  amongst  others,  large  interest  rates  differential  causes  undue  capital 
inflows or outflows. 
You  may  also  need  to  have  an  operational  target,  which  is  an  economic  variable  that  the 
central  bank  wants  to  influence  on  a  day-to-day  basis,  through  its  monetary  policy 
instruments. Although we do not have a formal operating target, we do monitor the level of 
our official reserves, as the fixed currency peg requires the country to fully back its currency 
in circulation with international reserves. Our current levels of the official reserves are more 
than sufficient to protect the fixed exchange rate arrangement. However, at the N$12 billion 
mark, the reserves are still minimal in comparison to similar economies. We therefore need 
to continue to intensify our efforts in accumulating more reserves. 
The  main  policy  tool  that  we  use  to  influence  local  monetary  conditions  is  the  Repo  rate, 
which  is  kept  close  to  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank’s  repo  rate.  The  Repo  rate  is  the 
interest rate at which commercial banks borrow money from the Bank of Namibia, and this, in 
turn, affects other interest rates in the economy. Changes to the Repo rate usually take into 
account  not  only  the  SARB’s  decision  about  its  Repo  rate,  but  also  domestic  and 
international economic conditions, and future prospects. 
The main tools that the Bank uses to reach its operational targets include the call account, 
repurchase operations, Bank of Namibia Bills and other monetary policy tools. For those who 
are interested in more details about these tools, I encourage you to read the booklet we have 
just  issued.  However,  the  main  objectives  of  all  these  tools  are  to  manage  liquidity  in  the 
banking system. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, ladies and gentlemen, I hope that I have clarified a number of issues, and that 
you will have a better understanding and appreciation of the monetary policy decisions of the 
Bank. I also encourage you to make time and read the booklet on monetary policy framework 
that we launched today. As you read, please remember that our doors at Bank of Namibia 
are open, should you want to engage us on certain issues that may be of interest to you. 
That will help us make strides in our efforts to being transparent in our dealings. 
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 152/2008
