Yandraduth Googoolye: Supervision and regulation of state-owned 
banks 
Address by Mr Yandraduth Googoolye, First Deputy Governor of the Bank of Mauritius, at 
the  Financial  Stability  Institute,  World  Bank  and  International  Monetary  Fund  Seminar  on 
“Supervision and Regulation of State-Owned Banks”, hosted by the Reserve Bank of India, 
Mumbai, 5 November 2008. 
 Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I  am  very  pleased  to  be  in  Mumbai  today  to  share  a  few  thoughts  on  supervision  and 
regulation  of  government-owned  banks.  I  must  at  the  outset  compliment  the  Financial 
Stability Institute, World Bank and International Monetary Fund for having chosen this issue 
as the theme for this seminar. No subject could be more topical in the current context given 
that we are seeing in the West a reverse process of private banks getting wholly or semi-
nationalized.  Therefore,  the  lessons  of  this  seminar,  which  is  targeted  at  the  emerging 
economies, could be useful for the developed world as well, in a more meaningful way than 
perhaps they might have been a few weeks ago. 
Before getting to the theme of regulation and supervision of government-owned banks, let us 
see the different ways in which Government can have stakes in banks. Firstly, government 
ownership can arise at the initial shareholding stage, i.e. an entity in which Government has 
majority  shareholding  applies  for  a  banking  licence.  Secondly,  Government  may  set  up  a 
bank  or  nationalize  existing  bank(s)  through  an  Act  of  Parliament  to  further  its  social  and 
developmental objectives, and thirdly Government could acquire shares in an existing bank 
to bailing out a failing bank, something quite fashionable these days! 
Indeed  there  is  an  extensive  literature  and  a  lot  of  debate  on  the  role  of  government 
ownership in banking. It would perhaps be useful to briefly touch upon some of the theories 
that have been put forward on government ownership in banking. The views that have been 
more  frequently  associated  with  state  ownership  of  banks are  the  social  view,  the  political 
view  and  the  agency  view.  The  social  view  suggests  that  government-owned  banks 
contribute  to  economic  development  and  improve  general  welfare  (Atkinson  and  Stiglitz 
(1980)). The political view highlights the role of politicians in pursuing their personal goals, for 
example  maximizing  employment  of  their  electorate  or  financing  favoured  enterprises 
(Shleifer (1998)). The agency view relates to the agency costs in government bureaucracy 
that  may  result  in  managerial  inefficiency  (Banerjee  (1997),  Hart,  Shleifer  and  Vishny 
(1997)). 
Various studies have also been conducted to assess the impact of government ownership on 
banks. Caprio and Marinez (2000) demonstrated that government ownership is significantly 
and  positively  associated  with  increases  in  bank  fragility;  Barth,  Caprio  and  Levine  (2004) 
found no conclusive evidence on the relationship between government ownership in banks 
and the likelihood of a banking crisis. Those inconsistent results seem to suggest that in spite 
of the implicit deposit protection arising out of government ownership of banks, such banks 
are not immune from insolvency risk. Even if the depositors’ interests are not jeopardized, it 
might be at the cost of general public interest. 
These observations are meant to show the implications of government ownership of banks 
on  the  banking  system  and  on  economic  growth,  and  put  into  perspective  the  critical 
importance  of  regulation  and  supervision  of  government-owned  banks.  In  fact,  it  is  rather 
easy to see that the best way to get the maximum benefit of the government ownership of 
banks is to subject them to proper regulation and supervision. 
BIS Review 162/2008 
 1
The whole issue of regulation and supervision of the public sector banks assumes a special 
significance  only  because  there  is  a  notion  that  the  regulator  may  not  have  de  facto 
independence because the Government, as the shareholder of the regulator, may influence 
the  regulatory  process  as  applied  to  the  banks  owned  by  it  (Government).  However,  if 
government-owned  banks  have  to  function  as  commercially  viable  entities,  the  regulatory 
process  should  be  able  to  shield  them  from  being  used  in  a  manner  detrimental  to 
depositors’/public interest. This would also be necessary from the point of view of creating a 
level playing field for both government-owned banks and private banks. 
The issue of differentiated regulation or regulatory process may take  various forms. There 
could  be  differences  in  the  way  the  directors  are  chosen  by  Government.  If  the  board  of 
directors  of  a  government-controlled  financial  institution  comprises  only  representatives  of 
Government, there may be a tendency for the broader goals of Government to override the 
commercial objectives of the bank and thereby depositors’ interest. The objectivity with which 
the regulator deals with nominations of persons who might not pass the fit and proper test in 
such  cases will  be  an  indicator  of  the  independence  of  the  regulator and  the  uniformity  of 
supervisory practices. 
Another issue, also emanating from the corporate governance perspective, arises from the 
fact that while in the case of most enterprises, the shareholder gets the prime place among 
various  stakeholders,  in  the  case  of  a  bank,  the  protection  of  depositors’  interest  is  the 
central area of focus. In the case of a public sector bank in which the shareholder/controller 
of the central bank or the regulator is the sole or majority shareholder, a question arises as to 
how  the  regulator  (whether  the  central  bank  or  any  other  authority)  would  focus  on 
depositors’ interest as opposed to shareholders’ interest. One might wonder whether those 
interests  are  in  conflict.  It  may  not  be  so  all  the  time  but  there  do  exist  situations  where 
conflicts  might  arise.  For  example,  the  various  principles  of  prudence  that  the  regulator 
requires financial institutions to adhere to might curtail the risk-taking ability and thus channel 
resources into safer, but not so remunerative activities. 
A  third  area  of  perception  of  different  treatment  arises  in  regard  to  lending  policies.  For 
instance,  how  would  a  regulatory  authority  view  a  public  sector  bank  lending  for  socially 
justifiable  objectives  that  may  not  be  bankable  in  the  strict  sense  of  the  term?  Would  the 
regulator treat such lending by all banks alike or would it condone the lending by the public 
sector bank as an extension of the social objectives of the Government? 
A  fourth  aspect  could  be  over  regulation  because  of  public  accountability  associated  with 
government ownership. Thus the government may directly or through the regulator impose 
too many restrictions on the functioning of a bank owned by it and these could impede the 
fleet footedness one would expect a commercial entity to display. For example, decisions on 
write  offs,  restructuring  involving  financial  sacrifice  by  the  bank  may  go  through  the 
bureaucratic rigmarole leading to delays and failure to clinch critical settlements. Very often 
government ownership is associated with excessive emphasis on the process without regard 
to  and  often  to  the  detriment  of  the  expected  outcome.  The  regulator  too  may  view  these 
passively,  if  not  positively,  as  all  such  decisions  or  indecisions  may  be  justified  on  the 
principles of propriety as also because of the comfort of the bail out of the depositor in the 
event of insolvency. 
The Mauritian experience 
Let me now turn to the situation in Mauritius. Before I go into the details of the regulatory and 
supervisory process, I would like to outline the structure of the financial services industry in 
the  country.  The  major  financial  institutions  in  Mauritius  are  banks,  insurance  companies- 
both general and life, non-bank deposit taking financial institutions, cash dealers comprising 
money  changers  and  foreign  exchange  dealers.  Banks  account  for  80%  of  the  country’s 
financial  sector.  The  legal  framework  for  the  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial 
2 
 BIS Review 162/2008
institutions is provided mainly by the Banking Act 2004, the Bank of Mauritius Act 2004 and 
the Financial Services Act 2007. 
The Banking Act is administered by the Bank of Mauritius and applies to banks, non-bank 
deposit  taking  institutions  and  the  cash  dealers  while  the  Financial  Services  Act  is 
implemented  by  the  Financial  Services  Commission  which  oversees  all  other  segments  of 
the financial sector including insurance and leasing. The non-bank deposit taking institutions 
engaged in leasing business are regulated and supervised by both the Bank of Mauritius and 
Financial Services Commission, such overlaps not being uncommon in other jurisdictions as 
well.  There  are  conglomerates  having  business  in  segments  coming  within  the  purview  of 
both  regulators.  We  have  a  joint  coordination  committee  to  exchange  notes  and  we  are 
moving towards the concept of a lead regulator. The Bank of Mauritius Act basically sets out 
the responsibilities and functions of the Bank and thus its provisions have a bearing on the 
Bank’s regulatory and supervisory role. 
There  are  in  all  19  banks  and  13  non-bank  deposit  taking  institutions.  Out  of  these 
institutions, at present there are two banks and three non-bank deposit taking institutions in 
which Government has a majority stake – directly or indirectly. The shares in a bank in which 
the  government-controlled  development  financial  institution  held  a  majority  stake  were 
divested to private entities recently. 
The Government’s interest in the five institutions is held in different ways. For instance, in 
one  of  the  banks  Government  of  Mauritius  directly  holds  a  part  of  the  shares  while  the 
remaining is held through government-controlled organizations like the Pension Fund etc. In 
another  case,  Government  stake  is  partly  held  by  the  government-controlled  Post  Office. 
One  of  those  banks  is  listed  on  the  Stock  Exchange  as  well.  Two  of  the  non4  banks  are 
subsidiaries of government undertakings. In the final analysis though, the manner in which 
the  Government  stake  is  held  may  not  have  any  bearing  on  the  control  exercised  by 
Government on the entities’ management. 
All  these  institutions  are  regulated  and  supervised  by  Bank  of  Mauritius  like  any  other 
institution  under  its  purview,  as  I  would  explain  later  on.  However,  a  deposit-taking 
development financial institution in the public sector is not yet brought within the purview of 
the Bank. 
A uniform regulatory approach 
In certain jurisdictions, the legal framework for regulation and supervision makes a distinction 
on the applicability of certain provisions of the legislation to privately-owned and public sector 
financial institutions. In India, some of the provisions of the Banking Regulation Act (1949), 
particularly  relating  to  the  appointment  of  the  Chief  Executive  and  directors,  are  not 
applicable to the public sector banks. However, in Mauritius, all the provisions of the Banking 
Act apply in the same manner and to the same extent to both types of institutions. As such 
the regulatory authority of the Bank of Mauritius applies on all aspects of the functioning of a 
public sector financial institution as it does to those of similar institutions in the private sector. 
Perhaps it would be worthwhile to outline some of the more important aspects to illustrate the 
uniformity  of  approach,  namely  in  the  areas  of  licensing,  regulatory  limits,  audit,  onsite 
examination, offsite surveillance and corporate governance. 
The  Chairman,  Chief  Executive  officer,  the  directors  and  other  senior  officers  of  a 
government-owned entity are scrutinized for the fit and proper test in the same manner as a 
private  sector  entity,  when  examining  an  application  for  a  banking  licence.  All  guidelines 
apply equally to the public sector banks and the private sector banks. As an example of the 
extreme application of uniformity, I should cite the fact that lending by a government owned 
bank  to  a  public  sector  entity  is  considered  a  related  party  exposure  and  subject  to  the 
discipline governing connected lending. 
BIS Review 162/2008 
 3
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  vets  the  credentials  of  the  external  auditors  of  both  private  sector 
banks and public sector banks before giving its approval for their appointment. The offsite 
surveillance and the onsite examination are conducted in the same manner for private sector 
banks and public sector banks. 
Further, the various principles of corporate governance enunciated by the Bank are applied 
with the same rigour to a public and a private sector financial institution. As such the public 
sector institutions are required to even constitute Conduct Review Committees to examine 
related  party  transactions  –  which  in  their  case  would  mainly  mean  credit  facilities  to  or 
transactions  with  other  public  sector  enterprises.  Given  the  importance  of  corporate 
governance  in  banking  institutions,  the  independent  functioning  of  the  Board  of  Directors 
cannot be overemphasized. Our Guideline on Corporate Governance requires the Board of a 
banking institution to have a healthy proportion of independent directors and encourages a 
minimum of 40 per cent. The Board should also put in place an appropriate structure and 
procedures to achieve and project its independence. The directors of the Board should meet 
the “fit and proper” criteria at the outset and on an ongoing basis. These requirements have 
contributed  to  ensure  that  political  interests  do  not  take  precedence  over  the  bank’s 
commercial interests. 
As such the uniformity, de jure enshrined in the legal framework, is de facto extended to the 
supervisory process as well. 
Performance of banks in Mauritius 
Before moving over to my concluding remarks, I would briefly deal with the performance of 
the banking sector in Mauritius. It is a matter of great comfort that of late the sector has been 
witnessing  robust  growth  in  most  parameters  coupled  with  a  decline  in  the  ratio  of  non-
performing loans to total advances. The deposits of banks increased from MUR435 billion to 
MUR537  billion  between  end  June  2007  and  end  June  2008;  while  advances  grew  from 
MUR305 billion to MUR356 billion during the same period. The pre-tax profit increased from 
MUR9.9 billion for the year ended March 2007 to MUR11.1 billion for the year ended March 
2008. Non performing loans represented 2.4 per cent of the gross advances at the end of 
June 2008. There are 186 branches and 382 ATMs in the country and on an average more 
than one electronic card is in use per adult population. 
The public sector banks have also turned in good performance. In fact one of the two public 
sector  banks  is  the  second  largest  bank  in  the  country.  The  return  on  assets  for  the  year 
ended March 2008 of the two public sector banks was 2.84 per cent and 0.74 per cent as 
against the average of 1.7 per cent for the industry. Similarly the return on equity of one of 
them was 20.93 per cent as against the industry average of 23.26 per cent.  
It is therefore evident that the banking sector, including the entities in which Government has 
controlling interest, has performed well. I must also assure you that they are resilient enough, 
thus vindicating our faith in applying a uniform legal, regulatory and supervisory framework. 
Let  me  make  one  final  comment  on  the  performance  of  public  sector  banks.  There  is  a 
general  perception  that  public  sector  institutions  are  not  as  innovative  as  private  sector 
entities. Well this may not always be true. In fact one of the public sector banks in Mauritius 
won the Euromoney and The Banker Award for the “Best Bank in Mauritius” on a number of 
occasions. 
Concluding remarks 
It is undoubtedly a good practice not to let the ownership structure influence the regulatory 
and supervisory process. This has two positive effects. First, the public sector entity functions 
like any other commercial organization within the risk management guidelines issued by the 
regulator. Secondly, the privately-owned entities in the sector would not feel discriminated. 
4 
 BIS Review 162/2008
This is necessary to attract private capital in the sector. Obviously, a regulatory process that 
favours one segment vis-à-vis the other within the same industry would not be conducive for 
fostering healthy competition. 
Having said all this, there is an important issue, which we cannot lose sight of. One of the 
major comforts that a regulator seeks as part of its depositor interest centric function is the 
reputation  and  the  financial  strength  of  the  promoter.  From  this  perspective  the  nation’s 
sovereign as the main shareholder gives a lot of comfort to the regulator. The recent events, 
even if one may consider them exceptional, demonstrated that those perceived as invincible 
also  do  not have  the  financial  muscle  of  the  sovereign.  However,  the  regulator  should  not 
bask under the comfort of the sovereign being the promoter nor should it let any instruments 
of Government abuse this comfort. 
The punch line, if one has to sum up the whole gamut of issues relating to regulation and 
supervision of public sector banks, could read – Feel comfortable, but don’t relax! 
Thank you all for your attention. 
BIS Review 162/2008 
 5
