Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Economic policies on the two sides of the Atlantic 
– (why) are they different? 
Lecture by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Collegio Carlo Alberto, Moncalieri, 7 November 2008. 
 Introduction1  
1.  
The United States and the euro area are the two main economic and monetary areas in the 
world  and  they  are  reasonably  similar  in  size,  with  a  population  of  over  300  million  (300 
million in the United States and 320 million in the euro area) and GDP of around €10,000 
billion at current prices (at the going rate of exchange of around USD 1.30 to the euro – US 
GDP is worth around €11,000 billion, while euro area GDP is worth around €9,000 billion). 
The  economic  policies  implemented  in  these  two  areas  act  as  a  reference  for  the  whole 
world’s economy. They are carefully scrutinised and compared by academics, market players 
and commentators.  
In  recent  years,  the  two  economies  have  been  compared  in  a  largely  asymmetrical  way, 
possibly a hangover from an obsolete institutional setup and analytical reference framework. 
While  in  the  United  States  economic  policies  are  mainly  assessed  on  the  basis  of the  US 
economy’s underlying state, in the euro area the assessment is made on the basis not only 
of  European  economic  fundamentals,  but  also,  and  indeed  above  all,  with  reference  to 
economic policy decisions made on the other side of the Atlantic. On our continent, monetary 
and budgetary policies are often judged in relation to what is decided in the United States 
rather than in their own right. However, it is very rare that the opposite happens. Particularly 
at  moments  such  as  we  are  experiencing  right  now,  one  often  hears  people  asking  how 
come monetary and budgetary policies in the euro area do not closely follow the strategies 
implemented in the United States, without their pausing for a moment to consider whether or 
not those US policies are suited to the European economy. There is still a kind of unthinking 
reflex  in  Europe  that  prompts  some  people  to  believe  that  our  economic  policy  authorities 
should adopt the same approach as the US authorities, and that we are making a mistake 
when we do not do so. 
This kind of asymmetrical assessment was perhaps alright under the Bretton Woods system, 
in  which  the  European  countries  pegged  their  currencies  to  the  dollar,  and  under  the 
subsequent  fluctuating  system  in  which  the  individual  European  countries  were  relatively 
small, which allowed them to benefit from a certain amount of autonomy from the decisions 
reached  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic.  But  with  the  creation  of  the  euro  and  the 
development of the euro area to levels akin to the US economy, it would have been rather 
ironic if economic policy decisions in Europe simply mirrored the conduct of other authorities. 
It should be a given that the euro area’s monetary and budgetary policies should be shaped 
by  the  underlying  trends  and  political  objectives  in  Europe.  So  it  is  on  the  basis  of  those 
trends and objectives that the policies should be judged.  
That does not mean that the economic policies adopted on either side of the Atlantic cannot 
be  compared.  But  for  such  a  comparison  to  be  reliable,  its  control  variable  needs  to  be 
precisely the underlying trends and policy objectives in the two areas. In other words, there 
must be a symmetrical comparison conducted on an equal footing, capable of allowing us to 
explain any differences encountered, including on the basis of the distinct characteristics of 
the two economies. 
                                                 
1   My thanks to Roberto Motto and to Adina Popescu for their help in preparing this lecture. 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 1
Today I would like to present an analytical model that should help us to understand whether, 
and why, economic policies – with particular reference to monetary and budgetary policies – 
have  been  different  in  the  euro  area  and  in  the  United  States.  This  may  prove  useful  to 
those, especially in Europe, who wonder why certain decisions are made on our continent, 
and the reason why they sometimes differ from those reached in the United States.  
Monetary policy 
2.  
It does not take a huge number of graphs or tables to show that monetary policies in the euro 
area and in the United States have partly differed over the past ten years. From the start of 
Economic  and  Monetary  Union  in  1999  to  the  present  day  the  ECB  has  altered  its  official 
interest rate 25 times, including yesterday (see Figure 1). In that same time frame, the US 
monetary policy rate has been altered fully 45 times, almost twice as often. And we can see 
the difference also in terms of accumulated variations. For instance, the monetary tightening 
– or rather the abolition of accommodating monetary policy after the bursting of the dot.com 
bubble – which began in the United States in 2004 and in the euro area in 2005, was clearly 
different in intensity. The accumulated rise in the official rate through August 2007 was equal 
to 200 basis points in the euro area and to 425 basis points in the United States; from August 
2007 to today the accumulated cut in reference rates was equal to 100 basis points in the 
euro area and to 425 basis points in the United States. 
How should we explain these differences in the degree of activism in monetary policy? We 
may consider three potential factors. The first concerns the macroeconomic shocks that have 
struck  the  two  areas  during  this  period.  If  the  shocks  have  been  different,  then  that  may 
explain  different  monetary  policy  responses.  The  second  criterion  concerns  the  underlying 
economic  structure  in  each  area.  For  instance,  if  the  labour  and  product  markets  are 
different, then the mechanisms with which the shock spreads and the mechanisms for the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  may  be  different,  and  that  in  turn  may  entail  different 
responses  in  terms  of  interest  rate  variation  and  levels.  And  finally,  the  third  criterion 
concerns the preferences of the central bank and, on a broader level, of society as a whole, 
which may justify differences in approach. 
I would like to take a brief look at these three aspects (shock, structures and preferences) in 
greater depth, on the basis of analytical considerations and empirical results. 
Macroeconomic shocks 
2.1 
Let  us  consider  the  extreme  case  of  two  countries  whose  central  banks  are  absolutely 
identical in terms of preferences and of their decision-making systems. In other words, let us 
pretend  that  European  monetary  policy  is  not  decided  by  the  ECB,  but  by  the  Federal 
Reserve System. Next, let us suppose that the two areas are hit by macroeconomic shocks 
that are different in terms of their magnitude, nature and timing. If that were so, even if the 
same central bank were making the monetary policy decisions in both areas, the difference 
in the shock could be such as to demand broad and frequent official rate adjustments in one 
instance, while more moderate and gradual intervention might be sufficient in the other. Thus 
the degree of monetary policy activism can be different; this, however, is not on account of a 
different  decision-making  strategy,  but  on  account  of  the  different  nature  of  the  shocks 
impacting on the two areas.  
Comparative analyses show that the macroeconomic shocks on both sides of the Atlantic, 
while of similar magnitude, appear to be partially different in their nature.2 Over the past ten 
                                                 
2   See, for instance, Smets, F. and R. Wouters (2005), “Comparing Shocks and Frictions in US and Euro Area 
Business Cycles: a Bayesian DSGE Approach”, in Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 20, No 2, pp. 161-
2 
 BIS Review 135/2008
years the euro area has been worse hit by “supply shocks” than the United States. A supply 
shock  tends  to  have  an  effect  on  growth  with  the  opposite  sign  to  that  of  inflation.  One 
example is the decline in total factor productivity (TFP) in the early part of this decade which 
brought upward pressure to bear on inflation at a time when economic activity was slowing 
down, as occurred following the bursting of the dot.com bubble. Indeed, available evidence 
seems to suggest that the exacerbation of negative supply shocks is a recurring feature of 
economic slowdown phases in the euro area. As a result of that phenomenon, inflation in the 
euro  area  tends  to  react  to  an  economic  slowdown  less  rapidly  than  it  does  in  the  United 
States. This difference may explain why, especially in cyclical slowdown phases, monetary 
policy action in the euro area tends to be less aggressive than it is in the United States. 
In the United States, on the other hand, analysis seems to show that demand shocks tend to 
prevail,  which  puts  pressure  on  inflation  and  on  economic  activity  simultaneously.  Supply 
shocks  like  those  related  to  productivity  tend  to  have  a  considerable  impact  on  demand  if 
agents  expect  them  to  have  an  impact  on  permanent  income,  affecting  consumption.  For 
example, the increase in productivity in the second half of the 1990s led to strong growth in 
consumption  in  the  United  States,  financed  by  debt.  In  this  context,  the  monetary  policy 
reaction  can  be  more  decisive,  and  transmitted  through  relatively  more  marked  and  more 
frequent  official  rate  adjustments.  This  is  true  in  phases  both  of  economic  growth  and  of 
economic slowdown. 
In conclusion, if Europe’s economy and the US economy suffer shocks of a different nature, 
it is only natural that the responses should be partly different. Some studies suggest that the 
role of shocks is the predominant factor in explaining the differences in conduct between the 
ECB and the Federal Reserve.3
Economic structure: the propagation of shocks 
2.2. 
Now let us move on to the possible differences in the two economies’ structures. In deciding 
interest rates, central banks do not only look at the nature of economic shocks but also at the 
way  in  which  those  shocks  are  spreading  to  the  economy  and  at  the  mechanism  for  the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy.  These  characteristics  are  determined  by  institutions  and 
practices that develop gradually by comparison  with the time frame within which monetary 
policy influences economic trends, and thus the central bank tends to regard them as given. 
A distinctive feature of the euro area’s structural context is the level of both real and nominal 
market inflexibility. The Product Market Regulation indicator compiled by the OECD, which is 
often cited as a measure of market inflexibility, is 50% higher in the euro area than in the 
United States. All available indicators on real labour market inflexibility are higher in the euro 
area. One has but to recall the OECD indicator on Employment Protection Legislation, which 
is ten times weightier in the euro area than it is in the United States. Collective bargaining 
mechanisms  cover  76%  of  the  euro  area  and  only  14%  in  the  United  States.4  The  most 
exhaustive  empirical  evidence  is  available  for  nominal  inflexibility.  The  mean  duration  of 
consumer prices – a yardstick for measuring  time used by retailers to change the price of 
                                                                                                                                                         
183; Christiano, L., R. Motto and M. Rostagno, “Shocks, Structures or Policies? A Comparison of the Euro 
Area and the US”, in Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control (due to be published very soon). 
3   See in particular Sahuc, J.-G. and F. Smets (2008): “Differences in Interest Rate Policy at the ECB and the 
Fed: an Investigation With a Medium Scale DSGE Model”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 40, 2-3, 
pp. 505-521. 
Indicators for the labour and goods and services markets are compiled by the OECD. The figures for individual 
countries in the euro area have been merged together. 
4  
BIS Review 135/2008 
 3
their produce – is 13 months in the euro area, while it is under seven months in the United 
States.5  
These characteristics have a particular impact on the dynamic properties of inflation. Prices 
in  the  euro  area  are  slower  to  reflect  changes  in  economic  conditions.  This  means  that 
inflationary pressure has a slower impact on price dynamics. Adjustment to macroeconomic 
shocks initially tends to have an effect above all on employment and economic activity, only 
impacting on prices later. It follows that if inflation is allowed to grow, it is then far more costly 
and difficult for monetary policy to bring it back down to an acceptable level. In other words, 
the  so-called  ”sacrifice  ratio”,  or  the  cost  of  restoring  price  stability  in  terms  of  GDP  and 
employment, appears to be higher in the euro area than in a more flexible economy such as 
the  US  economy.  Empirical  evidence  based  on  the  Phillips  curve,  which  I  shall  discuss  in 
greater  depth  in  a  minute,  confirms  that  inflation  in  the  euro  area  is  less  reactive  to  the 
degree of resource use than it is in the United States.6
The euro area’s greater inflexibility in price formation has an impact on the mechanism for 
the  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  Empirical  analysis  confirms  that,  if  the  European 
economy  were  as  flexible  as  the  US  economy,  a  given  interest  rate  hike  would  have  a 
greater impact on inflation.7 This has a direct implication for the desirable level of monetary 
policy  activism.  First  of  all,  according  to  neo-Keynesian  economic  models,  the  greater  the 
degree of price inflexibility, the higher the impact will be of a drop in the interest rate. Thus, 
for a given variation in the interest rate, the impact on economic activity tends to be greater in 
the euro area than it is in the United States. In other words, to achieve the same impact on 
economic activity as that achieved in the euro area, the Federal Reserve has to change the 
interest rate to a larger extent. Several studies have shown that in the negative phase of the 
cycle, even though the interest rate in the euro area is changed to a lesser degree than it is 
in  the  United  States,  the  impact  of  monetary  policy  on  economic  activity  is  nevertheless 
stronger.  
Secondly,  the  European  markets’  greater  inflexibility  makes  it  necessary  to  adopt  a  “pre-
emptive” monetary policy strategy capable of stably anchoring inflation expectations. This is 
a direct consequence of the fact that, in the context of a high degree of inflexibility, the more 
inflation is allowed to grow, the more costly it then is, in terms of interest rate increases, to 
bring it back down to price stability. Indeed, the challenge that the central bank has had to 
face from the outset in the euro area has been precisely to boost monetary policy’s ability to 
pre-empt  inflation  from  gaining  a  foothold  in  the  private  sector  expectations.8  The  irony  is 
that, the more monetary policy is able to act in a pre-emptive fashion and to anchor people’s 
inflation expectations, the more inflation stays under control and thus the less need there is 
to intervene aggressively on interest rates. If such a strategy is successful and the central 
bank  is  credible  in  its  anti-inflation  policy,  statistics  commonly  used  to  assess  monetary 
policy activism (such as the frequency and breadth of changes to the official interest rate) 
ironically show the opposite, namely that monetary policy is not very active or even that it is 
passive, whereas precisely the reverse is true. 
                                                 
5   For  the  euro  area,  see  Dhyne,  E.  et  al.  (2005),  Price-Setting  in  the  Euro  Area:  Some  Stylised  Facts  From 
Individual Consumer Price Data, ECB Working Paper No 524; for the United States, see Bils, M. and P. J. 
Klenow (2004), “Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky Prices”, Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 112, 
No 5, pp. 947-985. 
6   See, for instance, Sahuc and Smets (op. cit.). 
7   See Sahuc and Smets (op. cit.) as well as Cristiano, Motto and Rostagno (op. cit.). 
8   See the article entitled The “Activism” of Monetary Policy published in the November 2006 issue of the ECB’s 
Monthly Bulletin. See also J.-C. Trichet (2006), chairman’s speech delivered at the conference entitled “The 
ECB and its Watchers IX”, held in Frankfurt am Main on 7 September 2007. 
4 
 BIS Review 135/2008
One way of boosting monetary policy’s effectiveness is to reduce the overall persistence of 
inflation, which can simply be defined as the period of time that inflation takes on average to 
return to its initial value after a shock. The overall persistence of inflation can be represented 
as a function of two factors,9 apart from the price inflexibility that I have just mentioned. The 
first factor is linked to the extent to which, when determining prices, agents stay focused on 
the long-term inflation target rather than allowing themselves to be guided by the most recent 
inflation trends; in the Phillips curve this is represented by the coefficient on past inflation. 
The second factor is a result of the process whereby expectations are formed and in the new 
Keynesian model it is represented by the term indicating inflation expectations. If there isn’t 
full information on the nature of the shocks and the structure of the economy or the central 
bank’s determination to ensure price stability, then businessmen have a long learning curve 
to  embark  on.  This  increases  the  danger  that  a  shock  that  temporarily  raises  the  inflation 
level,  such  as  a  major  hike  in  oil  prices,  may  end  up  gaining  a  foothold  in  inflation 
expectations  rather  than  rapidly  disappearing.  That  is  why  an  effective  monetary  policy 
depends to a large extent on pegging those expectations to the goal of price stability.  
Preferences 
2.3 
The  third  element  of  difference  between  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  can  lie  in  the  approach 
adopted by the central banks, which to some extent reflect also their mandate, in accordance 
with  the  institutional  setup  prevailing  in  each  individual  country.  In  the  euro  area,  the 
European  Central  Bank’s  mandate  is  enshrined  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  which  clearly 
emphasises price stability maintenance as being monetary policy’s primary goal. To support 
the implementation of that principle, the ECB has adopted a quantitative definition of price 
stability  –  namely,  an  inflation  rate  below  but  close  to  2%.  This  facilitates  learning  by  the 
private sector and diminishes market uncertainty, thus promoting macroeconomic stability.10 
This stability means that there are fewer variations in the interest rate. The US central bank’s 
mandate,  on  the  other  hand,  envisions  two  goals:  maintaining  price  stability  and 
guaranteeing  sustainable  growth.  No  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability  has  been 
adopted.  
Another principle guiding the ECB’s monetary policy is the notion whereby, if monetary policy 
pursues  a  more  stable  and  less  volatile  course,  that  fact  will  boost  its  effectiveness,  thus 
increasing the central bank’s long-term ability to influence interest rates throughout the yield 
curve. This characteristic is particularly important in the context of relatively inert economies 
such as the euro area economy. On the other hand, a monetary policy that tends to react 
strongly to new data and to short-term economic developments is less effective in controlling 
inflation expectations, with the risk that inflation takes longer to return to price stability after a 
shock. Empirical analysis based on estimating a central bank’s “response function”, typically 
in  the  shape  of  the  so-called  “Taylor  Rule”,  proves  that  monetary  policy’s  degree  of 
persistence is greater in the euro area than in the United States, even taking into account the 
different trends in the business cycle.11
                                                 
9   A 
neo-Keynesian 
stylised 
Phillips 
curve 
can 
be 
represented 
as 
follows: 
where 
is  the  inflation  rate, 
is  the  expectation  factor, 
denotes  the  basic  process  that  drives  inflation  (in  other  words  the  output  gap),  and  ut  is  a  shock  that  puts 
pressure on costs. The persistence due to inflation's dependence on its past trends is often called “intrinsic 
persistence”, while the persistence produced by the expectation of inflation is called “expectation-based”. See 
Altissimo, F., M. Ehrmann and F. Smets (2006), Inflation Persistence and Price-Setting Behaviour in the Euro 
Area, ECB Occasional Paper No 46. 
10   Regarding the importance of a commitment to pursuing the primary goal of price stability and transparency in 
connection  with  the  quantitative  definition  of  price  stability,  see  Orphanides,  A.  and  J.  C.  Williams  (2006), 
Inflation Targeting Under Imperfect Knowledge, Chilean Central Bank Working Paper No 398. 
11   See Sahuc and Smets (op. cit.) as well as Christiano, Motto and Ristagno (op. cit.). 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 5
However, we should not overstate the differences in the conduct of monetary policy between 
the  euro  area  and  the United  States.  On  the one  hand,  the  US  central  bank,  too,  assigns 
primary importance to price stability, as has been stressed on more than one occasion by the 
Federal  Reserve’s  most  recent  chairmen.  For  instance,  the  current  Federal  Reserve 
chairman himself argued (and I quote): “ Experience shows that low and stable inflation and 
inflation  expectations  are  also  associated  with  greater  short-term  stability  in  output  and 
employment, perhaps in part because they give the central bank greater latitude to counter 
transitory  disturbances  to  the  economy.  […]  In  sum,  achieving  price  stability  is  not  only 
important in itself; it is also central to attaining the other mandated objectives of maximum 
sustainable  employment  and  moderate  long-term  interest  rates.”12  The  ECB,  for  its  part, 
aims to maintain price stability in the “medium term”, thus minimising economic fluctuation in 
the short term. In other words, in line with its mandate as enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty, 
the ECB is not indifferent to short-term economic growth trends.  
Empirical results 
2.4 
So, on balance, what have been the factors underlying the difference in approach between 
European and US monetary policy? 
From the empirical results we see that the overall persistence of inflation is basically alike in 
the euro area and in the United States, even though inflexibility is far more pronounced in the 
euro  area.  Secondly,  the  evidence  suggests  that  monetary  policy  impacts  on  the  process 
whereby  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  are  shaped.  These  expectations  have 
remained basically in line with the quantitative definition of price stability provided by the ECB 
for the best part of the last ten years, and have displayed low variability, as can be seen in 
Table 1. Recent studies have confirmed the importance of a clear definition of price stability. 
For  instance,  the  response  of  long-term  interest  rates  (which  should  respond  better  to  the 
anchoring  of  inflation  expectations)  to  economic  news  has  virtually  disappeared.13  Thirdly, 
structural analysis suggests that agents assign less importance to past inflation trends – one 
of the factors that determines the persistence of inflation mentioned above – in the euro area 
than they do in the United States.14 Moreover, it is important to highlight the fact that not only 
has there been less inflation variability in the euro area compared to the United States, there 
has also been less variability in economic growth.15 And, contrary to popular belief, the euro 
area’s  greater  stability  has  not  been  achieved  to  the  detriment  of  its  growth,  which  in  per 
capita terms has been broadly the same as in the United States for the past ten years. The 
same is true regarding the creation of new jobs, with 17 million new jobs having been created 
since the euro was first introduced. Thus it is incorrect to argue, as people often do, that the 
stabilisation of inflation in Europe has damaged economic growth.  
Budget policy 
3. 
The  differences  between  the  European  and  US  budget  policies  can  be  attributed  to  a 
combination  of  factors  including:  the  political-cum-institutional  setup,  the  general  public’s 
preferences regarding the role and size of government and the structure of the economy in 
the broader sense. Just like monetary policy, so also budget policy in Europe appears on the 
                                                 
12   Bernanke, B. (2006), “Semi-annual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress”, 15 February 2006. 
13   See Ehrmann, M. et al. (2007), Convergence and Anchoring of Yield Curves in the Euro Area, ECB Working 
Paper No 817. 
14   See Christiano, Motto and Rostagno (op. cit.). 
15   See Bini Smaghi, L., Il paradosso dell’euro (2008), Rizzoli. 
6 
 BIS Review 135/2008
whole  to  be  less  proactive  and  more  regulation-based  than  in  the  United  States,  where 
discretionary powers are broader. 
I would like to begin by briefly analysing government budget’s two component parts, namely 
automatic stabilisers and discretional measures, in order to allow me to better examine the 
differences between European and US policies using the same model for interpretation as I 
used with monetary policy. 
Automatic stabilisers and discretionary budget policies 
3.1  
The  automatic  stabilisers  are  the  component  of  government  expenditure  and  revenue  that 
automatically varies with the economic cycle, without requiring any explicit decision on the 
part of governments. These mechanisms are the result of the social protection and welfare 
system,  of  the  institutions  underlying  the  labour  market  and  of  various  components  in  the 
taxation  and  public  expenditure  system.  They  depend  largely  on  political  decisions  and 
operate in an automatic and anti-cyclical fashion, in the sense that they reduce revenue and 
increase expenditure when the cycle slows down, and vice versa. 
As  far  as  discretionary  measures  resulting  from  specific  fiscal  policy  decisions  are 
concerned, their usefulness as a an anti-cyclical tool has been a matter for debate for a long 
time now, both in the euro area and in the United States. All in all, the evidence points to 
discretionary  fiscal  policy  having  a  moderately  positive  impact  on  economic  growth  in 
advanced economies. Yet the effectiveness of such measures depends on the way in which 
they are taken and their timing, in particular with regard to delays in the recognition, decision 
and implementation process. Precisely because of such difficulties, a budget policy which is 
aimed ex ante in an anti-cyclical direction tends to produce pro-cyclical effects ex post.16 The 
effectiveness of discretionary measures also depends on the temporary nature and on the 
possibility  of  withdrawing  them  in  a  timely  manner  once  the  shock  has  passed  so  as  to 
guarantee fiscal sustainability. 
3.2  
Comparing the importance of automatic stabilisers and discretionary policies 
in the euro area and in the United States 
If  we  compare  budget  policy  on  the  two  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  we  see  that  the  automatic 
stabilisers play a more important role in the euro area.17
First of all, the greater the percentage of government spending over GDP, the greater the 
budget  position’s  response  to  fluctuations  in  economic  activity.  Automatic  stabilisers  are 
smaller  in  the  United  States,  where  government  is  smaller  in  relative  terms  (government 
spending is worth 37% of GDP, whereas it tops the 45% mark in the euro area countries).18 
Furthermore, the level of government welfare services (including unemployment insurance, 
social  security  and  welfare  services,  and  senior  citizens’  assistance 
is 
systematically lower in the United States than in the euro area countries; at present it stands 
at  12%  of  GDP  in  the  United  States  and  at  15%  of  GDP  in  the  euro  area.19  Thirdly,  the 
importance of automatic stabilisers depends also on the taxation system, in terms of its level 
insurance) 
                                                 
16   Cimadomo, J. (2008), Fiscal Policy in Real Time, ECB Working Paper, No 919. 
17   See,  for  instance,  Brunila,  A.,  M.  Buti  and  J.  in’t  Veld  (2002),  Cyclical  Stabilisation  Under  the  Stability  and 
Growth Pact: How Effective are Automatic Stabilisers?, Bank of Finland Research Discussion Paper, No 6; 
Darby, J. and J. Melitz (2008), “Social spending and automatic stabilizers in the OECD”, Economic Policy, Vol. 
23, pp. 715-756. 
18   Girouard,  N.  and  C.  André  (2005),  Measuring  Cyclically-Adjusted  Budget  Balances  for  OECD  Countries, 
OECD Economics Department Working Paper, No 434. 
19   Debrun, X., J. Pisani-Ferry and A. Sapir (2008), Government Size and Output Volatility: Should We Forsake 
Automatic Stabilization?, European Economy – European Commission Economic Paper, No 316. 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 7
of taxation and of the overall fiscal drag in the tax system. Not only do Europe’s governments 
have far higher revenue as a percentage of their GDP, they also show a broader quota of 
social security contributions in respect of direct and indirect taxation (15% of GDP in the euro 
area, as against 7% in the United States), which tends to make the system more gradual. 
Fourthly, redistributive policies are also expressed in other ways than through government 
expenditure, for instance through the regulation of labour markets. On the basis of a series of 
indicators such as minimum wages, the legal safeguards protecting those in employment and 
the  unemployment  benefit  replacement  rate,  the  United  States  is  at  a  lower  level  than  the 
average level for the EU.20
One  way  of  measuring  the  magnitude  of  automatic  stabilisers  is  the  budget’s  overall 
sensitivity  to  cyclical  fluctuations  in  the  economy,  which  can  be  expressed  in  terms  of  the 
elasticity of the primary budget balance (as a percentage of GDP) in relation to the output 
gap, in other words the gap between real revenue and its potential level.21 If budget policy is 
anti-cyclical,  the  coefficient  should  be  positive  (in  other  words,  it  increases  in  a  phase  of 
expansion and decreases in a recession). An OECD study gives us a correlation of 0.48 for 
the euro area and 0.34 for the United States.22 The lower overall budget responsiveness to 
the economic cycle in the United States can be ascribed both to lower current expenditure 
elasticity  and  to  low  tax  responsiveness  compared  with  most  of  the  countries  in  the  euro 
area. 
The  discretionary  component  of  budget  policy,  by  contrast,  can  be  measured  by  the 
variations  in  the  primary  balance  adjusted  to  account  for  cyclical  effects.  According  to  the 
OECD’s figures, the budget balance in the United States, adjusted for the economic cycle, as 
a percentage of GDP shifted from a break-even situation in 1998, to a 0.9% surplus situation 
in  2000,  and  then  to  a  4.5%  deficit  in  2003  (and  a  3.2%  deficit  in  2007;  Figure  2).  The 
aggregate deficit in the euro area adjusted for the cycle fluctuated between 2.7% in 2002 and 
0.7%  of  GDP  in  2007.  The  budget  balance  fluctuation  range  has  thus  been  significantly 
narrower than in the United States.23  
To summarise, automatic budget stabilisers are more important in the euro area, while in the 
United States there is greater recourse to discretionary policies. 
Shocks 
3.3  
As with monetary policy, the difference in the shocks hitting the two economies may explain 
the  varying  degrees  of  fiscal  activism.  In  theory,  an  economy  which  is  hit  principally  by 
demand shocks should make greater use of anti-cyclical budget policies than an economy hit 
mainly by supply shocks. This is a topic on which, as far as I know, no empirical studies have 
been conducted to date and it is thus a particularly interesting field of research. A hypothesis 
worth examining is the extent to which the greater frequency of demand shocks in the United 
States has justified greater fiscal activism in an anti-cyclical direction. In the euro area, by 
contrast,  the  adoption  of  active  budget  policies  ought  to  have  been  discouraged  by  the 
greater frequency of supply shocks.  
                                                 
20   Akkoyunlu,  S.,  I.  Neustadt  and  P.  Zweifel  (2008),  Why  Does  the  Amount  of  Income  Redistribution  Differ 
Between United States and Europe? The Janus Face of Switzerland, Working Paper by Zurich University’s 
Socio-Economic Institute, No 810. 
21   It measures the variation in the budget balance, as a percentage of GDP, for a 1% variation in GDP. 
22   See Table 9 in Girouard and André (op. cit.). 
23   OECD (2008), Economic Outlook, No 83. 
8 
 BIS Review 135/2008
Structural factors 
3.4  
I  shall  now  discuss  structural  factors,  which  are  political-cum-institutional,  as  well  as  more 
strictly economic in nature. 
3.4.1   Political and institutional factors 
In  general  terms,  factors  of  a  political  and  institutional  nature  offer  greater  assistance  in 
understanding  the  differences  in fiscal  policy  compared  with  monetary  policy.  In  particular, 
there  is  a  strand  of  political  economy  literature  suggesting  that  the  principle  of  a  majority 
system  as  implemented  in  the  US  political  system,  together  with  more  marked  fiscal 
centralisation,  tends  to  prevent  minority  interest  groups  from  achieving  the  political  power 
needed  to  foster  greater  redistribution  of  revenue.24  A  deep-seated  tradition  of  stringent 
safeguards for private property and the legal system itself have further curbed redistribution 
trends in the US. Even the United States’ federal structure may have helped to restrict the 
role played by central government in budget policy. The EU Member States’ constitutions, on 
the other hand, tend more towards the principle of proportional representation, which some 
consider to be in favour of universal programs designed to benefit various groups and thus 
higher government spending.25  
It  is  common  knowledge  that,  in  an  effort  to  avoid  the  pitfalls  of  unsustainable  budget 
policies,  the  Maastricht  Treaty  and  the  1997  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  lay  down  the 
conditions necessary for safeguarding budget discipline within a monetary union. The Pact’s 
underlying  philosophy  in  the  budget  field  is  that  countries  must  structurally  pursue  break-
even  budgets  or  a  budget  surplus,  in  order  to  then  allow  automatic  stabilisers  to  function 
without any restriction. 
This institutional setup, comprising constraints of an almost constitutional nature in the field 
of budget policy, is different from that in the United States where tax regulations are in some 
ways more flexible, although they have been much altered in recent decades. It has been 
repeatedly proposed to introduce a break-even budget rule in the United States, but it has 
not  happened  yet.  Another  example  of  the  importance  assigned  to  discretionality  over 
regulations  in  the  United  States  can  be  seen  in  the  fact  that,  while  the  overall  debt  is 
nominally subject to a ceiling approved by Congress, that ceiling is in fact regularly modified, 
thus in actual fact it is not binding at all. 
For  example,  the  deficit  targets  established  in  the  1985  Budget  and  Emergency  Deficit 
Control  Act  (Gramm-Rudman  Act)  were  abundantly  breached  and  later  relaxed.  In  light  of 
this,  the  1990  Budget  Enforcement  Act  (BEA)  introduced  restrictions  to  the  discretionary 
component of expenditure and ground rules designed to restrict spending to real revenue; on 
the basis of those rules, any new discretionary spending (apart from the legislation on social 
security and revenue) was to have a neutral impact on the budget. Thanks to this method, a 
positive budget balance was achieved and maintained for a certain amount of time under the 
Clinton administration. Yet the deficit’s disappearance proved short-lived; negative balances 
were  repeatedly  recorded  in  the  wake  of  the  taxation  and  spending  policies  adopted  by 
President Bush’s administration. 
3.4.2   The economic structure 
Moving on to the deep-seated differences in economic structure, a crucial difference between 
the United States and the euro area lies in the far smaller size of the US government sector. 
                                                 
24   Alesina,  A.  and  E.  L.  Glaeser  (2005),  A  World  of  Differences.  Fighting  Poverty  in  the  United  States  and  in 
Europe. Published by Editori Laterza, Bari. 
25   Persson, T., G. Roland and G. Tabellini (2000), “Comparative Politics and Public Finance” , Journal of Political 
Economy, No 108, pp. 1121-1161; Persson, T. and G. Tabellini (2003), The Economic Effects of Constitutions, 
Munich Lectures in Economics, MIT Press, Cambridge. 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 9
It follows that the automatic stabilisers, in particular, operate in somewhat different contexts 
in the two economic areas. This could partly explain why countries with larger governments 
generally show less product variability. On the other hand, however, there appears to be a 
threshold beyond which this ratio evens out or even starts to go the other way. Indeed it has 
been  estimated  that  an  increase  in  the  size  of  government  has  a  negligible  and  marginal 
impact  on  income  variability  if  government  spending  exceeds  40%  of  GDP.26  Moreover, 
recent  figures  tend  to  suggest  that  the  negative  correlation  between  government  size  and 
income variability appears to have decreased since the 1990’s, and thus the role of budget 
stabilisation policies in attenuating fluctuations in consumption has also diminished.27 Fiscal 
multipliers appear to have decreased over time (and may even have gone below zero) both 
in the United States and in the euro area countries. 
Preferences 
3.5 
Finally,  the different  level  of  fiscal activism  in  the  United  States  and  the  euro  area  can  be 
ascribed  to  the  general  public’s  preferences,  which  are  then  mirrored  in  the  budget 
authorities’ decisions. People often argue that the Europeans are more averse to inequality 
than the Americans, and that this has led to a higher level of fiscal redistribution in Europe. 
People’s  attitude  toward  inequality  may  well  be  influenced  by  their  expectations  of  social 
mobility.  Even  though  income  mobility  in  the  United  States  is  not  particularly  high,  several 
statistics28  show  that  the  “American  dream”  ideal  continues  to  have  a  major  psychological 
impact on people at the grassroots level as well as on the country’s political choices.  
Trends  which  have  been  ongoing  in  the  past  decade,  such  as  rising  inequality  in  Anglo-
Saxon  countries  and  the  current  financial  crisis,  could  determine,  however,  a  shift  in  the 
preferences of the US population in favour of greater State intervention in sectors such as 
education and health care. This is, at least, what seems to come out from the election of the 
new US president.  
The  reduced  importance  of  the  public  sector as  an  automatic  stabiliser  could increase  US 
business  cycle  variability  and  create  the  scope  for  more  discretionary  fiscal  stabilisation 
measures. The preference for discretionary interventions is enhanced by the low tolerance in 
the  US  for  protracted  slowdowns  of  economic  growth.  This  may  hinge,  inter  alia,  on  the 
impact that economic slowdowns may have on social cohesion in an environment with fewer 
automatic  stabilisers.  Another  reason  may  have  to  do  with  the  frequency  of  the  electoral 
contests, not only in the executive but also and especially in the legislative branch, where 
elections take place every 2 years. It is well known, in fact, that the economic situation has a 
crucial importance for voters. 
Ricardian  equivalence  is  one  widely  debated  aspect  of  the  discretionary  component  of 
budget policy. It is worth pointing out that a financial agent adopting a Ricardian approach is 
capable of looking ahead and of understanding that higher government spending today will 
entail higher taxes tomorrow. Thus a Ricardian consumer does not easily alter his spending 
in  response  to  fiscal  injections.  Direct  tests  of  Ricardian  equivalence  have  produced 
conflicting results and do not allow us to draw any clear conclusions regarding its existence 
or its potential magnitude either for the United States or for the euro area. In the euro area 
the equivalence seems to have been disproved by a sample test conducted in a select group 
                                                 
26   Debrun, X., J. Pisani-Ferry and A. Sapir (2008), Government Size and Output Volatility: Should We Forsake 
Automatic Stabilization?, International Monetary Fund Working Paper, No 08/122. 
27   Debrun, X., J. Pisani-Ferry and A. Sapir (2008), Government Size and Output Volatility: Should We Forsake 
Automatic Stabilization?, International Monetary Fund Working Paper, No 08/122. 
28   Échevin,  D.  (2008),  Social  Polarization  vs  Income  Polarization:  An  International  Comparison,  Cahier  de 
recherché/Working  Paper  del  Gruppo  di  ricerca  in  economia  e  sviluppo  internazionale  dell’Università  di 
Sherbrooke, No 08-02. 
10 
 BIS Review 135/2008
of  15  EU  member  countries  between  1970  and  2000.29  Yet  private  consumption  would 
appear  to  respond  better  to  increasing  wealth  in  “less  indebted”  countries  compared  with 
those countries suffering from higher debt. In this connection, a higher public debt level could 
entail  a  more  Ricardian  form  of  conduct  by  European  consumers  and  that,  in  turn,  should 
discourage fiscal activism. 
Conclusions 
4.  
In conclusion, if monetary and budget policies appear to be different on the two shores of the 
Atlantic,  and  indeed  have  been  in  terms  of  gradualism  and  activism,  the  reason  does  not 
necessarily lie in differences of conduct on the part of the economic policy authorities, but in 
differences in the way the economies are structured and in how they function. Let us take a 
look at the current monetary policy stance in the two economies, where the policy interest 
rate has been brought to 1% in the US, 350 basis points below the level one year ago, while 
in the euro area it was reduced to 3.25%, just 75 below the levels of one year ago. Anyone 
who, in comparing the different stance of monetary policy between the US and the euro area, 
fails to take into account the differences in economic structure and in the shocks hitting the 
two economies is making an error of judgment. In particular, the US economy has been hit 
by  a  major  slump  in  the  real  estate  market,  which  in  Europe  is  restricted  to  only  a  few 
countries.  The  financial  crisis,  that  started  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic  but  it  has 
propagated  rapidly  on  our  side,  is  having  a  bigger  impact  on  the  US  banking  system’s 
capability  to  convey  financing  to  non-financial  firms  on  account  of  the  different  financial 
structure. To give you just some data, if we compare the result of bank surveys in the euro 
area  and  the  US  in  October,  we  see  that  the  percentage  of  banks  adopting  tighter  credit 
standards  with  medium  and  large  corporations  has  risen  to  84%  in  the  United  States 
compared with 68% in the euro area, and where residential mortgages and home loans are 
concerned, that figure stands at 69% in the United States as opposed to 36% in the euro 
area. That said, the European economy, which is also suffering a major slowdown, shows a 
great deal of inflexibility on the supply side, with a big drop in productivity and persistent unit 
labour  cost  dynamics,  which  instead  remain  more  moderate  in  the  United  States.  Inflation 
could thus drop more slowly in the euro area, especially in its domestic component, and have 
a  more  serious  impact  on  employment.  For  example,  in  the  second  quarter  of  this  year 
wages increased by 3.1% in the US, more or less in line with the 3.5% in the euro area, but 
due to higher labour productivity growth in the US unit labour costs have increased only by 
0.6%,  against  3.2%  in  the  euro  area.  Finally,  despite  the  different  developments  in  the 
monetary  policy  stance,  market  interest  rates,  especially  those  that  really  matter  for 
households  and  firms,  have  not  been  substantially  divergent.  In  some  cases,  they  are 
actually more favourable in the euro area. For example, government bond yields are more or 
less equal, which given the lower level of short-term rates in the US implies a steeper slope 
of  the  term  structure  and  higher  expected  short  term  rates  in  the  future.  Interest  rates  on 
long-term corporate bonds were between 4.9% and 8.2% in October, depending on the risk 
profile,  while  they  were  between  5.7%  and  9.6%  in  the  US.  As  far  as  household  credit  is 
concerned,  short-term  mortgage  lending  rates  were  indeed  lower  in  the  US  in  September 
(5.1% against 5.8%), but long-term rates (which are prevailing in the US) were higher than in 
the euro area (5.8% against 5.4%).30 To sum up, financing conditions to non-financial firms 
and households remain slightly more favourable in the euro area, and they will continue to be 
so after yesterday’s decision to reduce ECB policy rates. 
                                                 
29   Afonso,  A.  (2001),  Government  Indebtedness  and  European  Consumers’  Behaviour,  Working  Paper  del 
dipartimento di economia dell’ISEG No 12/2001/DE/CISEP. 
30   Note that the data are not fully comparable since the lending rates refer to primari mortgages in the US, and to 
all mortgages in the euro area. 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 11
In  conclusion,  the  euro  area  and  the  US  economies  are  different  and  their  management 
requires monetary and fiscal policies that cannot be the same. They are more gradual and 
less  activist  in  Europe.  If  European  policy-makers  decided  to  follow  their  American 
counterparts, neglecting the different structure and shocks, this would result in destabilising 
economic policies, which would bring us to the high inflation and profligate fiscal policies of 
the 1970s. 
This judgement is backed by a lot of analysis, which – perhaps unconsciously – has been 
understood  by  European  citizens  and  their  governments.  Those  who  lived  the  times  of 
economic instability should have understood that offloading the weight of the macroeconomic 
adjustment  onto  future  generations  is  elusive  and  counterproductive.  With  a  longer  life 
expectancy,  the  mistakes  of  a  given  generation  are  paid  in  large  part  by  the  same 
generation.  It  is  best  therefore  not  to  commit  those  mistakes  altogether,  and  let  economic 
policies follow tested rules of good behaviour. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Official interest rates in the euro area and in the United States 
(percentage points) 
Sources:  ECB  and  Federal  Reserve  Council.  NB:  most  recent  observation  dated  30  October  2008.  Euro  area 
interest  reference  rate  is  rate  on  main  refinancing  operations  to  June  2000,  and  minimum  bid  rate  thereafter. 
Official US interest rate is federal fund rate. 
 
 12 
 BIS Review 135/2008
 
Table 1. Measuring long-term inflation expectations in the euro area and in the United 
States  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Government budget balance in the euro area and in the United States 
  NB:  Total  budget  balance  shows  degree  of  budget  policy’s  expansion  or  contraction.  Adjusted  balance  for  the 
cycle is a measure, albeit an imperfect one, of budget policy’s “discretionary” component.0 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 13
