Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 23 October 2008. 
 Good morning and thank you for joining us. Before I discuss today's Monetary Policy Report, 
which reflects the Bank of Canada's latest thinking on the economy, I would like to say a few 
words  about  the  global  financial  crisis.  We  realize  that  this  has  created  a  great  deal  of 
uncertainty and stress. We understand the severity of the situation, and we are taking action 
to address it. These problems originated outside of our borders, and the primary solutions to 
correct them must take place there as well. That is why we are working so closely with our 
international colleagues and why the G7 Plan of Action is so important. Many international 
banks need substantial additional capital, and efforts to provide this capital are now under 
way in earnest.  
In  Canada,  our  financial  system  is  sound,  and  our  financial  institutions  are  already  well 
capitalized. We are nonetheless affected by global developments. That is why the Bank of 
Canada  has  taken  extraordinary  measures  to  provide  liquidity.  This  will  aid  the  ongoing 
functioning of our financial system during this time of stress, and we will continue to provide 
additional liquidity for our financial institutions as long as conditions warrant.  
It  is  important  to  remember  that  Canadian  monetary  policy  remains  firmly  focused  on  the 
Bank  of  Canada's  mandate  to  maintain  low,  stable,  and  predictable  inflation.  We  know 
through long experience that this is the best way to promote the economic and financial well-
being of Canadians. 
Let  me  turn  to  today's  Monetary  Policy  Report.  In  it,  we  note  that  three  major  interrelated 
global developments are having a profound impact on the Canadian economy and making 
the  outlook  for  growth  and  inflation  more  uncertain  than  it  was  at  the  time  of  the  July 
Monetary Policy Report Update. First, the intensification of the global financial crisis has led 
to severe strains in financial markets. The associated need for the global banking sector to 
continue to reduce leverage will restrain growth for some time. Second, the global economy 
appears to be heading into a mild recession, led by a U.S. economy already in recession. 
Third, there have been sharp declines in many commodity prices.  
The Bank expects growth to be sluggish through the first quarter of next year, then to pick up 
over  the  rest  of  2009  and  to  accelerate  to  above-potential  growth  in  2010  supported  by 
improving  credit  conditions,  the  lagged  effects  of  monetary  policy  actions,  and  stronger 
global  growth.  The  recent  sizable  depreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar  will  also  provide  an 
important offset to the effects of weaker global demand and lower commodity prices. 
With  excess  supply  projected  to  build  throughout  2009,  and  with  lower  assumed  energy 
prices,  inflationary  pressures  will  ease  significantly  relative  to  the  projection  in  the  July 
Update.  Core  inflation  is  now  projected  to  remain  below  2  per  cent  until  the  end  of  2010. 
Total CPI inflation should peak during the third quarter of 2008, fall below 1 per cent in mid-
2009, and then return to the 2 per cent target by the end of 2010. 
In  light  of  diminished  inflationary  pressures,  the  Bank  of Canada  has  acted  decisively  and 
lowered its policy interest rate by a total of 75 basis points over the past two weeks. These 
actions provide timely and significant support to the Canadian economy. The Bank's policy 
rate has been cut in half since the beginning of December 2007. 
In line with the Bank's new outlook, some further monetary stimulus will likely be required to 
achieve the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term. The evolution of the financial 
crisis,  its  impact  on  the  global  economy,  and  the  timing  of  the  effects  of  the  various 
BIS Review 128/2008 
 1
extraordinary  measures  being  taken  to  address  it  pose  significant  risks  to  the  inflation 
projection on both the upside and the downside. 
2 
 BIS Review 128/2008
