Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Impact of the current global financial 
crisis on Bahrain’s economy  
Address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain,  at  the  BCCI  Seminar  “Impact  of  the  Current  Global  Financial  Crisis  on  Bahrain’s 
Economy”, Manama, 18 November 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I would like to thank the Chamber of Commerce and Industry for their kind invitation to speak 
to you at today’s Seminar. The topic that they have chosen, “Impact of the Current Global 
Crisis on Bahrain’s Economy” is very timely. 
Until only a month or so ago, many commentators and analysts believed that the economies 
of the GCC would be an oasis of calm in the on-going financial turmoil. We also tended to 
hear  a  great  deal  about  the  so-called  “decoupling”  thesis.  This  was  the  idea  that  the 
emerging  economies  would  continue  their  recent  strong  growth  despite  the  economic 
downturn in Europe and the United States. 
However, since the collapse of Lehman Brothers in mid-September, it has become clear that 
no part of the world will be immune to the current crisis.  
What began in September of last year as a crisis in the US real estate market – the so-called 
“sub-prime” crisis – earlier in this year turned into what we began to call the “Credit Crunch.” 
The losses that US and European banks suffered as the result of their exposure to sub-prime 
assets  reduced  their  capital  and  hence  their  ability  to  lend.  This  sharply  reduced  the 
availability  of  credit  in  Europe  and  the  US,  while  at  the  same  time  both  corporate  and 
household  borrowers  attempted  to  de-leverage  –  that  is,  to  reduce  the  amount  of  debt 
outstanding on their balance sheets. 
This  was  the  situation  that  the  world  economy  and  financial  system  was  facing  until  the 
middle of September. It pointed to a global economic slowdown, but the worst effects would 
be  concentrated  in  the  developed  markets.  The  emerging  economies  were  expected  to 
continue their recent strong growth. 
The collapse of Lehman Brothers in mid-September moved the financial crisis into a new and 
much  more  unpredictable  phase.  The  immediate  effect  was  a  scramble  for  liquidity  in  the 
main  international  financial  centres,  and  by  the  large  international  banks.  There  was  a 
massive rise in risk aversion in financial markets, reflected in a variety of indicators, including 
a rise in risk premiums – the margin that financial intermediaries demand for holding riskier 
assets – and steep falls in global stock markets. 
Even in the GCC the crisis has begun to have an impact. Although the GCC countries enjoy 
strong fundamentals, this has not shielded them from the crisis. Several have experienced 
significant stock market corrections. Some GCC members have needed to provide support to 
their  banking  sectors,  either  in  the  form  of  recapitalization  funds,  or  by  providing  blanket 
guarantees of deposits, or by a combination of both. There is plenty of anecdotal evidence 
that investment projects are being delayed or scaled back. 
In the immediate term the CBB’s objective has been to ensure that Bahrain’s banking system 
remains  on  a  sound  footing.  We  receive  daily  reports  from  the  banks  of  their  liquidity 
positions,  and  weekly  reports  of  their  exposures.  We  have  also  encouraged  them  to  bring 
forward  the  disclosures  of  their  third  quarter  results,  many  of  which  have  now  been 
published. 
In the longer term the Global Financial Crisis contains many lessons for both regulators and 
the  financial  industry.  In  particular,  it  helps  to  underscore  the  need  for  sound  risk 
BIS Review 162/2008 
 1
management,  effective  internal  controls  and  strong  corporate  governance  at  financial 
institutions. All of these elements are essential to ensure the stability of individual financial 
institutions and of financial systems. 
The  role  of  the  regulator  in  addressing  these  challenges  is  crucial.  We  can  provide  the 
guidance and create the appropriate regulatory framework to enable the sound and stable 
conduct of financial services and financial institutions. The 6-volume CBB Rulebook is at the 
very core of our regulatory development and enhancement programme. 
The importance of sound corporate governance is one issue brought to prominence by the 
recent global financial turmoil. As Alan Greenspan acknowledged last month in testimony to 
the  United  States  Congress,  an  important  cause  of  the  crisis  was  the  failure  of  internal 
monitoring  and  control  in  financial  firms.  He  had  assumed,  he  said,  that  shareholders  in 
financial  firms  had  adequate  incentives  to  ensure  that  the  firms  they  owned  did  not  take 
excessive risks. As shareholders have subsequently found out, risk taking that goes wrong 
can be very costly to them.  
However, Greenspan acknowledged, his assumption turned out to be flawed. Shareholders 
did  not  act  to  prevent  excessive  risk-taking.  The  conclusion  is  clear.  If  firms  lack  the 
incentives for adequate self-regulation then the regulator must step in. This is the aim of our 
Rulebook requirements on corporate governance and internal controls.  
The financial crisis also points to the need for high standards of risk management in financial 
firms. Improving the risk management practices of banks was an important component of the 
work already being undertaken by the Central Bank before the financial crisis, and as a result 
of the crisis we plan to step up our efforts. 
In late 2007 we directed all locally-incorporated banks to carry out internal risk management 
assessments.  The  initial  reports  indicated  that  Bahraini  banks  have  good  internal  control 
systems  overall.  We  have  also  required  all  locally-incorporated  banks  to  submit  risk 
concentration policy documents. We carried out a review of all banks’ policies and risk limits 
in  the  summer  of  2008,  and  we  are  in  the  process  of  notifying  all  banks  with  observed 
deficiencies or gaps to address these matters by the end of the year. 
A particular issue for risk concentration concerns the extent to which banks are exposed to 
the real estate sector. Since 2005, we have required banks to report their exposure to the 
sector  in  order  that  we  can  discuss  real  estate  concentrations  by  individual  banks,  and  to 
monitor the system’s overall exposure to real estate.  
Since  late  2007,  we  have  been  consulting  with  the  local  banks  on  measures  to  limit  their 
exposure to the real estate sector. We have issued three consultation papers on real estate 
with regard to setting formal rules in due course. We have also increased the regulatory risk 
weighting to real estate to 200% to act as a regulatory constraint on excessive real estate 
expansion. 
Regulation that limits banks’ risk taking will never be universally popular. Some shareholders 
might see it as reducing their ability to make profits, at least in the short-term. But as Alan 
Greenspan’s admission clearly indicates, the pursuit of short-term profitability without regard 
to  the  risks  that  it  involves  is  in  no  one’s  interest  –  particularly  not  the  interests  of  the 
shareholders themselves. 
I should emphasize, however, that it is not the regulator’s job to protect shareholders against 
excessive  risk-taking.  Shareholders  are  the  providers  of  risk  capital  and  should  expect  to 
share in losses when risk-taking goes wrong. Instead, we aim to limit risk taking because our 
responsibility is to protect a bank’s depositors against losses. 
Depositors are a special category of a bank’s creditors for two main reasons. Bank deposits 
are the main form of savings for many people, especially the less wealthy. Bank deposits are 
also  money,  and  the  insolvency  of  a  bank  –  especially  a  large  one  –  can  have  serious 
economic side effects by sharply reducing the supply of money and credit to the economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 162/2008
Because  of  their  importance  to  both  individual  savers  and  to  the  wider  economy,  bank 
deposits  are  subject  to  a  special  form  of  protection  in  the  event  that  a  bank  becomes 
insolvent. This protection is usually referred to as deposit insurance. 
In  Bahrain  we  have  had  a  deposit  insurance  system  for  some  years.  Until  now  this  has 
protected deposits up to a maximum of 75% of BD15,000. It is also what is know as an “ex-
post” funded scheme in that the required funds can be collected from the other banks only 
after a bank has already failed. This takes time, and one of the lessons of the recent financial 
crisis is that it is important that depositors should be compensated promptly after their bank 
fails. 
Reflecting the lessons of the financial crisis, and also the recent development of international 
best practice standards on deposit insurance, the Central Bank is in the process of finalizing 
a new regulation on reform of the existing deposit protection arrangements. The purpose of 
this reform will be to establish a pre-funded scheme. This will be a scheme in which a fund of 
money  is  accumulated  in  advance  of  the  scheme  needing  to  make  any  payouts  to 
depositors.  The  fund  will  be  accumulated  by  regular  contributions  from  the  banks  that  are 
members of the scheme. 
The purpose of all the measures I have described to you is to ensure that Bahrain’s financial 
system  remains  sound,  stable  and  able  to  provide  the  credit  that  the  domestic  economy 
needs.  Sometimes  these  measures  might  lead  to  complaints  from  particular  sectors  or 
groups that their access to credit is being impeded, but as a central bank we need to take a 
broader view of the overall stability of the system. It would be in no one’s interests to allow 
banks in Bahrain to take excessive risks. A sound banking system is one in which firms are 
well-diversified, have many different revenue sources, and do not concentrate their risks in 
one particular economic sector. This is one of the most important lessons we can draw from 
the financial crisis. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 162/2008 
 3
