Christian Noyer: Lessons from the crisis. A central banker’s reflections 
on some accounting policy issues 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at the European meeting of 
the accounting profession, Paris, 11 December 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am delighted to be taking part in this European meeting of the accounting profession. This 
discussion seems to me to be especially timely since the current crisis has raised a whole 
series of questions related more or less closely to accounting policy. It is no coincidence that 
the latest Banque de France Financial Stability Review is devoted to issues of valuation. I am 
convinced that the crisis will force us to carry out an in-depth assessment of the concepts 
and tools relating to valuation. 
I  am  not  an  accountant.  The  point  of  view  I  am  putting  forward  today  is  that  of  a  central 
banker who is responsible in particular for financial stability. With this perspective in mind, I 
propose that together we take a look at three topics. 
• 
• 
• 
an overview of the crisis from the point of view of valuation 
the issue of the neutrality of accounting conventions 
the consistency of rules and practices with regard to valuation 
Financial crisis, a crisis of valuation 
In many respects, the current crisis is about valuation. To be sure, the factors underlying and 
accounting  for  the  crisis  are  numerous.  However,  one  of  its  significant  features  is  that  the 
uncertainty surrounding the “true” value of complex financial instruments has undermined the 
confidence  of  global  markets,  increased  uncertainty  about  counterparty  risk  and  led  to 
contagion  across  asset  classes,  financial  markets  and  economic  regions.  The  crisis  has 
highlighted  the  fact  that  the  valuation  of  financial  instruments  is  not  only  a  question  of 
accounting.  It  raises  issues  about  risk  measurement  and  management  by  financial 
institutions,  prudential  issues  via  the  definition  of  capital  requirements  and,  more  widely, 
financial stability issues. However, valuation is also without any doubt an accounting issue. It 
is therefore hardly surprising that the debate about the application of accounting standards to 
financial instruments is a highly topical one. 
I think it interesting to note that the crisis has occurred in a financial system that has seen 
two far-reaching developments. I am referring first of all to the rapid growth in securitisation 
and  products  whose  valuation  is  complex.  I  will  not  dwell  on  this  aspect  as  it  is  not  the 
subject of today’s meeting. The aspect I would like to focus on is the transition to the “fair 
value” accounting of financial instruments. 
The rationale behind this accounting development is understandable and can be summarised 
as follows. The aim is to enable investors and financial system participants, which include 
supervisors, to have a better understanding of the risk profile of financial institutions in order 
to  better  assess  their  position.  In  order  to  achieve  this,  financial  statements  must  –  in  the 
case of instruments for which it is economically relevant – be sensitive to price signals from 
markets, which reflect transaction values. 
I  believe  that  two  elements  are  important  in  this  argument.  The  first  is  that  financial 
statements have the crucial merit of providing information. The second is that the rationale of 
fair value valuation contains within it its own limitations. The concept of "transaction", which is 
BIS Review 160/2008 
 1
fundamental in this context and, as a result, that of "market", should constitute the limits of 
the scope of application of fair value accounting. 
Are accounting choices neutral? 
It  goes  without  saying  that  the  greater  sensitivity  of  balance  sheets  to  market  fluctuations 
resulting from fair value accounting obviously has an impact on financial stability. A central 
banker may legitimately wonder whether accounting conventions are neutral with respect to 
the behaviour of financial players and market dynamics. 
The  current  crisis  and  volatility  that  we  have  been  faced  with  over  the  past  few  months 
suggest that accounting conventions have an impact in terms of financial incentives and may 
have had a not insignificant impact on financial players' strategies. 
One example serves to illustrate this point. It is macroeconomic in nature and relates to risk-
taking  by  financial  institutions.  It  is  the  possibility,  in  the  case  of  some  instruments,  of 
recording as of the first trading day all of the discounted future profits even though the risks 
remain on the balance sheet. If we are to believe the financial industry itself, this possibility 
has an impact on investment strategies. It cannot be ruled out that because this rule makes it 
possible  to  record  substantial  income  flows  during  cyclical  upswings,  it  has  contributed  to 
greater  risk-taking  by  some  institutions  in  order  to  maintain  these  income  flows  year  after 
year.  In  a  more  general  way,  the  extension  of  the  scope  of  application  of  fair  value 
accounting  has  very  probably,  during  cyclical  upswings,  also  contributed  to  many  assets 
being accounted for at market value whereas the intention of market participants to manage 
these assets on a fair value basis was not clear. 
My aim here is not to make a judgement about the relative merits of accounting choices. It is 
to highlight the fact that these choices have implications that go beyond accounting policy. In 
concrete  terms,  therefore,  the  question  that  we  need  to  ask  collectively  is:  what  is  the 
optimum  policy  response?  Do  accounting  conventions  need  to  be  modified?  Or  can  other 
regulatory frameworks correct these effects? 
Consistency of valuation rules  
This leads me to the last point that I would like to an address today: the consistency of rules 
and practices with respect to valuation. 
There  are  currently  differences  of  approach  between  accounting  practices,  prudential 
regulation and risk management practices. It is thus wholly accepted in the financial industry 
that  there  is  inevitably  uncertainty  surrounding  the  valuation  of  financial  instruments, 
particularly  when  they  are  complex  or  illiquid.  In  addition,  the  limitations  of  mathematical 
models are recognised. These two factors, i.e. price volatility over the financial cycle and the 
limits  of  quantitative  techniques  highlight  a  number  of  divergences  between  internal  risk 
management and fair value accounting. More generally, the application of accounting rules, 
which give the value of a company or activity at a given moment, does not always allow the 
forward-looking valuation of financial instruments or sound risk management practices. Yet 
these  aspects  are  important  for  prudential  authorities.  Conversely,  choices  in  terms  of 
prudential regulation can have an impact on financial stability when they interact with certain 
accounting rules. For instance, the hitherto favourable treatment given by prudential rules to 
the trading book has without doubt encouraged behaviour  aimed at generating very short-
term profits via transactions booked at market value. 
Like me you will have noted that, in their press release in November, the G20 Heads of State 
and Government gave particular attention to accounting issues. The work programme they 
have assigned to ministers and experts addresses several areas. It is aimed at "harmonising 
accounting  standards,  particularly  for  complex  instruments,  during  times  of  stress".  It  also 
aims to "address weaknesses in accounting and disclosure standards for off-balance sheet 
2 
 BIS Review 160/2008
vehicles". Lastly, it aims to "enhance the required disclosure of complex financial instruments 
by  firms".  The  Heads  of  State  and  Government  have  assigned  an  ultimate  objective  to 
accounting standard setters, i.e. the creation of a "single high-quality global standard". It is 
striking  that  the  attention  given  to  accounting  issues  is  linked  to  financial  stability 
considerations. 
To  conclude  this  address  that  has  already  been  rather  too  lengthy,  I  should  just  like  to 
remove any ambiguity that may have arisen from the discussions that have intensified with 
the  crisis.  I  do  not  think  that  it  is  in  anyone's  interest  in  the  current  period  to  weaken 
accounting conventions. Accurate, rigorous and fully transparent financial statements are the 
bedrock  of  financial  activity.  The  aim  of  the  work  and  discussions  that  have  been  actively 
pursued over the last few months and that will continue in the coming period is in fact both a 
modest and a difficult one. It is to ensure that accounting conventions fully reflect the reality 
of financial activities and are not overambitious. This undoubtedly means reviewing the role 
of fair value in the accounting treatment of financial instruments. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 160/2008 
 3
