Rakesh Mohan: Global financial crisis and key risks – impact on India 
and Asia 
Remarks by Dr Rakesh Mohan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the IMF-
FSF High-Level Meeting on the Recent Financial Turmoil and Policy Responses, Washington 
DC, 9 October 2008. 
The assistance of Meena Hemachandra, Chandan Sinha, R.K. Pattnaik, Amitava Sardar and Muneesh Kapur in 
preparation of the remarks is gratefully acknowledged. 
 The turmoil in the international financial markets of advanced economies, that started around 
mid-2007, has exacerbated substantially since August 2008. The financial market crisis has 
led  to  the  collapse  of  major  financial  institutions  and  is  now  beginning  to  impact  the  real 
economy in the advanced economies. As this crisis is unfolding, credit markets appear to be 
drying  up  in  the  developed  world.  With  the  substantive  increase  in  financial  globalisation, 
how much will these developments affect India and other Asian emerging market economies 
(EMEs)?  
India, like most other emerging market economies, has so far, not been seriously affected by 
the recent financial turmoil in developed economies. In my remarks today, I will, first, briefly 
set  out  reasons  for  the  relative  resilience  shown  by  the  Indian  economy  to  the  ongoing 
international financial markets’ crisis. This will be followed by some discussion of the impact 
till date on the Indian economy and the likely implications in the near future. I then outline our 
approach to the management of the exposures of the Indian financial sector entities to the 
collapse of major financial institutions in the US. Orderly conditions have been maintained in 
the domestic financial markets, which is attributable to a range of instruments available with 
the monetary authority to manage a variety of situations. Finally, I would briefly set out my 
thinking  on  the  extent  of  vulnerability  of  the  Asian  economies,  in  general,  to  the  global 
financial market crisis.  
Financial globalisation: the Indian approach 
The Indian economy is now a relatively open economy, despite the capital account not being 
fully  open.  The  current  account,  as  measured  by  the  sum  of  current  receipts  and  current 
payments, amounted to about 53 per cent of GDP in 2007-08, up from about 19 per cent of 
GDP in 1991. Similarly, on the capital account, the sum of gross capital inflows and outflows 
increased from 12 per cent of GDP in 1990-91 to around 64 per cent in 2007-08.1 With this 
degree  of  openness,  developments  in  international  markets  are  bound  to  affect  the  Indian 
economy and policy makers have to be vigilant in order to minimize the impact of adverse 
international developments on the domestic economy. 
The  relatively  limited  impact  of  the  ongoing  turmoil  in  financial  markets  of  the  advanced 
economies in the Indian financial markets, and more generally the Indian economy, needs to 
be  assessed  in  this  context.  Whereas  the  Indian  current  account  has  been  opened  fully, 
though  gradually,  over  the  1990s,  a  more  calibrated  approach  has  been  followed  to  the 
opening  of  the  capital  account  and to  opening up  of  the  financial  sector.  This  approach  is 
consistent with the weight of the available empirical evidence with regard to the benefits that 
may  be  gained  from  capital  account  liberalisation  for  acceleration  of  economic  growth, 
                                                 
1  
It  may  be  noted  that  India  is  more  open  as  compared  to  the  US:  the  ratio  of  current  receipts  and  current 
payments was 41 per cent of GDP in the US in 2007, while capital inflows and capital outflows were around 15 
per cent and 10 per cent, respectively. 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 1
in 
foreign 
investment 
investment 
India,  while  encouraging 
particularly in emerging market economies. The evidence suggests that the greatest gains 
are  obtained  from  the  opening  to  foreign  direct  investment,  followed  by  portfolio  equity 
investment. The benefits emanating from external debt flows have been found to be more 
questionable  until  greater  domestic  financial  market  development  has  taken  place  (Henry, 
2007; Prasad, Rajan and Subramanian, 2007).  
Accordingly, 
flows,  especially  direct 
investment inflows, a more cautious, nuanced approach has been adopted in regard to debt 
flows. Debt flows in the form of external commercial borrowings are subject to ceilings and 
some  end-use  restrictions,  which  are  modulated  from  time  to  time  taking  into  account 
evolving  macroeconomic  and  monetary  conditions.  Similarly,  portfolio 
in 
government  securities  and  corporate  bonds  are  also  subject  to  macro  ceilings,  which  are 
also  modulated  from  time  to  time.  Thus,  prudential  policies  have  attempted  to  prevent 
excessive  recourse  to  foreign  borrowings  and  dollarisation  of  the  economy.  In  regard  to 
capital outflows, the policy framework has been progressively liberalised to enable the non-
financial corporate sector to invest abroad and to acquire companies in the overseas market. 
Resident individuals are also permitted outflows subject to reasonable limits.  
The financial sector, especially banks, is subject to prudential regulations, both in regard to 
capital and liquidity (Mohan, 2007b). As the current global financial crisis has shown, liquidity 
risks  can  rise  manifold  during  a  crisis  and  can  pose  serious  downside  risks  to 
macroeconomic and financial stability. The Reserve Bank had already put in place steps to 
mitigate liquidity risks at the very short-end, risks at the systemic level and at the institution 
level as well. Some of the important measures by the Reserve Bank in this regard include, 
first, restricting the overnight unsecured market for funds to banks and primary dealers (PD) 
as well as limits on the borrowing and lending operations of these entities in the overnight 
inter-bank  call  money  market.  Second,  large  reliance  by  banks  on  borrowed  funds  can 
exacerbate vulnerability to external shocks. This has been brought out quite strikingly in the 
ongoing  financial  crisis  in  the  global  financial  markets.  Accordingly,  in  order  to  encourage 
greater  reliance  on  stable  sources  of  funding,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  imposed  prudential 
limits on banks on their purchased inter-bank liabilities and these limits are linked to their net 
worth.  Furthermore,  the  incremental  credit  deposit  ratio  of  banks  is  also  monitored  by  the 
Reserve  Bank  since  this  ratio  indicates  the  extent  to  which  banks  are  funding  credit  with 
borrowings  from  wholesale  markets  (now  known  as  purchased  funds). Third,  asset  liability 
management guidelines for dealing with overall asset-liability mismatches take into account 
both on and off balance sheet items. Finally, guidelines on securitization of standard assets 
have laid down a detailed policy on provision of liquidity support to Special Purpose Vehicles 
(SPVs).  
In order to further strengthen capital requirements, the credit conversion factors, risk weights 
and provisioning requirements for specific off-balance sheet items including derivatives have 
been  reviewed.  Furthermore,  in  India,  complex  structures  like  synthetic  securitisation  have 
not been permitted so far. Introduction of such products, when found appropriate, would be 
guided by the risk management capabilities of the system. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  also  issued  detailed  guidelines  on  implementation  of  the  Basel  II 
framework  covering  all  the  three  pillars  with  the  guidelines  on  Pillar  II  being  issued  as 
recently as on March 27, 2008. In tune with RBI’s objective to have consistency and harmony 
with  international  standards,  the  Standardised  Approach  for  credit  risk  and  Basic  Indicator 
Approach for operational risk have been prescribed. Minimum capital-to-risk-weighted asset 
ratio (CRAR) would be 9 per cent, but higher levels under Pillar II could be prescribed on the 
basis of risk profile and risk management systems. The banks have been asked to bring Tier 
I CRAR to at least 6 per cent before March 31, 2010. After analyzing the global schedule for 
implementation,  it  was  decided  that  all  foreign  banks  operating  in  India  and  Indian  banks 
having a presence outside India should migrate to Basel II by March 31, 2008 and all other 
scheduled commercial banks encouraged to migrate to Basel II in alignment with them but 
not later than March 31, 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 122/2008
In  addition  to  the  exercise  of  normal  prudential requirements  on  banks,  the  Reserve  Bank 
has  also  successively  imposed  additional  prudential  measures  in  respect  of  exposures  to 
particular  sectors,  akin  to  a  policy  of  dynamic  provisioning.  For  example,  in  view  of  the 
accelerated exposure observed to the real estate sector, banks were advised to put in place 
a  proper  risk  management  system  to  contain  the  risks  involved.  Banks  were  advised  to 
formulate specific policies covering exposure limits, collaterals to be considered, margins to 
be kept, sanctioning authority/level and sector to be financed. In view of the rapid increase in 
loans to the real estate sector raising concerns about asset quality and the potential systemic 
risks posed by such exposure, the risk weight on banks' exposure to commercial real estate 
was increased from 100 per cent to 125 per cent in July 2005 and further to 150 per cent in 
April  2006.  The  risk  weight  on  housing  loans  extended  by  banks  to  individuals  against 
mortgage  of  housing  properties  and  investments  in  mortgage  backed  securities  (MBS)  of 
housing  finance  companies  (HFCs)  was  increased  from  50  per  cent  to  75  per  cent  in 
December 2004, though this was later reduced to 50 per cent for lower value loans. Similarly, 
in light of the strong growth of consumer credit and the volatility in the capital markets, it was 
felt that the quality of lending could suffer during the phase of rapid expansion. Hence, as a 
counter  cyclical  measure,  the  Reserve Bank increased the risk weight for consumer credit 
and capital market exposures from 100 per cent to 125 per cent.2
An additional feature of recent prudential actions by the Reserve Bank relate to the tightening 
of  regulation  and  supervision  of  Non-banking  Financial  Companies  (NBFCs),  so  that 
regulatory  arbitrage  between  these  companies  and  the  banking  system  is  minimized.  The 
overarching principle is that banks should not use an NBFC as a delivery vehicle for seeking 
regulatory arbitrage opportunities or to circumvent bank regulation(s) and that the activities of 
NBFCs do not undermine banking regulations. Thus, capital adequacy ratios and prudential 
limits  to  single/group  exposures  in  the  case  of  NBFCs  have  been  progressively  brought 
nearer  to  those  applicable  to  banks.  The  regulatory  interventions  are  graded:  higher  in 
deposit-taking NBFCs and lower in non-deposit-taking NBFCs. Thus, excessive leverage in 
this sector has been contained.  
Various  segments  of  the  domestic  financial  market  have  been  developed  over  a  period  of 
time to facilitate efficient channelling of resources form savers to investors and enable the 
continuation  of  domestic  growth  momentum  (Mohan,  2007a).  Investment  has  been 
predominantly  financed  domestically  in  India  –  the  current  account  deficit  has  averaged 
between one and two per cent of GDP since the early 1990s. The Government’s fiscal deficit 
has  been  high  by  international  standards  but  is  also  largely  internally  financed  through  a 
vibrant  and  well  developed  government  securities  market,  and  thus,  despite  large  fiscal 
deficits, macroeconomic and financial stability has been maintained. Derivative instruments 
have been introduced cautiously in a phased manner, both for product diversity and, more 
importantly, as a risk management tool. All these developments have facilitated the process 
of price discovery in various financial market segments.  
The rate of increase in foreign exchange market turnover in India between April 2004 and 
April 2007 was the highest amongst the 54 countries covered in the latest Triennial Central 
Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity conducted by the Bank for 
International  Settlements  (BIS).  According  to  the  survey,  daily  average  turnover  in  India 
jumped almost 5-fold from US $ 7 billion in April 2004 to US $ 34 billion in April 2007; the 
share of India in global foreign exchange market turnover trebled from 0.3 per cent in April 
2004  to  0.9  per  cent  in  April  2007.  There  has  been  consistent  development  of  well-
functioning,  relatively  deep  and  liquid  markets  for  government  securities,  currency  and 
derivatives in India, though much further development needs to be done. However, as large 
segments  of  economic  agents  in  India  may  not  have  adequate  resilience  to  withstand 
                                                 
2   The status in India with regard to proposals in the April 2008 Report of the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) is 
given in Annex. 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 3
volatility in currency and money markets, our approach has been to be increasingly vigilant 
and proactive to any incipient signs of volatility in financial markets.  
In brief, the Indian approach has focused on gradual, phased and calibrated opening of the 
domestic financial and external sectors, taking into cognizance reforms in the other sectors 
of  the  economy.  Financial  markets  are  contributing  to  efficient  channelling  of  domestic 
savings  into  productive  uses  and,  by  financing  the  overwhelming  part  of  domestic 
investment,  are  supporting  domestic  growth.  These  characteristics  of  India's  external  and 
financial sector management coupled with ample forex reserves coverage and the growing 
underlying strength of the Indian economy reduce the susceptibility of the Indian economy to 
global turbulence. 
Impact of the crisis on India 
While the overall policy approach has been able to mitigate the potential impact of the turmoil 
on domestic financial markets and the economy, with the increasing integration of the Indian 
economy and its financial markets with rest of the world, there is recognition that the country 
does  face  some  downside  risks  from  these  international  developments.  The  risks  arise 
mainly from the potential reversal of capital flows on a sustained medium-term basis from the 
projected slow down of the global economy, particularly in advanced economies, and from 
some elements of potential financial contagion. In India, the adverse effects have so far been 
mainly  in  the  equity  markets  because  of  reversal  of  portfolio  equity  flows,  and  the 
concomitant effects on the domestic forex market and liquidity conditions. The macro effects 
have so far been muted due to the overall strength of domestic demand, the healthy balance 
sheets of the Indian corporate sector, and the predominant domestic financing of investment.  
As might be expected, the main impact of the global financial turmoil in India has emanated 
from the significant change experienced in the capital account in 2008-09 so far, relative to 
the  previous  year  (Table  1).  Total  net  capital  flows  fell  from  US$17.3  billion  in  April-June 
2007  to  US$13.2  billion  in  April-June  2008.  Nonetheless,  capital  flows  are  expected  to  be 
more  than  sufficient  to  cover  the  current  account  deficit  this  year  as  well.  While  Foreign 
Direct  Investment  (FDI)  inflows  have  continued  to  exhibit  accelerated  growth  (US$  16.7 
billion during April-August 2008 as compared with US$ 8.5 billion in the corresponding period 
of 2007), portfolio investments by foreign institutional investors (FIIs) witnessed a net outflow 
of about US$ 6.4 billion in April-September 2008 as compared with a net inflow of US$ 15.5 
billion in the corresponding period last year.  
Similarly,  external  commercial  borrowings  of  the  corporate  sector  declined  from  US$  7.0 
billion in April-June 2007 to US$ 1.6 billion in April-June 2008, partially in response to policy 
measures  in  the  face  of  excess  flows  in  2007-08,  but  also  due  to  the  current  turmoil  in 
advanced  economies. With  the  existence  of  a merchandise  trade  deficit  of  7.7  per  cent of 
GDP in 2007-08, and a current account deficit of 1.5 per cent, and change in perceptions 
with respect to capital flows, there has been significant pressure on the Indian exchange rate 
in recent months. Whereas the real exchange rate appreciated from an index of 104.9 (base 
1993-94=100)  (US$1  =  Rs.  46.12)  in  September  2006  to  115.0  (US$  1  =  Rs.  40.34)  in 
September  2007,  it  has  now  depreciated  to  a  level  of  101.5  (US  $  1  =  Rs.  48.74)  as  on 
October 8, 2008.  
4 
 BIS Review 122/2008
 
With the volatility in portfolio flows having been large during 2007 and 2008, the impact of 
global  financial  turmoil  has  been  felt  particularly  in  the  equity  market.  The  BSE  Sensex 
(1978-79=100)  increased  significantly  from  a  level  of  13,072  as  at  end-March  2007  to  its 
peak of 20,873 on January 8, 2008 in the presence of heavy portfolio flows responding to the 
high  growth  performance  of  the  Indian  corporate  sector.  With  portfolio  flows  reversing  in 
2008, partly because of the international market turmoil, the Sensex has now dropped to a 
level of 11,328 on October 8, 2008, in line with similar large declines in other major stock 
markets.  
As noted earlier, domestic investment is largely financed by domestic savings. However, the 
corporate  sector  has,  in  recent  years,  mobilized  significant  resources  from  global  financial 
markets for funding, both debt and non-debt, their ambitious investment plans. The current 
risk  aversion  in  the  international  financial  markets  to  EMEs  could,  therefore,  have  some 
impact on the Indian corporate sector’s ability to raise funds from international sources and 
thereby  impede  some  investment  growth.  Such  corporates  would,  therefore,  have  to  rely 
relatively more on domestic sources of financing, including bank credit. This could, in turn, 
put  some  upward  pressure  on  domestic  interest  rates.  Moreover,  domestic  primary  capital 
market issuances have suffered in the current fiscal year so far in view of the sluggish stock 
market conditions. Thus, one can expect more demand for bank credit, and non-food credit 
growth has indeed accelerated in the current year (26.2 per cent on a year-on-year basis as 
on September 12, 2008 as compared with 23.3 per cent a year ago).  
The financial crisis in the advanced economies and the likely slowdown in these economies 
could  have  some  impact  on  the  IT  sector.  According  to  the  latest  assessment  by  the 
NASSCOM, the software trade association, the current developments with respect to the US 
financial  markets  are  very  eventful,  and  may  have  a  direct  impact  on  the  IT  industry  and 
likely  to  create  a  downstream  impact  on  other  sectors  of  the  US  economy  and  worldwide 
markets.  About  15  per  cent  to  18  per  cent  of  the  business  coming  to  Indian  outsourcers 
includes  projects  from  banking,  insurance,  and  the  financial  services  sector  which  is  now 
uncertain.  
In  summary,  the  combined  impact  of  the  reversal  of  portfolio  equity  flows,  the  reduced 
availability of international capital both debt and equity, the perceived increase in the price of 
equity with lower equity valuations, and pressure on the exchange rate, growth in the Indian 
corporate  sector  is  likely  to  feel  some  impact  of  the  global  financial  turmoil.  On  the  other 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 5
hand,  on  a  macro  basis,  with  external  savings  utilisation  having  been  low  traditionally, 
between  one  to  two  percent  of  GDP,  and  the  sustained  high  domestic  savings  rate,  this 
impact can be expected to be at the margin. Moreover, the continued buoyancy of foreign 
direct investment suggests that confidence in Indian growth prospects remains healthy. 
Impact on the Indian banking system 
One  of  the  key  features  of  the  current  financial  turmoil  has  been  the  lack  of  perceived 
contagion  being  felt  by banking  systems  in  EMEs,  particularly  in  Asia.  The  Indian  banking 
system also has not experienced any contagion, similar to its peers in the rest of Asia.  
A detailed study undertaken by the RBI in September 2007 on the impact of the sub-prime 
episode on the Indian banks had revealed that none of the Indian banks or the foreign banks, 
with whom the discussions had been held, had any direct exposure to the sub-prime markets 
in the USA or other markets. However, a few Indian banks had invested in the collateralised 
debt  obligations  (CDOs)  /  bonds  which  had  a  few  underlying  entities  with  sub-prime 
exposures.  Thus,  no  direct  impact  on  account  of  direct  exposure  to  the  sub-prime  market 
was in evidence. However, a few of these banks did suffer some losses on account of the 
mark-to-market  losses  caused  by  the  widening  of  the  credit  spreads  arising  from  the  sub-
prime episode on term liquidity in the market, even though the overnight markets remained 
stable.  
Consequent upon filling of bankruptcy under Chapter 11 by Lehman Brothers, all banks were 
advised to report the details of their exposures to Lehman Brothers and related entities both 
in India and abroad. Out of 77 reporting banks, 14 reported exposures to Lehman Brothers 
and its related entities either in India or abroad. An analysis of the information reported by 
these  banks  revealed  that  majority  of  the  exposures  reported  by  the  banks  pertained  to 
subsidiaries  of  Lehman  Bros  Holdings  Inc.  which  are  not  covered  by  the  bankruptcy 
proceedings.  Overall,  these  banks’  exposure  especially  to  Lehman  Brothers  Holding  Inc. 
which  has  filed  for  bankruptcy  is  not  significant  and  banks  are  reported  to  have  made 
adequate provisions.  
In the aftermath of the turmoil caused by bankruptcy, the Reserve Bank has announced a 
series of measures to facilitate orderly operation of financial markets and to ensure financial 
stability which predominantly includes extension of additional liquidity support to banks. 
RBI response to the crisis 
The  financial  crisis  in  advanced  economies  on  the  back  of  sub-prime  turmoil  has  been 
accompanied by near drying up of trust amongst major financial market and sector players, 
in  view  of  mounting  losses  and  elevated  uncertainty  about  further  possible  losses  and 
erosion of capital. The lack of trust amongst the major players has led to near freezing of the 
uncollateralized  inter-bank  money  market,  reflected  in  large  spreads  over  policy  rates.  In 
response to these developments, central banks in major advanced economies have taken a 
number of coordinated steps to increase short-term liquidity. Central banks in some cases 
have substantially loosened the collateral requirements to provide the necessary short-term 
liquidity.  
In contrast to the extreme volatility leading to freezing of money markets in major advanced 
economies,  money  markets  in  India  have  been,  by  and  large,  functioning  in  an  orderly 
fashion, albeit with some pressures. Large swings in capital flows – as has been experienced 
between  2007-08  and  2008-09  so  far  –  in  response  to  the  global  financial  market  turmoil 
have made the conduct of monetary policy and liquidity management more complicated in 
the  recent  months.  However,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  effectively  able  to  manage 
domestic liquidity and monetary conditions consistent with its monetary policy stance.  
6 
 BIS Review 122/2008
This has been enabled by the appropriate use of a range of instruments available for liquidity 
management with the Reserve Bank such as the Cash Reserve Ratio (CRR) and Statutory 
Liquidity Ratio (SLR)3 stipulations and open market operations (OMO) including the Market 
Stabilisation  Scheme  (MSS)4  and  the  Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility  (LAF).  Furthermore, 
money market liquidity is also impacted by our operations in the foreign exchange market, 
which, in turn, reflect the evolving capital flows. While in 2007 and the previous years, large 
capital flows and their absorption by the Reserve Bank led to excessive liquidity, which was 
absorbed through sterilisation operations involving LAF, MSS and CRR. During 2008, in view 
of some reversal in capital flows, market sale of foreign exchange by the Reserve Bank has 
led to withdrawal of liquidity from the banking system. The daily LAF repo operations have 
emerged  as  the  primary  tool  for  meeting  the  liquidity  gap  in  the  market.  In  view  of  the 
reversal of capital flows, fresh MSS issuances have been scaled down and there has also 
been some unwinding of the outstanding MSS balances. The MSS operates symmetrically 
and  has  the  flexibility  to  smoothen  liquidity  in  the  banking  system  both  during  episodes  of 
capital  inflows  and  outflows.  The  existing  set  of  monetary  instruments  has,  thus,  provided 
adequate flexibility to manage the evolving situation. In view of this flexibility, unlike central 
banks  in  major  advanced  economies,  the  Reserve  Bank  did  not  have  to  invent  new 
instruments or to dilute the collateral requirements to inject liquidity. LAF repo operations are, 
however, limited by the excess SLR securities held by banks.  
While LAF and MSS have been able to bear a large part of the burden, some modulations in 
CRR and SLR have also been resorted, purely as temporary measures, to meet the liquidity 
mismatches.  For  instance,  on  September  16,  2008,  in  regard  to  SLR,  the  Reserve  Bank 
permitted banks to use upto an additional 1 percent of their NDTL, for a temporary period, for 
drawing liquidity support under LAF from RBI. This has imparted a sense of confidence in the 
market  in  terms  of  availability  of  short-term  liquidity.  The  CRR  which  had  been  gradually 
increased from 4.5 per cent in 2004 to 9 per cent by August 2008 was cut by 50 basis points 
on October 65 (to be effective October 11, 2008) – the first cut after a gap of over five years – 
on  a  review  of  the  liquidity  situation  in  the  context  of  global  and  domestic  developments. 
Thus, as the very recent experience shows, temporary changes in the prudential ratios such 
as CRR and SLR combined with flexible use of the MSS, could be considered as a vast pool 
of back-up liquidity that is available for liquidity management as the situation may warrant for 
relieving market pressure at any given time. The recent innovation with respect to SLR for 
4  
                                                 
3   At  present,  banks  are  required  to  hold  25  per  cent  of  their  net  demand  and  time  liabilities  (NDTL)  in 
Government (and some other approved) securities. As against this requirement of 25 per cent, banks holdings 
of SLR securities were 26.7 per cent of their NDTL as on September 12, 2008. Thus, banks held nearly 1.7 
per  cent  excess  SLR  securities  –  equivalent  to  Rs.  700  billion  –  which  could  be  used  by  banks  to  avail  of 
liquidity from the Reserve Bank under the daily LAF operations. 
In view of sustained large capital flows on the one hand and the finite stock of government securities with the 
Reserve Bank, and the absence of the option of issuing central bank securities under the RBI Act on the other 
hand, a new scheme, Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS), was introduced in April 2004 to manage the large 
capital flows. Under this scheme, the Reserve Bank has been empowered to issue government Treasury Bills 
and  medium  duration  dated  securities  exclusively  for  sterilization  purposes,  so  as  to  manage  liquidity 
appropriately. The proceeds collected under MSS auctions are kept in a separate identifiable cash account 
with the RBI, and can be used only for redemption and/or buy back of securities issued under the MSS. The 
payments for interest and discount on MSS securities are not made from the MSS Account, but shown in the 
Union budget and other related documents transparently as distinct components under separate subheads. 
The  MSS  securities  are  indistinguishable  from  normal  government  Treasury  Bills  and  dated  securities. The 
introduction  of  MSS  has  succeeded  broadly  in  restoring  LAF  to  its  intended  function  of  daily  liquidity 
management (see Mohan (2006)). 
5   On  a  review  of  the  evolving  liquidity  situation  in  the  context  of  global  and  domestic  developments  in  the 
context  of  the  abrupt  changes  in  the  international  financial  environment  subsequent  to  the  October  6th 
announcement, it was decided, on October 10, 2008, to reduce the CRR by 150 basis points to 7.50 per cent 
of NDTL  with  effect from the fortnight beginning October  11, 2008 instead  of the 50 basis  points reduction 
announced on October 6, 2008. As a result, an amount of about Rs. 600 billion would be released into the 
system (instead of the injection of Rs 200 billion announced earlier). 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 7
combating  temporary  systemic  illiquidity  is  particularly  noteworthy.  The  relative  stability  in 
domestic  financial  markets,  despite  extreme  turmoil  in  the  global  financial  markets,  is 
reflective of prudent practices, strengthened reserves and the strong growth performance in 
recent years in an environment of flexibility in the conduct of policies.  
Active liquidity management is a key element of the current monetary policy stance. Liquidity 
modulation through a flexible use of a combination of instruments has, to a significant extent, 
cushioned the impact of the international financial turbulence on domestic financial markets 
by  absorbing  excessive  market  pressures  and  ensuring  orderly  conditions.  In  view  of  the 
evolving environment of heightened uncertainty, volatility in global markets and the dangers 
of  potential  spillovers  to  domestic  equity  and  currency  markets,  liquidity  management  will 
continue to receive priority in the hierarchy of policy objectives over the period ahead. The 
Reserve Bank will continue with its policy of active demand management of liquidity through 
appropriate  use  of  the  CRR  stipulations  and  open  market  operations  (OMO)  including  the 
MSS and the LAF, using all the policy instruments at its disposal flexibly, as and when the 
situation warrants. 
Impact on Asian EMEs 
In  contrast  to  the  previous  episodes  of  global  turmoil,  EMEs  have  exhibited  relative 
resilience,  though  equity  market  and  exchange  rate  pressures  have  intensified  in  recent 
days. So far, the investment sentiment is positive for the Asian EMEs reflecting their strong 
economic  performance  and,  for  some  countries,  favourable  investment  opportunities 
associated with elevated commodity prices, though they have adjusted downwards in recent 
times,  while  being  somewhat  volatile.  Credit  policy  reforms,  better  structuring  of  banking 
sector  debt  and  improved  fiscal  positions  have  also  played  their  role  making  the  EMEs 
resilient from the crisis. In addition, large foreign exchange reserves, particularly in Asia, also 
provide a degree of protection against possible sudden stops. Another factor that could be of 
relevance for this favourable situation is the relatively smaller presence of foreign banks in 
the Asian banking sector. This is evident from the fact that the share of banking assets held 
by  foreign  banks  in  these  economies  generally  lies  between  0  and  10  percent  (Global 
Development Finance, 2008).  
The  spillovers  to  the  EMEs  from  the  current  global  financial  market  crisis  have  occurred 
mainly in and through financial markets, reflecting the relatively high level of integration of 
such  markets  in  the  global  financial  system.  In  this  respect,  there  have  been  four  major 
spillovers, viz., (i) a rise in the price of risk; (ii) a reduction in international bond issuance; (iii) 
a  sell-off  in  equity  markets;  and  (iv)  some  unwinding  of  carry-trade  positions.  The  major 
EMEs in Asia have been recording surpluses on the current account in recent years, with the 
exception of Korea and India. Thus, the vulnerability of Asia, other than Korea and India, is 
relatively contained to that extent. It is in this context the foreign exchange markets in India 
and Korea have experienced greater pressure in recent times. 
Despite  the  fact  that  no  significant  macroeconomic  disruption  has  taken  place  in  EMEs, 
some  vulnerabilities  exist.  There  are  indications  that  the  current  crisis  will  have  some 
implications  in  terms  of  higher  funding  costs  and  raising  external  finance,  particularly,  for 
lower  rated  firms.  Further,  countries  with  significant  foreign  bank  presence,  mostly  in  East 
European  economies,  might  be  vulnerable  to  financial  stress  faced  by  a  parent  bank. 
Similarly, slowdown in advanced countries might impact the remittances to EMEs.  
 As regards the impact  of financial turbulence on the real sector, Asian EMEs may not be 
entirely  immune  to  slowing  growth  in  developed  economies.  For  East  Asian  economies, 
since  most  of  these  economies  are  small  and  their  trade  sector  (export  plus  imports)  as 
proportion of GDP varies at a significantly higher level between over 200 per cent and 60 per 
cent as opposed to the weight of domestic demand as in India, it could be an area of concern 
for  these  countries.  Therefore,  for  these  set  of  countries,  the  crises  could  be  transmitted 
through the trade channel. While strong regional sources of growth within EMEs may be a 
8 
 BIS Review 122/2008
mitigating factor, most EMEs still retain substantial trade linkages with developed economies. 
In Asia, while intra-regional trade has been growing rapidly over recent years, much of this 
activity is still driven by developed economies as a major destination for final goods.  
According  to  the  analysis  contained  in  the  IMF’s  latest  Global  Financial  Stability  Report 
(October 2008) (IMF, 2008a), both domestic and global factors are important in explaining 
the movement in equity prices in the EMEs. Correlation of equity markets in EMEs with those 
in the advanced economies has risen, suggesting a growing transmission channel for equity 
price  movements.  Amongst  the  three  group  of  EMEs  (Latin  America,  Asia  and  Emerging 
Europe), the spillover from global factors is found to be strongest in Latin American EMEs 
followed  by  Emerging  Europe  and  Asia.  The  wealth  effect  of  stock  market  changes  on 
consumption and investment, although statistically significant, is found to be weaker in EMEs 
vis-à-vis  the  advanced  economies.  Furthermore,  such  wealth  effects  tend  to  play  out 
gradually.  
During the financial turmoil, commodity prices may have been pushed higher to some extent 
by  increased  demand  for  commodities  as  a  hedge  against  a  depreciating  US  dollar  and 
possibly also as a hedge against higher inflation. As global growth slows, a fall in commodity 
prices  represents  a  downside  risk  to  commodity-exporting  EMEs,  which  is  particularly 
relevant for some Latin American EMEs. In  an extreme scenario, where commodity prices 
fall dramatically, this could have significant implications for economies that have had a heavy 
reliance  on  the  performance  of  commodities  in  recent  years,  and  might  furthermore  pose 
some risks to the financial stability in these countries. On the other hand, Asian EMEs which 
are  commodity  importers  may  benefit  from  the  correction  in  global  commodity  prices.  This 
may  alleviate  inflationary  pressures  in  these  economies  and  may  provide  the  necessary 
flexibility to monetary policy in these countries. However, the beneficial impact of softening 
commodity  prices  is  getting  partly  eroded  by  the  depreciation  pressures  in  some  of  the 
EMEs, thus, limiting to some extent the manoeuvrability available to the monetary policy.  
Overall, while the real sector in the major Asian EMEs has held up relatively well, it needs to 
be  recognised  that  the  financial  crisis  in  the  US  has  deepened  significantly  over  the  past 
couple of months and there are signs of its spreading to the mature economies in Europe. 
The  deepening  and  widening  of  the  financial  crisis  is  already  getting  reflecting  in  elevated 
volatility in the financial markets of key EMEs and widening of spreads of the EME assets. 
Although  a  large  amount  of  liquidity  has  been  injected  by  the  central  banks  of  the  major 
advanced  economies,  short-term  market  rates  remain  well  above  policy  rates.  Financing 
costs for the EMEs have increased over the past few weeks and could thus deteriorate in the 
coming months. If the financial crisis were to linger longer and the economic activity in these 
regions  slows  down  significantly,  the  adverse  impact  on  the  real  economies  in  the  major 
EMEs  could  turn  out  to  be  stronger  than  that  has  been  observed  so  far.  According  to  the 
IMF’s  latest  World  Economic  Outlook  (October  2008)  (IMF,  2008b),  major  advanced 
economies  are  already  in  or  close  to  recession  and  the  recovery  is  likely  to  be  unusually 
gradual.  Global  output  growth  (at  purchasing  power  parity  (PPP)  exchange  rates)  is  now 
seen at 3.0 per cent in 2009, down from the likely 3.9 per cent in 2008 and the robust growth 
of almost 5 per cent each during 2006 and 2007. Growth in advanced economies is projected 
to decelerate from an average of 2.8 per cent during 2006-2007 to 1.5 per cent in 2008 and 
only  0.5  per  cent  in  2009.  Policy  rates  have  been  cut  in  a  coordinated  manner,  an 
unprecedented move, by central banks of major advanced economies on October 8, 2008 in 
view of the substantial downside risks to growth. Thus, financial headwinds – both through 
reduced  capital  flows,  widening  of  spreads  and  elevated  volatility  in  domestic  financial 
markets  of  the  EMEs  and  through  weakening  of  demand  in  major  advanced  economies  – 
have  increased  downside  risks  of  the  major  EMEs,  especially  for  the  relatively  more  open 
economies in the region. 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 9
Concluding observations 
India has by-and-large been spared of global financial contagion due to the sub-prime turmoil 
for  a  variety  of  reasons.  India’s  growth  process  has  been  largely  domestic  demand  driven 
and its reliance on foreign savings has remained around 1.5 per cent in recent period. It also 
has  a  very  comfortable  level  of  forex  reserves.  The  credit  derivatives  market  is  in  an 
embryonic  stage;  the  originate-to-distribute  model  in  India  is  not  comparable  to  the  ones 
prevailing  in  advanced  markets;  there  are  restrictions  on  investments  by  residents  in  such 
products issued abroad; and regulatory guidelines on securitisation do not permit immediate 
profit  recognition.  Financial  stability  in  India  has  been  achieved  through  perseverance  of 
prudential policies which prevent institutions from excessive risk taking, and financial markets 
from becoming extremely volatile and turbulent. 
Annex* 
Financial Stability Forum (FSF) Report: status 
In the wake of the turmoil in global financial markets, the FSF brought out a report in April 
2008  identifying  the  underlying  causes  and  weaknesses  in  the  international  financial 
markets.  The  Report  contains,  inter  alia,  proposals  of  the  FSF  for  implementation  by  end-
2008 regarding strengthening prudential oversight of capital, liquidity and risk management, 
enhancing  transparency  and  valuation,  changing  the  role  and  uses  of  credit  ratings, 
strengthening the authorities' responsiveness to risk and implementing robust arrangements 
for dealing with stress in the financial system. The Reserve Bank had put in place regulatory 
guidelines  covering  many  of  these  aspects,  while  in  regard  to  others,  actions  are  being 
initiated. In many cases, actions have to be considered as work in progress. In any case, the 
guidelines are aligned with global best practices while tailoring them to meet country-specific 
requirements at the current stage of institutional developments. The proposals made by the 
FSF and status in regard to each in India are narrated below: 
1. Strengthened Prudential Oversight of Capital, Liquidity and Risk Management 
(i) 
Capital requirements:  
Specific proposals will be issued in 2008 to:  
• 
Raise  Basel  II  capital  requirements  for  certain  complex  structured  credit 
products;  
Introduce additional capital charges for default and event risk in the trading 
books of banks and securities firms;  
Strengthen  the  capital  treatment  of  liquidity  facilities  to  off-balance  sheet 
conduits.  
  Changes will be implemented over time to avoid exacerbating short-term stress. 
Liquidity:  
Supervisory  guidance  will  be  issued  by  July  2008  for  the  supervision  and 
management of liquidity risks. 
Oversight of risk management: 
Guidance for supervisory reviews under Basel II will be developed that will:  
• 
Strengthen oversight of banks' identification and management of firm-wide 
risks;  
Strengthen oversight of banks' stress testing practices for risk management 
and capital planning purposes;  
 BIS Review 122/2008
(ii) 
(iii) 
10 
 (iv) 
Require banks to soundly manage and report off-balance sheet exposures; 
• 
Supervisors will use Basel II to ensure banks' risk management, capital buffers and 
estimates of potential credit losses are appropriately forward looking. 
Over-the-counter derivatives:  
Authorities  will  encourage  market  participants  to  act  promptly  to  ensure  that  the 
settlement,  legal  and  operational  infrastructure  for  over-the-counter  derivatives  is 
sound.  
The  road-map  for  the  implementation  of  Basel  II  in  India  has  been  designed  to  suit  the 
country-specific conditions. The phased implementation process got underway with the Basel 
II Accord being made applicable to foreign banks operating in India and Indian banks having 
operational  presence  outside  India  with  effect  from  March  31,  2008.  All  other  commercial 
banks  (except  Local  Area  Banks  and  RRBs)  are  encouraged  to  migrate  to  Basel  II  in 
alignment  with  them  but  in  any  case  not  later  than  March  31,  2009.  The  process  of 
implementation is being monitored on an on-going basis for calibration and fine-tuning.  
The minimum capital to risk-weighted asset ratio (CRAR) in India is placed at 9 per cent, one 
percentage  point  above  the  Basel  II  requirement.  Further,  regular  monitoring  of  banks' 
exposure  to  sensitive  sectors  and  their  liquidity  position  is  also  undertaken.  In  India,  off-
balance sheet vehicles in the form of SPVs for the purpose of securitisation are in existence 
for which extensive guidelines, in line with the international best practices, have already been 
issued.  Liquidity  facilities  to  such  SPVs  are  subject  to  capital  charge.  Banks  have  been 
required to put in place appropriate stress test policies and relevant stress test frameworks 
for various risk factors by March 31, 2008.  
In order to further strengthen capital requirements, the credit conversion factors, risk weights 
and provisioning requirements for specific off-balance sheet items including derivatives have 
been  reviewed.  Further,  in  India,  complex  structures  like  synthetic  securitisation  have  not 
been  permitted  so  far.  Introduction  of  such  products,  when  found  appropriate,  would  be 
guided by the risk management capabilities of the system. 
The  Reserve  Bank  had  issued  broad  guidelines  for  asset-liability  management  and  banks 
have  flexibility  in  devising  their  own  risk  management  strategies  as  per  board-approved 
policies.  However,  in  regard  to  liquidity  risks  at  the  very  short  end,  the  Reserve  Bank  has 
taken  steps  to  mitigate  risks  at  the  systemic  level  and  at  the  institution  level  as  well.  The 
Reserve Bank has introduced greater granularity to measurement of liquidity risk by splitting 
the first time bucket (1-14 days, at present) into three time buckets, viz., next day, 2-7 days 
and 8-14 days. The net cumulative negative mismatches in the three time buckets have been 
capped at 5 per cent, 10 per cent, and 15 per cent of the cumulative cash outflows. 
The  Reserve  Bank  had  recognised  the  risks  of  allowing  access  to  unsecured  overnight 
market  funds  to  all  entities  and,  therefore,  restricted  the  overnight  unsecured  market  for 
funds only to banks and primary dealers (PD). Since August 2005, the overnight call market 
is  a  pure  inter-bank  market.  Accordingly,  trading  volumes  have  shifted  from  the  overnight 
unsecured market to the collateralised market.  
Greater  inter-linkages  and  excessive  reliance  on  call  money  borrowings  by  banks  could 
cause systemic problems. The Reserve Bank has, therefore, introduced prudential measures 
to address the extent to which banks can borrow and lend in the call money market. On a 
fortnightly average basis, call market borrowings outstanding should not exceed 100 per cent 
of capital funds (i.e., sum of Tier I and Tier II capital) in the latest audited balance sheet.  
Recognising  the  potential  of  “purchased  inter-bank  liabilities”  (IBL)  to  create  systemic 
problems, the Reserve Bank had issued guidelines in March 2007 prescribing that IBL of a 
bank should not exceed 200 per cent of its net worth (300 per cent for banks with a CRAR 
more than 11.25 per cent).  
BIS Review 122/2008 
 11
2. Enhancing Ttransparency and Valuation 
(i) 
Robust risk disclosures: 
• 
The  FSF  strongly  encourages  financial  institutions  to  make  robust  risk 
disclosures using leading disclosure practices at the time of their mid-year 
2008 reports.  
Further  guidance  to  strengthen  disclosure  requirements  under  Pillar  3  of 
Basel II will be issued by 2009.  
 (ii) 
(iii) 
Standards for off-balance sheet vehicles and valuations: Standard setters will take 
urgent action to:  
• 
Improve  and  converge  financial  reporting  standards  for  off-balance  sheet 
vehicles;  
Develop guidance on valuations when markets are no longer active, establishing an 
expert advisory panel in 2008. 
Transparency in structured products: 
Market  participants  and  securities  regulators  will  expand  the  information  provided 
about securitised products and their underlying assets.  
The  Reserve  Bank  has,  over  the  years,  issued  guidelines  on  valuation  of  various 
instruments/assets  in  conformity  with  the  international  best  practices  while  keeping  India-
specific conditions in view. In order to encourage market discipline, the Reserve Bank has 
developed a set of disclosure requirements which allow the market participants to assess key 
pieces  of  information  on  capital  adequacy,  risk  exposure,  risk  assessment  processes  and 
key  business  parameters  which  provide  a  consistent  and  understandable  disclosure 
framework  that  enhances  comparability.  Banks  are  also  required  to  comply  with  the 
Accounting  Standard  (AS)  on  Disclosure  of  Accounting  Policies  issued  by  the  Institute  of 
Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI).  
In recognition of the fact that market discipline can contribute to a safe and sound banking 
environment and as part of the ongoing efforts to implement the Basel II Accord, the Reserve 
Bank issued guidelines on minimum capital ratio (Pillar 1) and market discipline (Pillar 3) in 
April  2007  and  guidelines  for  Pillar  2  (supervisory  review  process)  were  issued  in  March 
2008. Under these guidelines, non-compliance with the prescribed disclosure requirements 
would attract a penalty, including financial penalty. 
Changes in the Role and Uses of Credit Ratings 
3.  
Credit rating agencies should:  
• 
Implement  the  revised  IOSCO  Code  of  Conduct  Fundamentals  for  Credit  Rating 
Agencies to manage conflicts of interest in rating structured products and improve 
the quality of the rating process;  
Differentiate ratings on structured credit products from those on bonds and expand 
the information they provide.  
 Regulators will review the roles given to ratings in regulations and prudential frameworks. 
The Reserve Bank has undertaken a detailed process of identifying the eligible credit rating 
agencies  whose  ratings  may  be  used  by  banks  for  assigning  risk  weights  for  credit  risk. 
Banks should use the chosen credit rating agencies and their ratings consistently for each 
type of claim, for both risk weighting and risk management purposes. Banks are not allowed 
to “cherry pick” the assessments provided by different credit rating agencies. If a bank has 
decided to use the ratings of some of the chosen credit rating agencies for a given type of 
claim, it can use only the ratings of those credit rating agencies, despite the fact that some of 
12 
 BIS Review 122/2008
these claims may be rated by other chosen credit rating agencies whose ratings the bank 
has decided not to use. External assessments for one entity within a corporate group cannot 
be used to risk weight other entities within the same group.  
Banks  must  disclose  the  names  of  the  credit  rating  agencies  that  they  use  for  the  risk 
weighting  of  their  assets,  the  risk  weights  associated  with  the  particular  rating  grades  as 
determined by the Reserve Bank through the mapping process for each eligible credit rating 
agency as well as the aggregated risk weighted assets as required. 
In India, complex structures like synthetic securitisations have not been permitted so far. As 
and  when  such  products  are  to  be  introduced,  the  Reserve  Bank  would  put  in  place  the 
necessary enabling regulatory framework, including calibrating the role and capacity building 
of the rating agencies.  
4.  
• 
Strengthening the Authorities' Responsiveness to Risks 
A  college  of  supervisors  will  be  put  in  place  by  end-2008  for  each  of  the  largest 
global financial institutions.  
In the Indian context, there has been exchange of supervisory information on specific issues 
between  the  Reserve  Bank  and  few  other  overseas  banking  supervisors/regulators. 
Supervisory cooperation has been working smoothly and efficiently. 
The Mid-Term Review of October 2007 had announced the constitution of a Working Group 
to  lay  down  a  road-map  for  adoption  of  a  suitable  framework  for  cross-border  supervision 
and  supervisory  cooperation  with  overseas  regulators,  consistent  with  the  framework 
envisaged in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). A Working Group was 
constituted in March 2008 and is in the process of finalising its Report. A number of overseas 
regulators  of  countries  such  as  the  USA,  the  UK,  Canada,  Hong  Kong,  Australia  and 
Singapore have been formally approached to share  systems and practices, including legal 
positions, in the matter of supervisory cooperation and sharing of information with overseas 
regulators.  The  response  from  a  few  countries  has  been  received  and  is  being  examined. 
The  “Supervisory  College”  arrangement  for  this  purpose  is  also  being  examined  by  the 
Group. 
5.  
• 
Robust Arrangements for Dealing with Stress in the Financial System 
Central  banks  will  enhance  their  operational  frameworks  and  authorities  will 
strengthen their cooperation for dealing with stress. 
In the Reserve Bank, there is an institutional arrangement in place to oversee the functioning 
of the financial markets on a daily basis. There is a Financial Market Committee monitoring 
and  assessing  the  functioning  of  different  financial  markets.  Based  on  such  an  oversight, 
appropriate and prompt action is taken, whenever necessary. 
The  Reserve  Bank  has  the  necessary  framework  for  provision  of  liquidity  to  the  banking 
system, in terms of Sections 17 and 18 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934. The regular 
liquidity management facilities of the Reserve Bank include the LAF, OMO and MSS besides 
standing  facilities  such  as  export  credit  refinance  (ECR)  and  the  liquidity  facility  for 
standalone PDs. The Reserve Bank can undertake purchase/sale of securities of the Central 
or  State  Governments  and  can  purchase,  sell  and  rediscount  bills  of  exchange  and 
promissory notes drawn on and payable in India and arising out of bona fide commercial or 
trade  transactions  for  provision/absorption  of  liquidity  for  normal  day-to-day  liquidity 
management operations as also for provision of emergency liquidity assistance to the banks 
under the lender of last resort function. 
The  Reserve  Bank  is  empowered  under  the  existing  legal  framework  to  deal  with  the 
resolution  of  weak  and  failing  banks.  The  Banking  Regulation  Act  provides  the  legal 
framework for voluntary amalgamation and compulsory merger of banks under Sections 44 
BIS Review 122/2008 
 13
(A) and 45, respectively. The Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation (DICGC) 
offers deposit insurance cover in India. The mergers of many weak private sector banks with 
healthy  banks  have  improved  overall  stability  of  the  system.  Not  a  single  scheduled 
commercial bank in the country has capital adequacy ratio which is less than the minimum 
regulatory requirement of nine per cent. 
* Source: Annual Policy Statement for the Year 2008-09, Reserve Bank of India. 
References: 
Henry,  Peter  Blair  (2007),  “Capital  Account  Liberalization:  Theory,  Evidence,  and 
Speculation”, Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XLV, December. 
International Monetary Fund (2008a), “Global Financial Stability Report”, October 
--- (2008b), “World Economic Outlook”, October. 
Mohan, Rakesh (2006), “Coping With Liquidity Management in India: A Practitioner's View”, 
Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, April. 
----  (2007a),  “Development  of  Financial  Markets  in  India”,  Reserve  Bank  of  India  Bulletin, 
June. 
----  (2007b),  “India's  Financial  Sector  Reforms:  Fostering  Growth  While  Containing  Risk”, 
Reserve Bank of India Bulletin, December. 
Prasad,  Eswar  S.,  Raghuram  G.  Rajan  and  Arvind  Subramanian  (2007),  “Foreign  Capital 
and Economic Growth”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1. 
Reserve Bank of India (2008), Annual Policy Statement for the Year 2008-09, April,  
World Bank (2008), “Global Development Finance 2008”, June. 
14 
 BIS Review 122/2008
