Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: The international financial crisis and its 
impact on Uganda  
Speech by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the Bank 
of Uganda, Kampala, 24 September 2008. 
 Introduction  
I.  
The current global financial turmoil is rooted to the sub prime mortgage crisis. It is a recent 
economic problem that is characterized by contraction in liquidity in the global credit markets 
and banking system. An undervaluation of the real risk in the subprime market is cascading, 
rippling and ultimately severely affecting the world economy.  
The crisis began with the bursting of the United States’ housing bubble and high default rates 
on  "subprime"  and  adjustable  rate mortgages  (ARM).  Loan  incentives, such  as  easy  initial 
terms, in conjunction with an acceleration in rising housing prices encouraged borrowers to 
assume  difficult  mortgages  on  the  belief  that  these  would  be  easy  to  refinance  at  more 
favorable terms. However, once housing prices started to drop moderately in 2006–2007 in 
many parts of the U.S., refinancing became more difficult. Defaults and foreclosure activity 
increased dramatically, as easy initial terms expired. Home prices failed to go up as originally 
anticipated,  and  ARM  interest  rates  reset  higher.  Foreclosures  accelerated  in  the  United 
States in late 2006 and triggered a global financial crisis through 2007 and 2008.  
Effects of the crisis on Uganda 
II.  
Uganda’s  macroeconomic  conditions  and  the  entire  financial  system  are  generally  robust, 
healthy, and better able to weather the ongoing financial storm in the global economy. First, 
Uganda’s  financial  institutions  had  not  invested  in  derivatives  that  had  exposure  to  these 
investment  bankers.  Better  supervisory  oversight  and  risk  management  practices  have 
strengthened  bank  balance  sheets  while  Bank  asset  quality,  profitability,  and  capital 
adequacy have also improved remarkably over recent years.  
Second, our real estate sector is also unlikely to be negatively affected since our relatively 
young real estate companies are not linked to the international organizations that have failed. 
Our company valuations are therefore unlikely to be adversely affected.  
Uganda’s economy resilience also stems from improved economic policies and institutional 
frameworks built over the last two decades. The banking and the entire financial system are 
stronger after years of restructuring. These have not only favored price stability and a firm 
base  for  sustained  economic  growth,  but  have  also  increased  the  country’s  resilience  to 
shocks generated by adjustments in international financial markets.  
For  example,  since  late  2007,  as  the  subprime-generated  financial  turmoil  gained 
momentum,  Uganda’s  continued  economic  expansion  has  not  been  adversely  affected.  In 
fact, according to Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS), real economic growth was registered 
at 9.8 percent in 2007/08 and is projected at 8.1 percent in 2008/09.  
Although direct exposure to crisis-related debt is very limited, vulnerabilities in sub-Saharan 
financial markets may become more exposed. As a result, perceived risks of a protracted US 
downturn,  or  even  recession,  and  what  that  would  mean  for  Africa’s  and  in  particular 
Uganda’s growth momentum may be intensified.  
The economic slowdown in the US and Europe could naturally affect demand for Uganda’s 
exports.  Coupled  with  the  pass-through  effects  of  ongoing  price  hikes  in  oil  and  food-
BIS Review 118/2008 
 1
commodities,  the  harsher  external  environment  today  may  inevitably  place  downward 
pressure on our growth prospects in the immediate period.  
There  may  be  also  an  impact  from  reduced  private  transfers  to  Uganda  especially  as 
industrialized  economies  take  a  hit  in  terms  of  reduced  GDP  growth  and  market  liquidity. 
There  is  also  the  possibility  of  reduced  aid  flows  from  developed  countries  to  low  income 
countries. 
A prolonged poor performance in the industrial economies may also be reflected in reduced 
interest  from  offshore  players  in  the  Ugandan  market.  However,  given  our  strong  and 
favourable macroeconomic fundamentals, it is expected that foreign direct investment to the 
Ugandan economy will maintain a sustained upward trend.  
Conclusion 
III.  
Bank  of  Uganda  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  and  assess  the  possible  effects  of  the 
ongoing  turmoil  in  the  international  financial  market  on  Uganda’s  economy  and  will  effect 
necessary policy actions to ensure overall macroeconomic stability. However, as the country 
continues to experience robust economic growth, the Bank of Uganda is always wary of the 
vagaries of our linkage to the global financial system. In addition, the economic cooperation 
and integration being pursued both regionally and globally will aid in addressing any effects 
of the exogenous shocks on the domestic economy. 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2008
