Sada Reddy: Impact of the global crisis on Fiji’s economy 
Presentation  by  Mr  Sada  Reddy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Fiji,  to  the  Fiji 
Employers Federation, Suva, 12 November 2008. 
 Outline 
The outline of my presentation is as follows:  
• 
• 
• 
Global economic conditions 
Impact of the financial crisis on Fiji’s economy 
Summary 
Global economic conditions 
• 
  According to the latest International Monetary Fund’s World Economic Outlook, the 
“credit crunch” or “liquidity crisis” that first erupted with the US sub-prime mortgage1 
collapse  in  mid-2007  has  entered  a  new  troubled  phase  in  the  recent  months, 
unfolding as the “2008 financial crisis”. Regarded as the most severe shock since 
the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s,  the  impact  has  been  felt  across  the  global 
financial  system,  and  is  expected  to  result  in  a  major  downturn  in  the  world 
economy.  
Intensifying  solvency  concerns  have  badly  shaken  confidence,  pushing  the  global 
financial system to the brink of meltdown, leading to emergency resolutions in the 
major advanced economies. Stock markets across the globe have fallen significantly 
and  money  and  credit  markets  have  frozen,  causing  severe  stress  in  financial 
systems and resulting in the failure of several large financial institutions in the United 
States  and  Europe.  The  financial  crisis  together  with  high  energy  and  commodity 
prices is pushing many countries, including the most advanced economies, to the 
brink of economic recession. Concerted efforts by central banks and governments to 
mitigate  the  crisis,  has  seen  financial  rescue  and  economic  stimulus  packages 
amounting to billions of dollars being implemented. 
Consequently,  in  its  November  2008  forecast,  the  IMF  revised  its  global  growth 
projection  down  to  3.7  percent  from  3.9  percent  for  this  year.  The  IMF  further 
revised  the  2009  world  growth  projection  down  to  2.2  percent  from  the  earlier 
projection of 3.0 percent. We therefore expect our major trading partners to have a 
sluggish outlook for the next two years. Emerging economies, like China and India, 
are  also  expected  to  experience  some  slowdown  in  growth  but  will  continue  to 
experience  relatively  high  growth  rates  and  may  provide  some  stability  to  global 
growth.  
                                                 
1   Another term for high risk loans. 
BIS Review 138/2008 
 1
 2009(f) 
2008(f) 
Economies 
Australia 
New Zealand 
US* 
Eurozone* 
Japan* 
China* 
India* 
Singapore 
South Korea 
Source:*IMF World Economic Outlook – Nov-08; Consensus Forecast & Asia Pacific Consensus Forecast – Oct-
08 
2007 
4.2 
3.2 
2.0 
2.6 
2.1 
11.9 
9.3 
7.7 
5.0 
2.1 
1.3 
-0.7 
-0.5 
-0.2 
8.5 
6.3 
2.4 
3.8 
2.5 
0.6 
1.4 
1.2 
0.5 
9.7 
7.8 
3.0 
4.3 
Impact of the financial crisis on Fiji’s economy 
• 
Fiji’s  financial  sector:  Overall,  Fiji’s  financial  sector  is  quite  insulated  from  the 
financial markets abroad and the banking, insurance and other financial institutions 
remains sound. The crisis is affecting the financial institutions in foreign countries on 
two fronts – (1) Financial Institution’s ability to lend due to the liquidity shortage; and 
(2)  Confidence  in  the  financial  sector.  In  case  of  Fiji,  both  of  these  prominent 
features are absent since – (1) our banking system is flush with liquidity; and (2) our 
banking  institutions  are  sound  and  prudent  in  their  management  of  funds,  thus  it 
provides the confidence for the depositors.  
Regular updates and assurances by the Reserve Bank of Fiji to this effect play a key 
role in maintaining confidence in Fiji’s financial system. Moreover, unlike the foreign 
banking system, the domestic financial system is financed from local depositors and 
credit  is  extended  to  domestic  entities  –  in  this  respect,  Fiji  is  immune  from  the 
global financial crisis.  
The insurance industry is relatively sheltered from the effects of the financial crisis. 
Macroeconomic impact: Fiji, being a small open economy in the world, is heavily 
dependent on its major trading partners for trade and financial flows. Currently, the 
US, UK Japan and Eurozone are directly exposed to the financial crisis, which will 
have significant implication for other major economies around the world. In addition, 
the possibility of a recession in the US, UK, Japan and Eurozone, will definitely have 
repercussions  for  our  other  major  trading  partner  countries  (Australia  and  New 
Zealand)  given  the  strong  trade  and  financial  links  with  these  mature  economies. 
The effects of the financial crisis could indirectly trickle down to the Fijian economy 
transmitted  via  the  possibility  of  economic  downturn  in  trading  partner  economies 
which could lower demand for exports and reduced financial flows from the major 
trading partner economies. Overall, the potential risks to Fiji’s macro-economy from 
the financial crisis are on the downside. 
Impact on exports: Exports may be affected selectively. Demand for fish, mineral 
water  and  garments,  textiles  &  footwear  may  ease  somewhat  as  a  result  of  the 
slowdown  in  US,  Japan  and  Australia,  which  are  Fiji’s  major  markets  for  these 
products. Overall, a marginal adverse impact on exports is expected from the global 
slowdown. 
Impact on imports: A relatively weaker domestic economy may also weaken the 
import growth. This may be most evident in the import of intermediate goods, mainly 
oil,  and  other  investment  goods.  Lower  prices  of  commodities  in  the  international 
markets will also help weaken import growth for other food items, such as wheat, 
rice and dairy products. 
   2 
 BIS Review 138/2008
     Crude  oil  prices:  In  the  first  10  months  of  the  year,  oil  prices  have  averaged 
US$108 per barrel. Since its peak of US$146 in July, oil prices have since declined, 
currently around $US58 per barrel. Strong demand from emerging economies like 
China, combined with supply disruptions, geo-political concerns, the weak US dollar 
and  speculative  demand  amidst  the  US  financial  crisis  have  underpinned  the 
movements in oil prices. Prices are anticipated to remain high in the months ahead. 
Impact  on  tourism  and  remittances:  While  there  are  mixed  views  on  visitor 
arrivals,  there  is  a  mild  possibility  of  a  slower  growth  next  year  in  line  with  the 
economic slowdown envisaged in our major tourist markets. This in turn will lower 
tourism earnings without any compensatory increases in per diem expenditure. If the 
Asian destinations are affected, they may respond aggressively with discounts – if 
Fiji were to compete accordingly with them, yields for the domestic industry could be 
affected further. 
Remittances  may  also  be  affected,  given  that  the  labour  market  conditions  in  the 
advanced  economies  will  be  affected.  Nevertheless,  it  is  important  to  note  the 
remittance  already  started  declining  in  before  the  financial  crisis  started  in  2007. 
Therefore, this financial crisis could exacerbate the decline in remittances flows. 
Impact  on  Foreign  Direct  Investment:  Most  of  the  foreign  investments  are 
financed, in large part, through loans from external banks and other institutions. The 
tight global liquidity conditions could restrain foreign borrowing to finance investment 
in  Fiji  by  non-residents,  as  well  as  residents.  As  a  result,  FDI  into  Fiji  may  be 
affected  negatively.  On  the  other  hand,  non-residents  could  also  withdraw  their 
existing  investment  and  re-invested  earnings  to  meet  their  offshore  financial  or 
liquidity needs, especially by offloading, say real estate investments in Fiji.  
Impact  on  exchange  rate  and  competitiveness:  The  US  dollar  is  generally 
perceived to be the safest of currencies and is in high demand in times of crisis. This 
has been the case with the current financial crisis where exceptional demand for the 
US dollar has strengthened the currency while weakening other currencies. In this 
regard, the Fiji dollar is expected to weaken against the US dollar. The appreciation 
of the USD will augur well for exports to the US or goods priced in USD. However, 
this will be offset by the losses from the Australian and New Zealand dollars, both of 
which have weakened against the Fiji dollar. While it is not clear where the trading 
partner currencies are headed, there is a general agreement that the US dollar will 
continue to strengthen against the major currencies. 
In  addition,  our  external  competitiveness  could  be  affected  by  competition  from 
Asian  economies,  as  they  normally  keep  an  undervalued  exchange  rate  to  boost 
their exports and services (e.g. tourism) sectors. 
Exchange  rates:  Compared  to  the  beginning  of  the  year,  the  Fiji  dollar 
strengthened against the Australian and NZ dollars by around 12 and 13 percent, 
respectively. However, the Fiji dollar fell against the US dollar and Euro by 13 and 2 
percent, respectively. 
Impact on economic growth: The risk to the Fiji economy from the financial crisis 
is on the downside. This can be largely attributed to the expected negative effects 
emanating from the trade and financial channel. That is, if exports of mineral water, 
fish,  garments,  textiles  &  footwear  and  other  domestic  exports  (like  agro-based 
produce)  potentially  decline  then  this  will  naturally  feed  into  lower  production  in 
these sectors. In addition, any slowdown in tourism would impact the wholesale & 
retail trade, hotels and restaurants sectors, as well as, the air transport and services 
allied to transport sectors adversely. Furthermore, a reduction in remittances flows 
could suppress consumption expenditure. Similarly, lower financial flows (especially, 
FDI) could lead to a decline in investment, especially in the building & construction 
BIS Review 138/2008 
 3
 sector. Thus, domestic demand may be affected as a result of the global financial 
crisis. It is likely that the financial crisis will erode Fiji’s growth prospects somewhat. 
Impact  on  Fiji’s  monetary  policy  objectives:  In  terms  of  the  monetary  policy 
objectives,  the  global  slowdown  will  ease  inflationary  pressures.  Although  there  is 
some appreciation in the US dollar, oil prices have dropped more sharply. On a net 
basis, this is expected to ease inflationary pressures from oil.  
In contrast, it is likely that pressures on foreign reserves (the underlying position of 
the  Balance  of  Payments  (BoP))  may  increase  as  a  result  of  anticipated  weaker 
tourism  earnings  &  remittances,  lower  FDI  and  export  earnings  from  selected 
commodities. 
Consequently, the Reserve Bank of Fiji will maintain tight money and credit policies. 
Summary 
• 
The impact of the financial crisis on Fiji will be via the impact on its major trading 
partner economies  
Financial  sector  assessment  reinforces  the  soundness  of  the  banking,  insurance 
and other financial institutions  
Macroeconomic threats are firmly on the downside  
  4 
 BIS Review 138/2008
