Jean-Claude Trichet: The financial turbulence – where do we stand? 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Economic Club of New York, New York, 14 October 2008. 
 Introduction  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great honor and a pleasure for me to be invited to speak at the Economic Club of New 
York in these very challenging times for banking supervisors and central bankers.  
The  changing  nature  of  the  turbulence  over  recent  months,  together  with  the  new 
developments  over  the  past  few  weeks,  have  meant  that  the  turmoil  is  an  enormous 
challenge  for  the  financial  system  at  large,  as  well  as  for  policy  makers  and  regulators 
around the globe. Since August 2007 central bankers have been busy managing increasing 
volatility and risks in financial markets. The primary goal of a central banker and certainly of 
the ECB is to maintain price stability over the medium term and be credible in delivering price 
stability, which is a necessary condition for financial stability, if not a sufficient condition. To 
achieve this, we not only have to define the monetary policy stance and set policy rates, but 
we  also  have  to  implement  our  monetary  policy.  This  is  done  by  conducting  open  market 
operations with the aim of steering short-term interest rates on the interbank money market – 
and in particular the overnight rate – close to our main policy rate, i.e. the minimum bid rate 
in the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem. In doing so we steer the shortest end 
of the yield curve, which is the starting point of the transmission process of monetary policy, 
ultimately reaching the real economy in order to achieve price stability. 
I  would  like  to  commence  by  describing  how  the  ECB  has  implemented  monetary  policy 
during  the  financial  market  turbulence,  which  started  in  August  last  year.  In  this  context,  I 
shall  describe  how  the  Eurosystem  took  action  through  its  liquidity  provision  to  the  euro 
money market in order to ease tensions. I shall then turn to the coordinated action taken by 
central  banks,  and  how  important  it  was  for  them  to  address  effectively  tensions  in  global 
financial markets. 
In  the  second  part  of  my  intervention,  I  will  discuss  the  measures  put  in  place  by  the 
international  financial  community  to  restore  market  functioning  and  to  ensure  that  the 
weaknesses highlighted by the current market correction do not recur in the future. In this 
regard, I will cover the progress made on the implementation of the priority recommendations 
of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF),  as  well  as  policy  areas  in  which  work  is  currently 
underway, including risk management of financial institutions, procyclicality and cooperation 
between  central  banks,  supervisors  and  regulators.  I  will  conclude  with  the  most  recent 
“action  plan”  that  was  adopted  by  the  G7  in  Washington  and  on  the  “concerted  European 
action plan of the euro area countries”, which was just agreed last Sunday in Paris. 
The responses of central banks to the financial turmoil  
1.  
Over the past four weeks – in particular following the collapse of Lehman Brothers – credit 
risk  concerns  have  intensified  and  have  led  to  additional  disruptions  in  the  functioning  of 
money  markets,  not  only  in  the  United  States,  but  also  in  the  euro  area  and  Europe  in 
general.  
Central  banks  are  taking  all  the  necessary  steps  to  stop  the  downward  spiral,  and  recent 
actions have once again demonstrated their determination in this respect.  
In both “normal” and “turbulent” times, the primary objective of the Eurosystem’s open market 
operations is to keep the shorter rates, in particular, the overnight rate, as close as possible 
BIS Review 123/2008 
 1
to  the  minimum  bid  rate.  However,  during  the  recent  period  of  turbulence,  open  market 
operations have also aimed at ensuring the continued access of solvent banks to liquidity, 
notably  by  contributing  to  easing  the  impaired  functioning  of  the  money  market.  The 
Eurosystem intends to continue to follow this approach as long as necessary.  
From the first day of the financial market turbulence on 9 August 2007, in an environment of 
increased liquidity risk and in response to banks’ changed liquidity demand pattern, the ECB 
has  achieved  these  objectives  through  making  technical  changes  to  the  way  in  which  it 
supplies  liquidity  in  normal  times,  while  also  utilising  the  full  latitude  of  its  framework  for 
monetary policy implementation.  
First, the Eurosystem has adjusted the distribution of liquidity supplied over the course of the 
reserve maintenance period by frontloading, relative to normal times, the supply of liquidity at 
the beginning of the maintenance period and reducing it later. In this way, the total supply of 
liquidity over the entire maintenance period remained unchanged and, at the same time, the 
changed pattern in banks’ liquidity demand was satisfied without putting pressure on short-
term interest rates. In addition, last month the ECB enlarged the provision of liquidity at its 
regular weekly main refinancing operations, well above the amount normally envisaged by 
the frontloading approach, with the aim of further strengthening its liquidity intermediation at 
a  time  of  significant  rigidity  in  the  euro  money  market.  The  ECB  then  reabsorbed  the 
resulting  excess  of  liquidity  on  a  daily  basis  through  overnight  fine-tuning  operations,  and 
continued to rebalance the liquidity conditions towards the end of the reserve maintenance 
period. 
Second, the Eurosystem has supplied liquidity to the banking system by using open market 
procedures, which were very rarely, if at all, used before the start of the turbulence.  
1. 
The  use  of  fine-tuning  operations  has  been  much  more  frequent  than  in  “normal 
times”  because  of  the  volatility  in  banks’  liquidity  demand  and  the  difficulty  of 
producing a reliable ex-ante estimate of the overall liquidity conditions. In particular, 
I would like to mention that the ECB made recourse to these operations repeatedly 
in  August  2007  and  again  in  September  this  year  to  provide  overnight  liquidity  in 
addition  to  the  liquidity  provided  at  its  weekly  main  refinancing  operations.  In 
addition,  as  already  mentioned,  in  the  past  two  weeks,  overnight  fine  tuning 
operations  have  been  used  regularly  to  re-absorb  the  excess  liquidity  provided  to 
the euro money market.  
The Eurosystem has very significantly increased the average maturity of its lending 
to euro area banks. The outstanding amount of refinancing provided via longer-term 
refinancing operations has increased by around €270 billion since 2007. The latest 
measure in this respect consists of a series of special term refinancing operations 
with a maturity of six weeks, which were launched in September 2008 and will be 
continued until at least beyond the end of the year. Consequently, and in order to 
keep the total amount of outstanding refinancing unchanged, the amount of liquidity 
provided  via  the  one-week  main  refinancing  operations  has  been  reduced 
correspondingly.  
On 8 October, due to intensified tensions in the financial market, the ECB took the 
absolutely  exceptional  decision  to  adopt  a  fixed  rate  tender  procedure  with  full 
allotment for all its weekly main refinancing operations as long as market conditions 
dictate. 
2. 
3. 
Third,  in  October  2008  the  ECB  reduced  the  corridor  of  the  standing  facilities  around  the 
interest rate on the main refinancing operations was reduced from 200 basis points to 100 
basis points. 
These  measures,  which  reflect  the  increasing  intermediation  role  assumed  by  the 
Eurosystem  during  this  period  of  turbulence,  have  contributed  to  the  stabilisation  of 
conditions in the euro money market, to containing the volatility in the very short-term rates, 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2008
especially  in  the  overnight  rate  as  measured  through  the  so-called  EONIA,  and  to  limiting 
somewhat the volatility in the three-month Euribor, even if the behaviour of the money market 
remained extremely tense, as was also the case in New York. 
Cooperation between central banks in the field of monetary policy 
It  is  important  to  recall  that  as  the  financial  market  turbulence  developed  ,  central  banks 
strengthened  the  already  remarkable  levels  of  cooperation,  first,  through  enhanced 
information  exchange  and  collective  monitoring  of  market  developments  and,  later  on, 
through  coordinated  steps  to  provide  liquidity.  Since  December  2007,  the  ECB,  in 
cooperation with the US Federal Reserve System and the Swiss National Bank, has been 
conducting  term  auction  facilities  –  so-called  TAF  operations  –  in  which  it  provides  USD 
liquidity on behalf of the US Fed to euro area banks against ECB eligible collateral. These 
operations  do  not  have  a  direct  impact  on  euro  liquidity  conditions  and  are  aimed  at 
improving global funding conditions.  
In this respect I would like to stress that to my knowledge this was the first joint action of that 
kind ever taken by central banks to relieve pressures in the short term funding markets.  
Yesterday at 8 a.m. Central European Time and 2 a.m. in New York, the ECB announced, 
together  with  the  Bank  of  England  and  the  Swiss  National  Bank,  that  –  thanks  to  a  swap 
agreement with the Federal Reserve System – we will conduct tenders of US dollars funding 
at 7-day, 28-day and 84-day maturities at fixed interest rates for full allotment. Counterparties 
in  these  operations  will  be  able  to  borrow  any  amount  they  wish  against  the  appropriate 
collateral  in  each  jurisdiction.  This  is  a  “world  premiere”  in  exceptionally  confident 
cooperation between central banks. 
Another exceptional “first” at global level was the coordinated reduction in policy rates by the 
same amount of 50 basis points, which was decided by a large number of central banks from 
the G10 countries. It was justified by the fact that the intensification of the financial crisis had 
further diminished the upside risks to price stability and that central banks were considered to 
have regained control of inflation expectations. 
The role of the Eurosystem operational framework during the financial market 
turbulence 
The current financial market turbulence has certainly provided the biggest challenge to the 
operational framework of the Eurosystem since its inception more than ten years ago. The 
recent experience has so far proved that some of the structural features of our framework 
have  had  an  important  role  in  stabilising  short-term  money  market  rates,  signalling  the 
monetary policy stance and contributing to financial stability.  
More  precisely,  the  Eurosystem’s  operational  framework  is  characterised,  first,  by  a  large 
number of counterparties eligible for refinancing operations and marginal lending facility. This 
facilitates the direct provision of liquidity to a large number of banks in need of it, at a time 
when the money market is working imperfectly. 
Second,  the  Eurosystem  accepts  a  wide  range  of  collateral  eligible  for  its  refinancing 
operations.  This  has  facilitated  the  raising  of  liquidity  via  the  Eurosystem  for  banks  with 
reduced  access  to  the  interbank  market,  at  the  same  time  economising  through  their 
operations  with  the  Eurosystem  on  those  few  types  of  assets  that  have  continued  to  be 
tradable  throughout  the  turbulence,  such  as  government  bonds.  In  this  respect,  the 
framework may have also supported the continued functioning of capital markets. 
Third,  the  large  size  of  its  refinancing  operations  (around  one  third  of  total  assets  in  the 
Eurosystem balance sheet – or €450 billion) has allowed the Eurosystem to provide longer 
term refinancing to banks at a large scale, and at the same time to continue to adequately 
steer liquidity in the course of the maintenance period. 
BIS Review 123/2008 
 3
Implications for central banks, financial regulators and supervisors  
2.  
At the level of the international community, we have adopted a methodology for responding 
to the present turmoil and working out what lessons can be drawn from the crisis: the FSF, 
created  after  the  Asian  crisis,  coordinates  global  efforts  towards  creating  a  more  resilient 
financial  system.  By  April  2008,  the  FSF  had  reached  consensus  on  a  set  of  67  policy 
recommendations  aimed  at  addressing  the  vulnerabilities  identified  in  the  global  financial 
system. Some of these recommendations concern structural changes and thus can only be 
implemented  over  the  medium  term.  However,  a  number  of  priority  areas  calling  for 
immediate  action  were  identified  and  the  relevant  recommendations  are  already  being 
implemented by the competent authorities and the industry. In this respect, a major priority 
area involves the disclosure of financial institutions’ structured finance-related exposures and 
their valuation practices. Many large global banks have already applied the methodology set 
out in the FSF report to their holdings of complex and illiquid instruments in their mid-year 
financial reports. By doing so, they have demonstrated the willingness of the private sector to 
contribute to strengthening market confidence by increasing transparency. I strongly support 
this development and believe that the example set by these banks should be followed by a 
wider range of institutions. 
Furthermore, guidance on transparency has been provided and is being further developed by 
the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  public  sector  initiatives,  such  as  the 
European  and  the  American  Securitisation  Fora.  In  the  same  vein,  the  International 
Accounting  Standards  Board  is  intensifying  its  work  to  enhance  the  accounting  and 
disclosure standards for off-balance sheet entities and to develop guidance for valuation in 
illiquid  markets.  The  ECB  is  monitoring  developments  in  this  area,  and  I  believe  that 
providing  clear  guidance  on  this  issue  is  pivotal  to  improving  the  confidence  in  and  the 
comparability of banks’ financial statements. 
Finally,  another  area  where  good  progress  has  been  made  under  the  impulse  of  the  FSF 
concerns the role of credit rating agencies, which is being clarified thanks to new regulation 
by the SEC and the revision of the IOSCO Code of Conduct. At the same time, in Europe, 
the European Commission will engage in regulatory initiatives for the credit rating agencies’ 
authorisation and supervision.  
Let  me  now  focus  on  three  issues  which  I  believe  are  especially  important  in  the  current 
context  and  for  which  transatlantic  cooperation  between  central  banks  and  financial 
regulators  is  warranted,  namely  risk  management,  procyclicality  and  financial  stability 
arrangements.  
With regard to risk management, it has become clear that the current situation in the financial 
markets  originated  for  the  large  part  in  excessive  risk-taking  and  leverage  by  financial 
institutions.  A  key  explanation  for  this  behaviour  lies  in  banks’  risk  management  systems, 
which did not appropriately price risks, resulting in the creation of capital and liquidity buffers 
that (in many cases) proved insufficient to insulate them from the dislocation in the financial 
markets.  Furthermore,  liquidity  risk  did  not  receive  enough  attention  in  banks’  overall  risk 
management. 
Strengthening  risk  management  techniques  and  procedures  is  key  in  the  current  context. 
Public  authorities  have  a  clear  role  in  this  respect,  and  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision is a major player in this field at the global level. I fully endorse the work done by 
the Basel Committee to review banks’ risk management practices, as well as the Guidance 
on  Sound  Liquidity  Risk  Management  and  Supervision,  which  was  recently  published  and 
constitutes a benchmark for the practices of financial institutions. 
The  European  Central  Bank,  as  the  ultimate  provider  of  liquidity  in  the  euro  area,  has  a 
particular  interest  in  issues  relating  to  liquidity  risk  management.  Against  this  background, 
our  work  on  liquidity  stress  testing  and  contingency  funding  plans  has  highlighted  the 
importance  of  both  banking  supervisors  and  central  banks  having  access  to  the  results  of 
liquidity  stress  tests  carried  out  by  banks  so  that  they  can  better  assess  the  potential 
4 
 BIS Review 123/2008
systemic  impact  of  a  liquidity  shock.  The  ECB  supports  the  idea  of  organising  common 
liquidity stress tests, for which participating banks would use their own stress tests based on 
a joint scenario. 
Furthermore, the contingency funding plans of large banks should be shared not only with 
banking supervisors but also with central banks, as also recommended by the FSF.  
Having said that, I would like to stress that financial institutions are ultimately responsible for 
ensuring that all relevant risks, including liquidity risk, are properly integrated into their overall 
risk management. In this vein, the full and timely implementation of the principles and best 
practice recommendations developed by both the public authorities and the industry, as well 
as a regular assessment of this implementation process, are of utmost importance. 
The  second  issue  that  I  would  like  mention  is  that  of  procyclicality,  and  in  particular  the 
extent to which the current regulatory framework could encourage the procyclical behaviour 
of financial institutions. This is a complex issue as procyclicality depends on many factors. 
Although the way in which financial institutions manage their risk is regarded by many as the 
main determinant of procyclicality, other elements such as capital requirements, accounting 
standards or banks’ compensation schemes can act as contributing factors. In terms of policy 
action in this field, in the short term, regulators are determined to avoid measures aimed at 
tightening  capital  requirements,  as  these  could  impinge  on  the  financial  standing  of  banks 
and negatively impact the supply of credit and, in turn, the whole economy. At the same time, 
the contributing factors to procyclicality must be looked at from a longer-term perspective.  
Finally,  I  would  like  to  address  the  importance  of  cross-border  cooperation  between 
central banks, supervisors and regulators in the current context. Indeed, the significant 
impact  of  the  crisis  in  the  US  sub-prime  market  on  other  parts  of  the  world  highlights  the 
importance of improving cooperation between national authorities, both for preventing and for 
resolving shocks. On the crisis prevention side, it has now been agreed that there is a need 
to reinforce multilateral surveillance at the global level. To this end, the FSF and the IMF will 
intensify their cooperation with a view to enhancing the assessment of financial stability risks 
on  a  global  scale  as  well  as  to  coordinating  possible  policy  responses.  This  endeavour 
should  be  mirrored  at  the  national  and  the  regional  level  by  heightening  the  level  of 
cooperation and exchange of information between central banks and supervisory authorities 
to establish an overall better monitoring and assessment of the risks to the financial system.  
On the crisis management side, the ECB focuses on central bank operations and on cross-
border arrangements between financial authorities. With regard to central bank operations, I 
would  underline  that  we  need  to  ensure  that  central  banks’  operational  frameworks  are 
flexible  enough  to  deal  with  extraordinary  situations.  In  this  respect,  the  Eurosystem’s 
framework  is  very  flexible.  In  terms  of  cross-border  arrangements  between  financial 
authorities,  I  would  stress  the  urgent  need  for  enhancing  cross-border  arrangements 
between  banking  supervisors  for  dealing  with  weak  banks.  In  fact,  the  global  nature  of 
financial  markets  and  the  increasing  interlinkages  between  markets  and  institutions  mean 
that  the  systemic  impact  of  a  financial  crisis  can  only  be  properly  assessed  if  supervisory 
authorities share information on the risk exposures of large institutions and on the impact of 
shocks  in  their  jurisdiction.  In  addition,  supervisory  cooperation  should  be  intensified  on  a 
cross-sector basis. Indeed, all financial sectors are impacted by market developments as the 
boundaries between financial activities are becoming increasingly blurred. More broadly, all 
competent financial authorities, central banks, supervisors and ministries of finance should 
strengthen  their  coordination  mechanisms  for  managing  a  crisis  impacting  cross-border 
financial institutions. In Europe, an important step has been taken in this direction with the 
Memorandum of Understanding signed by the financial authorities of all EU Member States 
in June 2008, which established common principles, procedures and terminology to be used 
by all parties involved in a cross-border crisis. 
BIS Review 123/2008 
 5
indispensable  because 
times  where  quick  decisions  are 
Conclusion  
We  are  experiencing  a  very  challenging  and  demanding  episode  of  the  market  correction 
which  started  more  than  a  year  ago  and  was  due  to  a  significant  underassessment  and 
underpricing  of  risks  in  global  finance.  This  fostered  extremely  high  risk–taking  behaviour, 
excessive  leverage  and  a  widespread  use  of  toxic,  obscure  and  abnormally  sophisticated 
financial instruments. In this regard, global finance was potentially unstable before the start 
of the turbulence and this was mentioned publicly, particularly in 2006 and the first part of 
2007,  by  a  number  of  speakers,  including  myself.  The  sub-prime  mortgage  crisis  has 
therefore played the role of a trigger but there was a good deal of explosive around. 
My experience of previous crises is that it is extremely important to analyse situations very 
carefully and lucidly and never to underestimate its gravity. Since 9 August 2007, we at the 
ECB realised that we were facing a very serious situation and drew all the lessons for such 
events not to be repeated. 
The  same  experiences  lead  me  to  think  that  crisis  management  is  essential  and  that  it 
requires a lucid diagnosis as well as the ability to act not only wisely and decisively but also 
in a quick fashion whenever and wherever it is necessary. 
These  are 
the  adverse 
consequences of a delayed – albeit right – decision may be considerable. Central banks, on 
both sides of the Atlantic, have in my opinion been lucid in their judgement of the situation, 
bold  in  their  decisions  and  quick  to  take  these  audacious  actions.  Let  me  only  mention 
yesterday’s decision to provide broad access to liquidity and funding in dollars. 
We are doing – and will continue to do – everything that is necessary to supply the requisite 
liquidity while preserving the solid anchoring of inflation expectations. However, we cannot, 
and should not, assume the role of executive branches. It is time for all of us to take action – 
private sector as well as public authorities – at the global level. 
From this standpoint, I am impressed by the concision of the Plan of Action that I signed, 
together with Ben Bernanke, Ministers and Governors of the G7 in Washington last Friday. 
This unusually concise five point plan shows that this is time for immediate action and not for 
eloquent rhetoric. 
It  is  such  action,  called  for  at  the  level  of  the  international  community  three  days  ago  in 
Washington by the G7, the IMFC and the G20, that the Europeans considered indispensable, 
particularly in the euro area last Sunday, with the adoption of a concerted European action 
plan. 
This plan has six dimensions: ensuring appropriate liquidity; facilitating the funding of banks 
through various means (guarantee, insurance or similar arrangements for new medium-term 
–  up  to  five  years  –  bank  senior  debt  issuance);  providing  additional  capital  resources  to 
financial 
recapitalisation  of  distressed  banks;  ensuring  appropriate 
implementation of accounting rules; and enhancing cooperation among European countries. 
The  very  day  after  the  meeting,  namely  yesterday,  a  large  number  of  euro  area  countries 
displayed their implementation of the Eurogroup commitments at the level of the Heads of 
State and Government. 
I will not hide the fact that I am impressed by the degree of responsibility and decisiveness 
that was demonstrated last Sunday and this week in the euro area. I am impressed by the 
will of the countries that share the single currency not only to work together, but also very 
closely with the United Kingdom and all EU Member States. And I see that the new decisions 
taken in the United States are further reinforcing this very impressive implementation of the 
plan that has been approved by the international community. 
This  is  no  time  for  complacency.  Central  banks  will  remain  solid  anchors  of  stability  and 
confidence. Public authorities must be alert, decisive and effective at a global level: this is not 
a problem of the industrialised countries alone; this is a global issue that has to be addressed 
institutions; 
6 
 BIS Review 123/2008
with  the  full  participation  of  the  emerging  countries.  At  the  same  time,  private  financial 
institutions and market participants must behave wisely, prudently and with a solid sense of 
responsibility. It is time to keep our composure. 
I thank you for your attention.  
BIS Review 123/2008 
 7
