Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Growth and inflation in the euro area – the 
importance of productivity in the services sector 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Lorenzo  Bini  Smaghi,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the Ludwig Erhard Lecture, Brussels, 28 October 2008. 
 Introduction1  
1.  
I would first like to thank the organisers for inviting me to give the “Ludwig Erhard Lecture” 
this year. It is both a privilege and a pleasure for me to be here today. I would like to discus 
an issue – productivity in the services sector – which might seem a bit disconnected from the 
pressing  economic  and  financial  situation  we  are  currently  experiencing.  I  will  try  to  show 
that, on the contrary, the issue is quite relevant for the conduct of economic policies and the 
prospects for recovery of our economy.  
In  my  speech  today,  I’d  like  first  of  all  to  explain  why  services  productivity  matters  to 
monetary policy. Then I’ll look at a few facts on labour productivity performance and the links 
between  productivity  and  inflation  in  the  services  sector.  Finally,  I’ll  consider  the  policy 
responses, particularly in the field of structural reforms.  
Services productivity and monetary policy 
2.  
Productivity  in  the  services  sector  matters  not  only  to  each  and  every  one  of  us  as 
consumers. It is also important for central banks in general, and for the ECB in particular. Let 
me mention three key dimensions in this respect. The first two dimensions have to do with 
the  nexus  between  productivity  and  inflation,  both  from  a  longer-term  and  a  cyclical 
perspective. 
Over  the  longer  term,  in  a  world  of  rising  commodity  prices  other  components  of  inflation 
need  to  grow  more  slowly,  if  at  all,  for  overall  inflation  to  be  in  line  with  central  banks’ 
objective  to  maintain  price  stability.  Since  energy  and  food  account  for  over  30%  of  the 
consumer  price  index  in  advanced  countries,  it  is  simple  arithmetic  that  inflation  in 
manufacturing  and  services  should  increase  at  a  pace  well  below  the  definition  of  price 
stability, which in the euro area is close to, but below 2%. For manufacturing goods this has 
been the case over the past decade, but not so for services prices. Limited competition and 
poor productivity growth have been at the root of services price inflation remaining at a pace 
that is not consistent with price stability over the medium term, as I will argue in more detail 
later.  
Second, from a more cyclical perspective, poor productivity growth may exacerbate the effect 
of  negative  supply  shocks  and,  more  generally,  tends  to  intensify  growth  slowdown.  Low 
productivity growth reduces potential output growth and makes it more likely, ceteris paribus, 
that  negative  supply  shocks  will  lead  to  very  low  growth  or  even  a  recession,  at  least 
temporarily.  This  might,  on  the  other  hand,  also  reduce  the  equilibrium  level  of  the  real 
interest rate.  
Poor  productivity  growth  also  prevents  inflation  from  falling  adequately  when  growth  is 
slowing, by keeping unit labour costs excessively high. A high degree of nominal price and 
wage rigidities slows down the response of the economy to exogenous shocks, thus making 
the economy less resilient and the adjustment process less efficient. As a consequence, the 
transmission of monetary policy is affected in important ways – mainly by decelerating the 
                                                 
1  
I thank Christophe Madaschi for his input in the preparation of these remarks. 
BIS Review 130/2008 
 1
pass-through of nominal interest rate changes to final demand and prices. Poor productivity 
growth creates inertia in both wage and price inflation and slows down the process by which 
the economy returns to its natural level of activity, thus making the task of monetary policy to 
ensure price stability more complicated.  
In the presence of structural rigidities, the central bank has to delay monetary easing when 
faced with a negative supply shock because of the persistence of inflationary pressures even 
during  the  downturn.  We  are  currently  experiencing  this  problem  in  the  euro  area,  as  the 
persistence  of  strong  underlying  wage  dynamics  in  nearly  all  countries,  in  spite  of  the 
slowdown, has maintained pressure on the underlying dynamics of inflation. In the second 
quarter of this year, for instance, in spite of the overall negative GDP growth, nominal wages 
have  increased  by  3.5%  and  unit  labour  costs  by  3.2%.  This  has  contributed  not  only  to 
sustain  higher  inflation  but  also  to  increase  unemployment,  especially  in  countries  with 
indexation.  
Finally, differences in productivity growth largely explain the divergences in price and costs 
dynamics experienced within the euro area over the last decade. These divergences do not 
have a direct impact on monetary policy, since the latter is targeted to the euro area as a 
whole,  but  rather  on  the  ability  of  some  countries  to  sustain  economic  growth  over  time. 
Countries accumulating losses of competitiveness, because of lower productivity growth, will 
have to catch up over time either through a relative pick up in productivity or through lower 
rates  of  growth  of  wages,  which  will  have  a  negative  impact  on  growth.  In  this  respect, 
structural  reforms  may  help  to  reduce  cross-country  differences  in  key  regulations  and 
institutions, and thus align adjustment processes across countries. In fact, recent research 
on the intra-euro area impact of structural reforms shows that the variance of the responses 
of  national  outputs  to  an  interest  rate  tightening  would  be  –  at  the  peak  and  after  the 
implementation of such reforms – roughly one-sixth of the level that it achieves in conditions 
of cross-country heterogeneity in terms of price and wage rigidity.2   
Key features of past productivity growth 
3. 
When comparing the euro area’s economic performance with that of the US over the longer 
term, there is evidence of clear underperformance in output growth. Since 1995, the annual 
growth rate for the euro area has averaged 2.2% per year compared with 3.1% in the US. 
One  of  the  main  reasons  for  the  euro  area’s  disappointing  performance  is  the  low  trend 
growth in labour productivity. Between 1980 and 1995, hourly labour productivity in the euro 
area grew on average by 2.3%, and between 1995 and 2007, it grew by only 1.3%. In the US 
over the same periods, the figure went from 1.2% to 2.1%.3  
Understanding developments in services is crucial to our understanding of developments in 
the economy as a whole. Services account for 69% of the euro area economy and 70% of 
total  employment.4  Private  sector  services  represent  roughly  half  of  the  economy,  and 
government-related services make up the rest. And it’s the private sector services that mainly 
account for the gap in labour productivity growth between the euro area and the US. From 
1995 to 2005 their hourly labour productivity in the euro area only grew by 1.0% compared 
with  2.9%  in  the  US.  Of  the  private  sector  services,  distribution  services,  including  the 
                                                 
2   These  results  are  obtained  using  a  multi-country  DSGE  model  of  the  euro  area,  which  is  calibrated  to  the 
three  largest  Member  States,  namely  France,  Germany  and  Italy.  Structural  reforms  were  simulated  by 
reducing the degree of price and wage rigidity and sectoral mark-ups to the lowest level prevailing in the euro 
area.  See  Altissimo,  F.,  T.  Blattner  and  S.  Siviero  (2008).  “A  Multi-Country  DSGE  Model  of  the  euro  area: 
Lessons for structural policies”, forthcoming. 
3   Figures at the sectoral level are from EUKLEMS database and are not fully comparable with figures for the 
whole economy mentioned earlier in the speech. 
4   EU KLEMS database. 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2008
wholesale  and  retail  trade  sector,  have  been  the  main  reasons  for  the  gap,  followed  by 
finance  and  business  services  (excluding  real  estate).  In  the  wholesale  and  retail  trade 
sector,  for  instance,  hourly  labour  productivity  grew  on  average  by  1.4%  in  the  euro  area, 
while it grew on average by 4.6% on the other side of the Atlantic.  
What lies behind these labour productivity developments? 
Specific policies aimed at increasing employment, particularly in the unskilled segment of the 
labour  market,  have  certainly  contributed  to  the  slowdown  in  labour  productivity  growth, 
especially  in  services,  which  are  usually  more  labour-intensive.  However,  developments  in 
labour supply are only part of the story. To a large extent, the slowdown in labour productivity 
growth  can  be  attributed  to  a  marked  slowdown  in  total  factor  productivity  (TFP)  growth, 
which is generally taken as a measure of technological progress and improvements in the 
organisation and overall efficiency of production. Between 1980 and 1995, TFP for the whole 
economy grew on average by 1.5%, before declining to 0.8% between 1995 and 2007.5 And 
private sector services significantly contributed to this decline. Indeed, TFP growth in these 
services  slowed  down  from  0.6%  between  1980  and  1995  to  -0.1%  between  1995  and 
2005.6  
Several authors, such as Oliner and Sichel (2002), have already highlighted the major role of 
innovation  and  information  and  communications  technology  (ICT)  in  the  revival  of  labour 
productivity  growth  in  the  US.7  Moreover,  it  has  been  argued  that  the  effect  of  ICT 
dissemination, as measured by ICT investment, has been particularly important in explaining 
the  differences  in  labour  productivity  growth  developments  in  some  market  ICT-using 
services  sectors  between  the  euro  area  and the  US.  Since  the  early 1980s,  investment  in 
ICT in the United States has been double that of the euro area.8 Basu and others (2003) find, 
for instance, that industries with faster growth in ICT capital in the 1980s and early 1990s 
had faster TFP growth rates in the late 1990s.9 It seems that the ICT investments in some 
private sector services in the US have sparked further innovations in managerial processes, 
procedures and organisational structures, and facilitated complementary innovations. The full 
benefits of the productivity acceleration however can only be reaped if there are no obstacles 
to  organisational  change.10  In  this  regard,  the  structural  characteristics  of  the  euro  area 
economies – as reflected by labour market rigidities and the lack of competition in product 
markets – did not allow European firms to exploit the benefits of new technologies to their full 
extent. 
Productivity and the single market 
4.  
For the ECB, long-term growth prospects matter, but our main focus is of course on inflation 
developments.  Let  me  therefore  now  turn  to  the  role  of  productivity  in  shaping  inflation 
                                                 
5   Source: European Commission. 
6   EU KLEMS database. 
7   See Oliner and Sichel (2002), “Information technology and productivity: where are we now and where are we 
going?”  Federal  Reserve  Board.  See  also  Jorgenson,  D.,  M.S.  Ho  and  K.  Stiroh  (2002),  “Information 
Technology, Education, and the Sources of Economic Growth across U.S. industries”, mimeo. 
ICT investment represented roughly 3% of GDP in the United States compared with 1.5% in the euro area 
over the period 1980-2005 (source: OECD productivity database). 
8  
9   Basu, S., J. Fernald, N. Oulton, and S. Srinivasan. 2003, “The Case of the Missing Productivity Growth: Or, 
Does  Information  Technology  Explain  why  Productivity  Accelerated  in  the  United  States  but  not  the  United 
Kingdom?”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual. 
10   See for, example, van Ark, Bart and Inklaar, Robert, 2006, “Catching up or getting stuck? Europe’s troubles to 
exploit  ICT’s  productivity  potential”,  GGDC  Research  Memorandum  GD-79,  Groningen  Growth  and 
Development Centre, University of Groningen. 
BIS Review 130/2008 
 3
dynamics  and  some  characteristics  of  inflation  in  services  more  generally.  I  will  touch  on 
inflation  at  an  area-wide  level,  but  also  –  and  mainly  –  on  inflation  differentials  within 
Monetary Union. 
At an area-wide level, unit labour costs resulting from wage and productivity developments 
are a key predictor of inflation. Wage increases not covered by productivity gains push up 
production  costs,  which  eventually  add  to  price  pressures.  When  looking  at  price 
developments across sectors, it appears that in the euro area, the prices of services have 
increased faster than the prices of goods over the last two decades. Evidence of this inflation 
gap can be found by looking at the main HICP components and gross value added deflators. 
For instance, when using the GDP deflator at factor cost, inflation in private sector services 
has  been  on  average  0.8  percentage  points  higher  than  in  the  manufacturing  sector.11 
Similar developments have been found for the US and other industrialised economies, but 
the gap in the euro area has been more persistent than in the US. The persistent divergence 
between  services  and  goods  inflation  in  the  euro  area  clearly  reflects  a  weakness  in 
productivity growth in services activities. 
Turning to individual euro area countries, several ECB studies show that the differences in 
unit labour cost developments across individual euro area countries have also clearly been 
associated with differences in their HICP inflation rates over the last ten years.12 Countries 
such  as  Greece,  Ireland,  Italy,  Luxembourg,  the  Netherlands  and  Spain,  which,  over  the 
period, had above-average unit labour cost growth rates also recorded higher-than-average 
inflation rates. When looking more closely at the contribution of wages and productivity, at 
the aggregate level, to the cross-country differentials in cost competitiveness – as captured 
by  unit  labour  costs  –  we  see  that  much  of  it  can  be  explained  by  developments  in 
compensation  per  employee.  However,  in  several  cases  which  have  experienced  major 
competitiveness  losses,  lacklustre  productivity  growth  has  been  an  important  factor 
contributing to this loss. This holds as well for sectoral cost competitiveness. For instance, 
over  the  last  ten  years,  the  gap  in  labour  productivity  growth  between  manufacturing  and 
private sector services has been more than twice as high as the gap for the average growth 
in compensation per employee. The stronger increase in unit labour costs in private sector 
services relative to the manufacturing sector has therefore been largely driven by the relative 
weakness of labour productivity growth in those services in the euro area. 
Inflation differentials across sectors and countries have of course a number of causes and 
cannot  entirely  be  attributed  to  productivity  gaps.  One  important  element  is  the  degree  of 
competition to which a sector is exposed and its impact on prices. In this respect, remaining 
institutional  restrictions  on  services  sector  competition  not  only  go  hand  in  hand  with  low 
productivity performance, but also with higher profit margins and more price stickiness. For 
instance, even though caution is required when interpreting mark-ups, it is worth mentioning 
that over the last 20 years (1981-2004) mark-ups in private sector services, defined as the 
price to marginal cost ratios, were 1.56 in the euro area compared with 1.36 in the United 
States and 1.18 in manufacturing and construction sectors in the euro area and 1.28 in the 
US.13  
Finally, extensive empirical research on price flexibility and inflation persistence shows that 
the frequency of price changes in a given month in the euro area is considerably lower than 
                                                 
11   Source: EUKLEMS – the period is 1995-2005. 
12   Two articles published by the ECB have dealt with various aspects of euro area country differentials, namely 
“Output growth differentials in the euro area: sources and implications” in the April 2007 issue of the Monthly 
Bulletin  and “Monetary  policy  and inflation differentials in a heterogeneous currency  area” in the May  2005 
issue of the Monthly Bulletin. 
13   R. Christopoulou and P. Vermeulen, (2008) “Mark-ups in the euro area and the US over the period 1981-2004: 
a comparison of 50 sectors” ECB Working Paper No 856. 
4 
 BIS Review 130/2008
in the United States. Prices change infrequently in the euro area and with notable differences 
across sectors. In the services sector – which is my main focus tonight – less than 6% of all 
retail prices change every month, a fact which points to a frequency of price adjustments that 
is  lower  than  in  every  other  sector  of  our  economy,  and  less  than  half  of  the  comparable 
frequency in the United States. Of course, this lack of flexibility in euro area services prices is 
probably  a  faithful  reflection  of  the  relatively  low  degree  of  competition  and  integration, 
implying  that  the  burden  of  adjustment  in  response  to  an  unfavourable  shock  falls 
disproportionately on changes in output, income and employment. 
Having  pointed  out 
inflation  and  competitiveness 
developments,  I’d  now  like  to  consider  how  long-term  economic  performance  can  be 
improved. 
features  of  productivity, 
these 
The policy responses: strengthening structural reforms for long-term growth 
5.  
Structural rigidities are widely held to be the main reason for Europe’s weaker productivity 
performance compared with the United States and with some other advanced industrialised 
economies. Let me point to three key policy areas where further reforms could help to spark 
medium to long-term productivity growth. 
First  of  all,  Europe  needs  more  flexible  labour  markets.  Indeed,  in  a  context  of  rapid 
technological change, it is essential to ensure that human capital can be adjusted to labour 
market  needs,  so  that  the  labour  force  remains  employable  and  flexible.  A  high  level  of 
employment  protection  legislation  may  have  a  particularly  strong  negative  impact  on 
industries  experiencing  rapid  technological  change,  since  it  may  prevent  the  efficient 
matching of workers to jobs.  
Second, increasing competition by establishing efficient and well-functioning product markets 
is also fundamental. Many studies point to the potential of competition to boost productivity 
trends by improving production efficiency and enhancing the incentive to invest and innovate. 
Nicoletti  and  others  (2006)14  find,  for  instance,  that  restrictive  product  market  regulations 
slow  the  process  of  adjustment  through  which  best  practice  production  techniques  spread 
across  borders  and  new  technologies  are  incorporated  into  production  processes.  This 
suggests that remaining cross-country differences in product market regulation can partially 
explain the recently observed divergence of productivity in OECD countries. 
In  this  respect,  the  Single  Market  has  already  yielded  major  benefits  for  the  European 
economy.15  In  telecommunications,  for  instance,  now  largely  or  fully  open  to  competition, 
labour productivity growth has significantly accelerated, from 4.4% between 1980 and 1995 
to 7.4% between 1995 and 2005 and telephone prices charged by the former monopolies for 
national  and  international  calls  were  reduced  by  more  than  40%  on  average  in  Europe 
between  2000  and  2006.  The  extension  and  deepening  of  the  internal  market  remains 
however a priority as regards the pursuit of effective competition in the energy market, the 
implementation of the Services Directive and further financial market integration.  
Third and finally, to fully exploit productivity potential, the labour and product market reforms I 
have  mentioned  need  to  be  accompanied  by  policies  which  unlock  business  potential,  by 
action to support innovation through higher investment in research and development, and by 
measures aimed at improving human capital.  
                                                 
14   P.  Conway,  D.  de  Rosa,  G.  Nicoletti  and  F.  Steiner,  2006,  “Product  market  regulation  and  productivity 
convergence”, OECD Economic Studies No 43. 
15   The European Commission recently estimated that the Single Market has created 2.75 million extra jobs and 
an additional increase in welfare of €518 per head in 2006, corresponding to a 2.15% increase in the EU’s 
GDP over the period 1992-2006 (see European Commission, “The single market: review of achievements”, 
November 2007). 
BIS Review 130/2008 
 5
Europe needs more new and dynamic firms willing to reap the benefits of opening markets 
and  to  pursue  creative  or  innovative  ventures  with  a  view  to  large-scale  commercial 
exploitation.  Notably,  it  is  new  and  smaller  firms,  rather  than  large  ones,  that  are  the  job 
creators. An entrepreneur-friendly economic environment would imply less red tape for small 
and  medium-sized  enterprises, and  help  them  to  develop at  home  and  abroad,  as  well  as 
easier access to the finance they need. Europe is significantly lagging behind in this field; its 
venture capital financing, for instance, remains only a fraction of that in the US, relative to the 
size of its economy. 
Research  and  development  as  well  as  human  capital  make  also  valuable  contributions  to 
total  factor  productivity  growth.  Moreover,  meeting  the  challenges  of  innovation  and  its 
dissemination  as  well  as  ensuring  the  labour  force’s  employability  and  flexibility  requires 
improved education and training, as well as lifelong learning. However, investment in human 
capital in Europe is still clearly inadequate for a “knowledge-intensive” economy. Europe still 
needs  to  enhance  the  quality  and  efficiency  of  its  schools  and  universities  as  well  as  to 
increase incentives for all relevant parties, including firms, to invest in human capital. 
In this connection, let me now focus more specifically on the financial services sector which 
is, within the services sector, probably the most important and, in some sense, problematic 
component. For the ECB, financial integration is essential, given its relevance to the conduct 
of  the  single  monetary  policy.  And  it  is  gradually  taking  place  across  Europe,  with 
considerable progress having already been made. The degree of integration, however, varies 
across  market  segments,  and  integration  is  generally  more  advanced  in  those  market 
segments  which  are  closer  to  the  single  monetary  policy.  While  the  euro  area  banking 
markets  for  wholesale  and  capital  market-related  activities  have  shown  clear  signs  of 
increasing  integration  since  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  the  retail  banking  segment  has 
remained  more  fragmented,  leaving  European  firms  and  consumers  unable  to  take  full 
advantage  of  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  and  the  Single  Market.  The  current 
extraordinary  conditions  in  financial  markets  should  provide  a  unique  opportunity  for 
overhauling the architecture of financial markets not only worldwide, but also within the EU 
and EMU. 
Many would argue that embarking on such reforms is probably easier said than done. And 
European  policy-makers,  notably  in  the  euro  area,  seem  to  take  for  granted  that  the 
electorate will punish them for bold reform in product and labour markets. This may explain 
why progress in the euro area has been comparatively limited. However, a recent paper from 
the  Commission  (Buti  et  al.  2008)16  suggests  that  fear  of  electoral  backlashes  may  be 
unfounded.  Moreover,  as  I  argued  earlier,  without  reforms  the  economic  costs  in  terms  of 
output and job losses will be increased, and monetary policy will be forced, sooner or later, to 
react  more  forcefully  to  continued  upward  price  pressures.  Renewed  efforts  to  raise 
productivity  –  also  in  the  services  sector  –  can  reduce  inflationary  pressures,  raise  real 
income and strengthen the resilience of our economies to the global shocks in the financial 
system and commodity prices which we are experiencing.  
Concluding remarks 
5.  
Ludwig Erhard was prized for his courageous policies, which were based on the principles of 
free  competition,  flexible  prices  and  open  markets.  On  many  occasions  he  stressed  the 
importance  of  price  stability.  In  my  view,  these  principles  still  act  as  guideposts,  helping 
Europe to cope with the shocks facing the global economy by maintaining sound and stable 
macro-economic policies, to support flexibility and innovation, and to continue with structural 
reforms.  In  this  respect,  the  thoughts  I  have  shared  with  you  here  today  confirm  that  his 
                                                 
16   M.  Buti,  A.  Turrini,  P.  Van  den  Noord  and  P.  Biroli,  2008,  “Defying  the  “Juncker  Curse”:  can  reformist 
governments be re-elected?”, European Commission Economic Papers No 324. 
6 
 BIS Review 130/2008
ideas remain valid for our times. Europe must strive to deliver growth, jobs and low inflation 
consistently over time under the Lisbon Strategy for Growth and Jobs, which aims to make 
Europe fit for the future.  
One  might  be  tempted  to  think  that  this  long  term  agenda  may  not  fit  quite  well  with  the 
shorter term challenges that we are currently facing, which is to get out of the current crisis. It 
would be a mistake. We have seen that some of the causes of the current crisis lie in the 
inappropriate functioning of certain markets, notably the financial sector. We also noted that 
the rigidities in the labour and product markets weigh on the ability of economic policies to 
effectively  address  some  of  the  shocks  that  we  are  currently  experiencing.  In  particular, 
monetary policy in the euro area is constrained by the rigidities in the labour markets that risk 
dis-anchoring  expectations  of  price  and  wage  setters.  This is  the  reason  why,  even  in  the 
current  deteriorating  economic  conditions,  monetary  policy  has  to  continue  to  be  framed 
within the established ECB strategy in which the primary objective of monetary policy is price 
stability. If this was not the case, monetary easing could be perceived to be the result of a 
change in priorities by the ECB, in favour of economic growth or financial stability rather than 
price  stability.  Economic  agents  could  expect  that  monetary  policy  would  now  be  ready  to 
accommodate higher inflation expectations, under the form of higher nominal rates of return 
or higher wages. This would lead to much worse macroeconomic results over the short and 
medium term.  
Going forward, the stance of monetary policy will continue to be adapted on the basis of the 
primary objective of price stability – a rate of inflation close but less than 2%. The stronger is 
the  underlying  growth  of  productivity,  especially  in  the  services  sector,  the  higher  are  the 
prospects to achieve such a target, the greater the room for manoeuvre for monetary policy 
to adapt to the weakening of economic conditions. The current economic difficulties do not 
justify any stop, or reversal of reforms. On the contrary, it’s time to accelerate them. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 130/2008 
 7
