Jean-Pierre Roth: Steps to strengthen the Swiss financial system 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National  Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements, at the news conference, Bern, 16 October 2008. 
 Pursuant  to  art.  5  of  the  Swiss  National  Bank  Act  (NBA),  the  SNB  shall  contribute  to  the 
development of our economy and the proper functioning of our monetary system. 
This  is  why  the  SNB  has  decided  to  extend  a  loan  not  exceeding  USD  54  billion  to  the 
special purpose vehicle (SPV) set up to take over illiquid assets currently held by UBS. A 
similar offer has also been extended to the CS Group, which has refrained from making use 
of such a possibility. 
For the SNB, this operation is highly unusual, both with regard to its scope and the reasons 
for it. 
Scope of operation 
As  to  the  scope  of  the  operation,  USD  54  billion  is  clearly  a  substantial  amount  for  the 
National  Bank.  I  would  like  to  emphasise,  however,  that  the  loan  amount  is  entirely 
guaranteed by the portfolio assigned by UBS, i.e. securities valued at USD 60 billion in the 
UBS balance sheet. Given the fact that in the past twelve months, UBS has made aggressive 
write-downs  on  its  risky  positions  and  that  its  portfolio  is  fairly  diversified  (it  does  not  only 
consist of toxic assets), we feel that the risk of further losses on this portfolio is limited. We 
will, in any event, reassess the value of each portfolio component before making the transfer 
to the special purpose vehicle. The lowest valuation will be applied. 
To secure initial financing for the operation, we will obtain US dollars through a Dollar-Swiss-
Franc swap with the Federal Reserve. Thereafter, we will turn to the market for refinancing. 
The SNB will therefore not incur any currency risk. Since the entire operation will be effected 
in US dollars, it will not affect the National Bank's monetary policy in any way. 
Reasons for operation 
This operation is nevertheless unprecedented with regard to the reasons for it. In carrying it 
out, we are making a contribution to an essential element of the Swiss financial system, at a 
time when financial markets have been in turmoil for some months now. A better functioning 
of the financial markets – in particular the banking sector – is essential so that our country 
will  be  able  to  weather  the  economic  difficulties  resulting  from  the  anticipated  global 
economic slowdown in the months ahead. It is therefore preferable that we go ahead with 
this operation now, in an orderly fashion, despite the fact that the markets have regained a 
certain degree of optimism in the past few days – rather than at a later point under potentially 
more adverse conditions. 
The Federal Council and the Swiss Federal Banking Commission have been kept abreast of 
the preparations underway and our negotiations with UBS. 
BIS Review 125/2008 
 1
