Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Prospects for the Islamic financial 
industry against the background of the current global financial turmoil 
Keynote address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central 
Bank  of  Bahrain,  at  the  AAOIFI-World  Bank  Annual  Conference  on  Islamic  Banking  and 
Finance, Manama, 10 November 2008. 
 Distinguished Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  participate  in  the  Opening  Ceremony  of  this  Conference  and  in  the 
Graduation Ceremony for the “Certified Shari’a Adviser and Auditor”, and “Certified Islamic 
Professional Accountant’ programmes. In addition to congratulating the graduating students, 
I  should  like  to  thank  the  many  distinguished  speakers  who  will  be  appearing  during  the 
Conference, as well as the event organisers. Particular thanks are due to the World Bank for 
their support for this event. 
Against the background of the current global financial turmoil, it appears good time to take 
stock of the prospects for the Islamic financial industry. 
In  recent  months,  as  the  global  financial  crisis  has  deepened,  there  have  been  many 
commentators who have pointed to the relative success of the Islamic financial sector. So 
far, Islamic financial institutions have escaped relatively unscathed from the severe downturn 
which is affecting most conventional financial institutions. This certainly presents the industry 
with an opportunity to continue its successful growth of recent decades. 
Because  interest-based  transactions  are  prohibited,  Islamic  finance  encourages  business 
and  trade  activities  that  generate  fair  and  legitimate  profit.  The  prohibition  on  speculative 
activity also helps to ensure that there is a close link between financial flows and productive 
activities.  These  intrinsic  properties  of  Islamic  finance  contribute  towards  insulating  it  from 
the potential risks resulting from excess leverage and speculative financial activities. 
But  while  Islamic  financial  institutions  have  been  largely  sheltered  from  the  present  crisis, 
there is no room for complacency. It is inevitable that they will be affected to some degree, 
as they are part of the wider global economic system. The effects of the global financial crisis 
on the real economy has the potential to transmit shocks to Shari’a compliant institutions as 
well. This means that there must be a very high priority placed on sound management and 
risk management practices at Islamic financial institutions. 
As  I  have  pointed  out  in  the  past,  the  sensational  growth  of  the  industry  in  recent  years, 
combined with high levels of liquidity, has meant that Islamic banks have not needed to fight 
for funding or ideas. New entrants to the industry have merely tended to copy the strategies 
they see being successfully pursued by their more established rivals. As a result, a very high 
percentage of Islamic banks have a strategy that is heavily weighted towards real estate and 
asset finance. 
The downturn in global economic conditions will provide these business models with a stern 
test. Project-driven business strategies will be affected by the reduction in global liquidity and 
the  slowing  of  global  economic  growth.  Islamic  financial  institutions  will  need  to  plan  and 
prepare for these more challenging operating conditions. 
The industry needs to respond to this challenge by developing a greater diversity of business 
models, more diverse and stable income sources, and more rigorous risk management and 
stress testing techniques to assess its preparedness to deal with any downturn in economic 
activity. 
The essential consideration in Islamic finance, as in all forms of finance, is to find the right 
balance between business development and risk management. There are certain measures 
BIS Review 161/2008 
 1
that  the  Central  Bank  of  Bahrain  can  take  to  assist  Islamic  financial  institutions  in  this 
process.  We  have  recently  launched  an  Islamic  Sukuk  liquidity  instrument,  which  is  a 
repurchase agreement  that  enables  financial  institutions,  both  conventional  and  Islamic,  to 
access short-term liquidity against the Government of Bahrain Ijara Sukuk. At the same time, 
however, the primary responsibility for sound risk management and control resides with the 
firms  themselves.  The  principles  and  standards  developed  by  AAOIFI  provide  Islamic 
financial  institutions  with  a  sound  basis  on  which  to  manage  their  activities.  Those  of  you 
today,  who  are  graduating  with  the  qualification  of  “Certified  Shari’a  Adviser  and  Auditor”, 
and  “Certified  Islamic  Professional  Accountant”,  will  be  at  the  forefront  of  Islamic  financial 
institutions’ ability to manage, monitor and control their risks in the future. 
There is a continuing need for high quality human resources in the industry. Islamic banking 
has  been  growing  so  fast  that  it  has  been  difficult  for  institutions  to  find  enough  skilled  or 
qualified  staff.  This  is  why  the  CBB  has  participated  with  Islamic  institutions  in  Bahrain  in 
setting  up  the  Waqf  Fund  to  provide  financial  and  technical  support  in  upgrading  training 
programmes  and  introducing  new  ones.  We  are  now  beginning  to  see  a  larger  number  of 
financiers  qualified  in  Shari’a  related  subjects  and  this  can  only  be  to  the  benefit  of  the 
Islamic finance industry. 
The two courses which are graduating today, are both challenging study programmes, and 
congratulations belong first and foremost to those students who have successfully completed 
them. Doing so has required hard work and commitment. It is an achievement to be proud of, 
and one that I am sure will serve you in good stead, as you further develop your professional 
careers. 
Let me conclude by wishing the graduating students all the best in their future careers, and to 
wish you all a very successful Conference. 
2 
 BIS Review 161/2008
