José De Gregorio: Financial stability, monetary policy and central 
banking   
Introductory speech by Mr José De Gregorio, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, to the 
12th annual conference of the Central Bank of Chile “Financial stability, monetary policy and 
central banking”, Santiago, 6 November 2008. 
 Welcome  to  this  12th  Conference  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  entitled  Financial  Stability, 
Monetary  Policy  and  Central  Banking,  which  will  gather  a  select  group  of  central  bankers, 
experts and academics today and tomorrow.  
I  cannot  open  this  conference  without  sending  my  most  heartfelt  condolences  to  Klaus 
Schmidt-Hebbel,  our  former  director  of  Economic  Research  and  creator  of  this  series  of 
conferences, and to all his family, on behalf of the Central Bank of Chile and myself, for the 
terrible loss of his beloved son Diego. To him we dedicate these two days' work. 
Like  every  year  since  1997,  we  are  looking  forward  to  two  days  of  intensive  work  with 
discussions of the highest technical level, which usually have opened areas for us to develop 
our research agenda with rigor and relevance, in an ever more complex world. 
This version of our Annual Conference finds us in the midst of severe global financial crisis. 
After the Asian crisis, many of us wondered about where the next blow would come from and 
what shape it would take.  
The academic literature has analyzed foreign exchange and financial crises in small, open 
economies. First there were the first-generation fiscal and currency crises, which gave way to 
second-generation crises such as the one endured by the European monetary system in the 
early  1990s,  and  finally  to  third-generation  ones  occurring  in  Asia.  All  of  them  featured  a 
variety of origins and transmission mechanisms.  
Now  we  are  facing  an  international  financial  episode  that  many  concur  in  labeling  as  the 
worst since the Great Depression, which originated in the developed economies, particularly 
the United States. Its initial symptoms are known: rapid financial innovation, credit expansion 
and asset price bubble. Its progression and repercussions, however, are unprecedented.  
On the other hand, our better understanding of the distortions that bad macroeconomic and 
financial  policies  can  trigger,  has  made  emerging  economies  in  general,  and  Chile  in 
particular, build a strong position to deal with a very weak international scenario. There is no 
better moment than this to get together and exchange our visions and opinions, and draw the 
first lessons from the events unfolding in the world economy. 
I  want  to  begin  with  some  comments  on  the  present  crisis.  This  episode  has  several 
unprecedented aspects stemming mainly from the complexity and sophistication of financial 
institutions and instruments, in a context of high financial and trade globalization.  
Of course, some elements have been observed before, such as the loss of confidence in key 
financial  institutions  by  investors  and  the  general  public,  and  the  uncertainty  regarding  its 
duration. 
As we all know, this crisis started little over a year ago, with the end of the real estate boom 
in developed economies, which would end up exposing both the weakness and the excesses 
of  the  subprime  mortgage  loans.  However,  and  as  was  apparent  in  the  subsequent 
developments,  the  problem  went  far  beyond  lending  to  agents  with  low  payment  capacity. 
Overall, an asset price bubble, particularly in the housing sector, fueled by an accelerated 
credit expansion has proven to be a dreadful combination. Maybe bubbles cannot be made 
to  disappear,  but  the  integrity  of  the  financial  system  must  be  preserved  and  requires 
continuous monitoring. 
BIS Review 134/2008 
 1
The collapse of Lehman Brothers can be considered a landmark event that took the financial 
markets from a period of turmoil to a major crisis. In fact, after the downfall of this investment 
bank, commercial banks in developed economies, regardless of size, began fearing that their 
counterparts  might  go  broke  and  stopped  lending  to  each  other,  which  nearly  dried  up  an 
already  precarious  interbank  market.  Every  fragility  indicator  in  this  market,  and  stock 
exchanges around the world, reflected the onset of a confidence crisis.  
Whether or not it was a prudent decision to let Lehman Brothers go bust will be argued over 
for years to come, an institution whose fragility was common knowledge since early this year. 
Probably some bet on a Bear-Sterns-type rescue, a clear example of moral hazard. Maybe it 
should  have  been  intervened  months  ago.  But  anyway,  had  Lehman  been  salvaged,  one 
cannot be sure that other systemically important institutions would not have followed. Would 
a 750 billion dollar package been approved without the collapse of Lehman? If Lehman had 
been thrown the lifeboat, would such a large package have been necessary? There will be 
plenty  time  to  discuss  this  and  other  issues.  However,  there  is  a  very  straightforward 
conclusion,  which  is  that  policymakers  should  have  been  aware  of  the  magnitude  and 
consequences  of  the  downfall  of  a  major  financial  institution.  This  is  at  the  core  of  this 
conference: evaluating systemic risks in a very complex world. Such a complexity offers big 
benefits, but also poses enormous challenges in regulation, monitoring and risk assessment.  
In the future, it will also be necessary to discuss what to do about weak institutions. As has 
happened in Chile in the past and is now happening in developed economies, in my opinion 
the balance is tilted towards allocating the losses to shareholders and executives, intervening 
institutions to ensure good use of public funds and preserving financial discipline. 
In  the  past  few  years  we  have  accumulated  a  lot  of  experience,  which  permits  us  to  be 
certain that asset price drops and credit market difficulties can impose a large burden on the 
economy if ignored. Investors have lost confidence in the ability of certain firms to meet their 
obligations,  complicating  access  to  the  capital  market  and  short-term  financing,  and  thus 
accelerating the fall in those firms’ stock prices. Here, the role of central banks as liquidity 
provider is essential to ensure the proper functioning of the financial system, and this is one 
of the main lessons we learned from the mistakes made during the Great Depression that 
wrecked havoc in the real sector, which could have been substantially reduced.  
We  have  also  learned  that  sound  regulations  designed  for  normal  times  and  as  crisis 
preventing mechanisms are not necessarily the best for moments of great stress or turmoil, 
including mark-to-market practices in some segments of the financial industry. 
It  would  be  premature  to  draw  definitive  lessons  from  the  present  crisis  that  is  still  in  the 
making  and  going  through  the  damage-control  phase.  A  new  wave  of  discussions  on  the 
international financial architecture will come. And although this happens every time there is a 
world crisis, progress to date has been rather timid. 
Nonetheless,  the  potential  liquidity  constraints  that  economies  outside  the  epicenter  of  the 
crises may suffer, may add an unnecessary burden to countries that had little or nothing to 
do with today’s events and at the same time are the basis to sustain growth in the world. In 
synchrony  with  this,  the  new  liquidity  swap  facility  that  is  being  offered  by  the  IMF  is  very 
appropriate.  It  should  be  disbursed  quickly  as  current  conditions  require.  In  the  present 
circumstances,  countries  that  have  saved  their  terms-of-trade  windfalls  and  enjoy  a  solid 
international  liquidity  position,  as  is  the  case  of  our  country,  should  not  have  the  need  to 
apply for these facilities. 
Once the emergency is over, the present international financial architecture will have to be 
examined carefully, in terms of its extreme dependence on the decisions of more advanced 
countries, its governance and its surveillance role, particularly in the financial system. The 
IMF has made great progress with the World Economic Outlook, which had already warned 
about  the  real-estate  bubble  and  global  imbalances,  and  the  Global  Financial  Stability 
Report. These efforts must now be redoubled.  
2 
 BIS Review 134/2008
From the standpoint of central banks, recent events have underscored not only their role in 
monetary policy, but also their important function in the stability of the financial system. In 
this  context,  research  on  issues  related  with  financial  stability  has  been  dramatically 
intensified. Clearly, there are varied degrees of consensus regarding how to characterize a 
good financial policy framework, how to measure it, achieve it and preserve it, as well as its 
possible tradeoffs with monetary policy.  
This  conference  seeks  to  contribute  the  study  and  analysis  of  these  topics,  as  well  as 
cooperating in our management, as policymakers, of financial stability and associated macro-
financial risk. 
Today, our work will focus on defining the concepts of financial stability and systemic risk, 
and on understanding the conceptual frameworks that support their evaluation and the links 
with and feedback from monetary policy.  
Garry Schinasi will open the day, introducing what we must understand by financial stability 
and examining the implications and challenges of understanding systemic risk. Claudio Borio 
will  explore  the  operational  aspects  and  the  precautions  we  must  take  regarding  the 
methodologies we use to measure systemic risk. Dale Gray will handle the third presentation, 
integrating  the  idea  of  financial  risk  –  by  using  options  –  with  macroeconomic  models 
focusing on monetary policy analysis, then applying the tools to the particular case of Chile 
based on his joint research with Leonardo Luna and Jorge Restrepo. Johan Molin will share 
with  us  the  experience  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  which  has  led  financial  stability  analysis 
since the problems it endured in the early 1990s.  
This afternoon, Francis Diebold will analyze, for the financial markets of the United States 
and  four  Latin  American  economies,  stock  returns  and  volatilities  to  look  for  evidence  of 
contagion  and  its  characteristics.  Charles  Goodhart,  Dimitrios  Tsomocos  and  Alexandros 
Vardoulakis  will  present  us  the  study  of  a  heterogeneous  agent  model  with  a  real-estate 
sector and financial fragility. Later on, Ethan Cohen-Cole and Enrique Martínez-García will 
present  their  research  on  the  interaction  of  financial  intermediation  and  banking  system 
regulations and its effect on the optimal monetary policy response.  
Tomorrow will begin with the presentation of Jaime Ruiz Tagle and Marcelo Fuenzalida, who 
will examine, for the case of Chile, the systemic risk of household debt. Miguel Segoviano 
will  follow,  with  a  review  of  systemic  risk  and  banking  stability  from  a  macroeconomic 
perspective. 
Then comes a presentation by Jaime Caruana, who will draw some lessons from the recent 
crisis and the international financial integration. In the afternoon we will feature Sujit Kapadia 
and Prasanna Gai with an analysis of financial contagion using a network model. In addition, 
there  will  be  two  panels  that  will  review  financial  risk  management  with  two  important 
nuances: its incidence in emerging economies on one hand, and on systemically significant 
financial  institutions,  on  the  other.  The  economists  invited  to  these  panels  include  Michael 
Bordo, Paul McCulley, Martín Redrado, José Darío Uribe, Martin Wolf and Roberto Zahler. 
Finally,  Charles  Calomiris  will  share  with  us  his  vision  on  the  current  crisis  and  the 
implications of the works presented in this conference.  
Two intense days that hold in store enormous technical content that, without any doubt, will 
make  a  fundamental  contribution  to  our  future  view  of  macroeconomic  and  financial 
phenomena. 
I  want  to  finish  by  thanking  Rodrigo  Alfaro,  Dale  Gray  and  Jorge  Selaive  for  their  work  in 
putting together this conference. Also Mauricio Calani, Mónica Correa and Soledad Gallardo, 
and our Institutional Affairs Management for their help in organizing this event. 
I also want to thank the many authors and discussants of the papers for their dedication to 
preparing their valuable presentations. To all of you, dear participants, I wish you two days of 
fruitful discussion. Thank you. 
BIS Review 134/2008 
 3
