Ben S Bernanke: Policy coordination among central banks  
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Fifth ECB Central Banking Conference “The Euro at Ten: Lessons 
and Challenges”, Frankfurt am Main, 14 November 2008.  
 I am pleased to be here in Frankfurt today to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the euro. The 
euro’s introduction was a remarkable achievement. As an academic, I did a bit of consulting 
for  the  European  Monetary  Institute,  the  European  Central  Bank’s  (ECB)  predecessor,  on 
monetary transmission mechanisms; I thus played a part, albeit an extremely small one, in 
this grand project. I mention this only as a reminder that the creators of the euro drew on 
monetary expertise from around the world, an early example of the international cooperation 
that has since proven to be one of the hallmarks of the ECB. Indeed, the run-up to the euro’s 
establishment  and  the  experience  of  the  past  decade  have  been  associated  with  an 
unprecedented  degree  of  policy  coordination  among  the  sovereign  states  within  the  euro 
area, including cooperation in the areas of fiscal and regulatory policies as well as monetary 
policy.  
The current financial crisis and global economic slowdown likewise have been an occasion 
for  unprecedented  international  policy  coordination,  within  Europe  but  also  globally.  For 
example, in its regulatory capacity, the Federal Reserve has worked closely with regulators 
and supervisors from a number of European nations, and we are active participants in the 
international Financial Stability Forum and the  standard-setting bodies operating under the 
aegis of the Bank for International Settlements. My focus today, however, will be cooperation 
in monetary policy and, especially, in the meeting of the liquidity needs of our increasingly 
globalized financial markets. 
As  you  know,  financial  markets  remain  under  severe  strain.  The  proximate  cause  of  the 
financial  turmoil  was  the  end  of  the  U.S.  housing  boom  and  the  attendant  losses  on 
mortgages and mortgage-related assets by many institutions. However, more fundamentally, 
the turmoil was the product of a global credit boom, characterized by a broad underpricing of 
risk, excessive leverage by financial institutions, and an increasing reliance on complex and 
opaque financial instruments that have proven to be fragile under stress. The unwinding of 
this boom (and the associated financial losses) has led to the withdrawal of many investors 
from credit markets and deleveraging by financial institutions, both of which have acted to 
constrict  available  credit  to  households  and  businesses.  This  credit  squeeze  is,  in  turn,  a 
principal cause of the economic slowdown now taking place in many countries. 
Central  bankers  have  been  working  closely  together  throughout  this  period  of  financial 
turmoil.  Personally,  I  have  found  the  opportunity  to  share  views  regularly  with  President 
Trichet  and  other  leading  central  bankers  at  various  international  meetings  extremely 
valuable. We are all in frequent contact by phone as well. Our consultations allow us to keep 
abreast of developments in other countries, to compare our analyses of developing trends, 
and to draw on each other’s experience and knowledge. 
The  merits  of  coordinated  monetary  policies  have  been  discussed  by  policymakers  and 
academics for decades, but in practice, such coordination has been quite rare. However, on 
October 8, the Federal Reserve announced a reduction in its policy interest rate jointly with 
five  other  major  central  banks  –  the  Bank  of  Canada,  the  Bank  of  England,  the  ECB, 
Sveriges Riksbank, and the Swiss National Bank (SNB) – with the Bank of Japan expressing 
support. Last month’s joint action was motivated by the abatement of inflationary pressures 
and increased indications of economic slowing in our respective economies. In addition, the 
coordinated rate cut was intended to send a strong signal to the public and to markets of our 
resolve to act together to address global economic challenges.  
BIS Review 139/2008 
 1
As  you  know,  however,  monetary  policy  actions  have  not  resolved  the  ongoing  strains  in 
financial markets, including interbank funding markets. The Federal Reserve has responded 
to the strong demand for funding by banks and primary dealers by dramatically increasing 
the  amount  of  term  funding  that  it  auctions  to  banks,  providing  new  lending  facilities  for 
nonbanks, supplying high-quality securities for use in repurchase agreement (repo) markets 
and for other collateralized lending, and funding purchases of commercial paper. Elsewhere, 
including Canada, the euro area, and the United Kingdom, central banks have introduced or 
expanded  similar  measures  to  boost  the  provision  of  liquidity  in  their  local  currencies.  In 
addition  to  these  measures,  governments  in  many  countries  broadened  deposit  insurance 
coverage and announced plans to inject capital into their banking systems and to guarantee 
bank debts. All of these steps are consistent with the principles agreed to by the Group of 
Seven finance ministers and central bank governors in their October 10 communiqué.  
Although the range of mechanisms we have used has been broad, our provision of liquidity 
conforms  to  a  central  bank’s  traditional  role  as  the  lender of  last  resort.  However,  a  novel 
aspect  of  the  current  situation  is  that  the  balance  sheets  of  financial  institutions  have 
increasingly  come  to  include  instruments  denominated  in  foreign  currencies.  The  need  for 
currencies outside an issuing country’s markets arises primarily from the global role played 
by key international currencies, such as the dollar and the euro. For example, over the past 
decade, international loans and deposits have grown tremendously, as has the issuance of 
international  debt  securities  –  that  is,  bonds,  notes,  and  money  market  instruments  sold 
outside  the  borders  of  the  borrower’s  country  and  sometimes  denominated  in  foreign 
currencies. These developments have posed new challenges for conventional central bank 
liquidity  and  lender-of-last-resort  policies.  For  example,  injecting  euros  or  sterling  into 
national money markets may not be sufficient to restore market function in these economies 
when funding shortages are in dollars.  
Indeed, a significant feature of the recent financial market stress is the strong demand for 
dollar  funding  not  only  in  the  United  States,  but  also  abroad.  Many  financial  institutions 
outside  the  United  States,  especially  in  Europe,  had  substantially  increased  their  dollar 
investments  in  recent  years,  including  loans  to  nonbanks  and  purchases  of  asset-backed 
securities  issued  by  U.S.  residents.1    Also,  the  continued  prominent  role  of  the  dollar  in 
international trade, foreign direct investment, and financial transactions contributes to dollar 
funding needs abroad. While some financial institutions outside the United States have relied 
on dollars acquired through their U.S. affiliates, many others relied on interbank and other 
wholesale markets to obtain dollars. As such, the recent sharp deterioration in conditions in 
funding markets left some participants outside the United States without adequate access to 
short-term dollar financing. 
The  emergence  of  dollar  funding  shortages  around  the  globe  has  required  a  more 
internationally  coordinated  approach  among  central  banks  to  the  lender-of-last-resort 
function.  The  principal  tool  we  have  used  is  the  currency  swap  line,  which  allows  each 
collaborating  central  bank  to  draw  down  balances  denominated  in  its  foreign  partner’s 
currency. The Federal Reserve has now established temporary swap lines with more than a 
dozen  other  central  banks.2  Many  of  these  central  banks  have  drawn  on  these  lines  and, 
using a variety of methods and facilities, have allocated these funds to meet the needs of 
                                                 
1   See  Patrick  McGuire  and  Goetz  von  Peter  (2008),  “International  Banking  Activity  amidst  the  Turmoil,” BIS 
Quarterly Review, June; also see ECB (2008), “The International Role of the Euro” July. The ECB report noted 
that investment banks based in the United States and financial institutions based in the United Kingdom have 
been among the top non-euro-area issuers of euro-denominated bonds; it also said that banks in Europe and 
some firms located mainly in the United Kingdom with business concentrated in the securitization of residential 
mortgages have been among the top non-U.S. issuers of dollar-denominated bonds. 
2   The  central  banks  include  those  in  Australia,  Brazil,  Canada,  Denmark,  the  euro  area,  Korea,  Japan,  New 
Zealand, Mexico, Norway, Singapore, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom. 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2008
institutions  within  their  borders.3  Although  funding  needs  during  the  current  turmoil  have 
been  the  most  pronounced  for  dollars,  they  have  arisen  for  other  currencies  as  well.  For 
example,  the  ECB  has  set  up  swap  lines  and  repo  facilities  with  the  central  banks  of 
Denmark and Hungary to provide euro liquidity in those countries. The terms of many swap 
agreements have been adjusted with the changing needs for liquidity: The sizes of the swaps 
have  increased,  the  types  of  collateral  accepted  by  these  central  banks  from  financial 
institutions in their economies have been expanded, and the maturities at which these funds 
have been made available have been tailored to meeting the prevailing needs. Notably, in 
mid-October,  the  Federal  Reserve  eliminated  limits  on  the  sizes  of  its  swap  lines  with  the 
ECB, the Bank of England, the SNB, and the Bank of Japan so as to accommodate demands 
for U.S. dollar funding of any scale. Taken together, these actions have helped improve the 
distribution of liquidity around the globe. 
This collaborative approach to the injection of liquidity reflects more than the global, multi-
currency nature of funding difficulties. It also reflects the importance of relationships between 
central banks and the institutions they serve. Under swap agreements, the responsibility for 
allocating foreign-currency liquidity within a jurisdiction lies with the domestic central bank. 
This arrangement makes use of the fact that the domestic central bank is best positioned to 
understand the mechanics and special features of its own country’s financial and payments 
systems  and,  because  of  its  existing  relationships  with  domestic  financial  institutions,  can 
best assess the strength of each institution and its needs for foreign-currency liquidity. The 
domestic central bank is also typically best informed about the quality of the collateral offered 
by potential borrowers. 
The efforts by central banks around the world to increase the availability of liquidity, along 
with  other  steps  taken  by  central  banks  and  governments,  have  contributed  to  tentative 
improvements in credit market functioning. However, the continuing volatility of markets and 
recent indicators of economic performance confirm that challenges remain. For this reason, 
policymakers will remain in close contact, monitor developments closely, and stand ready to 
take additional steps should conditions warrant. In times like these, we are especially aware 
of  the  importance  of  having  close  working  relationships  with  our  central  bank  colleagues 
around the world. These relationships are fostered by the ties established in forums like this 
one and in the many venues where policymakers regularly gather.  
The 10th anniversary of the euro is an opportunity not only to celebrate an impressive and 
historic achievement, but also to reaffirm our commitment to cooperation as we address the 
challenges  of  an  increasingly  integrated  global  economy.  Central  bankers  and  other 
policymakers  around  the  world  must  continue  to  work  together  to  address  disruptions  in 
credit markets and to promote a vibrant global economy. 
                                                 
3   Some other countries with extensive accumulated stocks of dollar reserves have made these dollars available 
in their economies through auctions and regional arrangements. 
BIS Review 139/2008 
 3
