Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Recent economic and financial developments and 
the conduct of monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Foreign 
Correspondents' Club of Japan, Tokyo, 29 September 2008. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  addressing  this  community  of  distinguished  journalists  at  the 
Foreign Correspondents' Club of Japan. Today, I first wish to share with you how I see the 
current  state  of  the  Japanese  economy  and  the  outlook.  And  then  I  will  touch  on  the 
implications of both for the future course of monetary policy. 
Diverse engines of growth and canceling-out of small shocks during economic 
recovery since 2002 
To  assess  current  economic  activities  in  Japan,  it  is  worthwhile  to  look  back  on  the 
developments since 2002 as a starting point.1
The Japanese economy has recovered continuously since hitting the bottom in early 2002. 
Although an average of around 2 percent real GDP growth during this period does not seem 
particularly  high,  it  is  above  the  economy's  potential,  and  shows  remarkable  stability. 
Thestability  comes  not  from  a  uniform  decline  of  demand  fluctuations  across  sectors,  but 
from a canceling-out of small fluctuations of demand in different sectors. In fact, one salient 
characteristic of this period is that the timing of peak production varied among industries. 
In  past  business  cycles,  we  commonly  observed  concurrent  increases  and  decreases  in 
production in various industries. A typical example is the so-called IT bubble and its collapse: 
production  of  not  only  IT-related  goods  but  also  other  goods  increased  and  decreased  in 
tandem.  In  contrast,  since  2002,  various  industries  have  taken  the  lead  in  production  and 
have  been  successively  replaced.  For  example,  when  the  production  of  IT-related  goods 
decreased, production in materials industries increased. 
I can point out two contributing factors, closely related to globalization. First, on the demand 
side,  the  engine  of  world  growth  has  been  diversified.  High  economic  growth  continued  in 
countries such as China, India, Russia, and some in the Middle East, and Japan's exports to 
these countries increased considerably. As a result, the variety of goods exported, previously 
confined mainly to IT-related and durable consumer goods, broadened to include goods such 
as  construction  machinery  and  materials.  Second,  on  the  supply  side,  linkages  between 
various industries in Japan became weaker as international diversification of production sites 
continued. When materials necessary to produce a particular good were imported rather than 
secured domestically, a decrease in domestic demand for this good did not have large direct 
negative effects on other domestic industries through the input-output relationship, although 
it reduced imports of materials. 
The  diversification  of  demand  and  supply  sources  just  described  led  to  asynchronicity  in 
production  activity  and  resulted  in  canceling-out  of  small  shocks  in  sectoral  demand  and 
supply, leading to a stable growth pattern. However, this also meant that we did not have a 
strong engine of growth affecting all sectors, and thus the speed of economic expansion was 
moderate.  In  fact,  the  recovery  since  2002  has  been  led  mostly  by  the  corporate  sector, 
                                                 
1   For details of this assessment, see Kiyohiko G. Nishimura, "Increased Diversity and Deepened Uncertainty: 
Policy Challenges in a Zero-Inflation Economy," International Finance 10:3 (2007), 281-300, which is based 
on 
2007 
(http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko0707a.htm). 
Brookings 
Institution 
speech 
July 
the 
my 
at 
in 
BIS Review 120/2008 
 1
especially  exporting  firms.  Corporate  profits  exceeded  their  previous  peak  and  corporate 
fixed  investment  increased  steadily.  However,  since  growth  was  at  best  moderate,  firms 
remained  cautious  in  increasing  their  labor  force  and  production  capacity,  and  maintained 
their  restrictive  stance  on  wage  increases.  Although  this  cautiousness  apparently  has 
prevented firms from accumulating excess production capacity and excess labor so far, it has 
resulted in sluggish wage increases and ultimately, in a lackluster state of consumption. 
The current state of the Japanese economy 
In this way, the Japanese economy enjoyed not so strong, but stable and resilient, economic 
growth until the end of last year. Since then, however, the growth rate has slowed. 
First,  there  was  the  shock  caused  by  a  stringent  revision  of  the  Building  Standard  Law, 
resulting  in  a  fall  in  housing  and  construction  investment.  Then  came  a  sharp  increase  in 
energy and materials prices, which has caused a substantial transfer of income from Japan 
to oil and materials exporting countries. This decrease in real income had an adverse effect 
on both private consumption and corporate fixed investment. The decrease in corporate fixed 
investment has been noticeable especially among small and medium-sized enterprises that 
rely  mostly  on  domestic  demand  and  therefore  do  not  benefit  from  strong  increases  in 
exports. 
Recently,  exports  have  lost  their  momentum,  reflecting  the  gradual  slowdown  of  the  world 
economy. The turmoil in the U.S. financial markets, which stemmed from the U.S. subprime 
mortgage problem, has affected economic activities in the U.S. as well as those worldwide. 
Currently,  the  Japanese  economy  is  sluggish  against  the  backdrop  of  high  energy  and 
materials prices and weaker growth in exports. Thus, it is particularly important to assess, 
first, developments in energy and materials prices and second, financial market conditions 
and their effects on economic activities, especially in the United States. 
Factors contributing to the surge in commodity prices 
Let me first examine the surge in commodity prices. There are three possible factors behind 
the  recent  surge.  The  first  factor  is  the  increase  in  demand  especially  in  emerging 
economies,  whose  resource  usage  is  not  so  efficient.  The  high  growth  rate  of  these 
economies  has  led  to  a  rapidly  increasing  demand  for  energy  and  materials.  The  second 
factor is the difficulty of increasing the supply of these products in a timely manner. A large 
investment  is  required  with  a  considerable  lag  between  exploration  and  production. 
Moreover, projects are often impeded by environmental and geopolitical problems. The third 
is a financial factor. Global investors, confronted with the turmoil in global financial markets, 
are  said  to  have  shifted  their  investments  from  complex  financial  products  to  simple 
commodities.  This  so-called  "flight  to  simplicity"  may  have  contributed  to  the  surge  in 
commodity prices. 
Since the rise of commodity prices started well before the current financial turmoil, it is likely 
that it was the demand factor that set the long-run trend. However, it is hard to deny outright 
that supply constraints and especially financial factors contributed to recent acceleration until 
July. Although commodity prices have slipped back since around mid-July, they are likely to 
remain elevated if the demand-side factor in emerging economies does not change. 
The subprime mortgage problem and global financial turmoil 
I now turn to the subprime mortgage problem, and the resulting global financial turmoil, which 
is still under way. 
In financial markets, there are many investors with different preferences in terms of liquidity, 
return,  and  risk  profile  of  financial  products.  Financial  institutions  effectively  intermediate 
2 
 BIS Review 120/2008
between  these  investors  by  providing  various  financial  products.  Securitization  was  an 
innovation  that  enabled  financial  institutions  to  provide  a  wider  range  of  financial  products 
with  a  view  to  meeting  investors'  various  needs.  In  order  to  enhance  confidence  in  newly 
introduced securitized products, various "supporting devices," such as liquidity-enhancement 
guarantees  from  banks,  insurances  by  monolines,  and  credit  ratings,  were  employed  and 
used  widely.  Moreover,  to  facilitate  transactions  as  well  as  to  obtain  profits,  financial 
institutions themselves became active players in the securitized products market. 
Investors' confidence in financial products was first shaken in the spring of 2007 when prices 
of  some  tranches  of  subprime  RMBS  fell  in  a  way  unthinkable  previously.  This  raised 
suspicion that information provided by rating agencies and utilized by financial institutions in 
their  sales  pitch  was,  after  all,  wrong.  Erosion  of  confidence  in  the  values  of  securitized 
products  became  increasingly  evident  as  time  went  by.  As  confidence  eroded,  investors 
became extremely cautious and reduced transactions.2 This led to a further price decline of 
securitized products and contributed to further erosion of confidence. Moreover, an old and 
more  familiar  vicious  circle  of  financial  stresses  and  economic  slowdown  was  coming  into 
play in recent months. 
The  turmoil  in  global  financial  markets  in  the  last  several  weeks  has  been  extraordinary. 
Stock  markets  have  been  volatile  and  credit  spreads  spiked.  Demand  for  liquidity  has 
increased  and  there  has  been  a  conspicuous  "flight  to  quality."  In  order  to  address  the 
elevated pressures in U.S. dollar short-term funding markets, six central banks announced 
coordinated measures to supply dollar liquidity to money markets on September 18. The U.S. 
government  announced  a  plan  to  buy  impaired  assets  possessed  by  U.S.  financial 
institutions. The purchase of impaired assets is particularly important in several ways. First, it 
will create liquidity and promote price discovery in the markets for these assets. Second, this 
measure will make the balance sheets of these financial institutions more transparent so a 
reasonable  assessment  of  their  financial  condition  can  be  made  by  investors,  reducing 
uncertainty considerably. Although there remains considerable uncertainty about the outlook 
for  global  financial  markets,  I  hope  that  a  series  of  measures  taken  by  governments  and 
central  banks  will  contribute  to  stabilization  of  the  markets,  leading  to  recovery  in  global 
economic growth. 
The outlook for economic activity and the risk factors 
I would now like to turn to the outlook for the Japanese economy. 
Our  main  scenario  is  that  economic  activity  will  likely  remain  sluggish  for  the  time  being 
against the backdrop of high energy and materials prices and weaker growth in exports due 
to  a  slowdown  in  overseas  economies.  The  question  is  whether  or  not  the  Japanese 
economy  will  experience  a  deep  adjustment  phase.  We  believe  that  the  possibility  of  this 
occurring is rather small. 
First, as a result of firms' restructuring efforts, which started in the 1990s and continued up 
until recently, the "three excesses" – namely, in production capacity, employment, and debt – 
have been largely eliminated. This suggests that the Japanese economy has become more 
resilient  to  shocks  affecting  economic  growth.  Second,  the  subprime-related  losses  of 
Japanese  financial  institutions  are  limited  compared  to  those  of  U.S.  and  European 
counterparts. As a result, Japanese financial markets continue to function well, though there 
                                                 
2   This seemingly overcautious behavior is not irrational. Rational investors,  who are, say, 95% confident that 
these financial institutions' advice is true, but think that there is a 5 % chance that the institutions might be 
utterly incompetent and their advice might be wrong, always consider the worst outcome and try to improve it, 
rather than to maximize their profits taking the institutions' advice for granted. This decision situation is called 
ε-contamination  of  confidence.  See  Kiyohiko  G.  Nishimura  and  Hiroyuki  Ozaki,  "An  Axiomatic  Approach  to 
Epsilon Contamination," Economic Theory, 27:2 (2006), 333-340. 
BIS Review 120/2008 
 3
are  occasional  disturbances  reflecting  the  stress  in  global  financial  markets.  And  third, 
Japanese financial conditions have been generally accommodative with a very low inter-bank 
call  rate,  although  financing  conditions  in  the  construction  and  real  estate  industries,  and 
small and medium-sized enterprises in general, are becoming increasingly tight. The short-
term real interest rate calculated by subtracting the CPI inflation rate from the call rate has 
been negative, as the policy interest rate – the uncollateralized overnight call rate – has been 
at  a  low  level  of  0.5  percent.  This  accommodative  environment  for  corporate  finance  is 
expected to continue to support business activity. 
Thus, the main outlook scenario is that the Japanese economy will return gradually from its 
current sluggish condition onto a moderate growth path, as commodity prices stabilize and 
overseas economies move out of their deceleration phase. 
The outlook for economic activity, however, is accompanied by considerable uncertainty, and 
various risk factors could influence the outlook. Global financial markets, which I mentioned 
earlier, are likely to remain strained for some time, and there are downside risks to the world 
economy. There is also a risk that domestic demand may weaken further as a result of the 
outflow of income due to the elevated energy and materials prices prevailing until recently. 
The  Bank  is  therefore  attentive  to  the  downside  risks  to  economic  growth,  although  the 
economy does not face urgent need to adjust production capacity and employment. 
As I have mentioned earlier, one salient characteristic of the economic recovery since 2002 
was the diversification of growth engines and canceling-out of small shocks. In contrast, we 
are now facing two large shocks that may spread to many economies – the surge in energy 
and  materials  prices  and  the  financial  turmoil  stemming  from  the  subprime  mortgage 
problem. We cannot totally rule out the possibility that, if these two shocks simultaneously 
impact heavily on the global economy, business conditions in various industries and firms in 
various  regions  might  become  synchronized,  and  thus  trigger  a  negative  feedback  or 
amplification  of  adverse  effects  through  interdependency.  Thus,  with  respect  to  future 
developments in the real economy, we should be attentive to the downside risks. 
Low inflation in the recovery since 2002 and a spike in energy and material prices 
Let me turn to inflation. First I will explain why inflation was almost non-existent from 2002 up 
until  the  midyear  of  2007.  Then  I  will  assess  the  current  threat  of  a  possible  rekindling  of 
inflation posed by the sharp increase in energy and material prices.  
As I have explained earlier, real GDP growth had been on average around 2 percent since 
2002 until recently, somewhat above Japan's potential growth rate. The output gap, which 
was substantially negative before the economic recovery started, recovered gradually to its 
past average. However, the CPI inflation rate remained near zero until around the middle of 
last year. There are two factors contributing to this lack of response of prices to a change in 
output gap. 
First,  competition  has  intensified  against  the  backdrop  of  globalization  and  deregulation. 
Emerging  economies,  in  the  process  of  being  incorporated  in  the  global  economy,  have 
established  themselves  as  global  production  sites  with  abundant  and  inexpensive  labor. 
Imports  from  these  emerging  economies  have  increased  dramatically  and  the  competitive 
threat from these imports prevented domestic producers from increasing their product prices 
when  demand  recovered.  Deregulation  is  another  factor  increasing  competition,  which  is 
exemplified in the deregulation of large-scale retail stores. Competition has intensified among 
retailers, large or small, and they have tried to avoid charging higher prices even if demand 
picked up, fearing that they might lose their customers to their competitors. 
Second,  wage  increases  have  remained  subdued  throughout  this  period.  Competitive 
pressures  from  emerging  economies  of  inexpensive  labor  have  become  a  major  factor 
restricting  increases  in  wages.  Moreover,  there  are  other  factors  specific  to  Japan.  An 
increase in the number of non-regular employees with low wages is one. Another factor is 
4 
 BIS Review 120/2008
the mass retirement of baby-boomers who were paid higher wages than young workers, and 
the resulting replacement of high-wage old workers by low-wage young ones. Furthermore, 
severe  fiscal  conditions  forced  central  as  well  as  local  governments  to  restrain  wages  of 
government and related agencies' employees, which had a spill-over effect on other service 
industries. This subdued wage behavior might also be the product of the very low inflation 
expectations of private economic entities, reflecting the past low inflation record. 
The benign situation of low inflation has changed since the end of last year. The Corporate 
Goods Price Index has increased rapidly against the background of the surge in commodity 
prices  to  record  annual  increase  of  7.2  percent  in  August.  CPI  inflation  is  also  rising 
noticeably. Specifically, prices of petroleum products, such as gasoline and kerosene, and 
processed food have been increasing. Moreover, there are some spill-over effects on related 
service products, such as eating out and electricity. The rate of CPI inflation excluding fresh 
food increased from 0.5 percent in the fourth quarter of last year to 2.4 percent in August. 
However, if we exclude energy and food from the CPI, then the inflation rate has been still 
around zero, although it has crept up a little in recent months. 
Thus, the recent rise in the CPI inflation rate is mostly due to the rise in commodity prices 
and some pass-through to other goods and services. 
The outlook for prices and the risk factors 
The Bank first published its "understanding of medium- to long-term price stability" in 2006 
and  it  has  been  reviewed  annually.  This  document  clarifies  the  level  of  inflation  that  each 
Policy Board member understands as being consistent with price stability over the medium to 
long term, in conducting monetary policy. The "understanding" is expressed in terms of the 
rate of change in the CPI, and currently falls approximately between 0 and 2 percent with 
most members' median figures at around 1 percent. 
The recent CPI inflation rate exceeds the upper limit of the range. However, the assessment 
of price stability should be based on its sustainability in the medium to long term. Thus, the 
real question is whether the current momentum of inflation is sustained in the medium to long 
run, or to put it another way, whether we see second-round effects of inflation. This depends 
on  people's  confidence  in  price  stability,  which  ultimately  is  determined  by  the  stance  of 
monetary  policy.  At  this  moment,  we  are  not  seeing  second-round  effects,  and  it  seems 
unlikely  that  they  will  emerge  in  the  near  term,  given  the  current  weakness  of  demand, 
households'  negative  reaction  to  price  increases,  and  firms'  price-setting  behavior.  Wage-
setting is one important indicator of whether we have second-round effects, and so far wage 
growth has been relatively weak. 
Taking account of these recent developments, it is reasonable to expect that, although CPI 
inflation is likely to remain elevated over the coming months due to lagged pass-through of 
earlier increases in import prices, it will decline gradually in line with the expected moderation 
of worldwide commodity price inflation and tapering-off of import-price pass-through. 
However, we see risks in this main scenario, which are on the upside. As I mentioned earlier, 
increases  in  energy  and  materials  prices  are  long-run  phenomena,  rather  than  temporary, 
reflecting  the  growing  importance  of  emerging  economies.  Moreover,  since  this  is  the  first 
outbreak of noticeable inflation in a decade, it may eventually change inflation expectations 
of households and firms' price-setting behavior. Taking these possibilities in mind, the Bank 
should pay close attention to the possible upside risk of a rekindling of inflation. 
The conduct of monetary policy 
Finally,  I  now  turn  to  monetary  policy.  The  Bank  introduced  the  new  monetary  policy 
framework in March 2006 and has been explaining its monetary policy stance based on this 
framework.  In  this  framework,  the  Bank  first  examines  the  prospects  for  economic  activity 
BIS Review 120/2008 
 5
and prices for one to two years ahead and assesses whether the economy will follow a path 
of sustained growth with price stability in the most likely scenario. This is policy assessment 
under the "first perspective." Then, the Bank assesses the risks considered most relevant to 
the conduct of monetary policy. This is policy assessment under the "second perspective." I 
would  now  like  to  outline  the  Bank's  current  assessment  based  on  this  framework  which 
forms the basis for the conduct of monetary policy. 
In the "first perspective," the most likely outlook is that economic activity will remain sluggish 
for the time being, while the CPI inflation rate is expected to remain above 2.0 percent over 
the coming months. Thereafter, the economy is expected to return gradually onto a moderate 
growth  path  as  commodity  prices  stabilize  and  overseas  economies  move  out  of  their 
deceleration phase. CPI inflation is expected to moderate gradually as energy and materials 
prices level out and the pass-through of earlier increases in import prices is completed. Thus, 
after its current sluggishness, the economy is likely to return eventually onto a sustainable 
growth path with price stability. 
In the "second perspective," which assesses risks of the most likely outlook, we concluded 
that the Bank should monitor carefully both downside risks to economic growth and upside 
risks  to  inflation.  Furthermore,  if  downside  risks  to  the  economy  turn  out  to  decrease,  we 
should  pay  close  attention  to  the  risk  of  prolonging  the  period  of  accommodative  financial 
conditions,  which  may  lead  to  swings  in  economic  activity  and  prices  in  the  future,  as  the 
recent experience of the world economy suggests. 
In conducting monetary policy, the Bank will continue to carefully assess the future outlook 
for economic activity and prices, closely considering the likelihood of its projections as well 
as factors posing upside or downside risks, and will implement its policies in an accordingly 
flexible manner. Moreover, since global financial markets are expected to remain strained for 
some time and there are various uncertainties in the outlook for economic activity and prices, 
it is essential for the Bank to maintain market stability. 
The  world's  economies  now  face  serious  challenges.  The  Japanese  economy  is  no 
exception.  Uncertainties  remain  elevated  both  in  financial  markets,  real  economic  activity, 
and  inflation.  To  deal  with  these  challenges,  we  believe  it  is  important  to  explain  carefully 
how we assess economic conditions and how we conduct monetary policy. To this end, we, 
the  policy  makers,  must  be  good  communicators.  Providing  necessary 
information 
appropriately  will  enhance  the  credibility  of  our  policy-making.  Also,  as  globalization 
proceeds, it has become increasingly important to communicate internationally. I think these 
thoughts  can  be  shared  with  people  like  you  who  are  professionals  in  the  field  of 
communication. 
In  closing,  before  I  leave  you  I  would  like  to  express  our  strong  commitment  to  make 
appropriate economic assessments and policy decisions, and to explain them to the public 
appropriately in a timely manner. Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 120/2008
