Irma Rosenberg: Monetary policy and financial stability – the Riksbank's 
two main tasks 
Speech by Ms Irma Rosenberg, First Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at Statistics 
Sweden, Stockholm. 2 October 2008.  
 Many  countries  are  currently  in  the  midst  of  a  financial  crisis  that  has  repercussions 
throughout the global financial system. Headlines referring to problems in large US banks, to 
rising risk premiums, poorly functioning markets and other consequences around the world 
have been prominently featured on the first pages of many newspapers. Sweden has so far 
been spared the worst. But now the financial markets here are also clearly affected by the 
uncertainty  and  lack  of  confidence,  which  thus  also  affects  the  Swedish  banks  and  other 
financial agents. The Riksbank is working intensively on dealing with these events right now, 
like most other central banks.  
The Riksbank’s task is to safeguard both price stability and financial stability. I am going to 
talk today about current monetary policy and the deliberations at our most recent monetary 
policy meeting in September. But the recent drama in the financial markets gives me reason 
to devote some time to explaining what our task of safeguarding financial stability concerns 
and to our assessment of the current situation.  
Two tasks – monetary policy and financial stability 
Some of the questions that have been the focus of attention are what the Riksbank and other 
central banks can and should do about what is happening in the financial markets right now. 
It is not surprising that these questions arise. But if they are to be discussed, it is important to 
separate the two tasks the Riksdag (the Swedish parliament) has given us – monetary policy 
and  financial  stability.  This  may  not  be  so  easy,  as  the  areas  in  many  ways  affect  one 
another. However, I shall try to make things a little clearer. 
Two different tasks… 
What is happening right now is important, both with regard to financial stability and monetary 
policy. The financial turbulence has also been included in our analyses of both areas, ever 
since the problems connected to the mortgage market in the United States became apparent 
last summer. However the perspectives are different. The stability perspective concerns how 
the  banks,  the  payment  system  and  the  financial  system  in  general  are  affected  by  the 
financial crisis. The monetary policy perspective concerns how inflation and developments in 
production and employment may be affected.  
… which are in many ways linked 
As I recently mentioned, our two fields of activity are closely linked. The financial turbulence 
that has spread around the world to a large extent has its roots in the problems in the United 
States, linked to financial stability. This has led to extensive losses in the bank system in the 
rest of the world, to considerable uncertainty and poorer functioning in the financial markets. 
This is of course important to economic activity. However, economic activity in its turn affects 
factors  that  are  important  to  financial  stability.  For  example,  the  number  of  company 
bankruptcies  and loan  losses  in  the  banks  is usually  higher  when  economic  activity  is  low 
and vice versa. There is also a fundamental relationship between our fields of activity. The 
Riksbank’s most important tool in conducting monetary policy is the repo rate. One can say 
that we try to influence economic activity and inflation by steering the price of credit, that is, 
BIS Review 119/2008 
 1
interest rates. But to be able to do this, the payment system and our interest rate steering 
system must function. Financial stability is therefore actually a necessary condition for being 
able to conduct monetary policy efficiently. 
With regard to financial stability, the Riksbank makes regular updated assessments. I shall 
soon return to our views on current developments. But before I do so, I would like to say a 
few words about what the task of safeguarding financial stability actually entails. Most people 
are  probably  aware  that  we  have  an  inflation  target  for  monetary  policy.  But  what  do  we 
mean by financial stability? 
What do we mean by financial stability? 
Financial stability is not so easy to define. In the Sveriges Riksbank Act the Riksbank’s task 
that we commonly refer to as safeguarding financial stability is formulated as “to promote a 
safe  and  efficient  payment  system”.  Put  simply,  this  concerns  working  in  different  ways  to 
ensure that he financial system is stable and functions smoothly. This is important for many 
reasons. The financial system fulfils a number of functions that are fundamental to society 
and which most people probably take for granted. For example, individuals, companies and 
organisations must be able to make and receive payments in an efficient manner. Goods are 
transported  to  consumers  via  our  usual  infrastructure,  for  instance,  the  road  or  railway 
networks.  When  one  then  pays  for  the  goods,  one  can  say  that  the  money  is  sent  to  the 
person  who  receives  it  via  the  “financial  infrastructure”  –  the  hub  of  which  is  our  central 
payment system, RIX. Almost all financial transactions include some form of payment via the 
payment  system.  Without  an  efficiently-functioning  financial  infrastructure  the  economy  will 
come to a halt. Another important function is to be able to save via the financial system. The 
funds saved become money that others can borrow. An efficiently-functioning credit market is 
a necessity in a developed modern economy. The financial system also makes it possible for 
those  who  invest  to  manage  the  risks  that  can  arise.  This  is  also  very  important  for  the 
development of the economy and actually for society to function well on the whole. 
How do we work to fulfil our task? 
So how do we work to fulfil our task? For one thing the Riksbank monitors and analyses the 
financial  system,  in  particular  the  major  Swedish  banks,  but  also  the  efficiency  of  the 
payment system as a whole. We identify possible risks and threats to the financial system 
and  evaluate  the  system’s  resilience.  This  is  done  for  instance  in  our  Financial  Stability 
Report, which is published twice a year, and in speeches held by Executive Board members. 
We also try to influence market participants who are important to financial stability. Part of 
this  work  includes  regular  contacts  with  the  banks,  other  government  agencies  and  our 
central bank colleagues in other countries. Most of our work concerns preventing problems 
and ensuring that the payment system functions as smoothly as possible. We can do this in 
many different ways. Some concrete examples are the recent actions taken by the Riksbank 
and other government agencies. I shall return to what these actions entail shortly.  
We work to prevent financial crises from arising. But if they do nevertheless arise, it is also 
our task to manage them. We have to be prepared to take action although we hope that we 
will  never  need  to  do  so.  This  preparedness  includes,  for instance,  regularly  holding  crisis 
exercises,  both  internally  and  together  with  other  Swedish  authorities,  and  sometimes 
together with central banks and authorities in other countries. The work on financial stability 
is reminiscent of fire safety work.  We have to provide information about the risks, but it is 
also our job to be prepared to put out the “fires”. And to be able to do this efficiently, we must 
have practised. In purely practical terms, we have the possibility to take a number of different 
measures if this should prove necessary. But one should bear in mind that each situation is 
unique and must be dealt with on the basis of the conditions prevailing at that time.  
2 
 BIS Review 119/2008
Worst case scenario 
One  fundamental  function  of  a  central  bank  is  the  role  as  “lender  of  last  resort”.  If  the 
Riksbank’s  assessment  is  that  financial  stability  is  threatened,  we  have  the  possibility,  in 
exceptional  circumstances,  to  contribute  liquidity  to  Swedish  banks  and  other  financial 
companies  by  granting  liquidity  assistance  on  special  terms.  However,  this  assumes  that 
these institutions are sound and that they are under the supervision of Finansinspektionen, 
the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority. Let us assume, for instance, that a bank that 
meets  the  requirements  and  thus  is  assessed  as  having  assets  that  are  greater  than  its 
liabilities,  nevertheless  experiences  severe  problems  in  financing  and  acquiring  sufficient 
liquidity to meet its payments. I shall briefly explain how such a situation can arise.  
In general, the banks finance themselves by borrowing money in the short term and lending it 
out on a longer term basis. When the banks lend to individuals and companies it is often on 
long-term  contracts,  which  means  that  the  bank  cannot  get  the  money  back  earlier  if  this 
should  prove  necessary.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  bank  receives  deposits  from 
individuals and companies, they usually have the possibility to withdraw the money whenever 
they wish. Also when the banks borrow money in the financial markets this is often as short-
term  loans,  that  is  with  a  short  duration.  If  it  should  suddenly  become  difficult  or  very 
expensive for the bank to borrow money, it may experience difficulty in meeting its payments. 
The  terms  for  the  more  long-term  lending  are  largely  restricted.  In  such  a  situation  the 
Riksbank can help to manage the bank’s financing problems by granting liquidity assistance. 
But  we  only  do  this  on  condition  that  the  terms  I  recently  mentioned  are  met  and  if  our 
assessment is that the stability of the financial system would be jeopardised if the bank in 
question failed.  
Another  fundamental  function  that  it  is  important  to  mention  in  this  context  “to  keep  the 
different tasks separate” is that the Swedish banks can borrow overnight from the Riksbank 
against  collateral  at  an  interest  rate  of  0.75  percentage  points  above  the  repo  rate.  They 
always have this possibility and this is not what we mean by liquidity assistance. 
But what if the bank suffering problems does not have larger assets than liabilities? Should 
the  Riksbank  provide  liquidity  assistance?  No,  in  such  a  situation  it  is  a  question  for  the 
government,  not  the  Riksbank,  to  decide.  What  the  Riksbank  can  do  is  provide  additional 
liquidity under certain conditions. We do not have the task of managing a bank’s problems 
with its creditworthiness. Even in this hypothetical reasoning it is important to point out, that 
in  principle  all  those  who  have  deposited  money  in  the  bank  are  protected  by  the  deposit 
guarantee in the event that a Swedish bank should default. This applies for amounts of up to 
SEK 250,000 per customer and institution. It is only if the deposit has been made by another 
financial institution or in some cases if the amount is frozen that the deposit guarantee does 
not apply. 
This  reasoning  concerned  what  we  could  do  in  a  situation  where  financial  stability  is 
threatened. Some central banks have recently been forced to take this type of measure. But 
none of the Swedish banks has had problems with its liquidity in the way I described in my 
example. So how do we view the current situation? 
Recent developments 
As I mentioned earlier, the financial turbulence has been included in our analyses for some 
time  now,  both  with  regard  to  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability.  The  Riksbank  has 
regularly emphasised many of the risks in the financial system and what could happen if the 
financial turbulence should grow worse. The Riksbank bases its assessment on an analysis 
that focuses on the four major Swedish banks, as they account for around 80 per cent of the 
market.  The  Swedish  banks  have  considerable  equity,  good  profitability  and  limited  loan 
losses. Our assessment is that there is a high degree of resilience to the international turmoil 
BIS Review 119/2008 
 3
that has prevailed for some time now. But this is not the same as saying that the Swedish 
financial markets and banks are not affected by the situation. Of course they are.  
The financial markets have been affected more noticeably 
The  international  markets  where  the  banks  obtain  funding  by  taking  out  bond  loans  have 
been functioning poorly. Borrowing has become more expensive and more difficult. Normally 
the  financial  market  participants  trade  with  one  another  and  thus  contribute  to  the  smooth 
functioning of the market. However, recently above all mutual distrust has meant that they 
are more wary of lending money to one another. One can say that this has “thrown sand in 
the  wheels”.  Many  central  banks  and  other  government  agencies  are  trying  to  counteract 
this,  as  I  will  discuss  shortly.  This  has  also  affected  the  Swedish  banks,  although  the 
problems have been less serious here than in many other parts of the world.  
We can observe that short-term interest rates have now risen substantially in Sweden, too. 
This  applies,  for  instance,  to  the  interbank  market,  which  is  the  market  where  the  banks 
borrow  money  from  one  another  to  cover  their  short-term  liquidity  needs.  However,  in  this 
context it is worth pointing out that the overnight market has functioned as usual and that the 
overnight  rate,  the  shortest  interest  rate  in  the  economy,  has  remained  stable  around  the 
repo  rate.  In  this  way  the  Riksbank’s  system  for  steering  the  interest  rate  functions  well, 
which is of course important not least for monetary policy. 
The market for mortgage bonds has also functioned less efficiently than normal. In times of 
uncertainty investors often prefer to buy safe assets and sell those that are higher risk, even 
if the latter have a higher return. So when the situation becomes uncertain the demand for 
government securities with a short duration, such as treasury bills, usually increases. At the 
same time the demand for less liquid securities considered to have a higher risk declines. As 
an example, in the United States they have been selling off mortgage bonds, as these have 
been regarded as particularly high-risk investments as a result of the US mortgage crisis. But 
even in Sweden there has been a strong demand for treasury bills with a short duration, at 
the same time as the supply of mortgage bonds has increased. This has occurred despite 
the  Swedish  mortgage  bonds  having  a  very  high  credit  rating.  Normally  these  have  an 
interest  rate  just  marginally  higher  than  the  rate  for  treasury  bonds  with  a  corresponding 
duration. However, recently the interest rate differentials between these securities have been 
much higher. 
Measures to improve the functioning of the markets 
The  Swedish  National  Debt  Office  and  the  Riksbank  have  maintained  a  regular  dialogue 
regarding  the  money  and  bond  markets  and  the  need  to  counteract  the  effects  of  the  US 
financial  crisis.  To  alleviate  the  problems  here,  the  Swedish  National  Debt  Office,  in 
consultation  with  the  Riksbank,  decided  two  weeks  ago  to  increase  the  supply  of  treasury 
bills through a number of additional auctions and at the same time buy, by reverse repo as it 
is called, the corresponding amount of mortgage bonds. These measures mean in total that 
the  Swedish  National  Debt  Office  will  probably  have  invested  around  SEK  150  billion  in 
covered  mortgage  bonds  by  the  end  of  November.  However,  there  is  also  a  flexibility  to 
adjust  the  issue  volumes  on  the  basis  of  market  developments.  It  is  worth  noting  that  the 
Swedish  market  for  mortgage  bonds  has  been  open  during  the  whole  period  of  financial 
turbulence, although it has functioned less efficiently than before. 
Just over a week ago the Riksbank also increased the possibility for credit for the participants 
in the RIX payment system. The purpose of this is to facilitate the banks’ payments to one 
another  during  the  day,  where  necessary.  To  oil  the  wheels  a  little,  one  might  say.  RIX 
participants can now to a greater extent use their own covered bonds, or those issued by an 
institution with close links, as collateral in the system. The collateral for a covered bond is 
directly tied to a particular portfolio of mortgage loans with high collateral. This means that 
4 
 BIS Review 119/2008
the  credit  granter  is  protected,  even  if  the  institution  issuing  the  bond  were  to  collapse. 
Covered bonds are therefore good collateral and many other central banks accept them to a 
greater extent than the Riksbank. In our case, the permitted share was raised from 25 per 
cent to 75 per cent. This measure meant, to put it simply, that participants in the RIX system, 
were given the opportunity if necessary to use more collateral as a base for their loans from 
the Riksbank.  
Another  preventive  measure  taken  by  the  Riksbank  has  been  to  establish,  together  with 
other  central  banks,  a  swap  facility  with  the  US  central  bank,  the  Federal  Reserve.  This 
agreement entails the Federal Reserve supplying US dollars in exchange Swedish krona if 
the need should arise. But it should also be pointed out that the Riksbank has a substantial 
foreign currency reserve. The agreement is not the only means for the Riksbank to obtain 
loans  in  US  dollars,  but  it  makes  it  easier  for  us  to  take  action  quickly.  Right  now,  the 
situation regarding short-term funding in USD has been very strained on many markets.  
To  increase  access  to  liquidity  in  US  dollars  and  to  make  the  markets  function  more 
normally, several central banks, including the Riksbank, have agreed on coordinated actions. 
The Riksbank has decided to lend dollars to Swedish banks in two auctions during October. 
The first was held yesterday and amounted to  USD 7 billion. A second auction with loans 
extending over the turn of the year will be held on 22 October and amount to USD 15 billion. 
A large part of the collateral the banks pledge for these loans will probably be comprised of 
covered mortgage bonds. The measures should therefore also have a positive effect on the 
functioning  of  the  mortgage  market.  Together  with  the  measures  taken  by  other  central 
banks, this should lead to better liquidity in the financial markets globally. 
A  further  measure  is  that  the  Riksbank  as  recently  as  today  decided  to  establish  a  loan 
facility in Swedish krona to increase access to loans of longer duration. 
There  have  thus  been  disruptions  in  the  financial  markets,  but  the  Riksbank,  other 
government agencies and central banks have taken action to improve the functioning of the 
markets. We will of course continue to follow developments very closely. We are constantly 
updating our analyses and we are prepared to take action if necessary. In addition, as I have 
already  mentioned,  we  have  close  contacts  with  the  banks,  market  participants,  other 
government agencies and our central bank colleagues in other countries. 
Monetary policy 
When  the  Executive  Board  met  for  our  most  recent  monetary  policy  meeting  on  3 
September,  the  decision  was  to  raise  the  repo  rate  by  0.25  percentage  points  to 4.75  per 
cent.  However,  the  forecast  for  how  the  repo  rate  would  develop  in  future  was  lowered  in 
relation  to  the  interest  rate  path  that  had  been  presented  in  July.  The  July  forecasts 
contained  a  fairly  high  probability  for  a  further  two  raises  during  the  autumn.  But  at  the 
September  meeting  the  Executive  Board’s  assessment  was  that  there  would  not  be  any 
more raises and that the interest rate might need to be cut during 2009. The decision was 
reached  by  a  narrow  majority.  Three  members  of  the  Executive  Board  supported  the 
decision,  while  three  were  against  it,  and  the  Governor’s  casting  vote  was  decisive.  I  was 
part of the minority who wished to hold the repo rate unchanged at the September meeting 
and to see a slightly faster reduction in the rate in the future.  
The main reasons put forward by the majority for raising the interest rate were that inflation 
had continued to rise and was far above the target, that inflation expectations remained high 
and that cost pressures had increased. The majority assessment was that it was necessary 
to raise the repo rate to prevent the increases in energy and food prices from spreading to 
other areas. The reasons for lowering the interest rate path included the fall in the oil price 
and other commodity prices over the summer. Another reason was that growth had slowed 
down more than expected, both in Sweden and abroad. The turmoil in the financial markets 
was of course also included in the picture. 
BIS Review 119/2008 
 5
My own assessment 
I personally had entered a reservation as early as July against the forecast that it would be 
necessary to raise the repo rate a couple more times during the autumn. At the September 
meeting  I  considered  that  the  arguments  against  further  interest  rate  raises  were  even 
stronger.  Although  inflation  was  high  and  far  above  the  inflation  target,  the  information 
received during the summer indicated that inflation would be weaker in the future than we 
had  predicted  in  July  and  my  assessment  was  that  the  risk  of  contagion  effects  had  also 
declined. Let me explain my reasoning at the time.  
There were three main areas where my assessment differed from that of the majority. These 
were  economic  activity  in  Sweden  and  abroad,  the  risk  of  contagion  effects  from  the 
increases  in  oil  and  commodity  prices  in  the  world  market  and  to  what  extent  the  weak 
productivity risked leading to inflation effects.  
Oil and food prices 
Oil and food commodity prices had fallen slightly during the summer, but were still a good bit 
higher at the time of the September meeting than they had been a year previously. There 
was also considerable uncertainty over how they might develop in the future. But my view 
was that the risk of these prices rising again had declined as a result of the clear weakening 
in economic activity both in Sweden and abroad. I also assessed that the risk of contagion 
effects  on  wages  and  prices  in  other  areas  had  declined.  I  therefore  considered  that  no 
further increase in the interest rate was necessary to counteract these effects.  
I would like to take the opportunity to answer the criticism against us that we care too much 
about the price of oil and food commodities in the world market when we make our monetary 
policy decisions. The reason given is that we cannot affect these prices with our monetary 
policy. Of course it is quite true that we cannot affect world market prices. But nor have we 
tried to stop the direct effects of the upturn in oil and commodity prices. If this had been our 
aim,  the  interest  rate  would  have  been  much  higher  than  it  is  now.  Inflation  is  also  much 
higher  now  than  our  target,  because  of  the  direct  effects  of  higher  commodity  prices.  The 
reason we have not tightened our monetary policy severely is out of consideration to the real 
economy,  production  and  employment.  However,  what  we  are  anxious  to  see  is  that  the 
indirect  effects  of  the  increases  in  oil  and  food  prices  are  not  allowed  to  push  up  inflation 
more permanently. We conduct a flexible inflation-targeting policy. If shocks occur that mean 
inflation will deviate from the target, we can allow it to take some time to attain the inflation 
target. The normal time horizon is a couple of years, but sometimes it may be sooner and 
sometimes it may need to take a little longer.  
Weaker growth 
With  regard  to  growth  in  Sweden  and  abroad,  my  views  were  more  pessimistic  than  the 
assessment  presented  in  the  September  Monetary  Policy  Update.  Developments  in  the 
United States appeared particularly uncertain. The crisis in the housing sector, together with 
falling employment and weaker growth in real wages meant that I found it hard to believe that 
the US economy would turn upwards as quickly as assumed in the forecast. Moreover, the 
forecast  for  global  growth  assumed  that  there  would  not  be  any  substantial  slowdown  in 
economic  activity  in  the  emerging  economies.  However,  my  assessment  was  that  growth 
would  also  weaken  there.  The  rises  in  energy  and  food  prices  entail  cost  increases  and 
reduce purchasing power in these countries too. I also pointed out the rapid slowdown in the 
growth rate in the euro area. All in all, I considered there were risks that economic activity 
abroad would weaken more than was forecast in the September Update. 
In Sweden, there were clear signs of an economic downturn as early as the monetary policy 
meeting in July. In September we could see that growth in the second quarter had slowed 
6 
 BIS Review 119/2008
down  much  sooner  than  expected.  The  situation  in  the  Swedish  labour  market  remained 
strong,  but  even  here  there  were  indicators,  such  as  labour  shortages,  the  number  of  job 
vacancies and redundancies, pointing to a cooling down. 
Productivity and inflation 
Productivity in Sweden has been weak since the beginning of last year. This means that unit 
labour  costs  as  measured  in  the  National  Accounts  are  increasing  more  quickly.  There  is 
thus a risk that companies will try to pass on their cost increases to consumers, which would 
result  in  higher  inflation.  However,  I  considered  that  this  risk  is  slight  at  present,  now  that 
economic activity is slowing down. The labour market usually lags behind production in the 
economic  cycle.  Employment  has  risen  rapidly  in  recent  years  and  when  demand  and 
production slow down as quickly as they are now, my assessment was that companies are 
more likely to cut their workforces rather than raise prices substantially. The redundancies 
announced at the beginning of the autumn may be an indication that many companies have 
had to reduce their labour forces.  
To  summarise,  my  assessment  was  that  inflation  would  slow  down  sooner  than  was 
assumed  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Update.  It  was  therefore  my  conclusion  that  no  further 
interest  rate  increase  was  necessary  to  bring  inflation  back  on  target  within  a  reasonable 
period of time. Further, my assessment was that the repo rate might need to be cut more 
than  indicated  by  the  proposed  interest  rate  path  and  I  therefore  entered  a  reservation 
against the new interest rate path. 
Some concluding thoughts 
The  Riksbank,  like  many  other  central  banks  around  the  world,  is  currently  facing  difficult 
challenges. But although they are difficult, we are well-equipped to meet them. For instance, 
we have an entirely different starting point from that during the finance crisis of 1992, which 
largely  concerned  problems  that  had  originated  here  at  home.  Today  we  are  suffering 
contagion effects from problems in the US mortgage market, a market to which the Swedish 
banks have only small direct exposures. The situation with regard to monetary policy is also 
quite different from during the early 1990s. The inflation target and the current regulations 
regarding  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  together  with  sound  public  finances  provide  a  stable 
base on which to stand and meet the coming economic downturn. 
Even if the Swedish banks are affected by current events, they have good capital buffers and 
good earnings, and are therefore well-equipped to meet the turmoil in the financial markets. 
The biggest problem for the banks at present is to borrow at longer durations. The Riksbank, 
together with other government agencies and central banks, has taken measures to improve 
the situation. We are also prepared to take further measures if necessary. 
BIS Review 119/2008 
 7
