Mario Draghi: Combating the global financial crisis – the role of 
international cooperation 
Text of the HKMA Distinguished Lecture by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy 
and Chairman of the Financial Stability Forum, Hong Kong, 16 December 2008. 
 Introduction 
It is an honour and a pleasure to be giving this HKMA distinguished lecture. I thank Joseph 
Yam for his kind invitation. I also thank Joseph and his colleagues at the HKMA for hosting 
the FSF Asia-Pacific Regional Meeting that has just concluded.  
The crisis afflicting the global financial system has now reached a critical stage. On the one 
hand the combined responses of governments, central banks, regulatory authorities and the 
private sector have created a base of stability, admittedly still fragile, for the world financial 
system. On the other hand, the sharp slowdown  in global growth will necessarily translate 
into  credit  losses  that  will  have  a  further  impact  on  the  banking  industry.  To  mitigate  the 
recession  and  break  this  vicious  circle  a  further  round  of  responses  –  including  fiscal, 
monetary and regulatory policies – is proving necessary. 
Shortcomings in assessment ahead of the crisis 
One striking aspect of the crisis is precisely how its unfolding has continued to catch both 
policy  makers  and  private  sector  players  by  surprise.  It  started  with  defaults  in  a  marginal 
segment of the financial services industry, then quickly spread to virtually all assets. From 
being  a  US-only  event,  it  has  become  global, and  in  fact  it  is  forcing and  accelerating  the 
redressing  of  world  macro  imbalances  that  have  been  with  us  for  15  years.  The  current 
recession is the result. 
None of these steps had been anticipated in a timely way by the relevant actors. And when I 
say “in a timely way” I mean with enough lead-time to permit action that could have affected 
the  outcomes.  Policies  that  were  reactive,  and  sometimes  even  very  effective,  but  never 
proactive, seem to have been the rule. This is of course not the approach to policy-making 
that  we  try  to  employ  when  it  comes  to  controlling  inflation  or  meeting  other  objectives  of 
macroeconomic  policy.  One  reason  for  this  asymmetry  is  that  our  knowledge  of  all  the 
interactions within the financial services industry in a global world was quite superficial at the 
beginning of the crisis. 
The private sector has not done any better. The immediate outcome of the private sector’s 
own  shortcomings  in  assessment  has  been  the  sudden  death  of  many  businesses  and  a 
generalized credit contraction. Our collective understanding of these processes has certainly 
deepened during the last year but we do not yet have a conscious and fully-fledged view of 
how the financial sector will look in the years to come. Much of the effort has gone so far into 
initiatives to address the short-term and medium-weaknesses in the system, but now we may 
be approaching the time when it will be appropriate to start thinking about reconstruction. To 
do  so,  however,  we  first  have  to  see  when  and  how  reality  eluded  our  or  the  market’s 
perceptions ahead of the crisis. 
First,  the  underlying  reason  why  problems  in  US  subprime  loans  led  to  the  current  broad-
based macrofinancial crisis was the global nature of exposures to increasing risk aversion 
and deleveraging. Risk is now priced and traded at the global level. Over the years preceding 
the  crisis,  the  overall  price  of  risk  fell  significantly,  and  risky,  illiquid  positions  were 
accumulated in many different national and international markets. When problems emerged 
in  the  specific  category  of  US  subprime,  this  started  a  process  which  ultimately  led  to  a 
BIS Review 160/2008 
 1
repricing  of  risk  across  all  asset  classes.  As  Tim  Geithner  noted  when  he  delivered  this 
lecture  two  years  ago,  this  pattern  is  not  a  new  one:  in  times  of  financial  crisis,  when 
investors cut risk-taking, they cut it everywhere, and the differing fundamentals of individual 
markets become irrelevant. 
Second, many saw risks and leverage increasing, but an optimistic view that overestimated 
the  true  degree  of  risk  dispersion  and  diversification  in  credit  markets  had  become  the 
conventional wisdom. In particular, even when it became apparent that credit standards had 
deteriorated,  neither  capital  markets,  nor  bankers,  nor  regulators  perceived  the  extent  to 
which the risk exposures generated by securitisation stayed on bank balance sheets. Also 
we  collectively  overestimated  the  ability  of  the  system  to  absorb,  rather  than  amplify, 
pressure for de-risking and deleveraging. On another front, it was only once the crisis was 
underway that the world seems to have discovered the risks inherent in business models that 
relied  excessively  on  wholesale  funding  markets,  both  for  specific  institutions  and  for  the 
system. And, given that these risks were misunderstood at the domestic level, all the more 
so  was  this  the  case  at  the  international  level,  where  firms,  investors  and  regulators  were 
farther from the markets where these bad risks were originated. 
One way to explain this collective blindness is to review those market developments that, in 
the years leading to the crisis, made both the regulators’ and market’s knowledge suddenly 
obsolete, while increasing the opacity of the financial system as a whole. Let me give you a 
few examples.  
• 
For  the  first  time  in  recent  years  securitization  was  applied  to  lower  quality 
mortgages. Monitoring by capital markets of this lower quality was made difficult by 
the fact that the probability of default did not factor in i) the probability of a drop in 
real estate prices in the US at the national level, which had not occurred since the 
Great Depression, ii) the effects of changes in lending standards on probabilities of 
default  in  these  markets,  or  iii)  the  cross  correlation  across  defaults  and  between 
defaults and the rest of the economy.  
Second,  especially  after  2004,  the  massive  amount  of  issuance  of  collateralized 
obligations by a few players increased both the market power of these players over 
the credit rating agencies and their dependence on this source of revenue.  
Third, the SEC’s relaxation in 2004 of pre-existing limits on leverage for investment 
banks  vastly  increased  the  complexity  of  their  risk  management.  For  some  time 
neither banks nor regulators seemed to have fully perceived how this decision would 
radically change the industry.  
Finally, the rapid growth of the CDS market, which in ten years went from zero to 44 
trillion dollars in notional amounts, created an entirely new definition of counterparty 
risk that was much more difficult to assess, evaluate and collateralize. 
   With the benefit of hindsight one may be tempted to say that regulators should have probed 
more  deeply,  for  example,  into  the  risk  characteristics  of  triple-A  rated  super  senior  CDO 
tranches, and should have realised that the risk of a very sharp fall in the credit quality and 
market value of such instrument was much greater than that of a triple-A rated bond. And, 
since it is the responsibility of supervisors to be especially attentive to tail risks and extreme 
events, they should have required banks to make appropriate capital charges against these 
instruments. This might have been the right thing to do but, as the previous discussion has 
shown, the knowledge leading to that type of behaviour simply was not there.  
There  are  many  lessons  that  one  should  draw  from  the  current  crisis  but  one  especially 
stands out for its general and all-encompassing character. In the future we will all be much 
more  alert  to  the  systemic  implications  of  both  market  developments  and  of  our  own 
decisions,  and  this  will  have  profound  implications  in  many  different  ways.  For  one  thing, 
financial innovation will not simply be welcomed for its narrow, specific benefits, as has been 
the case in the past, but it will be carefully scrutinized for its potential systemic risks. This 
2 
 BIS Review 160/2008
may well dampen the growth of the financial service industry, while enhancing its survival in 
the long term. Furthermore, it is no longer true that the threat to let a financial institution fail is 
the most effective weapon against moral hazard. When implications of defaults are systemic, 
and  in  a  global  world  this  is  the  case  much  more  often  than  in  the  past,  this  threat  is  not 
credible to say the least. And with this goes our reliance on the financial system’s incentive to 
credibly regulate itself, unless we can find other mitigants of moral hazard that are immune to 
systemic implications. Finally, we as regulators have to take a closer look at ourselves, with a 
view to eliminating everything that contributes to our segmented perception of events in the 
financial system. 
Response to the crisis 
A  financial  crisis  –  an  event  in  which  the  financial  system  fails  at  its  core  tasks,  including 
allocating savings, financing investment, pricing assets, and transferring risk – poses difficult 
challenges to policy in terms of assessment and the calibration of responses. These tasks 
are difficult at the domestic level, and still more complex at the global level.  
A  critical  set  of  challenges  relate  to  information  gaps.  We  have  made  progress  in  recent 
years  in  developing  analytical  tools  and  metrics  for  assessing  risks  ahead  of  a  crisis. 
Unfortunately,  almost  by  definition,  a  crisis  involves  events  and  processes  that  are 
unexpected. And once problems emerge, their dimensions and implications are impossible to 
gauge quickly. At the international level, assessment is more challenging still. Cross-border 
exposures are difficult to assess, and it is especially difficult to anticipate confidence effects, 
which are often the primary means of cross-border contagion.  
Also, determining how to calibrate the response is a classic case of decision-making under 
limited  information  and  uncertainty.  There  is  no  way  to  know  either  ex  ante  or  ex  post 
whether one made the right choice. A too hasty response in some countries may increase 
moral hazard in others. But, when we have reached the stage where a forceful response is 
needed, a delay by some countries in joining the others will dilute the impact of this response 
and delay prompt resolution.  
In summary our own vastly imperfect knowledge and its segmented nature would have made 
a faster and more effective crisis response unlikely, since we were just learning what to do 
while the crisis unfolded. Under the circumstances, I think governments and central banks 
have  been  remarkably  flexible  and  open-minded  in  developing  and  implementing  creative 
responses to the conditions that we have faced.  
We  can  identify  four  distinct  areas  where  authorities  have  needed  to  act:  funding  liquidity 
pressures  in  interbank  markets;  solvency  risks  facing  systemically  important  institutions; 
medium-  and  long-term  measures  to  strengthen  the  system;  and  the  slowdown  in  the 
macroeconomy. Each has featured a number of critical information gaps that have had to be 
overcome, and each has presented its own challenges in terms of international coordination.  
Liquidity pressures were the primary focus of policymakers in the early stages of the crisis, 
starting in August 2007, and have remained a concern ever since. Central banks understood 
at an early stage that they needed to act, and act quickly, given the sudden and rapid rise in 
the market’s demand for liquid funds, an asset for which they are ultimately the only source 
of  supply.  Central  banks  initially  focused  on  their  own  markets,  but  given  cross-border 
confidence effects as well as the need for foreign currency liquidity in many markets, they 
rapidly  developed  a  number  of  channels  of  cooperation,  including  coordinated  policy 
announcements and foreign currency swap lines.  
After the collapse of Lehman in September, the systemic nature of the crisis has manifested 
itself  with  unprecedented  force.  In  financial  markets,  we  have  observed  a  rapid  shift  from 
liquidity to credit risks, from a prevalent recourse to the market and central banks to massive 
governments’  intervention.  Responses  have  included  varying  combinations  of  deposit 
guarantees,  debt  guarantees,  capital  injections,  and  asset  purchases.  While  these  have 
BIS Review 160/2008 
 3
varied with local conditions, the need for coordination is well understood, and work to make 
these responses consistent is well underway.  
What have been the lessons of the experiences of recent months in dealing with the liquidity 
and solvency problems that have buffeted financial systems? For one thing, we have learned 
that  in  this  new  global  risk  environment  the  speed  of  developments  has  increased 
dramatically  and  correspondingly  reduced  the  time  that  authorities  have  for  an  effective 
response.  This  has  further  increased  our  reliance  on  preventative  measures  ahead  of  a 
crisis. 
Second,  we  have  learned  that  the  international  aspects  of  crisis  response  have  become 
many  times  more  important  than  before.  The  transmission  of  shocks  across  borders  now 
happens  through  more  diverse  channels  than  even  a  few  years  ago.  Given  the  many 
international  externalities  involved  in  the  measures  that  might  be  taken  by  national 
authorities,  the  mechanisms  for  coordinating  crisis  response  need  to  be  in  place  well  in 
advance. Plans need to be formulated and potential consequences must be thought through. 
Resolution  procedures  and  bankruptcy  arrangements  also  need  to  be  harmonised  better 
across markets.  
Strengthening the system 
From the start of the current crisis, it has been clear that short-term  measures to address 
liquidity and solvency have had to be complemented by actions to strengthen the system in 
the longer term. Just as there are critical externalities in short-term response measures that 
call  for  international  coordination,  these  longer  term  actions  have  needed  to  address  the 
cross-border  effects  of  regulatory  policies  in  order  to  assure  the  maintenance  of  a  level 
playing field.  
The work to strengthen global systemic resilience is proceeding with a degree of international 
cooperation  and  at  a  speed  that  would  have  been  unthinkable  only  one  year  ago.  In 
developing these initiatives, there has been a broad underlying consensus among authorities 
that the goal should be to create a financial system that is less leveraged, better capitalised, 
and more transparent, and that features stronger incentives for all participants in the system.  
The  FSF  has  proven  to  be  an  effective  vehicle  for  coordinating  these  actions  at  the 
international level. Thanks to our broad sectoral membership, which encompasses finance 
ministries,  central  banks,  top  regulators,  international  institutions,  international  standard-
setting bodies, and expert groupings, we are able to keep one another apprised of the risks 
facing different sectors and of our respective work programs. Importantly, our membership 
includes  most  of  the  key  actors  responsible  for  implementing  the  actions  that  we 
recommend. The willingness of our members to exchange information and views, and to alter 
and  accelerate  work  programs,  has  been  truly  remarkable.  However,  the  crisis  has  also 
pointed  up  the  need  for  us  to  expand  our  membership  geographically,  particularly  with 
respect  to  the  larger  emerging  economies.  This  is  an  issue  that  we  are  working  on  very 
seriously and on which we expect to make progress soon. 
A first set of initiatives taken by the FSF has focused on reducing information gaps: in terms 
of the raw data available to authorities and the market; in terms of the mechanisms, such as 
credit  ratings,  through  which  this  information  is  compiled  and  used  by  the  market;  and  in 
terms of the analytical work we do in the official sector to assess risks and vulnerabilities in 
the system. Improved international accounting and disclosure practices should help markets 
and  authorities  understand  risks  and  exposures  better.  Accounting  standard  setters  have 
been taking important steps to address weaknesses in such areas as the valuation of illiquid 
securities and the treatment of off-balance sheet vehicles. Securities regulators have taken a 
number of actions intended to improve the role of credit ratings in the system, to clarify their 
appropriate  use  by  investors  and  regulators,  and  to  address  concerns  about  conflicts  of 
interest in the ratings process.  
4 
 BIS Review 160/2008
Closer collaboration between the IMF and FSF is one way that we in the global community 
hope to improve our ability to stay on top of risks in the future. 
A  second  set  of  initiatives  has  focused  on  prudential  regulation  and  oversight.  I  believe 
strengthened capital and liquidity frameworks will be seen as a central achievement of the 
work  to  enhance  systemic  resilience.  More  capital  will  be  required  against  trading  and 
securitisation risks, and more intense oversight will be applied on liquidity risk management 
by banks. These improvements will be phased in carefully, so as not to exacerbate situations 
that are still fragile. Given the importance of preserving a level playing field, this work has 
necessarily been coordinated internationally. 
Third, the FSF has initiated different work streams directed at reducing procyclicality in the 
financial system, i.e. the tendency of the financial system to accumulate excessive risk and 
leverage  in  good  times  and  to  shed  risks  excessively  in  a  downturn.  Efforts  are  also 
underway to improve the incentives created by compensation systems in financial firms. 
Fourth,  supervisors  have  agreed  to  cooperate  more  closely  in  overseeing  internationally 
active banks, through such vehicles as supervisory colleges.  
Finally,  going  forward,  it  will  be  crucial  to  review  the  perimeter  of  regulation,  in  order  to 
reduce  gaps  and  inconsistencies  in  regulatory  regimes  and  to  address  potential  systemic 
issues that are present in sectors currently not regulated. 
New challenges for macroeconomic policies 
While  this  structural  response  is  clearly  an  essential  part  of  the  cure, as  it  helps  to  renew 
confidence  in  the  markets,  it  is  also  clear  that  many  of  the  measures  we  are  taking  or 
discussing will  only  have  an  impact  over  the  medium  term.  This  is  in  the  very  nature  of  a 
structural response, which is foremost concentrated on the regulatory framework. 
Today the immediate challenge we face is to avoid a situation where the recessive forces 
deepen  and  combine  with  the  impairment  of  financial  markets  in  creating  a  vicious  spiral. 
Over the last few months, the outlook has quickly shifted from slowdown to recession, from 
supply to demand shock, and from inflation to deflation risks.  
This new situation requires not only further and bolder actions, but also to step up the level of 
cooperation  and  common  understanding  between  policy  makers  both  at  the  national  level 
and  internationally.  Let  me  briefly  review  the  main  challenges  confronting  the  conduct  of 
macroeconomic policies looking forward. 
Monetary policies 
Monetary  policies  in  response  to  the  drying  up  of  global  liquidity  have  been  extremely 
responsive and fully cooperative. On October 8, coordination in the monetary field reached 
new heights, with the simultaneous reduction of interest rates in eight major central banks.  
Since then official interest rates have been reduced in rapid and successive waves across 
the globe, responding to the deterioration of the economic outlook and the rapid receding of 
inflation. Today the margins for further action are rapidly shrinking particularly in the US and 
Japan where policy rates are close to their zero lower bound.  
Rapidly  falling  inflation  expectations  and,  in  some  areas,  deflation  risks,  together  with  the 
impossibility  of  lowering  rates  below  zero,  pose  the  most  challenging  test  for  the 
effectiveness of monetary policies. We know that the inability to maintain sufficiently low real 
interest  rates  has  aggravated  crises  in  the  past.  At  the  start  of  the  Great  Depression,  for 
example, short term real interest rates actually increased in the US (up to more than 10 per 
cent!) until 1933, because of the rapid fall in inflation. In the Japan of the “lost decade” short 
term real interest rates remained relatively high until 1995. Such developments have been 
often pointed to as key factors driving these economies into prolonged depression. 
BIS Review 160/2008 
 5
The  list  of  monetary  policy  instruments  available  to  central  banks  to  reflate  the  economy 
when official rates are close to or at zero is fairly wide. It includes:  
• 
a “quantitative easing” policy, i.e. expanding the money base beyond what is strictly 
needed to keep the official rates at zero, in order to reduce liquidity risks and provide 
incentives for financial intermediaries to expand their credit (elements of this policy, 
amply  used  in  Japan  until  recently,  are  visible  in  the  exceptional  actions  of  many 
central banks today);  
measures to reduce longer term interest rates, through direct purchase of long term 
government securities and/or carefully designed communication to influence market 
expectations (Bank of Japan and the Fed in 2002-03); and 
the  purchase  of  a  wide  range  of  private  assets  from  securities  to  equity  (as  our 
guest, the HKMA, experienced during the Asian crisis ten years ago). 
  As  effective  these  unconventional  monetary  policy  instruments  may  be  in  boosting  the 
economy  when  price  stability  is  at  stake,  we  have  to  be  aware  of  their  limits  and  of  their 
broader implications. 
First, the effects of many such policies are not well-known: the conduct of monetary policy is 
bound  to  be  surrounded  by  much  more  uncertainty  than  is  normally  the  case.  It  is  for 
example  unclear  how  far  longer  term  rates,  and  in  particular  the  risk  premia  embedded  in 
those  rates,  can  be  brought  down  by  liquidity  injections  in  a  situation  of  widespread 
uncertainty about economic prospects. Well designed communication by central banks may 
be crucial in this respect.  
Second, and most importantly, we should always keep in mind that the responsiveness of the 
economy depends to a large extent on the health of financial intermediaries, in the absence 
of which even powerful liquidity injections are not greatly effective. 
Third, there is a risk of introducing distortions in financial prices, and this calls for particular 
care in designing the measures. 
Fourth,  unconventional  measures  may  have  a  more  direct  redistributive  impact  on  specific 
sectors of the economy or categories in society than normal monetary policy actions. This 
implies  a  high  degree  of  common  understanding  and  cooperation  between  fiscal  and 
monetary authorities, as part of a clear definition of respective responsibilities and fields of 
action. 
Fiscal policies 
As  the  effectiveness  of  action  in  the  monetary  field  becomes  less  certain,  fiscal  stimulus 
becomes  more  necessary.  When  financial  markets  are  not  working  properly  and  credit 
constraints are widespread, private spending is more sensitive to current disposable income, 
and the impact of a fiscal stimulus is therefore greater.  
To maximize their effectiveness, fiscal actions should not affect the longer term sustainability 
of public finances, in order to avoid the expectations of higher future taxes; moreover, the 
stimulus has to be directed where its impact is strongest and fastest.  
In  the  current  circumstances,  the  size  and  quality  of  international  coordination  is  crucial. 
Uncoordinated moves create spillovers and relative price or exchange rate movements that 
can  greatly  reduce  the  incentives  to  implement  a  fiscal  stimulus  at  the  individual  country 
level.  On  the  contrary,  with  coordinated  action  taken  globally,  an  individual  country’s 
measures will be more significant with the joint benefit of an increase in foreign demand. The 
quantitative effects of the spillovers can be quite substantial. Recent simulations conducted 
at the Bank of Italy find that a coordinated fiscal action at the European level could increase 
6 
 BIS Review 160/2008
by  some  30  per  cent  the  impact  of  the  same  measure  taken  in  Italy  alone.1  The  results 
reported  by  the  IMF  in  its  latest  World  Economic  Outlook  are  also  quite  telling  in  this 
respect.2
Moreover, in the case of concerted action, country level risk premia may remain more stable 
than otherwise. 
But coordination does not imply that every country has to do the same. Starting conditions 
need to be taken into account. Countries that are net creditors vis-à-vis the rest of the world 
and with sound public finances, in Asia and Europe, obviously have the possibility to take a 
frontline position. By doing so they would not only reduce the consequences of the crises for 
their own economies but also help to contain the weakening of net debtors’ economies and 
currencies. Moreover, bolstering internal demand in these countries goes in the direction of 
reducing  the  large  global  imbalances  accumulated  so  far  and  thus  may  help  to  set  the 
foundations for a more sustainable growth looking forward. 
In  other  countries,  where  public  finances  and/or  net  external  positions  are  less  sound,  the 
margins for action are obviously more limited. This does not mean that they are nil. But it 
implies that medium term growth-enhancing and debt-reducing policies become more crucial. 
For  example,  compensating  actions  may  be  taken  to  bolster  pension  reforms,  in  order  to 
lighten the burden coming from an aging population and increase participation rates; or to 
implement  deep  restructuring  measures  in  the  public  sector  to  enhance  the  efficiency  and 
quality  of  public  spending.  If  taken  with  determination,  such  actions  can  create  room  for 
maneuver in these countries so that they can alleviate the effects of the crisis and improve 
growth prospects.  
As  fiscal  measures  are  being  taken  in  many  countries  to  counteract  the  economic 
contraction, the need to ensure that individual actions come to form a coherent approach is 
more pressing. In Europe, the European Commission has proposed a plan, currently under 
discussion,  for  a  concerted  action  of  fiscal  authorities,  that  is  very  much  in  line  with  the 
principles  I  have  just  outlined.  In  the  context  of  the  European  single  market  this  is  an 
absolute  necessity.  But  I  think  that  great  benefits  could  derive  from  adopting  a  similar 
approach at the global level.  
Conclusion 
The  main  theme  of  this  conversation  is  that  at  the  origin  of  the  crisis  we  find  a  variety  of 
market developments spurred by financial innovation that were not understood neither by the 
market  actors,  banks,  and  capital  markets,  nor  by  regulators.  The  future  challenge  lies  in 
producing  an  environment  that  is  innovation  friendly  but  where  knowledge  of  market 
participants  is  adequate.  This  objective  is  certainly  not  realistic  for  all  sorts  of  financial 
innovation, for some of the products we discussed, a model taking into account and pricing 
all risks simply doesn’t exist. In other cases the limits to how much financial innovation will be 
accepted or allowed may come from the unwillingness of the relevant private sector players 
to provide all the necessary information. Whatever the case it is likely that the future financial 
system will have more prudential oversight and more standardisation than in the past. 
This crisis, as painful as it is, provides all of us with valuable experience that we at the FSF 
and  more  generally  the  supervisory  community  are  building  on  in  designing  the  future 
financial  system.  However  the  crisis  has  been  remarkable  in  raising  the  awareness  of  all 
                                                 
1   The exercise is conducted using a DSGE model described in L. Forni, A. Gerali and M. Pisani (2008), “The 
macroeconomics of fiscal consolidations in a monetary union: the case of Italy”, Bank of Italy, forthcoming. 
See  also  L.  Forni,  L.  Monteforte  and  L.  Sessa  (2008)  “The  general  equilibrium  effects  of  fiscal  policy: 
Estimates for the euro area”, Journal of Public Economics. 
IMF, “World Economic Outlook, October 2008. 
2  
BIS Review 160/2008 
 7
authorities  about  the  need  to  cooperate  and  coordinate  their  actions  domestically  and 
internationally. Let us hope that the present momentum will stay even when the situation will 
improve, as I am confident it will. 
8 
 BIS Review 160/2008
