Ben S Bernanke: Federal Reserve policies in the financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Greater Austin Chamber of Commerce, Austin, Texas, 1 December 
2008. 
 It is a privilege for me to be here in Texas, and I would like to thank the Austin Chamber for 
hosting  this  luncheon.  The  Texas  economy  is  strong  and  diversified,  accounting  for  more 
than a trillion dollars of output last year. However, our nation, and Texas too, is being tested 
by economic and financial challenges. Those challenges and the Federal Reserve's policy 
responses are the topic of my remarks today.  
Federal Reserve policies during the crisis 
As  you  know,  this  extraordinary  period  of  financial  turbulence  is  now  well  into  its  second 
year. Triggered by the  contraction of the U.S.  housing market that began in 2006 and the 
associated rise in delinquencies on subprime mortgages, the crisis has become global and is 
now affecting a wide range of financial institutions, asset classes, and markets. Constraints 
on credit availability and slumping asset values have in turn helped to generate a substantial 
slowing in economic activity.  
The  Federal  Reserve's  strategy  for  dealing  with  the  financial  crisis  and  its  economic 
consequences has had three components. First, to offset to the extent possible the effects of 
the  crisis  on  credit  conditions  and  the  broader  economy,  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee (FOMC) has aggressively eased monetary policy. The easing campaign began in 
September  2007,  shortly  after  the  turbulence  began,  with  a  cut  of  50  basis  points  in  the 
target  for  the  federal  funds  rate. The  cumulative  reductions  in  the  target  rate  reached  100 
basis  points  –  that  is,  a  full  percentage  point  –  by  the  end  of  2007.  As  indications  of 
economic  weakness  proliferated,  the  Committee  continued  to  respond,  reducing  the  target 
rate  by  an  additional  225  basis  points  by  the  spring  of  this  year.  By  way  of  historical 
comparison, this policy response stands out as exceptionally rapid and proactive. In taking 
these actions, we aimed not only to cushion the direct effects of the financial turbulence on 
the  economy,  but  also  to  reduce  the  risk  of  a  so-called  adverse  feedback  loop  in  which 
economic weakness exacerbates financial stress, which, in turn, leads to further economic 
damage. Unfortunately, despite the support provided by monetary policy, the intensification 
of the financial turbulence this fall has led to a further deterioration in the economic outlook. 
The Committee again responded by cutting the target for the federal funds rate an additional 
100  basis  points  in  October.  Half  of  that  reduction  came  as  part  of  an  unprecedented 
coordinated interest rate cut by six major central banks on October 8. 
The Committee's rapid monetary easing was not without risks. Some observers expressed 
concern at the time that these policies would stoke inflation, and, indeed, inflation reached 
high  levels  earlier  this  year,  mostly  as  the  result  of  a  surge  in  the  prices  of  oil  and  other 
commodities.  Throughout  this  period,  the  Committee  remained  closely  attuned  to  inflation 
developments.  Because  control  of  inflation  requires  that  the  public's  longer-term  inflation 
expectations remain well anchored, we paid particularly close attention to indicators of those 
expectations,  as  inferred,  for  example,  from  financial  markets  and  from  surveys  of 
households and businesses. However, the Committee maintained the view that the rapid rise 
in  commodity  prices  primarily  reflected  sharply  increased  demand  for  raw  materials  in 
emerging  market  economies,  in  combination  with  constraints  on  the  supply  of  these 
materials, rather than general inflationary pressures. We expected that, at some point, global 
economic growth and the associated growth in the demand for commodities would moderate, 
which would result in a leveling out of commodity prices, consistent with the predictions of 
BIS Review 150/2008 
 1
futures markets. As you know, commodity prices peaked during the summer and, rather than 
leveling out, have actually fallen dramatically with the weakening in global economic activity. 
As  a  consequence,  overall  inflation  appears  set  to  decline  significantly  over  the  next  year 
toward levels consistent with price stability. 
Although  monetary  easing  likely  offset  some  part  of  the  economic  effects  of  the  financial 
turmoil,  that  offset  has  been  incomplete,  as  widening  credit  spreads  and  more  restrictive 
lending  standards  have  contributed  to  tight  overall  financial  conditions.  In  particular,  many 
traditional  funding  sources  for  financial  institutions  and  markets  have  dried  up,  and  banks 
and  other  lenders  have  found  their  ability  to  securitize  mortgages,  auto  loans,  credit  card 
receivables,  student  loans,  and  other  forms  of  credit  greatly  curtailed.  Consequently,  the 
second component of the Federal Reserve's strategy has been to support the functioning of 
credit markets and to reduce financial strains by providing liquidity to the private sector – that 
is, by lending cash or its equivalent secured with relatively illiquid assets. 
To  ensure  that  adequate  liquidity  is  available,  consistent  with  the  central  bank's  traditional 
role  as  the  liquidity  provider  of  last  resort,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  a  number  of 
extraordinary steps. For instance, to provide banks and other depositories easier access to 
liquidity, we narrowed the spread of the primary credit rate (the rate at which banks borrow 
from the Fed's discount window) over the target federal funds rate from 100 basis points to 
25 basis points; extended the term for which banks can borrow from the discount window to 
up  to  90  days;  and  developed  a  program,  called  the  Term  Auction  Facility,  under  which 
predetermined amounts of credit are auctioned to depository institutions for terms of up to 84 
days. These innovations resulted in large increases in the amount of Federal Reserve credit 
extended  to  the  banking  system.  Following  the  funding  crises  faced  by  Bear  Stearns  and 
other institutions this past spring, we also expanded our liquidity programs to include primary 
dealers in the government securities market. It should be emphasized that the loans that we 
make to banks and primary dealers through our standing facilities are both overcollateralized 
and  made  with  recourse  to  the  borrowing  firm,  which  serves  to  minimize  the  Federal 
Reserve's exposure to credit risk. To further improve funding conditions, the Federal Reserve 
has also recently introduced facilities to purchase highly rated commercial paper at a term of 
three months and to provide backup liquidity for money market mutual funds. 
In our globalized financial markets, the provision of dollar liquidity has international as well as 
domestic  aspects.  To  improve  dollar  funding  conditions  in  important  foreign  markets,  the 
Federal Reserve has approved bilateral currency swap agreements with 14 foreign central 
banks.  Swap  facilities  allow  each  of  the  central  banks  involved  to  borrow  foreign  currency 
from the other; in this case, foreign central banks such as the Bank of Japan, the European 
Central Bank, the Bank of England, and the Swiss National Bank have borrowed dollars from 
the  Federal  Reserve  to  re-lend  to  banks  in  their  jurisdictions.  Because  short-term  funding 
markets are interconnected, the provision of dollar liquidity in major foreign markets eases 
conditions in dollar funding markets globally, including here in the United States. Importantly, 
these swap arrangements pose essentially no credit risk because our counterparties are the 
foreign central banks themselves, which take responsibility for the extension of dollar credit 
within their jurisdictions. 
Judging the effectiveness of the Federal Reserve's liquidity programs is difficult. Obviously, 
they have not yet returned private credit markets to normal functioning. But I am confident 
that  market  functioning  would  have  been  more  seriously  impaired  in  the  absence  of  our 
actions. My reading of the evidence and the reports we have received is that these programs 
have  been  helpful  in  lowering  spreads  in  certain  short-term  funding  markets,  enabling 
financial and nonfinancial businesses to obtain credit that would have been costly or difficult 
to obtain elsewhere, and allowing a more orderly process of asset sales and the necessary 
deleveraging  by  financial  institutions.  Ultimately,  however,  market  participants  themselves 
must  address  the  fundamental  sources  of  financial  strains  by  raising  new  capital, 
restructuring balance sheets, and improving risk management. This process is likely to take 
some  time.  The  Federal  Reserve's  various  liquidity  measures  should  help  facilitate  that 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2008
process  indirectly  by  boosting  investor  confidence  and  by  reducing  the  risk  of  severe 
disruption during the period of adjustment. Once financial conditions become more normal, 
the extraordinary provision of liquidity by the Federal Reserve will no longer be needed, and 
financial  institutions  will  again  look  to  private  counterparties,  and  not  central  banks,  as  a 
source of ongoing funding.  
Consistent  with  the  historical  mission  of  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  third  component  of  our 
policy response has been to use all our available tools to promote financial stability, which is 
essential for healthy economic growth. At times, this has required working to preserve the 
stability of systemically critical financial institutions, so as to avoid further costly disruptions to 
both  the  financial  system  and  the  broader  economy  during  this  extraordinary  period.  In 
particular, the Federal Reserve collaborated with the Treasury to facilitate the acquisition of 
the  investment  bank  Bear  Stearns  by  JPMorgan  Chase  and  to  stabilize  the  large  insurer, 
American International Group (AIG). We worked with the Treasury and the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to put together a package of guarantees, liquidity access, and 
capital for Citigroup. Other efforts include our support of the actions by the Federal Housing 
Finance  Agency  and  the  Treasury  to  place  the  government-sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs) 
Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac  into  conservatorship  and  our  work  with  the  FDIC  and  other 
bank  regulators  to  assist  in  the  resolution  of  troubled  depositories,  such  as  Wachovia.  In 
each  case,  we  judged  that  the  failure  of  the  institution  in  question  would  have  posed 
substantial risks to the financial system and thus to the economy.  
The Federal Reserve has worked to promote financial stability through other means as well, 
such as strengthening the financial infrastructure. For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York has led cooperative efforts to improve the clearing and settlement procedures for 
credit default swaps and other over-the-counter derivatives. In addition, the Federal Reserve 
is collaborating with the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures 
Trading Commission to facilitate the development of central counterparties for the trading of 
credit default swaps. Properly managed, central counterparties can mitigate the counterparty 
risk that has proved a source of contagion in the past year. 
The  Federal  Reserve's  efforts  in  conjunction  with  other  agencies  to  prevent  the  failure  of 
systemically  important  firms  have  been  controversial  at  times.  One  view  holds  that 
intervening to prevent the failure of a financial firm is counterproductive, because it leads to 
erosion  of  market  discipline  and  creates  moral  hazard.  As  a  general  matter,  I  agree  that 
preserving market discipline is extremely important, and, accordingly, the government should 
intervene in markets only in exceptional circumstances. However, in my view, the failure of a 
major financial institution at a time when financial markets are already quite fragile poses too 
great a threat to financial and economic stability to be ignored. In such cases, intervention is 
necessary to protect the public interest. The problems of moral hazard and the existence of 
institutions that are "too big to fail" must certainly be addressed, but the right way to do this is 
through  regulatory  changes,  improvements  in  the  financial  infrastructure,  and  other 
measures that will prevent a situation like this from recurring. Going forward, reforming the 
system to enhance stability and to address the problem of "too big to fail" should be a top 
priority for lawmakers and regulators. 
In particular, recent events have revealed a serious weakness of our system: the absence of 
well-defined procedures and authorities for dealing with the potential failure of a systemically 
important nonbank financial institution. In the case of federally insured depository institutions, 
the FDIC has the necessary authority to resolve failing firms; indeed, in situations in which 
the failure of a firm is judged to pose a systemic risk, the FDIC's powers are quite broad and 
flexible. No comparable framework exists for nondepository financial institutions. The Federal 
Reserve is authorized to lend to nondepositories under unusual and exigent circumstances, 
but such loans must be backed by collateral sufficient to provide reasonable assurance that 
they will be repaid; if such collateral is not available, the Fed cannot lend. And until recently, 
the Treasury also did not have the authority to inject capital to prevent the disorderly failure 
of systemically significant private institutions. 
BIS Review 150/2008 
 3
In the absence of an appropriate, comprehensive legal or regulatory framework, the Federal 
Reserve  and  the  Treasury  dealt  with  the  cases  of  Bear  Stearns  and  AIG  using  the  tools 
available. To avoid the failure of Bear Stearns, we facilitated the purchase of Bear Stearns by 
JPMorgan Chase by means of a Federal Reserve loan, backed by assets of Bear Stearns 
and  a  partial  guarantee  from  JPMorgan.  In  the  case  of  AIG,  we  judged  that  emergency 
Federal  Reserve  credit  would  be  adequately  secured  by  AIG's  assets.  However,  neither 
route proved feasible in the case of the investment bank Lehman Brothers. No buyer for the 
firm  was  forthcoming,  and  the  available  collateral  fell  well  short  of  the  amount  needed  to 
secure  a  Federal  Reserve  loan  sufficient  to  pay  off  the  firm's  counterparties  and  continue 
operations.  The  firm's  failure  was  thus  unavoidable,  given  the  legal  constraints,  and  the 
Federal Reserve and the Treasury had no choice but to try instead to mitigate the fallout from 
that event.  
Fortunately, we now have tools to address any similar situation that might arise in the future. 
The intensification of the financial crisis this fall made clear that a comprehensive approach 
involving the fiscal authorities was needed to address more effectively the problems of the 
financial system. On that basis, the Administration, with the support of the Federal Reserve, 
asked  the  Congress  for  a  new  program  aimed  at  stabilizing  our  financial  markets.  The 
resulting  legislation,  the  Emergency  Economic  Stabilization  Act  (EESA),  provides  the 
necessary authorizations and resources to strengthen the financial system and, in particular, 
to  deal  with  the  potential  failure  of  a  systemically  important  firm.  Notably,  funds  provided 
under the act facilitated the recent government actions to stabilize Citigroup. More broadly, 
the act allows the Treasury to recapitalize and stabilize our banking system by purchasing 
preferred  stock  in  financial  institutions.  The  Capital  Purchase  Program  is  voluntary  and 
designed  to  encourage  participation  by  a  broad  range  of  institutions  while  maintaining  the 
ability  of  participating  institutions  to  raise  private  capital.  Up  to  $250  billion  has  been 
committed to this program. In addition to measures being implemented by the Treasury, the 
FDIC has announced programs to guarantee selected liabilities of FDIC-insured depository 
institutions and their holding companies. With time, these measures should help strengthen 
the banking system, allowing credit to flow more freely to support economic growth. 
Collectively, the Treasury, the FDIC, and the Federal Reserve are now much better equipped 
to  address  potential  systemic  risks  quickly  and  effectively,  and  we  are  firmly  committed  to 
doing  so.  However,  measures  such  as  the  Capital  Purchase  Program  and  the  FDIC 
guarantee are temporary. In the longer term, the development of a statutory framework for 
resolving systemically critical nonbank financial institutions in ways that do not destabilize the 
financial system as a whole must be another key priority. 
Economic outlook 
Despite  the  efforts  of  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  policymakers,  the  U.S.  economy 
remains  under  considerable  stress.  Economic  activity  was  weakening  even  before  the 
intensification of the financial crisis this fall. The sharp falloff in consumer spending during 
the summer was particularly striking. According to the latest estimates, real gross domestic 
product (GDP) declined at an annual rate of 0.5 percent in the third quarter, with personal 
consumption falling at an annual rate of 3.7 percent.  
However,  economic  activity  appears  to  have  downshifted  further  in  the  wake  of  the 
deterioration  in  financial  conditions  in  September.  Employment  losses,  which  had  been 
averaging about 100,000 per month for much of the year, accelerated to more than 250,000 
per month, on average, in September and October, and the unemployment rate jumped to 
6.5  percent  in  October.  Moreover,  recent  increases  in  the  number  of  new  claims  for 
unemployment  insurance  suggest  that  labor  market  conditions  worsened  further  in 
November.  Housing markets remain weak, with low demand and the  increased number of 
distressed  properties  on  the  market  contributing  to  further  declines  in  house  prices  and 
ongoing  reductions  in  new  construction.  In  reaction  to  worse  economic  prospects  and 
4 
 BIS Review 150/2008
tightening  credit  conditions,  households  have  continued  to  retrench,  putting  consumer 
spending on a pace to post another sharp decline in the fourth quarter. In particular, sales of 
light motor vehicles fell to an annual rate of 10-1/2 million units in October, the lowest level 
since 1983, and November sales reports are downbeat.  
Business activity also slowed in recent months. Excluding the effects of the hurricanes and 
the  Boeing  strike  on  production,  manufacturing  output  fell  2  percent  over  the  months  of 
September and October, orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods fell markedly in 
October, and most survey measures of business conditions are at or close to record lows.  
Amid the bad news, there have been some positives. The pronounced declines in the prices 
for crude oil and other commodities have helped to reverse what had been a significant drag 
on  household  purchasing  power  through  much  of  the  year.  And  there  have  been  a  few 
tentative signs of stabilization in financial markets. For instance, short-term funding costs for 
banks and commercial paper issuers have come down recently, and issuance of investment-
grade bonds by nonfinancial corporations appears to have held up well. Banks have recently 
issued  bonds  backed  by  the  FDIC  guarantee.  That  said,  investor  concerns  about  credit 
quality have increased further, and risk aversion remains intense. As a result, in almost all 
credit  markets,  spreads  remain  wider,  maturities  shorter,  and  availability  more  constrained 
than was the case before the intensification of the crisis this fall. 
The  likely  duration  of  the  financial  turmoil  is  difficult  to  judge,  and  thus  the  uncertainty 
surrounding the economic outlook is unusually large. But even if the functioning of financial 
markets continues to improve, economic conditions will probably remain weak for a time. In 
particular, household spending likely will continue to be depressed by the declines to date in 
household  wealth,  cumulating  job  losses,  weak  consumer  confidence,  and  a  lack  of  credit 
availability. 
The  global  economy  has  also  slowed.  Many  industrial  countries  were  affected  by  the 
financial crisis from the beginning, but the latest economic data point to a more noticeable 
weakening of conditions. And emerging market economies, which were little affected at first, 
are slowing now as well. One implication of these developments is that exports are not likely 
to be as great a source of strength for U.S. economic activity in coming quarters as they had 
been earlier this year.  
At the same time, the increase in economic slack and the declines in commodity prices and 
import  prices  have  alleviated  upward  pressures  on  consumer  prices.  Moreover,  inflation 
expectations appear to have eased slightly. These developments should bring inflation down 
to levels consistent with price stability.  
Although the near-term outlook for the economy is weak, a number of factors are likely over 
time to promote the return of solid gains in economic activity and employment in the context 
of low and stable inflation. Among those factors are the stimulus provided by monetary policy 
and  possible  fiscal  actions,  the  eventual  stabilization  in  housing  markets  as  the  correction 
runs its course, and the underlying strengths and recuperative powers of our economy. The 
time  needed  for  economic  recovery,  however,  will  depend  greatly  on  the  pace  at  which 
financial and credit markets return to more-normal functioning. 
The outlook for policy 
Going forward, our nation's economic policy must vigorously address the substantial risks to 
financial  stability  and  economic  growth  that  we  face.  I  will  conclude  my  remarks  by 
discussing the policy options of the Federal Reserve, focusing on the three aspects of policy 
that I laid out earlier: interest rate policy, liquidity policy, and policies to stabilize the financial 
system. 
Regarding interest rate policy, although further reductions from the current federal funds rate 
target  of  1  percent  are  certainly  feasible,  at  this  point  the  scope  for  using  conventional 
BIS Review 150/2008 
 5
interest rate policies to support the economy is obviously limited. Indeed, the actual federal 
funds  rate  has  been  trading  consistently  below  the  Committee's  1  percent  target  in  recent 
weeks, reflecting the large quantity of reserves that our lending activities have put into the 
system. In principle, our ability to pay interest on excess reserves at a rate equal to the funds 
rate  target,  as  we  have  been  doing,  should  keep  the  actual  rate  near  the  target,  because 
banks should have no incentive to lend overnight funds at a rate lower than what they can 
receive  from  the  Federal  Reserve.  In  practice,  however,  several  factors  have  served  to 
depress the market rate below the target. One such factor is the presence in the market of 
large suppliers of funds, notably the government-sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae 
and Freddie Mac, which are not eligible to receive interest on reserves and are thus willing to 
lend overnight federal funds at rates below the target.1 We will continue to explore ways to 
keep the effective federal funds rate closer to the target. 
Although  conventional  interest  rate  policy  is  constrained  by  the  fact  that  nominal  interest 
rates  cannot  fall  below  zero,  the  second  arrow  in  the  Federal  Reserve's  quiver  –  the 
provision of liquidity – remains effective. Indeed, there are several means by which the Fed 
could influence financial conditions through the use of its balance sheet, beyond expanding 
our  lending  to  financial  institutions.  First,  the  Fed  could  purchase  longer-term  Treasury  or 
agency securities on the open market in substantial quantities. This approach might influence 
the yields on these securities, thus helping to spur aggregate demand. Indeed, last week the 
Fed announced plans to purchase up to $100 billion in GSE debt and up to $500 billion in 
GSE  mortgage-backed  securities  over  the  next  few  quarters.  It  is  encouraging  that  the 
announcement of that action was met by a fall in mortgage interest rates.  
Second, the Federal Reserve can provide backstop liquidity not only to financial institutions 
but also directly to certain financial markets, as we have recently done for the commercial 
paper  market.  Such  programs  are  promising  because  they  sidestep  banks  and  primary 
dealers  to  provide  liquidity  directly  to  borrowers  or  investors  in  key  credit  markets.  In  this 
spirit, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury jointly announced last week a facility that will 
lend against asset-backed securities collateralized by student loans, auto loans, credit card 
loans, and loans guaranteed by the Small Business Administration. The Federal Reserve's 
credit risk exposure in this facility will be minimized because the collateral will be subject to a 
"haircut" and because the Treasury is providing $20 billion of EESA capital as supplementary 
loss  protection.  Each  of  these  approaches  has  the  potential  to  improve  the  functioning  of 
financial markets and to stimulate the economy. 
Expanding the provision of liquidity leads also to further expansion of the balance sheet of 
the Federal Reserve. To avoid inflation in the long run and to allow short-term interest rates 
ultimately  to  return  to  normal  levels,  the  Fed's  balance  sheet  will  eventually  have  to  be 
brought back to a more sustainable level. The FOMC will ensure that that is done in a timely 
way. However, that is an issue for the future; for now, the goal of policy must be to support 
financial markets and the economy. 
Finally, working together with the Treasury, the FDIC, and other agencies, we must take all 
steps  necessary  to  minimize  systemic  risk.  The  capital  injections  into  the  banking  system 
under the EESA, the FDIC's guarantee program, and the provision of liquidity by the Federal 
Reserve have already served to greatly reduce the risk that a systemically important financial 
institution will fail. We at the Federal Reserve and our colleagues at other federal agencies 
will carefully monitor the conditions of all key financial institutions and stand ready to act as 
needed to preserve their viability in this difficult financial environment. 
                                                 
1   Banks have an incentive to borrow from the GSEs and then redeposit the funds at the Federal Reserve; as a 
result, banks earn a sure profit equal to the difference between the rate they pay the GSEs and the rate they 
receive on excess reserves. However, thus far, this type of arbitrage has not been occurring on a sufficient 
scale,  perhaps  because  banks  have  not  yet  fully  adjusted  their  reserve-management  practices  to  take 
advantage of this opportunity. 
6 
 BIS Review 150/2008
I have not discussed the international response to the crisis today, but policymakers abroad 
as well as those in the United States have taken a series of extraordinary steps to address 
an extraordinary situation. These steps include strong fiscal and monetary actions as well as 
measures to stabilize key financial institutions and markets and to strengthen the financial 
infrastructure. I am not suggesting the way forward will be easy. But I believe that the policy 
responses taken here and by our international partners, together with the underlying vitality 
and  resilience  of  the  American  economy,  will  help  to  restore  confidence  to  our  financial 
system and place our economy back on the path to vigorous growth.  
BIS Review 150/2008 
 7
