Durmuş Yılmaz: Developments in Mediterranean countries’ banking 
sectors and implications for financial stability 
Speech by Mr Durmus Yılmaz, Governor of the Central Bank of the Republic of Turkey, at 
the Euro-Mediterranean High Level Meeting, Alexandria, 26 November 2008. 
 Good afternoon. 
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  thank  the  European  Central  Bank  for  their  kindly 
invitation and the Bank of Egypt for hosting the Fifth Euro-Mediterranean High Level Meeting 
here in Alexandria. 
Since  the  beginning  of  the  Barcelona  process  in  November  1995,  Turkey  has  been  an 
enthusiastic partner of the Euro Mediterranean project. Throughout this process Turkey has 
collaborated  on  various  macroeconomic  issues  and  initiatives.  Recent  global  financial 
developments have proved that cooperation at the regional level as well as global level has 
become  more  important  than  ever  to  overcome  international  financial  challenges.  It  is  our 
joint responsibility as respective individual countries to contribute to the stability in financial 
sectors and build up a better international financial system. 
Distinguished Guests, 
The  worsening  expectations  of  global  growth,  problems  surfaced  in  financial  institutions  in 
developed  countries,  and  deterioration  of  global  credit  conditions  have  all  led  to  a  sharp 
spike in risk perceptions. De-leveraging process in the developed countries has caused risk 
indicators  of  emerging  markets  to  deteriorate  significantly.  For  example,  EMBI+  spreads 
have increased markedly since September reaching almost 900 basis points in late October, 
before  declining  to  700  basis  points  on  November  25.  Increased  risk  aversion  has  led  to 
sizeable  capital  outflows  from  emerging  markets  in  the  last  two  months,  resulting  in  an 
overall depreciation of domestic currencies. 
As you may already know, following the 2001 financial crisis, Turkey adopted an ambitious 
reform  agenda  to  strengthen  the  financial  sector  and  banking  system.  Thanks  to  these 
measures,  resilience  of  the  Turkish  economy  to  external  shocks  has  been  improved 
significantly and the banking system in Turkey has been relatively prepared for the current 
crisis, as witnessed during current financial turmoil. 
Since  securitized  products  are  rarely  used  in  the  Turkish  banking  sector,  the  ongoing 
financial  turmoil  has  not  put  a  marked  pressure  on  local  banks  through  that  channel.  In 
addition, there are no liquidity problems in the system. Deposits have been stable and banks 
have adequate level of collateral in the form of government securities that can be used in the 
open market operations. However, considering the severity of the current crisis and Turkey’s 
integration into the global economy, it won’t be surprising that the crisis has some effects on 
Turkish banking sector. 
The general framework of the Central Bank’s liquidity management is fairly flexible and well-
structured to fulfill its lender-of-last resort role and meet both New Turkish Lira and foreign 
exchange liquidity requirement of the banking system effectively. 
We have acted promptly to contain the adverse effects of the global financial turmoil on the 
domestic economy. To ensure smooth operation of the New Turkish Lira money markets and 
to contain the potential volatility in short term interest rates, the Monetary Policy Committee, 
judging  that  inflation  will  display  a  more  rapid  fall  than  envisaged  before,  has  lowered  the 
borrowing rates by 50 basis points and the lending rate by 100 basis points on November 19, 
2008. This allowed the margin between the lending and borrowing rates to be reduced by a 
further 50 basis points. 
BIS Review 153/2008 
 1
We are also aware of the significance of foreign exchange liquidity in the banking system and 
progressively  put  into  effect  necessary  measures  in  order  to  get  through  this  period  with 
minimal damage. 
To that end, we have resumed our role to act as an intermediary in the FX deposit market as 
of 9 October 2008, and later doubled the transaction limits to 10.8 billion USD. During times 
of confidence breakdowns among the participants of the financial markets, central banks can 
serve  as  a  blind  broker  to  intermediate  in  the  foreign  currency  lending  market.  In  this  FX 
deposit  market,  banks  can  post  their  bids  for  foreign  exchange  without  disclosing  their 
identities. It also acts as a market of last resort as the banks can borrow directly from the 
Central Bank. 
Along with the above-mentioned measures, we have also extended the maturity of the FX 
deposit borrowed by the banks from one week to one month, and reduce the lending rate 
from 10 percent to 7 percent for USD and 9 percent for Euro in the FX market. 
Needless to say, as the high level of volatility in global financial markets prevails, the Central 
Bank  of  Turkey  will  sustain  its  vigilance  and  will  stand  ready  to  take  additional  measures 
prudently within its means in order to ensure the smooth functioning of the financial system. 
Dear Colleagues, 
In the last part of my speech, let me say a couple of words about the current financial turmoil. 
This recent episode provides a good example of how, in a financially integrated environment, 
a  country  specific shock  can  spill over  rapidly  to  seemingly  distant  markets  and countries. 
The  problems,  which  started  in  sub-prime  mortgage  markets  in  the  United  States,  have 
spread to the whole financial system all around the world and reached a point that threatens 
the global economic stability. This shows that countries share not only benefits of financial 
integration but also the risks associated with it. 
In my opinion the most important lesson that we should derive from the current turmoil is the 
need for a global lender of last resort mechanism. In addition, with the cooperation of local 
and  international  authorities  an  early  warning  system  should  be  constructed  so  that  the 
fragilities  in  the  international  financial  system  would  be  identified  and  necessary  and 
sufficient  measures  to  fix  them  would  be  taken  beforehand.  In  this  context  I  believe  that 
effective and efficient risk management and re-regulation will be the cornerstones of the new 
global  financial  architecture  where  the  financial  intermediation  should  not  let  the  direct 
relationship  between  lender  and  borrower  to  be  cut  completely  under  various  forms  of 
effective risk diversification and securitization. 
Sound  domestic  policies  for  a  healthy  banking  sector  are  necessary  but  not  sufficient  for 
addressing  contemporary  challenges  of  the  global  world.  In  this  respect,  improving  policy 
coordination at the regional and international level is a must. Only then, we would be able to 
attain the optimal level of international financial regulatory rules and guidelines together with 
adequate tools that would match the complex nature of the international financial markets. 
With this consensus in mind, G-20 leaders at their summit in mid November, agreed upon an 
important set of principles on reforming the international financial architecture. We strongly 
support  the  promotion  of  these  principles  that  include  strengthening  transparency  and 
accountability,  enhancing  sound  regulation,  promoting 
financial  markets, 
reinforcing  international  cooperation  and  reforming  international  financial  institutions.  We 
must lay the foundation for reform altogether to ensure that a global crisis, such as this one, 
does not occur again. 
Thank you. 
integrity 
in 
2 
 BIS Review 153/2008
