Jürgen Stark: Closing address at the Fifth ECB Central Banking 
Conference 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the Fifth ECB Central Banking Conference “The Euro at Ten: Lessons and Challenges”, 
Frankfurt am Main, 14 November 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen 
I  wish  to  thank  all  of  you  for  joining  this  5th  ECB  Central  Banking  Conference  here  in 
Frankfurt.  It  has  been  a  privilege  for  us  –  and  here  I  am  speaking  also  on  behalf  of  my 
colleagues on the Executive Board of the ECB – to host this event, with such distinguished 
panellists and participants during this busy and extremely difficult time. 
In  my  view,  the  past  one  and  a  half  days  have  been  a  great  success.  Your  expertise, 
experience  and  thought-provoking  ideas,  as  well  as  your  contributions  to  the  discussions 
have  enriched  the  intellectual  and  political  debate  on  monetary  union  in  Europe  –  its 
achievements, its challenges and its future. 
It  has  not  been  the  aim  of  this  conference  to  celebrate  the  ECB  and  its  achievements. 
However,  it  is  worth  recalling  that,  contrary  to  what  was  expected  by  a  number  of  critical 
observers  in  the  run-up  to  Economic  and  Monetary  Union  (EMU),  the  euro  has  been  a 
remarkable achievement. Let me also remind you in this context that the ECB is obliged to 
maintain price stability. 
With  inflation  averaging  only  slightly  above  2%  in  the  euro  area  in  the  face  of  several 
significant adverse supply shocks, we have witnessed a decade of relatively stable prices. 
Likewise, longer-term inflation expectations have remained broadly anchored at levels in line 
with price stability during this time. Such anchoring reflects favourably on the high degree of 
credibility enjoyed by the ECB’s monetary policy. This success is also a tangible proof of the 
institutional robustness, coherence and unity of the Eurosystem – of its capacity to act in a 
truly European spirit on the basis of shared values, high standards and common principles. 
This has in turn led to striking progress in economic and financial integration in the euro area.  
Ten  years  on,  even  those  early  critics  admit  that  the  euro  has  performed  better  than 
expected. And meanwhile, today’s critics are saying that the ECB’s monetary policy over this 
period has not really been tested, that it’s just been lucky. Not true. The past ten years have 
not been plain sailing. Far from it. From the outset, the ECB has been confronted with a high 
degree of uncertainty and a series of severe shocks: the aftermath of the Asian crisis in the 
late 1990s; the bursting of the dot.com bubble; 9/11; and sharp rises in oil and food prices 
worldwide.  
Over this same period, the euro area has also had internal imbalances to contend with. An 
issue that was intesively discussed yesterday. These imbalances remain a challenge. While 
EMU  highlights  the  need  for  flexible  economies,  the  euro  cannot  be  blamed  for  the 
emergence  of  those  imbalances.  Rather,  this  largely  reflects  a  lack  of  adjustment  in  a 
number  of  Member  States.  This  is  particularly  true  for  those  euro  area  countries  whose 
adjustment  mechanisms  and  responsiveness  to  exogenous  shocks  is  still  rather  slow.  To 
allow euro area economies to develop their growth potential and to reap the full economic 
benefits of EMU, it remains indispensable that the countries concerned bring their structural 
reforms  and  fiscal  consolidation  measures  more  into  line  with  the  conditions  and  rules  of 
monetary union. 
Overall, the ECB has done well to overcome these difficulties. However, the current global 
financial distress poses challenges of a significant and unprecedented nature to the ECB and 
BIS Review 139/2008 
 1
other central banks around the globe. With this crisis, EMU is now ultimately experiencing a 
real test.  
In these demanding times, some widely-recognised core principles have helped the ECB to 
weather the storm. The Maastricht Treaty assigns a clear and unambiguous mandate to the 
ECB  to  maintain  price  stability.  It  also  grants  the  ECB  full  independence  from  political 
influence to fulfil this mandate. Besides these institutional safety belts, monetary policy needs 
to be forward-looking, medium-term oriented and underpinned by a comprehensive analytical 
framework. Given the monetary nature of inflation over the longer term, such a framework 
must  include  a  thorough  analysis  of  monetary  and  credit  developments  to  allow  for  well-
informed  and  consistent  decision-making.  Finally,  one  principle  –  that  has  gained  much 
attention during the current crisis – is to keep the determination of the monetary policy stance 
distinguished from the management of liquidity in money markets. 
All  these  principles  are  captured  in  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  strategy.  And  globalisation 
does not fundamentally alter these principles – which give guidance, in particular, in critical 
times. To weaken or even abandon these principles would undermine our commitment and 
credibility. And, in the end, we would risk losing orientation. 
Our strategy has provided a consistent and coherent framework not only for internal analysis 
and policy decision-making but also for external communication. Using the same framework 
for  internal  and  external  purposes  has  helped  the  ECB  to  ensure  that  its  monetary  policy 
remains consistent, credible and effective. One key element here is that the ECB, from the 
outset,  has been  transparent  about  its  mandate,  strategy,  and  decisions,  as  well as  about 
what monetary policy can do and, even more importantly, what it cannot do. In this sense, 
expectations  about  transparency  requirements  should  be  in  line  with  the  actual  strategy 
followed by the central bank. 
Without compromising on its mandate, the ECB has demonstrated a willingness and capacity 
to react rapidly to exceptional circumstances. It has taken a large number of extraordinary 
measures  to  support  the  functioning  of  the  money  market  and  interbank  intermediation. 
These measures could be perceived as innovative: 
• 
• 
• 
it has provided full allotment at a fixed interest rate in all its refinancing operations; 
it has expanded the range of eligible collateral in this context; and, 
in  close  cooperation  with  other  central  banks,  it  has  taken  measures  to  improve 
global funding conditions in various currencies. 
Allow me to add here, on a personal basis, a word of caution: we, as central bankers, have 
the obligation to remain prudent. First, not to set the wrong incentives for market participants. 
Second, central banks need to be aware of any operational and reputational risks associated 
with the adoption of new measures and less traditional instruments, notably for the balance 
sheet of the Eurosystem and, ultimately, for the credibility of the ECB’s monetary policy. Not 
to mention the potential impact on central bank independence. The reputation of the ECB is 
firmly based on the credibility of its commitment to price stability. This credibility must by no 
means be put at stake.  
Likewise,  in  its  monetary  policy  decisions,  the  ECB  has  not  shied  away  from  taking  some 
highly unusual but appropriate steps. Within the space of less than one month, on 8 October 
and 6 November, the ECB lowered its key rates by 100 basis points in total. These moves 
were remarkable and unique in the ECB’s ten-year history – in terms of magnitude, timing 
and  rapidity.  Importantly,  the  latest  policy  decisions  remained  fully  in  line  with  the  ECB’s 
mandate and the principles I mentioned just now. 
Those who say that we were or still are “behind the curve” should consider all the decisions 
the ECB has taken since the financial crisis has intensified and broadened. In this respect, let 
us not forget that a central bank has only one instrument at hand, namely monetary policy. It 
cannot be held accountable for meeting more than one objective. Any such attempt would 
2 
 BIS Review 139/2008
overburden  monetary  policy.  For  this  reason,  the  Treaty  provides  for  a  clear  and  efficient 
allocation  of  policy  responsibilities,  with  price  stability  being  exclusively  and  primarily 
assigned to an independent ECB as its primary objective.  
Not  surprisingly,  our  debates  yesterday  and  today  have  triggered  the  question  of  how  to 
safeguard EMU and build on its achievements at a time when the world’s financial landscape 
is changing dramatically. In fact, the current financial turmoil – the origins and implications of 
which we discussed in detail – is likely to dampen demand in the euro area and the rest of 
the world for quite some time. It may well turn out to be a litmus test for the functioning of 
EMU, both in economic and institutional terms. 
Having  carefully  listened  to  the  presentations,  I  remain  confident  that  monetary  union  will 
withstand the test of time. As illustrated during the conference, the euro has already brought 
real benefits to the 320 million people in the euro area. It has been the main driver behind the 
remarkable increase in economic and financial integration as well as the transformation of 
the  financial  system  over  the  past  decade.  It  has  made  the  euro  area  economically  more 
stable for both investors and consumers. 
In particular, financial integration has promoted cross-border portfolio flows in the euro area 
and  thus  enabled  consumers  and  investors  to  share  and  diversify  risks.  As  illustrated 
yesterday, EMU has increased banking integration. 
Another interesting finding is that key policy initiatives at the European level, notably within 
the  context  of  the  Financial  Services  Action  Plan,  have  made  a  significant  contribution  to 
fostering banking and regulatory integration. 
However, in my view, there is room for improvement, especially as regards cooperation and 
coordination between national supervisors and regulators in Europe. As the Vice-President 
emphasised in his opening address yesterday, there is a growing understanding of the need 
to  strengthen  the  pan-European  character  of  financial  stability  arrangements  for  crisis 
prevention and resolution. 
However, during the ongoing financial turmoil, the euro area and the EU as a whole have 
proved  their  capacity  to  act  decisively  and  promptly  under  difficult  circumstances. National 
measures  have  been  coordinated  in  a  pragmatic  manner  with  a  view  to  enhancing  their 
effectiveness through mutual reinforcement.  
As  regards  the  role  of  central  banks  in  banking  supervision,  recent  tensions  in  financial 
markets have confirmed that close cooperation and active exchanges of information between 
central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  are  indispensable.  In  particular,  the  financial 
turmoil has revealed areas in which cooperation could be strengthened. In fact, central banks 
contribute to financial stability. 
But improved coordination and institutional innovations, while necessary, are not sufficient to 
make the euro area economy more resilient to adverse shocks. To enhance the adjustment 
capacity of the euro area economy, the current situation should serve as a catalyst for the 
resolute implementation of the necessary reforms. This would enable the Member States of 
the EU to fully exploit the benefits of economic and financial integration, with positive effects 
on growth potential and job creation in the euro area. 
Having said all this, we should not forget how Europe would look today without the euro. An 
issue that was only marginally addressed during the conference. It goes without saying that 
the  euro  area  countries  would  be  significantly  worse  off.  Multiple  crises  would  arise 
simultaneously.  Currency  crises  would  go  hand  in  hand  with  banking  crises  and  real 
economy  disruptions  at  country  level.  These  currency  crises  might  also  spill  over  to  other 
countries  in  the  region.  Not  to  forget  political  tensions  between  countries.  By  eliminating 
contagion  via  the  exchange  rate  channel,  the  euro  has  mitigated  the  risk  of  contagion 
stemming from national economic or financial crises. In this sense, the euro has been a very 
important stabilising element in difficult times. 
BIS Review 139/2008 
 3
It is therefore not surprising that many central and eastern European countries would like to 
join  the  euro  area  on  a  fast-track  procedure  to  be  better  shielded  from  global  financial 
tensions  and  crises.  This  is  understandable,  given  that  many  of  them  have  already  made 
progress towards adopting the euro. But we have also heard clear words of caution. Let me 
take the opportunity to emphasise that the euro area is not a closed shop. Following three 
enlargement  rounds  since  the  start  of  monetary  union  in  January  1999,  and  with  Slovakia 
joining the euro area as its 16th member on 1 January 2009, there is no reason to believe 
that the door might one day be closed.  
But there is no shortcut. In fact, the difficulties that some countries face today are related to 
their failures to adjust, failures that go back a long way. As a result, domestic and external 
imbalances  have  emerged,  with  adverse  effects  on  the  sustainability  of  the  catching-up 
processes  in  those  countries.  The  fast  introduction  of  the  euro  would  not  resolve  the 
underlying problems – but could weaken EMU. 
Structural adjustments as well as nominal and real convergence are therefore needed prior 
to  the  adoption  of  the  euro.  This  means  that  the  countries  concerned  must  achieve  a 
sustainable  level  of  nominal  convergence  at  high  standards  in  terms  of  meeting  the 
convergence criteria. 
The adoption of the euro without adjustment is not possible. To regard entry into EMU as an 
easy  way  to  solve  or  circumvent  the  current  challenges  surrounding  the  catching-up 
processes would be wrong. And a premature entry might aggravate current problems and put 
the credibility of EMU at risk. Policymakers have to be aware that the adoption of the euro 
represents a regime shift and thus, as Governor Constancio pointed out yesterday, need to 
learn the rules of the game in advance. 
The  ECB  has  demonstrated  its  ability  to  act  even  under  extraordinary  circumstances  – 
without compromising its price stability mandate. This has strengthened the ECB’s credibility. 
If the ECB is to continue to deliver price stability over the medium term, then the financial 
system has to be stable and function smoothly. It is first and foremost through that financial 
system  that  monetary  policy  impulses  are  transmitted  to  future  price  developments.  It  is 
indispensable  to  restore  confidence  and  bring  the  global  financial  system  back  on  a  solid 
footing.  It  is  crucial  to  understand  the  implications  of  globalised  financial  markets  for  the 
design of institutional arrangements for the prevention and resolution of financial crises. 
Let me conclude: We are going through a period when solid institutions are needed around 
the  globe.  And  solid  institutions  are  expected  to  be  disciplined.  As  such,  central  banks 
provide an anchor of confidence and stability in difficult times. This must not be put at risk by 
weakening or even “lifting” this anchor. 
4 
 BIS Review 139/2008
