Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The role of retail finance for financial markets 
efficiency and stability 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Eleventh  Conference  of  the  ECB-CFS  Research  Network,  Prague, 
20 October 2008. 
 Introduction  
It is for me a real pleasure to speak here in Prague at the European Central Bank and Centre 
of Financial Studies Research Network conference. I would like to thank the organizers of the 
conference for compiling a very interesting and stimulating program. My special thanks go to 
our  host,  the  Czech  National  Bank,  for  the  very  good  cooperation  and  for  an  outstanding 
local organization of this conference. 
Being here in Prague, I was reminded that Joseph Schumpeter was born not too far away 
from Prague in a small town named Třešť. It was Joseph Schumpeter who once said that 
“economic  progress  in  capitalist  society  means  turmoil”.  It  would  be,  of  course,  unfair  and 
undue reference to associate Schumpeter’s notion of turmoil with the current period we are 
experiencing  in  financial  markets.  In  my  speech  today,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  retail 
banking sectors’ contribution to efficiency and stability in financial markets also in light of the 
ongoing  financial  market  turbulences.  I  will  also  stress  the  importance  of  retail  payment 
infrastructures, and particularly the issue of harmonisation and integration as it underlies the 
Single European Payment Area (SEPA) project as a fundamental basis for the efficiency and 
stability of the European retail finance market.  
1. 
The role of retail banking for economic development and monetary policy 
Retail banking plays a crucial role in fostering economic activity 
(i)  
Retail banking is the backbone of banking activities. Retail sector banks, in particular, have 
the  expertise  to  provide  credit  to  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  (or  SMEs)  and  to 
evaluate the associated risks. As SMEs are the main engines of job creation and economic 
growth, they are also important drivers of innovation in the economy. Therefore, an efficient 
and  stable  retail  banking  business  is  needed  for  the  financing  of  SME  activities.  As  these 
firms do not have access to global capital markets, they are heavily dependent on banks for 
their  funding.  This  is  particularly  true  for  European  SMEs,  as  the  European  market  for 
venture capital remains very small compared to the one in the US. The availability of bank 
credit is, thus, crucial for sustained investment of firms and, therefore, plays an important role 
for economic development and growth.  
(ii) 
Integrated retail banking markets can enhance the effectiveness of monetary 
policy 
For the retail banking market to be as innovative and efficient as possible, market integration 
of  the  retail  banking  sector  is  key.  It  is  crucial  that  borrowers  and  depositors  are  charged 
similar  fees  and  costs  for  similar  banking  services  across  the  euro  area.  However,  most 
indicators  of  retail  banking  integration  suggest  that  there  is  still  significant  room  for  closer 
integration.  For  instance,  the  dispersion  of  lending  rates  charged  by  banks  to  households 
and non-financial corporations has remained relatively high across countries. Also quantity 
BIS Review 127/2008 
 1
indicators  of  banking  integration  –  while  suggesting  that  banking  market  integration  was 
boosted by the introduction of the euro – remain at relatively low levels.1  
The  low  levels  of  integration  can  generally  be  attributed  to  differences  in  the  national 
economies, institutional factors and financial structures. These factors include differences in 
credit risk and pricing models, differences in taxation and regulation but also the relatively 
high level of fragmentation of retail infrastructures.  
Therefore, more efforts with respect to integration of the retail banking sector are needed. 
Not least, since, first, a more efficient and integrated retail banking sector would lead to a 
better  allocation  of  credit  to  innovative  and  growing  companies,  and  second,  from  a 
macroeconomic  perspective  would  contribute  to  both  fostering  economic  growth  and 
strengthening  of  the  transmission  of  changes  in  official  interest  rates  to  the  economy  and, 
thereby,  enhancing  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.  At  the  same  time,  the  recent 
turbulences  in  financial  markets  remind  us  that  any  further  integration  process  has  to  be 
guided by appropriate provisions to safeguard financial stability. 
2. 
Changes in the retail banking business model over the past decade 
Increase in market-based funding 
(i)  
Over the past decade there has been a significant transformation in banks’ business models, 
away  from  the  traditional  model  based  mainly  on  retail  deposits  towards  a  more  market-
based  funding  model.  The  significant  recourse  to  specific  funding  instruments,  such  as 
mortgage  bonds  and  securitisation,  have  made  banks  increasingly  more  dependant  on 
money  and  capital  markets,  but  at  the  same  time,  of  course,  less  dependent  on  their 
                                                  
1   See ECB (2008), Financial Integration Report. 
2 
 BIS Review 127/2008
opportunities  to  expand  customer  basis  for  funding.  Although  customer  deposits  still 
constitute the largest part of banks funding base, their share as a percentage of total assets 
of the euro area banking sector has been declining. This is shown in Chart A.  
 
 In  the  last  ten  years  the  access  to  market-based  funding  and  wholesale  deposits  have 
allowed banks to raise large amounts of funding at relatively low costs in order to finance the 
provision  of  new  loans.  To  the  extent  that  more  stable  retail  deposit  financing  has  been 
replaced  by  short-term  wholesale  funding,  banks  may  have  become  more  exposed  to 
interest  rate  and  liquidity  risks.  More  recently,  with  the  financial  market  turmoil  the 
shortcomings of this increasing dependence on financial markets has become apparent. 
Diversification in the sources of revenues  
(ii)  
The  increased  diversification  of  banks’  income  sources  via  higher  brokerage  fees  and 
commissions  –  what  is  more  generically  called  “non-interest  income”  is  another  structural 
trend in banks' changing business models. The diversification of income provides banks with 
additional  sources  of  income  –  empirical  studies  concerning  the  effects  of  income 
diversification  on  profitability  tend  to  conclude  that  there  has  been  a  positive  correlation 
between  non-interest  income  and  profitability  –  and  allows  banks  in  principle  to  reap  the 
benefits of diversification. Literature concerning the impact of diversification in the sources of 
revenues on the volatility of banks' earnings point out that there has been some stabilisation 
effect  of  income  diversification  on  profits,  due  to  the  negative  correlation  between  non-
interest  income  and  interest  income,  but  that  non-interest  income  has  been  more  volatile 
than  interest  income.  However,  an  important  aspect  relates  to  the  potential  impact  on 
financial  stability.  Recent  literature  investigating  income  diversification  effects  on  financial 
BIS Review 127/2008 
 3
stability  conclude  that  in  general  income  diversification  tended  to  increase  systemic  risk.2 
Indeed,  even  though  income  diversification  tends  to  increase  profits,  and  that  strong  and 
profitable banks are better able to absorb losses and thus strengthen financial stability, this 
strategy at the same time can increase financial stability risks as the increasing reliance on 
non-interest income sources entails a higher exposure of banks to the major global risks, and 
in  particular  those  related  to  capital  markets.  Also,  diversification  implies  that  institutions 
become increasingly involved in similar sets of activity; in this case, it becomes more likely 
that  whenever  an 
increased 
interdependence might propagate, and, possibly, amplify shocks at a systemic level. 
Once again the current financial market turmoil has revealed the weaknesses underlying this 
change in the business model.  
faces  difficulties,  others  do  as  well.  This 
institution 
(iii) 
An example of pronounced market reliance: US investment banks  
 
An extreme example of high dependence on non-interest income would be the case of the 
US investment banking houses. Chart B shows that US investment banks are also typically 
more profitable than commercial banks but also shows that their earnings are more volatile 
than those of commercial banks. The large European universal banks are, in terms of profits, 
somewhat in the middle between commercial and investment banking. This is more or less 
expected  given  their  broader  business  model  nature  combining  both  retail  and  investment 
                                                  
2   See e.g. Stiroh (2006). 
4 
 BIS Review 127/2008
banks activities. The drop in profits from 2006 to 2007 experienced by investment banks was 
much more pronounced than for commercial banks, Chart C.3  
 
 (iv) 
The relation of the changes in the business model to the ongoing financial 
market turmoil  
The financial turmoil has starkly illustrated that market-based funding is heavily dependent 
on market perception, including trust and confidence. Deposit funding has proven to be more 
stable  during  the  ongoing  financial  market  turmoil  than  other  sources  of  banks’  funding. 
While  there  are  of  course  other  factors  at  play  Chart  D  shows  that  during  the  ongoing 
turbulences the market has valued more positively those institutions with more funding via 
customers’  deposits.  Related  to  this,  the  recent  events  illustrate  the  benefits  long-term 
relationships of banks with depositors and borrowers.  
As mentioned before, the financial turmoil has also illustrated possible implications of banks’ 
changing business model for financial stability. Let me emphasise that, in principle, market 
funding and in particular securitisation can provide significant benefits in terms of risk sharing 
and  diversification.  However,  the  recent  crisis  has  highlighted  some  features  of  those 
markets which can strongly impair the orderly functioning of markets.4  
For  ensuring  an  orderly  functioning  of  the  market,  transparency  is  crucial.  Banks  need  to 
properly evaluate and disclose risks and use proper valuation techniques. For this we need 
                                                 
3  
In  fact,  a  number  recent  academic  studies  document  a  “return  to  retail”  for  U.S.  commercial  banks  with 
managers and analysts touting the relative stability of consumer-based business lines (see for instance Hirtle 
and Stiroh, 2007). 
4   Ashcraft and Schuermann (2008). 
BIS Review 127/2008 
 5
“good”  regulation.  A  regulation  that  gives  the  right  incentives  to  contain  risks,  but  also 
regulation  that  is  flexible  enough  to  adapt  to  innovations  in  financial  markets,  allowing 
financial innovations that help to enlarge the capacities for investment and growth and the 
diversification of risks in the market. 
The  importance  of  retail  banking  is  likely  to  revive  against  the  background  of  the  ongoing 
turmoil. Efficiency and competition in that sector is certainly of high importance. Nonetheless, 
to  ensure  a  smooth  functioning  of  the  retail  banking  market,  we  need  to  have  “good” 
regulation  and  stable  infrastructures  in  place,  which  brings  me  to  the  second  part  of  my 
speech on the role of retail infrastructures.  
 3.  
The Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) changes retail payment business 
SEPA is important for retail banking 
(i)  
The realization of the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) is important for two reasons. First, 
it will contribute to creating a competitive and integrated European retail payment market and 
thereby fostering innovation and growth in the retail banking sector. And second, at the same 
time SEPA will contribute to a smooth and safe underlying payment infrastructure which will 
provide  the  basis  for  stable  transactions  on  a  retail  banking  level,  contributing  to 
safeguarding financial stability.  
With SEPA individuals and corporates are able to make their cashless payments throughout 
the euro area from a single payment account anywhere in the euro area using a single set of 
payment  instruments  as  easily,  efficiently  and  safely  as  they  can  make  them  today  at  the 
national level.  
 
6 
 BIS Review 127/2008
   Especially,  at  a  time  when  other  sources  of  income  for  banks  are  more  volatile,  payment 
services  will  contribute  to  banks’  business  as  banks  can  count  on  reliable  and  regular 
BIS Review 127/2008 
 7
revenues  generated  through  payment  services.  Payment  services  are an  important  part  of 
the banking industry, accounting for more than a third of the operational costs of banks, and 
around 25% of their revenues. This is also reflected in the fact that according to the latest 
figures, non-cash payment transactions of European countries grew on average at an annual 
rate of 7% in the past six years stemming from ongoing modernisation of payment means 
and systems.5 Moreover, payment services are also important in helping banks to establish 
long-term relationships with their customers, private individuals as well as corporations. From 
an economic perspective, efficient and safe payment systems are important in facilitating real 
and financial transactions in advanced economies. 
The Eurosystem continues to support the creation of the SEPA, in which it plays an active 
role as a catalyst and offers a platform for debate among the various stakeholders regarding 
the advantages of a fully integrated market for retail payment services. 
(ii)  SEPA spurs overall economic growth 
 
SEPA  makes  an  important  contribution  towards  a  more  integrated  payments  market  in 
Europe, which will foster financial market efficiency and bring substantial economic benefits 
to society. 
As it was also shown today at this conference, SEPA offers an enormous potential to banks, 
non-banks, corporations, and consumers, and society as a whole. Also a recent ECB study 
concludes that banks may significantly reduce their costs, but will face increased competition 
putting  downward  pressure  on  prices  and  revenues.6  Already  today,  prices  for  payment 
                                                  
5   Capgemini et al. (2008). 
6   Schmiedel (2007). 
8 
 BIS Review 127/2008
services have gone down in a number of euro area countries. SEPA will also offer market 
participants  an  opportunity  to  market  new,  value-added  services  related  to  the  payment 
chain. Further empirical evidence supports the view that harmonisation and standardisation 
of retail payments processing across the euro area are likely to create economies of scale in 
the  provision  of  payment  services  in  Europe.  Significant  cost  efficiency  gains  can  be 
expected from continued consolidation across borders.7  
Overall,  SEPA  will  bring  greater  standardisation  and  harmonisation  in  the  retail  payments 
market  thereby  promoting  competition,  and  innovation.  At  the  same  time,  SEPA  plays  a 
crucial role for fostering efficiency and stability in the retail banking sector. 
(iii)  
Overcoming the “final hurdles” 
  
A major milestone in the direction of greater harmonization was the launch of SEPA Credit 
Transfer in January 2008. Preparations for the SEPA Direct Debit (SDD) have progressed 
well and the SDD launch is scheduled for 1st of November 2009. Work is also ongoing on e-
payments  and  mobile  payment  channels,  as  well  as  on improvements  to  the  SEPA  Credit 
Transfer. 
In a time in which banks are under stress, it might be tempting to slow down the process of 
modernisation  and  innovation  of  payment  services.  But  the  opposite  is  needed.  The  new 
SEPA standards need to be implemented and the old ones should phase out. We need to set 
an end date for the final realization of new products and processes and find clarity on the 
pricing of services.  
                                                 
7   Beijnen and Bolt (2007). 
BIS Review 127/2008 
 9
This is easier said than done and requires the efforts from all stakeholders: banks, customers 
and public authorities. More initiative is needed and much more work remains to be done to 
complete the SEPA project. SEPA can play a crucial role for fostering efficiency and stability 
in the retail banking sector.  
Conclusion 
To  conclude  my  remarks,  retail  banking  has  proven  to  be  an  area  of  stability  within  the 
banking business during the recent months in credit markets. It plays a crucial role allowing 
savings  to  flow  efficiently  to  borrowers  via  credit.  “Credit”  comes  from  the  Latin  word 
“credere”, which means “to believe”. This symbolizes that trust is a crucial prerequisite for the 
functioning  of  credit  markets  at  a  retail  banking  level  as  well.  If  this  trust  is  disappointed 
uncertainty  can  soar  with  serious  consequences  for  the  functioning  of  financial  markets. 
Therefore,  trust  can  only  stem  from  good  and  transparent  business  practises,  sound 
business models of banks and robust and stable retail banking infrastructures.  
SEPA  can  make  an  important  contribution  in  that  respect.  It  provides  a  single  European 
integrated  retail  payments  infrastructure  that  contributes  to  efficient  but  at  the  same  time 
stable financial markets at the retail level. Authorities as well as the private sector need to 
strive for further progress in the field of payment infrastructures not to loose the momentum 
in creating an integrated and harmonised retail market in Europe.  
This  conference  offers  a  good  opportunity  to  discuss  recent  advances  in  the  field  of  retail 
banking  it  provides  an  important  contribution  to  better  understand  developments  in  retail 
banking. I wish all of us continued stimulating presentations and fruitful discussions.  
Finally, let me stress that I see retail payments as promising avenues for future research. It is 
only  recently  that  retail  payment  issues  have  received  greater  priority  on  the  academic 
agenda with efforts being made to analyse essential elements and the evolving dynamics of 
the  retail  payments  industry.  Against  this  background,  let  me  draw  your  attention  that  the 
European  Central  Bank  and  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  will  be  hosting  a  conference  entitled 
“Retail  payments:  integration  and  innovation”  on  25-26  May  2009.  With  this  conference,  I 
anticipate two days of interesting discussions on highly topical and relevant issues relating to 
retail payments. Maybe we will meet each other again next year in Frankfurt. 
References 
Ashcraft,  A.  and  Schuermann,  T.  (2008),  “Understanding  the  Securitization  of  Subprime 
Mortgage Credit”, Federal Reserve Bank New York Staff Report 318. 
Bolt, W. and Chakravorti (2008), “Consumer Choice and Merchant Acceptance of Payment 
Media”, mimeo. 
Capgemini/Royal Bank of Scottland/European Financial Management & Market Association 
(2008), “World Payments Report 2008”. 
Beijnen, Ch. and W. Bolt (2007), “Size Matters: Economies of Scale in European Payment 
Processing”, DNB Working Paper, No. 155/November 2007. 
Dell’Ariccia,  G.,  Igan,  D.  and  Laeven,  L.  (2008),  “Credit  Booms  and  Lending  Standards: 
Evidence from the Subprime Mortgage Market”, International Monetary Fund Working Paper 
106. 
ECB (2008), Financial Integration Report. 
European Commission (2008), “SEPA: Potential Benefits at Stake – Researching the impact 
of SEPA on the Payments Market and its Stakeholders”, Capgemini Consulting. 
10 
 BIS Review 127/2008
Financial  Stability  Forum  (2008).  “Report  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  on  Enhancing 
Market and Institutional Resilience”, March. 
Hirtle,  B.  J.,  and  Stiroh,  K.J.  (2007),  “The  Return  to  Retail  and  the  Performance  of  U.S. 
Banks”, Journal of Banking and Finance, 31, 1101-1133 
Jonker, N. and A. Kosse (2008), “Towards a European Payments Market: Survey Results on 
Cross-Border Payment Behaviour of Dutch Consumers”, DNB Occasional Studies, Vol. 6/No 
1 (2008). 
Kemppainen, K. (2008), “Integrating European Retail Payment Systems: Some Economics of 
SEPA”, Bank of Finland Discussion Paper, 2008 forthcoming. 
Mian, A. and Sufi, A. (2007). “The Consequences of Mortgage Credit Expansion: Evidence 
from the 2007 Mortgage Default Crisis”, NBER Working Paper 13936. 
Schmiedel, H. (2007), “The Economic Impact of the Single Euro Payments Area”, European 
Central Bank Occasional Paper Series, No. 71, 2007. 
Stiroh,  K.  J.  (2008),  “Diversification  in  Banking”,  in  A.  Berger,  P.  Molyneux  and  J.  Wilson 
(eds.), Handbook of Banking, Oxford University Press.  
BIS Review 127/2008 
 11
