Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Ensuring stability – international 
perspectives on creating an effective regulatory framework 
Inaugural plenary address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the 
Central  Bank  of  Bahrain,  at  the  15th  World  Islamic  Banking  Conference  2008,  Manama, 
24 November 2008. 
 Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen: “Salaam Alaikum” 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  participate  in  this  Opening  Session,  and  to  have  this  opportunity  to 
welcome you all to the 2008 World Islamic Banking Conference. This is the 15th Conference 
of  its  kind  to  have  been  held  here  in  Bahrain,  and  in  July  of  this  year,  the  first  WIBC 
European Summit  was held in London. The inaugural European Summit was yet a further 
indication that Islamic finance is rapidly moving into the financial mainstream. 
I  should  like  to  begin  by  thanking  the  many  distinguished  speakers  who  will  be  appearing 
during  the  Conference,  as  well  as  the  event  organisers  and  sponsors.  Collectively,  your 
contributions are the reasons for the success of this event. I should also particularly like to 
extend  a  warm  welcome  to  His  Excellency  Heng  Swee  Keat,  Managing  Director  of  the 
Monetary Authority of Singapore. Thank you for being with us today. 
The  theme  of  this  Session  –  “Ensuring  stability:  International  perspectives  on  creating  an 
effective regulatory framework” – is timely in my view. 
Until  very  recently,  many  commentators  and  analysts  believed  that  the  economies  of  the 
GCC  were  an  oasis  of  calm  in  the  ongoing  global  financial  turmoil.  However,  since  the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers in mid-September, it has become clear that no part of the world 
can be immune to the present crisis. We have seen a vastly changed financial landscape, 
and  there  is  little  doubt  that  the  availability  of  funds  and  the  costs  of  borrowing  are  being 
affected in all parts of the world. 
Against the background of this global financial turmoil, it seems a good time to take stock of 
the  prospects  for  the  Islamic  financial  industry,  and  to  consider  in  particular  how  best  to 
ensure the stability of the industry in future. 
In  recent  months  as  the  global  financial  crisis  has  deepened,  many  commentators  have 
pointed  out  that  Islamic  financial  institutions  have  escaped  relatively  unscathed  from  the 
severe  downturn  which  is  affecting  most  conventional  financial  institutions.  This  certainly 
presents  the  industry  with  an  opportunity  to  continue  its  rapid  and  successful  growth  of 
recent decades. 
However, the fact that Shari’a compliant institutions have avoided significant losses resulting 
from the global financial crisis does not mean that there are no lessons that they can learn 
from the fallout. Let me mention three in particular which I believe are particularly relevant – 
the risks of herding behaviour, the importance of liquidity management, and the importance 
of sound corporate governance. 
The first example I invite you to consider concerns the belief by many conventional banks 
that lending to sub-prime borrowers represented a viable new business line in which there 
would  be  an  appropriate  risk  reward  trade-off.  The  first  movers  in  this  market  might  have 
found a profitable niche – but once many banks tried to become players in the same market, 
credit  standards  became  lax  and  loans  were  made  to  borrowers  who  had  little  chance  of 
repaying them. Although some banks recognized the risks they did not do enough to mitigate 
them at a sufficiently early stage. The reason, as the former head of a major bank remarked 
in explaining his bank’s sub-prime related write-offs, is that “if the music is playing, you have 
to get up and dance.” 
BIS Review 162/2008 
 1
The  sub-prime  episode  provides  an  illustration  of  the  herding  instinct  which  has  been  a 
recurrent  feature  of  financial  markets  since  their  very  beginning.  Some  banks  discover  a 
profit  opportunity,  other  banks  follow,  and  before  long  the  oversupply  of  credit  has  led  to 
losses. 
Although  Shari’a  compliant  financial  institutions  have  been  insulated  from  direct  losses 
resulting  from  the  recent  financial  crisis,  this  does  not  mean  that  they  are  not  as  much 
subject to herding as are conventional financial institutions. As I have pointed out in the past, 
newer  entrants  to  the  industry  have  merely  tended  to  copy  the  strategies  they  see  being 
successfully pursued by their more established rivals. 
As a result, the industry’s assets have become heavily weighted towards the property sector 
– real estate, commercial property and construction. Events in other parts of the world have 
recently reminded us that this sector can and does experience significant cycles of activity. 
We also need to remember that a business model which looks robust in conditions of rising 
asset values and abundant liquidity, may not be so in a changed economic environment. 
The industry needs carefully to consider the risks of the widespread adoption of the same 
business model. Is it that there are genuine profit opportunities that are not being exploited 
by their competitors? Or is it instead the consequence of merely deciding to follow the herd?  
An important part of the regulator’s role is to lean against the tendency towards herding that 
seems to be a perennial feature of financial markets. This is not always a popular role but it 
is  an  essential  one.  For  example,  by  imposing  concentration  limits,  regulators  can  require 
banks  to  hold  a  more  diversified  and  therefore  less  risky  portfolio  of  assets.  While  we 
recognise that there are advantages to banks in developing expertise in particular economic 
sectors, there are also significant risks in chasing after the profit opportunities others have 
already exploited. 
While regulators can help to ensure that financial institutions’ risks are well diversified, the 
main  incentive  for  risk  diversification  needs  to  come  from  the  industry  itself.  The  industry 
needs  to  develop  a  greater  diversity  of  business  models,  more  diverse  and  stable  income 
sources, and more robust risk management and stress testing techniques. 
The essential consideration in Islamic finance, as in all forms of finance, is to find the right 
balance between business development and risk management. 
A  second  issue  brought  to  prominence  by  the  recent  global  financial  turmoil  concerns 
financial  institutions’  liquidity  risk  management.  Conventional  financial  institutions  and  their 
regulators clearly did not pay sufficient attention to liquidity risks in the run up to the crisis. 
Liquidity  has  been  a  source  of  potential  risk  for  the  Islamic  financial  services  industry  for 
some  time,  particularly  given  the  relative  unavailability  of  short-term,  liquid  money  market 
instruments that are Shari’a compliant. 
To  assist  Islamic  financial  institutions  to  overcome  this  problem,  the  CBB  has  recently 
developed an Islamic Sukuk liquidity instrument. This is a repurchase agreement which has 
been  designed  to  enable  financial  institutions  to  access  short-term  liquidity  against 
Government of Bahrain long- and short-term Ijara Sukuk. Despite this important innovation in 
the CBB’s standing facilities, there is a continuing need for more depth and liquidity in Shari’a 
compliant money markets and the CBB will continue to explore other such initiatives. 
A final issue which the recent global financial turmoil has brought to prominence concerns 
corporate  governance.  The  experience  of  the  conventional  financial  sector  has  been  a 
reminder that financial institutions need high standards of corporate governance as they are 
entrusted with other people’s money. While this is true of all financial institutions, the need is 
particularly great for those which are Shari’a compliant due to several issues that are specific 
to their business model. 
Decisions on profit distribution, for example, require the careful balancing of the interests of 
multiple  stakeholder  groups  –  not  just  shareholders  as  in  conventional  banks,  but  the 
2 
 BIS Review 162/2008
interests  of  the  holders  of  investment  accounts  as  well.  Investment  account  holders  are 
exposed to many of the same risks as shareholders, but lack the same control rights – such 
as the ability to vote for Board members – that are attached to equity ownership. Balancing 
these different stake holder interests, requires the adoption of strong corporate governance 
practices,  and  the  standards  developed  both  by  AAOIFI  and  by  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services Board, are vital components of the solution. 
To conclude, although the Islamic financial services industry has been insulated to-date from 
the  effects  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  there  are  many  lessons  that  Shari’a  compliant 
institutions can learn. The global financial crisis has been a reminder of the importance of 
risk diversification, of good liquidity management, and sound corporate governance. These 
are all lessons which the Islamic financial industry needs to bear in mind if it is to continue to 
enjoy the framework for stability that is essential for its future prosperity. 
BIS Review 162/2008 
 3
