European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and  Mr  Lucas  Papademos,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  Brussels, 
4 December 2008. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press  conference  here  in  Brussels.  I  would  like  to  thank  Governor  Quaden  for  his  kind 
hospitality and to express our special gratitude to his staff for the excellent organisation of 
the meeting of the Governing Council. 
We  will  now  report  on  the  outcome  of  today's  meeting,  which  was  also  attended  by  Mrs 
Lagarde, President of the ECOFIN Council, and Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council decided 
to reduce the key ECB interest rates by a further 75 basis points. This step follows the two 
50-basis  point  reductions  in  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  announced  on  8  October  and  6 
November 2008. Overall, since our last meeting, the evidence that inflationary pressures are 
diminishing further has increased and, looking forward, inflation rates are expected to be in 
line with price stability over the policy-relevant horizon, supporting the purchasing power of 
incomes  and  savings.  The  decline  in  inflation  rates  is  due  mainly  to  the  fall  in  commodity 
prices and the significant slowdown in economic activity. Largely related to the effects of the 
intensification  and  broadening  of  the  financial  turmoil,  both  global  demand  and  euro  area 
demand are likely to be dampened for a protracted period of time. At the same time, while 
the  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion  has  remained  strong,  it  has  continued  to 
decelerate  further.  All  in  all,  the  level  of  uncertainty  remains  exceptionally  high.  The 
Governing Council will continue to keep inflation expectations firmly anchored in line with its 
medium-term  objective.  In  so  doing,  it  supports  sustainable  growth  and  employment  and 
contributes  to  financial  stability.  Accordingly,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all 
developments over the period ahead. 
Allow me to explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Since September, there has been an intensification and broadening of the financial market 
turmoil. Tensions have increasingly spilled over from the financial sector to the real economy, 
and  the  world  economy  as  a  whole  is  feeling  their  adverse  effects.  In  the  euro  area,  a 
number  of  the  downside  risks  to  economic  activity  that  were  identified  previously  have 
materialised, leading in the third quarter to a contraction of 0.2% in real GDP growth, on a 
quarterly basis, according to Eurostat's first estimate. Available survey data and the monthly 
indicators for October and November suggest that economic activity has weakened further 
during the fourth quarter of 2008. 
Looking further ahead, on the basis of our current analysis and assessment, we see global 
economic weakness and very sluggish domestic demand persisting in the next few quarters. 
According to the December 2008 Eurosystem staff macroeconomic projections for the euro 
area,  a  subsequent  recovery  should  then  gradually  take  place,  supported  by  the  fall  in 
commodity  prices  and  assuming  that  the  external  environment  improves  and  the  financial 
tensions  weaken.  Eurosystem  staff  project  annual  real  GDP  growth  of  between  0.8%  and 
1.2% for 2008, between -1.0% and 0.0% for 2009, and between 0.5% and 1.5% for 2010. 
These  figures  represent  substantial  downward  revisions  relative  to  the  previous  ECB  staff 
projections  for  2008  and  2009  published  in  September.  Forecasts  by  international 
organisations have also been revised downwards and are broadly in line with the December 
2008 Eurosystem staff projections. 
In  the  view  of  the  Governing  Council,  the  economic  outlook  remains  surrounded  by  an 
exceptionally high degree of uncertainty. Risks to economic growth lie on the downside. They 
BIS Review 151/2008 
 1
relate mainly to the potential for a more significant impact on the real economy of the turmoil 
in  financial  markets,  as  well  as  concerns  about  protectionist  pressures  and  possible 
disorderly developments owing to global imbalances. 
It is crucial that all parties concerned make their contribution to lay sound foundations for a 
sustainable  recovery.  For  this  to  materialise  as  early  as  possible,  it  is  of  the  utmost 
importance to maintain discipline and a medium-term perspective in macroeconomic policy-
making. This is the best way to support confidence. The significant measures announced by 
governments to deal with the financial turmoil should be implemented swiftly so as to help 
ensure trust in the financial system and to prevent constraints on credit supply to companies 
and households. 
With  regard  to  price  developments,  annual  HICP  inflation  has  declined  substantially  since 
July.  According  to  Eurostat's  flash  estimate,  HICP  inflation  was  2.1%  in  November,  after 
3.2%  in  October  and  4.0%  in  July.  The  significant  decline  in  headline  inflation  since  the 
summer mainly reflects the considerable easing in global commodity prices over the past few 
months, which more than offsets the impact of the sharp rise in unit labour costs in the first 
half of this year. 
Looking forward, lower commodity prices and weakening demand lead us to conclude that 
inflationary pressures are diminishing further. The annual HICP inflation rate is expected to 
continue to decline in the coming months and to be in line with price stability over the policy-
relevant  horizon.  Depending  primarily  on  future  developments  in  oil  and  other  commodity 
prices, a faster decline in HICP inflation cannot be excluded around the middle of next year, 
mainly due to base effects. However, also due to base effects, inflation rates could increase 
again in the second half of the year, so that any sharp fall in HICP inflation should be short-
lived and is therefore not relevant from a monetary policy perspective. 
Consistent with this assessment, the December 2008 Eurosystem staff projections foresee 
annual HICP inflation of between 3.2% and 3.4% for 2008 and declining to between 1.1% 
and 1.7% for 2009. For 2010, HICP inflation is projected to lie between 1.5% and 2.1%. The 
HICP inflation projections for 2008 and 2009 have been revised downwards substantially in 
relation to the September 2008 ECB staff projections, reflecting mainly the large declines in 
commodity  prices  and  the  impact  of  weakening  demand  on  price  developments.  In  this 
context, let me remind you of the conditional nature of these projections, which are based on 
a  series  of  technical  assumptions,  including  market  expectations  for  short  and  long-term 
interest rates, as well as futures prices for oil and non-energy commodities. In addition, the 
projections are based on the expectation of a decline in wage pressure over the projection 
horizon. Forecasts from international organisations give a broadly similar picture. 
Looking  through  the  shorter-term  volatility  in  headline  HICP  inflation  rates,  risks  to  price 
stability at the policy-relevant horizon are more balanced than in the past. Unexpected further 
declines in commodity prices could put downward pressure on inflation, while upside risks to 
price  stability  could  materialise  particularly  if  the  recent  fall  in  commodity  prices  were  to 
reverse or if domestic price pressures turn out to be stronger than assumed. It is therefore 
crucial that price and wage-setters fully live up to their responsibilities. 
Turning  to  the  monetary  analysis,  various  estimates  of  underlying  broad  money  growth 
point to a sustained but moderating rate of monetary expansion in the euro area. Monetary 
trends  therefore  support  the  view  that  inflationary  pressures  are  diminishing  further,  with 
some risks remaining on the upside in the medium to longer term. 
It  should  be  recognised  that  the  intensification  of  the  financial  market  turmoil  since  mid-
September  marks  a  potential  watershed  in  the  evolution  of  monetary  developments.  The 
most  recent  money  and  credit  data  indicate  that  this  intensification  has  had  a  significant 
impact  on  the  behaviour  of  market  participants.  Thus  far,  such  developments  have  largely 
taken  the  form  of  substitution  among  components  of  the  broad  aggregate  M3,  rather  than 
sharp changes in the evolution of M3 itself. 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2008
The latest available data, namely up to the end of October, reveal a continued moderation of 
the growth rate of loans to the non-financial private sector. At the same time, for the euro 
area  as  a  whole,  there  were  no  significant  indications  of  a  drying  up  in  the  availability  of 
loans. The annual growth rate of loans to households also moderated further, in line with the 
weakening of economic and housing market prospects and tighter financing conditions. The 
data  do  signal  an  impact  of  the  intensification  of  the  financial  turmoil  on  bank  behaviour. 
Looking forward, more data and further analysis are necessary to form a robust judgement. 
To  sum  up,  there  is  increased  evidence  that  inflationary  pressures  are  diminishing  further 
and  inflation  rates  are  expected  to  be  in  line  with  price  stability  over  the  policy-relevant 
horizon,  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  incomes  and  savings.  The  decline  in  inflation 
rates is due mainly to the fall in commodity prices and the significant slowdown in economic 
activity  largely  related  to  the  global  effects  of  the  financial  turmoil.  A  cross-check  of  the 
outcome  of  the  economic  analysis  with  that  of  the  monetary  analysis  supports  this  view. 
While the underlying pace of monetary expansion has remained strong, it has continued to 
decelerate  further.  Hence,  when  considering  all  available  information  and  analysis,  the 
Governing Council decided to reduce the key ECB interest rates by a further 75 basis points. 
All  in  all,  the  level  of  uncertainty  remains  exceptionally  high.  The  Governing  Council  will 
continue to keep inflation expectations firmly anchored in line with its medium-term objective. 
In  so  doing,  it  supports  sustainable  growth  and  employment  and  contributes  to  financial 
stability.  Accordingly,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all  developments  over  the 
period ahead. 
Regarding  fiscal  policies,  the  Governing  Council  considers  it  crucial  that  discipline  and  a 
medium-term perspective are maintained, taking fully into account the consequences of any 
shorter-term  action  on  fiscal  sustainability.  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  that  the  public's 
confidence  in  the  soundness  of  fiscal  policies  is  preserved,  with  the  rules-based  EU  fiscal 
framework  being  fully  applied  and  its  integrity  being  fully  preserved.  The  provisions  of  the 
Treaty  of  Nice  and  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  require  a  medium-term  perspective  and 
allow for the necessary flexibility. Automatic fiscal stabilisers are relatively large in the euro 
area and provide a powerful source of fiscal support to a weakening economy. Where room 
for  manoeuvre  exists,  additional  budgetary  measures  could  be  effective  if  they  are  timely, 
targeted and temporary. 
Turning  to  structural  policies,  the  ongoing  period  of  weak  economic  activity  and  high 
uncertainty  about  the  economic  outlook  imply  the  need  to  strengthen  the  resilience  and 
flexibility of the euro area economy. Product market reforms should foster competition and 
speed up effective restructuring. Labour market reforms should help to facilitate appropriate 
wage-setting,  as  well  as  labour  mobility  across  sectors  and  regions.  The  current  situation 
should therefore be seen as a catalyst to foster the implementation of necessary domestic 
reforms in line with the principle of an open market economy with free competition. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 151/2008 
 3
