Duvvuri Subbarao: The global financial turmoil and challenges for the 
Indian economy 
Speech  by  Dr  Duvvuri  Subbarao,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Bankers' 
Club, Kolkata, 10 December 2008. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  this  evening  and  to  be  able  to  share  my  thoughts  with  an 
exclusive gathering of bankers. Since this is an in-house meeting and we are professional 
colleagues, I propose to be frank and forthright. I am glad to know that the Bankers' Club in 
Kolkata  has  been  recently  revived  and  is  engaged  in  promoting  professional  interaction 
within the banking community.  
The  global  financial  crisis  is  now  the  staple  of  front  page  news.  Banks  around  the  world, 
including those in India, are in the forefront of managing the challenge of crisis resolution. 
Since  it  is  so  topical,  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  share  my  perspective  on  the 
current  global  turmoil,  its  impact  on  India,  the  outlook  for  the  Indian  economy  and  the 
challenges that lie ahead for the Indian banking system, in particular.  
Global financial outlook 
The global financial situation continues to be uncertain and unsettled. What started off as a 
sub-prime  crisis  in  the  US  housing  mortgage  sector  has  turned  successively  into  a  global 
banking crisis, global financial crisis and now a global economic crisis. Text book economics 
often  cites  housing  as  a  prime  example  of  a  non-tradable  good.  It  is  paradoxical  that  a 
quintessentially  non-tradable  good  as  housing  has  triggered  a  crisis  of  global  dimensions. 
This crisis is also the first of a kind in the sense that it is the first financial crisis since the 
Great Depression that originated in the advanced economies and rapidly engulfed the whole 
world.  Such  is  the  depth  and  sweep  of  financial  globalisation.  By  far,  the  most  frequently 
asked question (FAQ) today is whether the worst – in terms of the financial sector meltdown, 
and in particular, failure of financial institutions – is behind us. No one is really willing to take 
a definitive call on this, which is a sign of the increasing number of unknown unknowns.  
Even as recently as six months ago, there was a view that the fallout of the crisis will remain 
confined to the financial sector and that, at the most, there would only be a shallow recession 
in the advanced economies. These expectations, as it now turns out, have been belied. The 
contagion  has  traversed  from  the  financial  to  the  real  sector;  and  it  now  looks  like  the 
recession will be deeper and the recovery longer than earlier anticipated.  
Global economic outlook 
Many economists are now predicting that this “Great Recession” of 2008/09 will be the worst 
global recession since the 1930s. The IMF made its customary forecast for global growth in 
the World Economic Outlook published in October 2008. By early November, the IMF had 
revised its forecast for global growth downwards – from 3.9 per cent to 3.7 per cent for 2008, 
and from 3.0 per cent to 2.2 per cent for 2009. There are two inferences that follow from this. 
First, that the global situation has deteriorated rapidly, in a space of less than two months. 
Second, that 2009 is going to be a more challenging year than 2008.  
Emerging economies 
Ironically, even as late as six months ago, it was intellectually fashionable to subscribe to the 
“decoupling  theory”  –  that  even  if  advanced  countries  went  into  a  downturn,  emerging 
BIS Review 162/2008 
 1
economies will, at worst, be affected only marginally, and will largely steam ahead on their 
own. In a rapidly globalising world, the decoupling theory was never very persuasive; given 
the  evidence  of  the  last  few  months  –  capital  flow  reversals,  sharp  widening  of  spreads 
between sovereign and corporate debt, and abrupt currency depreciations – the decoupling 
theory has almost completely lost credibility. Growth prospects of emerging economies have 
most  definitively  been  undermined  by  the  ongoing  crisis  with,  of  course,  considerable 
variations across countries.  
Impact of the crisis on India 
India  too  is  having  to  weather  the  negative  impact  of  the  crisis.  As  the  impact  on  India 
unfolds, there are two frequently asked questions: First, how is that India is affected when it 
came out of the Asian crisis relatively unscathed? Second, why is India affected even when 
its exports account for only 15 per cent of its GDP? The answer to both the questions lies in 
globalisation. We are certainly more integrated into the world economy today than ten years 
ago at the time of the Asian crisis. Integration into the world implies more than just exports. 
Going by the common measure of globalisation, India's two-way trade (merchandise exports 
plus imports), as a proportion of GDP, grew from 21.2 per cent in 1997-98, the year of the 
Asian crisis, to 34.7 per cent in 2007-08. If we take an expanded measure of globalisation, 
that is, the ratio of total external transactions (gross current account flows plus gross capital 
flows) to GDP, this ratio has increased from 46.8 per cent in 1997-98 to 117.4 per cent in 
2007-08. These numbers are clear evidence of India's increasing integration into the world 
economy over the last 10 years.  
We must also note another important difference between the crisis in the advanced countries 
and the developments in India. While in the advanced countries the contagion spread from 
the  financial  to  the  real  sector,  in  India,  the  slowdown  in  the  real  sector  is  affecting  the 
financial sector, which in turn, has a second-order impact on the real sector.  
The Indian banking system 
The Indian banking system is not directly exposed to the sub-prime mortgage assets. It has 
very  limited  indirect  exposure  to  the  US  mortgage  market,  or  to  the  failed  institutions  or 
stressed  assets.  Indian  banks,  both  in  the  public  sector  and  in  the  private  sector,  are 
financially  sound,  well  capitalised  and  well  regulated.  The  average  capital  to  risk-weighted 
assets  ratio  (CRAR)  for  the  Indian  banking  system,  as  at  end-March  2008,  was  12.6  per 
cent, as against the regulatory minimum of nine per cent and the Basel norm of eight per 
cent.  Even  so,  India  is  experiencing  the  knock-on  effects  of  the  global  crisis,  through  the 
monetary,  financial  and  real  channels  –  all  of  which  are  coming  on  top  of  the  already 
expected  cyclical  moderation  in  growth.  Our  financial  markets  –  equity  market,  money 
market, forex market and credit market – have all come under pressure mainly because of 
what we have begun to call “the substitution effect” of: (i) drying up of overseas financing for 
Indian  banks  and  Indian  corporates;  (ii)  constraints  in  raising  funds  in  a  bearish  domestic 
capital  market;  and  (iii)  decline  in  the  internal  accruals  of  the  corporates.  All  these  factors 
added to the pressure on the domestic credit market.  
Simultaneously,  the  reversal  of  capital  flows,  caused  by  the  global  de-leveraging  process, 
has put pressure on our forex market. The sharp fluctuation in the overnight money market 
rates in October 2008 and the depreciation of the rupee reflected the combined impact of the 
global credit crunch and the de-leveraging process underway. 
Outlook for India 
The  outlook  for  India,  going  forward,  is  mixed.  There  is  evidence  of  a  slow  down  in  the 
economic activity. The real GDP growth has moderated in the first half of 2008-09. Industrial 
2 
 BIS Review 162/2008
activity,  particularly  in  the  manufacturing  and  infrastructure  sectors,  is  decelerating.  The 
services  sector  too,  which  has  been  our  prime  growth  engine  for  the  last  five  years,  is 
slowing,  mainly  in  the  construction,  transport  and  communication,  trade,  hotels  and 
restaurants sub-sectors. For the first time in seven years, exports have declined in absolute 
terms in October 2008. Recent data indicate that the demand for bank credit is slackening 
despite comfortable liquidity in the system. Higher input costs and dampened demand have 
dented corporate margins while the uncertainty surrounding the crisis has affected business 
confidence. 
Inflation 
On the positive side, headline inflation, as measured by the wholesale price index, has fallen 
sharply,  and  the  decline  has  been  sustained  for  the  past  four  weeks,  pointing  to  a  faster-
than-expected reduction in inflation. Largely, the falling commodity prices have been the key 
drivers  behind  the  disinflation;  however,  some  contribution  has  also  come  from  slowing 
domestic demand. The reduction in prices of petrol and diesel announced last week, and a 
cut in the excise duties should further ease the inflationary pressures. To be sure, consumer 
price inflation for the months of September and October 2008 did increase. This is possibly 
owing to the firm trend in food-articles inflation and the higher weight of food articles in the 
measures  of  consumer  price  inflation.  Historically,  there  has  been  a  positive  correlation 
between wholesale and consumer price inflation, and given this correlation, consumer price 
inflation too can be expected to soften in the months ahead.  
RBI's policy stance 
The  Reserve  Bank's  monetary  policy  stance  has  consistently  been  to  balance  growth, 
inflation and financial stability concerns. When inflation surged earlier this year, the RBI had 
moved  quickly  to  tighten  policy.  Then  again,  reflecting  the  unfolding  global  situation  and 
expectation of decline in inflation, RBI has adjusted its monetary stance over the last couple 
of  months.  The  endeavour  of  our  monetary  stance  has  been  to  manage  liquidity  –  both 
domestic  and  forex  liquidity  –  and  to  ensure  that  credit  continues  to  flow  for  productive 
activities.  
Measures taken so far 
The RBI has taken several measures aimed at infusing rupee as well as foreign exchange 
liquidity and to maintain credit flow to productive sectors of the economy. Measures aimed at 
expanding the rupee liquidity included significant reduction in the cash reserve ratio (CRR), 
reduction  of  the  statutory  liquidity  ratio  (SLR),  opening  a  special  repo  window  under  the 
liquidity  adjustment  facility  (LAF)  for  banks  for  on-lending  to  the  non-banking  financial 
companies  (NBFCs),  housing  finance  companies  (HFCs)  and  mutual  funds  (MFs),  and 
extending  a  special  refinance  facility,  which  banks  can  access  without  any  collateral.  The 
Reserve Bank is also unwinding the Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) securities, roughly 
synchronised with the government borrowing programme, in order to manage liquidity.  
Measures aimed at managing forex liquidity include upward adjustment of the interest rate 
ceilings on the foreign currency non-resident (banks) [FCNR(B)] and non-resident (external) 
rupee  account 
the  external  commercial 
borrowings (ECB) regime, allowing the NBFCs and HFCs access to foreign borrowing and 
allowing  corporates  to  buy  back  foreign  currency  convertible  bonds  (FCCBs)  to  take 
advantage of the discount in the prevailing depressed global markets. The Reserve Bank has 
also  instituted  a  rupee-dollar  swap  facility  for  banks  with  overseas  branches  to  give  them 
comfort in managing their short-term funding requirements.  
[NR(E)RA]  deposits,  substantially  relaxing 
BIS Review 162/2008 
 3
Measures to encourage flow of credit to sectors which are coming under pressure include 
extending  the  period  of  pre-shipment  and  post-shipment  credit  for  exports,  expanding  the 
refinance facility for exports, counter-cyclical adjustment of provisioning norms for all types of 
standard  assets  (except  in  case  of  direct  advances  to  agriculture  and  small  and  medium 
enterprises which continue to be at 0.25 per cent) and risk weights on banks' exposure to 
certain  sectors  which  had  been  increased  earlier  counter-cyclically,  and  expanding  the 
lendable resources available to the Small Industries Development Bank of India (SIDBI), the 
National Housing Bank (NHB) and the Export-Import Bank of India (EXIM Bank).  
To improve the flow of credit to productive sectors at viable costs so as to sustain the growth 
momentum, the Reserve Bank signalled a lowering of the interest rate structure by reducing 
its key policy rate viz., the repo rate by 250 basis points from 9.0 per cent as on October 19 
to 6.5 per cent by December 8, 2008.  
Although,  we  remain  vulnerable  to  global  financial  and  economic  developments,  the 
measures taken so far have eased the liquidity and credit flow situations considerably. I must 
also add that in managing the impact of the global crisis, we have been mindful that no policy 
initiative is totally costless. Managing this delicate balance between costs and benefits has 
been one of our challenges. 
The measures taken by the RBI have been appreciated and criticised. I would like to assure 
you  that  we  give  as  much  importance  to  our  critics  as  our  admirers.  While  some  of  the 
criticism has been fair and value adding, some of it stems from an inadequate appreciation of 
the RBI perspective. I thought it may be useful to give our perspective so as to inform public 
debate on important monetary policy issues.  
Everyone  is  now  agreed  that  the  way  forward  on  this  crisis  at  the  present  time  is  too 
uncertain. Even today, it is not possible to clearly see the path of the crisis and its resolution 
over the coming months. It is just not possible to have a precise road map all laid out to be 
unleashed in one go. This crisis does not allow us that luxury. And, mind you, India is not 
unique  in  this  respect.  Almost  every  country,  whether  or  not  directly  affected,  is  having  to 
manage under uncertainty. There are simply too many unknown unknowns. 
In  the  circumstances,  the  stance  of  the  RBI  has  been  to respond  to  the  evolving  situation 
swiftly and effectively, and to the extent possible, in anticipation of immediate developments. 
We do have a road map that is comprehensive and practical. It would be our endeavour to 
adapt  this  road  map  to  the  evolving  global  developments  and  implement  it  flexibly  and 
pragmatically.  Our  approach,  as  indeed  of  every  prudent  central  banker  around  the  world, 
has been to "cross the river by feeling the stones". The RBI will continue to be on vigil and do 
everything  possible  within  its  mandate  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  the  crisis  on  the  Indian 
economy. 
The challenges ahead 
Let  me  now  turn  to  the  major  challenges  facing  the  banking  system  in  the  country, 
particularly in the wake of the global financial crisis.  
The first challenge: maintaining the credit flow 
The  outlook,  both  for  the  world  and  for  India,  continues  to  remain  uncertain.  The  future 
trajectory of the global crisis is not yet clear. As I mentioned earlier, the year 2009-10 will be 
more challenging than the current one. There was a noticeable decline in the credit demand 
in the month of November 2008 but it is not yet clear if it was a one off episode or it reflects a 
trend.  If  it  is  indicative  of  slowing  economic  activity,  it  would  be  a  major  challenge  for  the 
banks  to  ensure  healthy  flow  of  credit  to  the  productive  sectors  of  the  economy.  As  you 
know, economic growth, even in normal times, requires efficient financial intermediation. An 
economic  downturn,  therefore,  requires  even  more  efficient  financial  intermediation  –  and 
4 
 BIS Review 162/2008
this  is  a  major  challenge  that  the  banking  community  has  to  address.  There  is  a  need  to 
ensure  a  steady  credit  flow  to  the  real  sector  of  the  economy  in  order  to  sustain  demand 
even while maintaining credit quality.  
There are two aspects to lending viz., availability and cost of credit. While the availability of 
credit should not be an issue, the cost of credit seems to be an issue at the current juncture. 
There  seem  to  be  two  reasons  inhibiting  the  banks  from  extending  credit:  first,  a  high 
weighted-average  cost  of  funds  because  of  high  interest  rates  on  deposits;  and  second, 
concerns about credit quality, which makes the banks risk averse, particularly in lending to 
certain segments. During the last one month, there has been a sharp reversal in trend and, 
as noted earlier, credit demand seems to be slackening. The reduced funding demand on the 
banks  should  enable  them  to  reduce  the  interest  rates  on  deposit  and  thereby  reduce  the 
overall  cost  of  funds.  In  addition,  from  a  macro  perspective  the  decelation  of  headline 
inflation  noticed  so  far  and  the  expectations  of  softening  of  inflation  in  the  months  ahead 
should  enable  a  reduction  in  nominal  interest  rates.  These  developments  in  turn,  would 
facilitate lending at lower interest rates, making fresh lending more viable and, at least partly 
obviating the risk aversion of the banks.  
Let me assure you that the RBI, on its part, will continue to maintain adequate liquidity in the 
system to enable the flow of credit to the economy. 
The second challenge: how do we reform financial sector regulation? 
By far, the most contentious and most voluble debate triggered by the crisis has been about 
the flaws in the regulatory architecture of the financial sector. Several issues have come to 
the fore. I will mention just a few. How can complex derivative products, which transmitted 
risks  across  the  system,  be  made  more  transparent?  What  are  the  financial  stability 
implications of structured products like credit derivatives?  Are exchange traded derivatives 
better than over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives? How do we eliminate the drawbacks of the 
“originate-to-distribute”  model?  Is  universal  banking,  the  model  that  the  United  States  has 
now  turned  to,  appropriate?  Can  we  apply  the  same  regulatory  regime  for  both  wholesale 
and retail banks? 
The burden of all the above questions is to identify the drawbacks in the present regulatory 
regimes  and  indicate  possible  solutions.  There  is  no  doubt  that  we  must  pursue  all  these 
questions.  In  doing  so,  I  would  urge  that  we  remember  two  things.  The  first  thing  to 
remember is that no one size fits all. For example, universal banking may be good in some of 
the  countries  and  in  some  of  the  situations,  and  not  so  in  others.  The  second  thing  to 
remember  is  that  some  regulations,  arguably,  have  been  behind  the  curve.  There  is  no 
denying that regulations have to keep pace with innovations in the financial markets but in 
doing so, we must be  mindful of the risks of over-tightening the regulations lest they stifle 
innovation. 
The third challenge: regulatory forbearance and relaxing regulatory norms 
There  has  been  a  sustained  demand  from  various  quarters  for  exercising  regulatory 
forbearance in regard to extant prudential regulations applicable to the banking sector. As a 
part  of  counter-cyclical  package,  we  have  already  made  several  changes  to  the  current 
prudential  norms.  These  include:  (a)  reduction  in  the  risk  weights  for  claims  on  unrated 
corporates  and  commercial  real  estate  to  100  per  cent;  (b)  reduction  in  the  provisioning 
requirement  for  all  standard  assets  to  0.40  per  cent;  (c)  permitting  housing  loans  to  be 
restructured  even  if  the  revised  payment  period  exceeds  ten  years;  (d)  making  the 
restructured  commercial  real  estate  exposures  eligible  for  special  treatment  if  restructured 
before June 30, 2009. 
There  are  demands  for  further  regulatory  forbearance.  For  example,  there  has  been  a 
demand  to  relax  the  asset  classification  norms  by  increasing  the  period  of  delinquency 
BIS Review 162/2008 
 5
beyond the current norm of 90 days after which the loan asset is required to be classified as 
non-performing.  The  objective  underlying  the  demand  is  to  permit  the  banks  to  avoid 
recognising  non-performing  loans  (NPLs)  for  a  longer  period.  Is  it  desirable  to  change  the 
NPL  norm  by  relaxing  the  90  day  rule?  The  demand  is  presumably  premised  on  the 
argument  that  the  relaxation  in  the  norm  will  make  the  banks'  financials  look  better,  allow 
them to reserve less, conserve capital, and may even allow them to offer more credit (or at 
least  not  cut  back  on  credit).  However,  there  are  several  forceful  arguments  against  the 
relaxation sought. Let me mention a few.  
(i) 
Delay in recognition of NPL removes pressure on the banks to deal promptly with 
the problem. History suggests that delayed recognition of impairment in the value of 
the assets makes the problems only worse. The sooner banks restructure the loan 
(through, say, CDR mechanism) or, where appropriate, send the loan for collection, 
the better. 
This global downturn is likely to be a prolonged one. If banks do not recognise their 
problem loans here and now, and deal with them expeditiously, the problem will only 
get compounded with the passage of time and will keep haunting them in future.  
The  prudential  regulatory  norms  ought  not  to  be  changed  lightly,  especially  when 
markets are on edge. If the impression gains ground that the modified norms under-
state the extent of impairment and over-state the asset quality in the banking sector, 
the  markets  could  suspect  the  worst  and  needlessly  penalise  the  banks  through 
market discipline.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
These are the issues we need to reflect on in moving towards further regulatory forbearance. 
The fourth challenge: effective implementation of Basel II framework 
As you are aware, a part of the Indian banking system has already migrated to the Basel II 
Framework effective March 31, 2008 and the remaining commercial banks are slated to do 
so by March 31, 2009. However, having regard to the state of preparedness of the system, 
we  have,  for  the  present,  adopted  only  the  simpler  approaches  available  under  the 
Framework.  The  RBI  is  yet  to  announced  the  timeframe  for  adoption  of  the  Advanced 
Approaches  in  the  Indian  banking  system  but  the  migration  to  these  Approaches  is  the 
eventual  goal  –  for  which  the  banking  system  will  need  to  start  its  preparations  in  all 
earnestness.  
The  migration  to  the  Advanced  Approaches  poses  several  significant  challenges  to  the 
bankers and, as the banking regulator and supervisor, also to the RBI. The first challenge is 
the availability of long time-series data for computing the risk parameters required under the 
Advanced Approaches. Good-quality, consistent and reliable data and information relating to 
the loan portfolios of the banks as also sophisticated IT resources are critical to the proper 
risk  assessment  under  the  Basel  II  framework.  Data  limitation  is  a  key  impediment  to  the 
design and implementation of credit risk models. This may prove to be a major challenge for 
us in India, given the wide-spread branch network – though the increasing computerisation in 
the banking industry should prove to be of great help.  
The second challenge is that the Advanced Approaches for credit risk and operational risk 
envisaged under the Basel II Framework also require use of risk models by the banks. This, 
in turn, requires internal validation of these models by the banks themselves as also by the 
supervisors before the models can be permitted to be used for regulatory capital purposes. 
Such a validation process demands expert skills which need to be developed and nurtured.  
Third, since Basel II Framework is primarily about ensuring robust risk management in the 
banks, its effective implementation, particularly the Advanced Approaches, will demand rapid 
and significant upgradation of skills – both at the level of the banking system as also within 
the RBI. In this context, the challenge that banks are likely to face will be multi-faceted, viz., 
assessing skill requirements, identifying and bridging the gaps, identifying talents, putting the 
6 
 BIS Review 162/2008
available  talents  to  optimum  use,  attracting  fresh  talents,  retention  of  talents,  and  change 
management.  Banks  would,  therefore,  need  to  pay  special  attention  to  strengthening  their 
risk management infrastructure, in all its dimensions, including the human resources. We, in 
the  RBI,  are  mindful  of  our  part  of  the  challenges  in  this  regard  and  are  taking  necessary 
measures.  
The  implementation  of  Basel  II  requires  closer  cooperation,  information  sharing  and  co-
ordination  of  policies  among  sectoral  supervisors,  specially  in  the  context  of  financial 
conglomerates.  The  existence  of  separate  supervisory  authorities  to  regulate  different 
segments  of  the  markets  within  a  jurisdiction  may  create  challenges  in  implementation  of 
Basel  II  not  only  within  a  jurisdiction  but  also  across  jurisdictions  –  which  would  require 
effective cross-border supervisory cooperation and co-ordination.  
The fifth challenge: the challenge of banking development and financial inclusion in 
Eastern India  
Banking  development  in  the  eastern  region  of  the  country,  as  measured  by  several 
parameters, is lagging behind the national average. Let me give some evidence to illustrate 
this.  
• 
In  March  2008,  the  all-India  per  branch  population  coverage  was  15,400.  For  the 
eastern region, the figure varied from 25,000 in Bihar to 9,600 in Sikkim..  
In  March  2007,  at  the  all-India  level,  the  per  capita  deposit  was  Rs.  28,600.  The 
corresponding figure for the eastern region was Rs. 14,400. Similarly, as against the 
per capita credit of Rs 28,600 at the all-India level, the corresponding figure for the 
eastern region is only Rs. 7,200.  
In March 2007, at the all-India level, the population of people having bank accounts 
was 41 per cent. The corresponding population for the eastern region was only 30.7 
per cent, ranging from 21.1 per cent for Bihar to 39.6 per cent for West Bengal.  
In March 2007, at the all-India level, the credit-deposit ratio was 74.5 per cent. For 
the eastern region, the ratio was just 50 per cent.  
   In terms of infrastructure coverage and other development indicators, the eastern region is 
not  as  developed  as  other  regions  of  the  country.  Admittedly,  this  affects  the  credit 
absorption capacity and may also explain some of the lagging parameters mentioned above. 
However, this can not be an excuse for inaction. It should be impetus for vigorous action. 
Finance can lead development just as much as it can be led by it. This is specially true for 
the poor. Nearly a third of the people of Bihar and West Bengal are below the poverty line. 
Through  greater  financial  inclusion  it  should  be  possible  to  provide  savings,  loan  and 
insurance products at affordable prices and this can generate income and employment in a 
very significant measure.  
We must recognise that the opportunity cost of formal finance for the borrower is so high that 
mere  financial  inclusion  can  unlock  value  that  today  is  accruing  to  rentiers  and  informal 
finance providers. This apart, transaction costs can be reduced through the kind of scale of 
operations that only banks are capable of achieving and this itself become a source of value 
creation.  
Financial  inclusion  can  not  be  reduced  to  a  mere  number  game.  The  actual  impact  of 
financial inclusion and expanded banking coverage must be felt at the grass-root level. I find 
that  a  number  of  measures  have  been  initiated  to  deepen  the  banking  penetration  in  the 
region.  For  example,  in  West  Bengal,  a  Task  Force  for  extending  banking  facilities  in 
unbanked Gram Panchayats (GP) was constituted by the State Level Bankers’ Committee in 
December  2007.  The  task  force  has  identified  511  GPs  at  which  bank  branches  will  be 
opened in next three years and at 427 GP-centres in the following three years. I understand 
BIS Review 162/2008 
 7
that the State Government has agreed to provide premises adjacent to the GP offices and 
extend other facilities like road connection and power at such centres.  
Where a full fledged branch can not be opened immediately, banks could look at covering 
the  unbanked  areas  through  satellite  offices,  weekly  branches,  or  use  the  business 
correspondent  model  for  ensuring  greater  coverage  within  a  shorter  period.  Information 
Technology  (IT)  solutions  should  also  be  explored  for  providing  a  back  bone  of  credit 
information,  customer  information  apart  from  facilitating  more  efficient  credit  delivery  and 
reducing cost of payments and remittances.  
I understand there has been an interesting and innovative experiment undertaken in West 
Bengal  for  promoting  financial  inclusion.  A  Financial  Inclusion/Literacy  Campaign  was 
launched in an urban slum area viz., the Basanti Colony, Ultadanga, Kolkata in mid-October 
2008  in  association  with  six  commercial  banks.  These  banks  are  the  State  Bank  of  India, 
United Bank of India, UCO Bank, Allahabad Bank, Bank of India and Bank of Baroda – which 
had branches in the vicinity of the slum area. All six banks were allotted separate counters 
for opening of accounts as well as to campaign for their bank-specific products. Free photo 
facility  for  account  holders  was  provided  and  the  cost  was  shared  by  all  the  participating 
banks. The initiatives such as this should be pursued and the full range of financial services 
provided to these areas. I understand that the Local Council extended support for obtaining 
identity  documents  required  for  opening  of  bank  accounts.  This  experiment  demonstrates 
what banks can do if only they are responsive, sensitive, proactive and result oriented. 
Coming to sectoral flow of credit, while the share of agriculture in the State’s SDP is higher 
than at the all-India level, the share of agricultural credit in total credit is roughly the same for 
the State. This points to the need to look at bankable schemes in the agriculture sector. Also, 
NABARD has a very significant role to play in this region. As the micro and small enterprises 
account  for 7.2  per  cent  of  total  credit  in  the  region,  SIDBI  too,  as  a  development  finance 
institution, has to play a prominent role in accelerating and catalysing the flow of bank credit 
to the MSE sector in the region.  
Although  not  often  acknowledged,  effective  financial  intermediation  has  been  one  of  the 
important factors behind India’s recent growth episode. Efficient financial intermediation is a 
formidable  challenge  where  poverty  and  disadvantage  are  high.  You,  as  senior  bank 
managers  in  the  eastern  region  of  the  country,  have  a  bigger  challenge  and  greater 
opportunity. A bigger challenge because you have to be even more efficient than elsewhere, 
and  a  greater  opportunity  because  by  being  responsive  and  sensitive,  you  can  make  "a 
bigger difference".  
Conclusion 
Going forward, developments in the real economy, financial markets and global commodity 
prices point to a period of moderation in growth with declining inflation. What is heartening 
though  is  that  the  fundamentals  of  our  economy  continue  to  be  strong.  Once  calm  and 
confidence are restored in the global markets, economic activity in India will recover sharply. 
But a period of painful adjustment is inevitable. It is our collective challenge – for you, the 
bankers,  and  for  us  at  the  RBI  –  to  respond  to  this  extraordinary  situation  effectively  and 
return India to its path of growth and poverty reduction.  
Thank you. 
8 
 BIS Review 162/2008
