Mark Carney: Building continuous markets 
Remarks  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canada-United 
Kingdom Chamber of Commerce, London, England, 19 November 2008.  
 It is a pleasure to be back in the City. Twenty years ago, I started my first proper job here, as 
a  credit  analyst  –  remember  that  quaint  role?  at  an  investment  bank  –  remember  those 
archaic  institutions?  I  came  to  London  then  because  it  appeared  poised  to  realize  the 
promise  of  market-based  finance  and  to  reassume  its  role  at  the  centre  of  global  finance. 
Today, I come to London, when so many are burying markets, to praise them and set out 
some thoughts on how to make them more robust. 
Throughout  the  years,  Canada  has  been  a  major  beneficiary  of  London's  innovation. 
Companies  of  adventurers,  conceived  and  funded  in  London,  opened  up  large  swathes  of 
Canada  to  international  trade.  Global  capital,  channelled  through  London,  financed  our 
infrastructure and commodities booms at the turn of the twentieth century. Our governments 
leaned heavily on the Euromarkets to finance their borrowings in the 1980s and early 1990s. 
More recently, we have looked to London for an array of new financial products. 
We have also given back. Canada helped to finance Britain's World War II efforts, and we 
were pleased to receive the final repayment, on schedule, in 2006. The Bank of Canada's 
pioneering  of  inflation  targeting  was  undoubtedly  of  some  assistance  to  the  Bank  of 
England's thinking in its adoption of this successful framework. We now may have something 
to  contribute  amidst  the  current  maelstrom:  a  dispassionate  and  ultimately  optimistic 
perspective on how to build sustainable markets in the age of global capital. 
The simple fact is that, while Canadian markets have been under strain, they have remained 
open. Our banks have not sought public capital. They continue to expand lending to both the 
business  and  household  sectors  without  the  kind  of  prodding  seen  in  other  jurisdictions. 
While we are not immune to the impact of a potentially serious global recession, we have a 
financial system that affords us the means, and gives us the prospect, of investing for the 
inevitable global recovery. For that recovery to reach its full potential, we all need a financial 
system  with  continuously  open  markets  at  its  core.  It  is  on  this  theme  that  I  would  like  to 
concentrate my remarks today. 
Markets and banks 
The  current  crisis  marks  the  reversal  of  a  decades-long  transition  of  the  global  financial 
system from being primarily relationship-oriented and dominated by banks to being primarily 
transactions-oriented  and  dominated  by  financial  markets.  This  model  had  the  potential  to 
price risk and to allocate capital more efficiently. In some cases, however, the development 
of  markets  ran  well  ahead  of  the  supporting  infrastructure.  Moreover,  lulled  by  early 
successes, participants became increasingly reliant on opaque securitization, dependent on 
excessive leverage, and complacent about market liquidity. A system that appeared resilient 
(and enormously profitable) in times of low volatility proved brittle in the face of shocks. 
With  the  breakdown  of  many  markets,  the  pendulum  is  swinging  away  from  market-based 
finance  back  towards  bank-based  finance.  This  shift  carries  with  it  a  number  of  costs  and 
associated risks. First, the sudden re-emphasis on bank-based intermediation has led to an 
urgent need for banks to raise very large amounts of capital. If not managed properly, this 
threatens  to  exacerbate  the  global  economic  slowdown.  Second,  the  crisis  has  shaken  a 
number of articles of faith among market participants: that one could always borrow against 
"good" collateral, that market-based liquidity would always be available, and that ratings were 
efficient substitutes for due diligence and judgment. With these assumptions now in doubt, 
BIS Review 144/2008 
 1
certain markets are now frozen and could take a long time to return, if they do at all. Third, in 
recent  weeks,  we  have  seen  evidence  of  a  "home  bias"  re-emerging  in  global  financial 
markets as banks and investors furiously repatriate capital. This reflects both the desire of 
banks to concentrate their limited resources on geographically close relationships, and the 
need for funds to liquidate assets in preparation for large redemptions. This development has 
the potential to significantly slow growth in some emerging markets.  
All  of  these  risks  are  the  consequence  of  relying  on  markets  built  on  sand.  To  find  the 
bedrock  on  which  to  rebuild  open  continuous  markets,  all  of  us  –  market  participants  and 
policy-makers alike – must learn the lessons of this crisis. 
Lessons of the crisis  
The crisis has its roots in macroeconomic imbalances and microeconomic failures. On the 
macro side, we are experiencing the inevitable correction of a period of global imbalances, 
characterized by excess savings and under-consumption in major emerging markets, and by 
negative  savings,  rapid  credit  expansion,  and  asset-price  booms  in  many  western 
economies. These trends were encouraged by policies including, in Asia, inflexible exchange 
rates and an overreliance on export-led growth, and in the United States, the response to the 
bursting  of  the  tech  bubble.  These  measures  collectively  contributed  to  a  low  and  stable 
interest  rate  environment  that  fed  enormous  risk  taking  and  leverage  across  markets  and 
currencies.  With  the  cavalier  "search  for  yield"  now  replaced  by  a  desperate  "rush  for 
shelter," leverage is being viciously unwound across markets.  
One  clear  lesson  is  that  price  stability  alone  is  not  sufficient  to  prevent  the  buildup  of 
macroeconomic imbalances. Indeed, asset bubbles frequently emerge during periods of low 
and stable consumer price inflation. It does not follow, however, that monetary policy should 
target  asset  prices.  Monetary  policy  is  a  blunt  instrument,  poorly  suited  to  addressing 
financial imbalances. Instead, it is increasingly recognized that macrofinancial stability should 
be one of the core objectives of financial regulation.  
The  current  crisis  has  made  it  crystal  clear  that,  as  designed,  the  form  and  conduct  of 
financial  regulation  is  not  fit  for  purpose.  It  will  not  be  enough  for  prudential  regulators  to 
adopt  new  measures  within  their  current  frameworks.  There  needs  to  be  oversight  of  the 
system  as  a  whole  –  including  both  systemically  important  institutions  and  systemically 
important  markets.  This  oversight  may  be  best  housed  in  those  public  institutions  with  a 
macroeconomic  orientation.  At  a  minimum,  there  must  be  close  coordination  between 
regulators, the central bank, and the finance ministry.  
As part of a new macroprudential approach, regulation must address three significant flaws 
in market structure – a lack of transparency, misaligned incentives, and inadequate liquidity. I 
will say a few words about each of these. 
The first priority is to improve transparency. Many highly structured products at the centre of 
the  turmoil  were  far  from  transparent,  and  the  disclosure  by  their  originators  was  often 
wanting. The substitution of credit ratings for adequate transparency promoted herding upon 
downgrades and common valuation errors across a range of asset classes. It also eliminated 
investor pressure for better disclosure, contributing to today's broken markets. Progress has 
been made, including the Financial Stability Forum's bank disclosure template and the Bank 
of  Canada's  disclosure  requirements  for  asset-backed  commercial  paper  pledged  as 
collateral.  Ultimately,  if  investors  are  truly  doing  their  credit  homework,  they  will  demand 
better disclosure. Otherwise, they will again pay the price.  
The  second  priority  is  to  address  a  series  of  misaligned  incentives.  It  has  been  belatedly 
recognized that the severing of the long-term relationship between originator and borrower 
contributed to a decline in credit quality. Further, within several global financial institutions, 
there were also inappropriate incentives created by the funding of trading desks at risk-free 
rates  and  poorly  designed  compensation  structures.  There  are  now  prominent  calls  for 
2 
 BIS Review 144/2008
increased  regulation  to  better  align  incentives  within  institutions.  These  matters  require 
judgment,  not  slogans.  I  firmly  believe  that  regulation  of  compensation  is  not  appropriate, 
even  though  it  is  in  vogue.  Rather,  regulators  should  consider  carefully  compensation 
incentives within a broader assessment of the robustness of risk-management and internal-
control  systems.  Regulators  also  need  to  address  misaligned  incentives  created  by 
regulation itself, such as the current state of capital requirements. 
It goes without saying that liquidity management across a broad range of financial institutions 
must be improved. Confidence that markets would remain liquid had encouraged the rapid 
growth  of  the  "originate-to-distribute"  credit  model.  The  current  illiquidity  is  hastening  its 
demise.  Liquidity  problems  have  spread  across  markets,  reflecting  both  fundamental 
concerns about the solvency of counterparties and the procyclicality of collateral margins.  
Core  money  markets  have  broken  down  as  a  result  of  these  three  failures,  thereby 
worsening  the  crisis.  Had  these  core  markets  continued  functioning,  we  would  likely  be 
experiencing  a  credit  crunch  –  where  the  cost  of  credit  would  have  been  sharply  higher  – 
instead of a full-blown credit crisis – where credit is unavailable at any price across a range 
of core markets. While the provision of extraordinary liquidity by central banks is limiting the 
damage from the crisis, it has long been apparent that official liquidity, irrespective of size, 
cannot re-open markets on its own. 
How to build continuous markets 
The current situation is unacceptable. The financial system should have a number of core 
markets – including interbank lending, commercial paper, and repo markets for high-quality 
securities  –  that  are  continuously  open  even  under  stress.  Achieving  this  will  require  a 
combination of the microeconomic measures just described and the pursuit of two strategies.  
The  G-7  Action  Plan  announced  last  month  provides  the  conventional  roadmap.  This 
strategy centres on shoring up systemically important institutions so that they can be more 
resilient and resume their market-making role. To this end, the G-7 has made it clear that no 
systemically important institution will be allowed to fail and that sufficient capital – public and 
private  –  will  be  provided  to  restore  confidence.  In  recent  weeks,  G-7  governments  have 
acted with bold plans to honour these principles. In tandem, central banks have fulfilled their 
commitments under the plan to "ensure that banks and other financial institutions have broad 
access to liquidity and funding." In providing liquidity to the core of the system, we expect 
that  key  markets  will  resume  functioning  as  this  liquidity  cascades  through  the  system  to 
other market participants and, ultimately, through private credit creation, to the real economy. 
While it will take time for capital and confidence to return, this strategy will be successful. 
The  second  strategy  requires  central  banks  to  act  as  market-maker  of  last  resort.  That  is, 
central banks would ensure that market transactions continue in times of crisis by becoming 
a counterparty to major market participants. This would address directly the current fear of 
non-bank  participants  in  many  global  money  markets  that  they  will  not  be  able  to 
continuously access liquidity. It should be acknowledged that the exit of money market funds 
from  non-government  money  markets  may  be  as  damaging  as  counterparty  risk  concerns 
and the liquidity hoarding of core financial institutions.  
In some jurisdictions, central banks are already acting as a de facto central counterparty by 
taking in deposits from institutions with excess liquidity and providing it to those with deficient 
liquidity.  The  issue  is  how  widely  to  expand  the  participants.  When  central  banks  act  as 
market-makers, markets become more systemic and institutions less so.  
Irrespective of which strategy is adopted to rebuild continuous markets, there are additional 
measures that policy-makers should consider to reduce risks and make individual institutions 
less systemic. For example, current efforts to create a clearing house for credit default swaps 
would  both  reduce  counterparty  risk  and  help  keep  this  market  open  in  stressful  times. 
Without underestimating the complexity of this initiative and the potential costs of margining, 
BIS Review 144/2008 
 3
policy-makers  can  be  expected  to  look  for  other  markets  that  could  be  moved  onto 
exchanges or into clearing houses, as well as working to risk-proof custodial banks.1   
Regulations  and  standards  could  reinforce  these  initiatives.  For  example,  consideration 
should be given to establishing higher capital requirements for securities that trade outside 
continuously  open  markets,  as  well  as  limiting  the  application  of  fair-value  accounting  to 
those  securities  that  trade  on  exchanges  or  in  continuously  open  markets.  Policy-makers 
should  also  seek  to  reduce  the  procyclicality  of  value-at-risk  margining,  perhaps  by 
maintaining margin requirements at fixed rates throughout the economic cycle. If the central 
bank were the market-maker of last resort, it could reinforce such standards. 
Having outlined these strategies, I would now like to use the Canadian situation to illustrate a 
few points about how they may be applied. 
The Canadian perspective 
Canada's  experience  is  instructive.  While  Canada's  financial  system  has  been  affected  by 
the  crisis  in  global  financial  markets,  the  impact  has  been  significantly  less  than  in  many 
other  major  economies,  not  least  because  Canada  is  further  along  than  others  in 
implementing the G-7 Action Plan. Canada starts with financial institutions that are healthier 
than  their  international  peers.  Not  merely  have  losses  on  structured  products  of  Canadian 
banks been modest, but more importantly, their absolute leverage is markedly lower. As a 
simple illustration, major Canadian banks have an average asset-to-capital multiple of 18 on 
a consolidated basis, which is slightly below the regulatory maximum of 20. The comparable 
figure  for  U.S.  investment  banks  is  over  25.  For  European  banks,  it  is  in  the  30s,  and  for 
some  major  global  banks,  it  is  over  40.  While  foreign  banks  are  in  the  process  of  moving 
towards Canadian levels, our banks obviously face no such pressures. In addition, the quality 
of Tier 1 capital of Canadian banks is among the strongest in the world. 
Canada's conservative banking culture clearly helped our institutions avoid some the most 
egregious  lending  practices  seen  elsewhere.  So,  too,  has  the  nature  of  securitization  in 
Canada. Only about 20 per cent of Canadian mortgages are securitized. With more of this 
lending remaining on balance sheets, underwriting standards have remained high. Further, 
since  Canada  requires  insurance  on  high-loan-to-value  mortgages  and  Canada  Mortgage 
Bonds  are  explicitly  guaranteed  by  the  sovereign,  there  is  no  negative  feedback  loop 
between the housing market and the financial sector as has been all too apparent in other 
major economies.  
Our  experience  demonstrates  that  the  G-7  strategy  will  work.  Given  the  combination  of 
strong  core  institutions,  the  provision  of  exceptional  term  liquidity  by  the  Bank  of  Canada, 
and  the  now  material  term  funding  from  the  Government  of  Canada,  we  expect  that  our 
major  financial  institutions  will  cascade  that  liquidity  through  the  system  by  supporting 
continuous markets and extending credit.  
Unfortunately, in other jurisdictions, this is not yet the case. The weaker the starting point of 
regulated  institutions  and  the  greater  the  importance  of  the  shadow  banking  sector,  the 
longer the healing process could take. Indeed, in a range of countries, this process must be 
carefully managed to avoid worsening their recessions. In particular, the overhang of large 
capital  requirements  could  be  compounded  by  concerns  that  overall  capital  levels 
themselves will rise. This could lead banks to hoard any new capital rather than deploy it. 
Doing so would worsen the economic outlook, which would then increase loan losses and 
further strain capital levels.  
                                                 
1   For example, in Canada, policy-makers have been encouraging greater use of the CLS Bank, which facilitates 
the settlement of foreign exchange in an environment without counterparty risk. 
4 
 BIS Review 144/2008
The  explicit  G-7  commitment  to  systemic  institutions  and  the  various  guarantee  programs 
should be used to help spread over time the necessary capital increases. Moreover, policy-
makers should have the courage of their (new-found) macroprudential convictions. With G-20 
leaders  calling  for  regulators  to  develop  measures  to  mitigate  procyclicality  in  capital, 
regulators  should  be  careful  about  pushing  capital  standards  up  too  high,  too  soon  in  the 
teeth of an economic slowdown. Through-the-cycle capital means that ratios should fall in a 
downturn. Finally, some policy-makers should give greater consideration to the central bank 
acting  as  market-maker  of  last  resort  to  maximize  the  likelihood  that  core  money  markets 
remain open.  
Notwithstanding the advantages of its financial sector, as one of the most open economies in 
the world, Canada has been importantly affected by global events. The intensification of the 
global financial crisis has led in Canada to an increase in credit spreads and a tightening in 
credit conditions generally. The global recession is deepening, with demand slowing sharply 
across  all  major  regions  in  recent  weeks.  As  a  consequence,  there  have  been  further 
declines in the prices of many commodities and a deterioration in Canada's terms of trade, 
which reduces Canadian incomes. The nature of the U.S. slowdown, with its acute weakness 
in the housing and auto sectors, is also particularly problematic for our exporters. Thus, while 
domestic demand in Canada remains relatively healthy and the depreciation of the Canadian 
dollar will offset some of the declines in external demand, the risks to growth and inflation in 
Canada  identified  in  the  October  Monetary  Policy  Report  appear  to  have  shifted  to  the 
downside.  Despite  having  already  cut  official  interest  rates  in  half  over  the  past  year  and 
having a financial sector that is still functioning effectively, some further monetary stimulus 
will likely be required to achieve the inflation target over the medium term. 
Act locally, think globally 
This leads to the final lesson from Canada's experience. As G-20 leaders agreed this past 
weekend,  effective  regulation  begins  at  home.  To  meet  this  responsibility,  Canada  has  a 
formal coordination mechanism that brings together institutions with a macroeconomic focus 
– the central bank and Department of Finance – with the prudential regulator and the deposit 
insurer. Given the pace of change in financial markets, we subject our regulatory regime to 
regular  scrutiny.  We  have  a  legislated  requirement  to  review  the  legislative  and  regulatory 
framework  for  the  financial  system  every  five  years.  We  have  also  twice  subjected  our 
system to rigorous examination under the Financial Sector Assessment Program conducted 
by the International Monetary Fund.  
While it is undeniable that good financial regulation begins at home, it is equally clear that it 
cannot  end  there.  Even  if  the  domestic  system  is  sound,  there  is  no  guarantee  that  core 
financial markets will always be available. Given the high degree of integration in the world 
financial system, and since individual countries may still underinvest in the global social good 
of  domestic  financial  stability,  there  is  a  pressing  need  for  international  institutions  that 
effectively monitor systemic risk and coordinate macroprudential and financial policy reform. 
There was no effective international surveillance that identified either the nature or the scale 
of  the  financial  crisis,  because  no  international  organization  had  yet  integrated  effectively 
macroeconomic and macrofinancial analysis. Progress on these imperatives was also made 
this past weekend in Washington, and they will remain a focus over the coming weeks.  
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude.  
The  turmoil  of  the  past  year  and  a  half  and  the  crisis  of  the  past  two  months  have  been 
momentous.  This  episode  will  take  its  place  as  one  of  the  most  important  in  economic 
history. Ultimately, however, our response to these events will be more important than the 
events  themselves.  We  can  never  eliminate  financial  crises,  but  we  can  reduce  their 
BIS Review 144/2008 
 5
likelihood and severity. In my opinion, the key to success in this regard is to seek to build 
continuously open markets. The pendulum is currently swinging back from market-dominated 
financing towards bank-dominated financing. We should not want the pendulum to swing too 
far.  The  capital  requirements  at  the  extreme  are  enormous.  More  fundamentally,  market 
forces  should  be  left  to  determine  the  relative  size  and  boundaries  of  the  banking  and 
markets  sectors.  They  will  only  do  so  if  markets  are  built  on  solid  foundations.  We  can 
construct  a  global  financial  system  that  will  lead  to  the  type  of  sustained  and  mutually 
beneficial prosperity that Canada and the United Kingdom have enjoyed over the centuries. 
6 
 BIS Review 144/2008
