Henrique Meirelles: Good governance in the Brazilian financial system  
Speech  by  Mr  Henrique  Meirelles,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Brazil,  at  a  seminar 
organized  by  the  International  institute  of  Studies  of  State  Law  (IIEDE  –  Instituto 
Internacional de Estudos de Direito do Estado), Sao Paulo, 5 September 2008. 
 1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  take  part  of  this  event  dealing  with  an  important  and  often 
overlooked topic: corporate governance in the Brazilian financial system. This is an 
especially dear issue for the Central Bank and particularly for me. 
To  start,  I  would  like  to  mention  that  monetary  stability  is  a  precondition  for  good 
corporate  governance.  In  the  inflationary  environment  Brazil  experienced  for 
decades,  the  requisites  for  good  governance  vanished  under  the  prevailing 
unpredictability  and  monetary  confusion.  There  is  no  room  for  a  transparent, 
disciplined and fair relationship among parties involved in a firm when predictability 
and stability are absent. In this sense, the main contribution of the Central Bank to 
corporate governance is to reaffirm its permanent commitment to inflation targeting 
in the conduction of monetary policy. 
The Brazilian Institute of Corporate Governance defines governance as “the system 
by which corporations are managed and monitored, involving relationships between 
shareholders,  board,  management,  independent  auditors  and  statutory  audit 
committee”.  Good  practices  of  corporate  governance  focus  on  increasing  the 
company’s  value,  facilitating  its  access  to  capital  and  contributing  towards  its 
stability  and  soundness.  Indeed,  this  general  definition  is  very  similar  to  the  one 
offered  by  OECD,  to  whom  corporate  governance  is  summarized  as  “a  set  of 
relationships between the administration of a legal entity, its board of directors, its 
stockholders and other stakeholders”. 
A  question  arising  from  these  definitions  is  that  of  how  to  establish  the  ethical 
standards  needed  in  the  construction  of  governance  to  secure  that  relationship 
between  the  different  corporate  agents  develop  in  a  fair  and  efficient  fashion. 
Contrasting  with  more  mature  economies,  which  have  more  thinly  distributed 
stockholding  and  relatively  more  liquid  exchanges  and  in  which  there  is  more 
pressure on management to minimize the asymmetry of information, ownership and 
control in Brazil are not comparably segregated, in spite of the significant increase in 
initial public offerings over recent years. 
Therefore,  our  ownership  structure  is  still  characterized  by  high  concentration  of 
stocks with the right to vote, typical of family companies or companies controlled by 
a restricted group of investors, by superimposition of ownership and management 
and by scarcely active minority stockholders. Besides, our boards frequently exhibit 
a  diffuse  segregation  between 
the 
administration,  in  addition  to  informal  structures,  low  number  of  professionally 
trained board members or members with a small degree of independence. 
As a result, the main challenge to be faced in Brazil in governance issues involves 
the relation between controlling stockholders and minority stockholders or creditors. 
How to face this challenge? 
As far as the Brazilian financial system is concerned, the Central Bank follows some 
well established principles of corporate governance, including: 
• 
Transparency, facilitating the analysis of the activities of the company, its 
economic and accounting reports and non-financial aspects inherent to its 
businesses,  offering  to  those  interested  a  comprehensive  vision  of  the 
their  own  responsibilities  and 
that  of 
BIS Review 117/2008 
 1
the 
corporation’s  performance.  The  administration  shall  go  beyond 
obligation to inform, and reach the desire to inform, in addition to fostering 
good internal and external communication, which shall not be restricted to 
financial aspects, but shall be wide and comprehensive. 
Discipline,  that  is  to  say,  commitment  by  the  management  in  adhering  to 
behavioral standards widely recognized as correct and appropriate. 
Independence, in what it relates to arrangements to safeguard or minimize 
possible  conflicts  of  interest,  such  as  the  control  by  an  executive  or  a 
majority stockholder. Such arrangements include, for instance, a balanced 
composition  of  the  executive  board  and  administration  and  the  use  of 
external audit. 
Accountability, according to which agents of corporate governance shall be 
accountable for their actions before those who elected them and shall fully 
answer for acts practiced in the performance of their duties. 
Responsibility,  by  which  executives  shall  care  for  the  continuity  of  the 
organization and, therefore, shall incorporate considerations of social and 
environmental  content 
their  businesses  and  operations, 
including a system for corrective actions and punishment, as needs be. 
Equality,  which  is  translated  into  a  fair  and  equalitarian  treatment  to  all 
minority  groups,  either  of  capital  or  of  other  stakeholders,  where 
discriminating policies or attitudes shall be deemed unacceptable. 
in  defining 
     Based on the foregoing principles, the Central Bank, in its supervising role, follows 
the best international practices, materialized in the standards defined by the Basle 
Committee of the Bank for International Settlements, according to which corporate 
governance  represents  a  critical  issue  in  the  banking  environment.  Management 
shall monitor the establishment of corporate objectives, performance of the day-by-
day operations, defense of stakeholder interests, conformity to applicable laws and 
regulations, and care for the interests of depositors. 
Therefore,  the  directive  applied  by  the  Central  Bank  reaches  beyond  the  mere 
relationship  of  the  institution  with  external  stakeholders  or  the  concern  with  the 
truthfulness of its financial statements, since it considers all aspects related to the 
institution’s management and to its internal control systems. 
In  fact,  the  key  to  secure  efficacy  in  governing  financial  institutions  necessarily 
implies  an  effort  to  build  an  effective  system  of  internal  controls,  able  to  support 
stability  and  continuity  of  individual  activities  and,  consequently,  the  systemic 
stability of the financial system itself. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I referred above to the fact that Brazil faces more challenges 
to  consolidate  good  governance  in  corporate  practices  compared  to  more  mature 
economies.  As  a  final  message,  I  would  like  to  underline  that  monetary  and 
institutional  stability  and  the  effort,  not  only  of  the  Central  Bank,  but  also  of  other 
regulatory  agencies,  including  the  Comissão  de  Valores  Mobiliários  (the  Brazilian 
Securities  and  Exchange  Commission),  the  Superintendence  of  Private  Insurance 
(Susep)  and  the  Complementary  Pension  Secretariat,  and  initiatives  from  market 
institutions,  such  as  the  Novo  Mercado  implemented  by  the  São  Paulo  Stock 
Exchange, in addition to our growing corporate maturity in an increasingly globalized 
world,  enabled  us  to  make  significant  advances  in  recent  years  towards  best 
governance  practices,  gradually  converging  to  the  standards  of  more  advanced 
economies. There is no doubt that we shall continue to make more and permanent 
advances, and this is our goal. 
BIS Review 117/2008
8. 
9. 
10. 
11. 
2 
 