Marion Williams: The current turbulence in the US financial markets and 
its implications for Barbados 
Comments by Dr Marion Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, on the current 
turbulence  in  the  US  financial  markets  and  the  implications  for  Barbados,  Bridgetown, 
24 September 2008. 
 While  the  current  turbulence  in  the  US  financial  markets  is  unlikely  to  have  a  significant 
impact  on  Barbados  immediately,  as  the  US  economy  slows  or  goes  into  recession  as  it 
copes with these difficulties, the result could be a slowdown in the growth of the Barbados 
economy  going  forward.  Recession  in  the  UK  and  some  European  economies  would  also 
impact  adversely  on  our  tourism  prospects  and  our  investment  inflows.  However,  the 
Barbados financial system should remain sound although there may be some loss in value 
(realised and unrealised) on US dollar fixed income securities held by financial institutions, 
including the Central Bank, as securities’ prices in the US markets tumble. However, such 
losses in value are not expected to be significant in relation to the overall portfolios of these 
institutions, particularly over the medium term and especially for those who tend to hold short 
to  medium  term  securities  to  maturity.  For  non-bank  institutions  with  US  equity  portfolios, 
long-term investors would have some tolerance to the current volatility in the equity market 
but may record unrealised losses in the short term. 
For  some  institutions  in  the  international  financial  business  (or  offshore)  sector  who  trade 
more  aggressively  in  US  stocks  and  in  fixed  income  securities  and  more  especially  in 
derivative  instruments,  particularly  those  who  may  have  been  doing  active  business  with 
those US financial institutions involved in the US financial melt down, realised losses may be 
recorded. This is likely to be mitigated by the actions of the US Government to bail out these 
institutions. Details of the bailout are not yet clear, but it is expected that there will be free 
access  to  assets  placed  with  these  institutions  where  funds  are  held  in  an  agency  or 
custodial capacity on behalf of overseas investors. Funds held in the capacity of agent by 
these  US  institutions  should  retain  their  agency  status  and  should  not  be  affected  by  the 
financial losses of these institutions. Administrative hurdles during the adjustment period may 
however  hamper  immediate  access.  Any  problems  of  access  to  funds  held  in  an  agency 
capacity  are  expected  to  be  short-lived  if  the  bailout  goes  through.  In  any  event,  the 
investment activities of the offshore sector are segregated from the local banking system. 
In the interim, investors in overseas markets should be cautious about the external financial 
advisers,  consultants  and  custodians  they  choose.  Barbadian  investors  holding  direct 
deposits with commercial banks in the US can take comfort from the fact that the Federal 
Reserve Bank appears to be taking a protective stance and is unlikely to allow any large US 
commercial  bank  to  fail.  Certainly,  the  decision  of  Morgan  Stanley  and  Goldman  Sachs  to 
convert their status to that of a commercial bank (from that of investment bank) suggests that 
this is the market sentiment. There is much discussion about the moral hazard effect of such 
support as it reduces the incentive to increase the level of care required of these institutions.  
In the US system, ordinary depositors are assured US$100,000 in federal deposit insurance 
per depositor per bank. In Barbados, deposit insurance is also in place up to an amount of 
BDS$25,000  per  depositor  per  bank.  This  was  put  in  place  in  2007.  It  applies  to  Part  III 
companies,  as  well  (that  is,  Merchant  Banks,  Trust  and  Finance  Companies).  In  the 
meanwhile,  the  business  of  local  financial  institutions  with  their  overseas  correspondent 
banks continues. Such overseas correspondent banks are assured of liquidity support from 
the Federal Reserve Bank in the US. The Central Bank of Barbados also provides liquidity 
support to domestic banks but there is no reason to expect that this will be called upon as 
our banks (except for possible losses in value on their US dollar securities) have not been 
BIS Review 125/2008 
 1
directly impacted by the developments in the US market. It is expected that investors may 
turn to safe havens. Barbados is generally viewed as a well regulated domicile. 
Over the longer term and into 2009, given the size of the bailout by the US government, we 
can  expect  larger  US  fiscal  deficits,  possibly  a  further  depreciation  in  the  US  dollar  and  a 
likelihood of a longer US recession than was anticipated. The likelihood of a global slowdown 
also becomes greater. The international credit markets are likely to be hesitant to lend for a 
while until markets settle. However, given the healthy level of Barbados’ foreign exchange 
reserves, this is unlikely to be significant for Barbados at the level of official borrowing at this 
time,  but  foreign  investors  into  Barbados  who  were  depending  on  borrowing  on  the 
international markets may be put on pause. 
The one positive outcome of all this is that if there is a global slowdown as expected, and 
therefore lower demand for oil, oil prices should contract.  
2 
 BIS Review 125/2008
