Jean-Claude Trichet: The Eurosystem team at ten years 
Dinner address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, on the 
occasion  of  the  10th  Anniversary  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg,  Luxembourg, 
12 November 2008. 
 Cher Jean-Claude, cher Yves,  
Monsieur le Ministre, 
Chers collègues de la Banque centrale du Luxembourg, dear colleagues of the Eurosystem, 
Dear guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to celebrate with you this evening the 10th anniversary of the 
Banque centrale du Luxembourg (BCL) which, I might note, is of the exact same age as the 
ECB. The BCL was created with the aim to have it firmly anchored both within the European 
System  of  Central  Banks  and  the  national  institutional  environment.  Looking  at  how  the 
Banque centrale du Luxembourg has developed in the past ten years, I am impressed by the 
professionalism and the determination with which it accomplishes its mission. One extremely 
important factor when setting up of the BCL was to guarantee its full independence, in line 
with the provisions of the Treaty and the ESCB Statute. I am particularly pleased to note that 
this year, and most recently on 24 October 2008, amendments were made to the legislative 
framework  of  the  BCL,  which  among  other  things  further  improve  and  strengthen  the 
provisions relating to its independence and its role in the field of financial stability. The ECB 
was duly consulted and has welcomed these developments in its legal opinions.1  
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  institutional  context  in  which  the  BCL  operates:  The  creation  of 
European  Monetary  Union  is  one  of  the  most  profound  steps  in  the  history  of  European 
integration  with  major  significance  for  the  everyday  life  of  our  fellow  citizens.  Indisputably, 
one of its main accomplishments is the introduction of a single currency and the set-up of a 
federally-structured European System of Central Banks. No historical precedent exists for 
such a structure. It is unique. The US Federal Reserve System is comparable only to a 
limited extent, as it is based on a single nation state and is therefore not applicable to the 
diverse and multilingual euro area which is made up of individual sovereign nation states.  
I  would  like  to  recall  that  a  very  original  federal-type  structure  was  chosen  since  it 
corresponds best to the institutional diversity of the Community, keeping some continuity by: 
respecting  the  NCBs’  institutional  set-up,  infrastructure  and  operational  capacities 
• 
and, at the same time,  
benefiting from their rich and vast experience. 
• 
The  principle  of  decentralisation  introduces  a  national  anchoring  that  creates  closeness  to 
the local financial communities and the local general public. 
At  first  glance,  the  decentralised  set-up  with  its  checks  and  balances,  might  seem  quite 
complex and one might wonder how it can work in practice. Therefore, let us have a closer 
look at how the system functions and how it has evolved over the past ten years. 
                                                 
1   Opinion  of  the  European  Central  Bank  of  15  April  2008  at  the  request  of  the  Luxembourg  Minister  for  the 
Treasury  and  the  Budget  on  a  draft  law  improving  the  legislative  framework  for  Luxembourg  as  a  financial 
centre and on a draft law relating to social insurance contributions (CON/2008/17); Opinion of the European 
Central Bank of 10 September 2008 at the request of the Banque centrale du Luxembourg on amendments to 
the draft law improving the legislative framework for Luxembourg as a financial centre and amending the Law 
of 23 December 1998 on monetary status and on the Banque centrale du Luxembourg (CON/2008/42). 
 
BIS Review 138/2008 
 1
In  the  Eurosystem  architecture  the  Governing  Council  has  a  decisive  role  as  the  main 
decision-making  body  within  the  Eurosystem.  Its  members,  through  their  ad  personam 
participation, are required to focus on the European perspective. The one-member/one vote 
principle  guarantees  that  each  member  has  to  assess  the  interest  of  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole, instead of the interest of any particular country, a feature which makes the ECB very 
different from other European institutions, like the Commission and the Council. In that sense 
I  will  dare  say  that  the  Eurosystem  could  be  called  one  of  the  most  truly  European  of  all 
European institutions.  
Let me add at this stage, in particular in current times of very high market tensions, it is of the 
essence  to  take  decisions  which  reflect  the  collegial  wisdom  and  expertise  of  all  the 
members  of  the  Executive  Board  and  all  the  members  of  the  Governing  Council.  In  the 
present  circumstances  we  have  at  times  to  decide  rapidly  and  to  have  these  decisions 
implemented  timely,  usually  via  the  National  Central  Banks.  As  regards  monetary  policy 
since  the  start  of  the  turbulences,  let  me  stress  once  again  that  we  have  applied  our 
“separation principle”. The Eurosystem has been able to preserve medium-term confidence 
in price stability, in constantly designing the monetary policy stance to that end, whilst at the 
same time refinancing the commercial banks, with short-term rates close to policy rates, with 
a view to smooth as much as possible market tensions.  
Let me now turn to how the interaction between the component parts of the system, the ECB 
and the National Central Banks, which are an integral part of the Eurosystem, are organized. 
The  Statute  gives  some  guidance  regarding  the  distribution  of  labour  within  the 
Eurosystem where it states: 
• 
the  ECB  shall  ensure  that  the  tasks  conferred  upon  the  ESCB  [Eurosystem]  are 
implemented either by its own activities or through the NCBs (Art. 9.2);  
to the extent deemed possible and appropriate, the ECB shall have recourse to the 
NCBs to carry out operations which form part of the tasks of the ESCB [Eurosystem] 
(Article 12.1) 
 From  these  Articles  it  is  clear  that  in  the  system  of  currently  sixteen  component  parts  the 
ECB  has  a  special  position:  it  is  the  “captain  of  the  team”.  The  ECB  and  its  decision-
making bodies, the Governing Council and the Executive Board, are the decision-making 
centre of the Eurosystem, and many important decisions taken are – in full conformity with 
the principle of decentralisation – implemented by the (respective) National Central Banks; of 
course, on behalf of the Eurosystem.  
Still, at the beginning, it was probably hard to imagine how the Eurosystem would work in 
practice,  since  the  Statute  allows  a  degree  of  leeway  on  how  to  design  the  interaction 
between the ECB and the National Central Banks. It is clear that the major achievements of 
the  Eurosystem  which  include  the  successful  establishment  and  conduct  of  the  single 
monetary policy, the smooth introduction of the euro and the launch of the euro banknotes, 
could  only  be  accomplished  through  the  very  close  cooperation  of  the  staff  of  the 
Eurosystem  central  banks.  The  teamwork  necessary  to  successfully  master  these 
challenges  and  the  experiences  gained  in  the  process  contributed  to  the  emergence  of  a 
shared  identity  which  found  its  concrete  expression  in  the  Eurosystem  Mission 
Statement, its Strategic Intents and Organisational Principles. I regard the signature of 
this strategic document by all Eurosystem central banks in 2004 to be major achievement of 
our team and I am sure that Yves shares this view.  
Together  these  documents  define  the  role  of  the  Eurosystem,  the  principles  it  should 
rely on to achieve its main objectives, and how all its members should interact and 
cooperate  on  the  basis  of  shared  values.  In  other  words,  these  three  tools  aim  at 
increasing  the  coherence  and  unity  of  the  Eurosystem  by  basing  its  activities  on  common 
guidelines and by agreeing on high-level standards for the Eurosystem. With these aims in 
2 
 BIS Review 138/2008
itself 
mind, they demonstrate the Eurosystem’s commitment to credibility, trust, closeness to the 
citizens of Europe and the shared identity of the Eurosystem.  
The  Eurosystem  has  explicitly  committed 
to  applying  effective  and  efficient 
organisational  structures  and  working  methods.  This  means  that  all  members  in  the 
Eurosystem  strive  at  performing  their  functions  with  a  spirit  of  cooperation,  teamwork, 
efficiency, effectiveness and full transparency. We consider these values to be crucial to the 
successful functioning of the system. The principles also stress that the Eurosystem activities 
shall be performed by exploiting synergies, avoiding duplications and being cost efficient.  
A  very  tangible  example  of  implementing  the  Organisational  Principles  concerns  the 
establishment  of  a  common  Eurosystem  Procurement  Coordination  Office  (EPCO). 
EPCO  will  facilitate  the  adoption  and  exchange  of  best  practices  within  the  Eurosystem, 
develop a working infrastructure enabling purchasing power to be pooled, and coordinate the 
Eurosystem  procurement  agenda.  Just  imagine  the  significant  synergies  that  could  be 
achieved for example in the field of IT procurement, where the benefits would not only apply 
to pooling purchasing power but, at the same time, could bring the significant advantage of 
implementing systems/applications which are fully compatible across central banks which, in 
turn, would substantially enhance and facilitate cooperation. Eurosystem central banks will 
participate in EPCO on a voluntary basis; and also non-euro area central banks have been 
invited  to  join  this  initiative.  Central  banks  expressed  their  interest  in  hosting  EPCO,  and 
participated  in  a  competitive  process.  I  mention  this  with  particular  pleasure  here  at  the 
Banque centrale du Luxembourg, since the Governing Council decided in December 2007 to 
award the hosting of EPCO to the Banque centrale du Luxembourg until to end-2012. EPCO 
demonstrates that the before mentioned (organizational) principles are, indeed, pursued and 
implemented, but also that all NCBs participate on a level-playing filed. ECPO is indeed a 
tangible proof of the team spirit at work within the Eurosystem.  
The Eurosystem continues to strive for efficiency and effectiveness, using to the full extent 
the  resources  available  in  the  Eurosystem.  Further  evidence  of  this  are  the  major 
Eurosystem  projects  and 
in  operation  or  under 
development. Allow me to mention just a few examples. 
TARGET2  provides  a  centralised payment  system  based  on  a  single  technical  platform.  It 
guarantees a harmonised level of service for banks all over Europe combined with one single 
transaction price for domestic and cross-border payments and is one of the best individual 
payment systems in the world. This system was developed and is operated by a “consortium” 
of central banks – the Banca d’Italia, the Banque de France and the Deutsche Bundesbank – 
on behalf of the Eurosystem. TARGET2 Securities will be a platform for the cross-border 
and  domestic  settlement  of  securities  against  central  bank  money.  The  development  and 
operation of this system was assigned to the Deutsche Bundesbank, the Banco de España, 
the Banque de France and the Banca d’Italia.  
Following a review of the current Eurosystem collateral management handling procedures, in 
particular,  the  Correspondent  Central  Banking  Model  (CCBM),  the  Governing  Council 
decided  to  again  develop  a  single  platform,  called  CCBM2,  allowing  the  Eurosystem  to 
manage collateral both for domestic and cross-border operations. Work will be undertaken by 
the Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique and De Nederlandsche Bank 
based on their existing system. As you can see a range of different organisational models 
are explored to achieve maximum synergies, e.g. specialisation, attribution to one particular 
member  of  the  Eurosystem  team,  decentralisation  and,  when  and  where  needed,  pooling, 
which means that a group of central banks provides a service for the entire Eurosystem. You 
will not be surprised that I would stress that in call cases it is important that the ECB ensures 
the coherence of the full team by exercising in an appropriate fashion its captainship.  
Let  me  conclude  by  warmly  congratulating  the  Banque  centrale  du  Luxembourg  on  its 
10th anniversary. I think I can say that both our institutions are looking back on a decade of 
challenges successfully mastered. During the ten years of the Eurosystem’s existence, and 
initiatives  currently  either  already 
BIS Review 138/2008 
 3
in particular during the recent months of financial crisis, we have proven that the Eurosystem 
functions well, even in periods of great stress. The Eurosystem has passed the test of its first 
decade of existence. Looking ahead, I am confident that with its unique architecture and a 
strong and enduring team spirit it is also prepared to tackle the challenges of the future.  
I thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 138/2008
