Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and financial developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Joint Press Conference 
of  the  IMF  Mission  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  Bank  of  Albania,  Tirana, 
11 November 2008. 
 The regular visit of the IMF’s EU1 European Department mission is made in the context of 
the  last  review  of  the  current  3-year  PRGF  –  EFF  Arrangement  between  the  Albanian 
authorities and the IMF Board of Directors.  
This last review coincides with a sensitive outlook of the world economy, which is facing a 
highly intensive and uncommon global market correction. Given this situation, present and 
future prospects still remain vague and uncertain.  
However, worth to note is that the Albanian economy has exhibited admirable immunity to 
these developments. In this context, the prudent and systematic work of the Bank of Albania, 
both  in  terms  of  maintaining  the  macroeconomic  balance  at  home  and  safeguarding  the 
banking system’s financial stability, has provided an overwhelming contribution.  
Over  the  last  two  years,  the  Bank  of  Albania  has  been  an  active  actor  in  both  directions, 
analyzing  carefully  all  the  risk  factors  and  taking  various  measures  to  minimize  their 
materialization  in  practice.  In  our  work  we  have  been  guided  by  the  philosophy  that  one 
cannot build authority in the market through the mechanical use of a set of instruments but 
through the market perception and trust in the policies pursued by the authorities.  
The conservative policy – the increase of the interest rate extended in a time period of 18 
months  –  is  the  concrete  application  of  this  philosophy.  In  addition,  measures  have  been 
taken in terms of amending and constantly improving the legal and regulatory package. The 
entire  process  of  measures  and  decisions  has  aimed  at  ensuring  the  financial  system’s 
efficiency and stability.  
The  latest  regulatory  amendments,  which  have  brought  a  new  dimension  to  the  banking 
business in relation to the customers, foreign currency lending, investments in parent banks 
and internal control, are of particular importance. The Bank of Albania will persistently make 
an  assessment  of  the  existing  regulatory  framework  and  aim  at  improving  it,  in  order  to 
address the present and potential risks.  
I believe the set of actions taken recently by the central bank have been a kind of intensive 
therapy which has contributed to the increase of the banking system’s immunity.  
With reference to the economic and financial situation at home, I would like to inform you that 
the  Bank  of  Albania  shares  the  same  opinion  with  the  IMF  and  the  Ministry  of  Finance 
regarding the current period as of end 2008. We project that the GDP will grow during the 
present year by 6 percent. In addition, our projections indicate that the 12-month inflation will 
mark around 3 per cent at end year, which is very close to our numerical target.  
All the other macroeconomic indicators attest to a relative stability with rates being close to 
our projections.  
Despite  this  positive  outlook,  the  public  attention  is  at  this  moment  future-oriented.  In  this 
context, the year 2009 shows a more complex setting, with numerous challenges ahead not 
only  for  the  real  economy  but  also  for  the  monetary  policy,  the  fiscal  sector,  the  external 
sector of the economy and the financial system at home.  
With respect to the international developments, the partner countries are close or have now 
plunged  into  economic  recession.  The  decline  of  the  economy,  among  others,  affects 
negatively “the export of its surplus” in goods, capital and investments in partner countries. In 
BIS Review 140/2008 
 1
this  context,  the  possible  slowdown  in  foreign  currency  inflows  may  constitute  a  future 
occurrence, although the intensity at which this phenomenon may be exhibited is still vague.  
In the recent months there has been a halt in the price rise of raw materials, oil and foods. In 
addition,  a  rapid  correction  process  of  these  prices  on  the  demand  side  has  commenced. 
The further fall in prices may affect the decline on both sides of foreign trade. But, given the 
difference between imports and exports by several times, the net effect will naturally be the 
reduction  of  trade  deficit.  Worth  to  note,  however,  is  that  the  fall  in  prices  may  impact 
indirectly the performance of fiscal revenues since the amount on which the fiscal tariffs are 
applied will be lower.  
We are now facing the reduction in lending and credit lines extended by parent banks to their 
subsidiaries.  Based  on  these  arguments,  the  Bank  of  Albania  assesses  that  there  is  an 
increasing risk that the economic growth may slow down in 2009. 
The  harmonization  of  the  two  basic  policies  in  economy  is  a  key  element  which  ensures 
growth and a balanced development. In this context, we are in the process of analyzing the 
new project drafted by the Government for 2009. We remain constant in the belief that the 
harmonization of both basic policies remains a priority in the future as well. To this purpose, 
we require from the Government the inclusion in the fiscal package for 2009 of a fiscal rule 
on  the  performance  of  fiscal  policy.  This  rule  should  be  quantitative,  monitorable  and 
extended  through  the  entire  political  mandate,  with  a  clear  bias  towards  the  quantitative 
Maastricht criteria.  
Other possible risks involve those related to the hydro-energy situation and to the possible 
rise in the energy price or to the performance of agricultural production at home.  
In its last monetary policy meeting, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania concluded 
that there is a balance in the risk factors affecting the consumer price performance.  
Inflation expectations are now being anchored around our objective. Inflation is forecasted to 
continue to fluctuate around the current values during 2009 and 2010. The Bank of Albania 
remains committed to take all the required measures that will help contain inflation within our 
3 percent target.  
In terms of financial stability, I would like to re-stress that the banking system continues to 
operate  at  optimal  parameters  which  are  in  line  with  the  prudent  banking  supervision 
standards.  
The latest analyses indicate that the banking system has satisfactorily coped with the domino 
effect  of  the  international  financial  market.  The  central  bank  has  supplied  the  market  with 
necessary liquidity in order to avoid any unwelcome situation in the system. I would like to 
assure you that the Bank of Albania will continue to do so based on the market needs and 
specifications in different periods of time.  
I avail myself of this opportunity to address to the banking system, both to commercial banks 
and to their respective parent banks, to prudently analyze the Albanian economy in order to 
provide it with the real chances through the support with banking loans. The latter has been a 
key element in the economic development of Albania and consequently, it has to remain so 
in the future as well. Special emphasis should be also paid to the development of the money 
market. The new instrument of repurchase agreement transactions needs to be put in place 
as soon as possible. The Bank of Albania, the Ministry of Finance and the banking system 
need to mobilize the entirety of their resources and expertise in order to ensure a more liquid 
and stable money market. In view of this, I assure you that the central bank will assist and be 
fully committed to achieving it.  
The Albanian business should keep being active, far-sighted and dynamic in developing its 
business plans. Only this way it will be well-capitalized, lucrative and credited by the banking 
system. The business should co-operate closer with the bank, not only in terms of receiving 
2 
 BIS Review 140/2008
loans but also in obtaining financial advice, which is a pre-requisite for ensuring its long-term 
stability.  
I  would  also  like  to  address  to  households  and  the  public  at  large  and  advice  them  to  be 
calm, cautious and rational in the way they manage their savings and investments portfolio. 
Any  kind  of  savings  or  investments  outside  banks  and  in  the  form  of  cash  bears 
considerable moral, financial and physical risks. My appeal is simple and straightforward: 
consult  your  bank  for  any  actions  you  take.  The  banking  system  remains  your  best 
consultant. Prior to making a financial transaction of any kind, have the opinion of your bank 
as well – it is your banker.  
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  highlight  that  the  banking  system  is  a  national  wealth  –  it 
belongs to us all. Let us develop it further in order to ensure a stable growth and a better 
future for the generations to follow. 
BIS Review 140/2008 
 3
