Jan F Qvigstad: On the topic of keeping promises  
Speech by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at  a  seminar  arranged  by  Norges  Bank  and  Det  Norske  Videnskaps-Akademi  (The 
Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters), Oslo, 11 November 2008.  
 Why is keeping promises so difficult? 
1.  
This house, which now belongs to the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, was built 
by Hans Rasmus Astrup in 1886-87. Astrup was an entrepreneur. At the age of 20, he left 
Norway for Barcelona on a ship laden with a cargo of dried cod. He gradually built up a large 
trading business and later became an industrialist, not unlike businessmen of our own era.1  
For  innovators  and  the  business  sector,  a  stable  operating  environment  has  always  been 
important,  providing  a  foundation  for  adaptation,  economic  growth  and  social  progress.  A 
stable value of money is also a component of this foundation. 
We were taught as children to keep our promises. If we made a promise, we had to make 
good on it. But we were also taught that we should not promise too much. If we do not keep 
our word, others lose confidence in us and our credibility takes a toll. In recent months, we 
have  witnessed  that  this  is  of  particular  importance  for  the  financial  system.  A  proximate 
example is the situation in our neighbouring country Iceland. 
The value of confidence and credibility has been the subject of extensive analysis in many 
fields, including jurisprudence and the social sciences. One conclusion is clear – progress 
can be achieved if promises are kept. 
If keeping promises is clearly beneficial, why is it then so difficult? The expressions empty 
promises  and  empty  threats  reflect  the  temptation  to  renege.  The  social  scientist  and 
philosopher Jon Elster writes in his book “Ulysses and the Sirens”2 about weakness of will, 
shifting preferences over time, and the complexities of human nature. This is familiar ground. 
As early as 1960, the economist Thomas Schelling3 discussed similar issues in analyses for 
which  he  was  awarded  the  Nobel  Prize  in  economics.  According  to  Schelling,  a  credible 
threat can be difficult to establish when realising the threat involves costs for all the parties 
involved. A promise or a threat will be more credible if the person who has made the promise 
ties himself to the mast. 
Two  other  economists  carried  out  groundbreaking  work  when  they  applied  Schelling's 
analysis to economic issues. In 1977, Finn Kydland from Norway and Edward Prescott4 from 
the US wrote an article showing that authorities who attempt to follow an optimal economic 
policy  plan  may  have  strong  incentives  to  depart  from  the  same  plan  at  a  later  time.  This 
applies even if no news has emerged to indicate that the plan should be changed.5 Later, 
Kydland and Prescott were awarded the Nobel Prize in economics for their work. 
There is a common denominator between Elster, Schelling, Kydland and Prescott: keeping a 
promise  is  difficult,  because  reneging  on  a  promise  will  often  be  the  tempting  or  rational 
                                                 
1   See Sevåg, Reidar (1967): Statsråd H. R. Astrup, Oslo, Dreyer. 
2   See Elster, Jon (1979): Ulysses and the Sirens. Studies in Rationality and Irrationality. 
3   Schelling,  Thomas  C.  (1960):  The  Strategy  of  Conflict,  Harvard  University,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts, 
London, England. 
4   Kydland, F.E. and E.C.Prescott (1977): “Rules Rather Than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans” in 
Journal of Political Economy, 85, No. 3, pages 473-491. 
In macroeconomics, this dilemma is called the time inconsistency problem. 
5  
BIS Review 136/2008 
 1
choice in the short-term. If loss of credibility is taken into account, the best solution in the 
long term will nonetheless often be to keep your word. 
A key issue is how we can establish mechanisms that also safeguard long-term objectives in 
the short term. Jon Elster suggested the metaphor of “tying oneself to the mast”. We all know 
the myth of Ulysses and the sirens, referred to in Elster’s work. Ulysses wanted to hear the 
sirens  sing,  but  he  knew  that  he  and  his  crew  would  then  come  under  the  sirens’  spell, 
bringing their voyage to an end. He therefore ordered the crew to tie him to the mast, but 
before they did so, he filled their ears with wax. This prevented him from steering the ship 
towards the sirens himself, and the crew were prevented from hearing him when he would 
later succumb to temptation and order the ship to be steered towards the sirens’ island. The 
story  cannot  be  directly  transferred  to  economic  management,  but  the  concept  of  “tying 
oneself  to  the  mast”  is  used  in  promoting  mechanisms  that  prevent  short-term  objectives 
from  taking  precedence  over  long-term  objectives.  Precluding  the  possibility  of  breaking  a 
promise  makes  the  promise  more  credible.  Ensuring  accountability  for  promises  made 
through reporting and review can be a mechanism that ties us to the mast. 
A  central  bank’s  most  important  task  is  to  ensure  a  stable  value  of  money.  The  value  of 
money relies on responsible economic policies. For a central bank to be able to keep its word 
and  deliver  a  stable  value  of  money,  it  must  have  the  backing  of  the  political  authorities. 
Otherwise, the central bank will not be able to keep its word. 
In  the  long  term,  the  instruments  available  to  the  central  bank  allow  it  to  deliver  only  the 
promise of a stable value of money. Earlier, this promise was kept by regulating the amount 
of money issued. Today, the instrument is the interest rate. The central bank cannot steer 
real wages, the labour supply, employment or the level of unemployment in the long term. 
But  it  can  contribute  to  curbing  short-term  cyclical  fluctuations  if  price  stability  is  firmly 
anchored. 
Throughout history central banks have attempted to bind themselves to the mast in different 
ways. In the following, I will discuss the temptations facing issuers of notes and coins, the 
binding  mechanisms  that  have  been  tested,  and  the  potential  gains  for  society  associated 
with a central bank that keeps its word.   
A king’s word is worth a throne – but sometimes not a krone 
2.  
It  has  always  been  tempting  for  issuers  of  money  to  exploit  this  privilege.  It  costs  less  to 
produce a coin or a banknote than the value printed on it. The added value accruing to the 
issuer is called seignorage.  
Over-issuance  of  notes  and  coins  leads  to  inflation  and  a  fall  in  the  value  of  money,  and 
holders  of  money  pay  a  so-called  inflation  tax.  A  sharp  fall  or  strong  rise  in  the  value  of 
money also impairs the functioning of the economy because it becomes more difficult to keep 
track of changes in the price of one good relative to another. It is important that changes in 
relative  prices  are  easy  for  both  consumers  and  producers  to  observe.  Otherwise,  the 
function  of prices  as  conveyors  of  information  for  consumption,  production  and investment 
decisions will be impaired. The economy will operate less efficiently, resulting in lower growth 
and welfare.  
In the earliest monetary systems, the value of money corresponded to the metal value of the 
coin. Measured in metal, the value of money was inevitably stable. This system was not as 
dependent on confidence, since the metal content of the coin could in principle be verified in 
every transaction.  
Those in power nevertheless managed to exploit the system. Roman emperors were in the 
habit  of  financing  their  wars  by  reducing  the  precious  metal  content  of  their  coins.  This 
resulted in higher seignorage revenues from each coin issued. For a period, these revenues 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2008
were sufficient to finance an army, a long war or several monuments. This is the number one 
temptation facing money issuers. 
Henry VIII of England was one of the most renowned exponents of this kind of behaviour.6 In 
the 1500s, he reduced the silver content in coins to 1/3 of the original to finance wars against 
France and his own expensive lifestyle.  
In addition to coins, a system gradually developed involving paper money. Banknotes were a 
receipt for a money issuer’s claims on silver or gold. Instead of using coins as a means of 
payment,  the  receipt  was  used.  This  was  more  practical,  but  with  the  introduction  of 
banknotes the authorities also introduced a new promise. They promised the bearer that they 
would redeem the nominal value of the notes in silver or gold. The value of the notes was 
entirely dependent on confidence in the issuer’s promise. The authorities’ ability to fulfil their 
promise depended on government finances. Brutal tax collectors, abundant tax coffers and 
peace with neighbouring countries inspired confidence in the authorities’ ability to redeem the 
notes in a precious metal then or at some time in the future.  
The  authorities  often  granted  a  monopoly  on  banknote  issuance  to  an  institution  they 
controlled. This was no coincidence as printing money generated seignorage revenues. This 
way of raising seignorage is temptation number two: the authorities borrow money from the 
issuing  bank  and  the  issuing  bank  provides  the  loan  by  printing  banknotes.  This  was 
particularly common in times of war. It can be difficult to raise taxes or borrow directly from 
the  public  to  fund  an  unpopular  war.  Naturally,  a  regime  at  war  will  be  more  interested  in 
winning the war than in the long-term economic costs. Who cares about high inflation and 
debt repayment if surviving as a regime is at stake? 
Confidence – and the lack of it – had important consequences for England and France during 
the Napoleonic Wars. England was able to finance these wars more easily than France. The 
English  government  could  draw  on  several  funding  sources.  They  raised  taxes,  but  could 
also  borrow,  partly  from  the  public  and  partly  from  the  central  bank.  They  had  previously 
demonstrated that they stood by their commitments, and were therefore granted loans. The 
French government, on the other hand, had lost its creditworthiness after Louis XVI was sent 
to  the  guillotine.  The  only  source  of  funding  that  remained  was  taxation,  eliminating  the 
option of spreading war expenditure over time.7
Our own history also illustrates the costs associated with inflation and a loss of confidence. 
Soaring inflation in Norway during and after the Napoleonic Wars impaired the functioning of 
the payment system. The function of money as a unit of measurement was also undermined. 
An example of this is described in the local history books for the coastal districts of Karlsøy 
and Helgøy in Troms, northern Norway. At that time, accounts were sometimes kept in silver, 
or in goods such as cod liver oil, large saithe or flour.8 Inflation also resulted in the transfer of 
assets  from  creditors  to  debtors:  the  real  value  of  the  fishermen’s  debt  to  merchants  in 
Bergen decreased. This marked a historic shift. The fishermen were of course happy to see 
their  debt  diminish.  Creditors,  however,  lost  money,  which  probably  did  not  increase 
confidence and a willingness to lend the next time someone needed a loan.  
                                                 
6   Davies, Glyn (2002): A History of Money from Ancient Times to the Present Day, University of Wales Press, 
page 200. 
7   Bordo, Michael D. and Eugene N. White (1990): “British and French Finance during the Napoleonic Wars”, 
NBER  Working  Paper  No.  3517,  also  published  in  Bordo,  Michael  and  Forrest  Capie  (Eds.)  Monetary 
Regimes in Transition, Cambridge University Press, 1993. 
8   Bratrein,  Håvard  Dahl 
http://karlsoy.com/bygdebok/. 
(1989-1994):  Karlsøy 
og  Helgøy 
bygdebok,  Karlsøy 
kommune, 
BIS Review 136/2008 
 3
The promise of a stable value of money against gold and silver 
3.  
I  have  given  examples  of  how  easily  monarchs  succumbed  to  the  temptation  of  an 
apparently free lunch by exploiting opportunities for raising seignorage revenues. In times of 
political instability, they sometimes had no choice. But eventually, the authorities learned that 
the costs were high. The public pays an inflation tax, the monetary system is impaired and 
economic growth slows.  
The economic progress experienced by Norway and other countries in the second half of the 
1800s  was  founded  on  more  than  a  thousand  years  of  money  and  credit  history.  The 
authorities probably knew that a credible promise of a stable value of money measured in 
metal  was  one  of  the  cornerstones  of  the  success  experienced  by  towns  in  northern  Italy 
during the Renaissance and in 17th century Netherlands They knew that confidence in the 
promise  of  a  stable  value  of  money  could  be  maintained  by  relinquishing  seignorage  and 
limiting the issuance of money. The opposite was equally true. Kåre Lunden, for example, 
writes that “after 1387, no coins were minted in Norway for a hundred years”. According to 
Lunden,  the  deep  crisis  in  the  Norwegian  economy  between  1350  and  1500  was  not  only 
due to the Black Death but also to the absence of a monetary system.9
Stability in the value of money eliminated uncertainty and doubt among potential investors. 
Long-term planning became easier. Providers of credit could be reasonably certain that their 
investment would not be inflated away. They did not have to move their wealth into property 
or  other  fixed  investment  in  order  to  preserve  it.  The  willingness  to  save  and  accumulate 
wealth increased. 
History had taught the authorities the value of price stability, and the commitment mechanism 
was a monetary system linked to silver or gold. The whims of French kings were replaced by 
parliaments that were accountable to the people. It is no coincidence that the name of the 
most prominent great power’s monetary unit – the pound – reflected a measure of weight: 
the value of a pound of silver.10  
Credibility  hinged  on  orderly  government  finances  and  a  stable  political  situation,  which 
contained seignorage temptations and in turn strengthened public confidence in the value of 
money.  A  number  of  conditions  need  to  be  in  place  to  enable  a  central  bank  to  keep  its 
promise!  
When Norges Bank was established in 1816, the government sought to ensure credibility by 
establishing a tax-financed silver fund. A par value against silver for the new paper money – 
the  speciedaler  –  was  announced.  However,  the  market  value  of  the  speciedaler  was 
considerably  below  par  value  –  the  authorities  in  our  young  country  were  in  a  difficult 
financial  situation  and  had  not  yet  established  confidence.  It  was  not  until  1822  that  the 
authorities were able to establish a more orderly system when the Storting adopted a long-
term  strategy  whereby  the  silver  value  of  the  speciedaler  would  gradually  increase  to  par 
value.11 This goal was reached in 1842, twenty years later, bearing witness to long-termism 
and persistence in policy implementation.  
And persistence was rewarded. The rest of the 1800s and the period to the Second World 
War  were  generally  characterised  by  price  stability  and  strong  growth  in  the  Norwegian 
economy, even though there were also periods of weaker growth.12 Towards the end of this 
                                                 
9   Article by Kåre Lunden in the newspaper Klassekampen, 11 November 2008. 
10   Encyclopædia Britannica, http://search.eb.com/. 
11   Eitrheim, Øyvind (2005) in Eitrheim and Qvigstad (Eds.): “Tilbakeblikk på norsk pengehistorie. Konferanse 7. 
juni  2005  på  Bogstad  gård  (Norwegian  monetary  history  in  retrospect.  Conference,  7  June  2005,  Oslo)”, 
Occasional Papers No. 37, Norges Bank. 
12   See  for  example  Hodne,  Fritz  and  Ola  Honningdal  Grytten  (2000):  Norsk  økonomi  i  det  19.  århundre  (The 
Norwegian economy in the 19th century), Fagbokforlaget. 
4 
 BIS Review 136/2008
period,  confidence  provided  Norges  Bank  with  the  scope  to  adjust  the  interest  rate  to  the 
domestic economic situation rather than solely in relation to the gold standard.13,14
The era of broken promises 
4.  
The interwar years proved to be highly turbulent, both in Norway and abroad. In 1921, for 
example, per capita GDP in Norway fell by 11 per cent. The structure of the economy had 
changed, the functioning of the labour market had deteriorated15, external trade had become 
more important and the share of employment in agriculture had declined. We had become 
more vulnerable to external economic developments. 
The objective of monetary policy continued to be a stable value of money in relation to gold. 
However,  the  authorities  set  an  ambitious  goal:  they  aimed  to  restore  the  krone’s  pre-war 
value,  which  implied  deflation.  Moreover,  they  were  more  patient  than  had  been  the  case 
after the Napoleonic Wars a hundred years earlier. At that time, the par value of money had 
been  restored  over  a  period  of  20  years,  but  now  the  authorities  achieved  the  same  in  a 
quarter of the time at considerable real economic costs.16 We usually refer to this as “parity 
policy”.  
The ambition to keep their promise was admirable, but the follow-through lacked flexibility.17 
We might say that in the 1920s, the central bank adhered rigidly to “the letter of the law”.18  
After the Second World War, unemployment in the 1920s and 1930s was often associated 
with the rigidity of “parity policy”, which led to considerable changes in views on economic 
policy.19  
The objective of a fixed exchange rate and a gold standard nevertheless remained intact and 
was achieved. Norway and a number of other countries pegged their currencies to the dollar 
under the Bretton Woods Agreement. In reality, they also linked the value of their money to 
gold, since the dollar was linked to gold.20  
                                                 
13   In Norway, the silver standard was replaced by the gold standard on 1 January 1874. See annex by Ragna 
Alstadheim  in  Qvigstad,  J.F.  and  A.  Skjæveland  (1994)  “Valutakursregimer  –  historiske  erfaringer  og 
fremtidige utfordringer (Exchange rate regimes – historical experience and future challenges)”, in Berg, S. A., 
J. F. Qvigstad and K. Storvik (Eds.) Stabilitet og langsiktighet: Festskrift til Hermod Skånland (Stability and a 
long-term perspective: Festschrift for Hermod Skånland), 1994, Aschehoug. 
14   Øksendal,  Lars  Fredrik  (2008),  “Monetary  policy  under  the  gold  standard  –  examining  the  case  of  Norway, 
1893-1914”, Working Paper 2008/14, Norges Bank. 
15   See Bjerkholt, Olav and Jan F. Qvigstad (2007): “Introduction to Ragnar Frisch’s 1933 pamphlet Saving and 
Circulation Regulation”, in Revisita di Storia Economica, Banca d’Italia. 
16   See  Eitrheim  Øyvind.,  Jan  T.  Klovland  and  Jan  F.  Qvigstad  (Eds.)  (2004),  page  293:  “Historical  Monetary 
Statistics for Norway 1819-2003”, Occasional Papers No. 35, Norges Bank, Oslo. 
17   However, they were more flexible in September 1931. It only took seven days for Norway to follow the UK’s 
lead in abandoning the gold standard. 
18   There  was  a  consensus  on  parity  policy  in  the  1920s.  See  for  example  Hodne,  Fritz  and  Ola  Honningdal 
Grytten  (2002),  pages  111-112:  Norsk  økonomi  i  det  19.  århundre  (The  Norwegian  economy  in  the  19th 
century),  Fagbokforlaget  and  Skånland,  Hermod  (1967)  “Det  norske  kredittmarked  siden  1900  (The 
Norwegian credit market since 1900) Samfunnsøkonomiske studier No. 19, Statistics Norway, Oslo. See also 
Mykland, Knut (ed.) Cappelens Norgeshistorie, Vol. 13 page 86. 
19   For further discussion of parity policy and Norges Bank’s role, see Ecklund, Gunhild J. (2008), pages 46-51 
and  67-71:  “Creating  a  new  role  for  an  old  Central  Bank:  The  Bank  of    Norway  1945-1954”,  Series  of 
Dissertations 2/2008, BI Norwegian School of Management, Oslo. 
20   This link to gold was not as strong as when the obligation to redeem in gold applied. Under the Bretton Woods 
system,  countries  whose  public  finances  were  in  disequilibrium,  or  who  allowed  inflation  to  rise  for  other 
reasons,  had  to  let  their  exchange  rate  depreciate  against  the  dollar.  When  the  exchange  rate  against  the 
dollar fell, the value of money measured in gold decreased. 
BIS Review 136/2008 
 5
The post-war period was marked by the strong conviction that the economy could be fine-
tuned by the coordinated use of instruments decided at a centralised level. The value of the 
krone  was  pegged  to  the  dollar  and  to  gold  while  a  policy  of  low  interest  rates  was 
accompanied by an ample credit supply. This was possible in a highly regulated economy. 
The  positive  attitude  to  regulation  probably  stemmed  from  the  period  of  rationing  and 
centralised government during World War II. The system had functioned reasonably well and 
a regulatory apparatus was already in place.21  
Internationally, there was widespread desire to stabilise economic developments, originating 
in  theories  published  by  John  Maynard  Keynes  in  the  early  1930s.  This  was  part  of  the 
background  for  Norwegian  politicians’  ambition  to  fine-tune  the  economy  in  Norway.  The 
works of A. W. Phillips22, published in 1958, also supported this view. According to Phillips, a 
country  could  apparently  choose  between  low  unemployment  and  low  inflation.  This  menu 
option  is  often  referred  to  as  the  Phillips  curve.  And  what  kind  of  “option”  was  that? 
Unemployment is real, while inflation is only changes in an index! By formulating the question 
in this way, the choice was obvious. This analysis had a considerable impact on economic 
policy.  
The  global  economic  situation  became  difficult  into  the  1970s,  with  low  growth  and  high 
inflation in Norway and other countries. The US and European authorities opted to pursue an 
active  counter-cyclical  policy  rather  than  combating  inflation.  But  the  trade-off  between 
inflation and unemployment did not hold in the long term, as economists had first thought. 
The  analyses  had  not  factored  in  expectations  formation.  When  higher  inflation  gradually 
came to be expected by economic agents, it no longer led to lower unemployment. 
In his work, Phillips introduced the dilemma of short-term gains and long-term costs in a new 
area. The benefit was lower unemployment for a period. But confidence that inflation could 
be kept low would eventually be eroded. The cost was persistently higher inflation. The short-
term benefit evaporated along with confidence.  
It is easy to see that it can be tempting to exploit the short-term gains even though the long-
term  costs  are  known.  In  1971,  for  example,  US  president  Richard  Nixon  sought  higher 
growth in the money supply and an attendant reduction in unemployment in order to increase 
his  chances  of  being  re-elected.23  He  was  aware  of  the  inflation  problems  that  would 
subsequently arise, but his view was that they could be addressed at a later stage. Perhaps 
he  believed  that  if  he  were  not  re-elected,  the  long-term  costs  would  be  someone  else’s 
problem. The lesson we can learn from this is that a system involving changing governments 
may  be  particularly  prone  to  short-term  temptations.  Finding  an  effective  commitment 
mechanism is of particular importance in this context. 
Because  of  a  lack  of  fiscal  discipline,  the  Federal  Reserve  suspended  its  obligation  to 
redeem dollars for gold in 1971 and the Bretton Woods Agreement collapsed. This was the 
beginning of a period of inflation and economic instability in many parts of the world, referred 
to as the decade of Great Inflation. In Norway as in other countries, the government moved 
in practice away from the objective of a permanently stable exchange rate.24 It carried out 10 
                                                 
21   See  Bjerkholt,  Olav  (2008):  “Sosialøkonomenes  oppmarsj  og  nasjonalbudsjettet  (The  rise  of  the  economist 
and the national budget)”, Samfunnsøkonomen Nos. 6 and 7, Vol. 68. 
22   Phillips, A. W. (1958): “The Relation Between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money Wage Rates 
in the United Kingdom, 1861-1957”, Economica, Vol. 25, No. 100, pages 283-299. 
23   Friedman, Milton and Rose D. Friedman (1998): Two Lucky People: Memoirs, University of Chicago press, 
pages 386-387. More rapid growth in the money supply would imply lower interest rates in the short term. 
24   In 1975, Sargent and Wallace published the article “ ‘Rational’ Expectations, the Optimal Monetary Instrument 
and the Optimal Money Supply Rule” in  Journal of Political Economy, Vol 83, No. 2,  April, pages  241-254.  
According  to  the  article,  monetary  policy  had  to  come  as  a  surprise  in  order  to  have  any  impact  on  the 
economy.  Expected  policy  had  no  effect.  This  was  probably  also  part  of  the  reason  for  the  acceptance  of 
diverging from promises made, and may explain why transparency was of so little interest to the authorities. 
6 
 BIS Review 136/2008
de facto devaluations of the krone in the period 1976-198625, which led to high inflation. Data 
on price developments in Norway are available back to 1516. Five hundred years of price 
history show that in historical terms the inflation period in the 1970s and 1980s is unique.26 
Previously, periods of high inflation had been associated with government deficits as a result 
of war and unstable governments. This time, inflation was related to the system of economic 
policy management.  
The era of high inflation must be viewed against the background of the mixed experience of 
the parity system and reduced weight on keeping promises, ambitious economic stabilisation 
policies and belief in the validity of the Phillips curve. In addition, perhaps the importance of a 
stable value of money had lost some of its prominence. 
As there are many lawyers present here today, I will venture to comment on a case in your 
field  of  expertise:  the  so-called  gold  clause  case  (“Gullklausulsaken”).27  The  Norwegian 
government had issued a number of bonds in the period 1896 to 1909.28 Many of the bonds 
were held by French moneylenders. The bonds were issued in the gold standard period and 
the  moneylenders  were  promised  repayment  in  “monnaie  d’or”.  When  the  bonds  matured, 
the Norwegian government wanted to make the repayment in banknotes that had lost much 
of their value. This implied a devaluation that could perhaps be compared to the devaluation 
under Henry VIII. The case finally came before the Supreme Court in 1962. In their voting, 
the Supreme Court gave weight to a law from 1923, which stated that the gold clause, i.e. 
repayment in gold money, did not apply when the obligation to redeem banknotes for gold 
had been suspended, which was permanently done in September 1931. In the explanation of 
their  ruling,  the  Supreme  Court  also  referred  to  “vital  national  interests”.  It  would  cost 
Norwegian taxpayers far too much to repay the gold money that had been borrowed 60 years 
earlier.  
It would be far too pretentious of me to offer an opinion on the court ruling as such. What 
makes  this  case  interesting  in  the  light  of  today's  topic  is  that  in  the  Supreme  Court's 
assessments of “vital national interests”, there is no discussion of what the nation's interests 
are in the short term versus the long term. However, it must be added that it is probably not 
easy for a court to review other government authorities’ assessments of this point. There is 
also the question of whether this falls within the court's purview. 
Modern monetary policy – a promise both possible and right to keep 
5.  
The theoretical breakthrough by Kydland and Prescott and the era of high inflation eventually 
had implications for practical policy. It was observed that countries where weight was given 
to low inflation recorded favourable economic developments. 
                                                                                                                                                      
Theoretical works published some years later showed that expected and rules-based policy could stabilise the 
economy  provided  price  and  wage  rigidity  existed.  Some  examples  are:  Fischer  (1977):  “Long-Term 
Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal Money Supply Rule”, Journal of Political Economy, 85, No. 
1,  pages  191-206),  Taylor  (1980):  “Aggregate  Dynamics  and  Staggered  Contracts”,  Journal  of  Political 
Economy,  88,  No  1,  pages  1-24  and  Calvo  (1983):  “Staggered  Prices  in  a  Utility-Maximizing  Framework”, 
Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, No. 3, pages 983-998. Only when these articles were published was the 
theoretical basis in place for keeping promises while at the same time allowing monetary policy to contribute to 
stabilising the economy. 
25   See reference in footnote 13. 
26   See  Eitrheim,  Øyvind  (2005)  in  Eitrheim  and  Qvigstad  (Eds.):  “Tilbakeblikk  på  norsk  pengehistorie. 
Konferanse  7.  juni  2005  på  Bogstad  gård  (Norwegian  monetary  history  in  retrospect.  Conference,  7  June 
2005, Oslo)”, Occasional Papers No. 37, Norges Bank. 
27   Bahr,  Henrik  (1962):  “Høyesteretts  dom  i  gullklausulsaken  (The  Supreme  Court  ruling  in  the  gold  clause 
case)”, Lov og Rett: norsk juridisk tidsskrift, booklet No. 5, pages 193-211. 
28   Two government-guaranteed banks had also issued bonds. 
BIS Review 136/2008 
 7
Since the beginning of the 1980s, there has been a broad consensus that monetary policy 
must be geared towards price stability. This paradigm shift also reached Norway, but not until 
the  end  of  the  1980s.  The  government  recognised  that  the  repeated  devaluations  were 
ineffectual. Confidence had been lost. In Norway, inflation had also soared without a fall in 
unemployment. Even if it was costly to restore credibility, in reality we had no choice.29 The 
alternative was to bring the country even closer to the brink of financial chaos and runaway 
inflation. The devaluation in 1986 would become the last in the series.  
Internationally, the 1980s ushered in three innovations that would become decisive for the 
design of modern monetary policy as we know it today.  
- 
First, market deregulation led to freer cross-border capital flows. Promises could no 
longer be relegated to the future. Failing credibility was promptly reflected in higher 
interest  rates  and  weaker  exchange  rates.  Nixon’s  disinflation  plan  to  bring  down 
inflation at some point in the future would have had immediate consequences. On 
the other hand, it also became clear that a credible and transparent monetary policy 
could be more effective precisely thanks to financial markets’ swift reactions.30  
Second,  the  notion  of  central  bank  autonomy  regained  favour.  The  political 
authorities,  who  wanted  to  show  the  world  that  they  were  committed  to  delivering 
their promise of price stability, did as Ulysses and tied themselves to the mast. The 
mechanism  was  central  bank  independence  and  Norway  was  no  exception.  The 
new  Norges  Bank  Act  of  1985  gave  Norges  Bank  the  authority  to  set  the  interest 
rate.  Democratic  control  is  now  ensured  through  a  clear  mandate  defined  by  the 
government  for  the  central  bank’s  conduct  of  monetary  policy.  The  political 
authorities  can  verify  the  central  bank’s  compliance  with  the  mandate  without 
deciding on the use of the instrument.31  
The  third  innovation  sprang  out  of  New  Zealand.  In  connection  with  economic 
reforms,  the  authorities  introduced  fiscal  performance  targets.  They  then  started 
searching  for  good  and  realistic  performance  targets  for  monetary  policy.  They 
found that what monetary policy should deliver was stable inflation in the medium 
term – New Zealand introduced a so-called inflation target for monetary policy.32  
  What is the difference between what is referred to as inflation targeting and the former policy 
of  parity?  Let  me  explain  the  difference  using  a  stylised  example.  Assume  that  the  price 
index has been 100 over a longer period. The price level is thus stable. An increase in, say, 
energy  prices  then  occurs  and  the  index  moves  up  to  105.  Energy  has  become  more 
expensive in relation to other goods. Under the parity system, other prices had to be reduced 
to  move  the  index  back  to  100.  This  could  require  a  substantial  decline  in  output  and 
employment, as was the case in the interwar years. Under an inflation targeting regime, it is 
in  this  example  accepted  that  the  index  remains  at  105.  The  central  bank  will  ensure  that 
economic  agents  do  not  believe  that  inflation  of  5  per  cent  has  become  the  normal  level, 
                                                 
29   The new recognition that policy should be based on confidence rather than a series of surprises reflects the 
influence of theoretical developments on practical policy, c.f. footnote 24. 
30   In  recent  times,  central  banks  throughout  the  world  have  become  more  independent  but  at  the  same  time 
more  predictable  in  their  communication  with  other  economic  agents.  This  is  also  related  to  the  new 
recognition referred to in footnote 24. 
31   Norges  Bank  reports  on  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  its  Monetary  Policy  Report  and  Annual  Report. 
Norges Bank’s reporting obligations are set out in § 75c of the Constitution and § 3 of the Norges Bank Act. 
The  Annual  Report  is  submitted  to  the  Ministry  of  Finance,    presented  to  the  King  in  Council  and 
communicated to the Storting in the Government Credit Report. The Governor of Norges Bank also appears at 
an open hearing of the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs. 
32   The objective of EMU is consumer price stability in member countries as a whole, rather than stable prices in 
the individual country. The arguments for a stable value of money are the same as for Norway. 
8 
 BIS Review 136/2008
thereby preventing such a belief from affecting their behaviour. Under an inflation targeting 
regime, the central bank will accept, when shocks occur, a price increase without having to 
reduce other prices. The promise made under an inflation targeting regime is easier to keep 
when  the  economy  is  exposed  to  major  shocks  than  the  promise  made  under  a  parity 
system.33  
From  1986  to  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  Norway  pursued  a  fixed  exchange  rate  against 
European currencies without devaluations. In practice, this meant that Norway also had to 
pursue the same inflation goal as those countries. In autumn 1992, the fixed exchange rate 
regime collapsed. Even if we no longer operated a formal fixed exchange rate system, in the 
following years monetary policy was still oriented towards maintaining a stable exchange rate 
at  all  times.34  However,  the  currency  turbulence  in  the  latter  part  of  summer  1998 
demonstrated  that  like  other  central  banks,  Norges  Bank  could  not  make  good  on  the 
promise to maintain a stable exchange rate from hour to hour, day to day or week to week. 
Domestic economic considerations indicated that there were limits to how high the interest 
rate  could  be  set  in  support  of  the  krone  exchange  rate.  An  excessively  high  interest  rate 
would  not  have  been  credible  since  it  would  have  resulted  in  an  excessively  sharp 
downswing in domestic economic activity.  
In August 1998, Norges Bank shifted policy to setting the interest rate with a view to keeping 
inflation low and stable over time.35 The shift in monetary policy was explained in articles and 
statements  in  early  winter  1999.36  The  inflation  target  was  finally  formalised  in  a  new 
regulation on monetary policy in 2001, a good eleven years after New Zealand, nine years 
after the United Kingdom and eight years after Sweden.  
The mandate for Norges Bank states that monetary policy shall, in addition to securing price 
stability,  contribute  to  stabilising  output  and  employment.  It  is  possible  to  give  weight  to 
cyclical  fluctuations  in  interest  rate  setting,  and  to  new  information,  as  long  as  there  is 
confidence that inflation remains near the target. The central bank’s announced interest rate 
strategy ahead will be adjusted as new information emerges. This stands in contrast to the 
parity system, which was more rigid. 
The authorities cannot systematically allow policy to be more expansionary than announced 
to  bring  down  unemployment.  As  Kydland  and  Prescott  demonstrated,  this  would  lead  to 
                                                 
33   Another difference is that under parity policy the authorities stabilised the price of gold and not the price of a 
basket of representative goods – the consumer price index. Today, stabilisation of the consumer price index 
would  be  described  as  price  level  targeting.  Inflation  targeting,  on  the  other  hand,  implies  stabilisation  of 
changes  in  the  consumer  price  index.  There  is  also  a  difference  in  that  there  is  no  longer  any  redemption 
obligation. Confidence is not based on gold reserves, but more generally on responsible economic policy as a 
basis for achieving the inflation target through the active use of the interest rate. 
34   At that time, little academic research was available on alternatives to a fixed exchange rate regime or money 
supply targeting. Leading politicians and  economists  were sceptical  about the idea of  abandoning the fixed 
exchange rate regime. Money supply targeting was regarded as out of the question because of instability in 
the money supply. John Taylor’s works on interest rate rules that could contribute to stabilising inflation and 
the  real  economy,  through  transparency  and  predictability,  were  not  published  until  1993  (Taylor,  John  B: 
“Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice”, Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy 39, 195-214). 
35   Storvik,  Kjell  (1998)  “Aktuelle  økonomiske  og  pengepolitiske  problemstillinger  (Current  economic  and 
monetary policy issues)”. Lecture at Forex Norway, 28 August. Norges Bank  was prepared for a change in 
regime,  cf  .  the  discussions  in  Choosing  a  Monetary  Policy  Target,  Christiansen,  A.B.  and  J.F.  Qvigstad 
(Eds.),  Universitetsforlaget  (1997)  and  Perspektiver  på  pengepolitikken  (Monetary  policy  perspectives), 
Qvigstad, J.F. and Ø. Røisland (Eds.), 2000. A workshop entitled “The Conduct of Monetary Policy in Open 
Economies” was also held at the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters in October 2000. 
36   Article in the newspaper Aftenposten on 5 January 1999 in connection with the appointment of Svein Gjedrem 
as  governor  of  Norges  Bank,  lecture  by  Svein  Gjedrem,  Gausdal,  28  January  1999:  “Utfordringer  i  den 
økonomiske politikken (Challenges to economic policy)” and article by Svein Gjedrem in Aftenposten 4 May 
1999: “Utfordringer i pengepolitikken (Challenges to economic policy)”. 
BIS Review 136/2008 
 9
higher inflation without lower unemployment in the long term. Credibility hinges on the active 
use of the interest rate to attain the target.  
The lawyer and economist Michael Woodford has pointed out that in order to keep your word 
it  is  not  enough  to  make  a  promise  today  and  keep  your  word  tomorrow.37  When  making 
interest rate forecasts, we must also take into consideration the promises made yesterday. 
Only then can we fully use expectations to stabilise the economy optimally. This is referred to 
as  monetary  policy  from  a  timeless  perspective.38  My  understanding  is  that  a  person  will 
likewise  both  look  backward  and  forward  when  interpreting  the  laws  of  a  society.  It  is 
Norwegian  court  practice  for  judges  to  consider  precedent  effects  and  case  law  when 
interpreting legislation.  
Today  there  is  general  consensus  that  price  stability  is  not  only  the  best  contribution  that 
monetary policy can make to economic stability over time, but perhaps also the only promise 
the central bank can actually deliver. 
industry  and 
Today’s financial crisis  
fundamental  macroeconomic 
6.  
These days the world is in the throes of a severe financial crisis – the deepest crisis since the 
1930s. Many foreign banks have suffered large losses and a sense of fear is prevailing. We 
are  entering  a  global  economic  recession.  The  authorities  are  taking  action  to  restore 
confidence  in  the  financial  industry.  Macroeconomic  policy  measures  are  aimed  at  limiting 
the  crisis-related  effects  on  the  real  economy.  It  is  clear  that  regulatory  improvements  will 
eventually be needed so that the financial industry can assume a greater role in safeguarding 
their own credibility.  
The credibility of central banks is also being tested in this situation. In dramatic cases, such 
as  Iceland,  we  are  again  seeing  an  example  of  runaway  inflation  when  confidence  in 
government finances is severely impaired. In this situation, inflation targeting at the central 
bank of Iceland did not suffice. In Iceland, the problems stemmed from an over-dimensioned 
financial 
the  banks 
encountered problems, the authorities provided support in an attempt to secure a functioning 
financial system. As the Icelandic state did not have the financial strength to take over the 
banks’ total commitments, confidence in its currency and monetary policy was also shattered 
without the central bank being able to redress the situation.  
The financial crisis is a global one, and the Norwegian economy will be affected. However, 
our  country  is  in  a  sound  position  to  curb  crisis-related  effects.  In  Norway,  government 
finances  are  healthy,  the  banking  system  is  solid  and  there  is  confidence  that  monetary 
policy  will  continue  to  maintain  a  stable  value  of  money.  This  means  that  we  can  use  the 
interest  rate  actively.  We  have  already  reduced  it  in  two  increments  by  a  total  of  1 
percentage point, and we are willing to use the interest rate to a further extent if necessary.  
Central banks still face many unknowns about economic behaviour. There is nothing in our 
history that indicates that monetary policy, or any economic policy for that matter, has found 
its  final  form.  But  there  is  one  certainty:  keeping  promises  and  creating  confidence  are 
fundamental both for monetary policy and more generally for growth and development. 
The man who built this house, Hans Rasmus Astrup, died in 1898, just before the housing 
market crash in Kristiania and the ensuing crisis. House prices plummeted by more than 50 
per cent at that time and several banks collapsed in the next few years. The outfall of the 
imbalances.  When 
                                                 
37   Woodford, Michael (2003): Interest and Prices, Princeton University Press. 
38   Woodford (2003) points out that the central bank’s announced interest rate strategy can be adjusted as new 
information becomes available. However, in order to maintain confidence in the announced interest rate path 
and for it to be useful, the public must not have reason to expect systematic deviations. 
10 
 BIS Review 136/2008
current crisis is hardly likely to be as dramatic. Prime Minister Jens Stoltenberg has stated 
that  “the  Norwegian  authorities  are  prepared  to  implement  necessary  measures  to  secure 
confidence  in  the  Norwegian  banking  system”.  This  is  a  promise  that  the  government 
authorities both have the ability and will to fulfil.   
BIS Review 136/2008 
 11
