Jean-Claude Trichet: 18th Frankfurt European Banking Congress 
Statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the ECB, at the 18th Frankfurt European 
Banking Congress, Frankfurt am Main, 21 November 2008. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
This  year’s  European  Banking  Congress  takes  place  at  a  very  challenging  point  in  time. 
Today’s event is therefore a particularly important one. It is a pleasure to be here amid so 
many distinguished participants and to be joined on this panel by my central bank colleagues 
from Brazil and the United Arab Emirates.  
We are at a critical juncture as far as the set-up and functioning of the international financial 
system  is  concerned.  The  current  financial  crisis  was  triggered  by  a  widespread  and 
substantial undervaluation of risk. When the crisis erupted in August 2007, it was at first a 
systemic  threat  to  the  liquidity  of  the  financial  system,  which  mainly  affected  advanced 
economies. In mid-September of this year the crisis deteriorated very significantly and turned 
into a systemic threat to the solvency of important parts of the global financial system. It is no 
longer limited to advanced economies and is instead also affecting emerging economies. In 
addition, it has spilled over from the financial sphere to the real economy.  
Global challenges call for global responses. Policy-makers across the globe have responded 
and  are  taking  appropriate  action  to  contain  and  alleviate  the  crisis.  Central  banks  are 
playing a pivotal role in this regard, providing the necessary liquidity – sometimes in ways 
that were scarcely imaginable up until a few months ago – in order to ensure that financial 
markets and institutions can continue to function. As far as the ECB is concerned, I would 
like  to  point  out  once  again  that  we  have  acted  decisively  from  the  very  beginning  of  the 
turmoil  in  August  of  last  year.  At  that  time,  when  the  threat  to  the  liquidity  of  the  financial 
system first emerged, we provided the system with no less than EUR 95 billion of liquidity 
within  a  few  hours.  Later  that  year,  the  ECB  also  began  to  supply  liquidity  to  European 
counterparties  in  US  dollars  through  swap  arrangements  which  we  established  with  the 
Federal  Reserve.  Since  October  of  this  year,  we  have  been  granting  full  allotments  in  our 
monetary operations. These are only some of the key measures taken by the ECB in order to 
support financial markets, and you see from the design of these measures that some of them 
are literally without precedent.  
 At the same time as we are dealing with the current crisis, we also need to look ahead and 
strengthen  the  functioning  and  resilience  of  the  international  financial  system.  A  reform 
agenda for this system will need to comprise many elements. I would like to reiterate three 
principal elements that I consider fundamental.  
• 
First, short-termism – that is to say, the excessive focus on short-term returns – 
has  to  be  addressed.  As  we  have  seen,  modern  financial  systems  have  shown  a 
particular  preference  for  instruments  and  intermediaries  that  have  promised 
significant returns in the short term. Short-termism can lead to the misjudgement of 
underlying risk. It can also encourage excessive risk-taking on the basis of relatively 
small amounts of capital. It is therefore essential to establish the right incentives for 
market  participants,  including  the  use  of  appropriate  internal  compensation 
schemes.  
Second, it is essential that transparency be increased in various components of the 
global  financial  system  –  for  financial  instruments,  markets  and  institutions. 
Transparency is a key prerequisite for the efficient functioning of markets, and one 
that prevents markets from overreacting, both on the upside and on the downside. It 
 BIS Review 145/2008 
 1
 financial  products  are 
traded  and  strengthen 
can thereby help to reduce the scope for “herding behaviour” and contagion. To give 
two examples, regulators need to tighten up disclosure requirements for markets in 
which  structured 
reporting 
requirements for unregulated institutions which are relevant for systemic stability. 
Third, it is important to reduce the pro-cyclicality of the financial system, namely its 
potential  to  amplify  business  cycle  fluctuations  and  trigger  financial  instability. 
Drivers  of  pro-cyclical  behaviour  need  to  be  addressed,  to  restrain  financial 
institutions’  excessive  risk-taking  in  upturns  and  to  discourage  their  excessive 
conservatism when credit to companies and households is most needed. Elements 
of financial regulation, such as capital requirements, provisioning rules and valuation 
standards, can act as contributing factors in this regard. A considerable amount of 
work  is  under  way  with  a  view  to  addressing  the  issue  of  pro-cyclicality,  with  the 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  having  primary  competence  in  this  field 
and the Financial Stability Forum playing an important coordinating role.  
These three reform elements are of particular relevance to the functioning and resilience of 
the  international  financial  system.  Taken  together,  these  changes  will  foster  greater 
“discipline”  in  the  system.  Greater  discipline  means  a  reduced  likelihood  of  unwarranted 
fluctuations, a more appropriate assessment of risks and a better balance between short and 
long-term  investment  horizons.  In  my  view,  the  meetings  preparatory  to  the  G20  –  in 
particular the meeting at the level of Ministers and Governors in São Paulo – and the G20 
summit  itself  have  brought  us  a  step  closer  in  this  regard,  as  these  elements  and  many 
further important measures are reflected in the communiqué and the action plan. 
 to 
foster  greater  discipline 
But  changes  to  the  financial  system  itself  are  only  one  side  of  the  coin  as  regards  the 
measures that need to be taken in order to prevent a crisis like this from happening again. 
The other side of the coin relates to macroeconomic policies – another issue discussed at 
in  the 
the  G20  summit.  Specifically,  we  also  need 
macroeconomic policy-making  of  all  participants  in  the  global  economy.  Large  domestic 
and external imbalances have to be reduced in systemically important economies, as their 
build-up  and  unwinding  can  ultimately  trigger  spill-over  effects  in  the  global  economy  as  a 
whole.  Hence,  countries  should  pursue  policies  that  are  stability-oriented  and  sustainable 
over the medium and long term. One vital element in order to foster such policies is effective 
surveillance by the IMF. 
This brings me to the organisation and functioning of international institutions and fora, 
which  are  key  actors  in  the  global  financial  architecture.  It  is  important  to  have  in  place  a 
well-functioning surveillance framework which identifies imbalances in a timely fashion and 
encourages the implementation of corrective measures. The current crisis highlights the fact 
that the IMF needs to gain more traction as regards systemically important countries. This 
will  not  be  straightforward,  but  the  IMF’s  Multilateral  Consultations,  which  foresee  a  direct 
exchange between key members of the global economy, represent a process that should be 
vigorously developed for this purpose.  
In terms of governance, there is merit in the international community engaging with emerging 
market  economies  in  a  way  that  reflects  their systemic  relevance,  thereby  making  the  key 
international financial institutions and fora more inclusive.  
So far, I have focused primarily on the tasks that policy-makers are confronted with. But the 
financial industry also has a very important role to play. As regards the very short term, let 
me  refer  to  the  interbank  market.  Indeed,  it  is  of  paramount  importance  that  the  banking 
sector as a whole takes advantage of the efforts made by central banks and governments 
and  contributes  to  the  normalisation  of  market  conditions.  This  could  be  achieved  by 
committing  to  reigniting  the  interbank  money  market  and  resuming  the  intermediation 
function.  
2 
 BIS Review 145/2008
In conclusion, while the challenges we are currently facing are truly formidable, central banks 
in  general,  and  the  ECB  in  particular,  are  doing  everything  they  can  to  support  the 
functioning of the financial system. Moreover, market participants and other actors should be 
assured that the cooperation within the global network of central banks has been excellent 
and highly conducive to addressing the ongoing challenges.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 145/2008 
 3
