T T Mboweni: Lessons to be drawn from the financial crisis for 
multilateralism and global financial co-operation  
Keynote  address  by  Mr  T  T  Mboweni,  Governor  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank,  at  a 
charity gala dinner, organised by the University of Pretoria, Pretoria, 15 October 2008. 
 the 
financial  sector  are  attending 
Introduction 
I  would  like  to  express  my  sincere  appreciation  to  the  University  of  Pretoria  and  the 
organisers of the Charity Gala dinner for inviting me to address you tonight. I am glad to see 
that  so  many  representatives  of 
function, 
notwithstanding the present financial turmoil.  
There  are  some  encouraging  signs  that  following  the  concerted  commitment  shown  by 
various governments and central banks, and backed up by strong action, we may be finally 
embarking on the road to recovery from one of the worst crises the financial world has had to 
face.  The  global  financial  system  has  malfunctioned  and  there  appears  to  be  a  need  to 
seriously  consider  what  changes  and  adjustments  are  required  to  ensure  that  the  global 
financial  architecture  is  better  equipped  to  deal  with  future  challenges.  Given  that  the 
changes  will  inevitably  require  certain  vested  interests  to  be  confronted,  the  international 
community will have to commit itself to put the greater good of all of us at the centre of any 
efforts going forward. The change must, however, be managed and embedded in concrete 
actions  plans  to  create  stronger  institutions,  with  more  balanced  representation,  that  will 
contribute to long term financial stability and sustainable growth.  
this 
The global economic outlook 
Presently, we are witnessing a severe financial crisis, a crisis that many commentators view 
as the worst since the Great Depression. Even before the escalation of the financial crisis, 
growth  in  the  advanced  economies  had  been  faltering,  as  shown  in  the  recent  World 
Economic  Outlook  of  the  IMF.  Growth  in  advanced  economies  has  weakened  and  is  well 
below  potential.  Economic  activity  in  developing  countries  appears  to  be  moderating  at  a 
somewhat  faster  pace  than  had  been  anticipated.  The  danger  of  a  major  and  protracted 
slowdown in global growth, with inflationary pressures only likely to react with some time lag, 
is indeed very real.  
As most of you are participants in the financial market, I do not intend to go into any great 
detail  about  the  causes  of  the  global  market  turmoil.  By  now  we  seem  to  have  a  general 
consensus  that  accommodative  monetary  policy  conditions  in  developed  markets  laid  the 
foundation for an aggressive search for yield, which resulted in mispricing of risk on a large 
scale,  coupled  with  some  over-zealous  “financial  innovation”.  The  resultant  combination  of 
reckless  lending  and  unsophisticated  borrowing,  which  started  in  the  USA  ended  up 
engulfing large parts of the financial world.  
A need for change 
Against this background I attended the Annual Meetings of the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF)  and  the  World  Bank  last  week.  These  institutions  were  created  at  the  end  of  the 
Second  World  War  to  fill  a  much  needed  gap  of  providing  capital  in  the  global  financial 
system, as well as ensuring the orderly functioning of the system. The IMF was, inter alia, 
created to provide financial support to countries that may be experiencing short term balance 
of payments problems, while the World Bank was established to assist countries, in particular 
European countries, in their post war reconstruction efforts. 
BIS Review 126/2008 
 1
Over  time,  the  size  and  the  needs  of  the  membership  of  these  institutions  have  changed. 
These  institutions  have,  however,  not  kept  pace  with  the  changing  conditions  in  their 
operating  environment.  The  governance  and  representation  structures  have  lagged  behind 
the  changing  global  economic  realities.  The  IMF  has  not  fully  lived  up  to  one  of  its  core 
responsibilities,  being  the  conduct  of  effective  surveillance  of  the  global  economic 
environment and that of individual countries. 
The  relevance  of  the  Bretton  Woods  Institutions,  as  the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  have 
become to be known, has come under severe scrutiny, particularly over that last ten years in 
the aftermath of the Asian crises. Questioning the relevance of the IMF has intensified in the 
wake of the current crisis. A key area of criticism has been the failure of the IMF to warn its 
members of the outbreak of financial crises in a timely manner. The IMF and indeed other 
global financial institutions are in serious need of change. 
A need for collective action 
We need collective global action to overcome the current crisis. The IMF was established to 
promote  coordination  and  collective  action  in  order  to  avoid  the  kind  of  crisis  we  are  now 
facing. We all saw the dangers building up over the last few years, particularly with regard to 
global imbalances.  
These problems have for many years been discussed within the International Monetary and 
Financial  Committee  (IMFC).  But  this  common  knowledge  was  not  enough  to  spur  any 
determined action. Global policy makers were not able to act in unison, and the institutions 
tasked with facilitating a collective response could not or would not act in accordance with 
their  mandates.  This  failure  on  the  part  of  the  global  economic  policymakers  needs  to  be 
recognised,  and  as  we  acknowledge  this  failure,  we  must  recommit  ourselves  to  deeper 
multilateral cooperation, mutual accountability and active policy coordination, with adequate 
representation and participation of developing countries.  
The weaknesses in addressing these global imbalances are now clearly revealed, as well as 
the  flaws  in  the  regulatory  environment  of  some  advanced  economies.  The  current  weak 
global  economy  has  also  highlighted  the  gaps  in  global  economic  governance,  and  the 
absence  of  sufficient  institutional  capacity  to  manage  coordinated  global  responses  to 
simultaneous  global  crises.  It  is  incumbent  on  all  countries  not  only  to  strengthen  their 
respective policy environments domestically to prevent future meltdowns, but work needs to 
commence collectively to create a global financial architecture that can respond to crises of 
this nature in the future.  
In addition, policy actions are needed for improving the economic infrastructure and creating 
an  environment  conducive  to  investment,  and  for  strengthening  the  macroeconomic 
framework  and  sheltering  the  poor  from  the  adverse  consequences  of  the  crisis.  While 
remaining  committed  to  prudent  policies,  greater  flexibility  will  be  required  to  soften  the 
impact  of  exogenous  shocks,  even  as  we  consolidate  the  gains  of  better  macro-economic 
frameworks. 
A need for change of the Bretton Woods institutions 
There  is  a  widely  held  perception  that  the  Bretton  Wood  Institutions  have  become 
instruments in the hands of the major economies to control smaller member countries and 
indeed sometimes even larger emerging market countries.  
Over the last ten years the IMF and the World Bank have come under consistent criticism 
amidst the ever larger calls for them to change. A year ago the Crockett Committee reviewed 
the income model of the Fund and made some significant recommendations to ensure the 
sustainability of IMF resources. Some of the recommendations made by the Committee to 
2 
 BIS Review 126/2008
the IMF board are now being implemented and others will be implemented once endorsed by 
national legislatures. 
The IMF has also created a new Committee under the Chairmanship Mr Trevor Manuel, the 
Minister of Finance in South Africa to review its governance structures and to look at how to 
improve the effectiveness of the institution. The committee is due to report back to the IMFC 
at its next meeting in April 2009.  
The IMF and the World Bank found themselves completely on the sidelines in recent weeks 
in coming up with recommendations on how to address the current financial meltdown. While 
it  is  completely  understandable  that  as  countries  are  expected  to  come  up  with  their  own 
action  plans  to  get  economic  conditions  on  even  keel,  it  should  be  incumbent  upon  the 
Bretton Woods institutions, and in particular the Fund to provide overarching advice on how 
to stabilise the global economy, as a global public good. However, it would appear that it has 
been easier for the Fund to give direction to developing countries in times of crises than to 
provide similar advice to advanced countries.  
Notwithstanding  the  weaknesses  highlighted  and  the  clear  need  for  improvements,  the 
impression gained at the annual meetings earlier this week suggest that, with the right level 
of commitment from all stakeholders, the BWIs may adequately reform in the period ahead 
and regain their relevance. 
Where do we go from here? 
With the financial landscape around us under severe stress, we can rightly question, “Is there 
light at the end of the tunnel?” 
Given the changing landscape of the world economy and the failure of today’s multi-lateral 
institutions to provide us with a collective response to the crisis, an ambitious rethink of the 
global  financial system  is  required. We  need  to  go  far beyond  incremental  changes  of  the 
global  financial  environment  and  our  ambition  in  the  reform  of  the  global  architecture  of 
finance and economic policy making must match the gravity of the crisis we currently face, as 
well as the realities of the global economic environment.  
The recent financial turmoil has exposed the peripheral nature of the IMF's functions in global 
finance.  Once  the  crisis  struck  forcefully,  its  role  was  unclear  and  peripheral.  The  Fund 
needs to be strengthened in order to place it on the centre stage, unless we would wish it to 
become totally irrelevant.  
On the other hand the crisis presents the IMF with an opportunity to revive itself. With the 
necessary expertise, its universal membership and the convening power it can play a vital 
role into the future, especially if it is able to transform its governance structures to meet the 
challenges of tomorrow’s world.  
Other  institutions  such  as  the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements  and  the  G-20  have  also  enhanced  their  claim  on  providing  leadership  in  the 
global economic environment. The G-7 has proved itself to be increasingly irrelevant in the 
changing economic environment of today. 
Lessons to be learnt from the current crisis 
It is too early to draw lessons from the crisis that is yet to run its full course. However we 
must continue to debate the causes of the crisis and contribute to solutions to avoid a similar 
situation globally and at home. We need stronger institutions that should be lasting, so that 
the  current  problems  would  not  recur  quickly.  However,  as  the  Australian  Prime  Minister 
recently said at the United Nations: 
BIS Review 126/2008 
 3
“The  failures  that  we  have  seen  in  recent  times  do  not  lie  in  the  institutions  alone.  The 
failures lie more in the poverty of our political will to animate these institutions to discharge of 
the purposes for which they were created”. 
Is the global governance we are dealing with today still relevant? Clearly it is not. We need to 
craft  a  global  framework  of  economic  and  financial  relations  that  is  inclusive  and  not  only 
serves the needs of a few large economies. The G-7 has for long been acting as the steering 
committee for global economic governance, The G-7 is an exclusive economic club for rich 
countries and has outlived its usefulness, since some members in the club are no longer part 
of the richest members in the global economic environment and their influence will decline 
even further in the years to come. 
Countries like China, India, Brazil and Russia are playing an increasingly important role as 
the engines of growth in the global economy, and none of them are members of the G-7. I 
am sure that the G-20 will become more relevant in the period ahead, since the G-20 is small 
enough  to  allow  for  meaningful  discussions,  yet  its  global  influence  is  broad  enough  to 
incorporate all the major players. As a collective the G-20 contributes almost 90 per cent of 
global Gross Domestic Product and trade. The G-20 as a forum has also already proven its 
ability  to  contribute  to  the  global  dialogue  and  providing  imputes  for  new  global  economic 
governance. 
The  global  crisis  of  today  provides  us  with  a  new  opportunity  to  act  comprehensively  and 
collectively for the long term – rather than selectively and separately for the short run. 
We need the necessary resolve to work increasingly in a cooperative fashion with institutions 
such  as  the  IMF,  the  BIS  and  the  FSF  and  the  G-20  to  come  up  with  action  plans  which 
should  be  implemented  urgently  and  comprehensively.  We  need  new  global  governance 
structures that are inclusive for all the stakeholders.  
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS Review 126/2008
