Donald L Kohn: Productivity and innovation in financial services  
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, at the Official Celebration of the 10th Anniversary of the Central Bank of 
Luxembourg, Luxembourg, 12 November 2008. 
 I  am  pleased  to  participate  in  this  panel  discussion  on  the  importance  of  the  growth  and 
productivity of the financial sector for monetary policy. I am certain that when the European 
Money and Finance Forum and the Central Bank of Luxembourg planned their conference, 
they did not imagine how significant the topic would be.1  
We are in the midst of very difficult times for world financial markets and economies. Over 
the  past  several  decades,  we  witnessed  a  rapid  expansion  of  financial  intermediation  and 
financial  instruments  around  the  globe.  We  always  understood  that  the  new  financial 
relationships  were  substantially  influencing  the  characteristics  of  economic  activity  – 
especially in recent years, U.S. mortgage markets and residential construction, in particular, 
and  household  borrowing  and  spending  more  generally.  Unfortunately,  that  long  period  of 
innovation and heightened financial activity exploded into an unsustainable credit boom that 
was  marked  by  a  failure  to  appropriately  evaluate  risks  in  lending  to  households  and 
businesses, excessive leverage by both borrowers and lenders, and increased reliance on 
complex  and  opaque  financial  instruments  that  were  poorly  understood  and  fragile  under 
stress. The resulting financial strains and severity of their effects on real activity have clearly 
shown the limits of our ability to anticipate how and where problems in the financial sector 
would emerge and of our understanding of the channels through which the financial stresses 
could  lead  to  a  broad-based  pullback  in  lending  and  adverse  spillovers  into  the  real 
economy.  The  recent  experience  has  also  underscored  the  difficulties  associated  with 
measuring financial services and the productivity of financial firms.  
The financial sector and economic activity 
Banks and other financial institutions allocate credit. At the most fundamental level, they take 
savings  from  the  household  sector  and  elsewhere  and  lend  it  to  firms,  households,  and 
governments  that  want  to  borrow  to  spend.  In  the  best  circumstances,  the  operation  of 
financial markets is transparent to the macroeconomy. The financial system allocates credit 
efficiently to firms that invest in capital resources that improve the productivity of other inputs 
(for example, labor) and contribute to the growth of the economy. The financial system also 
offers  households  choices  about  how  they  allocate  consumption  over  time.  Financial 
institutions  can  be  viewed  as  reducing  information  asymmetries  that  impede  borrowers’ 
access  to  credit,  and  they  provide  transaction  services  to  borrowers.  And  by  reducing  the 
cost of external finance to firms generally, productivity gains in the financial sector can foster 
gains in a wide array of other industries as well.  
Even  before  the  proliferation  of  financial  institutions  and  products,  the  translation  of  the 
economic concept of financial services into a workable measure of output posed very thorny 
problems. This conference is an indication that important research continues quite actively 
on a variety of issues related to the measurement of the output of financial services and the 
efficiency of financial institutions.  
                                                 
1   The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Reserve Board. 
Joyce Zickler, David Reifschneider, Diana Hancock, and Paul Lengermann, of the Board staff, contributed to 
these remarks. 
BIS Review 137/2008 
 1
investment  choices  with  better  risk  and  return  characteristics. 
More  important  from  a  policymaker’s  perspective  is  the  need  to  assess  the  contribution  to 
economy-wide productivity and stability of the extraordinary expansion in the size and scope 
of  the  financial  sector  that  occurred  in  the  past  several  decades.  Certainly,  as  financial 
innovations  accelerated,  we  had  solid  reasons  to  believe  that  those  advances  were 
contributing  to  the  pickup  in  overall  productivity  and,  possibly,  to  the  moderation  in 
fluctuations  of  economic  activity.  Increased  technical  capabilities,  together  with  enhanced 
mathematical  applications,  permitted  the  development  of  products  such  as  derivatives  and 
loan  securitizations  that  provided  new  ways  to  unbundle  risks.  We  thought  that  risks  were 
being redistributed more efficiently to individuals and firms according to their risk tolerances 
and  their  abilities  to  absorb  risk.  And  evidence  suggested  that  opening  credit  markets  to 
more  households,  by  enabling  them  to  smooth  spending  in  response  to  shocks,  was 
contributing to the overall moderation in business cycles.  
Information technology also appeared to be making intermediation more efficient by reducing 
the cost and uncertainty of processing information that helps financial intermediaries make 
superior 
Information 
technology  also  made  possible  the  creation,  valuation,  and  exchange  of  complex  financial 
instruments  on  a  global  basis.  Financial  transactions  were  occurring  faster  and  were  less 
expensive to initiate and complete. The assumption was that markets were becoming deeper 
and more liquid. 
These innovations did produce lasting gains, but these gains were clearly accompanied by 
increasing  vulnerabilities.  In  the  United  States,  financial  innovation,  especially  in  the 
origination  and  distribution  of  subprime  mortgages,  ended  up  contributing  to  an  excess 
supply of houses at prices well above long-term sustainable levels. And innovations enabled 
households  to  liquefy  the  wealth  embedded  in  houses,  thereby  boosting  loan  amounts 
relative to the value of the house. Moreover, both borrowers and lenders badly mispriced and 
misunderstood risks, which often became embedded in new, complex, financial instruments. 
Neither  was  protected  against  a  substantial  decline  in  the  price  of  houses.  And  that 
mispricing was not just confined to the housing sector. Compensation for risk was too low 
across a broad array of credits. Ironically, an important contributor to these misalignments in 
spending and lending was the long period of economic expansion and low inflation over the 
past  25  years,  interrupted  only  a  few  times  by  mild  recession.  This  good  economic 
performance provided skewed data and bred complacency: House prices could only go up; 
income  interruptions  and  problems  servicing  debt  were  likely  to  be  short  lived;  financial 
markets would always be liquid. Models based on theory and estimated with data from the 
1990s  and  early  2000s  fit  well  –  too  well.  Complacency,  in  turn,  contributed  to  the 
unwillingness  of  many  financial  market  participants  to  enhance  their  risk-management 
systems sufficiently to take full account of the new (perhaps unknown) risks they were taking 
on.  
In this environment, financial institutions stretched the amount of capital they were holding, 
building leverage. With better models, sophisticated contracts, and the belief that risks had 
been  distributed  more  efficiently,  many  market  participants  believed  that  less  capital  was 
needed. Because the amount of capital held by financial institutions on their balance sheets 
was  so  small,  productivity  in  the  financial  sector  looked  as  though  it  had  increased 
dramatically  when  the  amount  of  securitization  and  other  off-balance-sheet  activities  (for 
example,  derivatives)  increased.  But  many  of  those  off-balance-sheet  instruments  came 
back  onto  the  balance  sheet  when  markets  started  to  seize  up.  Finally,  many  market 
participants  also  had  inadequate  liquidity  backstops,  apparently  because  they  (wrongly) 
assumed  that  markets  would  be  sufficiently  liquid  to  smoothly  adjust  risk  profiles  to  new 
developments in markets and the broader economy. Thus, capital and liquidity cushions fell 
short of what was needed for the complexity of instruments that were created, for the funding 
risks being incurred, and for the broad array of market and other risks to the firms and to the 
financial system more generally. Systemic risk is an externality that results from exposures 
that cannot be diversified away. 
2 
 BIS Review 137/2008
The financial turmoil that we have been experiencing for more than a year originated in the 
market for subprime mortgages, in which the combination of falling house prices and poor 
underwriting  standards  triggered  a  rapid  rise  in  delinquencies.  Multilayered  securitizations 
made it more difficult to implement loan modifications and other time-honored mechanisms to 
reduce default costs and other negative consequences of foreclosures. What has occurred 
since then has revealed how closely interwoven the global array of highly leveraged financial 
structures  and  investors  had  become.  Risk  did  not  go  away  when  it  was  sliced  and  diced 
across market participants, and it was not as distributed and diversified as had been thought 
– in short, the amount of capital to insure against such risks should not have been reduced 
as  much  as  it  was.  With  the  viability  of  counterparties  in  question,  financial  institutions 
needed  to  conserve  capital  and  liquidity.  Perceptions  of  inadequate  capital  and  liquidity 
cushions  sparked  a  flight  to  liquidity  and  safety  by  those  lending  to  financial  institutions, 
beginning an unwinding of leverage that, in turn, has exacerbated economic weakness. As 
the market price of risk increased, more capital was needed for risks that had already been 
undertaken.  The  financial  decelerator  engaged:  Households  and  businesses  needed  more 
collateral  and  net  worth  to  qualify  for  loans;  lenders,  in  turn,  needed  more  collateral  and 
capital  to  back  their  own  liabilities,  which  had  become  more  costly  to  issue.  The  resulting 
tightening of lending terms and conditions and reduction in credit availability has restrained 
spending – first in housing and then, as financial distress spread, in many other sectors. 
Robust,  dynamic  markets  are  the  lifeblood  of  market  economies.  They  are  the  source  of 
rising productivity and, as such, of increasing standards of living. But the dynamic functioning 
of markets also means that productivity advances will not necessarily occur smoothly – and, 
indeed,  are 
involve  some  cyclical  overshooting  and  undershooting,  often 
exacerbated by waves of optimism and pessimism that seem to be inherent in human nature. 
Innovation by its nature is risky; some innovations work better than others, and, thus, some 
new ideas and the businesses that invest in or use them must be allowed to fail.  
In many instances, these cyclical swings in productivity – such as the boom and bust in high-
technology  investment  in  the  late  1990s  –  occur  in  sectors  with  limited  spillovers  to  the 
functioning  of  the  financial  markets.  Risks  are  borne  by  private  investors  who  reap  the 
rewards or bear the losses associated with the economic outcomes of their investments. And 
they  are  often  funded  by  equity,  not  debt,  so  financial  intermediaries  are  not  at  risk.  The 
gains to aggregate economic activity from successful innovation – as in the high-tech case – 
are  realized  over  time.  When  overinvestment  occurs,  market  returns  respond,  new 
investment slows, and the capital stock eventually adjusts. In the end, productivity is higher 
than it would have been otherwise. 
In contrast, as we have seen, when the innovations heavily involve the financial sector, the 
unwinding of any resulting boom can quickly begin to entail more far-reaching and deeper 
effects  on  the  functioning  of  credit  markets  and,  thus,  can  pose  a  more  serious  threat  to 
economic stability. Although we are far from having written the final chapter on the current 
situation, we can identify several challenges that it has raised for central banks. 
likely 
to 
The challenges for central banks 
The  most  immediate  and  important  challenge  is  to  take  actions  that  will  help  restore  the 
financial system to productive functioning and put our economies on a path to growth and 
price stability. Government authorities and central banks have responded to the current crisis 
with forceful and innovative measures to rebuild confidence in the financial system, improve 
the ability of financial institutions to raise capital from private sources, and free up the flow of 
credit  to  businesses  and  households.  For  central  banks,  these  measures  have  entailed 
lowering policy interest rates and opening or expanding liquidity facilities to banks and others 
to  augment  the  credit  that  private  parties  are  unable  or  unwilling  to  extend  to  each  other. 
Although we have seen signs of improvement, financial market functioning remains impaired 
BIS Review 137/2008 
 3
in many ways, and we will need to continue to consider whether additional steps are needed 
to re-open credit flows and support the economy.  
When,  in  the  future,  the  financial  system  stabilizes  and  our  economies  start  to  recover, 
central banks will need to decide how best to phase out these extraordinary liquidity actions 
and  credit-market  interventions.  In  many  cases,  the  rates  charged  for  credit  under  these 
facilities  have  been  set  to  be  attractive  when  markets  are  disrupted,  but  uneconomical  for 
users  once  more-normal  functioning  returns,  and  usage  should  naturally  decline  as  risk-
taking returns. But, in addition, we will need to decide the appropriate timing of the winding-
down of many of the special lending facilities. The actions taken by the Federal Reserve to 
intervene  directly  in  some  financial  markets,  such  as  the  commercial  paper  market,  are 
clearly emergency operations only. Except in the most extreme circumstances, when market 
functioning  breaks  down  and  systemic  risk  reaches  unacceptable  levels,  central  banks 
should  distance  themselves  from  decisions  about  the  allocation  of  credit  among  private 
parties.  
The most critical challenge policymakers are facing involves deciding what steps they can 
take  to  minimize  the  risk  that  such  a  severe  financial  crisis  will  be  repeated.  To  this  end, 
central banks are already considering what lessons they can draw from their experiences for 
the  design  of  their  policy  instruments  in  a  financial  environment  where  borders  between 
countries,  institutions,  and  instruments  have  all  eroded,  producing  tight  linkages  among 
previously disparate markets. Some of what we have done – for example, swaps with other 
central banks and auctions of discount window credit – might be part of our permanent tool 
kit, kept on standby to contain the effects of a future emergency.  
As I indicated in my opening remarks, we must improve our understanding of the financial 
structure and, as it evolves, of where it may be vulnerable when stressed. In broad terms, 
policymakers  must  look  for  ways  to  identify  those  waves  of  innovation  and  expansion  in 
financial services – or in any other sector, for that matter – that may be accompanied by a 
buildup of destabilizing forces, such as rapidly rising asset prices or excessive leverage. We 
should  not  underestimate  the  difficulty  of  this  problem.  As  the  recent  financial  boom 
continued,  many  policymakers  did  indeed  worry  about  the  overpricing  of  houses  and  the 
underpricing of risk, but we were only partly successful in identifying the circumstances and 
channels  that  have  seemed  to  trigger  the  most  distress.  Almost  by  definition,  it  is  the 
unanticipated event that causes the most problems.  
And the way financial turmoil resonated through the global financial system indicates that the 
linkages  among 
interdependent 
counterparty  relationships,  and  backup  liquidity  agreements  propagated  and  intensified 
financial  distress  in  ways  neither  the  private  nor  the  public  sector  understood  very  well. 
Clearly, to improve the likelihood that we can contain systemic risk, we need to continue to 
learn more about financial products and market functioning. 
A  related  challenge  is  to  improve  our  understanding  of  the  linkages  between  the  financial 
sector and real activity. The recent experience indicates that we did not fully appreciate how 
financial innovation interacted with the channels of credit to affect real economic activity – 
both  as  credit  and  activity  expanded  and  as  they  have  contracted.  In  this  regard,  the 
macroeconomic models that have been used by central banks to inform their monetary policy 
decisions  are  clearly 
if  any,  complex 
relationships among financial institutions or the financial-accelerator effects and other credit 
interactions  that  are  now  causing  stresses  in  financial  markets  to  spill  over  to  the  real 
economy. Rather, these models abstract from institutional arrangements and focus on a few 
simple  asset-arbitrage 
recent 
developments in both credit volumes and risk premiums. Economists at central banks and in 
academia will need to devote much effort to overcoming these deficiencies in coming years. 
However  these  models  are  adapted,  recent  events  suggest  that  central  banks  should  be 
wary of placing too much faith in model-based analyses, which are necessarily predicated on 
inadequate.  These  models 
incapable  of  explaining 
lenders  and  borrowers 
leverage,  complex 
relationships, 
incorporate 
through 
leaving 
them 
few, 
4 
 BIS Review 137/2008
past  empirical  correlations  and  relationships.  As  we  have  seen,  financial  innovation  can 
induce  structural  changes  that  can  importantly  alter  the  way  financial  institutions,  markets, 
and the broader economy respond to shocks. For this reason, policymakers should take a 
critical  approach  to  evaluating  analyses  of  this  sort,  and  should  always  probe  to  find  the 
sensitivity of results to unstated assumptions that may no longer be valid.  
Given  our  limited  understanding,  the  first  line  of  defense  against  systemic  risk  must  be 
building more robust and resilient financial systems. Private parties are doing a great deal to 
increase  capital  and  liquidity  and  enhance  risk-management  practices.  But  policymakers 
must  also  adapt  their  supervisory  and  regulatory  structures  to  promote  a  robust  financial 
system that can withstand occasional shocks, even severe ones, without systemic problems 
that become destabilizing. We must ensure that financial firms – especially those central to 
the  functioning  of  our  highly  interlinked  markets  –  have  sufficient  capital,  liquidity,  and 
management  resources  to  back  financial  intermediation  activities  both  on  and  off  their 
balance sheets. Another important consideration should be to make sure that our regulatory 
policies do not exacerbate credit and business cycles. And we should be considering ways to 
promote transparency that would enhance market functioning and the ability of investors to 
bring their own discipline to bear on decisions to buy and sell. A central challenge will be to 
structure financial oversight to both deter unwanted and excessive risk-taking and permit the 
innovation that can ultimately boost economic growth. Because central banks are ultimately 
responsible  for  financial  stability,  they  must  work  closely  with  legislators  and  with  other 
supervisory authorities at home and abroad to ensure that these goals are met. 
Can the conduct of monetary policy also be adapted to reduce the odds of systemic financial 
events, and should the manipulation of short-term interest rates take account of the potential 
for imbalances and price bubbles as well as the traditional objectives of price stability and 
economic growth? Here I think the lessons of the current episode need to be studied further.  
Before  the  recent  experience,  I  believed  that  the  appropriate  strategy  for  conventional 
monetary  policy  was  to  focus  exclusively  on  the  stability  of  economic  activity  and  overall 
prices  for  goods  and  services  over  the  next  several  years.  Under  such  a  policy,  a  central 
bank would respond to signs of a potentially destabilizing rise in asset prices or leverage by 
incorporating  the  implications  of  those  developments  for  future  output  and  inflation  into  its 
deliberations.  However,  it  would  not  go  further  and  try  to  lean  against  the  speculative 
component of asset prices per se, on the assumption that such an attempt would likely not 
work. Instead, a central bank would do better to wait for an asset bubble to run its course, 
and then deal with the consequences when values inevitably returned to normal. This is how 
the Federal Reserve thought about asset markets as it made monetary policy.  
Whether a different approach would have produced a better outcome is still in my view an 
open  question.  Would  somewhat  higher  interest  rates  a  few  years  ago  have  damped  the 
speculation in housing and the deterioration of lending standards? Have we learned enough 
about the formation and propagation of credit-market problems to identify them in a timely 
manner?  Are  we  able  to  look  sufficiently  far  enough  ahead  to  be  reasonably  certain  that 
responding to a perceived speculative boom with tighter monetary policy will yield longer-run 
benefits  without  undue  shorter-run  costs?  I  believe  the  answers  to  these  critical  questions 
are still unclear.  
Certainly,  policymakers  at  central  banks  and  elsewhere  have  a  full  agenda  before  them.  I 
have been encouraged by the way in which governments around the globe have collaborated 
to craft new approaches to problems. A continued spirit of cooperation can help as we face 
the challenges that this panel is discussing. Our economies have proved resilient in the face 
of  other  economic  shocks,  and  I  am  certain  that  we  will  ultimately  succeed  in  restoring  a 
stronger and more robust financial system that can support solid and sustainable economic 
expansion.  
BIS Review 137/2008 
 5
