Lars Nyberg: Challenges following the current crisis 
Keynote address by Mr Lars Nyberg, Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the 12th 
annual  conference  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile  “Financial  stability,  monetary  policy  and 
central banking”, Santiago, 6 November 2008. 
Johan Molin, adviser at the Riksbank, represented Mr Nyberg in Chile. 
 In the last couple of months we have seen authorities all around the globe taking massive 
actions  to  deal  with  the  current  financial  crisis.  Few  countries  are  spared  as  the  crisis 
spreads over the world, not even those that have not been directly exposed to the problems 
that  initially  triggered  the  crisis.  Never  before  has  a  crisis  had  such  a  widespread  global 
impact as the one we are now witnessing. This obviously puts governments, central banks 
and supervisors in a somewhat new position as they have to deal with the challenges that 
financial globalisation entails. 
Needless to say, these challenges are huge. Today I will only be able to address some of the 
issues that we will have to deal with when the crisis is eventually over. I will also try to give 
my views on what the lessons from the crisis imply for the central banks’ work on analysing 
financial stability and systemic risks. However, let me first say a few words about the context 
of the crisis. 
Context of the crisis 
When the crisis was triggered it happened in a quite traditional way. As in the case of many 
historic crises, the underlying problem was that credit losses in the financial sector turned out 
to be much larger than anticipated. However, as the crisis has evolved over the last one and 
half years, the problems have come to be less about credit risks and more about the adverse 
consequences  of  a  global  financial  industry  experiencing  a  quite  substantial  deleveraging 
process. 
The huge credit expansion and financial asset growth that preceded the crisis was facilitated 
by  that  many  financial  institutions  were  assuming  high  levels  of  debt,  in  many  cases 
obviously  at  unsustainable  levels.  These  institutions  are  now  trying  to  decrease  their 
leverage either by injecting more capital – or if that is not possible – by shrinking in size.  
To shrink institutions simply must sell off assets. This is currently being done on a huge scale 
by institutions all over the world and explains why financial markets are so strained at the 
moment. On the supply side there are a lot of sellers trying to get rid of assets, but on the 
demand side – due to low credit supply and high risk aversion – there are hardly any buyers. 
As  a  result,  pricing  is  disrupted  and  liquidity  drastically  decreased,  which  in  turn  implies 
falling asset values and further losses in the financial industry. 
The fact that the problems to a large extent have been driven by financial markets breaking 
down, rather than by individual institutions credit risk exposures, explains the unprecedented 
international impact of the crisis. Globally interconnected markets have resulted in a situation 
in  which  financial  institutions  everywhere  have  been  hit,  even  if  not  exposed  to  the 
institutions or assets at the core of the crisis. My home country Sweden is a good example of 
this. 
What  we  have  witnessed  in  recent  months,  since  the  default  of  Lehman  Brothers,  is  the 
acute phase of a global financial crisis. To respond, authorities have taken action to prevent 
a  systemic  break  down  of  the  financial  system.  Both  the  US  and  the  EU  have  delivered 
financial  support  plans  committing  governments  and  central  banks  to  providing  the 
necessary support to the financial industry. 
BIS Review 134/2008 
 1
These  plans  are  now  being  implemented  and  we  cannot  yet  be  certain  of  their  success. 
However, in my view, the support plans contain the necessary measures to solve the most 
critical  issue  right  now,  namely  to  restore  market  confidence  by  providing  guarantees  to 
creditors  that  their  money  will  be  repaid.  Therefore,  the  prospects  for  restoring  financial 
stability  and  enhancing  the  availability  of  credit  for  firms  and  households  should  be  good. 
That  the  support  plans  also  provide  measures  for  government  capital  injections  and 
takeovers  is  obviously  good,  but  for  the  purpose  of  getting  markets  to  function  properly 
ownership issues really are of secondary importance. After all, what creditors are looking for 
is to get their money back. To them it should not really matter from where or from whom that 
money comes.  
Even if it is too early to tell, we can see that the financial support plans have contributed to a 
certain  degree  of  recovery  in  the  markets.  Interbank  rates  are  falling,  credit  spreads  are 
narrowing  and  liquidity  is  returning  in  some  markets.  However,  most  of  the  content  of  the 
support plans is directed at handling the most pressing problems in the financial system. In 
the longer term other measures will be needed, and this is what I will discuss now.  
What are the future challenges? 
Let me first say that we need to realise that times of financial turbulence are unavoidable and 
something that we have to learn to live with. What is important is that we learn from previous 
experiences and use this knowledge to lower the probability of future crises occurring, and 
when they actually do happen, to mitigate their costs.  
We also need to realise that despite the many similarities between various crises they are 
never  exactly  the  same.  Therefore,  flexibility  is  needed  in  the  policy  frameworks  aimed  at 
preventing and managing financial crisis.  
If I may start on the prevention side, it is hard – given the present circumstances – not to get 
in  to  a  discussion  of  what  role  monetary  policy  can  play  in  preventing  the  build  up  of 
economic imbalances.  
Crisis prevention – the role of monetary policy… 
In recent years, perhaps the most influential view of how monetary policy should respond to 
a rapid increase in the price of an asset, and a possible associated credit expansion, can be 
described as follows. Let us, for simplicity, say that we are talking about an increase in house 
prices that has gone hand in hand with a substantial increase in household indebtedness. 
Monetary policy should only respond to a rapid increase in house prices and borrowing if the 
central  bank’s  forecasts  indicate  that  it  will  lead  to  problems  such  as  overheating  and 
excessively high inflation. If this is not the case, the central bank should wait and see, but be 
prepared to quickly ease monetary policy if the housing market were to collapse and demand 
in  the  economy  were  to  fall  drastically.  The  main  argument  for  such  an  “asymmetric” 
response  would  be  that  central  banks  are  not  especially  good  judges  of  whether  there 
actually is an asset bubble or not.  
The fact that bubbles are difficult to identify is of course true. Nevertheless, house prices and 
borrowing  can  in  some  cases  rise  so  quickly  and  by  so  much  that  it  is  difficult  for 
policymakers to remain entirely passive – even if it is not possible to ascertain that there is a 
bubble building up. If a severe downward adjustment in house prices were to occur later on, 
it  is  probable  that  monetary  policy  would  receive  much  of  the  blame  for  having  been  too 
passive earlier. 
Essentially, it all comes down to a choice between two alternatives. On the one hand, central 
banks can try to slow down a worryingly rapid price rise in the housing market by keeping 
interest  rates  higher  than  they  otherwise  would  have  been.  The  obvious  risk  is  that  if 
increasing  prices  actually  are  driven  by  fundamentals,  then  an  incorrect  assessment  has 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2008
been  made  and  demand  in  the  economy  will  be  subdued  unnecessarily.  But  if  the 
assessment was correct, a rapid downward correction in house prices may be avoided, or at 
least mitigated, as well as a subsequent fall in demand. 
On the other hand, central banks can disregard the fears and refrain from raising the interest 
rate. If price increases in this case are due to fundamentals a needless slow down in demand 
will be avoided. But if prices are due, for instance, to over-optimism among households and 
lenders,  then  severe  problems  may  occur  in  the  future  when  there  is  a  rapid  downward 
adjustment of house prices and a subsequent fall in demand and inflation. 
Which  of  the  two  alternatives  is  preferable  can  always  be  discussed,  and  may  quite  likely 
vary from case to case. However, it is far from obvious that the best choice is always to wait 
and see when facing a rapid increase in the price of houses or some other asset. In fact, 
many  observers  argue  that  an  important  factor  behind  the  current  financial  crisis  was  that 
interest rates were being kept too low for too long. Hence, the approach of “wait and see” 
and  “clean  up  the  mess  afterwards”  is  increasingly  being  called  into  question,  not  least 
because “the mess afterwards” might be quite severe if the central banks have been passive 
during the build-up phase. This holds especially true if the price bubble has been associated 
with an expansion of credit. In most cases it is credit – not asset prices as such – that is the 
main worry 
Having said that, I want to emphasise that monetary policy is perhaps not the most efficient 
instrument for preventing crises from happening. Even though a too loose monetary policy 
may contribute to the build-up of a bubble, it is less clear to what extent monetary policy can 
prevent such a build-up. It is quite likely that substantial interest rate increases, that central 
banks would find it hard to implement, would be required to achieve this. More moderate rate 
increases  may  of  course  still  have  an  effect  at  the  margin,  not  least  as  a  signal  from  the 
central bank that there are certain concerns linked to prevailing developments. But a more 
capable  line  of  defence  to  prevent  financial  crises  is  to  have  proper  rules  and  effective 
supervision in place. 
…and regulation and supervision 
However,  both  the  present  and  previous  crises  tell  us  stories  about  ineffective  and 
misdirected regulation, as well as insufficient supervision. My point of view is that the need 
for policy response is not so much about imposing more and heavier regulations, but instead 
about improving and developing existing ones. When doing so, two conditions must be met: 
first, some kind of market failure has to be proven, and second, the benefits of imposing new 
rules must exceed the economic costs. 
Given recent events, there are numerous regulatory issues to discuss within this context. In 
many cases work has already started. For example, how to achieve better management and 
supervision  of  liquidity  risk  as  well  as  greater  transparency  in  the  financial  sector  are 
important matters currently under review. Further issues include regulatory treatment of the 
originate-and-distribute model and off-balance sheet entities, as well as procyclical elements 
in regulation.  
Of particular interest is the issue of clearing and settlement arrangements in the unregulated 
credit derivative markets. One partial explanation of the uncertainty that has prevailed in the 
financial  system  recently  is  the  absence  of  a  resilient  infrastructure  for  these  markets.  No 
central  counterparties  have  existed  and  there  has  been  no  common  market  place  for 
exchanging these instruments. As a result, trading has been fragmented and opaque, which 
in  turn  has  implied  that  nobody  has  really  known  where  the  credit  risks  are  and  few  have 
realised  that  these  risks  –  directly  or  indirectly  –  actually  have  remained  on  the  banks’ 
balance sheets.  
Clearly, there are many issues on the agenda and the course of events over the past year 
has  underscored  the  need  to  get  to  work.  But  let  me  stress  one  thing  very  clearly:  it  is 
BIS Review 134/2008 
 3
important that we get neither too zealous nor to indulgent about regulation. In times such as 
these, it is easy for opportunism to gain the upper hand, resulting in regulations that do more 
harm  than  good.  For  example,  I  am  a  little  bit  worried  about  where  the  discussion  on 
procyclicality is heading. Suggestions have been made that both Basel-rules and fair value 
accounting  standards  should  be  relaxed  to  cut  the  banks  some  slack  under  stressed 
circumstances. In my opinion, this seems like a very hazardous way forward. 
I am also worried about what I in some instances have seen being proposed with regard to 
the regulation of credit rating agencies. In can agree that in certain aspects regulation in this 
area could be considered, for instance in relation to the use of credit ratings for regulatory 
purposes and also concerning some governance issues. But for me, it is quite hard to see 
how  a  more  general  regulatory  intervention  in  this  particular  area  could  be  justified.  There 
seems to be neither any proof of an existing market failure, nor any convincing assessments 
on  the  benefits  of  imposing  rules.  On  the  contrary,  as  the  credit  rating  business  strongly 
builds  on  the  confidence  of  those  using  the  ratings,  market  mechanisms  should  be  quite 
enough to provide an efficient output. If agencies cannot deliver qualitative and reliable credit 
assessments they will soon go out of business. Therefore, the agencies' incentives to do a 
proper job should be quite enough without regulation.  
Crisis management – preparedness needs to be strengthened 
Another  issue  that  I  believe  needs  particular  attention  is  how  to  achieve  better  crisis 
preparedness, which means that I am now switching to talk about crisis management issues. 
As on numerous occasions in the past, many countries were ill prepared for this crisis and 
had to rely on ad-hoc solutions for handling it. In the case of the EU, member states quickly 
had  to  reach  an  improvised  agreement  on  a  co-ordinated  and  comprehensive  financial 
support plan. We have had the same situation in Sweden, both when we had a crisis in the 
early  90s  and,  more  surprisingly,  even  now.  Despite  the  quite  recent  experience  of  a 
systemic crisis, legislators had not been able to get a proper framework for the management 
and closure of distressed banks in place. Thus, also this time we had to rely on improvised 
solutions. 
Even if these ad-hoc measures often seem to work out pretty well there is no guarantee that 
they  will  do  so  consistently.  To  let  financial  system  stability  become  the  hostage  of 
improvised political processes is obviously not an optimal order. Experience from previous 
crises  also  shows  that  improvised  crisis  management  measures  often  come  too  late,  are 
inadequate, and ultimately turn out to be more costly then they would have needed to be. I 
would say that British Northern Rock is the perfect example of all this. 
So, what is it that we need in order to achieve better crisis preparedness? 
As I just indicated, one important requirement is to have in place solid frameworks for the 
management  and  closure  of  distressed  banks.  Such  frameworks  include  several  different 
aspects, everything from deposit guarantee schemes to insolvency procedures. Basically, it 
is a quite technical mix of legal and financial measures which can look rather different from 
country to country. However, the basic concept applies to all. Frameworks should facilitate 
the quick and efficient closure of banks at a low cost to the deposit guarantee system, while 
making  shareholders  and  uninsured  creditors  bear  the  responsibility  for  their  investment 
decisions.  It  must  also  allow  for  special  measures  to  be  taken  in  the  exceptional  situation 
where the failure of a bank risks destabilising the financial system as a whole. Also in such 
situations,  the  government  needs  to  have  a  strong  negotiating  position  relative  to  the 
shareholders. Necessary ingredients for achieving all this are to allow distressed banks to be 
put  under  special  receivership  and  to  enable  governments  to  issue  guarantees  and  make 
capital  injections.  As  a  countermeasure  the  government  obviously  needs  to  have  far-
reaching authority to take control of the institution, for example by requiring the compulsory 
sale of shares. 
4 
 BIS Review 134/2008
With  regard  to  central  banks  there  is  also  reason  to  contemplate  how  crisis  preparedness 
can be improved. For example, we need to consider how appropriate flexibility is achieved in 
the central banks’ operational frameworks to deal with extraordinary situations. Having said 
that, I would like to add that central banks have managed quite well to quickly adapt to the 
unprecedented circumstances in markets. Still, deeper thought has to be dedicated to these 
issues when time eventually allows.  
As  a  final  remark  on  preparedness  I  would  like  to  stress  the  importance  of  practice.  No 
matter  how  sophisticated  crisis  management  arrangements  are,  they  have  to  be  deployed 
properly by the authorities using them. However, since financial crises thankfully are pretty 
rare  events,  people  working  in  these  authorities  probably  are  not  going  to  be  particularly 
used  to  doing  that.  But  with  appropriate  practice,  crisis  management  skills  can  be 
substantially improved. In my own organisation we regularly perform crisis exercises, both on 
our  own  and  in  cooperation  with  other  relevant  authorities  and  countries.  These  exercises 
have  not  only  helped  to  improve  the  staffs’  skills  significantly,  they  have  also  provided 
important lessons on how different crisis management practices could be improved.  
One  such  lesson  has  been  that  a  higher  degree  of  international  coordination  and 
harmonisation is needed, a lesson that has certainly been confirmed by the current crisis. 
International co-operation and harmonisation is needed 
The need for greater cross-border cooperation pretty much applies to all of the issues I have 
touched upon so far, both regarding the prevention and the management of financial crises.  
Taking Europe as an example, it has become quite obvious in the last year that the diverging 
national  structures  of  frameworks  for  regulation,  supervision  and  crisis  management  have 
complicated  the  management  of  the  current  crisis.  The  existing  voluntary  agreements  for 
crisis management in the EU have proven not to be extremely helpful. Concrete and binding 
arrangements are instead needed in order to achieve better preparedness and co-ordinated 
crisis  responses.  Luckily,  this  time  policymakers  around  Europe  eventually  realised  that  a 
coordinated crisis response was a necessity. 
Partly  because  of  this  experience,  the  EU  has  initiated  work  to  review  how  the  EU’s 
supervisory framework can be reformed to better cope with the financial market integration. 
Exactly what this work will include is still unclear, but it is highly welcome that the issue has 
been  placed  on  the  agenda.  However,  I  would  like  to  add  that  –  because  of  the  close 
interaction between crisis prevention and management issues – it will not be sufficient to deal 
only with supervisory issues. Arrangements for deposit guarantee schemes and other crisis 
management tools need to be considered within the same international context. Of particular 
interest  is  the  sensitive  issue  of  how  to  distribute  the  burdens  associated  with  managing 
cross-border crises, which will inevitably be brought to the table if proposals for supranational 
supervision  enter  the  debate.  After  all,  who  would  like  to  share  crisis  management 
responsibilities without getting any supervisory powers in return? 
Implications for the central banks’ work on analysing financial stability and systemic 
risks 
I will now say a few words about the central banks’ work on analysing financial stability and 
systemic risks. Given the current conditions one may ask if such analysis is at all meaningful. 
Even if many central banks prior to the crisis pointed at single factors as potential threats to 
financial system stability, no one really managed to anticipate the situation now at hand. But 
does  this  really  mean  that  all  work  on  analysing  financial  stability  and  systemic  risks  is  in 
vain? Obviously, my answer to that question is no. I would rather say that the work in this 
area is more important than ever. However, as we gain new insights from the current crisis, 
we have to consider how the analysis could be developed. The obvious conclusion is that the 
analysis has to be broadened in order to cover all the relevant parts of the financial system 
BIS Review 134/2008 
 5
and  how  they  interact.  I  will  try  to  give  you  some  of  my  thoughts  on  how  this  can  be 
achieved.  
First, and perhaps most important, one lesson from the current crisis is that the traditional 
approach  to  analysing  institutions,  markets  and  infrastructure  separately  is  no  longer 
sufficient.  Recent  experience  shows  that  in  the  new  global  financial  landscape  the 
importance  of  markets  for  system  stability  has  increased  dramatically.  The  financial 
contagion we have seen is largely a result of certain markets deteriorating and subsequently 
affecting institutions and markets far from where the problems first emerged. To analyse and 
understand  the  interplay  between  institutions,  markets  and  infrastructure  and  the  potential 
contagion channels between them is a key factor for successful systemic risk analyses. 
The banks' increased dependency on financial markets to fund their operations also creates 
a need to keep an even closer eye on certain markets, and in particular the credit markets, 
which banks not only use for their funding needs but also to manage risks. 
The greater market dependency also entails the need to apply a greater international outlook 
in  our  analysis.  Even  if  a  country’s  financial  system  is  dominated  by  a  few  domestic 
institutions with limited operations abroad, they can evidently still suffer from the breakdown 
of  institutions  and  markets  elsewhere.  However,  a  wider  geographical  focus  is  not  only 
justified by the growing importance of markets. Over the last decade, institutions have also 
become more international. In Europe, for example, we now have a few truly pan-European 
banks and even more that operate across borders on a regional basis.  
Furthermore, in the last year we have seen that not only deposit-taking commercial banks 
can pose threats to financial system stability. Events in the US tell us that a broad array of 
other  financial  institutions,  such  as  investment  banks,  monolines  and  the  banks’  various 
kinds of special purpose vehicles have contributed to the build up of imbalances. Therefore, 
analytical  focus  is  needed  not  only  on  commercial  banks  but  also  on  their  different 
counterparties. 
Another  lesson  for  central  banks  I  would  say  is  to  use  their  expertise  to  work  more 
proactively  on  financial  stability  policy  issues. The  current  crisis  –  as  well  as  most  historic 
ones – can partly be explained by regulatory failures. Central banks have a big responsibility 
to make sure that such failures are avoided. For example, we should promote regulation that 
favours  efficiency  and  counters  undue  risk-taking.  We  should  also  try  to  make  sure  that 
regulation is designed in such a way that there is no scope for circumventing regulation in 
order to avoid costs or administrative burdens. 
Last but not least, greater international co-operation and harmonisation is desirable also in 
the analytical field, as this would help to provide a more comprehensive global surveillance of 
financial stability and facilitate coordinated policy responses to financial turbulence. To this 
end, it is very welcome that the Financial Stability Forum and the IMF will intensify their co-
operation in order to develop the assessments of financial stability risks on a global scale. 
Within  the  European  Union,  successful  efforts  have  been  made  to  establish  a  common 
framework for assessing the systemic implications of cross-border crises. The main purpose 
of this framework is to serve as a common language between authorities and countries for 
discussing  the  systemic  impact  of  a  financial  crisis,  thereby  enabling  them  to  reach  a 
common view on the economic impacts of any particular crisis. 
This framework is still quite fresh and has not yet been implemented in most EU countries. 
Therefore,  its  use  has  been  limited  in  the  current  crisis.  However,  when  it  is  eventually 
implemented I am convinced that it will contribute significantly to the common understanding 
of the dynamics and implications of financial crises. I would therefore like to encourage more 
countries to follow the initiative taken by the EU countries. 
6 
 BIS Review 134/2008
Concluding remark 
Let me now conclude. 
The crisis we have seen over the last one and a half years will most likely redraw the global 
financial landscape in various ways. And even if the recent measures taken by governments 
and central banks have improved market conditions somewhat, it is far from certain that the 
crisis will be over any time soon. What will come out at the other end of the crisis is also still 
much too early to tell. 
Today, I have given you my views on some of the issues that need to be dealt with in the 
aftermath of this crisis. It all adds up to a quite significant to-do list, including various aspects 
of  regulation,  crisis  preparedness,  central  bank  policy  and  assessment  and  so  on  and  so 
forth. It will most certainly take time before we can put an end to these discussions. 
In the meantime, the financial industry and the responsible authorities have to make certain 
that the costs of the prevailing financial turbulence are kept as low as possible. For me, as a 
central banker, this task translates into standing by the commitment to provide key markets 
and  sound  institutions  with  the  liquidity  needed  to  ensure  that  the  financial  system  can 
function properly. 
Thank you! 
BIS Review 134/2008 
 7
