Christian Noyer: Some thoughts on the crisis  
Address  by  Mr  Christian  Noyer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  France,  to  the  Congress  of  the 
National Federation of the Crédit Agricole, Nice, 21 October 2008. 
 Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to participate in the Congress of the National Federation of the 
Crédit Agricole. I am happy to be here, surrounded by colleagues and friends in the unique 
atmosphere  that  characterises  your  meetings.  Nowhere  else  is  there  such  a  blend  of 
conviviality and the greatest professionalism. That is why I would like to take this opportunity 
to present to you some thoughts on the current situation. 
For over a year, the global financial system has been in crisis. The crisis is not over. But, as 
you know, everything is being done to contain its effects. And central banks are at the very 
forefront of this combat. 
It  is  still  too  early  to  draw  all  the  lessons  from  these  events.  It  is  however  vital  to  start 
reflecting on the experience of the last few months. Even more in periods of tension than in 
normal times, action and reflection should reinforce one another. It is at the very moment of 
managing the current crisis that we lay the foundations for the future financial system. I am 
very happy to be able to share a few thoughts with you and in your company. 
I propose to explore four avenues: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The nature of the financial crisis 
The policies implemented to address it 
The macroeconomic outlook 
The outlook for financial regulation 
The nature of the crisis 
The crisis first emerged as a liquidity crisis. The first symptoms appeared as pressures on 
liquidity, which we can trace back to the beginning of August 2007 when serious disruptions 
appeared on the interbank market. More than a year later, these tensions are still present on 
money  markets.  This  is  demonstrated  by  the  abnormal  level  of  spreads,  the  shortening  of 
maturities,  and  the  contraction,  or  even  closure,  of  some  market  segments.  Through 
contagion, these tensions are also affecting non-financial corporations and the financing of 
the  economy:  in  the  United  States  for  example,  even  more  than  in  Europe,  issuing  of 
commercial paper remains very difficult. 
The crisis also emerged as a crisis of securitisation. Securitisation is a very old technique, 
which has been successfully used for 30 years for refinancing automobile loans, consumer 
credit, and (yes!) housing loans. For the past 10 years, however, it has also been used in 
more  debatable  circumstances,  i.e.  in  the  very  short-term  financing  of  complex  and 
structured products that are wholly illiquid and whose value is very uncertain as it is mostly 
determined by theoretical models. 
Such structures are intrinsically vulnerable and fragile. This fragility was doubly masked by 
the abundance of liquidity and the actions of some market intermediaries, particularly rating 
agencies and monocline insurers. 
When money was abundant, even debt of poor quality or uncertain value could be refinanced 
easily. This was especially the case since the quality of this debt was artificially boosted by a 
favourable rating and an insurance guarantee. With the first defaults on subprime loans, all of 
BIS Review 130/2008 
 1
these protections quickly fell apart. Liquidity – and this is one of its characteristics – dried up 
much  more  quickly  than  it  had  appeared.  There  was  a  flood  of  rating  downgrades  by 
agencies, which occurred at a speed and above all suddenness that nothing, in the metrics 
or  methodology  used,  could  have  suggested.  Lastly,  it  quickly  emerged  that  the  capital  of 
monoline  insurers  was  highly  insufficient  to  enable  them  to  honour  the  commitments  they 
had entered into. 
It then became apparent that, far from being spread across the whole system, credit risk was 
implicitly or explicitly concentrated in the hands of specific institutions, foremost among which 
were  the  major  investment  banks.  Hence  the  successive  waves  of  depreciations  of 
structured  products,  imposed  by  the  accounting  rules  in  force,  with  these  depreciations  in 
turn  fuelling  doubts  about  banks’  solvency,  liquidity  constraints  and  further  falls  in  asset 
prices. This negative spiral is still continuing today. 
The  collapse  of  structured  securitisation  has  highlighted  a  fundamental  reality.  To  a  great 
extent, the financial innovation of the past few years has served not to manage and spread 
risk better, but to increase the volume of credit per unit of capital, referred to as leverage. 
The  increase  in  leverage  has  appeared  everywhere:  in  the  expansion  of  banks’  balance 
sheets; in the proliferation of off-balance sheet vehicles that for the most part operate without 
own funds, i.e. with infinite leverage; lastly, as I have said, in the use of the limited capital of 
monoline insurers to guarantee a large volume of structured products. 
One  well-known  feature  of  leverage  is  that  it  amplifies  both  gains  and  losses.  For  many 
years,  the  US  property  boom  provided  substantial  returns  on  investment.  But  with  the 
turnaround in the market, very considerable depreciations have been recorded on structured 
products,  which,  for  many  banks,  have  exceeded  their  level  of  capital.  Their  inability  to 
recapitalise has led to the failure of some of them. 
How, in this environment, can we assess the state and performance of our banks? They are, 
of course, not immune to the crisis. They have direct or indirect exposures (notably via US 
monolines)  to  structured  products.  They  have  had  to  make  write-downs,  sometimes 
substantial ones. They are also suffering the impact of the drying up of liquidity, the seizing 
up of some markets and, more generally, the rise in their refinancing costs. 
That  said,  our  banks  are  sound  and  profitable.  It  is  worth  recalling  four  facts  that,  in  the 
current turmoil, are sometimes overlooked: 
First, the solvency ratios of French banks are high, well above the minimum requirements set 
by prudential regulation and the levels of their European competitors; 
Second, overall our banks remain profitable: over EUR 7 billion in the first half of 2008. We 
are ensuring that these earnings are reported using the strictest standards. In all likelihood, 
this trend – of lower but positive profits – should continue for the rest of the year. 
Third, our banks have regular sources of income. They are universal banks. This sets them 
apart from banks in some other countries that depend exclusively, or for the most part, on the 
financial  markets.  Our  banks  have sound  and  revolving  sources  of  future  profits. This  is  a 
vital asset at a time when it is difficult to raise capital by issuing shares on the market. 
Lastly, the “manoeuvrability” of our banks remains excellent and they are now ready to play 
their role in the possible restructuring of the international financial sector. 
These  facts  give  me  reason  for  confidence.  Beyond  the  sometimes  serious  tensions  and 
incidents that have affected the recent period, our banks may be justly proud of the progress 
in terms of productivity and innovation that they have made in the last two decades, which 
now positions them to cope effectively with turmoil that may occur in the future. 
2 
 BIS Review 130/2008
Public policy during the crisis 
Over the past two weeks, we have witnessed a marked change in public policy with regard to 
financial  institutions.  Having  hitherto  been  exclusively  geared  to  providing  liquidity,  public 
intervention  is  now  also  aiming  to  support  banks’  financing  and  own  funds.  This  shift  in 
stance is significant. 
The  problem  of  liquidity  remains  crucial  at  this  stage  of  the  crisis.  Interbank  markets  have 
started to return to normal, but there is still some way to go. To this end, central banks have 
mobilised considerable firepower. 
The action taken in the past two days represents the culmination of a process that has been 
underway for over a year. Central banks have adjusted their operational frameworks in four 
different areas: 
First, the maturity of their facilities has been extended, to help to unfreeze the money market 
beyond the short-term segment. 
Second, the range of eligible counterparties has been broadened to allow adequate provision 
of liquidity throughout the system. 
Third,  the  range  of  assets  eligible  as  collateral  for  refinancing  operations  has  been 
expanded. 
Lastly, extremely close international coordination between the different monetary authorities 
is  ensuring that  the  actions  taken  by  each  of  them  is  part of  a  consistent  overall strategy, 
while taking account of the specific features of each monetary area. 
These  exceptional  measures  should  greatly  contribute  to  restoring  confidence  and  the 
smooth functioning of money markets. All in all, combined with the coordinated cut in policy 
rates on 8 October, they are now enabling European banks to obtain short-term refinancing 
at a rate that is 120 basis points below that of just 10 days ago. 
Governments are also now intervening to support banks' solvency and resilience. Thanks, in 
particular, to France's leading role, Europe is organising itself. Since the Paris Declaration 
issued by the member countries of the euro area, Europe has a sound and consistent action 
plan. It is already being applied and comprises three main aspects. 
First,  the  authorities  are  supporting  the  refinancing  of  banks  by  providing  them  with 
guarantees so that they can, in turn, properly finance the economy. 
Second, very significant reforms of accounting rules are in the process of being finalised. The 
first reform aims to bring the current framework in line with what is best practice in the world 
today: it will allow banks to transfer instruments hitherto booked at market value to portfolios 
where that will no longer be the case. The second will introduce greater flexibility in marked-
to-market accounting rules, allowing assets, whose market is no longer active to be valued at 
amortised historical cost. This will ensure that the valuation of these products is better suited 
to the market conditions that have prevailed for the last few months. 
Lastly, governments have confirmed their support for the recapitalisation of banks. 
In  the  case  of  France,  the  Government  and  Parliament  very  quickly  fleshed  out  these 
European principles as follows: 
New  legislation  provides  for  the  creation  of  a  funding  vehicle,  created  to  guarantee  the 
refinancing  of  banks  for  medium-term  maturities  (up  to  five  years).  This  vehicle,  which  is 
strictly  supervised  by  the  French  Government  and  the  Banque  de  France,  has  a  credit 
capacity of EUR 320 billion. The guarantee is granted for a fee, so that the banks requesting 
it pay costs corresponding to normal market conditions. 
The  law  stipulates  that  a  state-owned  company  has  the  possibility  of  subscribing  to 
subordinated debt issues or preferred shares. 
BIS Review 130/2008 
 3
Work is now underway in the Paris financial centre to prepare the implementation of the new 
internationally accepted accounting rules. 
This  framework  will  enable  our  banks  to  increase  their  solvency  ratios  and  their 
capitalisation.  Did  they  really  need  this?  I  think  it  is  important  to  make  a  clear  distinction 
between two situations. 
The first concerns the specific case of DEXIA, which was hit by its exposure to US monoline 
risks, and for which the recapitalisation with public funds was absolutely necessary. 
The  second  regards  all  the  other  French  banks,  without  exception,  whose  own  funds  are 
sufficient  both  in  terms  of  prudential  requirements  and  in  comparison  with  standards  and 
situations in other developed countries. For our banks, and in contrast with other countries, 
the  aim  of  public  recapitalisation  is  not  to  make  up  for  any  faults  or  weaknesses,  but  to 
anticipate potential problems. We are experiencing exceptional circumstances in which even 
the  most  financially  sound  and  profitable  banks,  as  in  the  case  of  French  banks,  are  not 
certain to find the necessary resources on the market. As long as this uncertainty persists, 
we have to protect our credit system from hazards and preserve its role in the financing of 
the economy. 
The macroeconomic outlook 
Major worries have recently surfaced in public opinion and among analysts concerning the 
economic consequences of the crisis. I understand these worries, but I do not totally share 
them. 
In the short term, I must admit, the outlook is unfavourable. All indicators point to a general 
decline in confidence, both of consumers and investors. This decline is not unique to France; 
on  the  contrary,  it  is  much  stronger  in  our  partner  countries  and  particularly  in  the  United 
States. 
Indicators, however, only provide information on the near future. Beyond one or two quarters, 
forecasts are based more on analysis, debate and judgement. In the present circumstances, 
this is particularly difficult. This is perhaps why, over the past few days, a current of opinion 
bordering on an intellectual vogue has prevailed, with a view that any banking crisis is bound 
to have far-reaching and long-lasting consequences. Along these lines, the optimists refer to 
the  Swedish  experience  in  the  1980s,  which  was  marked  by  almost  three  years  without 
economic  growth,  and  the  pessimists  allude  to  Japan's  "lost  decade"  following  its  banking 
crisis. 
However, a comparison is misleading. The situation today is profoundly different. First, as I 
have said, our banks, and particularly French banks, are financially sound. Furthermore, the 
reaction in terms of economic policy has been particularly rapid and vigorous. I would like to 
reiterate: 
• 
that  all  European  banks  now  have  unlimited  access  to  short-term  liquidity, 
denominated in both euro and dollars, at a fixed rate; 
that in all countries there are guarantee mechanisms enabling banks to ensure their 
financing and therefore to maintain their credit activities; 
that banking systems are all being recapitalised at equivalent or higher levels than 
those prevailing before the crisis; 
and  lastly,  that  macroeconomic  policy  instruments  are  still  available  and  could  be 
used if economic activity were to decline durably. 
   Moreover, for the past two months we have witnessed a reversal of the oil and food shock 
which strongly penalised economic growth during  the first half of the year. Prices are now 
falling. If this trend continues, or even if it just stabilises, we can expect a gradual but marked 
4 
 BIS Review 130/2008
slowdown in inflation. This should spontaneously give households extra purchasing power, 
contributing to a possible pick up in consumption. 
Together, these developments could stabilise the economy and allow a recovery in economic 
growth during 2009. We cannot, of course, predict a precise date or forecast the extent of 
this  recovery.  However,  in  my  opinion,  the  prospect  of  a  significant  recovery  in  economic 
growth in 2009 is not being sufficiently taken into account, either by analysts or markets. 
The  latest  forecasts  by  the  IMF  envisage  for  the  euro  zone,  and  even  more  for  France,  a 
rebound in growth in the second half of 2009  [respectively +0.6% and +0.8% in 2009Q4 / 
2008Q4].  As  regards  inflation  in  2009,  the  IMF  is  forecasting  1.9%  and  1.6%  for  the  euro 
area and France respectively. This is not the dark scenario that some people are predicting. 
Moreover, the IMF forecasts are based on the rather pessimistic hypothesis of oil prices 30% 
higher than at present and do not factor in the action plans announced over the last ten days. 
The outlook for financial regulation 
The crisis has highlighted the need to take a fresh look at the foundations of financial system 
regulations  and  has  rekindled  concerns  about  the  structure  of  their  supervision.  At  the 
French  President’s  instigation,  Europeans  are  calling  for  the  creation  of  a  new  “Bretton 
Woods”, to establish a new international financial order. I believe it would be useful to revisit 
the  foundations  of  our  financial  regulation.  This  must  be  done  without  haste,  but  no  stone 
should be left unturned. Improved regulation appears to be necessary in several domains, 
from rating agencies to risk management, the organisation of financial markets and even the 
question of remuneration. 
As  a  contribution  to  this  ambitious  debate,  I  would  like  to  make  two  sets  of  remarks.  One 
involves the fluctuations of financial systems, the other concerns financial supervision. 
Financial  systems  that  operate  in  the  framework  of  a  developed  market  economy  are,  by 
nature, subject to cyclical forces. Financial institutions’ capital moves in parallel with the price 
fluctuations of assets when these fluctuations result in capital gains or losses. The pursuit of 
a constant capital adequacy ratio (leverage) tends to reinforce this effect, by sustaining the 
demand for assets when their prices increase, and vice versa. 
The  challenge  for  the  authorities  is  to  assess  whether  and  to  what  extent  the  regulatory 
framework  reinforces  these  dynamics.  In  other  words,  whether  the  financial  regulations 
determined from a micro-economic viewpoint produce effects that impact the entire financial 
system.  With  these  questions in  mind,  work  is being  undertaken  to  examine  the  impact  of 
prudential standards. It is also on this basis that the accounting adjustments that I mentioned 
earlier have been made. 
More generally speaking, we will have to set up supervision systems that are more suited to 
economic  developments.  The  need  to  develop  a  “macro-prudential”  policy  is  now  under 
debate.  The  general  principle  is  straightforward,  consisting  in  ensuring  that  supervision 
manages to limit risks for the stability not only of a particular institution, but also of the entire 
financial system. Its implementation, however, is complex. For the moment, we are only at a 
preliminary stage, contemplating which tools a macro-prudential policy could be based on, 
and how these tools could be used. 
As  regards  supervision,  this  crisis  has  shown  the  clear  advantage  in  having  the  banking 
supervisor close to the central bank. This is a conclusion that is now shared by all central 
bankers, whatever the regulatory environment they are operating in. In-depth knowledge of 
the banking sector and the various financial institutions is extremely useful when it comes to 
reacting  and  making  decisions  during  periods  of  turmoil  in  the  credit  and  money  markets. 
Since  the  beginning  of  the  crisis,  central  banks  have  had  to  judge  almost  instantly  the 
appropriateness  of  injecting  liquidity  in  different  forms  and  for  different  timeframes.  It  is 
therefore particularly important to be able to assess the quality of the market participants and 
BIS Review 130/2008 
 5
the reality of their needs. More generally, it is crucial during periods of crisis to distinguish 
between liquidity problems and solvency problems. Therefore it is a considerable advantage 
to have all the cards in one’s hands. 
As  regards  the  infrastructure  of  supervision,  it  seems  clear  to  me  that  simple,  robust  and 
pragmatic plans have shown their efficiency compared to more sophisticated and complex 
schemes.  During  the  last  few  months,  at  no  time  have  I  felt  that  our  organisation  was 
deficient  or  was  preventing  me  from  obtaining  adequate  information  needed  to  make  the 
necessary decisions. We have managed to deal with all situations, and I have observed the 
efficiency of our supervision system on a daily basis. 
Nonetheless, it is clear that an in-depth and comprehensive debate on the optimum structure 
of  financial  supervision  in  Europe  is  necessary.  Structures  have  to  adapt  to  the  rapid 
integration of the markets. I firmly support the Lamfalussy process and I am convinced that 
the current efforts to improve and develop this process deserve our full attention. I also firmly 
believe  that  the  process  must  be  carried  out  with  pragmatism  and  completely  in  tune  with 
reality rather than based on a theoretical scheme or vision. 
 Mr  Chairman,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  are  living  through  an  extremely  difficult  period  of 
economic history. 
I  am  nonetheless  firmly  convinced  that  in  France  and  Europe  we  have  both  the  tools 
necessary to help us out of this crisis and the necessary vision to guide our actions. 
The public authorities have shown their willingness to shore up the financial system. It is now 
essential that the system proves to be dynamic and takes the initiative, as it has in the past, 
so  that  the  credit  that  is  essential  to  the  economy  is  available  in  sufficient  quantity  and 
quality. 
I am sure that Crédit Agricole will, as it has in the past, muster the necessary energy for the 
benefit of our economy. 
Thank you very much. 
6 
 BIS Review 130/2008
