José Manuel González-Páramo: The financial market crisis, uncertainty 
and policy responses 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at  the  IE  Business  School  Annual  Alumni  Conference,  Madrid, 
21 November 2008. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  participate  in  the  Annual  Alumni  Conference  of  the  IE 
Business School and share with you some considerations about the impact of uncertainty on 
international financial markets and the responses by central banks, particularly by the ECB, 
and by governments from all over the world.  
One of the most relevant features of the current turmoil has been the role of uncertainty both 
within the financial sector and toward the financial sector. Indeed, the events over the last 
fifteen months have shown that, despite regulatory advances and technological progress in 
the financial sector, a number of weaknesses in key areas related to transparency, such as 
valuation practices and disclosure standards, are at the root of the financial market turmoil 
and have had major repercussions for the smooth functioning of key markets and institutions. 
In my intervention today I will briefly recall the dynamics of the financial market turmoil. I will 
then highlight the role of uncertainty during the turmoil and the way central banks and other 
authorities  have  responded  to  the  challenges  posed  by  the  developments  in  the  financial 
system. Finally, I will make some concluding remarks. 
The financial market turmoil  
2.  
As we all know, in August 2007 the global financial system entered a period of considerable 
turbulence that started with a liquidity squeeze triggered by rising delinquencies in the US 
sub-prime mortgages, and led to significant disruptions in various segments of the financial 
markets. 
More than one year later, the global financial system is still undergoing a correction process, 
and money and credit markets are suffering from lack of confidence on the precise impact of 
the turmoil on the robustness of financial institutions and their ability to weather the current 
shocks. 
More  generally,  most  segments  of  the  global  financial  system  continue  to  function  under 
stress.  While  much  progress  has  been  made  in  the  efforts  to  identify  and  value  the 
exposures  to  complex  securities  that  have  been  in  the  epicentre  of  the  turbulence  in  the 
markets, uncertainty still remains about the losses that will ultimately be suffered by investors 
and financial institutions across the globe. 
Many  financial  institutions  are  under  very  high  pressure  to  clean  their  portfolios  and  to 
strengthen their capital base, reinforcing the rapid de-leveraging process already underway. 
In addition, in the months following the takeover of Bear Stearns and the collapse of Lehman 
Brothers, the financial market turmoil intensified again and underwent a more damaging and 
disruptive phase in which large financial institutions failed or had to be rescued by either their 
private  counterparties  or  public  authorities,  while  the  viability  of  the  investment  banking 
industry as a whole and of “the originate to distribute business” business model was put into 
question. 
BIS Review 147/2008 
 1
At the same time, a number of international financial markets – particularly the markets for 
equities in developed and emerging economies, currencies as well as commodities and other 
industrial raw materials – have experienced a significant increase in volatility. Of particular 
concern for central banks has been the re-emergence of significant tensions in global money 
markets, where market liquidity has come under severe strain and term interest rates remain 
at elevated levels. 
Before talking about what central banks and other public authorities have done to address 
the challenges posed by the financial market turmoil, let me take a step back and elaborate 
on the role of uncertainty in the current turmoil. 
The role of uncertainty  
3.  
One of the most relevant features of the current turmoil has been the enormous increase in 
general  uncertainty  related  to  the  financial  sector  and  the  heightened  degree  of  what 
economists  call  “asymmetric  information”  in  credit  markets  (for  instance,  the  fact  that 
borrowers have more or better information than lenders about the potential returns and risks 
associated with the project for which they demand financing). 
In the current context, uncertainty mainly relates to imperfect information in relation to credit 
valuations.  Uncertainty  generally  increased  during  the  summer  of  2007,  because  market 
participants  realised  that  the  current  practices  used  for  valuations  –  often  based  almost 
solely on ratings – were no longer valid. With liquidity strains characterising certain market 
segments,  it  became  impossible  for  financial  firms  to  properly  value  a  range  of  financial 
assets  and  off-balance  sheet  exposures  using  the  existing  standards  on  valuation  and 
accounting. 
As  a  result  of  widespread  uncertainty  about  credit  valuations,  market  participants  found  it 
difficult  to  model  the  expected  occurrence  of  defaults,  which  led  to  wider  credit  spreads. 
Another typical effect of increased uncertainty was the flight-to-quality phenomenon in favour 
of government bonds as well as cash and bank deposits.  
In addition, lack of transparency throughout the securitisation process (the process by which 
credit  claims  are  engineered  into  complex  structured  products)  made  it  difficult  for  market 
participants  to  identify  where  the  risks  were  accumulating  in  the  financial  system  and  to 
assess  the  possible  losses  from  these  exposures.  Not  surprisingly,  efforts  by  public 
authorities at the international, European and national level (notably, the Financial Stability 
Forum  report)  to  identify  measures  aiming  at  restoring  confidence  and  enhancing  the 
resilience  of  the  financial  system,  have  stressed  the  need  to  address  weaknesses  in 
valuation practices and to enhance market transparency. 
During the current turmoil, uncertainty about the size and location of losses created by the 
opaque  transfer  of  credit  risk  brought  about  by  complex  securitisation  mechanisms  has 
aggravated the adverse selection problem typical of credit markets, rendering it increasingly 
difficult  for  market  players  to  distinguish  between  solvent  and  insolvent  borrowers  (an 
application of the so-called “market for lemons” problem). Such uncertainty has heightened 
counterparty  credit  risk  concerns,  inducing  banks  to  demand  high  risk  premia  of  their 
creditors, while discouraging them from lending to each other.  
Thus,  increased  uncertainty  has  led  to  the  protracted  “freezing”  of  the  interbank  lending 
market. This has translated into funding liquidity problems for individual banks, i.e. difficulties 
in  funding  their  business  activities.  As  the  degree  of  funding  liquidity  of  banks,  especially 
large banking groups, depends on the liquidity of the credit and securities markets they rely 
on  for  their  external  financing,  funding  liquidity  and  market  liquidity  are  in  practice 
interrelated. Indeed, some economists have developed models in which market and funding 
liquidity reinforce each other, leading to the emergence of “liquidity spirals” that may account 
for some of the declines in the liquidity of markets and individual institutions observed from 
the start of the crisis. 
2 
 BIS Review 147/2008
Protracted market illiquidity can also have potential negative repercussions for the banking 
sector  and  the  economy  as  a  whole.  In  fact,  under  normal  market  conditions,  market 
illiquidity  is  typically  short-lived,  particularly  since  it  creates  profit  opportunities  for  traders 
who, by providing extra funding liquidity, support the price discovery process and restore the 
smooth functioning of the market. In contrast, during a severe turbulence the disruption of the 
mechanisms  channelling  liquidity  –  be  it  through  assets  prices  or  the  balance  sheet  of 
financial institutions – may also deeply and lastingly weaken the balance sheets of financial 
institutions  and  undermine  their  solvency,  ultimately  creating  systemic  risks  for  financial 
stability.  
Policy responses from the Eurosystem and other central banks 
4.  
The general increase in uncertainty has affected the work of central banks via its impact on 
monetary policy formulation, implementation and transmission.  
Let me give you three examples of how uncertainty affects the conduct and implementation 
of monetary policy in the euro area. 
• 
The  intensification  and  broadening  of  the  financial  market  turmoil  has  led  to  an 
extraordinarily  high  degree  of  uncertainty  surrounding  the  outlook  for  economic 
growth and medium terms price stability in the euro area, which poses challenges 
for the formulation of monetary policy.  
As a result of increased uncertainty and the changing environment, the ECB cannot 
longer  rely  on  some  of  the  liquidity  management  tools  and  procedures  that  had 
previously served it well in order to implement in the money market the monetary 
policy stance decided by the Governing Council.  
Besides,  increased  counterparty  credit  risk  and  developments  in  the  financial 
system  have  impaired  the  functioning  of  the  money  market,  which  represents  the 
first step of the monetary policy transmission mechanism. 
  Along these lines, let me explain how central banks have responded to the challenges arising 
from market turmoil using a combination of operational measures and increased international 
co-operation.  
Main challenges to central banks 
In general, public policy responses to the financial market turmoil and the ensuing problems 
for the banking systems have focused on addressing three key sources of concern: market 
liquidity, funding and solvency. 
As  earlier  mentioned,  these  three  dimensions  of  the  turmoil  are  not  entirely  disjointed. 
Indeed, the current turmoil has brought to the fore the enhanced interaction between market 
liquidity and funding liquidity of individual institutions, partly reflecting the trend among large 
global banks towards greater reliance on wholesale market sources for funding as opposed 
to retail deposits. In addition, the experience of some financial institutions in recent months 
has  shown  that  protracted  illiquidity  may  weaken  the  balance  sheets  of  institutions  and  in 
extreme cases put their solvency at risk. 
Against this background, central bank interventions have aimed to address funding liquidity 
shortages  by  supporting  market  liquidity.  In  doing  so,  they  have  contributed  to  preventing 
insolvencies.  Of  course,  this  does  not  mean  that  central  banks  have  targeted  individual 
counterparty solvency concerns, which is of course a task which falls within the reach and 
responsibilities of governments rather than central banks. 
BIS Review 147/2008 
 3
Policy responses from central banks 
The responses have varied across central banks depending on the conditions of domestic 
money and credit markets as well as on their specific institutional frameworks. However, in 
general, the responses from central banks have mostly consisted of the following categories 
of interventions: 
• 
Active  liquidity  management:  central  banks  have  acted  to  keep  short-term  money 
market rates in line with their policy rates (or targets) through more active reserve 
management, thereby flexibly responding to shifts in the demand for reserves.  
Enhanced  liquidity  provision:  central  banks  have  sought  to  ease  pressures  in 
broader funding markets through a combination of measures, such as an increased 
supply  of  longer-term  funds,  the  expansion  of  collateral  accepted  in  lending 
operations, and the widening of the range of counterparties that may have access to 
collateralised lending. In some cases, central banks have also extended lending to 
non-depository banks and to financial institutions other than banks.  
Support to market trading activity: some central banks established securities lending 
facilities to improve the functioning of interbank repo markets. 
Increased cooperation: central banks have increased their co-operative efforts both 
through enhanced communication and collective market monitoring, and through co-
ordinated actions to provide both overnight and longer-term funds.  
Emergency liquidity assistance: in a fortunately limited number of episodes, central 
banks  have  assisted  their  domestic  governments  in  providing  emergency  liquidity 
assistance to institutions under stress. 
    In addition, several central banks – including the ECB – have also adjusted their monetary 
policy stance to take into account the impact of the financial market turbulences on inflation 
and real activity.  
In particular, in response to changes in the outlook price stability in the euro area, the ECB 
announced on 8 October a 50 basis point reduction (to 3.75%) in its key policy rate – the 
interest rate on the main refinancing operation – in a move coordinated with five other major 
central banks. A further reduction by 50 basis points (to 3.25%) was decided on 6 November 
against  the  background  of  a  further  alleviation  of  risks  to  price  stability  at  policy-relevant 
horizons  at a  time  when  weakening  demand  and  the  intensification  and  broadening  of  the 
market turmoil implies the materialising of some downward risks for economic growth. 
Responses of the Eurosystem 
Having briefly mentioned the adjustment to the euro area monetary policy stance, let me now 
discuss how the Eurosystem has responded through operational measures to the challenges 
stemming from the financial market turmoil.  
As  a  starting  point, it  is  worth  recalling  three  key  features of  the  Eurosystem’s  operational 
framework that have played a role in shaping the response to the turmoil in the euro area. 
The  Eurosystem:  (1)  grants  access  to  central  bank  liquidity  to  a  very  large  range  of 
counterparties;  (2)  accepts  a  rather  wide  spectrum  of  private  and  public  collateral  in  all 
classes of lending operations; and (3) conducts open market operations on a relatively large 
scale. 
These  features  of  the  operational  framework  have  allowed  the  Eurosystem  to  resort  to  a 
more pro-active liquidity management in order to achieve two objectives: 
1. 
to keep the very short-term money market rates in line with the chosen policy rate, 
thereby delivering the desired monetary policy stance, and 
4 
 BIS Review 147/2008
2. 
to ensure the smooth functioning of the market, thereby contributing to preserving 
financial stability.  
In particular, since the outbreak of the turmoil in August 2007 the Eurosystem has adjusted 
the  distribution  of  euro  liquidity  supplied  over  the  course  of  the  maintenance  period  by 
frontloading the supply of liquidity at the beginning of the period and reducing it later in the 
maintenance  period.  Furthermore,  it  significantly  increased  the  amount  of  refinancing 
provided via longer-term refinancing operations with a view to smoothening conditions in the 
term money market. In order to keep the total amount of outstanding refinancing unchanged, 
the net amount of liquidity provided via shorter term refinancing operations has been reduced 
accordingly. 
Following the rescue of Bear Stearns last March the financial market turmoil entered a new, 
more  intense  phase  that  further  deteriorated  with  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  mid 
September. In response to the renewed tensions, the Eurosystem stepped up its efforts to 
support the appropriate functioning of the euro money markets and to alleviate both the euro 
and the USD funding needs of euro area banks by:  
1. 
further  enhancing  the  policy  of  frontloading  liquidity  at  its  weekly  main  refinancing 
operations, 
significantly increasing the average duration of its refinancing operations, and  
also  by  expanding  coordinated  provision  of  USD  liquidity  within  the  context  of  the 
Term Auction Facility, as will be discussed in the next sub-section. 
2. 
3. 
In order to contribute to easing liquidity tensions in the euro money markets, the Eurosystem 
took on 8 October the exceptional decision to: (a) temporarily change the tender procedure in 
its  weekly  main  refinancing  operations  to  fixed  rate  tender  with  full  allotment  so  as  to 
provided uncapped access to euro liquidity (of course, against adequate collateral), while (b) 
reducing the corridor of standing facilities (from 200 basis points to 100 basis points) around 
the interest rate on the main refinancing operation.  
More  recently,  in  the  context  of  the  latest  initiatives  undertaken  by  the  EU  authorities  to 
restore confidence and the appropriate functioning of our financial systems, on 15 October 
the  ECB  approved  a  new  set  of  temporary  measures  designed  to  further  enhance  the 
provision of long-term euro liquidity until the end of the year and over the next quarter and to 
expand the list of collateral accepted in the Eurosystem monetary policy operations until the 
end of next year. 
In particular, as part of the measures designed to enhance the provision of long-term euro 
liquidity,  the  fixed-rate  tender  procedure  with  full  allotment  has  also  been  temporarily 
extended to longer-term refinancing operations, implying that euro area counterparties can 
now borrow as much euro liquidity as they wish (against eligible collateral) also at some key 
term maturities, against an expanded set of eligible assets accepted as collateral.  
The new set of temporary measures aim to further enhance the access to euro liquidity to 
solvent banks, while also contributing to restore confidence among market participants in the 
current  environment  in  which  money  markets  remain  under  stress  and  the  traditional 
channels of liquidity transmission are impaired.  
Increased international cooperation 
In addition to domestic operational responses, central banks have further strengthened their 
cooperation throughout the turmoil. They have enhanced their cooperation first by means of 
enhanced information sharing and collective monitoring of market developments and later on 
through coordinated steps to provide liquidity.  
The main example of such coordinated actions among central banks is the US dollar Term 
Auction Facility, which started in December of last year and in which the ECB agreed with 
BIS Review 147/2008 
 5
the US Federal Reserve to grant loans in dollars to euro area banks. These USD liquidity 
providing operations have increased over time in terms of size and number of participants 
(and now involve thirteen central banks, from both developed and emerging economies, in 
addition to the ECB).  
As far as the Eurosystem is concerned, the scope of this facility has significantly increased 
over time in terms of maturities covered and volumes involved. On 15 October the Governing 
Council took a further step with the decision – announced together with Bank of England and 
the Swiss National Bank – to conduct operations at various maturities at fixed interest rates 
and with full allotment. As a result of this decision, euro area counterparties will be able to 
borrow  as  much  USD  liquidity  as  they  wish,  also  at  some  term  maturities,  against  eligible 
euro-denominated collateral, with the supply of USD guaranteed by an unlimited temporary 
reciprocal currency arrangement between the Federal Reserve and the ECB that will remain 
in place for as long as needed.  
On 15 October the Eurosystem also entered into an agreement with the Swiss National Bank 
in order to facilitate the provision of liquidity denominated in Swiss Francs to euro banks. 
At the same time, in the past few  weeks the Eurosystem has signed agreements with the 
central banks of several European countries in order to improve the provision of euro liquidity 
to their banking sectors. 
Increased financial intermediation 
Before discussing the latest coordinated initiatives, I would like to point out that, as a result of 
its enhanced liquidity interventions in euro and other currencies (notably, in USD) during the 
turmoil, the Eurosystem has significantly increased its involvement in financial intermediation 
in the euro area. We are now effectively intermediating liquidity flows among banks in order 
to mitigate the dysfunctions of money markets. 
Of course, this is not the ideal long-term solution in a market-oriented economy like the euro 
area  and  it also  potentially  implies increased  financial  risks  for  the  Eurosystem  (which  are 
nevertheless  taken  care  of  through  adequate  risk  control measures).  However,  as  long  as 
money  markets  remain  dysfunctional,  the  Eurosystem  will  continue  to  provide  liquidity  as 
needed in order to ease tensions in the impaired money markets, with a view to ensuring that 
access  to  liquidity  of  solvent  banks  is  not  disrupted,  thereby  contributing  to  safeguarding 
financial stability. At the same time, we very much look forward to the reactivation of inter-
bank lending and to banks resuming their traditional intermediation activity. 
Recent coordinated initiatives 
5.  
Let  me  briefly  refer  to  the  recent  coordinated  initiatives  of  international  and  European 
governments and central banks. 
During  the  early  phases  most  of  the  current  turmoil  government  interventions  focused  on 
addressing  problems  at  single  institutions,  mainly  through  rescues  and  the  provision  of 
guarantees  covering  the  liabilities  of  individual  institutions  under  stress.  More  recently, 
increasing  awareness  that  the  current  turmoil  has  the  potential  to  jeopardise  systemic 
financial stability has prompted governments to announce more general and comprehensive 
schemes (mostly based on capital injections in exchange for equity and on the provision of 
state  guarantees)  that  are  designed  to  support  their  entire  financial  systems  rather  than 
individual institutions. 
The  more  recent  initiatives  have  not  only  been  comprehensive  but  also  “coordinated”, 
reflecting the increasingly consensual view that the “global” nature of the financial tensions 
requires  a  common  understanding  among  governments  of  the  roots  of  the  tensions  and 
concerted actions to address them. The framework for such concerted actions is defined by 
the common principles in key areas (ensuring appropriate liquidity, facilitating the funding of 
6 
 BIS Review 147/2008
banks through various means, providing additional capital resources to financial institutions, 
recapitalisation  of  distressed  banks,  ensuring  appropriate  implementation  of  accounting 
rules,  and  enhancing  cooperation  among  European  countries),  laid  in  the  recent  public 
commitments by the G7, Ecofin and governments of the euro area. 
In this respect, three important commitments are: (1) the Plan of action of the G-7 finance 
ministers and central bank governors of 10 October, (2) the ECOFIN Council conclusions of 
7  October  and  (3)  the  Declaration  on  a  concerted  European  action  plan  of  the  euro  area 
countries  on  12  October.  These  documents  list  common  principles  in  key  areas  (ensuring 
appropriate  liquidity,  facilitating  the  funding  of  banks  through  various  means,  providing 
additional  capital  resources  to  financial  institutions,  recapitalisation  of  distressed  banks, 
ensuring appropriate implementation of accounting rules, and enhancing cooperation among 
European  countries),  while  leaving  national  governments  free  to  design  the  operational 
aspects  of  such  interventions  according  to  the  specific  characteristics  of  their  domestic 
financial industries.  
In  particular,  these  public  commitments  establish  some  core  principles  on  how  to  address 
liquidity, funding and solvency problems that should contribute to define a common and more 
effective  approach  to  overcoming  the  present  turmoil.  This  common  approach  has  started 
materialising through the announcements by various euro area governments of co-ordinated 
action  plans  that  comply  with  the  general  principles  agreed  in  euro  area  and  international 
fora.  
The importance of cooperation mechanisms and information sharing was also underlined by 
the  European  Council  on  15  and  16  October  with  the  creation  of  a  “financial  stability  cell” 
aiming  to  improve  crisis  management  in  the  EU  and  the  decision  to  establish  regular 
meetings of national regulators. 
The  importance  of  broad  international  cooperation  to  address  the  challenges  faced  by  the 
world  economy  has  been  renovated  in  the  Statement  released  after  the  G-20  Summit  on 
Financial  Markets  and  the  World  Economy  of  16  November.  The  Statement  indicates 
principles  for  the  reform  of  the  international  financial  systems  and  the  improvement  of  the 
global financial architecture as well as policy responses to the global slowdown in economic 
activity. 
Strengthening  market  transparency,  improving  disclosure  and  accountability  are  indicated 
among the core principles for reform of financial markets, with the Statement also including a 
specific action plan listing both immediate and medium-term actions in these areas.  
In general, the principles for reform indicated by the G-20 are in many respects consistent 
with  those  previously  stated  in  the  public  commitments  of  other  international  fora. 
Nevertheless,  as  has  been  stressed  by  commentators,  their  restatement  by  the  G-20,  a 
group of countries including both the major developed economies and the largest emerging 
economies, is a confirmation of both the global nature of the financial crisis and the equally 
global determination to overcome it.  
Indeed, all of the public commitments so far together with the plans already adopted by many 
countries clearly show the strong determination of the international community to preserve 
the  stability  of  our  financial  and  economic  sectors  and  improve  the  functioning  of  the 
international financial systems.  
Of course, it is too early to tell the effect of the latest initiatives by public authorities, but there 
are some positive signs. The coordinated measures taken in recent weeks by governments 
and central banks worldwide seem to have had a favourable impact on financial markets as 
the  premia  on  banks’  CDS  contracts  have  fallen  sharply,  money  market  rates  have  fallen 
very significantly, spreads have narrowed  and volumes traded on money markets seem to 
have  increased  somewhat  while  some  (still  smaller  than  usual  in  aggregate)  term  money 
market transactions have taken place. Despite these improvements, the situation remains far 
from normal.  
BIS Review 147/2008 
 7
Final remarks 
6.  
Uncertainty is at the root of the financial market turmoil that we are currently experiencing. 
Such  uncertainty  translated  into  a  severe  under-appreciation  of  the  risks  associated  with 
certain classes of financial instruments and institutions. More recently, with the intensification 
and broadening of the market turmoil, uncertainty has further increased and developed into a 
pervasive phenomenon affecting a wide range of markets, assets and financial sectors.  
Systemic  uncertainty  may  potentially  undermine  the  foundations  of  our  financial  systems, 
which are in turn essential for the orderly functioning of our economies. This is why many of 
the policy recommendations from a wide range of fora and organisations aim at addressing 
the causes of uncertainty by implementing steps leading to a sound transparency framework 
based  on  improved  disclosure,  high-quality  accounting  standards  and  solid  valuation 
practices. 
In  the  meantime,  public  authorities  are  taking  a  number  of  systematic  and  comprehensive 
measures  designed  to  address  the  ongoing  financial  turmoil.  These  measures,  in 
combination  with  the  enhanced  liquidity  provisions  by  central  banks,  should  restore 
confidence  and  contribute  to  re-establishing  an  environment  in  which  governments, 
regulators  and  supervisors  can  implement  the  urgent  reforms  that  are  needed  in  order  to 
anchor the global financial system to sound foundations.  
It is of essence that private institutions live up to their responsibilities. In particular, by doing 
their part to restore orderly conditions in the money markets and by resuming in earnest their 
intermediation  function,  the  private  banking  community  should  help  to  ensure  that  the 
liquidity measures taken by central banks and the initiatives taken by governments in terms 
of bank recapitalization and debt guarantees lead to the desired results.  
Many thanks for your attention. 
8 
 BIS Review 147/2008
