Masaaki Shirakawa: Recent financial and economic developments and 
the conduct of monetary policy 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  special  meeting 
hosted by the Kyushu Association of Corporate Executives, Fukuoka, 1 December 2008. 
 Introduction 
I am honored to be invited to speak at the special meeting hosted by the Kyushu Association 
of Corporate Executives. I have a close relationship with the Kyushu region because I lived in 
Kokura, my home town, until I graduated from high school, and also worked as the General 
Manager  at  the  Oita  Branch  of  the  Bank  of  Japan  for  one  and  a  half  years,  from  1994 
through  1995.  Currently,  7  of  the  32  branches  are  in  the  Kyushu  region.  I  would  like  to 
express my deep gratitude for your cooperation with these branches. Today happens to be 
the 67th anniversary of the establishment of the Fukuoka Branch, and I am doubly delighted 
to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  today  before  business  leaders  in  the  region  on  such  a 
memorable day.  
At present, the world economy, including Japan's economy, faces a very difficult situation as 
the effects of the financial turmoil stemming from market developments in the United States 
and  Europe  have  been  spreading  worldwide.  I  would  first  like  to  talk  about  the  current 
situation of both of the domestic economy and overseas economies, and also the ongoing 
global financial crisis, and then explain the Bank's thinking regarding the conduct of monetary 
policy. 
The current situation of and outlook for Japan's economy 
I.  
Today I will speak about developments in Japan's economy mainly from a macroeconomic 
perspective.  Anticipating  that  some of  you  may  be  concerned  that  the Bank  does not  fully 
understand  the  circumstances  specific  to  each  region  and  each  firm,  I  will  stress  that  the 
Bank is fully aware of different circumstances by region, industry, and firm size that cannot 
be  perceived  only  from  a  macroeconomic  perspective.  Such  differences  are  reported 
regularly  by  General  Managers  of  the  Bank's  branches.  In  addition,  I  have  had  far  more 
opportunities to discuss with business leaders in various regions since being appointed as 
the  Governor  of  the  Bank  of Japan,  and  on  these  occasions  I  have  been  reminded  of  the 
differences.  
In  today's  speech,  I  will  focus  on  the  major  trends  in  the  world  economy  and  Japan's 
economy, but I would like to stress again that, when assessing economic developments, the 
Bank always takes into account microeconomic information such as economic developments 
in each region and business performance of firms. 
Let  me  first  discuss  the  current  situation  of  Japan's  economy.  Looking  back,  since  the 
beginning  of  2002  Japan's  economy  has  enjoyed  a  moderate  but  prolonged  economic 
expansion.  Since  the  middle  of  2007,  however,  the  economy  has  experienced  a  series  of 
negative  shocks,  and  now  faces  a  difficult  situation.  The  first  shock  came  from  a  sharp 
decline in housing investment since the middle of 2007, due to the coming into force of the 
revised Building Standard Law. Growth in corporate profits and wages has been subdued, 
due  to  the  deterioration  in  the  terms  of  trade  reflecting  increases  in  energy  and  materials 
prices,  and  as  a  result  growth  in  business  fixed  investment  and  private  consumption  has 
been  slowing  since  around  the  end  of  2007.  The  slowdown  in  overseas  economies  has 
become  pronounced  as  strains  in  global  financial  markets  and  in  the  U.S.  and  European 
financial systems have intensified since this summer, and reflecting this, growth in Japan's 
exports turned negative. Given these developments, economic activity in Japan has become 
BIS Review 151/2008 
 1
increasingly  sluggish  recently.  Economic  data,  including  the  index  of  industrial  production, 
released at the end of last week showed severe economic circumstances. 
The pace of the recent increase in the sluggishness of Japan's economy has been rapid, and 
overseas economies are also undergoing a similar drastic change. The U.S. economy has 
deteriorated  reflecting  the  emergence  of  a  negative  feedback  loop  operating  between 
financial  and  economic  activities  as  the  financial  crisis  stemming  from  the  subprime 
mortgage  problem  increased  in  severity.  European  economies  are  also  deteriorating,  with 
increased  downward  pressure  on  economic  activity  from  the  financial  side.  Moreover,  the 
effects of the weakness in the U.S. and European economies have been spreading to Asian 
economies. China has continued to show relatively high growth, but the country's growth in 
exports  has  recently  slowed  somewhat  and  investment  related  to  real  estate  has  been 
relatively  weak  against  the  backdrop  of  a  fall  in  real  estate  prices.  In  the  NIEs  and  the 
ASEAN  economies,  domestic  demand  has  been  weak  while  export  growth  has  been 
decelerating, and these economies have been slowing. A slowdown in the world economy 
taken  as  a  whole  has  become  evident  as  the  effects  of  the  financial  crises  in  the  United 
States and Europe spread steadily to Asian economies. 
According  to  the  World  Economic  Outlook  released  at  the  beginning  of  last  month  by  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF), output of advanced economies is expected to contract for 
the  first  time  in  the  post-war  period;  growth  in  emerging  economies  is  also  expected  to 
decline from the past several years' high growth of around 8 percent to 5-6 percent; and the 
growth  of  world  output  is  projected  to  fall  substantially  to  2.2  percent.  This  is  significantly 
lower than the world growth of around 5 percent registered for four years in the mid-2000s. 
The  timing  of  the  recovery  in  overseas  economies  depends  on  several  prerequisites  for 
recovery, and with regard to the U.S. economy the key questions are how adjustments in the 
housing market will progress and when the financial system will regain stability. I must admit 
that the timing of the recovery in the growth rate of overseas economies as a whole is highly 
uncertain,  but  given  the  current  severe  situation  it  seems  appropriate  to  assume  that  the 
growth rate of overseas economies taken as a whole is likely to show a clear recovery only 
after the middle of 2009. 
As  overseas  economies  are  expected  to  continue  to  face  a  difficult  situation,  Japan's 
economy, which recorded negative growth in the second and the third quarter of this year, is 
likely to continue to show increased sluggishness over the next several quarters. The primary 
reason  why  the  Bank  takes  this  view  is  that  the  effects  of  developments  in  overseas 
economies  and  of  the  turmoil  in  global  financial  markets,  which  I  mentioned  earlier,  have 
been steadily spreading to Japan's economy. I will elaborate on this later. 
The  price  situation  has  also  changed  significantly.  Looking  back  to  about  a  year  ago,  the 
year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all items excluding fresh 
food was around 0 percent, but then rose at a rapid pace, especially in petroleum products 
and food, due to the pass-through of higher commodity prices, and reached 2.4 percent this 
summer. However,  most recently it began to decline due to the drop in commodity prices. 
Given recent developments in commodity prices, it is projected to fall at a rapid pace going 
forward.  The  major  factor  behind  the  drastic  change  in  the  trend  of  the  CPI  is  changes  in 
import  costs.  In  addition,  changes  in  aggregate  supply  and  demand  conditions  and  in  the 
expected inflation rate also affect prices. Aggregate supply and demand conditions will likely 
ease, as growth in real GDP is expected to continue to fall short of the potential growth rate 
for the next several quarters. Although it depends on developments in prices of petroleum 
products and materials, the rate of change in the CPI may, for a brief period, turn negative in 
fiscal 2009. 
Bearing in mind these developments in Japan's economy, I will now move on to the factor 
that I regard as most important when discussing future developments in Japan's economy 
and  overseas  economies  –  the  impact  of  the  ongoing  financial  crises  in  the  United  States 
and Europe on overseas economies and on Japanese financial conditions. 
2 
 BIS Review 151/2008
The financial crises in the United States and Europe and their impact 
II.  
As  you  all  know,  the  current  financial  crises  stemmed  from  the  emergence  of  the  U.S. 
subprime  mortgage  problem.  Since  then,  the  severity  of  the  situation  has  intensified  with 
pessimisms  rising  and  falling  in  a  repetitive  pattern.  In  particular,  the  situation  changed 
drastically just after the bankruptcy filing of Lehman Brothers, which led to a continuation of 
the  intensified  strains  in  global  financial  markets.  Looking  back,  the  problem  surfaced  as 
"liquidity  constraints"  when  conduits  and  aggregators  of  securitized  products  and  financial 
institutions  faced  difficulties  in  raising  funds,  which  were  triggered  by  declines  in  prices  of 
securitized products backed by subprime mortgages. The next stage was a development of 
the "credit crunch"; losses incurred by financial institutions that possessed a large amount of 
securitized products expanded, and their capital bases were impaired. As a result, financial 
institutions  tightened  their  credit  standards  and  their  lending  attitudes,  and  this  started  to 
exert strong downward pressure on the economy. 
And now we face the current situation, where the negative feedback loop operating between 
financial  and  economic  activities  has  intensified.  Delinquency  rates  of  not  only  mortgage 
loans but commercial real estate loan and consumer loans have risen reflecting the weaker 
U.S.  economy.  Consequently,  capital  bases  of  financial  institutions  have  been  further 
impaired, and their lending attitudes have become even tighter. In addition, firms' fund-raising 
conditions in the markets have deteriorated, as seen in the difficulty faced by firms in issuing 
CP and corporate bonds and the extreme rise in issuance rates. They have ultimately had an 
adverse impact on economic activity – the emergence of a negative feedback loop operating 
between financial and economic activities. Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve has lowered its 
target for the federal funds rate from 5.25 percent to 1.0 percent since last September. In 
spite of this monetary easing, the issuance rates of corporate bonds have risen compared 
with the level observed in the summer of 2007. 
In addition, we can point out the worldwide propagation as one of the features of the current 
financial crises. There were some failures of major financial institutions in the United States 
following  the  bankruptcy  filing  of  Lehman  Brothers,  and  failures  started  to  be  seen  also  in 
Europe.  Furthermore,  the  financial  crises  in  the  United  States  and  Europe  are  starting  to 
affect  emerging  economies,  and  the  inflow  of  funds  to  these  economies  has  decreased 
substantially.  There  are  various  transmission  channels.  For  example,  in  recent  years 
emerging economies in Central and Eastern Europe experienced active credit expansion by 
foreign  financial  institutions  based  in  Western  Europe  but  now  see  a  decline  in  loans 
outstanding. Moreover, some emerging economies became incapable of raising funds from 
global financial markets and finally needed financial assistance from the IMF. Thus, unlike 
the past currency and financial crises in Latin America and East Asia, the ongoing financial 
crises in the United States and Europe propagated rapidly around the globe. The progress in 
the globalization of financial and economic activities since the 1990s has strengthened the 
financial and economic interaction between countries. And the current economic deceleration 
or  deterioration  in  each  country  is  the  first  global  economic  slowdown  to  take  place  in  a 
period of such drastic changes in the environment. In addition, the economic growth rate has 
deteriorated  with  unusual  speed.  With  these  characteristics  of  worldwide  propagation  and 
unusually  rapid  deterioration,  pessimistic  views  tend  to  propagate  easily  and  themselves 
promote further deterioration in the economy.  
Under these circumstances, it is necessary to understand the nature of the ongoing problem 
in order to consider policies necessary to address the situation. Let me first explain the swift 
and successive policy responses of governments and central banks. First is the provision of 
liquidity  by  central  banks.  Central  banks  have  been  making  efforts  to  stabilize  money 
markets  by  implementing  U.S.  dollar  funds-supplying  operations  under  a  coordinated 
framework in addition to providing sufficient liquidity in their own currency. Second is placing 
troubled  financial  institutions  under  government  control  and  injecting  public  funds.  Third  is 
the  substantial  expansion  of  the  coverage  of  deposit  insurance  and  the  guaranteeing  of 
financial institutions' debts.  
BIS Review 151/2008 
 3
As  a  result  of  these  measures,  the  situation  in  money  markets  in  the  United  States  and 
Europe  has  improved  compared  with  the  situation  at  the  height  of  the  tensions  in  those 
markets. However, the conditions in the money markets are far from normal, as seen in the 
fact that the 3-month dollar funding rate in the interbank market is around 2 percent higher 
than the yield on government bonds with the same maturity. Global financial markets remain 
under significant stress as seen in continued high credit spreads such as those on corporate 
bonds. Stock prices have plunged worldwide, and foreign exchange rates have continued to 
fluctuate widely.  
Why haven't conditions improved in spite of the swift actions taken by each country? As one 
of  the  reasons,  we  can  point  out  that,  given  the  various  large  excesses  and  imbalances 
accumulated  in  the  several  years  up  to  the  current  global  economic  deceleration  and 
deterioration,  and  financial  crises,  the  process  of  adjustments  will  inevitably  be  deep.  As  I 
mentioned  earlier,  a  prolonged  period  of  worldwide  high  growth  never  witnessed  before 
continued for several years in the mid-2000s. In addition, inflation rates declined due to an 
expansion of production capacity resulting from the participation of emerging economies in 
the  global  market  economy,  and  low  interest  rates  continued  in  the  environment  of  high 
growth  and  low  inflation.  In  the  process,  various  excessive  activities,  both  economic  and 
financial,  were  undertaken  and  "excesses"  were  accumulated.  Behind  the  rise  of  the  U.S. 
subprime mortgage problem and the surge in crude oil and materials prices observed until 
this summer, there were global high growth and expansion in financial leverage. Of course, 
there were some voices warning about the situation. However, given that the economy was 
in a favorable condition, it was difficult to accept such warnings as is often the case given the 
nature of human beings and society.  
The world economy is now undergoing a process of adjustment of various excesses that had 
been  accumulated,  to  achieve  more  sustainable  growth.  Under  these  circumstances,  it  is 
necessary  to  implement  appropriate  macroeconomic  policies  while  maintaining  financial 
system  stability  by  injecting  public  funds  into  financial  institutions  in  order  to  prevent  the 
economy from falling into a deep adjustment phase or turmoil. Although such policies have 
been implemented, losses incurred by financial institutions and their capital shortages tend to 
expand  when  a  negative  feedback  loop  between  financial  and  economic  activities  is 
operating.  Hence,  uncertainty  remains  as  to  the  final  amount  of  losses  that  need  to  be 
covered  and  of  public  funds  injection  required.  The  large  losses  that  arise  from  adjusting 
accumulated excesses can only be covered by flows of income generated by daily economic 
activities, and this will inevitably take time. 
in 
the  situation 
Financial conditions in Japan 
III.  
Let me explain financial conditions in Japan as an extension to what I have said about the 
global  financial  system.  Financial markets  in  Japan,  which  had  remained  stable  relative  to 
these in the United States and Europe, have also drastically changed since the bankruptcy 
filing  of  Lehman  Brothers.  Measured  by  the  spreads  between  interbank  funding  rates  and 
government  bond  yields, 
the  Japanese  money  markets  remains 
comparatively  favorable  to  date,  but  it  seems  that  careful  analysis  of  the  possibility  that 
pressures acting to depress economic activity from the financial side may increase in Japan 
is becoming necessary.  
In the conduct of monetary policy, it is extremely important but nonetheless difficult to judge 
how accommodative or how tight financial conditions are in a country. To make an accurate 
judgment of financial conditions, the Bank examines them from various angles, which may 
include  evaluation  of  the  level  of  interest  rates  and  asset  prices,  quantitative  monetary 
analysis  making  use  of  monetary  aggregates  and  bank  loans,  interviews  with  financial 
institutions and non-financial firms, and various surveys. From the perspective of corporate 
financing, the Bank, in a manner similar to corporate management, examines the situation 
based on two criteria: first, at what interest rates funds can be raised; and second, how easily 
4 
 BIS Review 151/2008
the 
that 
level  of 
to  profitability 
funding  rates  relative 
these  funds  can  be  raised,  in  other  words,  the  availability  of  funds.  Let  me  discuss  the 
current financial conditions facing firms from those two perspectives.  
First, with respect to funding rates, interest rates on bank loans remain at a low level. On the 
other hand, interest rates applied to funding in the market, such as issuing CP and corporate 
bonds, are rising reflecting growing risk aversion among investors such as investment trust 
companies and life insurance companies, under the influence of the turmoil in global financial 
markets. The issuing rates on corporate bonds have been rising especially for those with low 
credit ratings, and issuing rates on CP, which had been creeping up since the summer, have 
risen rapidly since September. Although the level of these interest rates is somewhat lower 
than  in  1998  and  1999  when  corporate  financing  experienced  a  period  of  increased 
pressures, the so-called credit crunch, the pace at which these rates are rising is comparable 
to that in 1998 and 1999.  
In  addition,  when  evaluating  the  level  of  funding  rates,  comparing  them  with  corporate 
profitability  becomes  important.  In  Japan,  the  ratio  of  funding  in  the  market  to  bank 
borrowings  is  approximately  one  to  four,  giving  bank  borrowings  the  dominant  share. 
Because of this, even with the current sharp rise in issuing rates on CP, funding rates as a 
whole remain broadly unchanged and remain very low relative to firms' profitability. On the 
other hand, in 1998 and 1999, funding rates were nearly at the same level as profitability due 
to the sharp decline in the latter. From these points, it is clear that the current level of funding 
rates itself is still accommodative. Nevertheless, corporate profits are under strong pressure 
due  to  the  effects  of  earlier  increases  in  energy  and  materials  prices  and  the  increased 
sluggishness in economic activity, which have led to a decline in profitability. This seems to 
indicate 
less 
accommodative. 
Second,  with  respect  to  the  quantitative  side,  the  availability  of  funds  is  showing  marked 
changes. With regard to funding in the market, the rate of increase in the amount outstanding 
of CP issued, which had been around 10 percent year on year since 2007 until the failure of 
Lehman  Brothers,  declined  sharply  thereafter  owing  to  growing  risk  aversion  among 
investors,  and  has  recently  fallen  below  the  previous  year's  level.  Furthermore,  the 
postponement of corporate bonds issuance, which had been limited to firms with low credit 
ratings, is spreading to firms with high credit ratings, which in the past had been able to issue 
bonds without difficulty.  
Under  these  circumstances,  it  seems  that  firms'  attitudes  are  becoming  increasingly 
defensive against the backdrop of the deceleration in global economic growth and the turmoil 
in financial markets as well as increased future uncertainty, and this is leading to a growing 
number of firms hoarding liquidity. Meanwhile, the rate of increase in the amount outstanding 
of bank loans is rising on the whole, particularly loans to large firms. However, the number of 
firms reporting tight lending attitudes of banks have been increasing, particularly among firms 
in the construction and real estate industries and small firms.  
To sum up, financial conditions in Japan seem to have become less accommodative at an 
accelerating pace, particularly in terms of availability of funds, reflecting the turmoil in global 
financial markets.  
Although future conditions for funding depend on various factors, among them the level of 
bank capital and conditions in global financial markets are important. Currently, the capital 
ratios of banks, in general, are considerably above the level required by regulation. However, 
banks, when actually making loans, consider not only their capital ratios at the time but also 
various  other  factors  such  as  expected  future  credit  costs.  Recently,  given  the  declines  in 
stock prices, the market risk of stock holdings is having an impact on bank capital, in addition 
to increased credit costs incurred by banks due to the increase in bankruptcies. Although at 
present the rate of increase in the amount outstanding of bank loans is rising, banks' lending 
attitudes will tend to become more cautious if they are not confident about the level of their 
capital bases. Furthermore, if the turmoil in global financial markets should intensify, there is 
is  becoming 
BIS Review 151/2008 
 5
a  risk  that  funding  in  the  market  might  become  more  difficult  as  a  result  of  increased  risk 
aversion among investors. Although the decrease in issuance of CP and corporate bonds, as 
a whole, is covered by the increase in bank loans as shown in the data up to the most recent 
figure for October, the Bank will monitor future developments carefully.  
The conduct of monetary policy 
IV.  
So far I have explained the present situation of and the outlook for the world economy and 
Japan's economy. With regard to Japan's economy, the increased sluggishness in economic 
activity is likely to persist for the next several quarters and, going forward, attention needs to 
be paid to the downside risks to economic activity arising from developments in the financial 
crises in the United States and Europe and their influence as well as financial conditions in 
Japan. Turning to prices, upside risks have decreased compared with the past, and there is a 
possibility  that  the  inflation  rate  will  decline  further  if  downside  risks  to  economic  activity 
materialize or commodity prices fall further.  
Based on these assessments, the Bank, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on October 31, 
reduced the policy interest rate by 20 basis points to 0.3 percent. With regard to the conduct 
of monetary policy, the Bank, given the increased uncertainty, will carefully assess the future 
outlook for economic activity and prices, closely considering the likelihood of its projections 
as  well  as  factors  posing  upside  or  downside  risks,  and  will  implement  monetary  policy 
appropriately. For the time being, it is particularly important to pay attention to the downside 
risks  to  economic  activity  that  may  arise  from  developments  in  the  U.S.  and  European 
financial systems and in global financial markets as well as their influence. 
To  produce  maximal  monetary  easing  effects,  it  is  a  necessary  precondition  that  markets 
function  in  a  stable  and  smooth  manner.  When  this  condition  is  not  met,  as  the  recent 
situation in the United States shows, the actual funding rates may rise notwithstanding the 
substantial reduction in policy interest rates. From this standpoint, the Bank has undertaken 
various measures. The first aim of these measures is to ensure stability in money markets 
through provision of liquidity. The Bank has not only been providing sufficient funds in yen, 
but  also  been  providing  dollar  funds,  based  on  the  internationally  coordinated  framework, 
with no limitation on the amount as long as they are within the value of collateral submitted. 
The  second  aim  is  to  facilitate  corporate  financing.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  financial 
conditions are currently becoming less accommodative mainly in terms of funds availability, 
and the risk that the effects of the current low interest rates may not permeate through the 
economy  is  increasing.  The  Bank  has  already  been  conducting  purchases  of  CP  under 
repurchase  agreements,  and  to  facilitate  corporate  financing,  the  Bank  has  started  to 
increase  such  purchases  since  October,  and  further  increased  them  since  November. 
Furthermore, the Bank is currently working on practical ways to contribute as a central bank 
to facilitate corporate financing during the run-up to the calendar and fiscal year-ends. The 
Bank  will  decide  what  measures  to  employ  and  put  into  action  as  soon  as  this  work  is 
completed. 
Various efforts by parties concerned are essential to address the current severe economic 
conditions,  and  the  Bank  will  continue  to  do  its  utmost  to  facilitate  the  return  of  Japan's 
economy to a sustainable growth path with price stability. Although what actual policies are 
desirable  depends  ultimately  on  the  situation  in  terms  of  economic  activity,  prices,  and 
financial conditions at the time, the Bank will take appropriate measures in light of its purpose 
stated in the Bank of Japan Act, that is, to ensure stability in prices and the financial system.  
Closing remarks 
In  closing,  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  economic  developments  in  the  Kyushu  region  and 
discuss Asian economies that have close relations with this region. 
6 
 BIS Review 151/2008
indicate 
that  Asian  economies  are  decelerating  due 
There  have  been  dynamic  changes  in  the  structure  of  the  economy  in  the  Kyushu  region, 
making  the  most  of  its  geographical  advantage  of  being  the  closest  to  Asian  economies. 
Japan's exports to Asian economies, for example, have increased around twofold during the 
last 10 years, whereas exports from the Kyushu region increased around threefold. Growth in 
exports  of  Japan's  major  products,  such  as  electrical  machinery  and  automobiles,  is 
substantially higher in the Kyushu region relative to Japan as a whole. As a result, the share 
of  secondary  industries,  such  as  those  producing  electrical  machinery  and  automobiles,  in 
the  Kyushu  region  is  increasing  –  the  region  is  sometimes  referred  to  as  "Car  Island"  or 
"Silicon Island" – and the region is becoming a hub for Asian trade. 
The  Kyushu  region  is  now  making  the  most  of  being  the  closest  to  Asia,  which  has  the 
fastest growing economies in the world. Assessing the growth potential of Asian economies, 
therefore, is important, but there are differing views on this and, ever since the 1990s, there 
have  been  various  arguments.  For  example,  the  World  Bank,  in  a  book  titled  "The  Asian 
Miracle: Economic Growth and Public Policy" published in 1993, stated that Asian economies 
had entered an autonomous growth cycle induced by direct investment. On the other hand, 
Paul Krugman, this year's Nobel laureate, stated in a 1994 article titled "The Myth of Asia's 
Miracle" that Asian growth was merely driven by extraordinary growth in inputs of resources 
like labor and capital, and Asian "tigers" were more like "paper tigers" because their growth 
was not accompanied by gains in productivity. More recently, there has been discussion as 
to whether the so-called "decoupling," whereby emerging economies will continue their high 
growth  despite  the  slowdown  in  advanced  economies,  or  "coupling,"  where  emerging 
economies will be influenced by the slowdown in advanced economies, applies to the current 
state of the world economy. 
Recent  developments 
the 
deterioration  in  the  U.S.  and  European  economies,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  and  so  any 
"decoupling" or "coupling" is clearly not perfect. In Asia, various countries and regions, one 
after another, have accomplished economic take-off starting with the NIEs, followed by the 
ASEAN economies and China, and then by India. And Asia taken as a whole has attained 
high growth through countries and areas at different stages of development influencing on 
each  other.  Developments  in  Asian  economies  have  a  strong  bearing  on  the  future  of  the 
economy in the Kyushu region together with developments in Japan's economy and in the 
world economy as a whole. In discussing the future of Asian economies, although it may well 
depend on how long the economic weakening in the United States and Europe continues, 
the  Bank  will  pay  close  attention  to  whether  strong  intraregional  demand  in  Asia  can  be 
maintained  through  making  the  most  of  economic  dynamism  in  Asian  economies  with  the 
assistance of economic policy actions in countries such as China. 
As  I  mentioned  in  the  beginning,  the  Bank  collects  information  on  the  regional  economies 
through  research  conducted  at  its  branches.  As  I  have  already  said,  I  worked  in  the  Oita 
branch of the Bank for a year and a half during the early 1990s, and one of the advantages 
that  I  enjoyed  as  General  Manager  was  being  able  to  hear  candid  views  from  the 
management  of  various  firms  in  the  region  regardless  of  firm  size.  I  had  an  experience  of 
visiting  a  small  convenience  store  at  the  time  and  hearing  views  on  the  business  of 
convenience  stores  from  a  couple  managing  the  store  in  their  family  room  upstairs.  The 
name, the Bank of Japan, may give you the impression that we are making policy judgments 
only from macroeconomic data or information collected in the metropolis, but this is not so. 
Since the interest rate policy affects areas throughout the country, we make efforts to collect 
a wide array of information to make our judgment. To this end, I would like to ask for your 
continued support. 
I am looking forward to hearing your views on the current situation of and issues facing the 
Kyushu economy as well as your requests to the Bank. 
Thank you very much for your kind attention. 
to 
BIS Review 151/2008 
 7
