Caleb M Fundanga: The importance of cross border information 
exchange for Zambia 
Remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the launch of the 
Alumniportal Deutschland, Lusaka, 25 November 2008. 
 • Her Excellency the Ambassador of the Germany Embassy in Zambia 
• Management and staff from the Germany Embassy in Zambia 
• Fellow alumni 
• Members of the press 
• Distinguished invited guests 
• Ladies and gentlemen 
Guten  Abend  meine  Damen  und  Herren.  I  am  truly  honoured  to  officiate  at  this  important 
Launch of the Alumniportal Deutschland. I am informed that Africa has a rare honour of being 
the  first  continent  to  implement  the  Alumniportal  Deutschland.  I  am  certain  that  our 
implementation process will define the failure or success of the whole project. We thus have 
a huge challenge to ensure that we achieve success and provide a benchmark for others to 
emulate. However, looking at the many beaming faces present in this room, I have no doubt 
that we will provide more than just a benchmark for others to follow. I am glad to note that we 
are all optimistic on the success of this project in Zambia in particular and Africa in general. 
We have a duty to represent our continent and give it the honour that it so deserves. 
Your  Excellency,  the  Launch  of  the  Alumniportal  could  not  have  come  at  more  opportune 
time when cross border information exchange has become cardinal in every aspects of life 
especially trade. I am reliably informed that almost 250,000 people from all over the world 
receive  education  or  training  in  Germany  annually.  Furthermore,  I  am  advised  that  about 
2000 African students are awarded a degree every year. The Germany curricular is certainly 
becoming increasingly influential in business and other field in Africa. This is beneficial to our 
continent as we are in a position to benefit from interactions with a diverse human resource 
in alumni activities after completion of the courses or training. 
However, after graduation, a good number of us Zambians have a tendency to forget and cut 
off  all  windows  of  communications  with  the  past.  We  properly  pack  our  certificates  and 
contacts in our archives and let them accumulate dust. We therefore, end up forgetting the 
precious friends that were once a great part of our lives and a source of knowledge. It is no 
wonder that the country’s representations at International Institutions like the United Nations, 
International Monetary Fund and the World Bank is very low. This is a sharp contrast to the 
levels  of  representations  at  such  institutions  by  other  African  countries  especially  in  West 
Africa. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, on numerous occasions, our businesses have dwindled mainly due 
to lack of genuine suppliers, reliable customers or due to excessive costs. These are mainly 
caused  by  a  lack  of  knowledge  of  cheaper  sources  of  inputs,  little  knowledge  about 
customers and supply bottlenecks as a result of dealing with many agents in the supply line. 
This is costly and no business can be profitable in the medium to long term without proper 
networks  in  their  business  lines.  Net  working  is  about  creating  a  set  of  contacts  and 
subsequently  building  a  trusting  and  genuine  relationship  with  these  people.  Networking 
provides  the  opportunity  to  discover  people  who  may  be  able  to  offer  assistance  to  one’s 
business and who may also benefit from the assistance that one has to offer. 
In this global economy, millions of transactions are made on a daily basis across borders, 
regions  and  continents.  For  these  transactions  to  be  cost  effective  and  profitable  there  is 
need  to  remove  information  asymmetries  and  to  reduce  the  risk  of  moral  hazard.  These 
significant  impediments  can  greatly  be  avoided  by  counting  on  the  contacts  that  one  may 
BIS Review 150/2008 
 1
have in a different country region or continent. The end product would thus be increase in 
economic welfare for all. 
Your Excellency, at a country level, Zambia still requires significant levels of investment in 
many sectors of the economy to achieve desirable levels of growth. The country possesses 
abundant natural resources and human capital. It is also surrounded with eight neighbouring 
countries  and  close  proximity  to  the  large  market  of  South  Africa,  a  surface  area  of  over 
750,000  sq  km,  and  an  approximate  population  of  over  11  million  people.  Its  active 
participation  in  the  SADC  Trade  Protocol  and  the  COMESA/FTA  offers  preferential  tariff 
access  to  market  potential  of  about  380  million  plus  people.  The  country  also  boasts  of  a 
suitable  climate,  peace  and  a  multi-party  competitive  democratic  political  system.  The 
country  thus  possesses  all  the  necessary  attributes  for  sustainable  economic  growth  and 
development. 
However,  most  economic  resources  remain  untapped  due  to  low  investments.  The  low 
investment  levels  in  the  country  could  partly  be  attributed  to  the  lack  of  knowledge  of  the 
local  situation  by  the  potential  investors.  In  order  to  complement,  Government’s  efforts  in 
marketing the country’s investment potential, we all need to use our contacts and friends to 
disseminate information on the vast economic potential that exists in the country.  
With  the  current  economic  challenges  emanating  global  financial  meltdown,  the  need  for 
increased  investment  levels  in  the  country  can  not  be  over  emphasised.  Therefore,  I 
challenge all of us gathered here today, to take advantage of the Alumniportal and market 
not  only  our  Curriculum  Vitaes  or  businesses  but  also  our  country.  Such  initiatives  will  no 
doubt  increase  awareness  among businessmen  outside  the  country  and  lead  to increased 
investment that would result in job creation that our citizens so much need. We are therefore 
in a better position to contribute a little to the economic growth of our country through this 
Alumniportal. 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  personally,  since  my  graduation  from  Konstanz 
University in 1985, I have managed to keep my contacts close to my heart. I have continued 
to benefit immensely from the interactions and friendship with most alumni from my days in 
Germany. I can even boast that in the process my contacts have expanded ten fold. I enjoy 
interacting with people whom I have a common interest and even those who have different 
views on several issues. 
In closing, let me reiterate that I have no doubt that the Alumniportal Deuschland will enable 
alumni to tap into an invaluable source of skills, vast experience and necessary expertise in 
many areas of development. It will link people beyond professional and cultural boundaries 
and  organisational  sectors  meaning  that  it  will  act  as  a  catalyst  for  rapid  and  continuous 
success. In a global world, success can only be guaranteed from long term cooperation and 
constant interactions with business partners and friends. Let us build our potential through 
the Alumniportal and in effect add to our own successes. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 150/2008
