José De Gregorio: The international financial crisis and its impact on the 
Chilean economy 
Speech by Mr José De Gregorio, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, presented before 
the Honorable Senate of the Republic, Santiago de Chile, 8 October 2008. 
 Mr. President of the Senate,  
In response to your invitation to participate in this special session of the Honorable Senate, I 
would  like  to  share  with  this  audience  our  vision  on  the  severe  financial  crisis  the  world 
economy is enduring, as well as its implications on our country.  
The world financial crisis and international growth 
The financial crisis being experienced by developed countries is the outcome of a period of 
stability,  with  abundant  liquidity,  fast  economic  growth  and  an  asset  price  bubble.  This 
combination  of  aggregate  factors  yields,  as  it  frequently  happens,  to  a  cycle  of  high  credit 
growth.  The  problem  is  that  this  occurred  during  an  extremely  accelerated  process  of 
financial innovation in market segments that were poorly or ambiguously regulated – mainly 
in the US. 
Low interest rates prompted an intense search for higher returns. Individuals with little or no 
ability to repay were lent for housing and, to reduce risks, credits were securitized and often 
taken out of the banks’ balance sheets (i.e.  Structured Investment Vehicles and conduits). 
Money was lent on the assumption that housing prices would continue on the rise, so the 
mortgage was all that was needed to relax lending standards. Also, the real-estate bubble 
encouraged the demand for homes to be used as financial assets.  
These  credits  were  sold  to  agencies  that  did  not  do  a  diligent  risk  assessment,  and  that 
triggered  contamination  not  only  throughout  the  US  financial  system  at  large,  but  also  to 
other developed economies. Risk-rating agencies were unable to give the proper ratings to 
complex  instruments.  In  addition,  there  was  a  severe  conflict  of  interests  in  the  risk-rating 
system. The executive compensation structure also encouraged the search for returns with 
little attention to the risks involved. 
That it is costly to lend to bad debtors that will not repay goes without question, but this can 
hardly  spark  off  a  crisis  of  the  proportions  we  are  seeing  today.  The  problem  worsened 
because of the way banks decided to get rid of these loans, the way they were rated, and the 
financial  instruments  that  were  devised  to  reduce  risks  and  make  it  appear  as  they  had 
vanished  when  they  had  only  shifted.  There  are  also  doubts  whether  the  operations  of 
derivatives markets have been as transparent as they should have been or if they have been 
manipulated. The paradox here is that in the banking system, whose purposes must be credit 
intermediation  and  risk  hedging,  it  seems  that  risks  were  covered  up  rather  than  covered 
against, in an intricate web of derivatives (and acronyms) favored by regulations that did not 
measure up to the challenges.  
Chile suffered a major banking crisis in the early 1980s, part of which can be blamed on poor 
regulation,  which  cost  the  country,  only  in  GDP  terms,  a  drop  of  16%  between  1982  and 
1983. The lessons learned the hard way have provided the basis for strict banking regulation, 
where  banking  business  supervision  and  limits  to  risk  exposure  prevent  episodes  like  the 
ones we are now seeing abroad from being replicated in our economy.  
Regarding  the  external  scenario  we  face,  consensus  projections  and  information  at  hand 
show  that  the  international  economy  continues  to  grow  and,  surprisingly,  there  is  a 
decoupling between developed economies and the rest of the world.  
BIS Review 123/2008 
 1
As can be expected in such a situation, and from the reactions we have seen at the global 
level, the world will see a deceleration, but from varied levels. While the developed world will 
probably  go  through  a  recession,  emerging  economies  will  moderate  growth.  This  may  be 
helped  by  the  current-account  surplus  accumulation  of  emerging  markets,  favored  by  high 
commodity prices and more responsible economic policies than in the past. For example, the 
substantial hoarding of international reserves in many countries, Chile included, allows the 
financing  of  deficits  for  several  years  to  weather  the  turbulences  via  domestic  growth. 
Overall,  more  severe  effects  on  emerging  economies’  growth  from  a  prolonged  period  of 
weakness in developed countries cannot be ruled out. 
The reserve accumulation program and liquidity provision 
Confronted with the uncertain outcome of the financial crisis in developed countries, where 
difficulties in funding for emerging economies could not be ruled out, and at a time when the 
Chilean peso had appreciated significantly, the Central Bank of Chile deemed appropriate to 
strengthen  its  international  liquidity  position.  To  that  end,  in  April  it  began  an  international 
reserve accumulation program.  
In recent weeks, particularly after the downfall of Lehmann Brothers in September, signs of 
more severely constrained international financial markets and tight foreign currency liquidity 
conditions  began  to  surface.  Chile  was  no  exception.  Accordingly,  on  September  29,  the 
Board of the Central Bank of Chile decided to terminate the reserve accumulation program. 
During  its  application,  5.75  billion  dollars  were  acquired,  amounting  to  70%  of  the  initially 
announced plan, which is the equivalent to an increase of 30% in international liquidity over 
the level of end of March 2008. 
In  addition,  and  to  reduce  tensions  in  foreign  exchange  market  liquidity,  the  Bank  has 
auctioned off one billion US dollars under the foreign currency swap modality where offers 
are made in terms of libor plus a premium. At first, this program considers two more auctions 
for  a  combined  total  amount  of  one  billion  US  dollars.  To  sterilize  the  monetary  effects  of 
these  operations  and  prevent  effects  on  peso  liquidity,  Repo  window  operations  are  being 
offered at the monetary policy rate at 28 days.  
In  this  aspect,  it  is  necessary  to  contextualize  the  Chilean  banking  sector  foreign 
indebtedness, especially the short-run component. Banking sector debt amounting to nearly 
2.7 billion US dollars is maturing in the last quarter of this year, that is, less even than the 
reserves accumulated from April to date. Meanwhile, the total external debt of the banking 
sector overall amounts to some 13 billion dollars, the equivalent to 60% of total reserves. The 
level  of  Central  Bank  reserves  is  sufficient  to  back  the  normal  operation  of  the  financial 
system,  in  particular  its  needs  for  foreign  funding.  The  Chilean  financial  system  must  be 
capable  of  securing  funds  in  international  markets,  a  feature  it  has  displayed  for  several 
years already. However, should access to foreign funds and liquidity complicate further, the 
Central Bank is well prepared and equipped to take decisive action. Precisely the levels of 
international reserves can do the job.  
International reserve management 
To  administer  international  reserves,  the  Central  Bank  has  separate  responsibilities  at 
various hierarchical levels, complying with international recommendations on the matter, and 
which  have  been  evaluated  by  the  IMF.  In  addition,  internal  and  independent  auditors 
perform  periodical  audits  to  review  the  Bank’s  investment  procedures.  An  internal  middle 
office is in charge of monitoring compliance with the investment guidelines and parameters 
defined by the Board, on a daily basis. 
This  year,  the  investment  policy  for  internally  managed  reserves  has  been  revised  on  two 
occasions, which resulted in updating the benchmark comparison, credit risk, and portfolio 
2 
 BIS Review 123/2008
duration, to better safeguard the Bank’s assets and address international markets’ volatility. 
The  main  changes  consisted  in  reducing  banking  credit  risk  associated  with  deposits  in 
commercial banks maturing in or before one year. The reference composition for banking risk 
was reduced from 37% to 20%, while for sovereign risk it was raised from 63% to 80%.  
Furthermore,  during  this  year  the  minimum  risk  rate  for  banks  to  be  eligible  was  changed 
from  A-  to  A,  also  restricting  investments  in  banking  institutions  rated  A  and  A+  to  a 
maximum of 5% of the investment portfolio. In line with the new bank deposit policy, deposits 
maturing in the months of October and November will not be renewed, in order to comply 
with the newly defined ceilings before December. 
Regarding  asset  breakdown  by  maturity,  60%  of  resources  in  the  internally  managed 
portfolio are invested in short-term instruments, with average maturity of three months, and 
the  remaining  40%  is  invested  in  long-term  securities  (mainly  sovereign  bonds)  with  a 
duration of 30 months. Thus, average duration for the overall portfolio is 13.9 months. The 
reference currency composition remains 59% in US dollars and 41% in euros. 
Despite  turbulences  in  international  financial  markets,  and  considering  that  the  biggest 
fraction of resources is invested in fixed-income sovereign instruments, the annualized return 
obtained from managing the Central Bank's international reserves in the first half of 2008 was 
3.47%  measured  in  foreign  currency.1  The  differential  return  obtained  with  respect  to  the 
benchmark structure was 0.15%.  
Implications of the ongoing crisis on the Chilean economy 
It is premature to try to quantify the consequences of the crisis on the Chilean or the world 
economy. There is great uncertainty, but still there are two aspects worth noting which point 
at the core of the Bank's objectives. One is associated with the financial markets’ operation 
and the other with inflationary prospects. 
Regarding  financial  stability,  our  powers  and  capacities  for  liquidity  provision  permit  us  to 
mitigate  the  financial  consequences  of  these  developments  occurring  outside  our  borders. 
Certainly, borrowing costs will go up, because credit constraints are an increasingly global 
phenomenon  from  which  there  is  no  escaping.  But  the  Central  Bank  must  safeguard  the 
normal functioning of the payments system, and that is what we were set out to do when we 
began hoarding reserves as an investment in stability.  
Since  the  outset  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  Central  Bank  has  been  not  only  attentive  to 
developments, but also analyzing much more stressful alternative scenarios and assessing 
the best policy responses to each of them. Although the reserve accumulation program was 
motivated by the possibility of having to face even worse scenarios than we have seen, we 
are  well  prepared  to  deal  with  bigger  complications  and  shield  our  economy  from  their 
effects. It was in this context that we decided to offer the aforesaid foreign currency swap. In 
yesterday’s tender offer, 30 of the 500 million dollars were awarded, which is evidence that 
the international liquidity problems are being properly managed by banks without having to 
resort to our credit lines. Notwithstanding, the Central Bank of Chile will continue to monitor 
the external financial conditions in order to mitigate the domestic impact of potentially bigger 
complications. 
From  the  inflationary  standpoint,  our  latest  Monetary  Policy  Report  assumed  that  the 
international  scenario  would  not  contribute  in  any  significant  manner  to  reduce  inflation. 
However, our risk scenario also assumed that a further deterioration of the world economy 
could not be ruled out, and we are seeing it today. Most likely, in the near future world growth 
projections will be significantly adjusted downward, helping to reduce inflationary pressures 
                                                 
1   As a function of the benchmark basket of the investment portfolio. 
BIS Review 123/2008 
 3
in the medium term. In addition, commodity prices have dropped recently, including a sharp 
reduction in the prices of oil and grains, especially wheat.  
Our objective and commitment is that annual inflation gradually converge, over a two-year 
period, to its 3% target, so monetary policy will continue to be oriented to complying with said 
objective. The potential inflationary consequences of events occurring internationally will be 
duly  pondered.  We  have  in  place  a  flexible  monetary  policy  that  allows  for  gradual 
adjustments to both changing international conditions and domestic developments, strongly 
committed  with  inflation  control,  because  low  inflation  ensures  the  necessary  stability  for 
sustained economic growth. We do this while never neglecting our obligation with the stability 
of  the  payment  system.  Therefore,  in  the  past  several  weeks  we  have  also  contributed  to 
alleviate liquidity stress. Our commitment is to continue to walk this road to the extent that 
circumstances so dictate. 
Our economy is not immune to episodes occurring elsewhere in the world and that is what 
we  have  been  experiencing.  However,  we  are  on  a  good  stand  to  deal  with  very  adverse 
environments,  and  it  is  the  commitment  of  the  Central  Bank  Board  to  ensure  the  best 
possible  performance  of  the  Chilean  economy  in  times  of  turmoil  and  uncertainty  at  their 
highest. With that in mind, we have established a monetary/foreign exchange policy scheme 
–  as  well  as  an  international  liquidity  position  –  that  will  help  us  soften  the  potential 
repercussions of the current problems of the world economy. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 123/2008
