Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The financial crisis and global imbalances – two 
sides of the same coin 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Asia Europe Economic Forum conference “The Global Financial Crisis: Policy 
choices in Asia and Europe”, Beijing, 9 December 2008. 
 Introduction1
When  analysing  the  current  financial  crisis  the  temptation  might  arise  to  attribute  all  the 
responsibilities to the excesses of the US financial system. I think this would be a mistake. 
While excessive debt creation and risk mispricing are clearly the root cause of the crisis, we 
should not forget that in order to make a market you need buyers and sellers. And this crisis 
is as much a crisis of sellers as of buyers. True, most of the toxic assets were originated in 
the  major  financial  centres.  But  they  were  distributed  not  only  in  the  US  but  also  in  other 
advanced economies as well as in emerging markets. Market participants in these countries 
have often bought assets without fully understanding their risk profile. Furthermore, there has 
been an insufficient production of alternative assets around the world, compared to the large 
amount of savings available.  
Although global macroeconomic conditions might not be at the origin of the crisis, they have 
contributed  to  it.  To  help  solve  the  crisis,  we  should  not  only  overhaul  the  regulatory 
framework for financial markets but also ensure a better macroeconomic management of our 
economies. This should be one of the main focuses of the G20 agenda. 
I  would  like  tonight  to  briefly  elaborate  on  the  close  intertwining  of  the  current  crisis  and 
global imbalances. I would like to consider how we can break the vicious circle and how we 
should respond to the crisis both in the short and the longer term. I will argue that we need a 
strong  and  appropriate  policy  response  at  global  level.  Yet,  in  considering  robust  and 
consistent  macro  and  micro  policy  measures,  we  should  ask  ourselves:  what  measures 
would have prevented the current problems? What measures could avert future problems? 
And what are the pre-conditions for these measures to succeed? Importantly, we also need 
to  start  thinking  hard  about  the  longer  run:  how  should  the  entire  global  monetary  and 
financial system move forward? And what role should emerging market economies like China 
play? 
In my speech tonight, I would like therefore to address these two issues – the circularity and 
the policy response – in turn. 
The global crisis 
1.  
The  build-up  of  exceptionally  large  global  imbalances  in  the  last  few  years  was  an  early 
symptom  of  the  growing  risks  faced  by  the  global  economy.  These  risks  have  now 
materialised. Their home-grown causes, such as insufficient savings and rising indebtedness 
in some advanced economies, excessive risk-taking and poor risk management, an overly 
inflated  financial  sphere,  and  the  emergence  of  asset  and  real  estate  price  bubbles,  now 
appear obvious. But they were more difficult to spot ex ante. By contrast, the home-grown 
                                                 
1  
I wish to thank A. Mehl and M. Fratzscher for their contribution to preparing this speech. The opinions reflect 
those of the author. 
BIS Review 156/2008 
 1
“anomalies”  and  imbalances  were  more  clearly  reflected  in  large  external  imbalances  at 
global level. These were more widely recognised and acknowledged.  
In  fact,  many  of  the  macro  roots  of  the  current  crisis  were  behind  the  widening  of  global 
imbalances in the last decade. Let me just mention three issues: 
• 
First, the marked asymmetry characterising the global financial system. On the one 
hand, rapid financial innovation and the sophistication of financial products in some 
mature economies have spurred consumer indebtedness through easy internal and 
external  financing.  On  the  other  hand,  pervasive  financial  under-development  in 
some  emerging  economies  has  encouraged  the  recycling  of  hefty  savings  and 
current  account  surpluses  into  the  financing  of  ever-growing  mature  economy 
deficits. 
Second, there are profound asymmetries in the international monetary system. On 
the  one  hand,  floating  exchange  rates  have  prevailed  among  mature  economy 
currencies  since  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods  system  in  1971,  a  collapse 
which was also due to major imbalances in the global economy. On the other hand, 
exchange  rates  have  remained  heavily  managed  in  emerging  economies,  notably 
vis-à-vis  the  US  dollar.  This  is  why  some  academics  referred  to  the  current 
international  monetary  system  as  “Bretton  Woods  II”.2  Under  this  system,  the  US 
has run large current account deficits, which are the source of export-led growth for 
other  countries,  and  they  in  turn  have  bought  up  dollars  and  dollar-denominated 
assets to fund the US deficit and growing external indebtedness. In particular, there 
have  been  significant  purchases  by  these  countries  of  paper  issued  by  US 
government-sponsored enterprises, which play a key role in US housing markets. 
A third related factor is insufficient macroeconomic discipline. In some economies, 
macroeconomic policies have not always been sufficiently focused on medium-term 
stability and sustainability. This has exacerbated domestic and external imbalances 
and, ultimately, heightened risks to the global economy. 
  Some observers were aware that risks were rapidly building up and sent early signals. Back 
in 2004 the ECB warned in particular about the “uncertainties” created by “persistent external 
imbalances  in  some  regions  of  the  world  and  their  potential  repercussions  on  the 
sustainability  of  global  economic  growth”.3  Repeated  efforts  to  draw  attention  to  the  risks 
posed by global imbalances culminated with the launch in 2006 of multilateral consultations 
among systemic economies under the umbrella of the IMF. For sure, there was no lack of 
analysis or discussion. But there was a lack of corrective action, and a lack of enforcement of 
the agreed corrective policy measures. 
What we are witnessing today is a disorderly unwinding of the past build-up of imbalances. 
Not only are growth forecasts being revised downwards sharply, but so are current account 
projections. Consider just one figure: the November International Monetary Fund projections 
suggest that the US current account deficit could come down to 3.3% of GDP by next year. 
This is almost a full percentage point less than the figure projected in April. Importantly, this 
is  nearly  a  halving  from  the  peak  deficit  reached  two  years  ago.  But  this  adjustment  is 
accompanied by several powerful factors: considerably heightened risk aversion; significant 
real estate, financial asset and oil price corrections; sharp reversals in the direction of capital 
flows  and  exchange  rate  movements;  mounting  pressures  on  external  financing  for  some 
emerging  economies;  and,  last  but  not  least,  a  marked  deterioration  in  global  growth 
prospects. 
                                                 
2   See e.g. Michael P. Dooley, David Folkerts-Landau and Peter Garber, “The Revised Bretton Woods System”, 
International Journal of Finance and Economics, 4 October 2004, vol. 9, pp. 307-313. 
3   See the editorial of the January 2004 ECB Monthly Bulletin. 
2 
 BIS Review 156/2008
Hence,  while  we  are  only  now  starting  to  fully  understand  the  imbalances  in  domestic 
financial  sectors,  we  have  been  aware  of  the  external  imbalances  for  some  time.  But  little 
was  done  about  it,  the  attitude  being  that  it  was  somebody  else’s  problem.  Had  we  taken 
these symptoms more seriously, and had we taken appropriate preventive policy action, we 
might  have  been  able  to  avoid  or  at  least  significantly  lessen  the  adversity  of  the  current 
crisis. The mutual reinforcement of domestic imbalances and external imbalances continues 
to pose a major risk to the global economy at the current juncture. 
The policy responses 
2.  
How can we break this vicious circle then? How should we respond to the crisis and reduce 
imbalances, both in the short and longer run?  
In  the  short  term,  what  we  need  is  a  strong  and  appropriate  policy  response  from  all 
competent authorities, both on the macro side and on the regulatory side. 
Consider the macro side first: 
• 
The  ECB  was  one  of  the  first  authorities,  together  with  other  central  banks,  to 
respond  to  the  liquidity  problems  in  the  financial  system.  We  have  continually 
consulted and cooperated with other major central banks in unprecedented ways to 
provide liquidity and reduce financial market strains. For example, on 8 October this 
year we cut interest rates simultaneously with six other central banks, when we saw 
inflationary  pressures  easing,  as  well  as  inflation  expectations  diminishing  and 
remaining  anchored  to  price  stability.  The  People’s  Bank  of  China  itself  mirrored 
these efforts and decided on the very same day to cut its benchmark deposit and 
lending  rates  and  commercial  bank  reserve  requirements.  Since  the  start  of  the 
crisis, we have therefore achieved a level of trust and cooperation within the central 
bank  community  that  some  would  have  considered  unthinkable  a  couple  of  years 
ago. 
Governments  across  the  globe  have  resolutely  taken  the  necessary  measures  to 
stabilise  financial  systems  and  respond  to  diminishing  growth  prospects.  The  G7 
Plan of Action adopted on 11 October – fully endorsed by the IMF membership – 
calling for “urgent and exceptional action”. On both sides of the Atlantic, they have 
earmarked several percentage points of GDP to guarantee exposures, recapitalise 
banking sectors and avert systemic solvency risks. They have used fiscal measures 
to  stimulate  domestic  activity,  when  appropriate  and  allowed  by  domestic 
circumstances.  China  has  again  joined  in  the  global  efforts  with  the  recent 
announcement of a stimulus package of close to USD 600 billion to help sustain its 
domestic expansion and to remain a global growth engine. 
Take now the regulatory response: 
• 
We now have a consensus at the highest political level on the principles of financial 
market reform, which draws on earlier work by the Financial Stability Forum. As you 
know,  three  weeks  ago  the  leaders  of  the  20  systemically  largest  economies  sat 
around the same table to devise these principles. And the diagnosis was clear: the 
global  financial  system  needs  more  transparency  and  accountability;  sounder 
regulation;  more  integrity;  more 
international  cooperation;  and  a  reform  of 
international  financial  institutions  so  that  they  more  accurately  reflect  changing 
economic weights in the world economy, and so that they have more legitimacy and 
effectiveness. 
Further  work  will  need  to  be  done  on  the  details  of  some  of  these  reforms,  Their 
ultimate test will be the extent to which they genuinely solve current problems and 
avert  future  ones.  It  is  important  for  us  to  ensure  their  swift  and  comprehensive 
implementation to convince markets of the benefits to come. But the key issue here 
  BIS Review 156/2008 
 3
–  in  my  view  –  is  confidence.  What  we  ultimately  need  to  achieve  is  to  rebuild 
confidence in the financial system and among market participants. Only confidence 
will bring about the normal functioning of markets, the intermediation process and of 
all transmission mechanisms. 
We are now in the middle of a storm, but it’s still worth thinking well ahead and envisaging 
new circumstances and opportunities. Remember that when the delegates from the 44 Allied 
nations gathered at the Mount Washington Hotel in Bretton Woods, New Hampshire, in the 
summer of 1944, the Second World War was still underway. Yet the conference laid down 
principles and established institutions that governed the global economy for three decades. 
Many of them are still in place today, more than 60 years later. 
The difficult phase we are passing through now, while certainly not as cataclysmic as 1944, 
may well prove to be a watershed. We had the original Bretton Woods system until 1971. 
Since the turn of the millennium, we have had what some have called a market-led “Bretton 
Woods II”. Let me ask then: should we move now to a “Bretton Woods III”, that is, to a new 
order for the global financial and monetary system? And if so, how?  
This question requires deep thinking and cannot obviously be resolved in a few minutes. I 
would like nevertheless to give you some food for thought.  
One point to consider is that any new Bretton Woods should combine issues related to trade, 
finance  and  macroeconomic  policies.  The  three  are  closely  intertwined,  not  only  in  good 
times  but  also  in  bad  times.  We  are  seeing  a  paralysis  in  world  trade,  not  because  of 
protectionism, as in the 1930s, but because of the absence of trade finance, so essential to 
commerce in today’s world. Trade issues are dealt with by the WTO, but closer ties need to 
be established with the IMF and the World Bank, given that global imbalances have both a 
trade and a financial dimension.  
Another thought is that in a globalised world all countries tend to become smaller and more 
open, and serve as less of an anchor for economic policies. This requires us to rethink how 
we  assess  the  prospects  for  national  economies  and  policies.  We  need  a  top-down  and 
bottom-up approach to build up the macro scenario and address the policy challenges. For 
instance, in an integrated world with high savings, monetary and fiscal policies might have to 
be different than in a world with low savings.  
A third remark, and lesson from the crisis, is that external imbalances are often a reflection, 
and even a prediction, of internal imbalances. Therefore economic policies conducted in our 
member states, whether advanced or emerging, should not ignore external imbalances and 
just assume that they will sort themselves out.  
My fourth and final observation is that economic policies should be based on an appropriate 
institutional  framework,  aimed  at  ensuring  medium-term  stability.  Some  kind  of  disciplinary 
regime  should  ensure  that  short-term  objectives  do  not  overshadow  or  supplant  long-term 
priorities.  
It is not easy to see how these thoughts can be incorporated into an institutional framework. 
However, I consider that the multilateral consultation on global imbalances launched by the 
IMF two years ago was a good starting point. It is a pity that it had little follow-up. 
That framework had the advantage of bringing together some of the key players to examine 
the imbalances which were emerging at global level and were mirroring internal imbalances. 
Had  the  policy  recommendations  which  were  made  at  that  time  been  followed  more 
seriously, the current crisis would probably have had less of an impact.  
To  be  sure,  if  the  US  had  adopted  measures  to  improve  net  savings,  in  particular  by 
households,  as  suggested,  the  housing  bubble  would  have  been  more  limited  and  its 
bursting less dramatic. Had the euro area further improved the functioning of its markets, the 
impact of the slowdown would have been more contained. If China had focused more on its 
domestic  market  rather  than  basing  its  growth  on  exports,  in  particular  through  a policy  of 
4 
 BIS Review 156/2008
competitive exchange rate policy, its economy would have been less vulnerable to external 
shocks. 
All these policies might not have been sufficient, by themselves, to ward off the crisis, but 
they  certainly  would  have  made  our  economies  more  resilient.  Any  revitalisation  of  the 
multilateral  consultation  process  needs  to  address  issues  related  to  financial  markets  and 
trade as well, as implied by the recent G20 summit in Washington.  
Highly  developed,  well-functioning  and  regulated  financial  sectors  are  crucial  for  allocating 
capital efficiently and thus for the long-term growth prospects of an economy. This applies to 
many  emerging  market  economies  today,  including  China.  The  lack  of  a  deep,  well-
functioning financial sector has not prevented China from growing rapidly over the last few 
years.  But  it  has  prevented  it  from  growing  in  a  balanced  way,  making  direct  use  of  its 
internal savings. The difficulties in stimulating domestic demand in the face of a slowdown in 
global demand are partly due to the limitations of its financial sector.  
It would be quite damaging if the current crisis – the result of financial excesses – ended up 
further  discouraging  financial  development  in  emerging  markets.  Financial  repression 
ultimately  is  as  harmful  as  financial  excesses,  because  it  does  not  support  sustainable 
domestic growth.  
Globalisation has thrust together highly sophisticated markets and highly repressed markets. 
It has inflated the bubble and made the bursting of that bubble more dangerous. The Great 
Depression of the 1930s was intensified by protectionism. Today, fortunately, we might not 
have those protectionist reflexes, but trade looks likely to be a major propagator of the crisis, 
because of the contraction in trade finance resulting from the lack of trust within and between 
financial  systems.  The  adjustment  in  global  imbalances  risks  being  abrupt  and  disorderly. 
Financial  links  need  to  be  re-established  rapidly,  not  only  within  countries  but  also  among 
countries.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 156/2008 
 5
