Pierre Duguay: The quest for confidence: 400 years of money – from La 
Nouvelle France to Canada today 
Remarks  by  Mr  Pierre  Duguay,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  students  and 
faculty of Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec, 10 November 2008. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  Bank  of 
Canada’s website.  
 Good afternoon. It's a real pleasure to be here. 
As we celebrate the 400th anniversary of the founding of Quebec, I thought it would be fitting 
for me, as a central banker, to take a look at how money has evolved over part of the past 
four  centuries.  As  I  relinquish  my  responsibilities  for  the  issue  of  Canada's  bank  notes  to 
concentrate more fully on financial system stability, I welcome this opportunity to underline 
recent progress in the fight against counterfeiting. But I'm getting ahead of myself. I'd like to 
thank Laval University and professor Kevin Moran for making this event possible. 
The  history  of  money  is  fascinating.  It  reflects  economic,  political,  and  social  history.  The 
history of money in Canada is particularly colourful. Here, as elsewhere, it is largely the story 
of two opposing forces. On the one hand, there has always been a need for a secure and 
practical medium of exchange and store of value – that is, for sound money. Sound money is 
money in which we can justifiably place our confidence. On the other hand, there have also 
always been two main enemies of sound money – inflation and counterfeiting. It's an exciting 
story, this contest between sound money and the forces that can undermine it. 
Over the next 45 minutes, I'd like to tell you a bit of this story. I'll start by focusing on the early 
days  in  la  Nouvelle  France,  and  then  I'll  mention  two  important  developments  in  the  19th 
century. I will then provide a context for understanding modern money by briefly describing 
the role of the central bank. I'll conclude by covering a few recent developments in money, 
particularly electronic alternatives. I'm going to illustrate my remarks with slides of material 
from  the  National  Currency  Collection,  which  is  maintained  by  the  Bank  of  Canada.  But 
before I get started, I should say what I mean by "money."  
Money is one of those things. Everyone knows what it is – until they study it – and then it 
gets  more  complicated!  The  American  writer  Gertrude  Stein  said  that  it  was  the  ability  to 
understand and count money that differentiated humans from other animals.1  
A conventional definition of money is that it is a "medium of exchange" – we use it as the 
basic tool to settle commercial transactions. Money solves the many problems that arise with 
barter, such as the requirement for a "coincidence of wants." Money is also a "store of value." 
It can be saved for future use, and, unlike a private IOU, it is readily accepted because it is 
free  from  the  risk  of  default.  Indeed,  modern  economists  would  now  argue  that  the  main 
reason for the use of money as a means of settlement is the risk of default.2 Finally, money 
acts as a unit of account – it provides a uniform way to express prices, incomes, debts, and 
assets  numerically,  which  is  useful  for  guiding  production,  consumption,  savings,  and 
investment decisions.  
One peculiar thing about money is that in most of its modern forms, it doesn't have much 
intrinsic value – you can't eat it and you can't keep yourself warm with it. In fact, the bulk of 
                                                 
1   G. Stein, "Money," Saturday Evening Post, 22 August 1936. 
2   See, for example, J. Chiu and A. Lai, "Modelling Payments Systems: A Review of the Literature," Financial 
System Review (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, June 2007): 63-66. 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 1
money  nowadays  does  not  even  have  a  physical  form.  It  consists  of  deposits  in  financial 
institutions, which exist merely as data in computers.3 But money is nonetheless useful and 
valuable to the extent that it is a reliable store of value (because its value isn't being eroded 
by inflation), and to the extent that it can be trusted and readily accepted (because the note 
or coin can be ascertained as genuine). All to say, money is useful to the extent that people 
place confidence in it.  
Now, let's go back in time . . . to the 17th century.4  
The early days of money in Canada 
Long before the Europeans arrived in North America, natives were engaged in commerce, 
often using various "trade goods." Perhaps the most important trade good in this part of the 
world was wampum. Wampum is a string of shells, usually from clams and whelks [image: 
wampum beads].5 Its value came from its scarcity – it took a good deal of effort to produce. 
In  addition  to  its  use  in  commerce,  wampum  had  symbolic  properties  and  was  used  in 
ceremonies.  In  the  absence  of  sufficient  coinage,  wampum  was  used  as  money  after 
European colonization. Indeed, for part of the 17th century, wampum was legal tender in the 
Dutch and British-American colonies. But over time, the value of wampum "was reduced and 
finally destroyed by cheap imitations imported from Europe"6 – an interesting early example 
of the destructive power of counterfeiting.  
In July 1608, Samuel de Champlain founded Québec with the goal of permanent settlement. 
We don't know much about money during the first 50 years of the colony of Québec, but we 
can surmise that the first settlers probably used credit for some of their trade. Credit makes 
sense in a small community where everyone knows everyone. Beaver pelts were universally 
accepted as a medium of exchange, and so it's fitting that the beaver can still be found on 
our  5-cent  piece  [image:  "beaver  pelt  and  5-cent  piece"].  Wheat  and  moose  hides  also 
served the same function.7 But for the most part, "internal trade was probably carried on by 
barter and accounts kept with [trading companies]."8  
The  first  modern  money  in  the  colony  was  coinage,  initially  the  coins settlers  brought  with 
them – French coins, mostly (deniers, doubles, liards, and douzaines), as well as Hispano-
American piastres and their divisions. When there were enough of them, these coins were 
used for small, daily transactions. But two problems undermined their usefulness.  
First, because there was a trade deficit, many of the larger-value coins that were brought to 
the colony quickly disappeared. They were shipped to France in payment for supplies and 
manufactured  goods,  and  hoarded  by  colonists  as  a  hedge  against  uncertain  times.  To 
address the coin-shortage problem, the French authorities in Paris tried, unsuccessfully as it 
turned out, in 1670 and again in 1721-1722, to issue coins exclusively for use in New World 
colonies [image: 15 sols, 1670]. These experiments failed mostly because the coins could 
not be used beyond the borders of the colony. To keep existing coinage in the colony, the 
authorities in France also gave a higher value to "monnoye du pays" coins than "monnoye de 
                                                 
3   Bank  of  Canada.  Beads  to  Bytes:  Canada's  National  Currency  Collection  (Bank  of  Canada,  Ottawa: 
forthcoming). 
4   For perspective, a time line showing the history of money from prehistoric times to the present, with a focus on 
Canada, can be seen at: http://www.bankofcanada.ca/currencymuseum/eng/learning/history_flash.php. 
5   Before European colonization, various items were used as money by native peoples in the northern part of this 
continent. Along the west coast, for example, tusk-shaped dentalium shells were strung and used as money. 
6   The Story of Canada's Currency. Bank of Canada: 1990, p. 4. 
7   J. Powell, A History of the Canadian Dollar (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, 2005), p. 3. 
8   A. B. McCullough, Money and Exchange in Canada to 1900 (Toronto: Dundurn Press, 1984), p. 29. 
2 
 BIS Review 135/2008
France" coins. The premium was initially set at one-eighth in 1664, but was later increased to 
one  third.9  The  second  problem  was  that  coins  were  often  "clipped"  and  therefore 
underweight – which undermined confidence as to their worth.  
Necessity  being  the  mother  of  invention,  promissory  notes  became  popular.  A  promissory 
note is an IOU. The note pledges that it can, at some specified date, be redeemed for goods 
or  services  or  for  conventional  money  [image:  promissory  note].  Promissory  notes  have  a 
special place in the history of money. They are an early example of a great and enduring 
invention  –  paper  money  –  "the  gift,"  according  to  John  Kenneth  Galbraith,  "of  Americans 
and Canadians to the Western world."10  
In the late 17th century, the American colonies faced similar problems and came up with the 
same  response:  they  issued  promissory  notes.  While  both  the  United  States  and  Canada 
were pioneers in developing paper money, the style of each country's first paper money was 
quite different. In The Age of Uncertainty, Galbraith contrasted the "dull puritanical model of 
Massachusetts" paper money with the "sparkling example" of New France11 [image: playing 
card money and Massachusetts Bay note]. The "sparkling example" he was referring to was 
playing card money, an ingenious solution to a difficult problem, and believed to be the first 
paper money ever issued by a Western government.12  
In 1685, Intendant Jacques de Meulles issued three denominations of playing card money 
(15 sols, 40 sols, and 4 livres). Citizens were advised that the notes would be redeemed as 
soon as funds arrived from France. Partly because refusal to accept them as payment was 
punished with a fine, but mostly because they met a need, the cards circulated freely and 
were a great success. So much so that even though they were redeemed with French money 
later that year, more playing card money was issued the following year, and at various times 
thereafter.  Unlike  coins,  playing  card  money  did  not  leave  the  colony,  and  in  that  respect, 
represented a clear improvement. 
The  authorities  in  France,  however,  saw  the  idea  as  "extremely  dangerous,  nothing  being 
easier to counterfeit than this sort of money."13 In fact, it wasn't long before a conviction for 
counterfeiting card money occurred. In 1690, Pierre Malidor, a "surgeon," was sentenced to 
be  "flogged  on  the  naked  shoulders  by  the  King's  executioner  at  the  gate  of  the  Parish 
Church  of  Notre  Dame  in  this  town  [i.e.,  Quebec  City],  and  in  the  customary  squares  and 
places, in each of which he shall receive six lashes of the whip . . . ." Poor Mr. Malidor was 
also fined, bonded into "compulsory service," and banished from the city.14 This shows that 
counterfeiting  was  perceived  as  a  serious  threat  to  the  well-being  of  the  colony  –  which  it 
was. 
But in fact, it was that other enemy of sound money, inflation, that posed the greater threat to 
card money. By the early 1690s, soon after it had been introduced, excessive issuance of 
card money led to rising prices (or, from another point of view, to diminishing the value of 
money). The problem became so acute that, in 1717, card money was redeemed at 50 per 
                                                 
9   The  coin  shortage  "was  not  confined  to  Canada  –  there  was  a  shortage  of  coin  in  the  British  colonies,  in 
Britain, and in France itself. The shortage in France was as acute as in Canada and economic conditions were 
worse." McCullough, ibid, p. 34. 
10   J. K. Galbraith, The Age of Uncertainty (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1977), p. 180. 
11   J. K. Galbraith, ibid, p. 181. 
12   The first paper money was issued in China, circa 650 AD. 
13   A.  Shortt,  Documents  Relating  to  Canadian  Currency,  Exchange  and  Finance  during  the  French  Period, 
Volume I, quoted in J. Powell, op. cit., p. 5. Interestingly, playing card money was issued and used in France 
some hundred years later during the Revolution. 
14   A. Shortt, op. cit., p. 87. 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 3
cent of its face value and withdrawn "permanently" – despite the reality that no one had come 
up with a better medium of exchange.  
Adding  to  the  hardships  of  settlers,  the  colony  itself  lacked  stable  funding.  In  the  1720s, 
"France's  finances  were  still  not  strong  and  she  could  not  always  forward  the  necessary 
money:  in  1727  the  colony  received  only  5,000  livres . . .  to  apply  to  a  budget  of  308,156 
livres, and in 1728 and 1729 no specie at all was received."15 The (usually overspent) budget 
had to be funded, so another form of promissory note, les ordonnances de paiement, was 
issued  by  the  Treasury  in  Québec  in  values  ranging  from  20  sols  to  96  livres  [image: 
ordonnance de paiement]. 
But to meet the needs of daily commerce, a more practical form of money was required. So 
in  1729,  despite  the  "permanent"  ban,  and  this  time  with  the  permission  of  the  king,  the 
colonial government reintroduced card money. This was not playing card money, but money 
on card stock of a similar size. Initially again, "Confidence in this new card money was . . . 
high . . . . With issuance tightly controlled, card money traded at a premium for a while as the 
government increased its issuance of Treasury notes to pay for its operations."16  
In the late 1750s, the mounting costs of the war with the British, declining tax revenues, and 
rampant corruption, led to rapid inflation. In April 1759, the Marquis de Montcalm noted that 
necessities cost eight times more than when his troops had arrived four years earlier – that's 
an  annual  inflation  rate  of  almost  70  per  cent!  "People  fear,"  he  wrote,  "I  think  without 
foundation, that the government will . . . authorize a depreciation. This opinion induces them 
to sell and speculate at an extravagant scale"17 And indeed, immediately after Montcalm's 
defeat, paper money became all but worthless.18  
Following the Treaty of Paris, and on into the 19th century, many different forms of money 
circulated at the same time in Lower and Upper Canada, and in Nova Scotia and elsewhere. 
A  single  transaction  might  involve  a  Treasury  note,  paper  notes  from  different  merchants, 
gold,  silver,  or  copper  coins,  and  private  tokens.  Adding  to  the  confusion,  each  colony 
independently decided the value of the various currencies in circulation.  
Following  the  political  union  of  Lower  and  Upper  Canada  in  1841,  two  significant 
developments  helped  to  simplify  things:  decimalization  and  the  introduction  of  government 
notes. Decimalization – the introduction of dollars and cents as a unit of account – occurred 
in  the  years  just  before  and  after  Confederation,  largely  because  the  people  of  Canada 
wanted it, despite the wishes of British authorities for Canada to stick to pounds, shillings, 
and pence [image: example of dual currency note]. At that time, twenty shillings (or a pound) 
was worth four dollars. And, interestingly, I might add, "trente sous," which today commonly 
refers to 25 cents, was indeed worth one quarter of a dollar (or 15 pence). 
It  was  the  failure  of  two  small  Toronto  banks  in  the  late  1850s  that  led  to  a  demand  for 
"improved government supervision" – does that sound familiar? – and thus paved the way for 
government-issued notes.19 While the first commercial bank notes in Canada were issued as 
early as 1817 by the Montreal Bank (later called the Bank of Montreal), the first government 
notes  were  issued  in  1866  [image:  Province  of  Canada  note].  These  provincial  notes 
addressed  two  forms  of  uncertainty:  uncertainty  about  the  solvency  of  the  issuer,  and 
uncertainty  about  the  ease  of  redemption.  Many  notes  issued  by  private  banks  could  be 
                                                 
15   A. B. McCullough, op. cit., pp. 44-45. 
16   J. Powell, op. cit., p. 7. 
17   A.  Shortt,  Documents  Relating  to  Canadian  Currency,  Exchange  and  Finance  during  the  French  Period, 
Volume II, quoted in J. Powell, op. cit., p. 9. 
18   J. Powell, op. cit., p. 9. 
19   A. B. McCullough, op. cit., p. 112. 
4 
 BIS Review 135/2008
redeemed only within a limited area, and were subject to a discount that depended on the 
distance between where it was redeemed and the bank's head office.  
Before  we  move  to  the  20th  century,  I'll  mention  one  of  the  most  interesting  and  colourful 
counterfeiting  episodes  in  Canadian  history.  In  this  case,  counterfeiting  was  a  family 
business: Ed Johnson, the "king of counterfeiting," engraved the printing plates by hand, his 
five sons printed the notes, his two daughters forged the signatures on them, and his wife 
sold  the  counterfeits  to  a  wholesale  dealer.  The  Johnsons  were  caught  and  served  many 
years in prison, but not before they had put a million dollars worth of counterfeit Canadian 
and American currency into circulation – a significant sum in the 1880s. Banks accepted the 
forged  notes,  not  recognizing  them  as  counterfeits,  and  even  the  men  whose  signatures 
appeared on the notes couldn't distinguish the forged signatures from their own.  
The Johnsons were tracked down and brought to justice by Ontario's first full-time detective, 
the famous John Wilson Murray. Detective Murray travelled extensively in the United States, 
trying to track down the Johnson clan, before finally catching up with them in Toronto. The 
counterfeit  notes  were  extremely  well  executed,  but  they  "could  be  distinguished  from 
authentic notes because they were "too perfect" and lacked the engraving flaws present in 
authentic  notes."20  "Crime  lost  a  genius,"  Murray  said,  "when  old  man  Johnson  died"21 
[image: genuine note and Johnson counterfeit].  
For  the  sake  of  brevity,  I'm  going  to  skip  over  some  interesting  history  –  Prince  Edward 
Island's "holey dollar," the paper 25-cent "shinplaster," the issuance of $6 and $7 bank notes, 
the rise and fall of "phantom banks," among other developments. But I hope you're beginning 
to see that money works only to the extent to which people have confidence in it, and why 
the raison d'être of an effective monetary authority is always a "quest for confidence."  
Before  turning  to  the  modern  era,  let  me  underline  two  lessons  from  this  early  period  of 
history:  
• 
there's a basic need for money, and sound money makes business and commerce 
much easier; and  
two  main  threats  –  counterfeiting  and  inflation –  can  undermine  the  soundness  of 
money.  
 Money and the central bank 
To understand money in modern times, it's useful to know a bit about the role of the central 
bank.  
The  Bank  of  Canada  was  created  in  1934.  Interestingly,  proposals  to  establish  a  central 
bank, or something akin to it, go back a long way in Canada – almost 200 years. In 1820, an 
anonymous pamphlet published in Quebec "advocated the establishment of a government-
owned  national  bank  that  would  be  the  sole  issuer  of  paper  money."22  And  in  1841,  Lord 
Sydenham, Governor General of the United Province of Canada, proposed the establishment 
of  a  bank  with  many  of  the  powers  and  responsibilities  of  a  modern  central  bank.  Such  a 
bank, he thought, could finance public works, generate seigniorage, and make paper money 
more effective.  
                                                 
20   Quoted in J. Chant, "The Canadian Experience with Counterfeiting," Bank of Canada Review (Ottawa: Bank of 
Canada, Summer 2004): 42. 
21   V. Speer (compiler). "The Million Dollar Counterfeiting." Memoirs of a Great Detective: Incidents in the Life of 
John Wilson Murray, Chapter 30. 1904. Available at: http://gaslight.mtroyal.ca/murray30.htm. 
22   J. Powell, op. cit., p. 21. 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 5
The  Depression  of  the  1930s  provided  impetus  for  the  creation  of  a  central  bank.  A 
widespread sense that the banking system was not serving the public very well – at a time 
when the economy was contracting – led to support for the formation of a central bank.  
The Bank of Canada's mandate is to promote the economic and financial well-being of the 
country. The Bank does this in three important ways: first, by keeping inflation low, stable, 
and  predictable;  second,  by  supporting  a  safe  and  efficient  financial  system;  and  third,  by 
issuing money that is safe from counterfeiting and readily accepted. These activities help to 
provide a sound foundation for economic security and growth.  
The Bank of Canada issued its first bank notes in 1935. Each denomination was issued in 
separate French and English versions [image: 1935-issue bank notes]. This 1935 series was 
the only Bank of Canada series to have a $25 denomination. If you want to buy one of these 
notes, be warned: a single note can fetch up to $15,000 at auction! Since 1937, Canadian 
bank notes have been bilingual.  
To deter counterfeiting, the Bank has issued a new series of bank notes every 15 years or so 
[image: $20 bank note over the years]. Anti-counterfeiting features have included intaglio (or 
raised)  printing,  multicoloured  tints,  microprint,  optical  security  devices,  and  fluorescent 
fibres. But today's technology has increased the counterfeiting threat, and the Bank expects 
to  issue  new  bank  note  series  every  seven  years  or  so  in  the  future,  with  the  intention  of 
taking advantage of advances in anti-counterfeiting technology. 
In the summer of 2000, counterfeit $100 bank notes from the Birds of Canada series started 
to  show  up  in  stores  in  the  Windsor-Montréal  corridor.  They  contained  facsimiles  of  the 
security devices found in genuine notes, and they were printed on high-quality paper. More 
than  $5,000,000  worth  of  these  notes  were  put  into  circulation  before  the  culprits  were 
arrested  in  July  2001,  causing  many  retailers  to  refuse  to  accept  any  $100  bills  –  a  vivid 
demonstration of how counterfeiting undermines confidence and exacts many different kinds 
of costs.23  
This episode prompted the Bank to adopt a comprehensive strategy to deter counterfeiting. 
The  strategy  involved  intensified  efforts  to  develop  and  issue  bank  notes  with  enhanced 
security features, expanded education of retailers and consumers about bank note security, 
and active promotion of law-enforcement and prosecution efforts [image: bank note security 
features].  This  strategy  has  proven  very  effective  in  dealing  with  a  surge  in  counterfeiting 
from 2001 to 2004 [graph: counterfeit notes detected per million notes in circulation], but we 
remain very vigilant.  
In 2006, we reinforced this strategy by setting a quantitative objective to bring the number of 
counterfeit  notes  passed  in  a  year  to  fewer  than  100  for  each  million  genuine  notes  in 
circulation by 2009. Drawing on advances in science and technology, the Bank of Canada is 
busily involved in developing its next series of bank notes for issue starting in 2011, with a 
view to keeping counterfeiting below 50 parts per million. 
Before I turn to the future of money, I'd like to say a few words about the exchange rate.  
In  New  France  and  other  North  American  colonies,  the  value  of  local  currency  vis-à-vis 
foreign currencies was typically set by the government and altered in response to economic 
imperatives.  A  similar  approach  characterized  the  Bretton  Woods  system  of  pegged  but 
adjustable  exchange  rates,  which  defined  the  international  monetary  order  in  the  period 
following the Second World War.  
Canada was a pioneer in departing from that approach, by allowing its currency to float and 
have its value determined by market forces. With the exception of a short eight-year hiatus 
                                                 
23   J. Moxley, H. Meubus, M. Brown, "The Canadian Journey: An Odyssey into the Complex World of Bank Note 
Production," Bank of Canada Review (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, Autumn 2007): 47-55. 
6 
 BIS Review 135/2008
from June 1962 to May 1970, the Canadian dollar has floated freely since October 1950. As 
a trading nation, and a producer of both commodities and manufactured goods, we learned 
early  on  that  a  flexible  exchange  rate  can  facilitate  economic  adjustment.24  A  floating 
exchange rate sends important price signals to producers and consumers, prompting them to 
adjust  effectively  to  changing  circumstances.  It  also  permits  monetary  policy  to  focus  on 
maintaining  the  balance  between  overall  demand  and  supply,  and  thus  on  controlling 
domestic inflation.  
So that's the context for understanding money in modern times. The central bank strives to 
keep the enemies of sound money at bay by keeping inflation low and stable, and by making 
it difficult and unrewarding to counterfeit money. It also strives to maintain a sound financial 
system  so  that  money  can  be  effectively  and  efficiently  saved,  borrowed,  invested,  and 
transferred.  
financial  cost.  Because  changes 
The future of money 
What will money look like a decade or two from now? Will there even be physical money? Or 
will electronic alternatives replace money as we know it?  
For  many  decades  now,  I've  seen  many  premature  predictions  of  the  imminent  "death  of 
cash," so I will remain cautious. We do know that despite the many and rapidly developing 
alternatives  to  paper  money,  the  demand  for  "old-fashioned"  bank  notes  has  continued  to 
grow fairly steadily, in line with the overall economy.  
Having said that, it's useful to remember that bank notes and coins are simply a means of 
payment, and "alternative" means of payment have been developed, and some of them are 
gaining in popularity. Each means of payment has advantages and disadvantages in terms of 
convenience,  security,  and 
in  means-of-payment 
preferences  can  affect  both  the  demand  for  bank  notes  and  the  overall  costs  of  retail 
payments, the Bank of Canada monitors and analyzes them carefully.25  
At the retail level in Canada, credit cards, cash, and debit cards are all popular, with credit 
cards representing roughly 48 per cent of transactions by value, debit card about 30 per cent, 
and cash about 22 per cent. While in absolute terms, the use of cash remains fairly steady, 
there is clear evidence that it is in relative decline vis-à-vis the use of credit and debit cards. 
But it is the use of cheques that has seen the largest decline, as a result of the increasing 
use of debit cards.  
Not  surprisingly,  payment  method  preferences  are  affected  by  an  individual's  age  and 
income.  A  survey  conducted  by  the  Bank  of  Canada  shows  that  payment  methods  also 
depend on the size of the purchase. For purchases under $25, Canadians generally prefer to 
use  cash.  For  purchases  of  $26  to  $100,  debit  cards  are  the  most  popular  means  of 
payment.  For  purchases  over  $100,  credit  cards  are  the  most  popular.26  Credit  cards  are 
also  a  preferred  means  of  payment  across  distances.  Cash  has  one  attribute  that  many 
people find attractive – it offers privacy and protection against identity theft.  
In coming years, we will likely see an increase in "contactless" payments using credit, debit, 
and  stored-value  cards,  including  those  made  by  cell  phones.  Such  technology  promises 
convenience to consumers and retailers, but it also presents security challenges.  
                                                 
24   For a brief, informative overview of the history of Canada's exchange rate regimes, see J. Powell, op. cit., pp. 
53-73. 
25   See, for example, C. Arango and V. Taylor, "Merchants' Costs of Accepting Means of Payment: Is Cash the 
Least Costly?" Bank of Canada Review (Ottawa: Bank of Canada, Winter, 2008-2009), forthcoming. 
26   V.  Taylor.  "Trends  in  Retail  Payments  and  Insights  from  Public  Survey  Results."  Bank  of  Canada  Review 
(Ottawa: Bank of Canada, Spring 2006): 25-36. 
BIS Review 135/2008 
 7
While it's difficult to predict the future of money, it's safe to say it will be determined largely by 
people's preferences. We naturally gravitate towards a payment method that best suits our 
needs.  
Conclusion 
With  the  limitations  of  this  kind  of  presentation,  I've  really  only  scratched  the  surface  of 
Canada's monetary history. It is a fascinating and colourful story, and opens a window on our 
social, political, and economic history.  
Sound money is fundamental to our economic well-being. While counterfeiting and inflation 
are  ever-present  threats  to  sound  money,  Canada  has  pioneered  some  important 
innovations in deterring counterfeiting and in controlling inflation. The Bank of Canada plays 
a vital role by keeping inflation low, stable, and predictable; by supporting the stability and 
efficiency  of  the  financial  system;  and  by  producing  the  currency  we  depend  on  in  our 
commercial lives. In other words, we try to earn your confidence – and that of all Canadians 
– every day.  
The  next  time  you're  in  Ottawa,  I  encourage  you  to  visit  the  Currency  Museum  [image: 
Currency Museum]. It houses and displays some of the National Currency Collection, and it 
tells many interesting stories about money. It's a wonderful showcase . . . and it's free! The 
museum  also  has  a  terrific  website,  which  you  can  easily  find  by  visiting  the  Bank  of 
Canada's website, and clicking on "Museum" [image: Currency Museum web page]. 
Finally, if you'd like to learn more about money in Canada, I warmly recommend three books 
published  by  the  Bank  of  Canada  [image:  three  books]:  The  Art  and  Design  of  Canadian 
Bank  Notes,  which  explains  the  art  and  science  of  bank  note  design,  and  celebrates  the 
beauty  of  Canadian  bank  notes;  The  History  of  the  Canadian  Dollar,  which  tells  the 
fascinating story of our dollar and its place in history, economics, and finance; and the next 
book in our "souvenir" series: Beads to Bytes: Canada's National Currency Collection, which 
will be available at the end of this month, and illustrates the role money plays in society with 
some of the extraordinary trove of bank notes, coins, tokens, and related material to be found 
in the National Currency Collection. All three books can be obtained at the Currency Museum 
or ordered via the Bank's website. 
Thank you for your attention. I'd be happy now to respond to any questions. 
8 
 BIS Review 135/2008
