Christian Noyer: Some thoughts on the financial crisis 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at Paris-Europlace, Tokyo, 
18 November 2008. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here and share some thoughts on the financial crisis. 
It is too early to draw all the lessons from recent events in financial markets. It is however 
vital  to  start  reflecting  on  the  experience  of  the  last  few  months.  Even  more  in  periods  of 
tension than in normal times, action and reflection should reinforce one another. It is at the 
very  moment  of  managing  the  current  crisis  that  we  lay  the  foundations  for  the  future 
financial system. 
Having said that, I propose to reflect with you on four topics: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The nature of the financial crisis 
The policies implemented to address it 
The macroeconomic outlook 
The outlook for financial regulation 
The nature of the crisis 
The crisis first emerged as a liquidity crisis. The first symptoms appeared at the beginning of 
August 2007 when serious disruptions surfaced on the inter-bank market. More than a year 
later, tensions on money markets are still with us. Recent weeks have witnessed abnormal 
levels of spreads, a shortening of maturities, and the contraction, or even closure, of some 
market  segments.  Through  spill-over,  these  tensions  are  also  affecting  non-financial 
corporations and, more broadly the financing of the economy. 
The crisis also emerged as a crisis of securitisation. Securitisation is an old and successful 
technique  used  to  refinance  a  range  of  loans.  What  was  new  about  it  is  that  it  got  used 
extensively  in  highly  unstable  financial  structures,  which  were  financing  short-term  assets 
that  were  illiquid,  complex,  and  whose  value  proved  to  be  uncertain  and  contingent  upon 
models. The instability of such structures was largely masked. Indeed, cheap money allowed 
easy  refinancing  of  poor  quality  debt  and  of  assets  with  uncertain  value.  Also,  favourable 
ratings and credit enhancements artificially boosted the quality of loans underlying structured 
products. The rise in defaults on such loans, first on subprime mortgages, triggered a chain 
of reactions whose consequences are still unfolding now. Credit protections proved illusory. 
Liquidity  dried  up  much  more  quickly  than  it  had  appeared.  Rating  agencies  massively, 
suddenly  and  sharply  downgraded  products  which  until  then  were  deemed  of  the  highest 
quality. 
The  demise  of  the  “new”  securitisation  chain highlights  two  fundamental  realities.  The  first 
one  is  that  far  from  being  spread  across  the  whole  system,  credit  risk  was  implicitly  or 
explicitly concentrated in the hands of specific institutions, foremost among which were the 
major  investment  banks.  Hence  the  successive  waves  of  depreciations  of  structured 
products, imposed by the accounting rules in place, with these depreciations in turn fuelling 
doubts about counterparty risks and solvency, liquidity constraints and further falls in asset 
prices.  The  second  reality  is  that  recent  financial  innovation  served  mainly  to  increase 
leverage  in  the  system.  Signs  of  this  are  many.  Banks’  balance  sheets  became 
overstretched. Off-balance sheet vehicles without any equity proliferated. Monoline insurers 
BIS Review 143/2008 
 1
guaranteed volumes of structured products way beyond what their equity position could bear. 
As you know, leverage works both ways. It amplifies gains as well as losses. Amplified gains 
took  the  form  of  the  US  property  boom.  Amplified  losses  are  with  us  now.  The  whole 
deleveraging  process  still  underway  has  meant,  since  its  start,  that  financial  institutions 
unable  to  raise  capital  had  to  suffer  very  considerable  depreciations  on  some  products, 
which in some instance wiped out their net worth, bringing them to failure. 
Against this background, what about French banks? Of course, they are not immune to the 
crisis. Direct or indirect exposures to toxic assets implied that they too had to record write-
downs; sometimes substantial ones. The liquidity shortage is also hurting and the prolonged 
market disruptions have raised their refinancing costs. That said, our banks are sound and 
robust. Indeed bearing in mind the following. First, French banks exhibit high solvency ratios. 
Indeed well above minimum prudential requirements and above ratios of many competitors. 
Second, overall, they remain profitable. It is so not least because they benefit from regular 
sources of income. They are universal banks; and as such much less susceptible to funding 
market  conditions.  Sound  and  revolving  sources  of  profits  are  a  vital  asset  at  the  current 
juncture.  Fourth,  French  banks  can  “manoeuvre”  and  play  an  active  role  in  the  ongoing 
restructuring  of  the  international  financial  sector.  All  in  all,  beyond  sometimes  serious 
tensions and incidents, French banks are now reaping the benefits of the major advances in 
productivity and innovation they have made over the last two decades. 
Public policy during the crisis 
Recent weeks have seen a marked change in public policy. Having previously been geared 
exclusively  to  providing  liquidity  to  financial  intermediaries,  public  intervention  is  now  also 
aiming to support banks’ financing and own funds. This is a significant shift. 
Needless  to  say,  restoring  liquidity  remains  a  pressing  priority.  Inter-bank  markets  have 
recently shown modest signs of improvements. Yet, there is still some way to go. To this end, 
central banks have mobilized considerable ammunition. A process underway for over a year 
has culminated in the central banks having adjusted their operational frameworks in various 
areas. The maturity and currency of their facilities have been expanded. The range of eligible 
counterparties has been broadened. The tender procedures have been modified with a view 
to ensure unlimited amounts of central bank money. The list of collateral for refinancing has 
been  widened.  Enhanced  international  coordination  between  the  monetary  authorities  is 
ensuring  that  their  actions  are  part  of  a  consistent  overall  strategy.  These  measures  are 
highly  exceptional.  As  such,  they  should  greatly  contribute  to  restoring  confidence  and  a 
smooth functioning of money markets. 
Governments have moved aggressively to support banks' solvency and resilience. Since the 
Paris Declaration by euro area member-countries, Europe, under the leadership of France, is 
acting according to what I consider a sound and consistent action plan. I won’t enter into the 
details.  Just  bear  in  mind  the  three  following  elements.  First,  authorities  are  extending 
guarantees  to  banks’  refinancing  so  that  they  can,  in  turn,  properly  finance  the  economy. 
Second, very significant reforms of accounting rules are now being implemented. Basically, 
these  reforms  allow  banks  to  transfer  instruments  previously  marked  to  market  value  to 
portfolios  where  that  will  no  longer  be  the  case.  They  also  provide  for  greater  flexibility  in 
marking to market value assets whose market has shut down. Third, and lastly, governments 
have confirmed their willingness, when warranted, to step in and support banks’ capital. 
What about France’s actions? The Government and Parliament very quickly put meat on the 
bones of the European principles. A new bill has been passed, which provides for two things. 
First,  it  sets  up  a  EUR  320  billion  funding  vehicle  to  guarantee  banks’  medium-term 
refinancing  (i.e.  up  to  five  years).  This  vehicle  is  strictly  supervised  by  the  French 
Government  and  the  Banque  de  France.  The  guarantee  is  granted  for  a  fee,  so  that  the 
beneficiaries  pay  costs  corresponding  to  normal  market  conditions.  Second,  the  law  also 
creates a state-owned company empowered with EUR 40 billion and entitled to subscribe to 
2 
 BIS Review 143/2008
banks’  subordinated  debt  issues  or  preferred  shares.  As  you  know,  six  banks  have 
expressed that they will issue subordinated debt and the Government announced that it will 
subscribe to these issues for EUR 10.5 billion. It is expected that such support will boost their 
capital position and as a result ensure these banks to keep up their lending to the economy. 
Did the French banks really need such a boost to their solvency and capital? Setting aside 
DEXIA, the answer is not really. DEXIA was very specific: because of its large exposure to 
US monoline risks, public recapitalisation was absolutely necessary. By contrast, all the other 
French  banks,  without  exception,  have  sufficient  own  funds,  be  it  in  terms  of  prudential 
requirements  or  in  comparison  with  their  peers  from  other  developed  countries.  Public 
recapitalisation is not aimed at making up for faults or weaknesses. Rather, it is to anticipate 
potential  problems.  Circumstances  are  indeed  exceptional;  even  the  soundest  and  most 
profitable banks cannot take it for granted that they will be able to tap markets to meet their 
funding and capital needs. As long as such uncertainty pervades and markets continue to 
fail, it is the public authorities’ duty to protect the credit system and safeguard the financing of 
the economy. 
The macroeconomic outlook 
It is fair to say that the public opinion is worried about the economic consequences of the 
financial crisis. I understand these concerns. Yet, I do not totally share them. Let me explain. 
When attempting to understand the situation we are facing, it is tempting to look at the past 
and draw lessons by mere analogy. Indeed, some sort of an intellectual vogue is flourishing, 
which contends that, in light of past experiences, any banking crisis is bound to have severe 
adverse  economic  consequences.  You  have  those,  the  optimists,  who  predict  a  Swedish-
type of crisis. And you have those, the pessimists, who allude to Japan's "lost decade". 
If referring to the past is of any use, it is precisely to learn from past errors. As a result, any 
comparison  is  bound  to  be  misleading.  Not  only  is  today’s  economic  situation  critically 
different. It is also addressed very differently. Let me insist on one key difference, which has 
to do with policy reactions to the crisis. They have been extraordinarily rapid, massive and 
vigorous. We have learnt from past crises, especially from the long adjustment Japan has 
been through after the burst of the asset price bubble in the late 80s. Let me also mention 
that  macroeconomic  policy  instruments  are  available  and  could  be  used  should  output 
decline dramatically. 
The outlook for financial regulation 
A  major  consequence  of  the  crisis  already  apparent  is  the  growing  consensus  around  the 
need for a fundamental review of the foundations of financial regulation. The crisis has also 
rekindled concerns about the structure of supervision. 
As you know, at the French President’s instigation, huge efforts are made to think about what 
is termed now a “new Bretton Woods”. Beyond these ambitious words, I do believe it to be 
useful  to  take  a  fresh  look  at  the  existing  financial  regulation.  This  must  be  done  without 
haste, but no stone should be left unturned. Improved regulation appears to be necessary in 
several  domains,  from  rating  agencies  to  risk  management,  the  organisation  of  financial 
markets and even the question of compensation. As a contribution to this debate, I would like 
to make two sets of remarks. One has to do with the fluctuations of financial systems. The 
other concerns financial supervision. 
Financial systems that operate in the context of a developed market economy are, by nature, 
subject to cyclical forces. Some are a consequence of the business cycle. Credit activity is 
an obvious example, as credit demand is heavily influenced by economic activity. Others are 
from within financial systems. For instance, financial institutions’ equity position moves in line 
with asset prices specially in a fair value world where fluctuations result in capital gains or 
BIS Review 143/2008 
 3
losses.  This  effect  tends  to  be  exacerbated  when  financial  intermediaries  actively  manage 
their balance sheets to target a preferred degree of leverage. 
The  challenge  for  the  authorities  is  to  assess  whether  and  to  what  extent  regulations 
reinforce  these  dynamics  and  impact  the  entire  financial  system.  With  these  questions  in 
mind, work is being undertaken to examine the impact of prudential standards. It is also on 
this basis that the accounting adjustments that I mentioned earlier have been made. We will 
have  to  set  up  supervisory  systems  that  are  more  suited  to  economic  developments.  The 
need  to  develop  a  “macro-prudential”  policy  is  now  under  debate.  The  general  principle  is 
straightforward: it consists in ensuring that supervision manages to limit risks for the stability 
not only of a particular institution, but also of the entire financial system. Its implementation, 
however,  is  complex.  For  the  moment,  we  are  only  at  a  preliminary  stage,  contemplating 
which tools a macro-prudential policy could be based on, and how these tools could be used. 
As regards supervision, this crisis has shown three things. First, it has highlighted the merits 
of having the banking supervisor close to the central bank. The point is not to claim there is 
an  optimal  supervisory  structure  that  fits  any  country’s  circumstances. Rather,  it  is  to  note 
that a system such as the one we have in France has proved very useful in allowing for an 
in-depth knowledge of the banking sector and the various financial institutions. It also allowed 
for very swift and timely exchanges of information, and, as a result, allowed us at the central 
bank  to  quickly  pass sensitive  judgments,  not  least  on  the  usefulness  of  injecting  liquidity. 
Second,  the  crisis  also  revealed  that,  as  far  as  supervisory  infrastructure  is  concerned, 
simple, robust and pragmatic plans have shown their efficiency. Thirdly, the crisis stressed 
the  need  for  supervisory  structures  to  adapt  to  their  environment.  This  is  very  true  for 
Europe.  I  guess  it  is  also  true  for  other  countries  and  regions.  Let  me  just  say  that,  while 
adjusting our institutions and tools to changes in financial systems, we should be pragmatic 
and completely in tune with reality rather than based on a theoretical scheme or vision. 
Let  me  conclude  by  stressing  one  point.  We  are  going  through  very  challenging  times,  in 
some  respect  even  unprecedented  times.  Economic  and  financial  forces  are  at  play  and 
recent  events  are  the  consequences  of  such  forces.  That  said,  we  should  not  completely 
disregard  the  importance  of  what  Robert  Shiller  terms  “attention  cascade”.  For  him,  a 
cascade is the situation in which economic events and problems become the subject of more 
and  more  talks  and  stories,  until  they  become  the  dominant  public  thinking.  We,  as  policy 
makers,  have  a  very  critical  role  to  play  to  try  and  ensure  that  such  qualitative  “attention 
cascades”  remain  aligned  with  facts  and  reality.  Today,  policy  making  is  also  about 
confidence building and financial education. 
Thank you very much Ladies and Gentlemen. 
4 
 BIS Review 143/2008
