José Manuel González-Páramo: Sub-prime crisis, liquidity tensions and 
central banks – one year on 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European  Central  Bank,  at 
the  2nd  Spanish  Capital  Markets  Forum,  Madrid, 
30 September 2008. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to be here in Madrid at this 2nd Spanish Capital Markets Forum. 
Having very good memories of the interesting discussions and presentations at last year’s 
event, I would like to thank the organisers for inviting me again and providing me with the 
opportunity to share with you some views about the financial market turbulences, how we – 
as central bankers – have addressed them and some of the lessons learned so far.  
The financial market turmoil: where do we stand? 
2.  
Let me briefly recall the situation prevailing in financial markets when this conference took 
place  last  year.  At  the  time,  the  market  turmoil  had  already  broken  out  and  central  banks 
were already engaged in interventions aiming to minimise the disruptions to money markets 
and to preserve the implementation of their desired monetary policy stance.  
In my intervention at the time I reported that although the ECB liquidity measures had had a 
stabilising effect on the euro money market rates at the shorter end of the term structure and, 
more  generally,  the  money  market  had  recovered  some  of  the  lost  ground,  market 
participants  continued  to  report  limited  trading  activity  and  high  spreads,  particularly  in 
unsecured inter-bank term markets. Banks seemed to be particularly reluctant to lend money 
in  the  unsecured  inter-bank  market  due  to  uncertainty  about  their  own  funding  needs, 
especially in USD, and lack of confidence in the soundness of their counterparties.  
One year later, the financial market turmoil has not yet come to an end. In fact, over the past 
few weeks, it has intensified again. Large financial institutions have failed or had to be taken 
over by others, while a number of markets have exhibited increased volatility and reduced 
liquidity.  In  particular,  significant  tensions  persist  in  global  money  markets,  where  market 
liquidity is strained and term interest rates are elevated. Meanwhile, volatility has increased 
in  other  global  financial  markets,  particularly  for  equities  and  commodities.  Central  banks 
have  provided  liquidity  to  help  to  stabilise  conditions  in  the  euro  money  market  and  to 
mitigate tensions in the US dollar money market and in the FX swap markets. In addition, 
public authorities have announced a number of measures and initiatives to address problems 
at  both  stressed  markets  and  troubled  individual  institutions.  Nevertheless,  international 
money markets remain under stress. 
Excessive volatility is, to a large extent, a reflection of the urgent need to harness investors’ 
“animal spirits” through the appropriate market and institutional framework. A full and rapid 
implementation  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  recommendations  on  the  strengthening  of 
supervision, regulation, risk management, and accounting and transparency frameworks is of 
maximum importance. At the same time, as pointed out above, several governments have 
taken decisive action to address credit concerns and central banks have been coordinating 
to address liquidity pressures in funding markets. In this respect, market participants would 
be  well  advised  to  heed  last  week’s  pledge  by  finance  ministries,  regulators  and  central 
banks of the largest world economies to take action as needed, individually and collectively, 
in  order  to  protect  the  integrity  of  the  international  financial  system  and  facilitate  liquid, 
BIS Review 118/2008 
 1
smooth functioning markets. More than ever, bringing market participants back into a liquid 
and stable marketplace remains our top priority.  
International transmission of liquidity shocks and liquidity spirals 
3.  
Let me now refer to a couple of elements which have played a central role during the turmoil: 
the  international  transmission  of  liquidity  tensions  and  the  interaction  between  market 
liquidity and funding liquidity. Indeed, the events of the past year have illustrated vividly the 
strength, the complexity and the rapidity of the international transmission of liquidity shocks. 
Clearly,  underlying  the  international  transmission  mechanism  is  the  fact  that  interbank 
markets are linked across countries by the activity and funding needs of banks doing cross 
border business on a large geographical scale and holding assets and liabilities denominated 
in varying currencies. Liquidity conditions in interbank markets are therefore correlated at the 
global level, because many of the key players are subject to common shocks. 
Another  dimension  of  the  ongoing  turmoil  is  the  enhanced  interaction  between  market 
liquidity  and  funding  liquidity.  Under  normal  market  conditions,  market  illiquidity  is  typically 
short-lived, in particular since it creates profit opportunities for traders who, by providing extra 
funding liquidity, support the price discovery process and restore the smooth functioning of 
the  market.  In  contrast,  during  a  severe  turbulence  the  disruption  of  the  mechanisms 
channelling liquidity – be it through assets prices or the balance sheet of financial institutions 
– may also deeply and lastingly perturb the functioning of markets, ultimately creating risks 
for systemic imbalances.  
The current episode is an example of this. Even the interbank market, which is considered 
the  deepest  and  most  liquid  of  all  markets,  has  been  protractedly  “frozen”.  This  has 
happened primarily due to uncertainties as to the size and locations of losses created by the 
opaque  transfer  of  credit  risk  brought  about  by  complex  securitisation  mechanisms.  Such 
uncertainty  has  heightened  counterparty  credit  risk  concerns,  discouraging  banks  from 
lending to each other.  
Moreover, it has brought to the fore the increased interaction between market liquidity and 
funding  liquidity  of  individual  institutions.  Indeed,  the  trend  among  large  global  banks  has 
been towards greater reliance on wholesale market sources of funding. Instead of relying on 
retail  deposits,  some  banks  are  increasingly  dependent  on  interbank  borrowing,  short  and 
long-term debt, and, as an ultimate line of defence, on the sale of marketable securities. This 
has made access to funding liquidity more dependent on market conditions.  
In addition, the range of systemically relevant institutions has become broader. Indeed, non-
deposit  taking  investment  banks  and  primary  dealers  play  a  systemic  role  in  their  crucial 
broker-dealer  function.  They  perform  a  key  role  in  maintaining  market  liquidity  in  a  broad 
range  of  unsecured  and  secured  markets.  If  they  face  funding  liquidity  constraints,  market 
liquidity will be widely affected, with potential negative repercussions for the banking sector 
as a whole.  
This  environment  poses  challenges  for  central  banks,  as  addressing  funding  liquidity 
shortages  may  require  supporting  market  liquidity.  Clearly,  the  nature  of  the  turbulence 
matters: concerns for market liquidity itself could in principle be addressed by central bank 
actions, whereas central bank liquidity operations would be ill positioned to tackle individual 
counterparty solvency concerns.1 Along these lines, let me explain how central banks have 
responded to the challenges arising from market turmoil using a combination of operational 
measures and increased international co-operation.  
                                                 
1   See “Central bank operations in response to the financial turbulences”, CGFS Papers, No 31, July 2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 118/2008
How central banks responded 
4.  
Clearly,  the  responses  have  varied  across  central  banks,  but  in  general  terms,  they  have 
tried to address the liquidity squeeze in similar ways and have concentrated on four fronts: 
First, central banks have acted to keep short-term money market rates in line with their policy 
rates (or targets) through more active reserve  management, thereby  flexibly responding to 
shifts in the demand for reserves.  
Second, central banks have sought to ease pressures in broader funding markets through a 
combination of measures, such as an increased supply of longer-term funds, the expansion 
of  collateral  accepted  in  lending  operations,  and  the  widening  of  the  range  counterparties 
that may have access to collateralised lending. Some central banks also increased securities 
lending to improve the functioning of interbank repo markets. 
Third,  central  banks  have  increased  their  co-operative  efforts  both  through  enhanced 
communication and collective market monitoring, and through co-ordinated actions to provide 
both  overnight  and  longer-term  funds.  Finally,  some  central  banks  also  calibrated  their 
monetary  policy  stance  to  take  into  account  any  impact  that  the  unfolding  credit  market 
turbulences might have on inflation and real activity. 
Responses of the Eurosystem 
4.1.  
Let  me  now  briefly  describe  how  the  Eurosystem  has  responded  through  operational 
measures to changes in banks’ liquidity demand.  
Since the very early phase of the ongoing turbulences in August 2007, the Eurosystem has 
resorted to a more pro-active liquidity management in order to maintain a proper control of 
short-term  interest  rates.  Owing  to  the  built-in  flexibility  of  its  operational  framework  for 
monetary policy implementation, the Eurosystem could address the impaired functioning of 
the money  market through relatively minor, technical adjustments to its normal operations, 
while at the same time utilising the full latitude of its liquidity management arrangements. 
In  particular,  we  adjusted  the  distribution  of  euro  liquidity  supplied  over  the  course  of  the 
maintenance period, in contrast to normal times, by frontloading the supply of liquidity at the 
beginning  of  the  period  and  reducing  it  later,  so  that  the  total  amount  of  liquidity  over  an 
entire maintenance period remained unchanged. Furthermore, we increased the amount of 
refinancing  provided  via  longer-term  refinancing  operations  significantly  with  a  view  to 
smoothening  conditions  in  the  term  money  market.  As  a  result  of  these  measures,  the 
average level of EONIA has remained close to the minimum bid rate, though with a higher 
volatility than before the start of the turbulences. 
Moreover,  the  lengthening  of  the  maturity  profile  in  the  regular  repo  operations  combined 
with  the  following  three  key  features  of  the  operational  framework  have  allowed  the 
Eurosystem to address funding constraints indirectly also in term money and asset markets: 
Firstly, access of a broad range of counterparties to central bank liquidity. This feature has 
allowed the Eurosystem to step in and effectively mitigate funding liquidity risk for a broad 
range  of  counterparties  on  those  occasions  when  short-term  interbank  markets  stopped 
functioning properly.  
Secondly, acceptance of a broad range of collateral in all classes of lending operations. As a 
consequence, sufficiency of collateral has not been a constraint. Moreover, the acceptance 
of  private-sector  collateral  has  allowed  counterparties  to  economise  on  the  use  of  central 
government  bonds  –  often  the  only  collateral  that  counterparties  could  still  use  in  repo 
markets  –  in  their  operations  with  the  central  bank.  And  it  has  to  some  extent  eased 
refinancing pressures for assets, such as ABSs, that faced a nearly complete withdrawal of 
third party investors. 
BIS Review 118/2008 
 3
Thirdly, the relatively large scale of the open market operations has allowed the central bank 
to temporarily take over a significant intermediation function.  
Increased international cooperation 
4.2  
As  pointed  out  before,  in  addition  to  domestic  operational  responses,  central  banks  have 
further  strengthened  their  cooperation  throughout  the  turmoil,  first  through  enhanced 
information  sharing  and  collective  monitoring  of  market  developments  and  later  on  by 
coordinated  steps  to  provide  liquidity.  One  example  of  such  coordinated  actions  among 
central  banks  is  the  by  now  familiar  US  dollar  Term  Auction  Facility,  which  started  in 
December of last year and in which the ECB agreed with the US Federal Reserve to grant 
loans  in  dollars  to  euro  area  banks.  More  recently,  the  scope  of  this  facility  has  been 
expanded  with  the  decision  on  18  September  to  start  providing  USD  funding  to  European 
counterparties also on an overnight basis and to increase the amounts offered in the existing 
operations  at  longer  maturities  (28-  and  84-days).  Besides,  last  Friday  (26  September)  an 
additional  one-week  operation  designed  to  mitigate  USD  funding  pressures  of  euro  area 
banks  over  the  end  of  the  third  quarter  was  announced.  And  yesterday,  in  response  to 
continued  strains  in  short-term  funding  markets,  ten  central  banks  announced  further 
coordinated  actions  to  expand  significantly  the  capacity  to  provide  US  dollar  liquidity.  As 
regards the specific actions in the euro area, the Federal Reserve and the ECB decided to 
double their temporary reciprocal currency arrangements (swap lines) from USD 120 billion 
to USD 240 billion. This reciprocal swap facility has been authorised through 30 April 2009. 
The increased facility will allow expanding the provision of US dollar liquidity in the euro area.  
It should be noted that these USD liquidity-providing operations do not have a direct effect on 
euro liquidity conditions, but are conducted to facilitate the funding of euro area banks in US 
dollars and aim to improve global funding conditions.  
It is important to stress that the actions in connection with the TAF marked, to my knowledge, 
the  first  systematic,  multilateral  and  successful  central  bank  co-operation  in  the  money 
market field, a market which is central to the implementation of a central bank’s monetary 
policy. I believe that all of these actions have proved to be effective in easing the tensions at 
the  short-term  end  of  the  global  money  markets  and  in  maintaining  control  of  short-term 
interest rates in the euro area. I am sure that global money and funding markets will continue 
to benefit from our very close cooperation. We will carry on working together closely and are 
prepared to take appropriate steps as needed to address funding pressures. 
What central banks have learned: two lessons among others  
5.  
Going forward, what preliminary lessons can we draw as central bankers from the ongoing 
turbulence?  
Lessons for the implementation of monetary policy 
5.1  
In  the  past,  common  central  bank  wisdom  was  to  say  that  there  is  no  unique  way  to 
implement monetary policy. In Borio’s words (2001): “Just as there are a hundred ways to 
skin a cat, so there are a hundred ways to implement monetary policy”.2  
Nonetheless,  the  currently  prolonged  dislocation  of  interbank  markets  and,  more  broadly, 
asset  markets  has  shown  that  there  are  certain  key  operational  features  that  facilitate  the 
implementation  of  monetary  policy  in  such  conditions.  In  order  to  distribute  reserves 
effectively  when  the  interbank  market  is  impaired,  central  banks  should  be  capable  of 
                                                 
2   Borio,  C.  (2001),  “A  hundred  ways  to  skin  a  cat:  comparing  monetary  policy  operating  procedures  in  the 
United States, Japan and the euro area”, BIS Papers No. 9. 
4 
 BIS Review 118/2008
providing access to collateralised lending operations to a wide set of counterparties against a 
broad range of collateral and on a large scale. Whether those features should become part of 
the  regular  operational  framework  or  are  introduced  on  demand  in  distressed  market 
conditions, is ultimately the choice of each individual central bank.  
As regards the Eurosystem, we believe that our flexible operational framework, including the 
collateral component, has served us well until now, and has helped us to weather a number 
of tests, including the latest of a prolonged liquidity squeeze in a wide range of unsecured 
and secured markets. However, this does not mean that there is no scope for refinement and 
further enhancement. 
One  recent  example  is  the  fine-tuning  of  our  risk  control  framework  in  the  context  of  our 
latest  2008  review  of  the  adequacy  of  the  risk  control  measures.  These  reviews  are 
conducted on bi-annual basis to meet the statutory obligation of the Eurosystem to adjust the 
collateral  and  risk  control  framework  over  time  so  as  to  ensure  that  it  remains  adequately 
protected  against  financial  risks  across  time,  while  allowing  at  the  same  time  the  effective 
implementation of monetary policy. The new risk control measures, which do not change the 
general characteristics of the framework and are not expected to impair the ability of banks to 
participate in our operations, were communicated by the ECB on 4 September, and will enter 
into force on 1 February 2009. 
I would like to highlight in particular the decision to require better rating disclosure standards. 
To  be  eligible  as  collateral  for  Eurosystem  credit  operations,  asset-backed-securities  will 
need  a  rating  that  must  be  explained  in  a  publicly  available  credit  rating  report,  being  a 
detailed  pre-sale  or  new  issue  report,  which  should  include  inter  alia  a  comprehensive 
analysis of structural and legal aspects and a detailed collateral pool assessment. Moreover, 
rating agencies – and the Eurosystem believes this is very important – would need to publish 
rating reviews of asset backed securities at least on a quarterly basis. By requiring that the 
result of the rating assessment as well as the regular surveillance reports are made public, 
the Eurosystem can support the functioning of ABS markets more widely through enhanced 
transparency, which is a pre-requisite to restore investor confidence. 
Other important changes to the risk control include the introduction of a uniform haircut of 
12% to asset- backed securities for all residual maturities and all coupon types, as well as a 
valuation mark-down of 5% to all asset-backed securities that are theoretically valued by the 
Eurosystem. These two measures respond to a careful analysis of the liquidity characteristics 
of asset-backed securities, and in particular, of the valuation uncertainties arising when there 
are no market prices that could provide a reference for intrinsic value. By introducing both 
measures,  the  Eurosystem  can  contribute  to  the  restoration  of  normal  conditions  in  the 
functioning of asset backed primary markets. 
Lessons for enhancing the international distribution of liquidity 
5.2.  
The current turbulence has also demonstrated that global channels for distributing liquidity 
across borders may become seriously impaired. To prepare for that possibility, central banks 
should  take  steps  to  strengthen  their  capacity  to  counter  problems  in  the  international 
circulation  of  liquidity.  Two  recent  reports  from  both  the  financial  industry  and  the  central 
banking  community  have  pointed  out  to  the  potential  advantages  of  establishing  or 
maintaining  standing  currency  swap  lines,3  which  may  be  quite  important  in  emergency 
situations. From a technical point of view, the coordinated distribution of foreign currency to 
the domestic bank sector through swap lines is feasible and it is also possible to design it in 
such a way that it does not conflict with domestic monetary policy implementation.  
                                                 
3   See Institute of International Finance (2008), Final Report of the IIF Committee on Market Best Practises, July 
and  Committee  on  the  Global  Financial  System  (2008),  CGFS’s  Report  on  Central  bank  operations  in 
response to the financial turmoil, July. 
BIS Review 118/2008 
 5
Similarly,  both  reports  consider  developing  and  maintaining  the  ability  to  accept  foreign 
currency denominated assets, which is more complicated than maintaining a swap line but 
could  support  the  efficient  management  of  collateral  by  internationally  active  banks  with 
multi-currency  liquidity  demands.  To  understand  this,  one  should  bear  in  mind  that  under 
normal  conditions,  cross-border  mechanisms  among  the  infrastructures  of  major  markets 
allow  private  banks  to  move  collateral  where  it  is  needed.  However,  in  an  emergency 
situation,  standard  transfer  procedures  may  simply  not  be  effective  or  quick  enough  and 
settlement may become a constraining factor.  
Easing  liquidity  pressure  for  large  internationally  active  banks  by  broadening  the  range  of 
acceptable  collateral  may  contribute  to  alleviating  potential  liquidity  contagion  risks  in 
payment systems, where the bulk of activity normally comes from the largest players, thus 
having a positive influence on financial stability. However, it should be noted that accepting 
foreign currency collateral also implies additional legal and financial risks in the conduct of 
monetary policy operations. Hence, this is an area where further work is needed. 
Final remarks  
6.  
Let  me  finally  offer  you  some  concluding  remarks.  One  year  after  its  start,  the  financial 
market turmoil has not subsided. In fact, it has intensified over the past few weeks, prompting 
central banks to step up their efforts to inject liquidity in global money  markets in order to 
keep  short-term  money  market  rates  in  line  with  their  policy  rates  and  to  guarantee  the 
smooth functioning of money markets, thereby contributing to preserving financial stability.  
While  the  continuation  of  the  market  turmoil  does  not  allow  us  to  draw  lessons  from  the 
comfortable position of an ex-post assessment, the experience of the past year suggests that 
some  key  features  of  the  ECB’s  monetary  policy  framework  –  particularly,  its  ability  to 
provide access to collateralised lending operations to a wide set of counterparties against a 
broad range of collateral and on a large scale – have served us well during these times of 
stress.  
Similarly,  increased  cooperation  among  central  banks  throughout  the  turmoil,  both  (1) 
through enhanced information sharing and collective monitoring of market developments and 
(2)  by  means  of  coordinated  liquidity  injections,  have  played  an  effective  role  in  easing 
tensions  at  the  short-term  end  of  the  global  money  markets  and  in  instilling  confidence  in 
market participants about the commitment of the world’s major central banks to addressing 
such tensions.  
Volatility though remains at elevated levels. This calls for a full and rapid implementation of 
the Financial Stability Forum recommendations on supervision, regulation, risk management, 
accounting and transparency. At the same time, several governments have taken decisive 
action  to  address  credit  concerns  and  central  banks  have  been  coordinating  to  address 
liquidity  pressures  in  funding  markets.  In  this  respect,  as  earlier  mentioned,  market 
participants  would  be  well  advised  to  heed  last  week’s  pledge  by  finance  ministries, 
regulators  and  central  banks  of  the  largest  world  economies  to  take  action  as  needed, 
individually  and  collectively,  in  order  to  protect  the  integrity  of  the  international  financial 
system and facilitate liquid, smooth functioning markets. 
I  am  convinced  that  next  year  this  conference  will  take  place  in  calmer  market  conditions 
than in its two first editions. In the meantime I look forward to today’s interesting discussions 
and interventions.  
Many thanks for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 118/2008
