Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir: Reaping opportunities as financial advisers 
Keynote address by Mr Mohd Razif bin Abd Kadir, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of 
Malaysia, at the Financial Advisers Seminar, Kuala Lumpur, 18 October 2008.  
 It  is  with  great  pleasure  that  I  welcome  all  the  participants  to  the  Seminar  today,  which  is 
organised  by  Bank  Negara  Malaysia,  with  the  assistance  from  the  Malaysian  Financial 
Planning  Council,  the  Financial  Planning  Association  of  Malaysia  and  the  Malaysian 
Association  of  Chartered  Financial  Consultants.  In  this  regard,  I  would  like  to  express  my 
sincere appreciation to the three associations for their commitment and effort in facilitating 
and ensuring the success of the seminar, for the benefit of the financial planning industry. 
The  chosen  theme,  “Reaping  Opportunities  as Financial  Advisers”,  is  a  fitting  indication  of 
the potentials and prospects as a financial adviser and I hope that this seminar would inspire 
you to achieve your full potential in a career in the financial services industry and for those 
not already in the industry to be aware of these opportunities. 
Today’s dynamic environment is marked by a more competitive financial services industry, 
increasing access to financial services, broader range of financial products and services, and 
more  complex  financial  transactions.  In  such  an  environment,  the  need  and  demand  for 
sound financial planning will continue to increase. With the proliferation of financial products 
from basic risk protection to more sophisticated financial products for retirement and asset 
accumulation,  it  is  important  for  consumers  to  have  access  to  professional  advice  to  help 
them work through the wide range of financial solutions which involve increasingly complex 
structures, and to avail themselves on solutions that will best suit their needs and capacity. 
For this purpose, Bank Negara Malaysia has introduced the framework for the licensing of 
financial advisers in 2005 in response to the increasing demand from Malaysian consumers 
for professional and specialised advisory services to meet their financial needs. The growing 
affluence  and  sophistication  of  consumers  have  created  the  demand  for  more  complex 
financial products and services, specifically insurance products. The introduction of financial 
advisers,  as  a  new  distribution  channel  for  the  insurance  and  takaful  industry,  will 
complement the services of the existing professional intermediaries in the financial markets 
in  providing  holistic  financial  advisory  services  which  range  from  insurance  protection, 
savings  for  education,  investments  and  retirement  planning.  In  the  long  term,  financial 
advisory  business  is  only  sustainable  if  its  operations  are  transparent  and  focused  on 
providing value added services rather than simply selling products. Financial advisers must 
provide the highest service levels and professional standards in order to sustain and prosper. 
Apart  from  the  growing  appetite  of  our  consumers  for  more  sophisticated  products  and 
services,  another  factor  which  had  prompted  the  introduction  of  financial  advisers  into  the 
financial services sector was the country’s relatively low insurance or takaful penetration rate. 
Over the period 2000 to 2007, the market penetration rate, measured in terms of the number 
of  life  insurance  policies  in  force  as  a  proportion  to  the  total  population,  increased  from 
31.5% in 2000 to 40% in 2007. Notwithstanding its wider reach of the market, life insurance 
coverage remained relatively low compared with the more developed markets in the region 
such as Japan, Korea and Singapore, which have penetration rates of more than 80%. The 
relatively  low  market  penetration  coupled  with  rising  household  incomes  and  high  savings 
rate suggest a very positive outlook for the Malaysian insurance sector to grow extensively 
and  presents  tremendous  opportunities  for  financial  advisers  to  serve  the  Malaysian 
consumers.  
With  increased  uncertainty  prevailing  in  the  global  economic  outlook  and  in  the  financial 
markets, effective financial planning will assume greater  prominence at both the retail and 
corporate levels. Households, in particular, will benefit from financial planning in order to be 
BIS Review 136/2008 
 1
more  self-reliant  and  resilient  against  the  increased  volatility  in  the  financial  markets.  It  is 
envisaged  that  the  financial  advisers  would  be  able  to  play  a  role  in  providing  financial 
solutions  to  consumers  on  how  best  to  manage  their  wealth  efficiently  and  effectively. 
Financial advisers will help mobilise the country’s financial resources to generate growth and 
further  develop  our  insurance  and  takaful  sector  specifically  and  the  financial  system 
generally. It involves actively engaging individuals within our community to participate more 
fully  in  the  economy  as  well  as  reaching  out  to  the  marginalised  community  and  bringing 
them into the mainstream financial system.  
It has now been three years since the financial adviser framework was first introduced. We 
are encouraged to note that consumers’ needs and demands continue to evolve to the extent 
that  financial  products  and  services  must  now  be  tailored  to  meet  individual  requirements. 
Being independent from any product provider or manufacturer, financial advisers are indeed 
in a unique position in terms of capability and capacity to compare and tailor-made various 
financial  products  in  order  to  get  the  best  deal  for  their  customers.  Such  unique  position 
underscores the importance of the financial advisers’ role in providing value-added service to 
consumers as they can expect financial advisers to provide financial advice on needs-based 
approach  rather  than  merely  product-push  approach.  Ultimately,  this  will  contribute  to  a 
higher standard of professionalism in the sale of life insurance products and preserve public 
confidence in the insurance industry. 
Let me briefly share with you the outlook of life insurance and takaful sector in Malaysia. The 
insurance  and  takaful  sector  recorded  a  strong  growth  of  11.4%  in  2007  with  combined 
premiums  and  contributions 
totaling  RM29.7  billion.  New  business  premiums  and 
contributions for life insurance and family takaful sector grew by 7.6% to RM9.1 billion driven 
primarily  by  stronger  demand  for  savings  and  investment-related  products.  Currently,  the 
new  life  insurance  premiums  transacted  through  financial  advisers  were  still  insignificant 
compared to the premiums transacted through agency forces and bancassurance. Any effort 
to improve the performance of financial advisers must include the takaful sector, which has 
evolved  considerably  over  the  years  to  become  a  thriving  global  business  to  complement 
conventional insurance. 
On that note, Bank Negara Malaysia has recently approved the inclusion of takaful products 
and services within the scope of business which can be distributed by financial advisers. The 
inclusion  of  takaful  products  is  a  significant  initiative  as  it  will  allow  financial  advisers  to 
capitalise on the potential for growth of the takaful sector given that the market penetration 
rate for takaful products is low at 7.7% and the large number of untapped Muslim population 
in Malaysia who are usually more inclined towards Shariah-compliant products. However, to 
undertake  the  marketing  of  takaful  products,  financial  advisers’  representatives  must  first 
equip  themselves  with  the  necessary  knowledge  in  takaful  and  understand  the  Shariah 
requirements and the differences between takaful and conventional products. In this regard, I 
commend  FPAM  and  MFPC  on  their  timely  effort  to  formulate  and  develop  Islamic-based 
professional qualifications in order to satisfy the growing needs among professionals within 
the  financial  advisory  fraternity.  FPAM,  together  with  the  Islamic  Banking  and  Finance 
Institute of Malaysia has jointly developed Islamic Financial Planner module whereas MFPC 
has  recently  launched  a  Shariah  Registered  Financial  Planner  module.  I  am  pleased  to 
inform all of you that Bank Negara Malaysia has accorded Islamic Financial Planner module 
as  a  recognised  qualification  for  financial  advisers’  representatives  and  we  are  currently 
considering  to  also  recognise  the  Shariah  Registered  Financial  Planner  module  as  a 
qualification. 
Apart from takaful products and services, Bank Negara Malaysia has also allowed banking 
institutions  and  Labuan  offshore  financial  institutions  to  draw  on  the  services  of  financial 
advisers  as  one  of their  distribution  channels. This  measure  was  taken  in  view  of  growing 
interest  from  financial  product  providers  to  leverage  on  the  expertise  and  capabilities  of 
financial  advisers  in  reaching  out  to  the  wider  community  and  at  the  same  time  promote 
access to financial services. 
2 
 BIS Review 136/2008
As some of you may be aware, Bank Negara Malaysia and the Securities Commission have 
signed  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  in  August  2007  which  provides  for  the  mutual 
recognition of financial advisers licensed by the Bank and financial planners licensed by the 
Securities Commission. In addition to providing for the mutual recognition of both licensing 
regimes  through  the  harmonization  of  licensing  requirements,  the  MOU  also  introduces 
green-lane  processes  for  financial  advisers  and  financial  planners  licensed  under  the 
respective regimes to apply for licences under the other regime. Bank Negara Malaysia will 
fast  track  the  issuance  of  a  financial  adviser’s  licence  upon  the  financial  planner  having  a 
RM100,000 paid-up capital as a corporate body. This is with the view of facilitating greater 
efficiency in the provision of appropriate services by financial planners and financial advisers 
in  response  to  consumer  needs  and  demands  as  well  as  to  pave  the  way  for  greater 
convergence in the financial planning industry. I would strongly encourage financial planners 
licensed by the Securities Commission to take advantage of the opportunity to apply for a 
financial adviser licence or become a financial adviser’s representative through this green-
lane approval process and expand your current business scope.  
Some of the measures implemented earlier to promote the development of financial advisers 
include  facilitating  the  transformation  of  the  tied  agency  force  into  financial  advisers’ 
representatives  by  allowing  tied  agents  to  continue  receiving  renewal  commissions  during 
the transition period of five years. These measures are indeed a reflection of Bank Negara 
Malaysia’s  serious  effort  and  commitment  to  continuously  promote  the  development  of 
financial advisers as a new distribution channel for financial products and services. 
Moving forward, the financial services intermediary sector which includes financial advisers, 
would be gradually deregulated and liberalized to pave the way for self-regulation with the 
expectation  of  continuous  improvement  in  service  standards.  We  believe  that  professional 
pride and aspiration of intermediaries such as financial advisers will provide the necessary 
self-discipline  to  ensure  orderly  development  of  the  sector.  In  this  regard,  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia  and  the  Securities  Commission are working together with key industry players in 
formulating  a  workable  self-regulatory  regime  for  the  financial  advisory  and  planning 
industries. 
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  has  so  far  issued  eight  financial  advisers  licences  which  employ  a 
total of 57 financial advisers’ representatives. I encourage you to follow their footsteps and 
embark on a new chapter in your professional careers, to make the most of the opportunities 
that  you  will  have  to  create  a  lasting  impact  in  promoting  sound  financial  planning  among 
Malaysians.  I  trust  that  the  distinguished  speakers  will  share  their  valuable  insights  and 
experiences to provide you better clarity on the opportunities as financial advisers. 
On that note ladies and gentlemen, I wish you a successful and productive seminar. We look 
forward to your contribution to the further growth and development of the financial services 
industry.  
Thank you. 
BIS Review 136/2008 
 3
