Radovan Jelašić: Macroeconomic policy in 2009 
Speech  by  Mr  Radovan  Jelašić,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  at  the  Second 
Business Roundtable with Government Representatives, organized by the Ekonomist Media 
Group, Belgrade, 27 October 2008. 
 In terms of political turbulences and uncertainties, this year can only be compared with the 
year 2000. The country was faced with the issue of territorial sovereignty, early parliamentary 
and  local  elections,  and  signing  and  deferral  of  ratification  of  the  Stabilization  and 
Association  Agreement  with  the  European  Union.  As  regards  the  economy,  however,  no 
sooner  had  inflationary  pressures  subsided  in  the  wake  of  a  fall  in  prices  of  food  and 
petroleum  products,  when  a  new,  still  greater  challenge  appeared  on  the  scene.  An 
unprecedented  crisis  broke  out  in  the  global  financial  markets  and,  whereas  its  negative 
consequences  were  soon  felt  in  Serbia  as  well,  its  end  effects  and  duration  are  still 
impossible to forecast.  
But let me ask you a question: is anyone in this country aware that, despite all the above 
external and internal turbulences, inflation in Serbia is within single-digit bounds, GDP growth 
is  still  robust,  the  exchange  rate  had,  until  recently,  been  “firmly”  stable,  real  wages  have 
been rising at double-digit rates for several years now, credits are available, etc.? Or, let me 
ask another question which is more important both for myself, and, I am firmly convinced, for 
the  future  of  this  country  –  why  do  people  take  these  results  “for  granted,”  as  something 
which will be sustained of itself, regardless of how we behave? Why do they believe that we 
can  keep  on  disregarding  external  and 
influences  without  bearing  any 
consequences?  And,  especially  when  we  all  know  that  our  doings  were  due  to  frequent 
elections.  Why  must  “bad  times”  return  before  people  understand  that  present  times  were 
good, only we failed to make the best of them?! 
Macroeconomic stability in Serbia will continue to hinge on the following key factors: 
1. 
internal 
Movements  in  global  money  and  capital  markets  leave  no  room  for  doubt:  the 
situation is bad, and, for the time being, there is no light at the end of the tunnel. 
Capital  markets  worldwide  are  swayed  by  unprecedented  turbulences  and  money 
remains expensive despite а) government interventions worth thousands of billions 
of euros and b) policy rate cuts and cash injections by central banks. 
At the same time, the banking system faces a number of serious challenges, such 
as: а) capital adequacy, which governments are now acting to improve and hence 
acquire a significant ownership in the banking system, b) the dilemma of whether to 
continue  lending  to  clients  now  that  banks  are  no  longer  able  to  borrow  in  the 
financial  market,  and  c)  the  question  of  market  valuation  of  assets  when  there  is 
simply no market for specific services and products. In light of the above, it is much 
less likely that banks will continue to generously “pump” money into our region or 
approve cross-border loans.  
In current circumstances, it would certainly be very useful to have a political buffer 
against  economic  challenges  –  if  not  in  the  form  of  the  euro  as  Slovenia  and 
Slovakia,  then  at  least  in  the  form  of  EU  membership  as  Hungary  or  the  Baltic 
countries.  As  things  now  stand,  we  will  obviously  have  to  take  on  this  external 
challenge by ourselves. And to be successful, everybody in Serbia, or at least the 
decision-makers, need to understand that the situation is very serious indeed. My 
warnings can no longer be discarded with: “The Governor is scaring people because 
he does not want wages or pensions to go up!” What I suggest is that all Doubting 
Thomases watch the news at least once or read at least one daily newspaper from 
any  country  they  choose  –  Brazil  or  China,  Venezuela  or  Russia.  The  time  of 
BIS Review 132/2008 
 1
slogans and empty phrases is long past. If Serbia does not make major changes to 
its economic policy in the near future, it may easily end up high on the black list next 
to  some  other  countries  of  the  region.  And  I  am  sure  that  no  one  wants  this  to 
happen! 
Monetary policy: This instrument has traditionally been restrictive, at times even too 
restrictive,  which  frankly  only  left  more  room  for  the  fiscal  policy!  At  the  moment, 
however,  there  is  no  alternative  for  the  NBS  but  to  implement  restrictive  policy 
stance  as  inflation,  the  key  challenge  for  the  central  bank  and  the  main  threat  to 
both  macroeconomic  stability  and  standard  of  living,  is  not  yet  overcome. 
Professionally,  however,  we  can  be  satisfied  that  all  international  financial 
institutions and rating agencies are commending the work of the National Bank of 
Serbia.  
Turbulences in the international financial market will not only affect the value of the 
dinar, but will also very much strengthen its role in the banking sector, even without 
any  further  restrictive  measures  by  the  NBS.  Still,  I  hope  that  the  government 
understands that these cheaper dinar loans will be in larger supply only if inflation 
and inflation expectations are reined in, which will, in turn, lead to cuts in the NBS 
key policy rate. 
Of late, many have asked why the NBS does not cut its key policy rate like other 
central  banks  have.  And  the  answer  is  simple  –  whereas  normally  any  decline  in 
economic growth automatically dampens inflationary pressures, Serbia is unique in 
this respect again and, capable of doing two bad things at the same time: having 
both  lower  economic  growth  and  higher  inflation.  This  has  been  proved  several 
times  over  the  past  few  decades.  And  this  is  why  it  is  necessary  that  the  NBS 
continues pursuing a highly restrictive monetary policy. 
Fiscal policy: Everyone is perfectly clear as to what needs to be done. All projections 
currently under preparation as part of the 2009 budget must be as pessimistic as 
possible, on both the revenue and expenditure sides. Let me make a note of some 
of the key categories: 
• 
Privatization  revenue  from  the  prior  period  has  been  spent  and  the 
likelihood  of  substantial  future  inflow  of  revenue  on  this  account  is 
diminishing; 
Terms  of  borrowing  in  both  domestic  and  international  financial  markets 
have already worsened – the price is not even asked; 
VAT revenue will certainly dwindle, as uncertainties rise and the purchasing 
power diminishes, 
The volume of contributions will also shrink! 
•   
On  the  expenditure  side,  calls  for  looser  fiscal  policy  will  grow  even  stronger, 
especially  as  the  private  sector  is  retreating.  The  time  of  easy  and  cheap  bank 
lending is now over. What is more, limited access to new lending may lead to limited 
investment in the private sector which Serbia stands in great need of.  
The  two  enduring  macroeconomic  challenges  for  Serbia  –  inflation  and  current 
account deficit – will become even more difficult to take on. And we are repeatedly 
sent 
two  months  ago,  by  EU 
representatives  at  end-September,  and  by  the  World  Bank  and  the  IMF  early  this 
month.  These  messages  are  loud  and  clear  for  all  to  understand.  And,  since  we 
ourselves  are  fully  aware  of  what  needs  to  be  done,  the  question  remains:  What 
keeps us from doing it? 
the  same  message:  by  Standard&Poor’s 
  BIS Review 132/2008
2. 
3. 
2 
 4. 
Structural  changes:  Restructuring  of  large  public  enterprises,  privatization  of  the 
remaining state-owned enterprises and institution of bankruptcy proceedings against 
enterprises  that  cannot  be  privatized  lies  at  the  core  of  the  transition  process  in 
Serbia. In this regard, however, we must be realistic: what we can do today is based 
on a couple of years’ work and the first positive results of our present activities will 
be visible in two to three years. Structural changes are very significant and must be 
implemented without delay, but their results are slow in coming! 
Structural  reforms  have  been  postponed  time  and  again  in  an  effort  to  preserve 
social  peace  and  now,  the  conditions  for  implementing  them  will  only  have 
deteriorated further. Many are aware that financial and organizational restructuring 
on a larger scale, including declaring redundancies, was postponed in anticipation of 
better days, when it will be easier for people to find new jobs or take out loans to 
start their own businesses. This is, however, highly unlikely in the months ahead.  
But this is not the first time that Serbia is facing major challenges. In fact, we often perform 
best under worst circumstances and I have every reason to believe that we will succeed this 
time again. It is important that all decision makers understand one thing: in the course of the 
next year or two, it will be impossible to be a popular and a responsible politician at the same 
time  unless  you  are  in  opposition.  And  no  coalition  agreements,  reference  to  “specific” 
circumstances or excuses that we are simply late in the transition process will help us fight 
the two major macroeconomic challenges, current account deficit and inflation. Inflation and 
external  deficit  respond  to  the  above  listed  four  categories  only.  The  first  –  movements  in 
global  money  and  capital  markets  –  is  beyond  our  control  and  will  probably  only  produce 
further negative effects. Monetary reins are already tight enough and structural changes are 
not the quick medicine we now need! What else are we left with other than fiscal policy! 
BIS Review 132/2008 
 3
