Jan F Qvigstad: Transparency and central bank communication 
Speech by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at a seminar at the Bank of Italy, Rome, 4 November 2008. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. 
 It  is  now  widely  accepted  that  monetary  policy  works  mainly  through  private  agents’ 
expectations. The widespread influence of the New Keynesian model in academic research 
on  monetary  policy  and  the  trend  towards  using  DSGE  models  in  central  banks  have 
underpinned the focus on expectations. Michael Woodford  puts it in a clear-cut way:1 “For 
not only do expectations about policy matter, […]but very little else matters”. The interest rate 
set by central banks is normally a very short-term interest rate, which in itself has negligible 
effects on economic decisions. It is mainly expectations about future policy rates that affect 
market interest rates and thus economic decisions. 
Due to the increased attention on the expectations channel of monetary policy, central bank 
communication has been a key issue in the academic debate on monetary policy. I will in this 
presentation  first  go  through  Norges  Bank’s  communication  approach  and  discuss  our 
experiences  with  being  open  about  our  future  policy  intentions.  Then,  I  will  discuss  other 
aspects of transparency, including how transparency has been measured and how Norges 
Bank performs in terms of such measures. Finally, I will briefly touch upon another important 
aspect of monetary policy, namely how to make good collective decisions, and the role of the 
staff in the monetary policy decision process. 
Communicating future monetary policy intentions 
Most central banks communicate future policy intentions in one way or another. The majority 
of  central  banks  communicate  indirectly  through  forecasts  based  on  technical  interest  rate 
assumptions,  and  by  giving  verbal  signals  about  future  interest  rate  decisions  in  policy 
statements  and  speeches.  With  such  indirect  communication,  the  market  participants  gain 
information  about  the  sign  of  future  interest  rate  decisions,  but  may  have  less  information 
about the size. Until November 2005, Norges Bank used technical interest rate assumptions 
in  the  inflation  forecasts,  but  also  on  some  occasions  commented  on  whether  the  Bank 
intended to follow a different policy than what seemed to be reflected in market interest rates. 
Thus,  the  Bank  gave  signals  about  the  sign  of  future  policy  intentions  relative  to  market 
expectations,  but  not  on  the  size.2 From  November  2005,  Norges  Bank  started  to  use 
endogenous  interest  rate  forecasts  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Norges  Bank  was  the 
second central bank with endogenous interest rate assumptions, following the Reserve Bank 
of  New  Zealand,  who  introduced  it  in  1997.  More  recently,  the  Swedish  Riksbank  and  the 
Czech National Bank have also started to publish interest rate forecasts.  
                                                 
1   Woodford,  M.  (2005),  “Central-Bank  Communication  and  Policy  Effectiveness,”  paper  presented  at  FRB 
Kansas City Symposium on “The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future,” Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 
25-27, 2005. 
2   Providing forecasts based on both a constant interest rate and market expectations give information not only 
about the sign but may also give some guidance about the range. See, for example, the following citation from 
the Bank of England’s Inflation Report of February 2008: “Under market interest rates, the central projection 
for inflation was a little above the target in the medium term, while under constant interest rates, it was below 
the target.” This suggests that the likely interest rate path lies somewhere between a constant rate and market 
expectations. 
BIS Review 132/2008 
 1
Publishing  endogenous  interest  rate  paths  raises  a  number  of  issues,  and  there  is 
disagreement  among  both  academics  and  central  bankers  on  whether  being  that  precise 
about future policy intentions is beneficial or not. The key issue in the debate is whether such 
communication implies guidance or noise. Some of the arguments for transparency relate to 
the  beneficial  effects  when  private  agents  understand  the  central  bank’s  reaction  function, 
such that market interest rates will adjust more appropriately to economic news.  
Publishing the interest rate forecast may not be sufficient to communicate the central bank’s 
reaction function, as one specific forecast does not in itself convey much information about 
how the central bank responds to various shocks. One could argue that three ingredients are 
required; 1) the forecasts, 2) how the central bank responds to shocks, and 3) the criteria 
underlying the forecasts and reaction function.  
The  first  two  ingredients  provide  efficiency  in  monetary  policy,  in  the  sense  that  private 
agents  knowing  the  central  bank’s  assessments  and  reaction  function  can  respond 
appropriately  to  economic  developments.  The  third  ingredient  contributes  to  a  better 
understanding  of  the  objectives  of  monetary  policy  and  the  link  between  objectives  and 
policy.  This  could  underpin  the  credibility  of  the  reaction  pattern,  and  is  also  important  for 
democratic  accountability.  In  addition,  the  reaction  function  could  change  over  time,  for 
example  due  to  a  change  in  how  the  economy  works  or  an  improvement  of  the 
understanding of economic mechanisms. The criteria could then give some guidance to the 
public on how and why the reaction function might change. 
Let  me  briefly  explain  how  Norges  Bank  communicates  the  three  ingredients  of  our 
communication, and let me start with the forecasts. Chart 1 shows the forecasts of the key 
variables.  The  uncertainty  bands  are  based  on  model  simulations  and  reflect  estimated 
variances of the different shocks. (Note that there is also a fan chart for historical values of 
the  output  gap,  since  there  is  also  uncertainty  about  potential  output  in  retrospect.) 
Communicating uncertainty through fan charts in the inflation reports was introduced by the 
Bank of England in 1997. While the fan charts for inflation illustrate that inflation cannot be 
controlled perfectly by the central bank, this argument does not apply for the policy interest 
rate.  The  fan  chart  for  the  interest  rate  serves  a  different  purpose:  It  illustrates  that  the 
interest rate path is not a promise, but a forecast which is uncertain. Moreover, it reflects the 
central bank’s adjustment of the interest rate as a response to new economic developments, 
which are subject to uncertainty. Our experience is that market participants and the public 
understand that our forecast for the policy rate is indeed a forecast and not a promise.  
Let me now turn to the second ingredient; how Norges Bank responds to new developments 
(“shocks”).  Monetary  policy  becomes  more  effective  if  market  participants  can  react 
adequately to economic news. In order to convey a broader reaction pattern, Norges Bank 
indicates how the Bank would react should certain disturbances occur. However, since no 
central  bank  follows  a  specific  reaction  function  mechanically,  it  would  be  misleading  to 
present  a  single  reaction  function  specified  mathematically.  Judgement  is  always  applied 
when  responding  to  shocks,  and  a  specific  reaction  function  will  give  a  very  simplified 
representation of the reaction pattern. There is thus a trade-off between misleading precision 
and uninformative generality. Norges Bank tries to balance this trade-off by applying various 
approaches to communicating the reaction pattern.  
First,  the  Bank  presents  alternative  scenarios  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Chart  2 
illustrates the interest rate response to a positive and negative shock to inflation respectively. 
The exact specification of the shocks in the illustrations can differ somewhat from one Report 
to another, but the shifts in the interest rate, and the corresponding scenarios for inflation and 
the output gap give an indication of how the Bank responds. The shifts are specified such 
that, if shocks of the same type and size should occur, the alternative interest rate path is the 
Bank’s best estimate of how the interest rate would be set in such a situation.  
In addition to presenting policy reactions to new developments, the Monetary Policy Report 
includes  an  account  of  the  disturbances  that  have  lead  to  a  change  in  the  interest  rate 
2 
 BIS Review 132/2008
forecast from the previous Report. For example, we see from Chart 3 that our interest rate 
forecast was revised upwards in Monetary Policy Report 2/08 published in June. The shocks 
contributing to this revision are illustrated in Chart 4. The black line is the difference between 
the current interest rate path and the path in the previous Report.  
The “interest rate account” is a technical model-based illustration of how the change in the 
interest rate forecast from the previous Report can be decomposed by different exogenous 
shocks to the model. The illustration shows how changes in the assessment of international 
and domestic economic variables as well as changes in shock processes have affected the 
interest  rate  path,  and  is  based  on  our  core  forecasting  model.  Since  the  “interest  rate 
account”  follows  from  a  specific  model,  the  exact  decomposition  is  model-dependent  and 
should thus be interpreted as a model-based illustration rather than a precise description of 
the  Executive  Board’s  reaction  pattern.  Notwithstanding  this  reservation,  the  “interest  rate 
account”  serves  several  purposes.  First,  it  gives  information  about  the  reaction  function. 
Second, it provides a compact summary of the Monetary Policy Report. Third, it is a tool of 
communicating  commitment.  Norges  Bank  aims  at  influencing  expectations  in  order  to 
stabilize inflation. In this respect, our policy has elements of commitment. The interest rate 
forecast should reflect economic news and not re-optimisation of monetary policy. With an 
“interest rate account”, the public is better able to check whether the central bank honours 
past commitments. 
Let me turn to the criteria underlying the interest rate forecast and reaction function. Among 
the few central banks that publish interest rate forecasts, it is common to communicate these 
in quite general terms.3 When formulating the criteria, there is a trade-off between being too 
general, which does not provide very much information, and being too specific, which might 
overly  restrict  policymakers’  room  for  manoeuvre  and  be  less  robust  to  changes  in  the 
economic  landscape.  The  Bank  has  developed  a  set  of  criteria  for  an  appropriate  interest 
rate  path.  The  criteria  serve  both  the  purpose  of  communicating  the  reasoning  behind  the 
interest rate path to the public and of providing an agenda for the Board discussion, which 
makes it easier to decide on a particular path.  
The criteria used by Norges Bank to assess the interest rate reflect policymakers’ general 
views and assessments. They are therefore not “carved in stone”, but can be changed and 
modified  due  to  new  insights.  Currently,  the  Bank  uses  five  criteria,  which  can  be 
summarized as follows: 
1. 
The interest rate should be set with a view to stabilising inflation close to the target in the 
medium  term.  The  horizon  will  depend  on  disturbances  to  which  the  economy  is  exposed 
and the effects on the prospects for the path for inflation and the real economy.  
2. 
Norges  Bank  conducts  flexible  inflation  targeting,  which  implies  that  stabilising  inflation 
around  the  target  should  be  weighted  against  stability  in  the  real  economy.  The  chosen 
interest  rate  path  should  therefore  imply  a  reasonable  balance  between  the  objectives  if 
there  is  a  conflict  in  the  short  term  between  stabilizing  inflation  around  the  target  and 
stabilizing the real economy. What is meant by a “reasonable” balance is obviously a matter 
of judgment and is an important element in Board discussions.  
Reasonable balance between the inflation gap and the output gap 
Achievement of the inflation target 
                                                 
3   For  example,  the  Swedish  Riksbank  communicates  the  criteria  behind  the  forecasts  as  follows:  “The 
Riksbank’s forecasts are based on the assumption that the repo rate will develop in such a way that monetary 
policy  can  be  regarded  as  well-balanced.  In  the  normal  case,  a  well-balanced  monetary  policy  means  that 
inflation is close to the inflation target two years ahead without there being excessive fluctuations in inflation 
and the real economy.” (See p.2 in the Riksbank’s Monetary Policy Report). 
BIS Review 132/2008 
 3
Robustness 
In  the  assessment,  potential  effects  of  asset prices,  such as  property  prices,  equity  prices 
and the krone exchange rate on the prospects for output, employment and inflation are also 
taken into account. Assuming the criteria above have been satisfied, the following additional 
criteria are useful: 
3. 
Interest rate developments should result in acceptable developments in inflation and output 
also under alternative, albeit not unrealistic, assumptions concerning the economic situation 
and the functioning of the economy.  
4. 
Gradualism and consistency 
Interest rate adjustments should normally be gradual and consistent with the Bank’s previous 
response pattern.  
5. 
It is important to cross-check the Board’s judgments concerning the interest rate path against 
other information. One natural cross-check is market expectations about the future interest 
rate, as represented by implied forward interest rates (adjusted for risk and term premia). In 
addition,  simple  interest  rate  rules  like  the  Taylor  rule  and  other  variants  suggested  in  the 
literature provide potentially useful cross-checks.  
Cross-checking  
Experiences 
What  are  our  experiences  of  our  communication  approach?  The  ultimate  objective  of  our 
communication is to achieve better outcomes in terms of improved stability in inflation and 
the real economy. However, with less than three years of being fully transparent about our 
future  policy  intentions,  it  is  too  early  to  draw  a  conclusion  regarding  macroeconomic 
stability.  
An  intermediate  objective  of  communication  is  to  provide  a  better  understanding  of  the 
Bank’s reaction pattern. One test of this to consider the volatility of market interest rates on 
the day Norges Bank decides the interest rate. If the new communication approach has been 
successful, one should expect that the interest rate decisions are more predictable.  
Chart 5 shows the magnitude of market rate changes on the day the interest rate is decided. 
We see that volatility in market interest rates has on average been smaller after we started 
publishing  our  interest  rate  forecasts.  Although  one  cannot  exclude  the  possibility  that  the 
reduction in volatility is caused by other factors than policy communication, it seems that our 
reaction pattern has become somewhat better understood.  
One  internal  effect  of  publishing  interest  rate  forecasts  is  that  it  provides  discipline  in  the 
internal  decision  process  and  good  incentives  for  the  staff.  I  have  observed  how 
transparency  has  changed  the  motivation  and  discipline  of  the  economists  within  Norges 
Bank. By publishing our own interest rate forecast, each sector expert will see how his or her 
judgment might affect policy. Moreover, by following the principle that what is communicated 
externally  should  reflect  the  internal  decision  process,  we  need  to  think  extra  hard  about 
what  we  do  internally.  Transparency  makes  the  public  better  capable  of  evaluating  the 
central bank’s analyses and policy assessments. If these are not of sufficient quality, we will 
be criticised. Public scrutiny disciplines the internal process and, I believe, results in better 
monetary policy. 
4 
 BIS Review 132/2008
Measuring transparency 
Even if I have focused on certain dimensions of transparency, such as openness about our 
intentions for future interest rate decisions, transparency has many other dimensions. Petra 
Geraats4 distinguishes between five dimensions of transparency: 
1. 
2. 
Political transparency refers to openness about policy objectives  
Economic  transparency  focuses  on  the  economic  information  that  is  used  for 
monetary policy  
Procedural transparency is about the way monetary policy decisions are taken  
Policy transparency refers to the announcement and explanation of policy decisions  
Operational transparency concerns the implementation of the central bank’s policy 
actions 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Due to the many dimensions of transparency, it is not possible to talk about transparency as 
if  it  were  a  one-dimensional  concept.  One  could  claim  that  some  central  banks  are  more 
transparent than others in some particular dimensions, but it is difficult – if not impossible – to 
measure  overall  transparency  by  a  single  metric  in  a  precise  and  non-controversial  way. 
However, for some research purposes, for example for cross-country comparisons and for 
analysing  historical  developments,  it  is  useful  to  try  to  measure  overall  transparency  by  a 
single  metric.  Sylvester  Eijffinger  and  Petra  Geraats5  have  constructed  an  index  that 
combines the above five dimensions of transparency into a single metric, and they used it for 
comparing  transparency  for  nine  of  the  major  central  banks.  Negriz  Dincer  and  Barry 
Eichengreen6  have  extended  this  work  and  applied  Eijffinger  and  Geraats’  index  to  100 
countries. Measured by this index, they found that in 2005 the three most transparent central 
banks  were  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  the  Riksbank  and  the  Bank  of  England. 
Norges Bank was ranked as number 15. The reason why Norges Bank was ranked number 
15  and  not  among  the  most  transparent  central  banks  is,  according  to  Dincer  and 
Eichengreen, the following:7  
1. 
2. 
3. 
Norges Bank’s monetary policy models were not public,  
the Bank does not publish quarterly economic forecasts, and  
we do not publish minutes and voting records from the monetary policy meetings of 
the Executive Board. 
As regards the publication of models, Dincer and Eichengreen’s claim is not correct, as we 
do publish our models (and we did so also in 2005). The lesson I have drawn from this is that 
central banks should have well designed webpages so that all relevant information is easy to 
find.  
Regarding the second reason – that we do not provide forecasts on a quarterly basis – I think 
this  point  is  overemphasized.  We  used  to  publish  Monetary  Policy  Reports  (then  called 
Inflation  Reports)  four  times  a  year  until  2001.  We  experienced,  however,  that  having  a 
forecasting round every quarter leaves very little time for the staff to digest new information 
and  conduct  thorough  analyses  before  the  next  Report  had  to  be  written.  This  is  why  we 
                                                 
4   Geraats, P.M., 2002. Central bank transparency, Economic Journal 112 (483), F532–F565. 
5   Eijffinger,  Sylvester  and  Petra  Geraats  (2006)  "How  Transparent  Are  Central  Banks?"  European  Journal  of 
Political Economy 22(1), March, pp. 1-21. 
6   Dincer, N. Nergiz and Barry  Eichengreen (2007) "Central Bank Transparency: Where, Why, and  with What 
Effects?," NBER Working Papers 13003, National Bureau of Economic Research. 
I  thank  Negriz  Dincer  and  Barry  Eichengreen  for  providing  the  sub-indexes  for  Norway,  which  were  not 
reported in their paper. 
7  
BIS Review 132/2008 
 5
started publishing three Reports a year instead of four. The Riksbank has come to the same 
conclusion and reduced the number of reports from four to three per year in 2006. I do not 
regret that Norges Bank made this move, and if I have to choose between good analyses 
and a high score on the Eijffinger-Geraats index, I know what I will choose.  
The third reason why we lost points on the Eijffinger-Geraats index is that we do not publish 
minutes and voting records. It is true that we do not publish voting records. This is because 
we have a collegial, and not individualistic, monetary policy committee, where the members 
of the Executive Boards stand unified behind the decision. In this respect, our committee can 
be  compared  to  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.  Our  external  members  are  part-time 
members, and are employed in posts outside the Bank while serving as Board members. If 
we were to publish voting records, the members would have to be individually accountable 
for their votes and assessments. This would place a workload on the external members that 
would not be consistent with being part-timers.  
The  Eijffinger-Geraats  index  does  not  take  into  account  how  different  types  of  committees 
can  communicate.  Alan  Blinder  and  Charles  Wyplosz  emphasize  that  “the  appropriate 
volume and methods of central bank communication depend crucially on the nature of the 
monetary policy committee.”8 To get the highest score on the Eijffinger-Geraats index, one 
needs to have an individualistic committee. However, one should not forget that the rationale 
for being transparent is to provide relevant information to the public. Communication is about 
providing  the  information  as  clearly  as  possible.  To  my  knowledge,  the  research  on 
committees and communication does not show that communication is necessarily better with 
individualistic  committees  than  with collegial  committees.  Even  if  individualistic  committees 
can go further in publishing the individual views of the members than collegial committees, it 
entails a certain risk. To quote Alan Blinder9: “A central bank that speaks with a cacophony 
of voices may, in effect, have no voice at all”. 
Although Norges Bank does not publish voting records or minutes that report the views of the 
individual  members,  we  publish  the  Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  statement.  The 
statement provides an account of the main aspects of economic developments that have had 
a  bearing  on  the  interest  rate  decision  and  the  Board’s  assessments.  If  you  compare  the 
Board’s policy statement with, for example, the minutes from the MPC meetings at the Bank 
of England, you will see that our statement is remarkably similar to the first part of the MPC’s 
minutes. In addition to the monetary policy statement, a press conference is held the same 
day. At the press conferences, which are webcast on Norges Bank's website, the governor or 
I  explain  in  more  detail  the  reasons  behind  the  Board's  decision.  Together,  the  policy 
statement  and  the  press  conference  provide  quite  thorough  information  about  the 
assessments behind the interest rate decisions. 
Some  might  object  that  the  policy  statement  can  hardly  give  much  information  about  the 
deliberations  during  the  Board  meeting,  since  it  is  published  only  a  few  hours  after  the 
meeting and thus has to be prepared in advance. However, when preparing the statement, 
the  staff  aims  at  following  the  bureaucratic  principle  that  all  relevant  aspects  should  be 
considered. In the final statement, which is written after the meeting, the various aspects are 
weighed according to the importance attached to them by the Board members. Moreover, the 
Board  has  meetings  with  the  staff  in  the  period  before  the  Monetary  Policy  Report  is 
published.  At  these  meetings,  the  main  issues  of  relevance  for  the  next  rate  decision  are 
discussed, and these discussions are reflected in the statements. That said, I recognise that 
it  would  be  possible  to  give  an  even  more  thorough  statement  with  more  details  from  the 
                                                 
8   Blinder.  A.S.,  and  C.  Wyplosz  (2004),  “Central  bank  talk:  committee  structure  and  communication  policy”. 
Paper presented at the 2005 meetings of the American Economic Association (2004). 
9   Blinder, A.S. (2007), ”Monetary policy by committee: Why and how?”. European Journal of Political Economy 
23, p.106-123. 
6 
 BIS Review 132/2008
deliberations  without  jeopardizing  the  anonymity  of  the  members.  That  would,  however, 
require  a  longer  delay  before  the  statement,  or  minutes,  is  published.  Our  communication 
strategy evolves over time, and how to give the best possible information about the Board’s 
assessments is an issue which is on our agenda. 
There are other approaches to measuring transparency than the one proposed by Eijffinger 
and Geraats. The IMF has used a somewhat different approach in their courses in monetary 
policy for the IMF staff. They talk about a “natural order” of transparency, starting from being 
explicit about the general goal(s) of monetary policy to being open about specific aspects of 
the policymakers’ assessments. The “natural order”, which is represented in Chart 6, could 
be interpreted as a roadmap for how central banks could develop their communication over 
time. The more transparent the central bank is, the further it is in the “natural order”.  
Based  on  the  information  on  the  central  banks’  websites,  we  have  placed  the  various 
countries on the BIS list of central banks into the IMF’s “natural order”. We see that as we 
move further down on the list, fewer countries satisfy the criteria. Based on this approach, 
Norges Bank is among the five most transparent central banks, as we satisfy every criterion 
on  the  “natural  order”.  The  point  I  will  make  by  showing  this  is  not  to  win  transparency 
competitions, but to illustrate that transparency has many dimensions, and there is no unique 
way to measure it.  
As a general guideline, Norges Bank applies Wim Duisenberg’s definition of transparency: 
The  external  communication  reflects  the  internal  deliberations.10  When  assessing  whether 
we should publish a given piece of information, we do not ask ourselves if there are any good 
reasons  for  publishing  it.  Instead,  we  ask  ourselves  if  we  have  any  good  reasons  for  not 
publishing it. Usually, we find no convincing arguments for not publishing what we find useful 
in the internal deliberations. An argument often heard against publishing certain information 
is that the public might misinterpret it or put excessive weight on it. However, the danger of 
misleading  the  public  by  providing  additional  information  could  also  be  seen  as  an 
advantage: It forces us to be clear and pedagogic in our communication. 
Transparency is, however, not just a means to improve the effectiveness of monetary policy 
and  discipline  in  the  internal  decision  process.  We  should  not  forget  that  transparency  is 
important 
for  democratic  accountability.  Central  banks  have  gained  considerable 
independence  during  the  last  20  years,  and  central  bank  independence  is  probably  an 
important commitment  mechanism for securing price stability. But the independence is not 
unlimited, as central banks are ultimately accountable to the political authorities. One could 
see  transparency  as  an  obligation  that  follows  from  gaining  independence.  Independence 
requires  accountability,  and  accountability  requires  transparency.  Transparency  is  also 
important for preserving the political acceptance for central bank independence.  
Finally, let me draw attention to another important issue, namely how to make good collective 
decisions. Monetary policy decisions are group decisions for two reasons. First, the interest 
rate decisions are usually taken by a monetary policy committee. Second, the inputs for the 
decisions are produced by the central bank staff. There has been a significant increase in the 
research on monetary policy committees during the last years, but the role of the staff in the 
decision-making process has received remarkably little attention in the literature. At Norges 
Bank, the staff members have two roles; producer (of analyses, forecasts, research, etc) and 
adviser. Each economist at Norges Bank has to give his or her interest rate advice before the 
interest rate meetings, and we have a system of aggregating the advice up to the governor 
and myself. Since most central banks have a large pool of highly skilled staff members, it is 
important to utilise this potential. What is the best way to aggregate the judgements of the 
                                                 
10   Duisenberg,  Wim  (2001):  “Letter  of  Dr.  W.  F.  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  ECB  to  the  Chairperson  of  the 
Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs”, www.ecb.int. 
BIS Review 132/2008 
 7
staff members? How should we ensure the integrity of the advisers and avoid groupthink? I 
welcome more research on these and other issues related to the role of the staff. 
Good  decisions  require  qualified  people,  an  appropriate  incentive  structure,  and  a  good 
decision-making  process.  In  addition,  good  decisions  become  more  effective  if  they  are 
communicated well. Transparency generally improves both the quality of communication and 
the decision-making process. My ambitious goal is that Norges Bank shall be at the forefront 
in terms of communication and decision-making processes. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 
 
  8 
 BIS Review 132/2008
    BIS Review 132/2008 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 132/2008
 BIS Review 132/2008 
 11
