Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: What should be done during the 
macroeconomic adjustment phase in Spain? 
Speech  by  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  a  Lunch-
conference organised by El Correo de Andalucía, Seville, 25 September 2008. 
 Since August last year the world’s developed economies have been convulsed by two very 
severe  shocks:  the  rise  in  oil  and  other  commodity  prices  and  the  outbreak  of  financial 
turmoil that has reached dimensions that nobody could have imagined initially. The increase 
in commodity and oil prices seems to be easing, and yet the events of recent weeks suggest 
that, as regards the turmoil, we are probably experiencing the most significant financial crisis 
since 1929.  
There  are  already  numerous  reports  by  domestic  and  international  agencies  (IMF,  OECD, 
Bank for International Settlements) analysing the causes and consequences of the situation 
the  industrialised  economies  are  currently  going  through.  At  first  it  was  thought  that  the 
repercussions of the financial crisis would be concentrated in the US economy. Then it was 
considered that other industrialised economies in which debt, the external imbalance or the 
property  boom  may  have  been  important,  like  the  UK,  Spain,  Ireland  and  New  Zealand, 
might  also be  affected,  while  other  countries would  remain  beyond  the  contagion.  But  this 
has not been the case. The effects have reached all countries. As we have just seen with the 
release  of  Q2  European  growth  figures,  countries  with  large  external  surpluses  such  as 
Germany, have also posted a very weak economic performance. As a result, today, unlike a 
few  months  ago,  nobody  is  defending  the  possibility  of  certain  European  economies 
decoupling from what is happening in the United States. 
As you can imagine, the Spanish economy has not been able to remain unaffected by these 
processes. In fact, our country, which had been building up certain imbalances, in the form of 
rapid growth of household and corporate debt and, consequently, of a large external deficit, 
had  already  embarked  upon  a  smooth  correction  from  mid-2006.  However,  global  events 
have  accelerated  and  intensified  this  adjustment,  even  though,  from  the  viewpoint  of  the 
financial system, Spanish banks have had absolutely nothing to do with the causes of the 
financial crisis. They have not generated doubtful assets like US banks have, nor have they 
invested in these assets like many European Banks have. However, the financial crisis has 
not only affected the institutions that generated these toxic products or invested in them but, 
by inducing financial market breakdown, has spread to all institutions. For Spain, this means 
that  the  adjustment  process  must  now  take  place  in  the  presence  of  much  more  difficult 
conditions in the financial and international environment than we have enjoyed during the last 
decade. 
That said, the Banco de España has pointed out on a number of occasions that some of the 
adjustment we are experiencing is an inevitable part of economic developments, which will 
allow correction of the imbalances that had been accumulating during the upswing. Indeed, 
their  continuation  would  have  entailed  an  increase  in  the  vulnerability  of  the  Spanish 
economy and the eventual correction would have been even more severe. Cyclical upswings 
followed by downswings are a normal feature of all economies, although the fact that Spain 
has recorded high growth rates without interruption for fourteen years may have led agents 
to forget the existence of this type of cyclical disturbance. 
Before addressing the central theme of my speech, it would be useful to answer the question 
why  the  industrialised  countries  have  suddenly  found  themselves  in  such  a  complicated 
situation. Part of the answer (the other part being the regulation and supervision failures in 
many countries) relates to the strong increase in corporate and household debt in numerous 
countries in recent years, which led, in the presence of highly favourable financial conditions, 
BIS Review 117/2008 
 1
to a significant appreciation in the value of financial and real assets. Some economists and 
institutions have argued that monetary policy was too lax and that central banks should in 
future  pay  attention  not only  to  inflation,  but  also  to  other  financial  developments, such  as 
credit, when taking their decisions. In some cases, these favourable financial conditions were 
harnessed  to  expand  residential  and  productive  investment  (as  in  Spain),  while  in  others 
consumption was also boosted by the ready availability of financing, leading to a spectacular 
reduction  in  household  saving  ratios,  as  in  the  United  States.  The  excessive  financial 
expansion  was  also  accompanied  by  a  reduced  perception  of  risk  by  investors  and 
intermediaries,  contributing  to  spending  growth  and  the  leveraged  buyout  boom.  This 
situation  was  gradually  changing  as  central  banks  tightened  their  monetary  policy,  but  the 
most radical change took place from the summer of 2007, when the turmoil led to a rapid and 
substantial reassessment of the risk of financial instruments and a sudden standstill in many 
segments of the money and capital markets. There then began a process of deleveraging, 
the opposite of the one that took place in the previous years of this decade, in which debtors 
are striving to rebuild their balance sheets, while investors exercise the greatest prudence in 
choosing where to place their savings. 
During  the  stage  of  strong  credit  growth,  the  Spanish  economy  accumulated  certain 
imbalances,  linked  to  the  fact  that  (residential  and  capital)  investment  exceeded  national 
saving. However, Spain has preserved a number of very important stabilising factors, such 
as the balanced budget, to which I will refer later. Also, as I have mentioned in detail in other 
speeches,  Spanish  banks  were  not  involved  in  the  financial  innovation  operations  that, 
through  the  creation  of  highly  sophisticated  instruments,  lie  at  the  source  of  the  current 
financial crisis. This means that our institutions are in a somewhat more solid position to face 
the new stage than those of other countries.  
Today  I  am  going  to  reflect  on  what  I  consider  that  different  economic  agents  should  do 
during  a  macroeconomic  adjustment  phase  like  the  one  we  are  currently  experiencing  in 
Spain. It seems to me that it would be useful for us all to understand what is happening and 
what we can do to get through this phase at the lowest possible cost. Admittedly each agent 
has a different degree of freedom of action, but it is important to remember that it is not only 
the  authorities  (governments,  parliaments,  the  ECB,  etc.)  who  can  help  our  economy  to 
return to a high growth path as soon as possible. 
* * * 
To  start  with,  I  should  like  to  point  out  that  the  most  important  thing  is  not  to  fall  into  the 
temptation of adopting policies that try to avoid the adjustment, since that would only prolong 
it and prevent the economy rebuilding the foundations for fresh growth. 
It  is  understandable  that  firms  for  which  oil  is  an  important  input  should  appeal  to 
governments to reduce the cost of energy through some mechanism, such as subsidies or 
lower taxes, as likewise it is understandable that businessmen and financial institutions that 
can  no  longer  obtain  low-cost,  long-term  funds  on  the  market  think  that  the  State  could 
provide them with larger volumes of financing and on better terms than the market. It is vital 
that governments and parliaments reject these temptations, not only because of the possible 
budgetary repercussions, but also because it is essential that economic agents adapt to the 
new  realities,  however  painful  these  may  be.  This  is  even  more  important  when  these 
realities, like the price of oil and the availability of funds on international financial markets, 
are global phenomena that even countries larger and more powerful than our own have been 
unable to influence. 
Thus, the aim should not be to isolate the Spanish economy and protect its agents from the 
various  shocks  that  we  have  suffered  in  recent  quarters,  but  rather  to  facilitate  the 
adjustment  process,  permitting  changes  in  relative  prices  (energy,  labour  costs, mark-ups) 
and the reallocation of resources across sectors to take place with a high degree of flexibility. 
Another approach that must be ruled out is short-termism. In general, economic policy should 
be designed in all situations from a long-term viewpoint, because many important measures 
2 
 BIS Review 117/2008
(I  dare  say  the  most  important)  are  structural,  and  these  are  the  ones  that  tackle  the 
economy’s fundamental problems. It is understandable that, when faced with a stream of bad 
economic  news,  like  at  present,  public  opinion  calls  for  rapid  reactions  and  that  the 
temptation  to  focus  on  short-term  measures  increases.  Such  proposals  are  also  based  on 
the idea that structural measures only have medium and long-term effects, and are therefore 
inappropriate  for  a  period  of  economic  weakness.  This  is  not  true.  Evidence  shows  that, 
apart  from  their  medium-term  effects,  structural  reforms  may  have  significant  favourable 
effects in the short term, in so far as their introduction may make agents more confident that 
the foundations for growth are being made more solid and flexible. Such an improvement in 
expectations may also help to bring forward certain spending decisions, such as investment 
projects aiming to exploit the new opportunities that these structural changes may give rise to 
in the future. 
Now is therefore the time to stress the essential role played by the institutional framework 
and  policies  that  provide  incentives  to  facilitate  economic  adjustment.  In  this  respect,  as  I 
have  already  mentioned,  obviously  not  all  agents  have  the  same  degree  of  responsibility 
when  facing  a  period  of  difficulty,  the  authorities  being  the  main  agents  responsible  for 
shaping this combination of positive incentives. Given that the decisions of the private sector 
(households  and  firms)  depend  significantly  on  the  institutional  framework  and  incentives, 
their  role  in  the  adjustment  (especially  that  of  households)  is  highly  constrained  by  the 
framework in which they operate. 
This is perhaps the main thing that the authorities should take into account in their response 
to  a  period  of  economic  difficulties,  both  when  managing  budgetary  policy  and  when 
designing their regulatory and market-organisation policies. It is necessary to analyse, at all 
times, whether the policies proposed provide the appropriate incentives for agents to adapt 
to the adjustment, increasing the probability that the economy will return to a growth path in 
the medium term. 
In the case of monetary policy, it is essential that it should be completely geared to the ECB’s 
mandated objective of keeping inflation at very moderate levels, and in this respect I think 
that the ECB is fully complying with its task. It would have been very negative if the European 
Central bank had fallen into the temptation of forgetting its objective of containing inflation, 
attempting to alleviate the painful adaptation by households and firms to the very substantial 
increases  in  commodity  and  oil  prices  that  we  have  experienced.  Fortunately,  there  is 
complete confidence that the ECB will ensure that inflation returns to its target level, and this 
is helping to somewhat reduce the uncertainty surrounding the financial system, growth and 
other variables. 
In the case of budgetary policy, one positive element of the Spanish case is its favourable 
starting position. This is based on the notable budget surpluses recorded in recent years and 
on the sustained decline in the ratio of government debt to GDP to 36%, a very low figure in 
comparison  with  other  developed  countries.  This  initial  situation  has  made  it  possible  for 
automatic stabilisers (i.e. the reduction in revenues due to the slowdown and the increase in 
spending on unemployment as a consequence of the rise in the numbers of unemployed) to 
be  allowed  to  operate  freely,  providing  a  significant  counter-cyclical  component  in  the 
adjustment phase. Moreover, this good starting point has, for example, avoided the need to 
react to the current losses of revenue by raising taxes, which would have certainly magnified 
the intensity of the adjustment. That said, the slowdown in spending is having a significant 
impact on tax revenue, reducing the budget balance very rapidly, so that utmost prudence 
must be exercised in fiscal and budgetary decisions. 
The  need  to  provide  the  appropriate  incentives  means  that  it  is  advisable  not  to  adopt 
widespread  and  permanent  discretionary  budgetary  measures  that  attempt  to  counter  the 
effects on households and firms of the inevitable reduction in national spending required by 
the adjustment process. Measures to increase spending would, at best, enable activity to be 
sustained only temporarily and would not help to improve the prospects for expansion in the 
BIS Review 117/2008 
 3
term.  And 
improvement 
I  say  at  best  because,  without  an 
in  external 
medium 
competitiveness, a large part of the increase in public spending would leak abroad and have 
only a minimal impact on domestic activity. 
Likewise,  strengthening  control  over  current  general  government  spending  is  an  essential 
measure  in  response  to  a  low-growth  phase,  since  it  limits  the  deterioration  in  the  budget 
balance,  signals  stability  and  rigour  to  the  private  sector,  and  provides  greater  leeway  to 
undertake  public  investment  projects  that  enable  the  Spanish  economy’s  productive  base 
and competitiveness to be enhanced. 
It should also be remembered that, since the bulk of public spending, including investment, is 
carried out by regional and local government, the behaviour of these authorities is going to 
be  decisive  in  determining  the  general  government  contribution  to  weathering  the 
adjustment. 
In the case of the Spanish adjustment, moreover, a shift in productive activity is required. It 
seems obvious that the relative size of the construction sector, following its strong expansion 
over the last decade, is going to be reduced, while other activities need to fill the gap. To 
facilitate the reallocation of resources of all kinds (human, financial, technological) entailed 
by this shift in output, it is essential that goods and factor markets should have a flexible and 
competitive structure. Thus, in a period like the present one, it is fundamental to review the 
situation of these institutions and to explore the scope for undertaking structural reforms to 
make the economy more flexible, liberalise sectors and markets and increase competition, so 
that resources can be used optimally. 
Despite the efforts made in recent decades, there are still a number of areas of the Spanish 
economy  in  which  these  reforms  continue  to  be  very  necessary.  The  high  inflation  rates 
recorded for some components of the consumption basket and the large mark-ups observed 
in  certain  activities  underline  the  need  to  enhance  the  competitive  environment  in  certain 
segments,  such  as  goods  distribution  and  services  provision.  The  transposition  of  the 
Services  Directive  is  an  opportunity  to  boost  competition  in  this  sector  that  must  not  be 
missed.  Lower  inflation  rates  would  not  only  favour  the  competitiveness  of  our  economy, 
which  is  so  vital  at  a  time  when  national  spending  is  slowing,  but  would  also  improve 
household  purchasing  power  against  a  background  of  declining  household  income  on 
account of the oil price shock and the slowdown in employment. There are many other fields 
(such as the postal service, railway transport, ports, airports, energy, etc.) in which structural 
reforms  giving  a  greater  role  to  the  private  sector  and  competition  need  to  be  adopted  as 
soon as possible. 
As  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  residential  sector  clearly  needs  to  slim  down  and  it  has 
been  doing  so  quite  rapidly  in  recent  months.  The  rise  in  uncertainty  regarding  both  the 
economic outlook and house prices is inhibiting residential demand, even though household 
creation,  due  to  the  increase  in  the  population  and  the  observed  tendency  for  average 
household  size  to  decline,  is  still  growing  at  significant  rates.  Improving  the  regulation  of 
rented housing, to make it more flexible, profitable and attractive, would enable the demand 
for  residential  services  from  those  who  do  not  wish  (or  are  unable)  to  buy  to  be  met  and 
would reactivate that part of the demand to purchase housing that basically stems from the 
investment motive, thus reducing the current excess supply in the market. 
In  particular,  providing  legal  certainty  to  home  owners  and  deregulating  the  rental  periods 
that may be agreed by tenants and landlords would boost the rental market. Since in recent 
years a part of household wealth has taken the form of property investments, if the number of 
houses used to generate funds through rental could be increased, it would also help many 
owners to meet their debts. 
A  third  area  in  which  reform  is  fundamental  is  the  labour  market.  The performance  of  this 
market will probably be the key to determining whether the current adjustment will be rapid 
and slight or whether it will be prolonged and far-reaching. It is often said that the Spanish 
labour  market  is  very  flexible,  and  the  evidence  cited  for  this  is  the  high  proportion  of 
4 
 BIS Review 117/2008
temporary  workers.  Indeed,  the  existence  of  a  relatively  high  proportion  of  temporary 
contracts  may  mean  that  some  firms  have  a  greater  capacity  to  respond  to  changes  in 
economic  conditions,  but  these  contracts  are  not  evenly  spread  across  sectors,  nor  would 
they  seem  to  be  conducive  to  the  proper  training  of  workers.  Moreover,  the  idea  that  the 
labour  market  is  flexible  because  it  allows  the  burden  of  adjustment  to  fall  on  temporary 
workers  is  hardly  equitable,  since  it  means  that  a  very  specific  group  (generally  the  last 
entrants to the labour market) bears the main burden of that cost. 
However, as I noted at the beginning, it is of interest to explore decision-making areas other 
than that of the authorities. Firms are the basic economic agent, since they take most of the 
economy’s production decisions and their management, strategy, adaptation to demand and 
use  of  resources  ultimately  determine  the  economy’s  growth  rate,  productivity  and 
competitiveness abroad. Given the weak national demand with which they are faced, firms 
will evidently give their utmost attention to managing their productive processes efficiently. In 
particular,  the  surge  in  oil  prices  will  force  them  to  review  the  energy  consumed  in 
production.  Although  oil  prices  have  moderated  in  the  last  few  weeks,  the  uncertainty 
surrounding this market makes it advisable to maximise efficiency in oil use. In this respect, 
progress has to be made in introducing competition in the energy market and, at the same 
time,  taxation  must  be  revised  to  stimulate  energy  saving,  since  this  input  represents  a 
significant burden on Spain’s trade balance. 
Spanish  firms  are  tackling  this  phase  through  three  lines  of  action,  which  the  authorities 
should support. 
First, firms are reviewing their growth strategy in Spain. They are analysing the markets in 
which they compete, but also others in which they still do not and to which demand may shift 
in  the  future.  Firms  will  try  to  see  beyond  the  next  few  years  of  low  growth  to  identify 
opportunities and imagine what the forthcoming needs and demands of consumers will be, in 
order to position themselves advantageously in those business areas. There are still highly 
profitable  sectors  and  businesses  with  plenty  of  scope  for  expansion,  so  firms  have  to  be 
able to refocus their activity flexibly and to set up new companies without hindrances in a 
framework  of  competition.  Moreover,  the  cyclical  weakness  will  require  firms  to  follow  a 
moderate  pricing  policy  and  reduce  mark-ups,  which  would  be  easier  to  achieve  if 
competitive pressure were to increase in the sectors where it is weakest. 
Second, faced with the inevitable fall in domestic demand, firms have no alternative but to 
turn  to  foreign  markets.  It  is  important  to  realise  that,  compared  with  the  foreseeably  low 
growth  of  national  demand  in  the  next  few  quarters,  Spain’s  export  markets  may  grow  at 
relatively high rates in the coming years. In 2008 Q2, for example, national demand grew by 
1.4% in year-on-year terms, while goods and services exports rose by nearly three times that 
figure.  For  this  reason,  efforts  to  boost  the  internationalisation  of  Spanish  firms  must  be 
maintained.  Compared  with  the  46  million  people  comprising  the  Spanish  market,  the 
inhabitants of the euro area countries number 320 million and the European single market 
consists of nearly 500 million. Note that Spain’s share of goods exports in world trade is still 
below its share of world production. Also, Spain sends a smaller fraction of its exports to the 
emerging  economies  (whose  imports  are  more  dynamic)  than  the  other  EU  countries.  To 
increase our exports, domestic costs have to remain on a moderate path and the strategies 
for  opening  up  the  economy  and  fostering  trade  have  to  be  developed.  There  are 
government initiatives to promote economic and trade relations with new areas (such as the 
Integral  Market  Development  Plans),  which  are  delivering  good  results  and  in  which  firms 
should not hesitate to take part. 
Finally,  firms  should  continue  to  pursue  innovation  and  quality  as  a  means  of  enhancing 
competitiveness, a strategy which calls for specialised, well-trained workers. In this respect, 
education  should  pay  greater  heed  to  the  practical  needs  of  the  productive  sector  by 
involving the business world more closely in the design and definition of vocational-training 
and university course contents. Here it is fitting to point out that some areas of education in 
BIS Review 117/2008 
 5
Spain  continue  to  produce  disheartening  results:  in  particular,  the  percentage  of  young 
people completing secondary school studies continues to be among the lowest in Europe. 
Hence government policies aimed at remedying this underperformance (in which the regions 
play a central role) should be prioritised. 
Firms,  along  with  trade  unions,  also  face  the  challenge  of  containing  the  effect  of  the 
adjustment  on  employment.  Given  the  repercussions  that  unemployment  has  for  spending 
and, above all, for household confidence and the general climate of uncertainty, this variable 
is crucial, since a smaller impact on employment would reduce the fall in demand and lower 
the probability of being caught in a vicious circle. 
In  this  connection,  it  should  be  kept  in  mind  that  all  macroeconomic  adjustments  are 
different. That seen in Spain in 1992 and 1993 stemmed from an accumulation of substantial 
losses in competitiveness, which could be recovered fairly rapidly through the devaluation of 
the  peseta.  But  the  devaluation  also  led  to  a  steep  rise  in  the  import  bill  which  reduced 
Spain’s real income and made it necessary to impose tighter financial conditions in the form 
of high interest rates, making the adjustment of national demand particularly pronounced. In 
the  current  circumstances,  membership  of  the  euro  area  prevents  a  sharp  currency 
depreciation  from  reducing  household  purchasing  power  and,  at  the  same  time,  limits  the 
possible  financial  shocks  that  domestic  borrowers  might  suffer.  However,  belonging  to  the 
euro  area  also  makes  it  impossible  to  rapidly  restore  nominal  competitiveness  to  a  more 
advantageous level for national production. For this reason, it is much more important than in 
the past for Spain to set in train immediately all the mechanisms that allow it to curtail cost 
rises and to increase productivity gains, so as to make production competitive and to reduce 
the negative effects on employment. Hence the external sector could provide a substantial 
offsetting influence in the adjustment phase and a larger boost to the subsequent recovery. 
This moderate cost behaviour demands a responsible response from firms and trade unions 
to the current labour market situation. Clearly the wage bill cannot be expanded by major pay 
rises, since this eventually leads to a higher relative cost of labour and, consequently, less 
job creation, higher unemployment, loss of household confidence and fresh falls in demand, 
which  would  mean  still  lower  growth  and  more  unemployment.  Therefore,  it  is  crucial  to 
adapt wages to the specific situation of firms, to their activity, productivity gains, profits, etc. 
The  current  wage  bargaining  system  does  not  take  into  account  the  large  differences  in 
individual firms’ specific situations, so it is not the most suitable one to prevent the bout of 
weak demand from generating a sharp fall in employment. 
Further, the predominance of indexation clauses in collective labour agreements is a problem 
that becomes particularly harmful when, as in the current circumstances, inflation has risen 
due to an external shock, like oil prices, at a time of cyclical weakness. It is naive to believe 
that  automatic  wage  adjustment  to  reflect  past  consumer  price  increases  provides  any 
protection to household disposable income. On the contrary, these clauses (which have now 
been done away with in most European countries) lessen the ability of firms to compete and 
keep creating jobs, generate inflation (which affects those not protected by similar provisions) 
and, in short, hinder adaptation to the external shock. 
In general, these characteristics of the Spanish labour market have meant that employment 
has so far been the economy’s main adjustment variable in periods of crisis, since it is the 
quantities (i.e. the number of workers) that change given the impossibility of adjusting prices, 
i.e. wages. Thus it is not surprising that in the past year the unemployment rate in Spain has 
risen by 2.4 percentage points to 10.4% in 2008 Q2, while in the same period the euro area 
unemployment rate has remained relatively steady at a little above 7%. The fact that Spain 
has  the  highest  unemployment  rate  of  the  OECD  countries  should  lead  us  to  reform  our 
labour market institutions and improve this lamentable ranking. 
Many  of  my  talks  in  recent  months  have  referred  to  the  activity  of  Spanish  financial 
institutions. These played an essential role in the fourteen years of expansion and, thanks to 
their  capable  management,  were  in  a  sound  position  at  the  beginning  of  the  international 
6 
 BIS Review 117/2008
financial crisis. But it cannot be denied that Spanish institutions face difficult challenges: first, 
as noted above, although they were not agents of the crisis, they are being affected by the 
standstill on the international financial markets; second, balance-sheet building by firms and 
households, which I mentioned earlier, will lead to a substantial moderation of borrowing by 
these sectors and hence to a reduction in the business of credit institutions; finally, the phase 
of real-estate adjustment and, in general, of economic slowdown, is already being reflected 
in increased doubtful assets, although this was to be expected and is still far from reaching 
alarming levels. For all these reasons, it is clear that there is no room for complacency and 
that institutions must act to achieve tighter cost control and to rationalise their procedures. 
Against a background of rising doubtful assets it seems essential to build up both the amount 
and  quality  of  capital  and  to  establish  sound  risk  control  mechanisms.  Lastly,  institutions 
should continuously carry out stress testing and develop contingency plans to anticipate what 
line  of  action  to  take  in  the  face  of  different  market  situations.  Regarding  the  supervisor,  I 
believe  there  has  been  widespread  recognition  of  the  reliability  and  quality  of  Spanish 
banking supervision. Therefore this work should continue to cultivate a close relationship and 
permanent contact with institutions, but without relaxing the demands made of them. 
The last agent to which I wish to devote attention is households. In the current circumstances 
it is inevitable that households should regard the future with greater uncertainty and restrict 
their spending, stepping up their saving and reducing their level of indebtedness.  
The behaviour of households will be influenced by whether or not they are indebted and, if 
so, the weight of this debt burden on their current income.  
In the case of the more heavily indebted households (in proportion to income), the picture is 
more  complicated  since,  to  the  prevailing  uncertainty  about  the  economic  outlook  may  be 
added the tightening of financing conditions, which is largely a result of the financial turmoil. 
It is difficult to predict whether this tightening will continue, although money market rates (the 
main  benchmark  in  Spanish  mortgage  loans)  now  contain  a  substantial  risk  premium  over 
the ECB’s official rates, currently at 4.25%. In addition, the adjustment phase will lead to a 
decrease in the high debt of households, which is a necessary step for them to be able to 
drive a fresh phase of high growth. 
As  in  the  case  of  firms,  households  will  also  have  to  be  asked  to  adapt  to  the  changes. 
Above all, this calls for a greater effort in training, acquiring professional skills and versatility. 
It  would  also  be  useful  if  energy  saving  could  be  included  in  households’  day-to-day 
activities,  although,  as  in  other  areas,  the  provision  of  proper  incentives  by  the  authorities 
(particularly through energy price and taxation policies) is crucial. 
I  would  like  to  end  with  a  message  of  confidence  on  the  Spanish  economy’s  capacity  for 
growth: the country’s productive foundations are much more solid than in the past and there 
has been a process of convergence with average European income levels which is unlikely 
to be reversed. Spain is a stronger economy than at the start of the 1990s and its productive 
and market structures are more flexible and modern. Moreover, macroeconomic stability is 
assured: the inflation rate will probably be closer to the European average in 2009 and 2010 
and the markets expect interest rates to continue at relatively moderate levels, far from the 
double-digit  levels  of  the  1980s  and  1990s.  Also,  there  is  a  broad  consensus  about 
maintaining a high degree of budgetary stability, probably the most significant development 
in the Spanish economy in the past decade. 
That said, the unemployment rate is rising rapidly and the growth rate of activity has begun to 
decline  notably.  Today  I  have  tried  to  put  forward  the  idea  that  all  economic  agents 
(authorities, social partners and households) can contribute to making this adjustment phase 
brief  and  to  helping  the  Spanish  economy  to  harness  this  opportunity  to  strengthen  its 
foundations for growth. In particular, a bolder attitude on the part of the authorities in their 
reforms  and  on  the  part  of  the  social  partners  in  their  shaping  of  wage-setting  and  other 
labour-market  mechanisms  would  lead  to  an  earlier  and  stronger  emergence  from  this 
complicated phase. 
BIS Review 117/2008 
 7
