Ewart S Williams: Implications of the current financial crisis for Trinidad 
and Tobago 
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, at a 
TTMA  Seminar  “Crisis  in  global  financial  markets:  implications  for  Trinidad  and  Tobago”, 
Port-of-Spain, 26 September 2008. 
 Thanks for the invitation. The sub-prime crisis first grabbed the headlines sometime around 
August 2007. Who would have thought that after one year of high-priced casualties, not only 
is  the  end  not  in  sight,  the  ongoing spillovers  now  threaten  to  destroy the  workings  of  the 
international financial system as we know it. We are now seeing, among the industrialized 
countries a level of financial panic the likes of which we have not seen in our life time. 
President Bush, in making the case for the US$700 billion rescue package warned that “the 
entire US economy was now in danger”: he cautioned that the current crisis could wipe out 
banks, empty retirement nest-eggs, send home-values into a free-fall and create millions of 
new jobless. Warren Buffet called the crisis “a financial Pearl Harbor”. 
The speakers before me have given their take on how the crisis will affect various sectors of 
our economy. I will try to avoid too much overlap by focusing on the impact of the crisis on 
the  country’s  external  reserves  and  on  our  financial  system  as  a  whole.  In  the  latter 
context, I would also like to suggest some lessons for financial sector regulation. I would end 
with a few brief comments on the macro-economic risks to the economy as a whole. 
Last week, at least two commentators wondered why specific details on the impact of crisis 
on  the  country’s  reserves  were  not  forthcoming,  surmising  that  the  Government  or  the 
Central Bank had something to hide. With the indulgence of my host, I would like to address 
this issue in some detail. 
Let me say up front that, as far as the official reserves are concerned, we have not suffered 
any capital losses as a result of the financial turmoil on Wall Street. And this is so because 
we  have  stuck  to  our  mandate  which  requires  the  Central  Bank  to  adhere  to  conservative 
reserve management principles and to have in place as many risk mitigants as feasible. 
Let me explain our reserve management system: 
Very often central banks are criticized for being too conservative in investing the country’s 
reserves  and  not  maximizing  their  income  potential.  It’s  an  unfortunate  criticism  since  the 
conventional wisdom is that generating returns is not the primary purpose for holding central 
bank reserves. For all central banks, capital value preservation is paramount. Simply put, 
reserves should be invested at low risk. 
Of course, reserves represent the country’s savings and thus the return objective should not 
be entirely neglected. Typically for central banks, the return objective is secondary to liquidity 
and safety. 
And this has been our approach to managing the country’s reserves. 
As  you  know,  official  reserves  have  increased  significantly  since  2000,  in  line  with  the 
increase  in  international  energy  prices.  Currently,  official  reserves  stand  at  US$  8.5  billion 
compared  with  US$1.4  billion  at  the  beginning  of  the  decade.  This  represents  a  six-fold 
increase. 
To handle our increasing wealth, a few years ago the Bank introduced a structured foreign 
reserve  management  strategy,  allocating  these  resources  between  three  tranches;  one  to 
meet  working  capital  needs;  another  tranche,  as  a  second  line  reserve;  with  the  residual 
allocated to an investment tranche. 
BIS Review 119/2008 
 1
The  Bank  engages  six  foreign  money  managers  (including  the  World  Bank)  to  manage 
portions  of  the  reserves  according  to  international  benchmarks.  External  managers  handle 
32 percent of our total official reserves, while 68% is managed by the Central Bank. Lehman 
Brothers was one of the external managers. 
Consistent  with  international  best  practice  the  Bank  utilizes  an  independent  custodian  to 
safe-keep  the  foreign  assets.  This  custodian  arrangement  ensures  that  our  assets  are  not 
co-mingled  with  the  resources  of  the  external  manager.  This  proved  to  be  extremely 
important since it meant that in the case of Lehman Bros our resources were not involved in 
Lehman’s insolvency. 
Our strategy also provides for investment guidelines designed to reduce the risk to which the 
portfolio is exposed. 
• 
One such guideline specifies a minimum rating for the banks in which the deposits 
are lodged. 
A second guideline puts a ceiling on the amounts that can be deposited into each 
bank. 
 As at the end of August 2008, just before the latest episodes of global financial stress 
• 
some  58  per  cent  of  central  bank  reserves  was  invested  in  money  market 
instruments; 
26 per cent was invested in US government and other GF government bonds; 
6 per cent was invested in agency bonds (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac); and 
the  remainder  was  held  in  asset-back  securities  and  other  money  market 
instruments. 
 This structure helped in insulating the official reserves from any loss. 
All our deposits are in commercial banks which have not been affected by the recent crisis. 
You would note that, so far, the turmoil has been largely in the investment banks: Bear 
Stearns, Lehman Bros, and Merrill Lynch; with some ripples in Goldman Sachs and Morgan 
Stanley. 
Our US bond holdings have benefitted from the increase in prices consequent on the flight to 
quality, which has been the main reaction to the market meltdown. 
Our limited exposure to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac bonds (some 6 per cent of our total 
reserves) could have resulted in some losses. However, the US Government take-over of 
these institutions has reduced, if not eliminated, the risk of this exposure. 
Lehman  Bros,  as  one  of  our  external  managers  managed  about  6  per  cent  of  the  total 
portfolio.  The  bulk  of  these  resources  was  invested  in  treasury  securities  of  G7  countries, 
and  as  such  faced  very  low  risk.  A  very  small  amount  (US$85  million)  was  invested  in  a 
mutual fund sponsored directly by Lehman Bros. We were able to liquidate this asset at no 
loss. 
The bulk of our asset-backed securities were issued by Merrill Lynch. The take-over of this 
institution by the Bank of America eliminates or reduces the risk attached to this asset. 
But ladies and gentlemen, if we had any doubts, the current turmoil in international financial 
markets should remind us that no institution is totally immune from possible contagion, 
regardless of what the rating agencies may say. 
As you may know, not too long before Bear Stearns was declared insolvent it was rated BBB; 
Lehman  Bros  was  rated  (A+)  and  Merrill  Lynch  (A+):  they  were  all  considered  investment 
grade. Before selecting Lehman Bros as an external manager, we went through a rigorous 
selection process that not only included examination of past performance of funds managed 
2 
 BIS Review 119/2008
and Lehman’s ability to deliver superior returns, we also conducted a thorough examination 
of Lehman’s financials. 
But as happened many years ago, with the dot-com crash, investor sentiment can change 
very  quickly  and  sharp  declines  in  stock  prices  can  quickly  erode  the  capital  of  even  the 
strongest banks, producing the dire consequences that have attended three of the world’s 
five largest investment banks. 
Since  Lehman’s  and  Merrill  Lynch’s  difficulties,  the  Bank  has  carefully  reexamined  the 
financial status of all our counterparties as well as our investment managers to ensure that 
none of these are on any watch-list. We have also taken the decision to introduce two new 
elements  to  our  investment  strategy.  First,  until  financial  markets  have  been  stabilized, 
maturing  deposits  will  be  rolled  over  but  for  shorter  periods  and  second,  we  will  aim  for 
further diversification among banks (within our approved guidelines), even at the risk of lower 
returns. 
I would just make this brief comment on the HSF. As you know, the plan is to invest HSF 
resources more aggressively with a focus on returns, subject to an acceptable level of risk. 
A  few  months  ago  the  HSF  Board  approved  a  Strategic  Asset  Allocation  which  called  for 
HSF funds to be invested in money market instruments, US government bonds of a maturity 
of 1-5 years, and US, and global equities. Under the HSF Act, the Central Bank is to act as 
the Fund Manager with the understanding that the management of the equity portfolio will be 
outsourced. 
Over  the  past  few  months,  the  Bank  has  been  involved  in  the  selection  process  for  the 
external  managers.  The  HSF  Board  agreed  that  pending  the  selection  of  the  external 
managers  and  the  implementation  of  the  Strategic  Asset  Allocation,  the  HSF  resources 
should be invested like the central bank reserves. 
Consistent with this guideline the resources are invested in short term deposits (95 per cent) 
and  US  treasuries  (5  per  cent).  The  deposit  holdings  are  subject  to  the  same  prudential 
guidelines. Consequently, these reserves have suffered no loss and are at no undue risk. 
Impact on the financial system 
Having surveyed most of our domestic financial institutions we can say, with a great deal of 
certainty, that the immediate impact of the crisis has been minimal. Some institutions had 
direct exposure to Lehman Bros, Merrill Lynch and AIG but in all instances the exposure was 
minimal, in relation to total assets. 
From our analysis there is no immediate risk facing our banking system which happens to be 
well capitalized (with a capital/assets ratio of about 18 per cent), with a very low level of non-
performing loans and basking in excess liquidity. 
Unlike the banks in large emerging markets the lending operations of our banks are based 
on local deposits rather than on borrowing from foreign banks. All of our local banks have 
foreign  short-term  revolving  credit  lines.  However,  given  the  ample  availability  of  foreign 
exchange  from  the  central  bank  and  in  the  domestic  market,  these  lines  are  quickly 
amortized  when  used.  The  credit  crunch  is  unlikely  to  affect  the  availability  of  these  lines 
though there could be some increase in cost. 
The  insurance  companies  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  also,  for  the  most  part,  match  their 
domestic  liabilities  with  an  investment  portfolio  heavily  concentrated  in  domestic  assets. 
Some companies have external exposure but to a very limited extent. 
But ladies and gentlemen, if the Wall Street crisis should remind us of anything, it is that we 
can’t be complacent. Rather, the crisis should spur all our institutions to take a close look 
at their risk management systems and it should make us realize that it is in all our interest 
to have robust regulatory systems. 
BIS Review 119/2008 
 3
We are hoping to have a new FIA in place before the end of the year and we expect to have 
a  new  Insurance  Act  and  perhaps  new  Credit  Union  legislation  by  the  middle  of  next 
year. While this is progress, ladies and gentlemen, there is a view that even the proposed 
new  legislation  will  not  be  as  robust  as  it  should  be  and  still  short  of  international  best 
practice. 
I can’t help making the observation that because we have not had a systemic disruption in 
our  financial  system  for  several  years,  many  of  our  institutions  prefer  to  cling  to  the 
status-quo  and  fight  change  even  when  they  recognize  the  risks  involved  in  not 
upgrading the existing systems. 
How else could one explain: 
• 
The tendency for so many institutions not to have audited accounts, six months after 
the end of their fiscal year; 
The  opposition  to  the  separation  of  an  institution’s  financial  and  non-financial 
activities to avoid contagion; or 
The  reluctance  on  the  part  of  some  institutions  to  readily  support  steps  to  reduce 
related  party  transactions,  or  strengthen  internal  audit,  or  corporate  governance 
practices. 
  In the Bank’s view, the current turmoil in the US market should serve as a catalyst for boards 
of directors and senior management of all companies, whether they are banks, insurers or 
credit  unions,  to  look  closely  at  their  risk  profile  and  determine  if  their  level  of  capital  and 
liquidity  are  appropriate  to  their  individual  circumstances.  Also  these  tough  times,  having 
unbiased  and  objective  advice  and  thinking  is  crucial  and  the  existence  of  independent 
directors on companies’ boards would facilitate this. 
Unfortunately, not all companies see these requirements as being essential to mitigating un-
necessary risks. 
And finally, ladies and gentlemen, in terms of the macro-economics, what can we expect 
going forward? 
I really wish we had a crystal ball to predict how the global economy will evolve in the short 
term. Unfortunately, we don’t and in such a situation, prudence is the best policy; a policy of 
preparing for the worst and putting systems in place to meet any downside. In a way, that’s 
what risk management is all about. 
And what are the downside risks? 
Well,  even  if  order  is  quickly  restored  to  the  US  financial system,  with  the  approval  of  the 
$700 billion package, the consensus is that the global economy is scheduled to undergo a 
pronounced slowdown (some are using the R word…recession). 
If this occurs, the reduction could prompt a fall in international oil and energy prices. Under 
these  circumstances,  something  will  have  to  give;  either  a  reduction  in  expenditure  or  a 
reduction  in  savings  through  the  HSF,  which  strictly  speaking,  is  permitted  under  the  HSF 
Act. Either option has unpalatable consequences. 
Trinidad  and  Tobago  is  in  a  better  position  to  withstand  a  global  slowdown  than  our 
CARICOM neighbors, who have already begun to experience declines in tourist arrivals and 
in migrants’ remittances. If this goes beyond a certain level, our manufacturing sector which 
contributes US$1 billion in exports, but provides substantial employment, could be affected. 
These are just two examples. 
There is no doubt that compared to the 1980s, we are in a better position now to withstand a 
global down-turn. But borrowing from the current lexicon, we have by no means de-coupled 
and a global slowdown could present a new set of challenges and at least slow our advance 
to our 20/20 vision. 
4 
 BIS Review 119/2008
But ladies and gentlemen, “God is a Trini” and these risks may not materialize. Even if we 
are  inclined  to  take  this  view,  we  should  see  in  the  current  global  financial  crisis,  an 
opportunity  to  further  strengthen  our  economic  fundamentals  most  notable  by  reducing 
inflation, increasing productivity and accelerating the diversification of our non-energy sector. 
That is the surest way of ensuring self-sustaining growth and improvements in the quality of 
life for our population. 
BIS Review 119/2008 
 5
