Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: The challenges to the Spanish banking 
system in the face of the global crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  at  the  50th 
anniversary of ESADE, Barcelona, 30 October 2008. 
 I have the pleasure of celebrating today with you the 50th anniversary of this institution. Over 
this half-century, ESADE has earned a reputation as one of the most prestigious business 
schools  in  the  world.  Education  and  training  is  the  most  important  factor  driving  economic 
and  social  development.  I  therefore  wish  to  begin  by  congratulating  you  on  the  work  you 
have done and encouraging you to continue on this path. 
The crisis besetting the international financial system will henceforth be a mandatory topic of 
study  in  your  classrooms.  The  events  unfolding  continuously  since  August  2007,  and  with 
particular virulence since September this year, make the current crisis the most serious one 
in living memory. 
This  crisis,  like  others  before  it,  manifested  itself  as  a  loss  of  confidence  by  the  agents 
participating  in  the  financial  markets.  Nevertheless,  there  are  features  which  make  it 
different:  its  degree  of  complexity,  its  global  span  and  the  speed  with  which  the  problems 
spread from one financial system to another are unprecedented. 
The current situation is further complicated by the notable weakness of the global economy. 
In  these  circumstances,  the  interrelatedness  of  financial  and  economic  factors  further 
contributes to the deterioration of the situation. 
In the face of this exceptional conjuncture, the monetary authorities and the governments of 
the  main  developed  economies  have  acted  in  coordination  to  adopt  a  set  of  far-reaching 
measures commensurate with the scale of the financial crisis facing us. Although we cannot 
expect that these measures will immediately correct the difficult economic situation at hand, 
but  rather  that  the  process  of  adjustment  will  be  slow  and  laborious,  they  should  however 
help financial institutions to resume normal operations and restore confidence to the financial 
markets. 
How  does  this  exceptionally  difficult  situation  affect  the  Spanish  banking  system?  What 
means  are  available  to  those  of  us  in  Spain  who,  in  our  different  areas  of  responsibility, 
participate in the financial system? During my talk I will try to answer these two questions, 
but allow me first to dedicate a few minutes to clarifying where Spain stands in the difficult 
situation besetting the international financial system. 
International context 
The financial crisis under way from summer 2007 to date can be divided into three phases. 
The  first  phase  ran  from  August  2007  to  the  beginning  of  last  September  and  was 
characterised  by  the  impact  of  the  financial  turmoil  on  the  balance  sheet  and  income 
statements of numerous financial institutions at international level. This turmoil originated in 
the  subprime  mortgage  segment,  although  it  progressively  spread  to  lower-risk  financial 
statements. 
One  of  the  business  segments  which  had  grown  up  in  the  US  mortgage  market  was 
characterised by the extension of mortgages to individuals or households with scant ability to 
meet their payment commitments. These are known as subprime or high-risk mortgages.  
Also, the process of transformation and securitisation of subprime loans consisted not only of 
packaging them and transforming them into bonds; in addition, the asset-backed securities 
BIS Review 133/2008 
 1
issued were sliced into smaller portions and re-packaged, so the instruments purchased by 
investors were increasingly complex and opaque and it was very difficult to ascertain their 
true  level  of  risk  despite  the  excellent  credit  ratings  generally  awarded  to  them  by  rating 
agencies. 
Numerous US and European banks were among those investors. Moreover, they invested in 
the securities via transactions recorded off their balance sheets through investment vehicles 
(conduits and SIVs) which enjoyed  a regulatory treatment in terms of  capital requirements 
that was much laxer than if they had been consolidated on bank balance sheets. These long-
term  investments  were  financed  at  very  short-term  through  the  issuance  of  securities 
targeted at money market investment funds or large non-financial corporations, which used 
them to put their temporary cash surpluses to work.  
The  house  price  slump  in  the  United  States  and  the  marked  worsening  of  defaults  on 
subprime lending, particularly on the loans extended in 2005 and 2006, sowed doubts among 
investors, which began to ask about the level of risk of the AAA-rated bonds they had bought 
and  which  offered  higher  returns  than  those  on  government  debt.  The  complexity  of  the 
products  made  it  difficult  to  determine  their  actual  ultimate  exposure  to  the  US  subprime 
segment.  In  these  circumstances,  both  money  market  investment  funds  and  non-financial 
corporations withdrew from the market. The investment vehicles created to transfer the risk 
and keep it off bank balance sheets then saw their liquidity dry up and had to turn to the lines 
of credit committed by their sponsoring banks. This increased the amounts which banks had 
to borrow and forced them to turn to the central banks for financing from 9 August 2007. 
The  tensions  which  characterised  thereafter  the  functioning  of  the  interbank  and  credit 
markets,  despite  attempts  by 
to  restore  normality,  were 
symptomatic of a growing lack of confidence about the situation of financial institutions in the 
main developed economies. These misgivings were confirmed by the considerable losses of 
banks caused by these complex products linked to US subprime loans, which in many cases 
gave rise to the need to raise large amounts of capital.  
Nonetheless,  although  some  credit  institutions  went  bankrupt  as  a  result  of  those 
investments and others were rescued, no systemic institution went under. Indeed, the rescue 
of Bear Stearns in March, with the US authorities supporting its acquisition by JP Morgan, 
sent a message that such failures would not be permitted. In that long year, the credit and 
interbank  markets  functioned  with  difficulty  and  liquidity  disappeared  from  the  primary  and 
secondary  securitisation  market,  against  a  background  of  growing  lack  of  confidence  and 
aversion to risk. This enormously hindered the wholesale funding of credit institutions.  
From last September the financial turmoil worsened and entered a second phase (intense 
crisis),  the  onset  of  which  was  marked  by  certain  systemic  events,  each  individually  of 
notable  size.  Practically  all  the  key  financial  markets  were  blocked,  and  this  hit  financial 
institutions  hard.  The  harshness  of  the  situation  is  evident  from  a  look  at  the  swathe  of 
events which took place in less than two months:  
- 
the  monetary  authorities 
As  a  prelude,  at  the  beginning  of  September  the  mortgage  finance  firms,  Freddie 
Mac and Fannie Mae, which accounted for 50% of US mortgage lending, finally had 
to be bailed out by the Treasury. 
However, the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, the largest in the history of the United 
States, proved to be a turning point, precipitating a series of extremely serious bouts 
of  financial  instability.  The  background  to  this  bankruptcy  was  that  institutional 
investors  had  begun  to  withdraw  large  sums  of  money  from  investment  banks,  a 
phenomenon that led to the virtual disappearance of these banks in the course of a 
few  short  weeks  in  September.  Merrill  Lynch  was  acquired  by  Bank  of  America, 
while Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley became commercial banks. 
At  almost  exactly  the  same  time  as  the  Lehman  bankruptcy,  the  financial  strains 
were  evident  in  an  extremely  serious  form  in  the  insurance  industry,  which  had 
 2 
 BIS Review 133/2008
already been under considerable pressure on account of the deterioration in highly 
rated  financial  products  to  which  it  was  severely  exposed.  AIG  (American 
International  Group),  one  of  the  world's  largest  insurers  and  the  biggest  in  the 
United  States,  was  rescued  and,  to  all  intents  and  purposes,  acquired  by  the 
Federal Reserve, in an operation without precedent in the United States or the rest 
of the world. 
The  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  led  to  loss  of  confidence  and  a  standstill  in 
numerous markets, including some that had until then been functioning reasonably 
well and that are fundamental to financing in the United States. Among these, the 
deterioration  in  the  commercial  paper  market  was  particularly  serious.  After  the 
Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, some money market funds with exposure to its debt 
recorded losses, causing investors to redeem their holdings. The funds were forced 
to  sell  large  amounts  of  securities  to  pay  investors,  causing  the  market  for  the 
commercial paper of non-financial firms to be seriously damaged too. 
In Europe, investors were sceptical about the liquidity position of entities reliant on 
very short-term financing, subjecting them to fierce selling pressure on the securities 
markets. In the United Kingdom, what started as a problem for the largest mortgage 
lender  (HBOS),  which  had  to  be  bailed  out  by  Lloyds  TSB,  spread  to  the  whole 
banking  sector,  prompting  the  British  government  to  launch  an  unprecedented 
intervention plan. 
The Belgian, Netherlands and Luxembourg authorities intervened in response to the 
problems  at  Fortis,  a  bank  whose  share  price  had  collapsed,  and  the  Belgian, 
Luxembourg and French authorities had to take action to deal with the problems at 
Dexia. 
The Icelandic government nationalised its three largest banks. 
In Germany the problems besetting the Hypo Real Estate bank led the government 
to  design  a  rescue  plan  for  the  entity,  at  the  end  of  September,  and  they  are 
currently providing support to Bayern LB. 
In the Netherlands, the problems at ING required a large injection of capital from the 
government, and the French government also had to recapitalise France’s five main 
banks. 
     In recent weeks the crisis has spread to many emerging countries, against a background of 
heightened risk aversion and the liquidation by investors of market positions subject to even 
minimal risk. The countries that have suffered most are those with significant current account 
deficits and financial systems strongly dependent on external financing. In Europe, I should 
mention  Hungary,  the  Baltic  States,  Bulgaria,  Rumania,  Turkey  and  Ukraine,  as  well  as 
Russia, which has also been affected by the fall in oil prices; and in Asia, Pakistan. In Latin 
America,  although  the  starting  position  was  in  many  cases  better,  the  impact  has  been 
significant, for various reasons, in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru. This 
risk  aversion  and  heightened  uncertainty  has  also  been  strongly  apparent  in  the  foreign 
exchange markets, which have seen a sharp rise in volatility and a strong appreciation of the 
yen and the dollar, the latest protagonists in an ongoing crisis. 
In my opinion, we are now entering the third phase of the crisis, which banks are facing from 
different starting points, according to the extent to which they have been penalised in the first 
two phases. The basic characteristic of this phase will be the sharp slowdown in the most 
developed  economies  which  will,  in  turn,  be  adversely  affected  by  the  global  slowdown  in 
lending.  The  recessionary  tendencies  are  going  to  pose  further  problems  for  banks  in  the 
next  few  quarters  although  they  will  be  more  traditional,  limited  and  familiar  than  those 
experienced so far. 
The factors which have given rise to such a dismal outlook as that described are diverse and 
have all interacted with one another. Let me present them now, merely so as not to bore you, 
BIS Review 133/2008 
 3
as  a  chain  of  errors  committed  by  all  the  agents  that  have  participated  in  the  financial 
system. 
To  start  with,  the  institutions  that  granted  loans  made  mistakes,  especially  in  the  United 
States, where the originate-to-distribute model became widespread. 
In the United States, in the years preceding the summer of 2007, lenders granted mortgage 
loans against collateral (real estate), whose value rose ever higher, generating incentives to 
lend  to  individuals  with  the  lowest  credit  quality.  This,  combined  with  a  business  model  in 
which the loans were packaged, turned into securities and sold on the market, meant that the 
incentive for lenders to correctly assess and subsequently monitor the risks was very low, 
since they did not retain the risks of the loan. 
Not only were the advantages associated with a model of this kind – which allows the risk 
assumed by the institutions to be managed with greater flexibility – not correctly harnessed, 
but the model eventually gave rise to transactions in which institutions had no incentive to 
select  borrowers  correctly.  They  became  mere  intermediaries  for  the  credit  granted  by  the 
system, mere commission earners, interested solely in the volume of operations. 
Many  institutions  also  made  mistakes  in  their  management  systems,  such  as  their  staff 
remuneration  arrangements.  The  remuneration  of  the  managers  of  many  institutions  was 
linked to short-term profits, without any consideration of the levels of risk being assumed to 
obtain them. 
Other banks, especially in central and northern Europe, made mistakes not so much in their 
lending  as  in  their  securities  investments,  using  very  unrealistic,  or  unjustifiably  optimistic, 
risk assessments. In a context of abundant liquidity at the international level, many financial 
institutions sought higher profits by investing in this type of complex instrument associated 
with the subprime segment as a mechanism to compensate for the fact that lending margins 
were narrower than in the past, relying excessively on the assessment of their credit quality 
by rating agencies. Another mistake made by many institutions, in an attempt to recover past 
levels of profitability, was to significantly increase their levels of leverage. 
The rating agencies also made mistakes, of almost scandalous proportions. They surprised 
investors by downgrading some securities from triple AAA to junk bond status overnight. 
In many countries, indeed, regulators and supervisors also made mistakes, failing to limit the 
perverse  effects  of  the  dynamics  and  incentives  that  I  have  just  mentioned.  The  weak 
regulation  to  which  some  financial  market  participants  were  subject,  an  over-complacent 
view  of  financial  innovation,  which  failed  to  identify  those  developments  that  had  proven 
themselves incapable of contributing value to the economy, and the lax interpretation of the 
international  accounting  standards  in  relation  to  the  need  to  consolidate  off-balance-sheet 
vehicles like conduits and SIVs, are illustrative in this respect. 
Finally,  central  banks  have  not  been  free  from  mistakes  either.  The  long  period  of  low 
interest rates in the United States and, albeit with some differences, in Europe and in the rest 
of  the  world  too,  led  financial  institutions,  firms  and  households  to  become  very  highly 
leveraged.  Although  this  stimulated  economic growth,  it  also  allowed  the  large  imbalances 
that are now so starkly revealed to build up. This world-wide expansionary policy, the risks of 
which  were  clearly  signalled  by  the  BIS,  has  probably  been  the  most  important  factor 
contributing to the present crisis. As a result, as soon as house prices began to fall in the 
United States and monetary policies became less expansionary in the face of the inflationary 
risks arising from commodity price rises, the credit expansion cycle was broken. That caused 
significant rises in default rates, which affected the securities that had been distributed on the 
market  among  large  numbers  of  investors,  and  the  crisis  whose  main  events  I  have 
mentioned was triggered. 
Having described the complex and extremely difficult international context, I now propose to 
offer  some  considerations  regarding  the  situation  of  the  Spanish  banking  system,  by 
4 
 BIS Review 133/2008
answering  two  questions.  What  has  happened  in  Spain  during  these  fifteen  months  of 
financial crisis? And what is going to happen in the near future? 
What has happened in Spain? 
The  answer  as  to  what  has  happened  in  Spain  during  the  crisis  is,  as  we  all  know,  that 
nothing has happened remotely comparable to the succession of bank bankruptcies and bail-
outs seen in the United States and practically throughout Europe. And this despite the fact 
that, at the beginning of the crisis, many international analysts identified the Spanish banking 
system as that which would suffer the greatest problems on account of its need for external 
financing,  its  dependence  on  wholesale  markets  and  the  degree  of  its  exposure  to  the 
property market. 
To  try  to  explain  why  Spanish  institutions  have  passed  the  tough  test  posed  by  this 
unprecedented crisis, I shall use the phrase recently used by Jacob Frenkel to summarise, 
humorously  and  clearly,  the  problems  currently  affecting  many  American  and  European 
banks.  What  has  happened,  according  to  Jacob,  is  that  in  the  balance  sheets  of  these 
institutions “on the right side there’s nothing left, and on the left side there’s nothing right”. In 
other words, on the assets side everything is damaged, while on the liabilities side, because 
some banks have financed themselves at such short maturities, the financing has vanished 
into thin air. 
This simplification of reality is highly illustrative of the situation that many international banks 
have got themselves into, but it also explains why the Spanish banking system has escaped 
the crisis. 
On the liabilities side, things are different in the Spanish banking sector. Admittedly, Spanish 
banks have been very active in seeking financing on the international wholesale markets. But 
they have focused on the longer maturities. This has given them greater peace of mind with 
regard to the structure of their liabilities, despite the fact that the cost has been higher than it 
would have been if they had made more use of financing at the shortest maturities. 
Spanish  banks’  recourse  to  wholesale  markets  has  taken  the  form  of  various  instruments, 
including asset-backed securities. However, Spanish securitisation bears little resemblance 
to that which is currently proving highly problematic. First, because of the high quality of the 
securitised  portfolios.  And  second,  because  securitisation  was  not  conceived  of  as  a 
business in itself to transfer risk. Rather, simple transparent structures were created to raise 
financing.  This,  along  with  the  prudential  regulation  and  supervision  applied  in  Spain,  has 
meant that banks did not establish complex off-balance-sheet structures (conduits and SIVs) 
acting like parallel banks. 
Continuing with the analysis of the liabilities, it should not be forgotten that Spanish banks 
have traditionally maintained a solid deposit base. This is largely explained by the particular 
banking  model  followed  in  Spain.  Activity  is  focused  on  retail  business,  with  a  proven 
capacity to adapt their combined offering of investment products. Spanish banks manage a 
large part of the assets of investment funds and sell insurance products. Evidence of this is 
the strong rate of growth of deposits in recent months, showing a notable response by banks. 
Accordingly, Frenkel’s phrase does not apply to Spain on the liabilities side: there is still a lot 
left on the liabilities side of Spanish banks’ balance sheets, in particular a broad deposit base 
and a significant volume of wholesale financing that matures in the medium and long term. 
If we now look at what is happening on the assets side, Spanish banks have not invested in 
the complex and opaque products that have turned out to be highly problematic or, as people 
usually now say, “toxic”. Admittedly, we are seeing a sharp rise in the doubtful assets ratio; 
however, this is not linked to this type of complex product, rather it is linked to developments 
in  the  real  economy  and  therefore  what  may  be  called  a  classic  banking  cycle  problem. 
Accordingly,  on  the  left-hand  side  of  the  balance  sheet  there  is  still  a  lot  right  in  Spain. 
BIS Review 133/2008 
 5
Spanish  banks’  assets,  even  taking  into  account  the  rise  in  doubtful  assets,  are  largely  of 
good quality. 
The fact that Spanish banks’ assets are mostly high-quality and that they have a liabilities 
structure  in  line  with  the  activity  they  finance,  in  terms  of  maturities  and  the  degree  of 
permanence,  is  related  to  their  business  model.  In  contrast  to  the  originate-to-distribute 
model,  the  activity  of  Spanish  banks  is  based  mainly  on  attracting  savings  to  lend  to 
businesses and households and, in the process, maintaining close and lasting links with their 
customers.  
This business model has normally been known as "traditional" banking, and many analysts 
prior to the summer of 2007 equated the concept of traditional with “antiquated”. True, just as 
the  originate-to-distribute  model  has  limitations,  which  have  been  laid  bare,  so  too  does 
traditional banking, insofar as it may indeed be antiquated in its management strategies and 
risk and cost control procedures. Consequently, it does not seem right to me to call Spanish 
banks “traditional”: Spanish banks bend over backwards for the customer, obtain information 
and  management  advantages  from  their  detailed  knowledge  of  their  customers  and  have 
demonstrated  their  innovative  capacity  in  the  marketing  of  different  products,  in  their  risk 
control and management mechanisms, and in the application of organisational developments 
and  technological  processes,  enabling  the  sector  to  become  one  of  the  world's  most 
advanced and efficient. 
What will happen to banks in Spain over the next few years? 
The road travelled so far has thus seen the entrenchment of a banking system with a proven 
capacity to manage risk and high levels of profitability, efficiency and solvency. This system 
has contributed decisively to the Spanish economy’s continuously strong growth since 1994 
and has withstood the first two phases of the international financial crisis well.  
At  the  onset  of  what  I  have  called  the  third  phase  of  the  crisis,  the  sector  is  in  a  strong 
position. Moreover, the Banco de España has the ability and experience to resolve the most 
complex situations without damaging savers or the economy as a whole. However, although 
there  is  no  sign  of  problems  at  Spanish  banks  in  the  short  term,  there  is  a  temptation  to 
which we bank supervisors must never succumb: complacency. 
Thus,  I  feel  obliged  to  conclude  by  identifying  the  challenges  that  the  Spanish  banking 
system  is  going  to  face  and  suggesting  the  action  necessary  to  overcome  them  with  the 
greatest guarantee of success. 
The  future  challenges  will  arise,  on  one  hand,  from  the  international  financial  crisis,  a 
phenomenon affecting all European banks; and, on the other, from the weak macroeconomic 
situation, which has global dimensions, but also elements particular to Spain. Both forces are 
going to affect the income statement, and therefore the ability to generate profits which, as 
we all know, are banks’ first line of defence against future problems. 
In the first place, banks are already suffering difficulties arising from the international financial 
crisis and, in particular, the consequences of the closure of financing markets. In this regard, 
the particular structure of the liabilities of Spanish banks, characterised by a broad deposit 
base and debt with mostly medium and long-term maturities, together with the plans recently 
approved by the  Spanish parliament in coordination with other EU countries, mitigates the 
problem, but does not make it disappear. 
The cost of financing will certainly not be the same as that prevailing prior to the summer of 
2007, when investors began to rapidly reassess the risk of financial instruments. Even if the 
wholesale markets gradually re-open, it is highly unlikely that the differentials required by the 
various products will return to their exceptionally low pre-crisis levels. 
6 
 BIS Review 133/2008
Greater  competition  among  banks  to  attract  deposits,  and  the  fact  that  they  are  replacing 
lower-remunerated sight deposits with time deposits, will also put pressure on the financial 
costs Spanish banks have to bear. 
In short, the banking sector will have to live with a structure of higher financial costs, which 
will squeeze the net interest margin and, therefore, the capacity to generate revenues. 
This  situation,  common  to  all  financial  institutions  at  the  international  level,  may  be  partly 
relieved  in  Spain,  insofar  as  a  high  percentage  of  the  financing  of  Spanish  institutions  is 
granted  at  a  variable  rate,  which  allows  them  to  adjust  interest  rates  more  rapidly  to  the 
general market risk premium, helping to keep their interest rate spreads more stable.  
The second challenge is lower demand for credit both from households and businesses. 
The  lower  demand  for  credit  is  a  natural  response  to  a  weaker  economic  climate  than  in 
previous years. However, this response will be larger in the case of those economic agents 
who,  after  years  of  very  notable  growth  in  their  indebtedness,  have  begun  a  process  of 
financial deleverage. 
For banks, this will mean a smaller volume of activity, that is to say, slower growth or even 
contraction  of  their  business.  In  the  past,  banks  responded  to  narrowing  margins  (income 
less  financial  costs)  by  increasing  their  volume  of  lending.  However,  this  lever  will  not  be 
available in the coming years, or at least not with the same strength, since lending can be 
expected to continue to decelerate, and to grow at below the economy’s nominal growth rate. 
Also, a smaller volume of activity puts further pressure on results, since overheads cannot be 
spread  across  a  larger  volume  of  activity.  Accordingly,  a  commitment  to  rationalise  costs 
must be a management priority for banks. 
The third and final challenge that will exert even more pressure on banks’ income statements 
in the coming quarters also arises from the weakness of the economic situation. Apart from 
the global deceleration, which primarily affects consumption and capital investment, we must 
not forget that the Spanish economy is in the midst of adjustment in the property sector. This 
adjustment  had  already  begun,  gradually,  before  the  summer  of  2007,  bringing  the  sector 
progressively  into  line  with  the  change  in  the  determinants  of  residential  investment.  This 
gradual rate of adjustment was altered by the international financial crisis, which established 
a climate of mistrust and uncertainty which, in turn, intensified the slowdown. 
The consequence for the banking sector has been a rapid growth in doubtful assets ratios 
since  end-2007.  This  growth  has  been  recorded  across-the-board,  but  especially  in 
construction and property development. Despite the counterweight provided by the existence 
of the general provision in Spain and the very low starting levels of the doubtful assets ratio, 
this has led to the need for greater credit write-downs, which have to be taken to the income 
statement,  and  that  is  the  third  reason  why  profits  will  be  under  pressure  in  the  banking 
sector. 
What must we do in this situation? 
Having reached this point, allow me some reflections on what we should do to address this 
situation. The first thing I should say is that the effort has to be shared, not only by monetary 
authorities and governments, but also notably by the institutions themselves. 
The  monetary  authorities  have,  in  recent  months,  mediated  to  a  greater  extent  in  the 
provision of liquidity to the financial system, also granting it at longer maturities and in other 
currencies, such as the US dollar and Swiss Franc. The Eurosystem has firmly committed 
itself to strengthening this line of action, and has in fact undertaken to grant the liquidity that 
institutions may require, without limit as to the amount and at a fixed interest rate, provided 
that  they  have  the  appropriate  collateral,  the  acceptable  range  of  which  has  been 
significantly  widened.  Also,  in  an  unprecedented  action,  the  central  banks  of  the  main 
BIS Review 133/2008 
 7
economic  areas  of  the  world  took  the  joint  decision  to  cut  interest  rates  by  50  bp  on  8 
October.  Admittedly,  this  reduction  was  not  immediately  passed  through  to  market  rates, 
owing to the crisis on the financial markets. But it is a measure that should be conducive to 
recovery in the confidence of consumers and businesses in the medium term. 
For  their  part,  governments  have  taken  various  decisions  for  coordinated  action  at  the 
international level. The upshot is a set of measures characterised by their exceptional nature 
and forcefulness, since their objective has been to break the market standstill. 
The proposal agreed by the European governments covers various areas. Thus, for financial 
institutions  with  insuperable  solvency  problems,  it  is  proposed  that  the  appropriate  rescue 
solution be implemented. For other institutions, that are solvent, but in difficulties that make a 
strengthening of their capital advisable, many governments have made capital available to 
them through shares, or other debt instruments that are, for regulatory purposes, deemed to 
be  capital,  such  as  preference  shares.  Apart  from  capital  strengthening,  and  in  order  that 
solvent institutions should start to function again as normal and have access once more to 
financial  markets  that  have  remained  blocked,  government  guarantees  are  going  to  be 
granted for issues of bank debt. This latter line of action, i.e. that relating to the availability of 
liquidity and financing, has been supplemented in the case of Spain by the purchase of high-
quality  assets.  Finally,  and  in  order  to  boost  the  confidence  of  depositors,  practically  all 
countries  have  increased  the  amount  covered  by  deposit  guarantee  schemes  and  have 
proposed  reducing  the  period  within  which  such  deposits  must,  where  necessary,  be 
returned to depositors. 
The Spanish government has prepared a roadmap that envisages all these actions. It will be 
implemented not so much to alleviate solvency problems, which have not materialised in our 
country,  as  to  help  restore  confidence  and  facilitate  institutions’  access  to  financing.  The 
ultimate  aim  is  to  avoid  institutions’  financing  difficulties  being  the  cause  of  a  reduction  in 
lending  to  firms  and  households.  A  credit  slowdown  stemming  from  the  weakening  of  the 
cycle,  due  to  its  obvious  effects  both  on  the  solvent  demand  for  credit  and  on  the  risk-
adjusted supply by institutions, would be another matter entirely. 
For  their  part,  institutions  need  to  assume  fully  the  new  reality  in  which  they  will  have  to 
operate in the coming years and address it intelligently and decisively. This will require an 
adjustment of their balance sheets, so that credit flows to the real economy while attention is 
paid to the greater risk of default which will have to be correctly managed. At the same time, 
on the liabilities side, it will be necessary to continue strengthening the deposit base as far as 
possible, since the capacity to finance banking activity through the wholesale markets will be 
more limited. 
This adjustment of bank balance sheets must be accompanied by strict cost controls, which 
are  the  main  mechanism  for  limiting  the  impact  of  the  new  environment  on  bank  income 
statements.  The  economies  of  scale  offered  by  bank  consolidation  (widely  aired  in  the 
media) is one way to tackle this rationalisation of cost structures. In any event, irrespective of 
the  strategy  that  each  institution  may  decide  to  adopt,  the  result  should  be  one  of  greater 
efficiency. 
Finally,  if  we  have  to  face  a  period  of  slower  growth  in  banking  activity,  with  greater 
uncertainty and lower profits, banks should also endeavour to strengthen their capital base. 
There are various ways of doing this, but in the scenario described, it seems logical to think 
of retaining more profits, without forgetting capital increases, or the issuance of non-voting 
equity stock by savings banks. 
Allow  me  to  conclude  by  repeating  what  I  have  already  said  on  previous  occasions. 
Governments,  which  have  proven  themselves  resolute  and  decisive  in  the  search  for 
solutions to resolve the impact of the financial crisis on the economy, must also take action 
on the policies that directly affect the real economy. 
8 
 BIS Review 133/2008
In  a  country  such  as  ours,  integrated  into  the  single  monetary  area  and  with  its  attendant 
competitiveness  difficulties,  decisive  action  is  essential  on  structural  reforms  that  liberalise 
product and factor markets, increasing competition and favouring a more efficient allocation 
of the available resources. Allow me to mention some of them, because it would be remiss of 
me to fail to speak today about what is most important for facing up to the crisis. 
First,  and  given  that  the  residential  sector  is  subject  to  an  especially  intense  degree  of 
adjustment in the present situation, measures are needed that help to satisfy the demand for 
rented  housing  and  that  will  also  reactivate  the  demand  for  housing  that  is  most  closely 
linked to the investment motive. Liberalising the market for rented accommodation and giving 
legal certainty to owners would be one of the timeliest structural reforms. 
Second,  there  are  still  a  large  number  of  sectors  and  market  segments  that  should  be 
liberalised in order to boost competitiveness. The distribution chains for goods and services 
provision, ports, airports, railway transport and energy are just a few examples. 
Finally, I should like to mention the need to reform the labour market, collective bargaining 
and indexation clauses. In the absence of prompt and decisive reforms in these areas we will 
see unemployment increase sharply, with the harmful effects that this has on activity and on 
the stability of our financial institutions. 
Conclusion 
We  are  currently  facing  an  unprecedented  international  financial  crisis  in  a  severely 
weakened  macroeconomic  setting.  Certainly  our  banking  system  has  moved  in  the  right 
direction, reinforcing its risk control management mechanisms, its profitability, its efficiency 
and its solvency. This gives it a solid starting position but we cannot allow ourselves to be 
either naive or complacent: the Spanish banking sector is facing major challenges that will 
affect its capacity to generate profits in the coming quarters. 
I  am  convinced  that  our  banks,  which  knew  how  to  capitalise  on  the  expansion,  will  also 
know  how  to  take  the  appropriate  management  measures  and  adopt  the  right  strategy  to 
allow them to address these difficulties successfully. For our part, the public authorities will 
continue to take the measures necessary to ensure that this unavoidable adjustment takes 
place in the least traumatic way possible for our economy. 
I believe that all of us, institutions and authorities, each from their own area of responsibility, 
are  pushing  in  the  right  direction,  and  therefore  I  am  convinced  that  we  will  successfully 
negotiate  this  extremely  difficult  time  for  the  financial  systems  and  economies  of  the  main 
developed countries. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 133/2008 
 9
