Stanley Fischer: Impact of the global financial crisis on Israel’s economy 
Address  by  Professor  Stanley  Fischer,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  to  the  General 
Assembly of the Association of Publicly Traded Companies, Jerusalem, 8 December 2008. 
 For more than a year the world has been confronting one of the worst financial crises in over 
seventy years. This crisis has two phases: the first, financial, and the second, real, in other 
words a significant slowdown, and possibly even a global recession. 
Both the financial and real effects of the global financial crisis on Israel's economy are clearly 
evident. I would like to stress, however, that Israel entered this period in a more favorable 
state than that in most other countries. 
On the financial side the crisis is reflected in Israel mainly by the fall in prices of shares and 
corporate bonds, unlike in the advanced and other economies. In addition, the rate of growth 
declined to 2.3 percent (annual rate) in the third quarter, and it is expected that the slowdown 
in Israel's growth rate will continue, i.e., growth will remain positive, but will slow further, (to 
1.5 percent in 2009), as opposed to a more significant slowdown, or even a recession, in the 
advanced economies.  
Israel's relatively favorable situation is due to several factors:  
1) 
2) 
The government's fiscal policy in the last few years was a responsible one. 
The Bank of Israel’s interest rate policy supported financial stability and the ability of 
the economy to deal successfully with the effects of the slowdown in growth. This, 
without acting counter to the return of inflation to within the target range. 
A surplus has been created in the current account of the balance of payments. 
Israel's  foreign  exchange  reserves  are  high  and  rising,  as  a  result  of  the  Bank  of 
Israel's plan to increase them. 
The levels of growth and employment were high at the onset of the crisis. 
Israel's banking system is strong and stable compared with those of the advanced 
economies. 
Israel's  capital  market  did  not  develop  advanced,  complex  financial  instruments 
whose inherent risk levels are difficult to assess. 
The average debt burden of companies and households is relatively low. 
8) 
The challenge at present is to preserve the economy's relatively favorable position, to take 
advantage  of  it  to  deal  with  the  new  situation,  and  to  introduce  the  measures  needed  to 
escape from the period of slowdown without harming the economy's ability to return to the 
path of rapid and sustained growth. All this, despite the forthcoming elections and the fact 
that the 2009 budget has not been approved yet. 
At this stage the Bank of Israel, in the framework of its powers and the instruments available, 
is taking the following steps: 
1) 
It is conducting an active interest rate policy intended to strengthen the economy's 
ability to handle the crisis. 
The  Bank  Supervision  Department  has  intensified  its  regular  monitoring  of 
developments in the banking system. In addition, the Bank announced that it was 
ready to help the banks with all the means at its disposal, as necessary, in order to 
support depositors.  
3) 
4) 
5) 
6) 
7) 
2) 
BIS Review 161/2008 
 1
3) 
The  Bank's  program  to  buy  foreign  currency  will  continue  until  the  forex  reserves 
reach the level considered appropriate under the current circumstances – between 
$40 billion and $44 billion.  
What do we still have to do?  
1) 
A  cautious  fiscal  policy  should  be  pursued.  Thus,  assuming  a  growth  rate  of  1.5 
percent  in  2009,  the  budget  deficit  is  expected  to  reach  about  3  percent  of  GDP, 
based on the automatic stabilizers, i.e., the expected drop in tax revenues resulting 
from  the  slowdown  in  growth,  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  certain  rise  in  government 
expenditure arising, for example, from an increase in unemployment, on the other. It 
would not be advisable to allow the deficit to rise much beyond that; in other words, 
our ability to embark on an expansionary fiscal policy is limited.  
Nevertheless, the tax cuts planned for 2009 should proceed, in a manner consistent with the 
automatic stabilizers.  
2) 
The  measures  formulated  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance  in  cooperation  with  the 
Securities  Authority  and  the  Bank  of  Israel  should  be  implemented.  This  program 
should help the economy weather the storm.  
It is essential, and I would place the emphasis on this aspect, to introduce measures 
on the financial side, particularly steps intended to increase the sources of bank and 
nonbank  credit  for  the  business  sector,  including  small  and  medium-sized 
businesses, and to stimulate foreign investment in Israel's capital market.  
3) 
Yesterday the Prime Minister decided to support the proposal put forward by the work teams 
of  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  the  Bank  of  Israel  and  the  Prime  Minister's  Office,  regarding  a 
"safety net" for savers close to retirement age. The Bank is in favor of the proposal and its 
immediate implementation.  
However,  we  view  the  safety  net  as  a  temporary  measure  for  this  particular  time.  It  is 
important to start thinking about changes to the structure of the pensions system in Israel, to 
ensure  that  those  paying  into  funded  pension  schemes,  as  opposed  to  those  covered  by 
unfunded schemes, are not placed in a situation in which, close to retirement age, they are 
likely  to  lose  a  significant  part  of  their  savings.  It  is  important  that  the  pension  system  be 
structured such that when the time arrives savers can receive a reasonable pension for the 
rest  of  their  lives.  One  possible  pension  scheme  structure  that  could  be  adopted  is  the 
Sicilian  model,  in  which  the  savings  of  those  close  to  retirement  age  are  transferred  to 
relatively low-risk channels.  
To my great regret, the other steps formulated by the Ministry of Finance, although approved 
by  the  Prime  Minister,  are  making  little  or  no  progress  vis-à-vis  the  Knesset,  and  are  not 
being implemented. Thus, valuable time that could be used to the benefit of the economy is 
being wasted, particularly regarding measures relating to the financial side. Further delay in 
applying these measures is likely to erode the economic achievements of the last few years 
and our ability successfully to meet the challenges facing us.  
This is not the time, therefore, to postpone decision making. The financial crisis is here, and 
is not waiting for us. The measures have been planned, and all that remains is to start with 
the none-too-simple task of making decisions and implementing them. It is essential that at 
this time, in the approach to the elections to the Knesset, we persist in being focused, and 
act with a view to the medium and long term. Failure to do so will cost us dear.  
2 
 BIS Review 161/2008
