Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Some thoughts on the international financial crisis 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  a  meeting  with  the  Unione  Cristiana  Imprenditori  e  Dirigenti,  Milan,  20  October 
2008. 
 I  should  like  to  thank  you  for  inviting  me  here  today.  I  will  share  with  you  some  personal 
views regarding the ongoing financial crisis and how we can rebuild a better system.  
The current crisis could be the starting point for many ideas, and must certainly be subjected 
to extensive analysis. Today, I intend to dwell on one particular issue, which is founded on a 
simple question: Why was Lehman Brothers allowed to fail? 
I wish to start with this question because the collapse of this investment bank on Monday, 15 
September  2008  was  one  of  the  factors  which turned  the  period  of  turmoil  in  the  financial 
markets that started in summer 2007 into a full-blown crisis. Following the failure of Lehman 
Brothers,  panic  set  in  that  any  bank,  irrespective  of  its  size,  could  go  bankrupt.  Market 
participants  revised  their  investment  decisions.  The  banks  themselves  started  to  fear  that 
any of their counterparties could fail and stopped lending money to each other, causing the 
interbank  market,  which  had  already  been  under  stress  for  months,  to  dry  up.  In  the  four 
weeks following the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers, the European stock exchanges plunged 
by around 30%, more than the total fall recorded over the previous 12 months. The three-
month Euribor spread, which measures tensions in the interbank market, more than doubled, 
exceeding 170 basis points. 
The  first  steps  taken  by  the  authorities  to  calm  the  markets  did  not  succeed  in  restoring 
confidence. This  did  not  happen  until  mid-October,  when  a  coordinated  action,  which  took 
the form of substantial recourse to public funds and concerted action by the central banks, 
was initiated in Europe and North America.  
Looking back at the events of last month, it seems clear that the failure of Lehman Brothers 
could have and should have been avoided. This is not just an ex-post assessment, made in 
the light of what happened afterwards, but also an ex-ante one. It was obvious that in a crisis 
of confidence, such as had existed for months, the failure of a bank, even a medium-sized 
one,  would  have  a  contagion  effect,  triggering  a  flight  from  the  system.  This  was  why,  in 
previous  months,  in  both  the  United  States  and  Europe  (for  example,  Denmark,  Germany 
and the United Kingdom), the authorities had intervened precisely to avoid the collapse of 
banks that were in difficulty (Bear Sterns, Northern Rock, IKB and Roskilde).  
In the light of this assessment, it is legitimate to ask why the failure of Lehman Brothers was 
not prevented. 
Various theories have been put forward in this regard. The one I find most credible is that 
there was a political veto, at the highest levels, against the use of public funds to rescue an 
investment bank. Indeed, right after the bank’s failure was announced, the US Secretary of 
the Treasury himself confirmed that, “I never once considered that it was appropriate to put 
taxpayer money on the line in resolving Lehman Brothers”.1 The timing of the Lehman crisis 
also played a key role. Only a few days later the US Treasury had taken on the sizeable debt 
of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, a decision which was criticised in the press. Straight after 
this step was taken, it appeared that the US Treasury did not want to be charged with using 
                                                 
1   “I  never  once  considered  that  it  was  appropriate  to  put  taxpayer  money  on  the  line  in  resolving  Lehman 
Brothers”, Dow Jones, 15 October 2008. 
BIS Review 127/2008 
 1
public money and practising what has been called a kind of “financial socialism”. There is no 
doubt that the pressure of public opinion played a role.  
We  could  stop  here,  with  a  negative  assessment  of  the  political  decision  taken  by  the  US 
administration,  which  proved  to  be  wrong.  However,  perhaps  the  problem  might  be  more 
complex than that.  
As subsequent events have shown, in particular when the first rescue package was rejected 
by the US Congress, opposition to providing the financial sector with public funds came not 
only  from  within  the  government,  but  also  from  parliament.  The  Members  of  the  US 
Congress,  many  of  whom  face  voters  at  the  beginning  of  November,  feared  that  such  a 
decision  would  compromise  their  re-election.  There  was  opposition  to  rescuing  Lehman 
Brothers,  therefore,  not  only  from  within  the  Administration,  but  also  from  Congress  and, 
more  broadly,  from  public  opinion. In  other  words,  the  decision  was  largely  the  result  of  a 
democratic process. Ultimately, it was the US citizens who did not want to rescue Lehman 
Brothers.  
This analysis is not restricted to the Lehman Brothers case alone. Even in countries where 
bankruptcies  were  successfully  avoided  through  intervention,  the  decision  was  fiercely 
criticised  by  the  respective  parliaments  and  public  opinion.  In  some  cases,  it  was  only 
possible to take the decision because immediate approval by parliament was not required. 
There is no denying that the conditions could have existed for letting some banks in difficulty 
to  fail  had  the  political  situation  been  different,  for  example,  if  elections  were  imminent  in 
Europe,  as  in  the  United  States.  Fortunately,  this  was  not  the  case.  Nevertheless,  it  is 
necessary to reflect on what might have happened. The question that needs to be asked is 
the  following:  why  do  democratic  decision-making  processes  lead  to  the  wrong  decisions 
being taken from the point of view of the common good, not only ex-post, but also ex-ante? 
The  response  given  to  justify  the  decision  to  let  Lehman  Brothers  go  bankrupt  is  that,  for 
citizens in general, and for tax-payers in particular, it is not fair to use public funds to bail out 
financial  institutions  which,  in  the  preceding  months  and  years,  had  accumulated  massive 
profits  for  their  shareholders  and  executives.  Obviously,  for  those  assigned  the  task  of 
deciding whether or not to come to a bank’s rescue it is not an easy task to convince the 
electorate that the future losses must be nationalised, when the past profits were privatised. 
The  rational  explanation  is  that,  without  the  rescue  operation,  the  whole  economy  would 
have suffered as a result, with direct consequences for citizens and tax-payers.  Given the 
contagion effect which is generated following the collapse of a bank, nationalising the losses 
prevents  an  even  greater  evil  being  unleashed.  The  financial  sector  is  different  from  other 
sectors, precisely owing to the systemic and contagion effects that a crisis would have on all 
the other sectors. It is thus in the interests of the individual citizen to support the decision to 
rescue a bank in difficulty, as the individual interest coincides with the public interest.2
What happened, however, suggests that the rational arguments that I have just propounded 
do not always chime with public opinion. Again, it strikes me as interesting to ask why this 
should be the case. 
To  answer  this  question,  it  is  necessary  to  enter  the  realm  of  the  analysis  of  human 
behaviour, via the field of behavioural economics. Several laboratory experiments have been 
carried  out,  which  show  that,  when  faced  with  some  economic  choices,  individuals  may 
behave in ways that are apparently not rational. In general, it has been shown that economic 
agents are not only motivated by self-interest, as economists have been keen to believe, but 
are also motivated by considerations relating to fairness and relative conditions. According to 
some  studies,  a  rise  in  income  is  only  seen  in  a  positive  light  if  it  exceeds  that  of  the 
reference group; if, instead, the increase in income is less than that of the reference group, it 
                                                 
2   Bini Smaghi, L. (2008), “La UE non segua l’esempio USA”, Corriere della Sera, 3 October 2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 127/2008
is perceived as being an absolute loss, even if it is only relative. One consequence of these 
tendencies, borne out in a number of experiments, is that individuals may even be prepared 
to renounce additional income, just to have a more equitable distribution of wealth within the 
community, particularly when this is to their advantage. Zizzo and Oswald,3 researchers at 
the Universities of Oxford and Warwick respectively, outline the results of an experiment in 
which the participants can pay out of their own pocket to “burn” money belonging to the other 
members of the group. The majority of subjects choose to do so, even if this reduces their 
own income. On average, it is the richest subjects who are most affected.  
This line of research suggests that inequalities create tensions within given social groups and 
lead  to  backlashes.  These  results  are  consistent  with  recent  studies  which  attempt  to 
account  for  the  “happiness”  of  individuals  in  terms  of  a  series  of  parameters,  including 
income.  In  this  context,  the  Easterlin  paradox  is  well-known.4  It  suggests  that  when 
individuals  see  an  increase  in  their  income,  their  level  of  satisfaction  does  not  necessarily 
rise if the increase is very unequal.  
This  literature  offers  an  explanation  of  the  behaviour  recently  observed  in  our  societies, 
namely  the  opposition  to  helping  the  crisis-hit  financial  system,  because  it  is  perceived  as 
being richer and well-off. On the contrary, there is greater readiness to help other sectors of 
the economy, such as agriculture or the automotive industry, even though these sectors have 
a smaller direct impact on people’s well-being. This is probably because these sectors are 
perceived  as  being  less  well-off  and  faced  with  difficulties  arising  from  exogenous  factors 
rather than recklessness, unlike the financial sector.  
It is interesting to note that such attitudes opposed to inequality have also emerged recently 
in the United States, where income disparities have tended to meet with greater acceptance 
than  in  Europe,  as  shown  in  studies  by  Alesina,  Di  Tella  and  MacCulloch.5  One  possible 
explanation is that the mechanisms of upward mobility in American society, which in the past 
made inequality more acceptable, have ground to a halt in recent years.  
In  the  last  few  years,  statistical  indicators  have  shown  an  increase  in  income  disparity  in 
most  advanced  countries.  The  Gini  index,  which  is  typically  used  to  measure  income 
inequalities,6 rose in the United States from 34% at the end of the 1980s to over 36% at the 
start  of  this  century.  The  index  also  increased  in  the  United  Kingdom,  rising  from  30%  to 
34%, and in the euro area, on average, where it rose from 29% to 31%. Within the euro area, 
the largest increases were recorded in Germany (from 26% to 34%) and Spain (from 30% to 
34%), while in France and Italy the figures remained substantially unchanged (at 29% and 
34% respectively).  
The growing income differences recorded in the last few years have been accompanied by 
two other distinct phenomena. First, a progressive decline in the average rate of growth of 
income has been recorded in advanced countries. In per capita terms, the last decade has 
been the worst experienced by the United States in over 100 years, barring only the 1930s. 
In Europe, the slowdown has been comparable, albeit not so marked. Second, the difference 
seems to have mainly favoured the financial sector. For example, in the United States the 
profits of the financial sector have in the past five years amounted to 40% of the total profits 
                                                 
3   Zizzo,  D.J.  and  A.J.  Oswald  (2001),  “Are  People  Willing  to  Pay  to  Reduce  Others’  Incomes”,  Annales 
d’Economie et de Statistique, Vol. 63-64, pp. 39-65. 
4   Easterlin,  R.A.  (1995),  “Will  raising  the  income  of  all  increase  the  happiness  of  all  ?”  Journal  of  Economic 
Behavior and Organisation, Vol. 27, pp. 35-47. 
5   Alesina, A., R. Di Tella and R. MacCulloch (2004), “Inequality and Happiness: Are Europeans and Americans 
different?”, Journal of Public Economics, Vol. 88, pp. 2009-2042. 
6   The index varies between 0% (perfect income equality) and 100% (maximum inequality). In general, advanced 
countries have a lower Gini index than developing countries; see, for example, Brandolini, A. and T. Smeeding 
(2007), “Inequality: International evidence”, New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. 
BIS Review 127/2008 
 3
of the corporate sector, i.e. double the average of the period 1960-2000. This is simply to 
report events, not to make a value judgement. 
The combination of these three factors – the worsening inequality, the economic slowdown 
and the high profitability of the financial sector – may partly explain public opinion and the 
attitude of the political authorities vis-à-vis the rescue package for the financial system.  
This crisis reveals that in our advanced societies, which are subject to far-reaching changes 
that affect people’s daily lives, the resolution of financial crises is becoming more complex, 
not only in terms of costs to the community, but also in terms of decision-making procedures. 
There is a risk that, in order to reach the democratic consensus necessary to act effectively, 
matters  must  be  pushed  right  to  the  brink  so  that  the  precipice  is  clearly  visible.  In  other 
words, there is a risk that a mistake, such as letting a bank fail, must first be committed, and 
the prospect of widespread hardship must make people realise that their vital interests are at 
stake, before effective action can be taken successfully.  
The problem is particularly acute in the case of the financial system, which is inevitably prone 
to  instability.  In  particular,  the  financial  system  is  typically  more  innovative.  Since  financial 
products cannot be patented, an institution’s ability to compete rests partly on its ability to 
create new products that enable it to increase returns without changing the level of risk or to 
diversify  risk  without  for  a  given  return.  However,  financial  innovation  tends  to  generate 
information  asymmetries  across  agents,  particularly  between  those  who  have  created  new 
instruments and those who buy them. Such asymmetries fuel market instability, leading to a 
tendency to underestimate risks until they materialise, and, subsequently, to a propensity to 
overestimate them when markets change direction. The procyclicality of the financial sector 
tends to produce a disproportionate increase in its profitability at times of economic growth 
and a decline during slowdowns, with self-propagation and contagion effects on the rest of 
the economy. 
Essentially, the financial system is of systemic importance to the economy. The stability of 
the  system  is  therefore  in  the  public  interest.  Consequently,  the  system  is  subject  to 
regulation  and  supervision.  Therefore,  it  is  somewhat  problematic  if  rejection  mechanisms 
develop within a society preventing effective action being taken to counter a financial crisis 
and contagion of the rest of the economy. 
So, what is the answer? 
There  are  some  time-honoured  lines  of  action  which  relate  to  the  prevention  of  crises, 
namely  better  regulation  and  supervision,  in  particular  at  the  international  level,  and  more 
effective crisis resolution mechanisms. I will not dwell on these two points, which will be the 
subject of technical and political discussions in the coming months and years. 
One new point for consideration that has emerged from this crisis relates equally to ethical, 
social and political aspects. In our advanced societies, which in years to come will continue 
to  undergo  periods  of  great  transformation  bringing  real  problems  for  many  sectors  of  the 
population,  the  emergence  of  stark  inequalities  entails  the  risk  that  decision-making 
mechanisms will be blocked, in particular in crisis situations, with negative repercussions for 
the collective good and social cohesion. This should be solved both by governments, so that 
decision-making mechanisms can be adopted which allow the abovementioned problems to 
be overcome in a crisis, and also by the financial sector itself, which must clearly draw some 
lessons from recent events.  
In  a  market  economy,  maximising  profits  and  shareholders’  interests  are  a  priority  for 
management. They permit the efficient allocation of resources within the economy. However, 
when a sector such as the financial sector is of systemic importance to the functioning of the 
economy and is prone to instability, the objective function must be broader. It is a problem of 
rules, incentives and individual responsibility.  
Much more work must be done on these points if we wish to avoid repeating past errors. 
4 
 BIS Review 127/2008
