Kevin M Warsh: The promise and peril of the new financial architecture 
Speech  by  Mr  Kevin  M  Warsh,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, 6 November 
2008. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 Overview 
The  financial  markets  did  not  observe  the  August  anniversary  of  the  onset  of  turmoil  with 
even  a  hint  of  fondness.1  Instead,  market  participants  seemed  to  mark  the  occasion  as  a 
kind  of  coming-of-age  opportunity  to  act  out.  The  subsequent  despair  among  market 
participants,  disrepair  in  credit  markets,  and  disregard  for  proper  market  functioning  was 
more  pronounced  than  witnessed  in  generations.  Significant  market  dislocations  disrupted 
credit  flows  to  households  and  firms  and  impaired  economic  growth.  All  and  all,  these 
conditions  demanded  –  and  received  –  a  forceful  response  from  monetary,  fiscal,  and 
financial policymakers.  
There  are  some  notable  signs  of  improvement.  Short-term  funding  spreads  are  retreating 
from extremely elevated levels. Funding maturities are being extended beyond the very near 
term. Money market funds and commercial paper markets are showing signs of stabilization. 
And credit default swap spreads of banking institutions are narrowing significantly.  
Nonetheless, financial markets overall remain strained. Risk spreads remain quite high and 
lending  standards  appear  strict.  Indications  of  economic  activity  in  the  United  States  have 
turned  decidedly  negative.  The  economy  contracted  slightly  in  the  third  quarter,  and  the 
recent data on sales and production suggest that the fourth quarter will be weak.  
Still, the depth and duration of this period of weak economic activity remain highly uncertain. 
The financial turmoil revealed that the old financial architecture is broken. But its successor is 
not  yet  established.2  In  my  view,  the  prospects  for  robust  economic  growth  over  the 
intermediate  term  are  likely  to  be  determined,  not  principally  by  the  trajectory  of  housing 
prices, but by the speed with which a new financial architecture emerges and the form that it 
takes. This challenge of creating a new financial architecture is hardly unique to the United 
States. The difficult choices made by policymakers and market participants around the globe 
will have real implications for future growth prospects. 
What do I mean by a new financial architecture? Recent travails contributed to a consensus 
that  the  financial  regulatory  framework  requires  fundamental  reform.  But,  in  my  view,  the 
financial  architecture 
the  government's  regulatory  and 
supervisory response. The new financial architecture, properly understood, must account for 
the  dynamic  relationship  between  private-market  actions  and  public-sector  strictures.  The 
economy's financial architecture is a function of the relationship among financial institutions 
and market participants that transfer capital and risk between borrowers and savers. But the 
architecture is also informed by the mix of prescriptions and postures of the Congress, the 
is  necessarily  broader 
than 
                                                 
1   The views  expressed herein  are my  own  and do not  necessarily reflect the views  of other members of the 
Board of Governors or of the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful for the assistance of Nellie Liang 
and Bill English of Board staff, who contributed to these remarks. 
In these remarks, I will elaborate on some topics I discussed when I last spoke here at New York University. 
(See Kevin Warsh (2008), "Financial Market Turmoil and the Federal Reserve: The Plot Thickens," speech 
delivered at the New York University School of Law Global Economic Policy Forum, New York, April 14.) 
2  
BIS Review 134/2008 
 1
the 
financial 
including 
regulators, 
the  Federal  Reserve.  This 
Administration,  and 
circumstance is particularly the case during times of financial turmoil.  
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  first  advance  a  plain  assessment  of  what  is  afflicting  global 
financial  markets.  Many  observers  judge  that  weaknesses  in  housing  finance,  and  the 
associated boom and bust in the housing sector, are the principal cause of the market turmoil 
and  economic  malaise.  In  my  view,  however,  recent  market  developments  –  in  the  United 
States and abroad – strongly indicate that the causes of the turmoil are broader and more 
fundamental than the problems in the mortgage markets.  
Second,  I  will  highlight  actions  by  financial  market  participants  in  the  transition  to  a  new 
financial  architecture.  Financial  institutions  are  being  fundamentally  transformed  by  the 
events of the last several quarters. Massive changes in business models, corporate forms, 
and funding sources are taking place faster than could be imagined even a few months ago. 
There is no going back to the old arrangements, nor should there be. And a new equilibrium 
will take shape only when financial institutions seize new opportunities and the changes in 
the  rules  of  engagement  and  the  relationship  with  the  official  sector  are  more  clearly 
understood.  
Third, I will discuss actions of the official sector during this period of turmoil. Most of these 
policy actions have been taken in vigorous pursuit of financial stability – that is,  to reduce 
financial stresses, shore up credit intermediation, and thereby support economic activity. And 
that makes good sense. Some material lessening of financial instability is essential so that 
markets can function properly and the economy can avoid more substantial weakness. But 
stability in and of itself should not be the be-all and end-all of policy. Rather, actions fostering 
financial stability should be temporary, providing a bridge to a new, more effective financial 
architecture. And that architecture should aspire to increase, not decrease, potential output 
through an economic cycle.  
The nature of the financial market turmoil  
Many observers maintain that the boom and bust in the housing market are the root cause of 
the  current  turmoil.  No  doubt  housing-related  losses  are  negatively  affecting  household 
wealth and spending. Moreover, the weakness in housing markets and uncertainty about its 
path have caused financial institution balance sheets to deteriorate. This situation has further 
accelerated  the  deleveraging  process  and  tightened  credit  conditions  for  businesses  and 
households.  
When  liquidity  pulled  back  dramatically  in  August  2007,  housing  suffered  mightily.3  For 
reasons well documented, including expectations that home prices would invariably increase, 
housing proved to be a highly vulnerable asset class. Many homeowners, particularly those 
that  purchased  properties  during  2005  through  2007,  are  suffering.  And  many  banks  and 
other  financial  firms  that  extended  mortgage  credit  or  purchased  mortgage-related  assets 
have written down sharply the value of those assets. Public and private policy actions have 
been taken to help cushion the blow to many homeowners and financial firms.4  
                                                 
3   See Kevin Warsh (2007), "Financial Intermediation and Complete Markets," speech delivered at the European 
Economics  and  Financial  Centre,  London,  June  5;  see  also  Kevin  Warsh  (2007),  "Financial  Market 
Developments," speech delivered at the State University of New York at Albany's School of Business, Albany, 
New York, September 21. 
4   To  help  homeowners,  the  Hope  for  Homeowners  program  enacted  as  part  of  the  Housing  and  Economic 
Recovery  Act  of  2008  (HERA)  allows  the  Federal  Housing  Administration  (FHA)  to  facilitate  mortgage 
refinancings.  HERA  also  established  a  first-time  homebuyer  tax  credit  and  appropriated  funds  to  provide 
housing  counseling  assistance.  FHA  Secure  is  another  refinancing  option  available  to  some  borrowers.  In 
addition, the Hope Now Alliance is an industry-based effort of mortgage servicers, housing counselors, and 
investors committed to establishing industry guidelines to facilitate loan modifications. 
2 
 BIS Review 134/2008
While housing may well have been the trigger for the onset of the broader financial turmoil, I 
have  long  believed  it  is  not  the  fundamental  cause.5  Indeed,  recent  financial  market 
developments  strongly  indicate  that  housing,  as  an  asset  class,  does  not  stand  alone. 
Indeed,  the  problems  associated  with  housing  finance  reveal  broader  failings,  including 
inadequate  market  discipline,  excessive  reliance  on  credit  ratings,  and  poor  credit  and 
liquidity risk-management practices by many financial firms.  
During  the  past  several  months,  this  domestic  housing-centric  diagnosis  has  also  been 
subjected to a natural experiment. Among U.S. financial institutions, asset quality concerns 
are  no  longer  confined  to  the  mortgage  sector.  At  the  same  time,  non-U.S.  financial 
institutions – including some with relatively modest exposures to the United States or their 
own domestic housing markets – appear to be suffering substantial losses. Equity prices of 
European  banks  declined  more  on  average  during  2008  year-to-date  than  their  U.S. 
counterparts. Moreover, economic weakness among our advanced foreign trading partners is 
increasingly  evident,  even  among  economies  with  more  modest  exposures  to  the  housing 
sector.  
If the challenges to the economy were predominantly about the value of the housing stock, 
my focus today would be far narrower than the establishment of a new financial architecture. 
So, what diagnosis, beyond housing weakness, is consistent with the unprecedented levels 
of  volatility  and  dramatic  financial  market  and  economic  distress?  I  would  advance  the 
following:  We  are  witnessing  a  fundamental  reassessment  of  the  value  of  virtually  every 
asset everywhere in the world.  
Short-term  funding  markets  have  become  suspect.  Roll-overs  of  existing  maturities  reveal 
systematic underpricing of once seemingly benign risks – credit, liquidity, counterparty, and 
even sovereign risks – which demand reassessment and recalibration. Indeed, wide-ranging 
assessments  of  these  risks  are  being  crudely  incorporated  into  the  pricing  of  virtually  all 
assets.  In some  cases,  at  present,  the  risks  do  not  appear  to  be  reliably  quantifiable,  and 
trading has become impaired. Until these assessments are more cleanly refined and more 
broadly understood, we are likely to observe elevated levels of volatility and unwillingness by 
many investors to participate in certain asset markets virtually at any price.  
This  phenomenon  is  proving  quite  detrimental  to  global  economic  growth.  In  my  view,  the 
speed  and  success  of  a  new  financial  architecture  is  likely  to  be  more  consequential  to 
economic  growth  than  the  design  and  implementation  of  well-intended  housing  policies 
alone.  The  establishment  of  a  new  financial  architecture,  thus,  is  the  essential  policy 
response to the greatest economic challenge of our time. 
Financial institution response in pursuit of survival and success  
In a speech about seven months ago, I noted that the transformation of financial institutions 
would be among the key variables that would affect the path of the real economy, but "the 
changing  paradigm  of  financial  intermediation"  is  happening  even  more  abruptly.6  The 
largest investment banks chose a different fate, or had one chosen for them.  Many of the 
largest  nonbank  financial  companies  are  no  doubt  reviewing  their  regulatory  status.  Large 
numbers of hedge funds, recently perceived as central to a well-diversified asset allocation 
program,  are  struggling  for  survival.  Their  investors  are  being  rudely  reminded  that  alpha-
returns cannot, by definition, be universally achieved. Large money center banks are casting 
a keen eye on their sources and uses of funding. And traditional community-based banks are 
adapting to a dramatically different competitive dynamic with respect to deposits and lending 
opportunities alike.  
                                                 
5   See Warsh, "Financial Market Developments," in note 3. 
6   See Warsh, "Financial Market Turmoil," in note 2. 
BIS Review 134/2008 
 3
The  business  of  banking  –  and  credit  intermediation,  more  broadly  –  is  fundamentally 
changing.  Wholesale  funding  models  are  severely  stressed.  Heavy  reliance  on  interbank 
funding and short-term indebtedness is proving highly detrimental to a financial institutions' 
health  and  society's  welfare.  Some  of  the  highest-rated  financial  products,  ironically,  are 
suffering  the  greatest  diminutions  in  value.  Selling  volatility  and  insuring  tail  risks  are  far 
riskier propositions than many imagined. These products and practices are proving to be a 
significant source of large, uncapped losses threatening to impair once-hearty franchises.  
We are witnessing perhaps the fastest, most significant structural shift in the history of the 
financial services sector. The direct share of value added in the finance and insurance sector 
approximated 8 percent of U.S. gross domestic produce (GDP) in recent years. This is about 
3  percentage  points  higher  than  the  contribution  of  financial  services  to  GDP  only  a 
generation  ago.  Similarly,  profits  of  the  Standard  &  Poor's  500  attributable  to  the  finance 
sector  peaked  at  more  than  21  percent  during  this  cycle,  5-1/2  percentage  points  greater 
than a decade ago. As the financial sector continues to delever and many financial products 
disappear altogether, the sector's shares of GDP and profits will shrink further. This reduction 
could involve many firms shrinking largely in tandem or, more likely, the orderly unwinding or 
sale of inefficient or unwise firms.7 The markets are fearful, in part I suspect, because of the 
swiftness of the reallocation of resources in the financial sector.  
The official sector response in pursuit of financial stability  
The turmoil of the past several quarters coincides with further erosion of confidence in what 
financial institutions and other market participants knew – or thought they knew – about the 
environment in which they were operating. It is no surprise, then, that those bearing the brunt 
of the turmoil are pining for calmer times, a period of less volatility, when market prices again 
comport  with  historical  regressions  and  newfangled  financial  models.  To  wit,  a  return  to 
financial stability.  
Government  officials,  in  the  U.S.  and  abroad,  are  not  unsympathetic  to  this  aspiration  for 
calmer  times.8  But  policymakers  are  prudent  to  balance  the  near-term  imperative  to  take 
actions to achieve financial stability with the objective – just over the horizon – of facilitating 
the  development  of  a  new  financial  architecture  in  which  market  participants  re-engage, 
provide credit to the real economy, and yes, succeed or fail. 
The Fed has a long and proud tradition, not solely as the monetary authority, but also as a 
regulator, supervisor, and lender of last resort to help foster financial stability.9 The Fed is in 
the financial stability business. But it's not our only business. The Federal Reserve's financial 
stability  responsibilities  are  not,  in  my  view,  an  independent  goal  of  policy.  They  are  best 
understood  through  the  lens  of  our  broader  objectives  for  the  economy.  The  conduct  of 
monetary policy, banking supervision and regulation, and the provision of liquidity are regular 
                                                 
7   See, for example, Kenneth Rogoff (2008), "The World Cannot Grow Its Way Out of This Slowdown," Financial 
Times, July 29. 
8   Central  bankers,  finance  ministers,  and  others  have  convened  the  world  over  to  ponder  the  causes  and 
consequences of the recent period of financial instability, its impact on the global economy, and the actions 
that  might  be  taken  to  avoid  future  outbreaks.  The  President's  Working  Group  on  Financial  Markets,  the 
Financial  Stability  Forum,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  the  Committee  on  the  Global 
Financial System, the Institute for International Finance, the Counterparty Risk Management Group, and many 
other public and private groups are making significant contributions to the discussion. 
9   The Federal Reserve was created in response to the periods of panic and bank runs that affected the United 
States in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. The Federal Reserve regularly responded to financial crises 
by  extending  credit  and  by  using  its  expertise  and  credibility  with  market  participants  to  address  market 
strains. 
4 
 BIS Review 134/2008
Federal Reserve activities that contribute to financial stability, and in so doing, help achieve 
improved macroeconomic performance.  
During this period of turmoil, the Fed has increasingly been called upon to be a steadying 
influence. When appropriate, and after due consideration, the Fed has chosen to employ its 
balance sheet, authority, and credibility to lessen the harm to the real economy. That is our 
role  and  responsibility.  But  we  should  resist  the  temptation  to  play  a  larger  role  than 
statutorily  mandated  or  economically  prudent.  Good-faith  pleas  for  relief  in  the  name  of 
financial stability will continue for some time, and the Fed should carefully consider the facts 
and circumstances. That period of consideration may require us, however, to be cognizant of 
the perils of popularity and decline to take action, including when it may be more properly 
considered  or  better  addressed  by  the  fiscal  authorities.  So  it  is,  financial  stability  has 
become the watchword of the global economy. But its frequency in our lexicon should not be 
confused  with  clarity  as  to  its  meaning  or  the  timing  of  its  achievement.  Nor  should  it  be 
construed as the sole beacon of policy.  
What is financial stability? It is perhaps easier to define by its absence.10 Financial instability 
is  a  situation  in  which  stresses  on  markets  and  institutions  are  sufficiently  severe  that  the 
intermediation between borrowers and savers is threatened, with the prospect of significant 
risks to the broader economy. Financial stability, moreover, should not be equated with an 
absence  of  volatility.  If  some  unexpected  news  arrives,  markets  adjust,  often  sharply. 
Generally,  these  adjustments  are  not  cases  of  financial  instability.  A  healthy  and  well-
functioning  financial  system  will  reward  well-managed  risk-taking  and  punish  imprudence, 
sometimes harshly. Such outcomes are not pretty and can be marked by large and pervasive 
losses, but most do not necessitate extraordinary policy interventions.  
Nonetheless,  circumstances  of  pronounced  financial  instability,  while  rare,  do  arise.  In  the 
most  recent  episode,  we  policymakers  deemed  it  necessary  to  take  significant  actions  to 
mitigate  the  risks  to  the  real  economy.  Financial  firms  became  highly  protective  of  their 
balance  sheets  and  sought  to  disengage  en  masse  from  the  provision  of  credit.  The  Fed 
responded, introducing lending facilities designed to support liquidity in overnight and short-
term  funding  markets.  With  the  approval  of  the  Congress,  Treasury  also  took  significant 
action,  making  large  capital  injections  directly  into  banks  to  help  jump-start  the  credit 
intermediation  process.  This  action  was  supplemented  by  various  forms  of  government 
guarantees. But bold official policy responses, even when successful in combating financial 
instability, may not be enough to support the resumption of trend economic growth over the 
medium term.  
Why is government action aimed at financial stability not sufficient to usher in a new era of 
prosperity?  Because  the  broader  financial  architecture  remains  in  substantial  flux,  as  is 
sometimes  unavoidable.  Confidence  in  markets  and  institutions  cannot  be  demanded  or 
forced  by  edict.  Confidence  in  a  new  architecture  cannot  be  jury-rigged,  even  by  well-
designed government actions. Nor can confidence be rushed.  
Comprehensive policy prescriptions to address financial instability are now being delivered to 
the  ailing  patient.  But  a  dose  of  patience  itself  may  be  equally  important  to  help  the 
recuperative  process.  Time  is  required  for  the  medicines  to  be  administered  and  their 
efficacy to be judged. New prescriptions, however well intentioned, can prove unsettling to a 
patient  who  is  searching  to  find  his  footing.  Of  course,  policy  must  respond  to  serious 
situations  as  they  arise;  and,  during  the  past  15  months,  these  developments  have  been 
difficult to anticipate with precision. But, if the framework for policy decisions is not viewed as 
clear, consistent, and predictable by market participants, the resulting actions run the risk of 
contributing  to,  rather  than  reducing,  market  volatility  –  at  the  most  inauspicious  of  times. 
                                                 
10   See  Kevin  Warsh  (2007),  "Financial  Stability  and  the  Federal  Reserve,"  speech  delivered  at  the  New  York 
State Economics Association 60th Annual Conference, Loudonville, New York, October 5. 
BIS Review 134/2008 
 5
Finally, actions intended to help achieve financial stability should not be allowed to interfere 
with the establishment of a sturdy, new financial architecture. 
Concluding remarks 
I am reminded of a certain Omaha-based investor who says that his investment style is to be 
greedy  when  other  investors  are  fearful,  and  be  fearful  when  others  are  greedy.11  I  would 
modify  the  advice  somewhat  to  make  it  applicable  to  policymakers:  We  should  be  steady 
when financial market participants are fearful, and fearful when markets appear steady.  
This call for steadiness is not some nostrum, implying that the government should be passive 
during  times  of  significant  economic  turmoil.  Quite  the  contrary.  But  comprehensive  policy 
prescriptions are most effective when they establish new rules of engagement that are clear 
in  intent,  consistent  in  application,  and  reasonably  predictable  in  effect.  This  policy 
formulation should allow financial firms to regain their footing and market participants, more 
broadly, to take new, constructive actions to facilitate the availability of credit. Perhaps in this 
way, policymakers and market participants alike can best contribute to the development of a 
reformed and robust financial architecture. 
I see more promise than peril over the horizon. The speed of these changes in the financial 
architecture understandably brings fear to some market participants, but it may equally sow 
the  seeds  of  recovery.  Policymakers  are  keenly  observing  the  pulse  of  private  financial 
institutions and other market participants to gauge their ability to take up the cause of reform 
and renewal. If financial institutions readily and steadily approach new ways of intermediating 
credit, the real economy might recover sooner and with more vigor than expected. If not, if 
private market participants prove unable or unwilling to establish new business models, then 
the  effects  of  the  current  financial  market  turmoil  may  be  a  significant  drag  on  economic 
growth long after stability is ostensibly achieved. Getting the architecture right is essential to 
address the central challenge facing our economy.  
                                                 
11   See Warren Buffett (2008), “Buy American. I Am.” an op-ed in New York Times, October 17. 
6 
 BIS Review 134/2008
