Savenaca Narube: Strengthening business partnership – a way out of 
this economic crisis 
Opening address by Mr Savenaca Narube, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the Fiji 
Indigenous Business Council Annual Symposium, Nadi, 5 November 2008. 
 Introduction 
Mr. Ulai Taoi, President of the Fiji Indigenous Business Council 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Introductory remarks 
Over  the  past  fifteen  years  I  have  made  many  presentations  to  business  councils.  I  recall 
giving  two  or  three  to  your  Council.  More  recently,  I  have  been  addressing  mainly  the  Fiji 
Australia Business Council and I am scheduled to do so again in three weeks time. 
I have said virtually the same messages over these years. I may say it differently each time, 
but  the  key  messages  about  the  economy  remain  basically  unchanged.  We  need  to  raise 
economic growth and we need to raise it sustainably. To achieve this, our growth should be 
export led. Investment is the engine of growth. Reforms are essential.  
Why  do  I  choose  to  say  the  same  things  over  and  over  again?  It  is  not  because  I  like 
listening to the echo of my voice. I am more modest than that. But it is basically because, in 
my view, we do not seem to get things done. I have always said that we already know what 
we need to do. But sadly we do not seem to be successful in getting them done. 
I apologise for starting on a rather negative tone this morning. But it is something that needs 
to be said again and again. Perhaps, I will balance it and end with a positive one.  
Today, I am not going to tell you any earth-shattering wisdom. You possess more experience 
and knowledge on businesses than I do.  
Let me thank Mr. Taoi for the invitation to attend your conference. It is a pleasure to be here 
this morning.  
Theme of the annual symposium 
“Strengthening business partnership: a way out of this economic crisis” – your theme 
is an interesting one. Strengthening business partnership is excellent and should be pursued 
at all times whether in a crisis or not. But what I found more interesting is your choice of the 
word  “crisis”.  Many  define  what  happened  in  late  2006  as  a  political  crisis.  You  have 
chosen  to  qualify  your  crisis  as  an  “economic”  one.  But  we  all  know  that  political  and 
economic developments are intertwined. One directly affects the other. Today however, I will 
stay strictly within the economic boundaries of your theme. 
Some  of  the  questions  that  we  need  to  answer  are:  How  does  one  define  an  economic 
crisis? Are we in one? If so, what is the way out? 
Global financial crisis 
Whatever  is  the  definition  of  crisis,  everyone  knows  that  the  world  is  in  the  middle  of  the 
deepest financial crisis since the Great Depression. The magnitude is amazing. The rescue 
BIS Review 137/2008 
 1
packages  are  unbelievable.  They  are  in  trillion  of  dollars  and  still  counting.  Interestingly, 
those that study these closely say that these financial crises come in cycles of around 10 or 
so  years.  We  had  the  Asian  crisis  in  1998.  Before  that  we  had  the  Mexican  crisis  and  so 
forth. This implies that we should be expecting another financial crisis in 2018. But I will leave 
that to those lucky ones that would be around then to worry about. 
The  cause  of  this  global  turmoil  is  well  known  and  I  would  not  repeat  them  here.  More 
interestingly,  I  will  try  to  define  how  I  see  it  affecting  Fiji.  They  affect  us  in  three  ways  – 
financial, economic and the exchange rate. 
I  do  not  expect  any  significant  effect  of  the  crisis  on  our  financial  system  for  the  following 
reasons: 
• 
• 
Firstly, our commercial banks are some of the highly rated banks in the world. 
Secondly, commercial banks do not borrow money from overseas. Their sources of 
funds are domestic deposits.  
Thirdly, they do not lend money overseas. All their lending is local. 
Fourthly, we have exchange controls which insulate our financial system from the 
rest of the world. 
Fifthly, our liquidity is more than adequate. 
Finally, the effects of the crisis on Australia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea and 
India  are  small.  Four  of  our  commercial  banks  are  branches  of  foreign  banks  in 
these countries. The fifth is a subsidiary of an Australian bank. 
  I would therefore like to again reassure you that our financial system remain sound. 
However, one financial impact would be that those planning to borrow money from abroad 
may find that the money will not only be hard to find but they would be dearer as well.  
While we are insulated from the financial effects of the crisis, we will not be so lucky from its 
economic fallout. The major economic fallouts for us are: 
• 
Lower  demand  on  our  exports  as  recession  begins  in  many  of  our  major  trading 
partners  like  the  US,  Europe  and  Japan.  We  export  about  19  percent  of  our  total 
exports to the US and Japan. Our exports to the US are mainly water and garments 
and to Japan it is mainly fish. The demand for these commodities may be affected 
by the recession in these two countries. 
Our  export  to  Europe  is  mainly  sugar  but  that  is  covered  under  the  EU  trade 
agreement and will not be affected. 
Our  exports  to  Australia  and  New  Zealand  will  also  be  dearer  as  the  Fiji  dollar 
appreciates against their currencies. This will dampen our competitiveness in these 
markets. 
In  summary,  our  exports  which  are  already  underperforming  will  face  even 
more challenges. 
Imports  will  be  cheaper  from  Australia  and  New  Zealand  as  their  currencies 
weakens. As a result, imports from these two countries will rise. We import about 40 
percent of our total imports from these two countries. On the other hand, imports will 
be  dearer  from  the  US  and  Japan.  That  means  that  cars  and  white  goods  will 
become dearer. A strong US dollar will partially offset the drop in oil prices. 
Overall, our import bill which is already rising will rise even more. 
Tourists from US and Japan may now decide to stay at home. The Australians and 
Kiwis will find Fiji more expansive. The growth in tourism numbers which we are 
relying on to take us out of this economic decline will soften.  
  2 
 BIS Review 137/2008
 Remittances which have been falling in the last two years will fall further. 
Foreign and local investors may defer investment decisions. 
Inflation will come down as oil prices fall. 
Economic conditions 
Ladies  and  gentleman,  the  economic  impact  of  the  financial  crisis  will  further  weaken  our 
economy.  We  came  out  of  2007  with  a  deep  decline  of  over  six  and  half  percent.  Our 
projections  are  that  the  economy  will  not  grow  any  higher  than  2  percent  in  the  next  two 
years.  Moreover,  these  projections  may  be  revised  downwards  due  to  the  global  financial 
crisis.  At  this  rate  it  will  take  at  least  four  years  to  get  back  to  where  we  were  in  2006. 
Investment has fallen to 15 percent of GDP when we need to be exceeding 20 percent. Our 
balance of payments has been under stress for some time and this stress will now mount. 
Inflation has jumped to over 9 percent, the worse in twenty years. Unemployment is rising. 
Poverty is worsening.  
Hence, taking that scenario into account, one would be forgiven in labeling this situation as a 
crisis. But I would not go as far as call it an economic crisis for the simple reason that we do 
not need international assistance to bail us out. That is my crude definition of a crisis. When 
a  country  is  in  a  crisis  it  means  that  the  International  Monetary  Fund  is  at  their  doorstep. 
Fortunately, we are not in that position now. And I hope we will never be in that position ever.  
But there is no doubt whatsoever that we are in very difficult economic times. It is a tough 
time for any business. Many things have converged on us at once – oil prices rose, then food 
prices followed and now the financial crisis.  
Unfortunately, it is the small businesses that suffer the earliest and the most. They do not 
have  the  cushion  or  the  liquidity  to  ride  out  troubled  times.  How  do  you  manage  your 
business today so you can still have one tomorrow when things turn upwards? 
If we look back at our economic history, it is not a pretty picture. Our growth has been very 
low and volatile. Countries that were at the same economic level as Fiji some years ago have 
zipped  past.  These  include  Mauritius,  and  Malaysia.  Many  Pacific  Island  countries  are 
currently doing much better than us like Papua New Guinea, Samoa and Vanuatu. We are 
being left behind. What makes it worse is that we have the potential to be a leading emerging 
economy in the region and indeed in the world. Sadly, we are not realizing this God given 
potential. 
Economic program 
What do we need to do to get out of this low economic growth cycle? To answer that, we 
need to do two things. First, separate the things that are beyond our control that we cannot 
do  anything  about.  The  global  financial  crisis  is  one  of  them.  The  weather  is  another. 
Second, identify what we can do immediately and those that will take a bit more time. 
An immediate macroeconomic prescription could look something like this: 
1. 
Support the industries that can immediately help us get out of this situation. Tourism 
is an obvious one. 
Government  to  help  support  the  economy  in  2009  by  increasing  its  spending  on 
infrastructure which is in a very poor state. 
Improve the approval processes for investment and setting up new businesses. All it 
takes is simply a change in attitude.  
Fast track the approval of major investment projects now under consideration. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
BIS Review 137/2008 
 3
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
Be consistent in policies that support private sector development. 
Be  consistent  in  the  interpretation  of  regulations  and  laws  covering  businesses 
particularly tax laws. 
Improve productivity. All it takes is leadership. 
Avoid excessive increase in wages which are not linked to productivity. Otherwise, 
this will lead to an inflation spiral and exacerbate our balance of payments position. 
We  will  not  solve  our  problems  by  paying  ourselves  more.  This  is  an  extremely 
dangerous thing to do.  
In the medium term, we could look at the following menu: 
• 
• 
• 
Raise exports. 
Reform the civil service. 
Privatize  relevant  public  enterprises.  Some  have  been  on  the  list  for  many,  many 
years.  
Reforms the sugar and agricultural sectors. 
Develop alternative energy sources. 
Lower taxes. 
Substitute imports for local products particularly in agriculture. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
In a few weeks time, the Government will deliver the National Budget for 2009. We all look 
forward to what the government will bring to the nation to get us through these difficult times. 
Business survival 
The key question is: How do your businesses survive in this situation and in the long run? I 
will make ten suggestions. 
Let me say this first. Businesses are individually based. You aim to succeed not because 
it will help the economy but it will benefit you and your family foremost. The national objective 
of lifting economic growth is a side effect of your success. This individual focus is important 
because  it  drives  what  you  should  and  can  do.  Do  not  rely  on  anyone  else  particularly 
government handouts. I truly believe that no one owes us a living except us. 
Second, cut down cost. This is one factor that is always under your control. 
Third, watch that cash flow like a hawk. This is the most vulnerable spot of any business 
big and small. Don’t mix personal and business cash. 
Fourth, if at all possible, avoid putting all your eggs in one basket. Our market is small. 
Therefore  think  of  diversifying.  When  one  business  line  weakens,  hopefully  the  other  can 
subsidize. 
Fifth,  there  is  no  substitute  for  hard  work.  All  the  assistance  in  the  world  will  come  to 
naught  if  you  are  not  prepared  to  work.  Affirmative  actions  will  not  be  sustainable  without 
sweat and tears. Traditionally, we tend to take the easy way out. We want to reap what we 
did not sow. In villages, some drink grog all night and survive by stealing from the plantations 
of their fellow villagers. When someone works hard and prosper, instead of trying to emulate 
them, we tend to be envious of them. And worse still, we sometime sabotage their efforts. I 
repeat – there is no substitute for hard work. In difficult times, we need to work even harder. 
When the going gets tough, the tough gets going.  
Sixth, we must have self confidence and respect. Fijians are known to be modest about 
ourselves.  Worse  still  we  even  talk  down  our  achievements.  We  belittle  ourselves.  In 
business, we should not rely on others to lift us up. We must do it ourselves. There is nothing 
4 
 BIS Review 137/2008
wrong about self praise and self respect. We should teach our children these values by being 
role models. We can be anything we want to be. 
Seventh, aim high. Again with lack of confidence we tend to think small. We are scared of 
over committing and going big. We take the safe route all the time. The sky should be the 
limit. We are what we think.  
Eighth, we should do our home work. We should plan and strategize. Don’t just live for 
today.  Look  towards  the  horizon.  Set  targets  of  where  you  want  to  be  in  five,  ten,  twenty 
years.  We  cannot  just  bump  along  and  expect  that  everything  will  miraculously  come 
together.  For  instance,  you  should  not  complain  that  a  commercial  bank  turned  your  loan 
down just because you did not take time to prepare a good submission. Many good ideas 
have bitten the dust because of lack of preparation. It should not happen that way. We must 
plan. Identify the risks to your business and develop ways to mitigate them. What are your 
contingency plans? In this difficult time, plan for the worse and hope for the best. 
Ninth, measure where you are. You cannot achieve what you cannot measure. We must 
keep proper accounts and records.  
Tenth, we must innovate. I am often told the story about village canteens. When someone 
in  the  village  sets  up  a  canteen  many  others  copy  irrespective  of  the  size  of  the  market. 
Similarly, when one sets up a grog place, a few more spring up. Taxi business is the same. 
It’s a herd mentality. Why don’t we diversify and synergize? Take time to innovate. There are 
many possibilities out there. 
Changing behaviours 
Talking of changing behaviours is easy but most importantly, how do you go about changing 
them? The key realisation is that it starts with you. You should change now. The second is 
that it will happen through education and training. So train yourselves now. Its never too late 
to learn. And more importantly, educate our children. Financial and business literacy is the 
key to our successes. We should start as early as primary school. 
Let  me  say  that  these  behavioral  changes  are  already  happening.  They  are  driven  by  the 
necessity to survive. I see small businesses sprouting up on the road sides and in towns and 
villages  more  now  than  when  I  was  growing  up.  The  change  is  already  happening.  We 
should change when we are in control rather than it being forced down our throats.  
Networking  is  another  medium  that  will  help  change  behaviours.  Your  Council  can  play  a 
very important role in sharing best practices, what works and more importantly what does not 
work.  But  I still  think  that  you  can do  more  than  that.  We  have  some  successful business 
people in this Council. I note that some will be sharing their experiences today. I challenge 
them  to  take  a  greater  leadership  role  in  supporting  and  guiding  our  business  people.  A 
mentoring  system  can  work  wonders.  A  system  of  hands-on-assistance  that  actually  help 
individual cases could also be developed. How effective is the Council on lobbying? 
Cultivate alliances and collaboration with institutions and organisations. How strong is your 
collaboration with the other business councils in Fiji – the Fiji Australia Business Council, Fiji 
New Zealand Business Council and others that are in existence? Don’t stop locally. Reach 
out globally.  
Information is important. Having a website is an integral part of the business. I note that the 
Council  does  not  have  a  website.  Perhaps  you  should  and  use  it  as  a  medium  to  assist 
members that seek your help. 
BIS Review 137/2008 
 5
Culture and tradition 
As  a  race,  we  have  our  culture  and  traditions.  We  often  hear  that  making  money  is  not  a 
natural part of the Fijian way of life. We all know the drawbacks of the modern “kerekere” 
system. We all complain about the burden of “soli” and “oga”. The “vakavanua” system now 
demands liquidity. 
We  are  well  known  for  our  friendliness.  Relationship  commands  a  premium  value. 
Maintaining traditional ties are paramount. Working together is an integral part of our culture.  
Do  these  values  conflict  with  the  commercial  and  business  culture?  On  face  value  some 
seem  to  be.  But  on  closer  examination,  perhaps  they  are  not.  Perhaps  the  extremes  are 
where the conflict is greatest. For instance, friendliness is a big plus in business as long as 
you do not give away the business jewels. Working as a team is encouraged in organisations 
and  businesses  as  long  as  it  does  not  shut  out  individual  initiatives.  The  “oga”  is  our 
obligation but we should keep them under control so we don’t spend what we don’t have. I 
firmly  believe  that  we  can  turn  these  cultures  around  to  our  business  advantage  through 
leadership, communication and more importantly education.  
Conclusion 
Our economic situation is grim. Many of our problems are from offshore and we do not have 
any  control  over.  But  some  are  domestically  generated  and  we  should  address  them 
urgently. I have suggested some solutions to them 
I am sure many of you would have read this small book called “Who Moved My Cheese” by 
Spencer  Johnson.  Before  I  conclude,  I  would  like  to  relate  what  we  are  going  through 
economically and culturally to the lessons from this book. In brief, the story is about two mice 
and two small people who found plenty of cheese. The two small people came to assume 
that the cheese would always be there and they relaxed and enjoyed the cheese. Suddenly 
one morning, the cheese was gone. The mice simply scurried off in search of new cheese 
and found them. However, the small people sat there moaning and complaining how unfair 
and unkind for someone to move their cheese. They refused to change and were afraid to 
move out to new grounds in search of new cheese. 
In  many  ways,  someone  has  moved  our  cheese.  Like  the  two  little  people,  would  we 
complain and moan why things have changed and refuse to venture  out in search of new 
ones? I hope that we can be like the mice, accept what has changed and set out in a new 
direction in pursuit of new opportunities. These opportunities are there for those that have 
courage to seek them out.  
I  said  I  would  end  on  a  positive  note.  I  always  believe  that  dark  clouds  invariably  have  a 
silver lining. What goes down must come up. There is always light at the end of the tunnel. 
We are managing the economy reasonably well under severe pressure. Our foreign reserves 
have stabilised. Our inflation will come back down. Our currency is stable. Tourist arrivals are 
growing at over 10 percent. Our national debt is within tolerable levels. With a coordinated 
policy effort I firmly believe that we can raise the growth rate beyond 2 percent in 2009. And 
if we undertake the necessary work now, we can raise growth to the 5 percent mark in future 
years. 
But as I said, we know what we should do. The problem is that we are not doing them. Let’s 
therefore  not  delay.  Let’s  act  now.  We  owe  it  to  our  children  and  grandchildren.  We  can 
make a difference.  
I wish you well in your deliberations.  
I have much pleasure in declaring this Symposium open. 
Vinaka Vakalevu and may God bless us all. 
6 
 BIS Review 137/2008
