Jürgen Stark: Growth and productivity of the financial sector – 
challenges for monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
delivered  at  the  High-Level  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg  Policy  Panel,  Luxembourg,  12 
November 2008. 
 Introduction 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  Banque  Centrale  du  Luxembourg  for  the  invitation  to  speak  here 
today. It gives me great pleasure to congratulate the Banque Centrale du Luxembourg on its 
tenth anniversary. It is a great honour for me to contribute to the Pierre Werner Lecture and 
to address such a distinguished audience on this occasion. 
Depending  on  one’s  perspective,  this  is  either  the  worst  or  the  best  time  to  address  the 
question of productivity in the financial sector and its implications for monetary policy. I lean 
towards the latter. 
The current financial crisis is now wreaking havoc and the economic outlook is extraordinarily 
difficult to assess. It is also a time when the market model is increasingly being questioned, 
not  only  by  the  usual  suspects  but  also  by  a  broad  spectrum  of  economists  and  non-
economists  alike.  That  the  financial  sector  is  now  experiencing  a  negative  shock  is  an 
understatement to say the least. In some respects, the financial landscape is already rather 
different from only half a year ago.  
What would we say if a non-financial sector were hit by a huge negative shock? Typically, 
the  sector  in  question  would  need  to  adjust  itself  to  leaner  times,  often  resulting  in  some 
combination of outsourcing to countries with lower costs and increased focus on automation. 
Low-skilled jobs would tend to become fewer, and highly skilled jobs would tend to gain in 
importance.  
That some sectors shrink and others expand is quite normal in a dynamic market economy 
and there are examples of shrinking industries as well as of expanding ones. 
In  the  short-to-medium  term,  I  think  it  is  a  good  bet  that  the  financial  services  sector  will 
shrink significantly and that the events now unfolding will change the financial landscape for 
years to come. In the longer term, developments are more open and will be shaped not least 
by the policy responses under way.  
I  would  like  today  to  discuss  the  role  of  financial  innovation  in  the  economy  and  its 
implications for monetary policy.  
The role and performance of services and financial services in the economy 
In the last few decades we have experienced a sustained trend towards services as a share 
of GDP at the expense of manufactured goods (in the OECD services account for more than 
70% of GDP).1 Financial services have been an important part of this trend. At the aggregate 
euro  area  level,  the  financial  sector  accounts  for  a  remarkable  share  of  about  6%  of  total 
industries, i.e. including manufacturing, in terms of value added, with an average growth rate 
of more than 7%. 
                                                 
1   OECD, Enhancing the Performance of the Services Sector, 2006. 
BIS Review 137/2008 
 1
These  numbers,  however,  mask  a  substantial  heterogeneity  among  countries.  In  some 
countries the services sector has expanded to a considerable size, while in others this is not 
the case – the range is from Luxembourg, where the financial services sector accounts for 
more  than  16,8%  of  value  added,  to  countries  such  as  Spain  where  it  accounts  for  about 
4,2%. 
This leads us to the following questions. To what extent are financial services at the service 
of the real economy? Are they to a considerable extent disconnected from other sectors? As 
yet these are open issues. 
But when assessing the financial sector it is useful to consider more than its development in 
terms  of  size.  The  development  of  the  role  the  services  sector  plays  may  be  even  more 
important.  Financial  services  are  critical  to  the  allocation  of  capital  in  the  economy  and 
provide the means to channel inter-temporal decisions of savers and borrowers.  
The  manufacturing  sector  has  declined  in  line  with  the  growing  importance  of  the  service 
sector. However, owing to its productivity growth, it has been able to produce more goods 
with less labour input. Likewise, growth and productivity of the financial services sector are 
important in their own right as a contribution to overall economic activity. However, it is also 
the role of this sector to be at the service of the real economy, by channelling resources to 
the most productive investment opportunities, those that are most significant for the smooth 
functioning of the economy. Financial services allow the exchange of risks and the transfer of 
capital to prospective entrepreneurs; they enable households to choose investment profiles 
according to their needs and attitudes to risk.  
The bumpy road from innovation to development 
Financial development and innovation  
• 
It is well known that innovations do not translate one-to-one into productivity growth and that 
many other factors matter too. In the financial sector, much innovation has been spurred by 
the interaction between banks and other financial intermediaries.  
Innovation in manufacturing and retail is about reducing costs, inventing new products and 
markets often as a part of a process of Schumpeterian “creative destruction”. Innovation in 
the financial sector is largely about risk – how to slice it, how to package it and how to trade 
it. You can think of it in two dimensions, innovation in products, illustrated by new types of 
securities,  and  innovation  in  processes  that  can  be  related  to  new  means  of  distributing 
securities.  
Both of these dimensions have benefited from advances in information and communication 
technology (ICT). ICT has made the creation, valuation and exchange of complex financial 
products possible. It has also affected the core of financial intermediation. But the increased 
efficiency has come at the cost of lack of transparency, the result of certain risk-management 
practices rather than computer software. 
As regards the first dimension, the innovations in products, derivatives stand out the most 
and  are  indeed  at  the  epicentre  of  the  crisis.  The  hedging  strategies  that  are  now 
commonplace would not have been possible without the advances in derivatives and ICT. On 
the lenders side, one of the more important effects of technological innovation on financial 
services is the abundance if not overabundance of real-time information. Since the costs of 
obtaining information have gone down dramatically with the advent of ICT, so have the costs 
of being in a particular market. 
The proliferation of derivatives did more than just reduce entry costs into a particular market. 
It also contributed to the second dimension of innovation, the innovation in processes, by 
changing  the  way  certain  types  of  securities  changed  hands  and  transactions  were  being 
conducted. This was most visible in the explosion of securitisation, i.e. the complex process 
in which risky securities were bundled together and then “tranched” again and again in an 
2 
 BIS Review 137/2008
increasingly  long  chain  of  permutations  and  combinations  which  allowed  risks  to  be 
customised and enabled issuers to reach an ever increasingly large investors base. 
However, I would like to make two points here. 
First, it is difficult to precisely pin down the link between financial innovation and productivity 
in  financial  services.  Just  as  productivity  in  the  services  sector  as  a  whole  is  difficult  to 
measure, it is especially the case in the financial sector: 
• 
It is not easy to identify some kind of rough proxy for innovation because there is an 
almost  infinite  amount  of  data  on  the  emergence  and  growth  of  new  financial 
instruments. 
And if you consider productivity as being the efficiency with which financial services 
are  provided  it  is  not  evident  how  this  can  be  separated  from  improvements  for 
example in infrastructure or ICT.  
 Lax institutional framework led to several problems 
Second, while it is clear that financial innovation plays an important role in strengthening the 
investment chain and in efficiently managing risks, it has not had a smooth history, a point 
perhaps less necessary to emphasise today. With all its benefits for the economy, it is rather 
prone to wild swings and excessive volatility from time to time. There have been excessive 
asset price development, that have been difficult to reconcile with the fundamentals, not to 
mention bubbles.  
The  current  crisis  has  even  led  a  well-known  economist  to  call  this  process  “destructive 
creation”, a phrase which certainly seems to capture the mood of the times.2
• 
It is now widely recognised that the regulatory framework on the supervisory side and the risk 
management  methods  of  the  financial  institutions  have  been  lagging  far  behind  financial 
innovations. However, the challenges posed by financial innovation for market participants, 
supervisors, rating agencies and, last but not least, for investors have been huge: 
First, the boost in innovation in financial services was associated with new products and 
processes  of  increasing  complexity.  The  derivatives  have  now  become  their  own  worst 
enemy. Their complexity combined with rapid growth of new types has been such that not 
only  were  borrowers  unaware  of  the  underlying  risks  but  also,  remarkably,  the  creators  of 
these products. There is also the complexity or increasing in-transparency of the increasingly 
longer chains of intermediation and re-intermediation through “securitisation”.  
This  made  a  further  proper  assessment  of  the  risks  even  more  difficult.  Indeed,  recent 
advances in the field of behavioural finance indicate that, excessive complexity may lead to 
investment decisions being based on a rudimentary information set, not infrequently the last 
bit  of  information  in  the  chain.  For  all  the  sophistication  of  mathematical  finance,  human 
beings have, by nature, a limited ability to acquire and process the relevant information from 
an over-abundance of information, much of which is in fact irrelevant for the decision at hand. 
While behavioural finance draws on research from psychology and other fields in cognitive 
science to support models of decision-making, I think we need to look no further than our 
own Inboxes with the emails we get every day to be convinced. 
Second, the abundance – or over-abundance – of real-time information may have created 
a great variety of trees but they have been so dense as to hide the wood itself and, just as 
with processed food, too much sugar has been added, which we know is not good for our 
health! 
                                                 
2   Baghwhati J., “We need to guard against destructive creation”, Financial Times, 17 October 2008. 
BIS Review 137/2008 
 3
Third, the innovation boost came hand in hand with agency problems. The agent, i.e. the 
originator of the loan, had little incentive, if any to act in the interest of the holder of the loan 
(the principal). It is often the case that banks have less incentive to control the credit quality 
of  a  loan  they  sell  than  of  a  loan  they  retain.3  A  bank  that  has  (financed  and)  monitored 
firms/borrowers’  projects  has  information  about  the  pay-off  coming  from  a  prospective 
project,  i.e.  if  it  is  likely  to  fail  or  succeed.  This  prompts  the  question  whether  the  bank’s 
incentives to sell the loan are in line with risk control otherwise used. The recent experience 
of the sub-prime meltdown suggests that agency problems contributed to a deterioration of 
the  loans’  underwriting  standards.  They  probably  also  played  a  part  in  the  relatively  large 
credit access to borrowers with weak financial positions.  
Overall, it was the idiosyncrasy of the instruments combined with the overlay of technology 
that  allowed  lenders  and  borrowers,  originators,  securitisers  and  re-securitisers  to  be 
increasingly exposed to the full spectrum of shadow risks that they had originated, passed on 
and taken over again when unbundled in new forms.  
The  institutional  and  regulatory  framework  was  not  able  to  keep  all  these  developments 
under  control  and  to  ensure  a  smooth  process  of  financial  innovation  with  sufficient 
transparency  as  regards  the  new  products  and  processes,  with  appropriate  incentive 
structures,  adequate  risk  management  practices  and  a  proper  system  of  checks  and 
balances. 
Implications for monetary policy 
The financial sector is relatively small but has a large impact on overall productivity. It is not 
only  in  this  capacity,  however,  that  financial  sector  productivity  is  extremely  important  for 
monetary policy. I would like to highlight three aspects in this context: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
the role of financial sector productivity in the transmission process, 
the implications for monetary policy of shocks to productivity in financial services, 
and,  finally,  I  would  like  to  make  a  few  remarks  about  monetary  policy  issues  in 
turbulent times. 
The level of productivity in the financial sector is important in terms of both the qualitative and 
quantitative aspects of the transmission mechanism. This is my first point. 
The  following  thoughts  are  necessarily  tentative  as  it  is  unclear  at  this  stage  which 
components of recent financial innovation will survive the current crisis. I will assume in the 
following  that  innovations  such  as  securitisation  and  structured  credit  products  will  remain 
with  us  also  after  the  crisis,  although  this  would  necessitate  that  the  paramount  incentive 
problems which are at the root of the current crisis be properly addressed. 
The  most  traditional  channel  is  the  interest  rate  channel,  whereby  changes  in  central 
banks’ key, very short-term interest rates are reflected in the interest rates that banks pay on 
deposits  and  charge  on  loans.  There  is  evidence  that  financial  innovation  has  led  to  a 
stronger  and  faster  pass-through  from  changes  in  policy  rates  to  banks’  interest  rates,  in 
particular for banks which are very active in securitisation and derivatives markets. 
The second channel is the so-called bank lending channel, operating via the effect of a 
monetary  policy  change  on  the  asset  side  of  banks’  balance  sheets.  For  example,  a 
monetary policy induced reduction of banks’ reserve holdings could lead to a contraction in 
loan  supply  if  banks  are  not  fully  able  to  replenish  their  reserve  holdings  through  the 
issuance  of  securities  or  deposits.  In  this  respect,  “true  sale”  securitisation,  in  which  the 
                                                 
3   Calomiris C.(2007)”Bank failures in theory and history: the Great Depression and other “contagious” events”, 
NBER WP 13597 ; BIS(2005, 2007), Credit Risk Transfer Report. 
4 
 BIS Review 137/2008
underlying credit is removed from the originating bank’s balance sheet, has provided banks 
with  a  formidable  instrument  to  conserve  on  bank  capital  and  reserves  and  to  expand  the 
asset  side  of  their  balance  sheet  through  leverage.  This  development  has  weakened  the 
traditional lending channel, to the extent that a change in monetary policy working through a 
change in bank reserves might not lead to a change in loan supply. However, in situations in 
which  the  securitisation  market  grinds  to  a  halt,  such  as  is  currently  observed,  the 
effectiveness of the bank lending channel may reassert itself. 
The third channel is the balance sheet channel, relating to the balance sheet position of 
banks’  borrowers.  Via  its  impact  on  interest  rates  and,  indirectly,  on  a  vast  array  of  asset 
prices, monetary policy can affect the net worth of borrowers and hence banks’ willingness to 
supply  loans.  It  may  thus  alter  the  credit  premium  that  banks  charge  on  loans  over  and 
above the rate at which they can collect funding.4 The net effect of financial innovation on the 
balance sheet channel is somewhat ambiguous. On the one hand, new tools to assess the 
creditworthiness  of  borrowers  might  have  contributed  to  compressing  the  external  finance 
premium.  Also,  and  perhaps  most  importantly,  credit  premium  determination  might  have 
become largely independent of the creditworthiness – and the value of collateral pledged by 
–  individual  borrowers.  The  explosion  of  sub-prime  loans  is  a  very  telling  example  of  this 
tendency  of  credit  terms  to  become  disconnected  from  the  credit  history  and  the  balance 
sheet position of borrowers.  
On the other hand, the more continuous pricing of credit market products offered by credit 
risk transfer instruments as well as the parallel move to fair-value accounting standards may 
have  accentuated  the  sensitivity  of  the  external  finance  premium  to  changes  in  monetary 
policy. 
The fourth and last channel I will mention is the so-called risk-taking channel, relating to 
the  potential  impact  of  monetary  policy  on  the  risk-taking  attitude  of  banks.  An  important 
element in the run-up to the current crisis seems to have been banks’ tendency to target a 
specific leverage ratio or a certain risk metric (e.g. the Value at Risk). In an environment of 
low interest rates and low inflation conducive to higher asset valuations banks might have 
been tempted to take on additional risk. There is no sound evidence that one can disentangle 
empirically this channel from the more traditional balance sheet channel. So, it is premature 
to draw inferences on this dimension in any direction. However, one might presume that such 
mechanism  might  contribute  to  making  bank  behaviour  more  pro-cyclical  and  less 
predictable than in the past. 
To  sum  up,  financial  innovation  in  the  recent  past  has  affected  the  various  transmission 
channels  of  monetary  policy  in  different  ways,  sometimes  strengthening  and  sometimes 
weakening  these  channels.  Some  of  these  mechanisms,  such  as  the  large  diffusion  of 
securitisation, have certainly increased the productivity of the financial sector, if measured by 
the  ability  of  financial  intermediaries  to  leverage  capital  and  liquidity  to  expand  their 
operations.  However,  securitisation  has  also  meant  that  the  traditional  chains  of  reactions 
that  monetary  policy  used  to  rely  upon  to  influence  credit  conditions  might  have  become 
more tenuous and more difficult to predict. The empirical evidence is yet too fragile and has 
mostly been derived for samples covering periods of booming securitisation and derivatives 
activities. It remains to be seen whether these findings apply over the entire economic and 
asset price cycle or only during periods of low financial market volatility, ample liquidity and 
benign risk levels. 
The  second  point  elaborates  on  the  question  of  how  shocks  to  productivity  in  financial 
services are transmitted to the economy and what the implications are for monetary policy.  
                                                 
4   The external finance premium is the difference between the costs to the borrower of external versus internal 
funds. 
BIS Review 137/2008 
 5
As productivity shocks are unobservable, there is considerable uncertainty about both their 
magnitude  and  persistence.  Part  of  this  uncertainty  can  be  addressed  by  distinguishing 
transitory from permanent productivity shocks.  
The  ECB’s  focus  is  on  the  inflation  effects  of  productivity  shocks.  The  impact  on  inflation 
depends on supply and demand effects:  
• 
As  regards  supply  effects,  negative  productivity  shocks  contract  –  at  least 
temporarily – the supply of goods or financial services and thereby tend to increase 
prices.  
D emand effects work through the wealth channel. If economic agents perceive a 
negative productivity shock to be permanent, they will feel poorer and reduce their 
spending  in  proportion  to  the  perceived  decrease  in  wealth.  If,  however,  they 
perceive this shock to be transitory, economic agents’ perceived wealth will remain 
more or less unchanged and the fall in demand will be muted.  
 This suggests that  
• 
 transitory negative productivity shocks will be associated with some degree of 
excess demand, pushing up inflation,  
whereas permanent negative productivity shocks could be associated with either 
excess supply or excess demand, depending on the perceived decrease in wealth.  
Is what we are experiencing right now a negative shock to financial sector productivity? And, 
if so, is it permanent? It is not easy to answer these questions because of the high level of 
uncertainty we face. Confidence in the private sector has been heavily affected, in particular 
after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, suggesting that the decrease in wealth perceived by 
agents around the world is very large.  
What can central banks do in this situation of heightened uncertainty? The short answer is: 
reduce  uncertainty  by  providing  a  firm  anchor  for  private  sector  expectations.  This  is 
precisely what the ECB has been doing.  
And this leads me to my third point: monetary policy in turbulent times. Our monetary policy 
strategy  is  rendering  us  very  valuable  services  in  this  respect.  In  particular,  the  monetary 
analysis helps us to obtain a robust assessment of the balance of risks to price stability and, 
ultimately,  to  adopt  the  monetary  policy  stance  that  is  appropriate  in  order  to  fulfil  our 
mandate. 
In these challenging times, core principles derived from the cumulated experience of central 
banks over a very long period of time have been the firm basis that has guided the monetary 
policy of the ECB. Allow me to briefly mention the most important of these principles:  
• 
First, monetary policy must be given a clear and unambiguous mandate to maintain 
price stability. 
Second,  the  central  bank  must  be  credible  in  its  commitment  to  deliver  this 
objective.  
Third, the central bank must be independent of political influence.  
Fourth, so as to maintain its legitimacy, an institution endowed with independence 
to pursue a specific public objective must act in a transparent manner.  
Fifth, monetary policy must maintain a medium-term orientation.  
Sixth,  monetary  policy  must  be  underpinned  by  a  comprehensive  analytical 
framework.  Given  the  importance  of  maintaining  credibility  and  a  medium-term 
orientation,  such  a  framework  must  include  a  thorough  analysis  of  monetary  and 
credit developments, reflecting the necessarily monetary nature of inflation over the 
longer term.  
   6 
 BIS Review 137/2008
 Finally,  a  clear  distinction  must  be  maintained  between  the  determination  of  the 
monetary  policy  stance  required  to  maintain  price  stability  and  the  provision  of 
liquidity to the money market, the so-called “ separation principle”. 
These principles should be the cornerstones of monetary policy-making in normal times but, 
arguably, become even more important in a time of crisis. In this respect, I would say that our 
monetary policy, while being pragmatic, has consistently followed these principles and has 
thus  been  able  to  address  the  challenges  that  the  financial  market  tensions  have  brought 
about. Allow me to briefly illustrate this point. 
Our  single,  clear  and  unambiguous  mandate  has  ensured  that  attention  has  remained 
focused on the attainment of our objective of maintaining price stability, at a time when other 
considerations could have come to the fore.  
At the same time, our monetary policy strategy has ensured that the appropriate medium-
term  orientation  of  monetary  policy  has  been  maintained.  In  particular,  the  monetary  pillar 
embedded  in  our  strategy  ensures  that  due  attention  is  paid  at  all  times  to  medium-term 
developments  in  nominal  variables.  The  identification  of  the  policy-relevant  signal  in 
monetary  developments  requires  a  detailed  examination  of  bank  balance  sheets, 
complemented by the analysis of other sources of financial information. This is instrumental 
in  understanding  market  developments,  monitoring  financial  innovation  and  assessing  its 
implications, for instance, for the transmission mechanism. In this respect, a thorough and 
broad-based monetary analysis not only provides relevant information on risks to consumer 
price  inflation,  but  can  also  support  the  early  detection  of  financial  imbalances  and  asset 
price misalignments.5
Finally,  by  having  a  clear  separation  between  the  monetary  policy  stance,  which  as 
explained, has maintained the appropriate medium-term orientation, and its implementation 
through liquidity operations, we have proved able to act in the liquidity management domain 
rapidly  and,  when  necessary,  significantly,  to  support  the  functioning  of  the  money  market 
that is central to the implementation and transmission of monetary policy. 
Concluding remarks 
Allow me to summarise my remarks with the following points. 
1. 
The long phase of heightened risk appetite has now come to an end, with effects 
over  the  foreseeable  future.  We  have  observed  and  will  continue  to  see  a 
consolidation of the financial services sector, in terms of the products and number of 
players.  In  addition,  there  is  a  need  to  simplify  and  standardise  complex  financial 
products. Some complex derivatives will disappear; securitisation is likely to become 
more  streamlined.  More  services  may  be  rendered  in  low-cost  countries.  These 
changes  are  already  underway  and  can  be  thought  of  as  a  huge  negative 
productivity shock to the financial services market. 
The enormous unwinding of liabilities, through de-leveraging is likely to result in a 
shake-up of the financial sector as a whole. Whether this will ultimately impact on 
the net worth of households and firms is as yet an open question. The effects of the 
shock need to be contained and reduced at as little cost to taxpayers as possible 
and with due regard for moral hazard problems.  
It is not only governments and central banks that need to think about putting in place 
safeguards  that  reduce  the  likelihood  of  such  occurrences  in  the  future.  Private 
2. 
3. 
                                                 
5   See R. Adalid and C. Detken, “Liquidity shocks and asset price boom/bust cycles”, ECB Working Paper No 
732, February 2007. 
BIS Review 137/2008 
 7
4. 
banks  and  credit  rating  agencies  also  need  to  have  better  control  and  greater 
transparency with regard to risk exposure. 
Improvements in the regulatory framework and its implementation are very important 
as transparency in the measurement of risks is a cornerstone in regaining trust in 
the financial sector. The pendulum, however, should not swing from one extreme to 
the  other,  namely  from  lax  regulation  to  overregulation.  We  need  a  rules-based 
approach  for  our  market  economies  to  function  properly  and  this  includes  the 
important issue of setting up the incentives properly. All this can be covered by the 
German term “Ordnungspolitik”. 
For us, price stability in the medium to long term is and will remain our primary objective. The 
threat to price stability remains, but it is smaller than it was only a few months ago. At the 
same  time,  to  deliver  price  stability  is  the  best  contribution  we  can  make  to  a  smooth 
adjustment of the financial markets to the negative shock of the crisis and financial stability in 
general.  However,  I  would  like  to  emphasise,  that  it  will  take  some  time  for  the  effects  of 
central bank efforts to fully materialise. We have to be patient. The challenge now is to retain 
the good parts of financial innovation and not to repeat past excesses that have contributed 
to the crisis. Risk management needs to provide life jackets, not golden parachutes. 
8 
 BIS Review 137/2008
