 Eva Srejber: Sweden and European integration 
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  IBC  Euroforum:  Nordic 
Banking, Stockholm, 3 June 2002. 
 Let me begin at once by stating the limits I intend to set for this subject in my speech: I intend to focus 
on financial integration within the EU and to discuss how companies and individuals can benefit from 
the advantages created by integration in this field. My starting point is, thus, that greater integration in 
the financial area mainly brings advantages, but there is cause to seek to analyse the forces behind 
such a development. As different public rules and regulations play an important role for developments 
in the financial sector, there is also reason to discuss a number of questions of a policy nature that are 
already  on  the  agenda  for  a  strengthened  co-operation  within  the  EU.  This  is  largely  a  matter  of 
achieving a balance between providing scope for product development and efficiency in the production 
of financial services in Europe, and creating the right conditions for stability and predictability in the 
financial system. 
From white paper to financial action plan 
Ten years ago, 1992, was the final date for realising the common market in the EU on the basis of the 
programme  in  the  white  paper  presented  by  the  European  Commission  in  1985.  In  this  paper  the 
commission  described  a  total  of  almost  300  different  directives  that  should  be  adopted  in  order  to 
realise full mobility for goods, services, capital and persons within the European Community. Twenty-
four of these directives concerned financial activities, including the liberalisation of capital movements. 
Almost all of these  directives also came to be decided  within the set time period, and  a number of 
favourable conditions were created for bringing about more vigorous competition between the different 
EU member states. 
A lot has also happened in this field and contributed to strengthening developments within the EU with 
regard to both supply and demand for financial services. The most important driving force behind this 
development  relates  to  the  general  internationalisation  process,  the  new  communication  technology 
and  the  deregulation  of  parts  of  the  government  rules  and  regulations.  When  the  euro  was  later 
introduced  as  the  single  currency  in  twelve  EU  member  states,  it  provided  the  ‘finishing  touch’  that 
abolished uncertainty over exchange rate developments in a large part of Europe. At the same time, 
there  is  some  disappointment  that  it  has  not  been  possible  to  create  a  market  completely  without 
borders for all types of financial activities within the EU even more quickly, and that some obstacles 
still remain. These obstacles are partly linked to the rules and regulations governing financial activities 
- and it is therefore in principle possible to influence them. The EU is now working on implementing a 
financial services action plan, which should be implemented by 2005. It includes 42 new or amended 
directives which have a bearing on the financial sector. 
Disappearing exchange rate risks … 
It  is  easy  to  conclude  that  there  has  been  a  dramatic  decline  in  interest  rate  spreads  between  the 
countries that have introduced the euro, in the region of from around 5 down to 0.3 percentage points 
for  government  bonds.  Some  of  this  decline  is,  of  course,  connected  with  the  consolidation  of 
government  finances  in  the  EU  member  states,  but  as  long  as  the  national  currencies  remained, 
investors often also  demanded  a premium for managing exchange rate risk. The remaining interest 
rate  spread  can  be  largely  explained  by  different  credit  ratings  of  member  states  in  the  euro  area, 
which are carrying different baggage weights from debt previously incurred, as well as by differences 
in  liquidity  between  different  bond  issues.  The  introduction  of  the  euro  has  also  contributed  to 
increasing the breadth and depth of European capital markets and in any case led to almost complete 
integration  of the  part  of the money market trading that  is closely connected  with the  Eurosystem’s 
monetary  policy  transactions.  To  be  sure,  it  is  the  quintessence  of  a  common  monetary  policy  that 
there  should  be  uniform  interest  rate  conditions  for  the  liquidity  supply  across  the  entire  monetary 
union. This has also led to an integration of deposit markets, i.e. short-term financing without formal 
collateral. 
  1
 … but remaining deficiencies in the infrastructure 
On the other hand, things have moved rather more slowly with regard to integration of cross-border 
money market trading against collateral. This is because it is more difficult to equate the value of these 
different  types  of  collateral  when  they  fall  under  different  national  legal  systems.  Securities  trading 
between different countries is on the whole made more difficult by the fact that the infrastructure has 
still  not  been  adapted  to  making  transactions  between  buyers  and  sellers  in  different  countries  as 
simply  and  cheaply  as  within  individual  countries.  One  of  the  most  cited  examples  of  obstacles  to 
cross-border financial transactions is the cost of making payments from one country to another. Now 
there is an EC regulation that prescribes that the price of making payments in euro between countries 
should not be higher than the same payments within a country, but the underlying infrastructure has 
involved  de  facto  higher  costs  for  making  payments  across  borders.  Other  examples  of  national 
differences  concern  provisions  aimed  at  establishing  good  consumer  protection,  but  which  make  it 
more  expensive  and  difficult  in  practice  to  create  an  efficient  competition  across  borders,  as  the 
suppliers of financial products must adapt their marketing strategies to each individual country. One 
might have believed that the Internet would break this national fragmentation and open up the way for 
a  demand-based  international  market  for  traditional  bank  services,  but  so  far  electronic  banking 
services  have  mainly  been  used  on  a  national  basis.  There  are  also  numerous  examples  of  tax 
systems  discriminating  between  domestic  and  international  financial  transactions,  which  of  course 
impedes the customers’ incentives to use foreign suppliers, even if they offer more favourable terms 
for the actual service. 
Integration contributes to greater welfare 
Despite  the  difficulties  in  moving  ahead  more  quickly  with  financial  integration  in  the  EU,  there  are 
estimates that it may be extensive enough in the future to make a contribution of more than one half of 
a per cent to GDP on an annual basis.1 The actual figure should perhaps not be seen as exact, but 
there is reason to expect an unequivocally positive connection between financial integration and real 
growth on the basis of the development trends observed so far. A larger market makes it possible to 
benefit from economies of scale and economies of scope. This means increased economic welfare for 
the financial system’s customers, provided that a sufficient degree of competition is maintained on the 
market and that there are efficient systems for supervision and oversight to ensure the stability of the 
system  is  upheld.  If,  for  instance,  European  securities  funds  could  operate  under  the  same market 
conditions  as  American  ones,  they  could  become much  larger  than  they  are  now.  According  to  the 
same source as above, this could entail annual savings for European fund savers of 5 billion euro - 
close to 50 billion kronor!2 
More diversified demand 
A  more  efficient  supply  also  presupposes  changes  on  the  demand  side.  If  the  element  of  national 
thinking  in  financial  investments  were  reduced,  more  savers  would  also  be  able  to  benefit  from  a 
broader supply of products. At the same time, it is essential that increased financial exposures towards 
companies and financial operators in other countries occur in controlled forms, i.e. with a high degree 
of transparency with regard to the risks attached to them. This is particularly important with regard to 
financial  commitments  of  normally  very  long  duration,  e.g.  investments  in  connection  with  life 
insurance. 
There is reason to  believe that the demand for financial services  will continue to be  a driving force 
behind the integration process and give a basis for further structural changes in the financial markets. 
Increased  corporate  financing  through  securities  is  one  trend  that  will  undoubtedly  be  further 
reinforced.  Similarly,  households’  saving  in  funds  will  probably  show  a  rapid  increase  in  the  future, 
particularly in order to secure future pensions, and this will call for a capacity to diversify investments, 
where geographical spread in particular is an important aspect. 
In these two  latter aspects, however,  Europe  is a long  way  behind the  United  States. One obvious 
difference between the US and Europe is that the banking system plays a much bigger role here. This 
                                                      
1  Heinemann, F & M Jopp (2002): The Benefits of a Working European Retail Market for Financial Services, Report to the 
European Financial Services Round Table. 
idem. 
2 
  has largely historical reasons, but it also has importance for the continued structural development of 
the financial system, since it has proved to be much more difficult to integrate financial institutions than 
financial markets. The most obvious trend in the banking system in Europe is the consolidation within 
individual countries into larger units. On the other hand, very few banks have established themselves 
in other countries, and the - relatively modest - consolidation that has occurred through cross-border 
mergers and acquisitions has not in general led to any radical change in the market within the EU for 
the services traditionally offered by the banks to households and small companies. Within this area of 
the banking sector there is still a substantial over-capacity in the EU, which seems to be taking some 
time  to  phase  out.  However,  a  number  of  banks  in  western  Europe  have  expanded  into  eastern 
Europe and contributed to a modernisation of the banking systems in the former planned economies. 
Internationalisation is a driving force 
My point thus far is that most of the driving forces behind the developments in the financial sector are 
connected  with  increased  international  competition  and  an  increased  awareness  of  international 
opportunities,  and  that  regulatory  systems  are  also  becoming  more  international.  Within  the  legal 
community  constituted  by  the  EU,  the  financial  legislation  applies  to  all  15  member states,  and  the 
financial services action plan that is now on the agenda for implementation by 2005 will also affect the 
conditions for the operations of the financial sector in Sweden. In addition, the single currency creates 
a  further  dimension  in  the  opportunities  for  bringing  about  a  truly  integrated  financial  market  in  the 
countries that have adopted the euro, in that it is more efficient to build up systems that can be used 
on  a  larger  market  than  within  smaller,  individual  currency  areas.  In  order  to  benefit  fully  from  this 
dimension, it is necessary to strengthen the incentives for making the infrastructure more efficient, in 
order to conduct cross-border trading in financial services, e.g. with regard to payments, clearing and 
settlement between operators in different countries. 
Less detailed government rules and regulations for financial services 
The political system, which has power over the rules and regulations for the financial sector, thus has 
important tasks with regard to ensuring that effective competition can be maintained and to reducing 
uncertainty regarding financial transactions. A number of initiatives are also being taken to strengthen 
financial  integration.  This  involves  the  delicate  task  of  prioritising  between  removing  obstacles  to 
cross-border  operations  and  ensuring  a  fundamental  consumer  protection  that  does  not  have  a 
discriminating effect. 
Ten years after the white paper on the single market was to be realised, there are new action plans 
within  the  EU  with  the  aim  of  removing  the  remaining  obstacles  to  borderless  trading  in  financial 
services. This should not necessarily be seen as a failure with regard to the initial ambitions, but is 
also a result of new trends in the financial system making new demands of the regulatory systems, 
which it is to be welcomed that the political system embraces. And there has also emerged a partially 
new view on the purposes of government rules and regulations, which has been a process that has 
taken  some  time  as  it  is  based  on  a  long  tradition  of  fairly  detailed  provisions  regarding  which 
transactions were allowed or forbidden and who should do what. This has applied at least to financial 
services primarily aimed at the household sector, which has made it difficult to continuously adapt the 
financial sector to changing market conditions and has entailed considerable costs for the consumers. 
Now the emphasis is on ensuring that those who produce the services are clear in showing what they 
have  to  offer  and  what  risks  may  be  involved  in  different  financial  commitments,  which  gives  the 
customers greater scope to decide for themselves how they want to make their arrangements. 
Continued pressure for political initiatives 
The EU has high ambitions to make the European economies more efficient. At the summit meeting in 
Lisbon two years ago the heads of state and government adopted a strategy aimed at making the EU 
the  most  competitive,  knowledge-based  economic  area  in  the  world  by  the  year  2010!  Financial 
integration plays an important role in realising this strategy. Prior to the most recent informal meeting 
of the finance ministers and central bank governors in the EU, which took place in Oviedo in Spain, a 
working  group  had  studied  the  conditions  for  speeding  up  financial  integration.  This  group  made  a 
review  of  the  important  welfare  functions  of  the  financial  system  and  referred  to  the  profits  that  an 
efficient financial sector can generate. They also illustrated some of the obstacles that remain within 
  3
 the EU and which I have just mentioned. On the basis of its analysis, the group drew conclusions on 
what measures from the public sector could contribute to realising the political ambitions within the EU. 
The  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors  of  the  EU  member  states  endorsed  the  group’s 
conclusions. They thus emphasise once again that the 42 measures in the financial services action 
plan must indeed be implemented in the member states no later than 2005, in a way that opens up 
markets  but  does  not  create  new  obstacles  to  integration.  Public  supervision  of  financial  activities 
needs to become more uniform within the EU, to enable operators with financial activities in several 
countries  to  be  covered  by  similar  conditions  and  to  facilitate  co-operation  between  the  national 
supervisory authorities. Competition within the financial sector should be intensified, and in particular 
different  financial  operators  should  be  afforded  equal  access  to  clearing  and  settlement  systems. 
Furthermore, existing elements of tax discrimination should be identified and removed. The position of 
consumers should be strengthened by making it easier for them to obtain information on the financial 
services they wish to use. They may also need better support from consumer complaints boards in the 
EU member states, to fight for their rights, where needed. 
General principles for regulation 
In this list of measures I would personally  like to draw attention to the principle that the regulations 
necessary for the financial sector should be more general in nature and be based on aspects such as 
transparency and openness in access to different markets. This creates the right conditions for active 
competition and for market forces to efficiently adapt to new trends in the supply of and demand for 
financial services. More general principles for prudential regulation also improves the scope for higher 
efficiency  in  the  supervision  of  financial  institutions  -  for  the  institutions  which  are  obliged  today  to 
report to many different authorities, as well as for the authorities themselves who can follow the same 
principles in all countries. 
Within  the  framework  of  clear  rules  that  promote  competition,  there  should  be  a  general  minimum 
protection for smaller consumers so that they do not risk being victims in the event of financial failures, 
e.g. in the form of a deposit guarantee for normal bank savings, and codes of conduct for operators on 
the financial markets to avoid abuse in the form of insider trading, etc. It is important to maintain a high 
level  of  confidence  that  institutions  and  markets  will  function  in  the  way  that  the  customers  expect 
them to function. It is quite possible to combine a good general consumer protection with flexibility in 
the range of products which could make production more efficient. On the other hand, a far-reaching 
harmonisation  of  detailed  conduct  of  business  rules  would  probably  involve  greater  costs  for 
consumers than what they would stand to gain from completely harmonised services. 
The principles that form the basis of the EU’s regulatory framework for the financial sector are to a 
great extent based on this general orientation. The directives generally establish criteria of minimum 
harmonisation in order to enable financial operators to be active throughout the entire union. On this 
basis,  authorisation  and  supervision  should  in  principle  be  performed  by  the  authorities  within  one 
member  state,  normally  the  home  country  of  the  institution  in  question.  This  “licence”  to  conduct 
financial  operations  should  thus  be  recognised  by  the  authorities  in  the  other  member  states  and 
financial institutions should be able to operate there from their establishments in their respective home 
country.  In  the  same  way,  the  EC  directives  on  securities  markets  have  led  to  some  minimum 
harmonisation  of  the  conditions  for  trade  in  financial  instruments,  e.g.  what  the  issue  prospectuses 
should contain and how insider trading could be limited. 
Limitations in practice 
The problem is that it is difficult to apply this model for rules and regulations fully when there are many 
different national peculiarities which are hard to do away with. This has therefore provided some scope 
for the authorities also in the host countries to apply supplementary provisions, which have in practice 
impeded cross-border competition. Such provisions are often attributed to some form of general good, 
which  can  be  hard  to  define  -  and  for  which  it  is  even  harder  to  disclose  a  hidden  protectionist 
background. 
Another problem with the legislative work within the EU is that it has been so difficult to continuously 
modernise the rules and regulations and adapt them to new market conditions. The legislators have in 
several cases been one step behind the market, which has meant on the one hand that new products 
and  operations  may  not  have  been  encompassed  by  the  new  freedom  of  movement  on  the  single 
  market,  and  on  the  other  hand  that  the  protection  the  legislation  aims  to  provide  has  been 
undermined. This problem came under particular focus last year, with regard to the securities markets 
within  the  EU,  and  a  Committee  of  Wise  Men  headed  by  former  EMI  head  Alexandre  Lamfalussy 
proposed a simplified procedure for the entire legislation process. As you know, directives are adopted 
by the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament in a co-decision procedure, which is in itself a 
complex process and even more so when the directives include detailed provisions on what is to be 
regulated.  A more efficient method  would be to  limit  the directives  to fundamental  principles and to 
delegate  the  detailed  design  and  further  development  to  a  special  committee.  Furthermore,  by 
involving the national supervisory authorities closer in the legislation process, the idea is to make it 
easier and quicker to adapt the rules and regulations to new market trends and behaviour. Since the 
Lamfalussy Group’s proposals touched on the delicate division of responsibilities between the Council 
of Ministers, the European Commission and the European Parliament, difficult negotiations have been 
needed  to  gain  acceptance  of  the  new  model,  but  it  is  now  being  applied  to  the  proposals  for  a 
directive presented most recently for the securities markets in the EU. Perhaps there are more pitfalls 
ahead  in  the  work  on  making  EU  legislation  on  financial  services  more  efficient,  but  ambitions  for 
achieving results in this field have now clearly been raised. 
Efficiency and stability must - and can - go hand in hand 
So far I have talked a lot about the importance of efficient financial markets and effective means of 
adapting  legislation  to  new  conditions.  However,  measures  to  ensure  the  stability  of  the  financial 
systems  are  at  least  as  important.  An  economic  policy  aimed  at  macroeconomic  stability  is  a 
fundamental precondition for a stable financial system. However, this is not sufficient in itself - special 
measures  aimed  directly  at  the  financial  system  are  also  required.  Regulations  should  ideally  be 
worked  out  in  consultation  between  the  legislators  and  the  supervisory  authorities  and  the  central 
banks in order to facilitate the different roles played by the authorities in promoting financial stability. I 
would like to emphasise that there is no contradiction between an increased significance for financial 
transactions  and  stable  financial  systems,  provided  that  there  are  good  opportunities  to  assess  the 
realism and risks in financial commitments. The review of the capital adequacy rules for banks now 
being prepared is a good example of how the overall purposes or rules to maintain financial stability 
can  be  combined  with  good  scope  for  individual  banks  to  apply  the  regulations  in  a  way  that  is 
effective for them. As the banks are enjoined to better monitor their own risks, a capital requirement 
that is adapted to their risk exposure is achieved de facto, without a need for detailed provisions in 
individual  cases.  This  also  builds  into  the  system  an  assurance  that  fundamental  stability  can  be 
maintained  within  the  system  without  unnecessary  encroachment  on  the  efficiency  of  the  financial 
sector. 
An efficient monitoring of institutions and markets is central to being able to assess the risk of tensions 
that  can  nevertheless  arise  if  over-investment  financed  by  loans  leads  to  financial  bubbles  and  if 
regulations  are  abused.  In  particular,  when  the  regulatory  framework  is  made  more  general  in 
character,  great  demands  will  be  put  on  having  sufficient  resources  and  good  competence  at  the 
authorities  concerned  in  order  to  carry  out  the  monitoring  in  a  well-informed  way.  Here,  it  is  also 
necessary to have an interplay between the central banks and supervisory authorities to implement 
existing regulations in a good manner. And the more integrated the financial sector becomes within the 
EU, the larger the number of people who will potentially be affected by such tensions or crises, which 
will  make  further  demands  for  well-oiled  channels  for  monitoring  between  different  countries  and 
concerning  different  types  of  financial  activities.  This  involves  not  merely  having  good  systems  for 
mutually  providing  information  on  what  is  happening  when  things  are  going  smoothly,  but  also 
maintaining a readiness to identify problems and intervene in acute crises that might arise and that 
could threaten the stability of the system. It is complicated to build up this kind of readiness when it 
comes to authorities in different countries with different traditions, different principals, responsibility for 
different parts of the financial system, etc., but it is nevertheless extremely important that the network 
co-operation in this field be developed further. 
New requirements for co-ordination in supervision and oversight 
The  basic  model  for  financial  supervision  within  the  EU  is  that  it  shall  be  carried  out  by  national 
authorities and this is, in my opinion, the most natural and efficient means of keeping a watch over 
financial operators and markets. However, this requires that the supervision of other operations and 
markets that can affect financial conglomerates is also sufficiently co-ordinated. 
  5
 Within  the  EU  a  discussion  has  come  up  as  to  which  type  of  authority  is  best  suited  to  exercise 
supervision of the financial system: the central banks with their overall responsibility for the safe and 
efficient functioning of the payment system, or independent financial supervisory authorities, which are 
not  involved  in  monetary  policy  decisions  that  can  have  consequences  for  individual  institutions.  In 
Sweden we apply the latter model, which I consider to work well in our environment. On the one hand, 
the  risk  of  a  conflict  of  interests  between  monetary  policy  decisions  and  supervisory  decisions  will 
thereby be avoided, and on the other hand it provides scope for a co-ordinated supervision between 
financial operations pursued in different institutional forms, e.g. banking and insurance, within financial 
conglomerates.  Other  EU  countries  have  other  models  and  there  are  also  ambitions  from  some 
quarters to change the division of responsibilities. 
In my opinion, there is no reason to settle for a particular institutional solution for the supervisory work; 
it is more important to ensure the good functioning of the arrangements that apply. A larger issue that 
might  have  institutional  consequences  is  whether  it  is  sufficient  in  a  more  integrated  EU  to  rely  on 
co-operation  and  co-ordination  between  national  authorities  or  whether  a  controlling  authority  is 
needed that can take on a leader role as required to ensure that the co-operation functions well. A 
discussion on this has recently been intensified within the EU and has also involved the question of 
what  type  of  institution  should  in  that  case  be  the  responsible  authority  at  European  level.  Here  I 
believe that it would be best to wait and see and to build upon the only path that there is currently 
political  scope  to  realise,  namely  to  ensure  that  the  co-operation  between  the  existing  authorities 
functions efficiently. 
Some conclusions 
Financial integration is an ongoing process throughout the world and has positive welfare effects in all 
countries  that  accept  it  and  ensure  to  adapt  their  regulatory  framework  to  make  it  possible. 
International  co-operation  takes  place  within  several  bodies  in  order  to  develop  the  regulatory 
framework, and Sweden is affected in particular by the legislation within the EU. When designing the 
rules and regulations for the financial sector, it is most important to identify the essential elements for 
counteracting  stability  problems  without  making  product  development  and  efficiency  more  difficult. 
There are distinct advantages to focusing on an overall framework legislation without too many details, 
which would obscure the view and hamper continued adaptation. 
When it comes to the implementation of the rules and regulations, co-operation is required between 
central banks and supervisory authorities in order to enable the financial system to develop effectively 
without  risks  to  the  overall  stability.  A  general  framework  legislation  does  not  make  supervision 
simpler, but instead makes greater demands for competent analysis of operational conditions in the 
financial sector. At the Riksbank we have therefore invested in developing competence within our field 
of responsibility for the oversight of the payment system, which plays a central role with regard to the 
functioning of the whole financial sector. 
 