 Bank of Japan’s February report of recent economic and financial 
developments1 
Bank of Japan, 12 February 2002. 
 The Bank’s View2 
Japan’s economy continues to deteriorate. 
With regard to final demand, net exports (real exports minus real imports) tend to decrease at a slower 
pace since the decline in exports is moderating. Meanwhile, business fixed investment continues to 
decrease and private consumption is also weakening. Moreover, housing investment remains sluggish 
and public investment is on a downward trend.  
Amid  this  weak  final  demand,  inventory  adjustment  is  progressing  in  many  industries  including 
electronic parts as a result of the large production cutbacks to date. Reflecting this development, the 
rate of decline in industrial production is contracting. However, firms maintain their stance on reducing 
personnel expenses under strong excessiveness in employment. Hence, the severity of employment 
and income conditions of households is rather intensifying, with unemployment continuing to rise and 
winter bonuses having decreased distinctly. 
Turning to the outlook, with regard to exporting conditions, the synchronized inventory adjustment in 
IT-related  goods  worldwide  is  coming  to  an  end.  As  a  consequence,  there  seem  to  be  signs  that 
exports and production of the East Asian economies have stopped declining. Moreover, the yen has 
been depreciating recently. Under these conditions, exports are expected to stop decreasing and to 
turn up toward the middle of this year. However, exports will recover only modestly, while the recovery 
in overseas economies is weak and final demand for IT-related goods worldwide remains stagnant for 
the time being. As regards the U.S. economy, there are increasing number of indicators suggesting 
that the economy will hit the bottom, but there still remain many uncertain factors. Therefore, including 
this aspect, developments in overseas economies continue to require close scrutiny. 
Meanwhile,  with  respect  to  domestic  demand,  business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  follow  a 
downtrend reflecting the fall in corporate profits. Private consumption is also likely to be weak mainly 
due to worsening employment and income conditions. Thus, while domestic private demand generally 
weakens,  government  spending  is  basically  projected  to  follow  a  downward  trend.  Consequently,  it 
may take quite a while for economic activity as a whole to stop declining, even though the decrease in 
industrial  production  may  move  toward  cessation  against  the  background  of  the  improvement  in 
exporting conditions and progress in inventory adjustment.  
Overall, Japan’s economy will continue to deteriorate, but the pace is expected to moderate gradually 
with the downward pressure from exports and inventories abating. Still, while the economy continues 
to  be  in  a  fragile  state,  continuous  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  risk  of  a  negative  impact  on  the 
economy from developments in foreign and domestic financial markets. 
With  regard  to  prices,  import  prices  are  rising  as  the  decline  in  international  commodity  prices  has 
stopped and the yen has been weakening. Domestic wholesale prices continue to decline as a whole 
mainly in machinery and chemical products, although the decrease in the prices such as of electronic 
parts seems to have ceased. Consumer prices are declining somewhat faster from the effects of the 
past decline in crude oil prices, while the prices of imported products and their substitutes continue to 
decrease. Corporate service prices continue to decline. 
As for the conditions surrounding price developments, the effects of the past decline in crude oil prices 
are likely to continue for a time. On the other hand,  the recent  yen’s depreciation is regarded  as a 
factor to support prices in the period ahead. However, as the economy continues to deteriorate, the 
balance between supply and demand in the domestic market will keep exerting downward pressure on 
                                                      
1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
February 7 and 8, 2002. 
2  The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on February 7 and 8 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 9/2002 
 1
 prices.  Furthermore,  in  addition  to  the  declining  trend  of  machinery  prices  caused  by  technological 
innovations,  the  decreases  in  the  prices  of  goods  and  services  reflecting  deregulation,  and  the 
streamlining of distribution channels will continue to restrain price developments. Overall, prices are 
expected to follow  a gradual declining trend for the time being. Moreover, given the high degree  of 
uncertainty  regarding  future  economic  developments,  the  possibility  that  weak  demand  will  further 
intensify downward pressure on prices warrants careful monitoring. 
In the financial market, the overnight call rate continues to move around zero percent as the Bank of 
Japan provided ample liquidity to the money market by aiming at maintaining the outstanding balance 
of the current accounts at the Bank at around 10 to 15 trillion yen. 
Interest rates on term instruments are declining on the whole. 
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  rose  slightly  and  are  mainly  moving  in  the  range  of  1.5-1.6 
percent recently.  Yield spreads between private bonds (bank debentures and  corporate bonds) and 
government bonds remain mostly unchanged as a whole. 
Stock prices continue to weaken. 
In  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  yen  dropped  slightly  against  the  U.S.  dollar  mainly  due  to  the 
widening gap between the U.S. and Japanese economic outlook. 
With  regard  to  corporate  finance,  private  banks  are  becoming  more  cautious  in  extending  loans  to 
firms  with  high  credit  risks  while  they  continue  to  be  more  active  in  extending  loans  to  blue-chip 
companies. The lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms are gradually becoming 
more severe. In corporate bonds and CP markets, the fund-raising conditions are generally favorable 
particularly for firms with high credit ratings as seen in a slight decline in CP issuance rates, but the 
issuing environment for those with low credit ratings continues to be severe on the whole. 
Credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  continues  to  follow  a  downtrend  mainly  because  firms  are 
decreasing their business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline at about 2 percent on a year-
on-year basis. As for the amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued, the year-on-year growth rate 
has been slowing since the issuance of corporate bonds with low credit ratings is sluggish. The year-
on-year growth rate of the amount outstanding of CP issued is declining, although the amount is still 
well above the previous year’s level.  
The year-on-year growth rate of monetary base has increased further. The year-on-year growth rate of 
money stock (M2 + CDs) continues to be around three to four percent.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole, although market funding 
costs for some firms and the long-term prime lending rate are rising somewhat. 
Overall,  the  recent  financial  environment  remains  extremely  easy  on  the  whole  in  terms  of  money 
market  conditions  and  interest  rate  levels.  However,  the  fund-raising  conditions  of  firms  with  high 
credit  risks,  especially  of  small  firms,  are  becoming  severe  as  private  banks  and  investors  are 
becoming  more  cautious  in  taking  credit  risks  against  the  background  of  a  growing  number  of 
corporate  bankruptcies.  Hence,  the  developments  in  the  behavior  of  financial  institutions  and 
corporate financing need closer monitoring. 
2 
 BIS Review 9/2002
