 Masaru Hayami: The economy - recent developments and challenges 
Speech by Mr Masaru Hayami, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at Kisaragi-kai, Tokyo, 30 May 2002. 
 Introduction 
There have finally been some positive signs that Japan’s economy has begun to stabilize as we enter 
the new fiscal year. However, our more than ten years of experience tells us that sustainable growth 
cannot  be  realized  unless  growth  potential  is  strengthened  through  productivity  growth.  While 
economic activity is showing signs of improvement, we should not be complacent. Rather we should 
take advantage of this favorable development and further promote structural reform through specific 
measures.  Such  efforts  will  no  doubt  augment  resilience  of  our  economy  through  rejuvenating 
business activity and improving consumer confidence. In this sense, this fiscal year will be crucial for 
our economy in order to return to a sustainable and stable growth path. Today, I would like to review 
recent  economic  developments  and  monetary  policy  management,  followed  by  some  of  the  main 
issues our financial system now faces. 
Recent economic developments 
Developments in domestic and overseas economies 
Amid  the  synchronous  deceleration  in  world  economies,  Japan’s  economy  continued  to  deteriorate 
from the beginning of last year. Yet, the pace of deterioration has recently somewhat moderated, with 
production  starting  to  pick  up  reflecting  an  increase  in  exports  and  the  progress  of  inventory 
adjustment against the backdrop of a recovery in overseas economies. 
The  US  economy  had  been  confronting  a  contraction  phase  since  around  end-2000  such  as 
retrenchment  in  the  information-technology  (IT)  sector,  and  the  tragic  events  of  early  September 
further  increased  uncertainty.  However,  due  to  stabilizing  forces  such  as  the  progress  of  inventory 
adjustments in the IT sector and resilient consumer spending as well as effects of monetary and fiscal 
policy  stimulus,  there  have  been  increasing  signs  recently  that  the  US  economy  is  beginning  to 
recover. In March, the Federal Reserve Board thus revised its assessment for the foreseeable future 
from  saying  that  “the  risks  are  weighted  mainly  toward  conditions  that  may  generate  economic 
weakness”  to  “the  risks  are  balanced”  with  respect  to  prospects  for  price  stability  and  sustainable 
economic growth. 
In response to indications of US economic recovery, exports and production in East Asian economies, 
which are highly dependent on exports to the US, have started to increase and the decline in domestic 
demand is nearing an end. European economies are also showing some signs of recovery. 
Japan’s  economy  has  also  basked  in  this  movement  toward  recovery  in  overseas  economies,  as 
evidenced  by  increased  exports  to  East  Asian  countries  and  the  US.  Inventory  adjustments  have 
further progressed in many industries, leading to a gradual recovery in production. But we have yet to 
see unequivocal movement toward the recovery of domestic demand, which will play a key role for a 
sustainable  recovery.  Capital  investment  continues  to  decline  and  consumer  spending  remains 
sluggish because of the cumulative worsening of the employment and income environment. 
April ‘Outlook Report’ 
What  is  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy?  The  Bank  of  Japan  released,  exactly  one  month  ago, 
‘Outlook and Risk Assessment of the Economy and Prices’ - the so-called ‘Outlook Report’ - which 
gives the standard scenario for the economy for about one year ahead and entailing risk factors. 
The economic outlook for fiscal 2002 and early fiscal 2003 described in the report can be summarized 
as follows. 
First,  should  the  recovery  in  exports  and  production  continue,  it  will  lead  to  an  improvement  in 
corporate  profits  and  capital  spending,  particularly  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  Therefore,  the 
BIS Review 35/2002 
 1
 standard scenario for Japan’s economy is that the economy is expected to stop deteriorating towards 
the latter half of fiscal 2002. 
Second,  even  though  this  might  be  the  case,  it  will  take  some  time  for  the  export  and  production 
recovery  in  the  manufacturing  sector  to  spread  to  the  economy  as  a  whole,  including  the 
non-manufacturing sector, small firms, and households. This is because, given the high level of labor’s 
relative  share  (wages/value  added  output),  the  corporate  sector  continues  to  pursue  restructuring 
efforts and thus persistent pressure on employment and wages is expected to remain. Consequently, 
even  after  the  economy  stops  deteriorating,  an  autonomous  recovery  is  not  likely  to  gain  much 
momentum. 
Third  is  the  outlook  for  price  developments  under  the  aforementioned  prospects  for  the  economy. 
Indications of change have also been emerging on the price front recently. The Domestic Wholesale 
Price Index (WPI), which represents upstream developments in the price transmission process, has 
been  leveling  off  reflecting  the  progress  of  inventory  adjustments  and  rise  in  oil  prices,  thereby 
narrowing  the  decline  in  the  index  on  a  year-on-year  basis.  How  such  changes  affect  overall  price 
developments,  the  Consumer  Price  Index  (CPI)  in  particular,  deserves  our  deliberate  review.  As  I 
previously  mentioned,  however,  it  will  take  some  time  for  domestic  demand  to  exhibit  a  distinct 
recovery, and supply-side factors such as the import of low-priced goods, technological advances, and 
deregulation are likely to remain forces pushing prices down. How wage declines affect service prices 
will also warrant attention. Bearing these factors in mind, it will likely take a long period before various 
price indexes, especially CPI, turn positive on a year-on-year basis. 
In  relation  to  this  standard  scenario,  the  Outlook  Report  identifies  risk  factors  which  might  induce 
deviation both on the upside and downside. Recently, downside risk triggered by overseas economies 
has certainly diminished substantially, but it is undeniable that the outlook for overseas economies is 
still difficult to pin down. In particular, sustainability of the recovery of the US economy is still uncertain 
given the low  personal savings rate of the  household sector, the high level  of household debt, and 
existing pressure to adjust capital stock in the private sector. A somewhat weak US stock market of 
late might mirror market participants’ lack of confidence with respect to prospects for corporate profits. 
Due  attention  continues  to  be  required  for  the  global  economic  implications  of  developments  in  oil 
prices and instability in some emerging economies. In addition, while the yen depreciated against the 
dollar  from  the  end  of  last  year,  it  has  started  to  appreciate  since  early  spring  this  year.  Some 
correction of the once optimistic prospects for the US economy and expectations for the recovery of 
Japan’s  economy  might  be  factors  behind  such  a  development.  Careful  monitoring  is  thus  also 
warranted with respect to developments in the foreign exchange market and international capital flows. 
Domestic  factors,  including  the  resilience  of  domestic  demand,  effects  from  the  disposal  of  non-
performing loans (NPLs) and structural reform, as well as prospects for long-term interest rates and 
stock prices should also be deliberately assessed. A detailed explanation of each of these factors is in 
the main text of the Outlook Report 1. What I would like to convey today is that these domestic factors 
are closely related. For example, the disposal of the NPLs of financial institutions and structural reform 
of the economy are two sides of the same coin, and are also deeply related with financial market and 
asset price developments. On the one hand, should long-term interest rates rise in the absence of an 
economic  recovery  or  stock  and  land  prices  plunge,  there  would  be  an  adverse  impact  on  the 
management  of  financial  institutions  and  their  financial  intermediary  function,  which  would  result  in 
hampering  the  smooth  pursuit  of  structural  reform  on  the  corporate  front.  On  the  other  hand,  how 
positively the disposal of NPLs and structural reform developments will be received by the financial 
markets offers a key to the smooth implementation of structural reform. 
The  NPL  problem,  structural  reform  of  the  economy,  and  asset  price  and  financial  market 
developments are eventually critical factors which have a decisive influence on the resilience of the 
recovery  of  domestic  private  demand.  Firms  and  households  can  only  reactivate  spending  such  as 
investment and consumption when clear prospects of a demand recovery following the resolution of 
various structural problems are in sight, future uncertainties with respect to employment and wages 
are dissolved, and a stable financial environment is in place. 
Such  thinking  again  highlights  the  importance  of  structural  reform,  through  which  resources  will  be 
efficiently reallocated and  growth  potential strengthened. As  assumed in the standard scenario,  our 
economy is expected to stop deteriorating led mainly by improved exports and production, but there 
still  remain  various  structural  adjustment  pressures.  In  other  words,  cyclical  factors  and  structural 
factors are locked in battle. I will now address this issue. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2002
 Business cycle and structural problem 
Cyclical recovery and structural problem 
Although our economy has followed a daunting road since the 1990s after the bursting of the bubble, 
there  were  some  periods  when  the  economy  expanded.  According  to  the  government’s  official 
business  cycle  turning  point,  there  were  two  recovery  phases:  from  the  end  of  1993  and  also  the 
beginning  of  1999.  During  the  former,  after  experiencing  a  temporary  standstill  due  to  effects 
stemming from the rapid appreciation of the yen in spring 1995, the economy realized more than 3% 
growth in 1996. In retrospect, the economy entered a recovery phase triggered by monetary easing 
and fiscal expansion after the bursting of the bubble, followed by an increase in personal consumption 
and capital investment partly supported by the prevalence of mobile phones and personal computers. 
The  economy  rapidly  deteriorated  in  the  latter  half  of  1997  against  the  backdrop  of  a  slowdown  in 
overseas  economies  due  to  the  Asian  crisis,  increased  uncertainty  with  respect  to  the  domestic 
financial system, and downward pressure from the fiscal front. 
The  next  recovery  phase,  from  the  beginning  of  1999  to  the  latter  half  of  2000,  is  still  clear  in  our 
memories. Against the backdrop of the global boom of information technology (IT), exports played a 
leading role and capital investment centering on IT-related industries also increased. However, since 
adjustment  pressure  in  the  IT-related  area  had  intensified  worldwide  before  domestic  consumption, 
another  engine  of  the  economy,  gained  momentum,  Japan’s  economy  deteriorated  again  after 
entering 2001. 
What the two recovery phases in the 1990s have in common is that although the economy started to 
recover there was no autonomous and sustainable expansion of private demand as a whole. This was 
principally because the economy was directly hit by a cyclical slowdown in overseas economies and 
was also vulnerable to shocks such as financial system instability. The fundamental reason for such 
vulnerability  is  that  excess  debt,  facilities,  and  employment,  which  firms  had  shouldered  during  the 
bubble period, were not thoroughly resolved, and forward-looking business activities which might have 
led  to  an  increase  in  productivity  and  strengthened  competitiveness,  did  not  appear.  This  can  be 
interpreted  as  the  NPL  problem  in  the  banking  sector  not  having  been  completely  solved.  Such  a 
problem becomes increasingly difficult to solve once the economy enters a downturn and tends to get 
caught in a vicious circle. 
Our economy is about to see the third recovery phase since the bursting of the bubble. As I mentioned 
previously, recent developments can be interpreted as a cyclical movement triggered by the progress 
of inventory adjustment worldwide in IT-related sectors. However, a precious lesson derived from our 
experience in the 1990s is that the autonomous and sustainable growth of domestic private demand 
can never be achieved without an improvement in growth potential. In other words, structural reform of 
the economy and strengthening of the financial system are more important than anything else in order 
to see current cyclical recovery movements develop into full-scale economic growth. 
Monetary policy 
Monetary policy over the past year 
Let me now turn to the issue of monetary policy management. 
One  year  and  two  months  have  passed  since  the  Bank  adopted  a  new  monetary  policy  framework 
which aims at ‘quantity’ - the outstanding balance of current deposit accounts (reserves) held at he 
Bank - as its main operating target. The past 14 months can be characterized as a period when not 
only economic activity but  also financial markets have been  under enormous stress stemming from 
such factors as the further deterioration of the economy, the tragic events in the US, and increased 
financial system uncertainty in the face of the partial ending of the blanket guarantee with respect to 
deposits.  Amid  these  economic  and  financial  developments,  the  Bank  timely  and  flexibly  took 
monetary easing measures such as increasing the target reserve amount. Such policy management 
has played a substantial role  in ensuring financial system stability,  thereby  preventing the economy 
from further deteriorating. 
BIS Review 35/2002 
 3
 Conditions for exerting monetary easing effects 
However, we have to face the reality that even such drastic monetary easing has not been sufficiently 
effective in igniting private demand. 
To understand this point, it is perhaps useful to review actual developments in the financial markets 
and real economy. In the financial markets, not only the overnight call rate but also short-term interest 
rates have been at extremely low levels. For example, the  yield of one-year short-term government 
bonds  is  less  than  0.01%,  virtually  a  zero  interest  rate,  in  the  secondary  market.  The  financing 
environment has been more or less favorable for firms. Credit spread, which is the difference between 
yields  on  CP  and  corporate  bonds  issued  by  major  private  firms  and  those  on  government  bonds, 
generally  widened  from  last  autumn  centering  on  firms  with  a  lower  credit  rating  but  has  recently 
started to gradually narrow. Although a severe financing environment continues for small and medium-
sized firms, it would seem that such deterioration is nearing an end. 
One  noted  development  of  late  is  the  high  growth  of  monetary  base  which  shows  the  amount  of 
money  directly  provided  by  the  Bank.  Year-on-year  growth  of  monetary  base  exceeded  10%  from 
September 2001 and has been around 30% since entering 2002. Such recent high growth matches 
that during the runaway inflation period immediately after the first oil shock. 
Overall, financial conditions in Japan have been extremely easy. But the growth rate of the economy 
and various price indexes has been negative. In other words, despite an extremely accommodative 
financial environment, real economic activity has not been rejuvenated. 
Various  structural  adjustment  pressures  lie  in  the  background,  which  can  be  summarized  from  the 
viewpoint of firms, the financial system, and households as follows. First, on the part of firms, they 
cannot activate business activity such as capital investment no matter how easy monetary conditions 
are since the problems of excess debt and industrial structure are yet to be solved. Second, forces to 
lift  the  economy  from  the  financial  side  are  not  likely  to  emerge  since  the  intermediary  function  of 
financial institutions has been eroded against the backdrop of the NPL problem. Third, households are 
cautious  to  increase  spending  even  under  easy  monetary  conditions  because  of  uncertainties  with 
respect to the future course of the public pension and social security system. 
For the Bank’s monetary easing to exert powerful effects, it will be necessary to solve such problems. 
Once fund demand related to economic expansion emerges, effects of current monetary easing will 
materialize  before  our  very  eyes.  Based  on  such  a  view,  I  have  been  repeatedly  emphasizing  the 
importance of strengthening the financial system and promoting structural reform of the economy. 
The Bank conducted research through its branch network to discover new approaches taken by firms 
in the various regions. According to this research, in the wake of deregulation and proactive efforts by 
firms,  nationwide  we  are  seeing  an  increase  in  new  entries  to  new  business  areas  including  the 
environment, nursing care, and health care. For specific examples, please refer to the report I recently 
made to the Council on Economic and Fiscal Policy 2. To foster such new developments and ensure 
that they bear fruit, it is important not only to promote deregulation decisively, but also for private firms 
to  take  advantage  of  new  business  chances  utilizing  their  management  resources  to  the  extent 
possible. 
Now, let me move to another important issue, that is, the financial system problem. 
Recent developments and challenges facing the financial system 
Current assessment of the financial system 
The  blanket  guarantee  for  time  and  savings  deposits  was  terminated  in  April  this  year  and  will  be 
totally terminated for all deposits from April 2003. Simply put, the world will shift from perfect protection 
of depositors with the public sector shouldering the burden to self-responsibility in principle, and, in this 
sense, fiscal 2002 will be a turning point for Japan’s financial system. 
It is ten years since the first bankruptcy of a financial institution was resolved by deposit insurance in 
April 1992. Six years have passed since the framework of government guarantee was introduced to 
the  deposit  insurance  system,  and  four  years  have  passed  since  a  framework  to  cover  losses  was 
established by the government. In the meantime, deposits with failed financial institutions have been 
fully protected. In addition, various arrangements have been devised for the sake of financial system 
4 
 BIS Review 35/2002
 stability such as the injection of public funds to financial institutions and establishment of safety nets 
with respect to securities and insurance companies. 
The  development  of  such  arrangements  has,  of  course,  been  closely  related  to  various  problems 
associated with the bursting of the bubble and many financial institutions being forced to fail. In fact, 
the number of financial institutions - banks, shinkin banks, and credit cooperatives - has decreased by 
more  than  30%  from  about  1,000  ten  years  ago  to  less  than  700  at  present,  partly  reflecting  the 
progress of integration such as mergers. 
In our estimation, the amount of NPLs to be disposed of by financial institutions, that is the sum of 
write-offs and loan-loss provisioning, has reached more than 80 trillion  yen over the past ten years. 
This figure suggests that financial institutions have disposed of a substantial amount, more than 17% 
of  the  loans  they  held  ten  years  ago.  Stated  differently,  with  the  NPL  problem  unresolved,  Japan’s 
financial system has significantly contracted in terms of the number of players and volume of assets. 
However, despite the painful experience of the past ten years, we have yet to restore credibility in our 
financial system that still receives harsh criticism from both home and abroad. 
Financial statements for fiscal 2001 
In fact, all major banks went into the red as shown in their financial statements released last week. 
Such results evidence that major banks have continued to dramatically dispose of their NPLs in an 
amount more than their operating profits, which should be taken positively. However, at the same time, 
the results also remind us of the severe situation Japanese financial institutions now face. 
In addition, financial institutions do not have enough of a buffer left due to the past disposal of NPLs 
and decline in stock prices. For them, the source of revenue that can be used for the disposal of future 
NPLs is basically operating profit, and, in this regard, an improvement in profitability is an extremely 
important challenge which financial institutions urgently need to tackle. 
Challenges for the financial system 
Bearing such a situation in mind, I would like to summarize the challenges the system now faces. 
There are two challenges. One is the NPL problem. The outstanding balance of NPLs has not shown 
any marked decrease and new NPLs continue to emerge at a high rate. 
The  other  relates  to  the  profitability  of  financial  institutions  or,  more  broadly,  to  financial  system 
infrastructure and markets. 
These  two  challenges  are  mutually  related  and  we  need  to  tackle  them  simultaneously  in  order  to 
restore financial system credibility both at home and abroad and to regain strength. 
Recent developments of the non-performing loan problem 
I would like to start with the NPL problem. 
When  discussing  the  NPL  problem,  we  should  also  look  at  the  borrower  side,  since  the  claims  of 
financial institutions are the debts of firms. There are various background factors to the NPL problem 
depending  on  the  environment  surrounding  corporate  management.  The  main  factors  behind  the 
generation of NPLs just after the bursting of the bubble have been the excess debt of firms and the 
price decline in real estate purchased, but factors stemming from structural changes in industries have 
gradually became dominant in recent years. The number of firms which are forced to undergo drastic 
restructuring  is  expected  to  increase  from  now  on  as  structural  reform  progresses,  and  there  is 
concern that banks’ loan assets will deteriorate in the process. 
To make loans to small and medium-sized firms becomes an important future challenge. In response 
to  the  ‘special  inspections’  conducted  by  the  Financial  Services  Agency  since  last  year,  various 
measures  such  as  the  drawing  up  of  management  rehabilitation  plans  and  organization  changes 
through  mergers  have  been  taken  by  large  firms  carrying  a  large  amount  of  debt  and  seeing  a 
noticeable  weakening  of  business  performance.  Although  careful  follow-up  will  be  necessary  with 
respect  to  rehabilitation  plans,  it  is  arguably  one  step  forward  from  the  viewpoint  of  the  disposal  of 
NPLs and corporate rehabilitation. 
BIS Review 35/2002 
 5
 Measures  have  increasingly  been  adopted  for  small  and  medium-sized  firms  such  as  rehabilitation 
under  the  Civil  Rehabilitation  Law  and  out-of-court  procedures  based  on  the  activities  of  newly 
established  sections  within  individual  banks  to  exclusively  support  the  rehabilitation  of  client  firms. 
However, as a whole, small and medium-sized firms, especially those in the non-manufacturing sector, 
are facing harsh business conditions and how to cope with the situation has become a big challenge 
also for the sake of restoring credibility in the financial system. 
Effective capital adequacy ratios take into account unrealized gains and losses on land and shares, 
and, looking at them as indicators to see the actual financial conditions of borrowing firms, we find that 
the current  level for all firms is about 30% lower than that before the bubble  period, confirming the 
decline in management strength. 
And, looking at the ratio by size of firm, the effective capital adequacy ratio of large firms is about the 
same as before the bubble period, but that of small and medium-sized firms has declined to almost 
half. Particularly noteworthy is that, within the category of small and medium-sized firms, those in the 
non-manufacturing  sector  such  as  distribution,  services,  and  construction  are  in  a  more  severe 
situation than those in the manufacturing sector. 
Given  the  fact  that  about  80%  of  Japan’s  labor  force  works  for  small  and  medium-sized  firms,  the 
NPLs of small and medium-sized firms are a serious problem. 
Things to be considered when dealing with small and medium-sized firms 
Since the management of small and medium-sized firms varies, the actual management conditions at 
individual firms should be carefully grasped by considering different aspects. For example, one should 
look at not only the indicators used in assessing large firms, such as the capital adequacy ratio, but 
also the financial position of owners, business areas, human resources, and skills. Therefore, financial 
institutions should have more thorough dialogue with individual small and medium-sized firms than in 
the  case  of  large  firms  with  respect  to  their  financial  conditions  and  management  prospects.  In  the 
case of Japan, financial institutions extend loans to a firm as a whole, known as corporate lending, 
rather  than  to  individual  projects  as  in  the  US.  Consequently,  the  viability  of  the  firm  becomes  an 
important factor when assessing the adequacy of each loan or conducting ex-post assessment. Since 
small and medium-sized firms have limited access to direct financing and almost exclusively rely for 
funding on bank borrowing, careful follow-up of individual cases becomes all the more important for 
financial institutions. In this regard, as has already started  in some cases, it might be  a meaningful 
approach  in  the  process  of  dialogue  between  firms  and  financial  institutions  if  financial  institutions 
disclosed their credit rating of borrowing firms, share points of concern, and together explore ways to 
solve them. Such an approach might contribute to putting in place risk-based loan pricing for financial 
institutions. 
At any rate, bearing in mind the economic outlook for the foreseeable future and progress of structural 
reform,  we  should  anticipate  that,  at  least  for  some  time  to  come,  there  is  the  risk  new  NPLs  will 
emerge and existing NPLs further deteriorate. In this regard, it is critical that financial institutions are 
well  prepared  for  such  risks  and  review  in  a  timely  fashion  their  classification  of  borrowers  and 
collateral conditions, and make appropriate provisions. 
Removal of non-performing loans from the balance sheet 
As a matter of course, increasing provisioning is not enough to overcome the NPL problem. Based on 
dialogue with borrowing firms, financial institutions need to remove NPLs from their balance sheets if 
the  borrowing  firms  are  not  likely  to  be  rehabilitated.  The  Financial  Services  Agency  released  a 
guideline regarding the disposal of NPLs which states that newly generated NPLs should be disposed 
of within three years, with, in principle, 50% being disposed of within one year and most removed from 
the balance sheet within two years. 
At the same time, in the event financial institutions themselves cannot cope with firms which are likely 
to  be  rehabilitated,  the  functions  of  the  Resolution  and  Collection  Corporation  (RCC)  have  been 
strengthened, such as by the establishment of an investment fund. From now, financial institutions will 
be requested to make efforts to utilize their own know-how as well as such arrangements. 
In order to rejuvenate our economy as a whole, it is my strong hope that concerned parties will make 
every effort to realize the rehabilitation of firms which are viable but facing difficulties due to pressures 
stemming from structural adjustment. 
6 
 BIS Review 35/2002
 Treatment of insolvent/undercapitalized financial institutions 
As  a  result  of  such  disposal  of  NPLs  and  their  removal  from  balance  sheets,  insolvent  financial 
institutions have no choice but to exit from the market. In such cases, non-viable financial institutions 
should be disposed of in an orderly manner. 
Even in cases where financial institutions have excess assets, it becomes necessary to expand the 
business  base  and  improve  profitability  through  measures  such  as  merger  if  they  are  not  likely  to 
survive on their own from a medium- to long-term perspective. As previously mentioned, although the 
number of financial institutions has already decreased substantially, further integration should not be 
ruled  out  if  necessary.  The  government  recently  announced  it  would  consider  merger  promotion 
measures and I hope they will be implemented expeditiously. 
Thorough  preparation  is  also  needed  to  avoid  credibility  in  the  financial  system  being  substantially 
eroded or system stability questioned in the process of disposing of NPLs. The idea that appropriate 
measures, including the injection of public funds, might be necessary in such a case is what I have 
repeatedly advocated. 
At the same time, the Bank, together with government measures such as capital injection, is ready to 
discharge  its  responsibility  as  lender  of  last  resort  in  providing  liquidity  when  deemed  necessary  to 
maintain financial system stability. 
Introduction of fixed asset impairment accounting 
My bottom line thinking is as I have explained so far, and now I would like to consider challenges for 
financial institution management from different viewpoints such as the accounting system, which is a 
financial system infrastructure, and also strengthening the profitability of financial institutions. 
The  precise  amount  of  NPLs  has  always  been  a  matter  of  debate,  and  thus  various  improvements 
have  been  made  such  as  clarification  of  the  definition  of  NPLs  and  also  the  recognition  process 
centering on the introduction of self-assessment. 
However, for financial institutions to precisely grasp detailed conditions of borrowers, it is imperative 
that balance sheets correctly reflect their financial conditions. The improvement of accounting rules is 
quite an important task in order to pursue dialogue between financial institutions and borrowing firms. 
Although  Japan’s  accounting  rules  recently  underwent  substantial  change  because  of,  for  example, 
the  introduction  of  mark-to-market  accounting  for  financial  products,  there  still  remain  challenges, 
especially the introduction of fixed asset impairment accounting. 
When the profitability of fixed assets is lower than anticipated, fixed asset impairment accounting rules 
require  firms  to  recognize  differences  from  initial  plans  as  losses,  thereby  aiming  at  narrowing 
divergence  between  balance  sheets  and  the  actual  business  conditions  of  firms.  The  Business 
Accounting Council released an exposure draft this April and fixed asset impairment accounting rules 
are  scheduled  to  be  introduced  from  fiscal  2005.  The  introduction  of  the  new  accounting  rules  will 
impact  corporate  management,  but  in  view  of  their  significance  I  hope  for  their  early  introduction 
following thorough discussion. 
It  goes  without  saying  that  such  accounting  principles  are  also  applied  to  financial  institutions. 
Because  of  balance  sheet  regulations,  especially  capital  adequacy  requirements,  accounting  rules 
have extremely important meaning for financial institutions. 
In  this  regard,  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  an  international  forum  on  bank 
supervision,  is  considering  revising  international  capital  adequacy  requirements  with  a  view  to 
implementing revised requirements from end-2006. 
The  most  important  point  of  the  revision  is  the  introduction  of  a  mechanism  that  recognizes  any 
deterioration in the value of loan assets at an early stage and that requires a proportional increase in 
capital corresponding to such deterioration or the risks adhering to projects. Under the current Basel 
Capital Accord, financial institutions are required to hold 8% of capital against corporate loans, while 
the  new  Accord  tries  to  estimate  the  probability  of  default  according  to  the  business  conditions  of 
borrowing  firms  and  imposes  required  capital  based  on  such  estimates.  Leading  banks  in Western 
countries have already adopted practices to promptly recognize any deterioration in the value of loan 
assets within their credit risk management framework. 
There is still some time until the implementation of the new Basel Capital Accord, but the idea that 
bank  capital  should  be  held  as  a  cushion  for  risks  corresponding  to  the  business  conditions  of 
BIS Review 35/2002 
 7
 borrowers seems quite reasonable, and I believe it necessary that Japan’s financial institutions should, 
regardless of the existence of regulations, actively pursue sophistication of such risk management. 
Strengthening of profitability 
As far as bank management goes, risk-based pricing is as important as holding capital to cover risks. 
Stated another way, it is important to secure lending profit margins. In the business world, it seems 
quite  reasonable  for  financial  institutions  to  receive  interest  from  borrowing  firms  based  on 
negotiations  and  the  risks  involved.  However,  in  order  to  do  so,  it  is  quite  important  for  financial 
institutions to reach an understanding with the borrowers who pay the interest. 
For  example,  in  the  US,  many  firms ranging  from  large  firms  to  those  with  lower  credit  ratings  and 
medium-sized  firms,  widely  issue  corporate  bonds  to  obtain  funding,  and  a  resale  market  for  loan 
assets is in place. Yields of corporate bonds issued and those in the secondary market for loan credits 
are  mutually  arbitraged  with  lending  rates,  thus  forming  an  environment  in  which  lenders  and 
borrowers  can  easily  agree  with  respect  to  interest  rate  conditions.  Improvement  in  terms  of  direct 
access by small and medium-sized firms to capital markets and expansion of the secondary market for 
loan  credits  including  NPLs  are  also  important  tasks  in  Japan.  Once  a  secondary  market  for  loan 
credits starts to function, removal of NPLs from balance sheets can be made more efficiently, and will 
have  a  positive  effect  in  improving  capital  efficiency.  And,  It  is  important  to  continue  improving  the 
secondary  market  for  loan  credits  by  exerting  steady  efforts  to  reduce  legal  costs  such  as  by 
standardizing contract formats and simplifying the procedure to transfer legal rights. 
From the viewpoint of strengthening conviction with respect to interest rate setting, some point out that 
credit assessment by Japanese financial institutions has put too much emphasis on judging whether 
there is default risk or not and has disregarded viewpoints such as the probability of default and what 
interest  rate  would  be  necessary  to  make  a  loan  profitable.  In  order  to  set  interest  rates  based  on 
credit risks, I hope our financial institutions will take a more forward-looking attitude in dialogue with 
their customers. 
From the viewpoint of improving financial institutions’ profitability, there are other important tasks. To 
begin  with,  cost  reduction  and  retreat  from  unprofitable  business  sectors  are  fundamental  ways  of 
increasing profits, and thus financial institutions should constantly review their business and drastically 
pursue  such  measures  if  deemed  necessary.  In  addition,  not  to  go  as  far  as  seeing  entry  to  other 
business  sectors,  I  believe  that  chances  to  develop  various  financial  services  are  substantially 
increasing  with  the  arrival  of  a  full-fledged  high-tech  society.  Individual  financial  institutions  will  be 
rewarded if they use their ingenuity and make unremitting efforts toward improving the quality of their 
financial services. 
The issue of public financing 
Of course there is a problem which cannot be solved through responses by financial institutions alone 
and that is the existence of public financing. The existence of institutions that provide public financing 
is extremely large in Japan compared with other countries and there are not a few areas in which they 
compete with private financial institutions. Viewed from the aspect of setting appropriate loan rates to 
cover  risks,  it  seems  necessary  to  review  the  role  of  government-affiliated  financial  institutions. 
Structural reform should proceed based on the idea that business activity be left to the private sector 
to the fullest extent possible. 
Concluding remarks 
Today,  I  have  talked  about  recent  economic  developments  and  financial  system  problems.  With 
respect to economic developments, I have explained that our economy has finally started to witness 
some  cyclical  bright  signs.  On  the  financial  system  front,  I  have  explained  that,  under  a  new 
environment where the blanket guarantee of deposits is scheduled to be terminated, there still remain 
many  challenges  financial  institutions  have  to  tackle.  What  I  wanted  to  emphasize  most  in  today’s 
speech  is  that,  for  our  economy  to  realize  autonomous  and  sustainable  growth,  we  should  not  be 
complacent about the cyclical improvement of the economy but seriously tackle resolution of the NPL 
problem  and  structural  reform  of  the  economy.  These  are  the  important  challenges  which  Japan’s 
economy  could  not  accomplish  during  the  1990s  and  which  have  been  carried  over  to  the 
21st century. 
8 
 BIS Review 35/2002
 I  believe  that,  if  not  only  the  government  but  also  financial  institutions,  private  firms,  and  each  and 
every citizen make efforts to derive  and  enhance the growth potential of Japan’s economy,  we can 
form  the  foundation  for  renewed  economic  development.  The  Bank  of  Japan  will  continue  to  make 
every effort on the monetary policy front to achieve price stability and sustainable economic growth, as 
well as to discharge its responsibility as a central bank from the viewpoint of financial system stability. 
BIS Review 35/2002 
 9
