 Arnold Schilder: Corporate governance, accounting and auditing post-Enron 
issues  
Address held by Professor Arnold Schilder, Executive Director of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman 
of the Basel Committee's Accounting Task Force, on the occasion of the opening of the new premises 
of the Bank of the Netherlands Antilles, Curacao, 8 May 2002. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let  me  start  by  congratulating  the  Bank  of  the  Netherlands  Antilles  with  the  opening  of  their  new 
premises.  Governor  Tromp,  on  behalf  of  the  Dutch  central  bank,  I  bring  you  the  best  wishes  of 
Governor Wellink and my other fellow Directors. Also, in my capacity as Board member of the Dutch 
Pensions and Insurance Supervisory Board (PVK), I bring you their best wishes as well! So a positive 
start, and one would expect this week’s program to be orchestrated in the same way.  
However, Governor Tromp invited me to speak about more troublesome issues such as accounting 
and auditing after Enron. I hesitated for a while, suggesting that we keep it a bit more general. But 
when preparing this speech, I realised he was right. We can no longer speak about accounting and 
auditing without mentioning Enron.  
I address this  issue from the perspectives ensuing from my mixed background. For 26  years I was 
involved in public accounting at one of the Big Four firms. (You will agree that we can no longer speak 
about the Big Five, sadly enough). In 1994 I finished my PhD on the subject of auditor independence. 
In 1995 I visited Curacao as the President of the Dutch Institute of Public Accountants Royal NIVRA. 
And then, in 1998 I was invited to join the Dutch central bank as the Executive Director of Supervision, 
succeeding  Tom  de  Swaan.  As  a  consequence  I  became  a  member  of  the  Basel  Committee  of 
Banking Supervision, and in 1999 I was asked to chair the Basel Committee’s Accounting Task Force. 
You will notice this mix of accounting, auditing, regulation and supervision in my address. 
Enron has seriously shaken our confidence. This is a grave matter, because it means confidence has 
weakened  in  rules  and  regulations,  in  supervisory  authorities  and  in  the  functioning  of  the  financial 
system  in  general.  Therefore,  I  will  first  discuss  key  issues  regarding  Enron.  From  there  we  will 
proceed  to  confidence  and  trust,  accounting  and  ethics.  I  will  then  review  some  challenges  to  the 
auditing profession. Finally, I will draw some conclusions. My one-line conclusion will be that the ethos 
of public service needs to be restored and that this is a matter which concerns people from many more 
walks of life than just auditors. 
Enron has shocked our confidence. That conclusion is obvious from so many comments, articles, and 
even worse, the spate of sceptical jokes about auditors. Such as: if you want to win an Olympic medal, 
just put some auditors on the jury. But it is actually about much more than auditors. The biggest shock 
is that no warnings were issued – and yet it happened. So the reputation of directors is at stake. The 
Enron executives are subject to public enquiries – but many other directors outside Enron suddenly 
face greater scepticism about their assurances. The slightest unclarity about financial statements may 
cause considerable confusion. Because it is no longer taken for granted that they can be trusted. Then 
the auditors, already mentioned. Are they still to be relied upon? In whose interests are they working: 
their paying clients? Their own interest in large fees? Is their integrity still intact? But the doubts do not 
stop here. Rating agencies: why did they not warn in time? How good are they? Can we still believe in 
their  quality?  And  then  analysts:  important  messengers  to  investors.  Are  they  just  telling  stories  to 
please  the  firm’s  important  clients?  Are  they  focused  on  their  bonuses  only?  And  the  investment 
bankers, what is the value of their advice? Do they apply professional judgement or are they simply 
out to conclude the next deal? 
And so on. Confidence is shocked – in virtually every participant in the financial reporting cycle. 
Nevertheless, one keeps wondering about the pervasiveness, the magnitude of this event. Inquiries 
are  going  on,  also  on  the  more  technical  issues.  However,  these  as  such  were  not  new.  Special 
purpose  vehicles,  derivative  instruments,  consolidation  principles:  they  are  examples  of  technically 
complex issues. But also in this field there is a pervasive accounting literature, and each accounting 
firm, rating agency or bank has specialists at hand. Of course, there is much to learn and to develop.  
BIS Review 29/2002 
 1
 Was it just the magnitude of the fraud then? Secret documents, side-contracts, lying to the auditors 
maybe?  But  think  of  large  scandals  like  Maxwell,  BCCI,  Barings.  Did  they  bring  similar  shocks  or 
consequences? 
To me  it  seems  that  the  most  unique  element  in  Enron  was  the  shredding  of  documents  by  Arthur 
Andersen  and,  subsequently,  the  handling  of  the  resulting  publicity.  The  gradual  confession  of  that 
professional and ethical crime really caused the earthquake. Because it was a blow to the very heart 
of the ethics that underlie our financial reporting system. So a public sense of great urgency resulted. 
For example, the Financial Stability Forum, which comprises finance ministers, central bank governors 
and regulators, discussed the Enron-case at length at its March meeting in Hong Kong.  
Let me briefly explain the ethics of the financial reporting model that are at stake. In business we have 
shareholders on the one hand, and firms led by directors on the other. Shareholders are dependent on 
the accounts given to them by the directors. But the latter know more about their business than the 
shareholders. This is called information asymmetry. To bridge this gap, directors use accounting as an 
intermediating  language  between  them  and  the  shareholders.  But  this  language  is  difficult  to 
understand  and  can  be  manipulated.  So  the  shareholders  called  for  independent  interpreters.  The 
shareholders require these interpreters to check the language used, and then to convey to them the 
real messages they need to know. The shareholders are entitled to ask this, as they are the principals 
of  the  directors  who  are  using  their  money.  Now  multiply  these  shareholders  into  many  kinds  of 
stakeholders,  including  employees,  taxpayers,  bondholders,  agencies.  One  can  easily  see  that  you 
need  a  lot  of  interpreters.  By  interpreting  correctly,  they  help  to  establish  fiduciary  relationships 
between  all  these  principals  and  their  many  agents.  That  is,  building  trust  in  the  economic 
relationships that are the basis for our conduct of business.  
Now what kind of ethics would one require from these interpreters? Well, the least that one expects 
from the interpreters is that they are unbiased, impartial translators of what they hear. If they make a 
mistake now and then, are tired or simply miss something, OK. But it would not be acceptable if they 
made  up  their  own  stories,  or  are  deliberately  involved  in  playing  games  with  their  audience.  They 
would be thrown out immediately. 
These key ethics are well known in the auditing profession. Let me read you several quotes from a 
magnificent book about the history of 75 years Arthur Andersen, called “A Vision of Grandeur” (1988). 
The  young  Arthur  Andersen  and  his  partners  believed  strongly  in  key  statements  like:  “Think 
straight/talk straight.” And: “Rigid standards of honesty and integrity.” And: “Accounting principles can 
and should only be accepted if they present most fairly and most honestly the financial facts.” For the 
experts  among  you:  a  clear-cut  example  of  principle-based  accounting,  including  a  true  and  fair 
override principle! 
These are the ethics that made Arthur Andersen such a strong global firm. So, what the firm shredded 
were not documents – it was their basic ethics. Arthur Andersen destroyed the trust it had earned in 
90 years’ time. What can society do in response other than withdrawing the license to operate? 
This is what happened to Arthur Andersen. But what does it tell the auditing profession in general? 
What challenges does it pose? 
First, the profession has to fully understand what caused the shock. So far I am not sure whether that 
is already the case. The other Big Four have been keen to pick up the victims from the global AA firm. 
But  what  is  the  response  to  the  broad  concerns  in  society  as  a  whole?  Or,  how  can  one  stop  the 
scepticism? As Bryan Carsberg and John Kay wrote (Financial Times, April 2, 2002): “It is to restore 
the ethos of public service and public obligation that has been eroded as accounting has moved from 
liberal profession to competitive business.” That, I believe, is the action program. In March 2002, the 
International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) announced a comprehensive “project on restoring the 
credibility  of  financial  statements  in  the  global  marketplace”.  IFAC  said:  “The  project  will  address 
worldwide  problems,  issues,  and  best  practices  in  the  areas  of  financial  and  business  reporting, 
corporate  governance,  and  auditor.  It  will  be  developed  by  a  task  force  comprised  of  members 
representing  IFAC,  audit  committees,  boards  of  directors,  the  investment  community,  and  financial 
management.” Well, it is to be hoped that IFAC will be able to do more than just ‘address’ this – the 
project needs clear deliverables that help to restore confidence and trust. 
In this context, the profession should prepare to have a more effective crisis management plan than 
Arthur Andersen was able to demonstrate. Much can be learned for example from the food and health 
industries. They have learned their lessons. If a problem occurs, the reaction is no longer to minimize 
the  issue  and  to  hide  behind  vague  excuses  or  to  accuse  other  parties  involved.  Instead,  full 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2002
 transparency  is  given  about  the  issue  and  the  risks  involved  for  the  public.  At  the  same  time,  a 
comprehensive  action  plan  is  announced  to  fully  take  away  the  risks  or  their  consequences,  to 
compensate for damages and to explain how in the future such an event will not occur again. 
Another  important  issue  is  public  regulation  and  oversight.  It  is  all  right  to  make  maximum  use  of 
sound  self-regulation.  But  the  auditing  profession  should  realize  that  self-regulation  alone  does  not 
suffice. Like for example financial services, accounting and auditing services are of great importance 
to society. It is all right that such services are offered on a commercial basis in competition. But as a 
counterbalance, strong independent oversight has to be established. Various initiatives are discussed 
in  this  context.  It  is  important  not  to  compromise  but  to  make  such  oversight  independent  and 
powerful.  Licensing,  examining  audit  practices  and  disciplinary  measures  are  some  of  the  crucial 
elements to be incorporated here. 
Let me mention several other important issues that may help to restore confidence and trust. In the 
accounting  area,  we  have  to  remember  what  I  quoted  from  young  Arthur  Andersen:  accounting 
principles and their implementation in daily practice have to aim at presenting a true and fair view of 
what was and is. This general principle has to override detailed rules and interpretations if necessary. 
It is not easy, it can be subjective and judgemental, it may lack comparability in the details – but in the 
end it is the only thing that matters. This of course is not something that is relevant to auditors only. It 
matters to all people involved in the reporting cycle. So it is a matter of education, of awareness and of 
discipline. 
Regarding  auditing,  let  me  highlight  a  few  important  issues.  Partner  rotation  should  be  made 
mandatory. At least for so-termed public interest companies, e.g. listed ones, or financial sector firms. 
Personally, I believe it should be applied more widely as it is a healthy discipline. 
Peer  reviews  have  to  be  strong  and  powerful.  As  a  consequence  of  public  oversight,  independent 
reviewers  need  to  be  involved.  And  adverse  results  should  have  adequate  response  and,  where 
necessary, disciplinary measures transparent to the public. 
Strong audit committees can be very helpful to monitor both a company’s executive management and 
its  internal  and  external  auditors.  They  need  to  comprise  independent  non-executive  directors  only 
and to report to the full board. They are also the appropriate body to monitor the extent to which the 
audit firm performs consultancy engagements for the audit client, and to set principles and limits for 
such practice. 
Finally  audit  firms  have  to  be  much  more  transparent.  At  least  they  should  be  as  transparent  and 
accountable as financial sector firms. I refer to what will be known as Pillar III in the new Basel Capital 
Accord,  that  will  require  substantial  transparency  from  banks.  I  cannot  see  why  global  audit  firms 
should be allowed to be any less accountable than listed companies in the United States or Europe. 
This includes openness about partners’ income. 
Ladies and gentlemen, let me conclude. 
In  1994,  I  concluded  my  PhD  on  auditor  independence  by  stating  that,  at  the  end  of  the  day,  it  all 
comes  down  to  the  ability  to  withstand  pressure.  That  this  is  what  matters  most  for  the  auditor’s 
reputation of integrity, and that without integrity auditors cannot exist. We have learnt a hard lesson 
from Enron in that not only auditors (or auditing firms) can be threatened in their existence. We are all 
on  call.  There  is  a  need  to  restore  the  ethos  of  public  service,  whether  we  are  auditors,  bankers, 
analysts,  regulators  or  executives.  In  fact  it  matters  to  all  players  in  the  broad  area  of  corporate 
governance. We all have a license from society to operate, as long as we adhere to essential ethics of 
public responsibility. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 29/2002 
 3
