 Svein Gjedrem: The inflation target and the floating krone: the interplay 
between fiscal policy, the interest rate and competitiveness 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to the Executive 
Board of the Federation of Norwegian Manufacturing Industries, Oslo, 20 March 2002.  
This  speech  is  based  on  information  provided  in  Norges  Bank’s  Inflation  Report  1/2002,  earlier 
speeches  and  the  Governor’s  Annual  Address  on  14  February  2002.  Accompanying  charts  can  be 
found on the Norges Bank’s website (www.norges-bank.no). 
 Norway’s economic policy is based on the guidelines for fiscal and monetary policy. The guidelines for 
fiscal  policy  state  that  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues  over  the  central  government  budget  shall  be 
equivalent to the expected real return on the Government Petroleum Fund. Monetary policy is oriented 
towards low and stable inflation. Historically, periods of high inflation have always been followed by a 
downturn. Low and stable inflation fosters stability and growth in the economy. 
Establishing  guidelines  for  economic  policy  is  not  new.  Both  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  have  been 
based on such rules throughout the post-war period, with the exception of the last half of the 1970s 
and the first half of the 1980s. Monetary policy has had a clear anchor since 1986. 
The inflation target provides an anchor for expectations concerning future inflation and interest rates. 
The inflation target is set at 2½ per cent. Of course, the authorities must stand firm about the figure 2½ 
if the inflation target is to anchor long-term expectations and if we shall reap the long-term benefits of 
this conduct of monetary policy. Monetary policy affects the economy with a lag. The current level of 
inflation does not provide an adequate basis for determining the level at which interest rates should be 
set  today.  Our  analyses  indicate  that  a  substantial  share  of  the  effects  of  an  interest  rate  change 
occurs within two years. Two years is thus a reasonable time horizon for achieving the inflation target.  
Economic agents can act on the assumption that the inflation rate will be 2½ per cent. If it appears that 
inflation  will  be  higher  than  2½  per  cent  with  unchanged  interest  rates,  the  interest  rate  will  be 
increased. If it appears that inflation will be lower than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the 
interest rate will be reduced. There is symmetry here. It is equally important to avoid an inflation rate 
that is too low, as it is to avoid an inflation rate that is too high. 
The global economy has experienced a slowdown during the last year. The downturn in the US has 
had contagion effects on European and Asian economies through its impact on world trade and the 
financial markets. Capital markets are global, and when revenues decline in the US, enterprises with 
operations  in  many  countries  also  reduce  investment  and  operating  expenses  in  Europe  and  Asia. 
Industrial  production  has  declined  markedly  in  all  major  regions  of  the  world  economy.  In  Norway, 
manufacturing output has been more stable.  
Norges Bank presented its last Inflation Report on 27 February. We expect price inflation to be about 
2½  per  cent  in  two  years,  if  growth  in  the  global  economy  picks  up  as  assumed.  The  tight  labour 
market will probably continue to result in fairly strong growth in labour costs and rather sharply rising 
prices for domestically produced goods and services. Annual wage growth is projected at 5 per cent in 
the period ahead. A subdued rise in prices for imported goods is pushing down overall price inflation. 
The  projections  are  based  on  the  technical  assumption  that  the  krone  exchange  rate  will  remain 
stable. On the whole, the risk associated with the inflation projection is regarded as balanced.  
Exchange rates between the major currencies fluctuate widely. The effective exchange rate on the US 
dollar has risen by more than 30 per cent since 1995. The German mark (later euro) has depreciated 
by about the same amount. The effective exchange rate for the Japanese yen has fluctuated sharply. 
Small  countries  have  also  experienced  wide  exchange  rate  fluctuations.  The  Swedish  krona  has 
changed considerable in the last 10 years and is now 10 per cent weaker than in the summer of 2000. 
The Australian dollar has depreciated by more than 30 per cent since the spring of 1997. Countries 
whose exports include a large component of raw materials tend to experience considerable volatility in 
their exchange rate. Australia is one example.  
Fluctuations in commodity prices entail changes in countries’ terms of trade, which measures the ratio 
of export to import prices. Changes in the terms of trade have an impact on the exchange rate, which 
in  turn  dampens  the  impact  on  profitability.  The  exchange  rate  acts  as  a  buffer.  In  the  1990s,  the 
BIS Review 20/2002 
 1
 fluctuations in Norway’s terms of trade were especially wide. Changes in oil prices were an important 
reason for this. The krone exchange rate has not fluctuated much compared with other countries. The 
Petroleum  Fund  acts  as  a  buffer  against  fluctuations  in  the  oil  price,  because  the  Fund’s  capital  is 
invested abroad. This contributes to stabilising the krone exchange rate.  
We  must,  nevertheless,  be  prepared  for  fluctuations  in  the  krone  that  are  more  in  line  with  the 
fluctuations  observed  in  other  countries.  Changes  in  the  global  economy  can  affect  the  krone 
exchange rate. The exchange rate may also react to and contribute to curbing the effects of domestic 
disturbances.  
The  floating  exchange  rate  is  by  and  large  a  well-suited  instrument  for  absorbing  unforeseen 
disturbances  to  the  economy.  A  stronger  krone  may,  for  example,  prevent  demand  pressures  from 
translating into higher price inflation. As history and the experience of other countries have taught us, 
the real economic losses associated with eliminating high inflation and curbing inflation expectations 
are considerably higher than those associated with a variable nominal exchange rate. If oil prices fall 
to such a low level that investment on the Norwegian shelf comes to a halt, a weaker krone would 
contribute  to  facilitating  the  restructuring  in  the  business  sector  and  the  rest  of  the  Norwegian 
economy. 
Historically, a stable krone exchange rate has been the nominal anchor in the Norwegian economy. 
Labour costs among trading partners provided an important reference. Now, the inflation target is the 
nominal anchor.  
The Norwegian krone has appreciated by 2½ per cent since the beginning of 2002 and by more than 8 
per cent since the spring of 2000. High interest rate differentials and oil prices have played a part in 
this development. At present, the krone exchange rate is close to the levels in 1990-92 and 1996. The 
cost-competitiveness of Norwegian manufacturing companies has deteriorated by 10 per cent since 
1996.  This  is  due  entirely  to  pay  increases  awarded  by  manufacturing  industry’s  organisations  and 
companies.  Underlying  this  cost  inflation  is  a  tight  labour  market  that  reflects  high  growth  in 
employment in public and private services as well as extensive working hour reforms in recent years. 
The increase in labour costs is important when Norges Bank assesses the outlook for price inflation 
and sets interest rates. Excessively high wage growth, both in manufacturing and other industries, will 
affect  the  internationally  exposed  sector  through  two  channels.  First,  high  wage  growth  will  reduce 
earnings and employment. Second, the interest rate will be increased. Normally, this will lead to an 
appreciation  of  the  krone,  with  a  further  reduction  in  earnings  and  employment.  Manufacturing  will, 
therefore, feel the effects of excessively high wage growth to an even greater extent than earlier.  
At  present,  the  labour  market  is  relatively  tight,  which  is  reflected  in  high  wage  growth.  In  other 
countries, the situation is different, with sluggish economic development and declining inflation. As a 
result, interest rates are higher in Norway than in other countries.  
According to the guideline for fiscal policy, the use of petroleum revenues will increase every year for a 
number of years ahead. This will sustain the demand for labour. The service industries will need more 
resources. The contest for labour resources will intensify. To contain inflation, monetary policy must 
probably be fairly tight in the years ahead. 
Since 1997, labour costs  have  increased by  between 5 and 7 per cent per  year. Nevertheless, the 
increase  in  consumer  prices  has  been  about  2½  per  cent  the  last  couple  of  years.  The  krone 
exchange  rate  has  appreciated  since  the  summer  of  2000  as  a  result  of  a  wider  interest  rate 
differential  between  Norway  and  other  countries.  Combined  with  low  growth  abroad  and  increased 
trade with low-cost countries such as China, this has led to a slower rise in import prices. A higher rise 
in prices for domestically produced goods and services reflects an increase in labour costs in Norway. 
As the world economy recovers, import price inflation will probably edge up. A rise in labour costs of 
more  than  5  per  cent  will  only  be  consistent  with  the  inflation  target  if  the  krone  continues  to 
appreciate. 
In  our  projections  for  the  Norwegian  economy  in  the  next  two  years,  we  expect  5  per  cent  wage 
growth. As long as wages increase this much, the business sector’s competitiveness will decline, thus 
contributing to a reduction in employment in goods-producing industries. 
When manufacturing and other industries exposed to competition are scaled back to the extent that 
there  is  room for  a  larger  service  sector,  competitiveness  will  once  again  stabilise.  In  the  long  run, 
wages must be compatible with the value added that is generated by workers, i.e. labour productivity. 
Over time, the increase in real wages is therefore determined by developments in labour productivity. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2002
 In mainland Norway, annual productivity growth has averaged 1½ - 2 per cent over the last 20 years. If 
this continues to be the case, an average increase in labour costs of around 4 - 4½ per cent in the 
long term will be consistent with the inflation target. 
The guidelines for economic policy may affect the krone exchange rate in two ways. On the one hand, 
increased  use  of  petroleum  revenues  may  lead  to  a  deterioration  of  the  business  sector’s 
competitiveness. With low and stable inflation, this may at times be reflected in a strong krone. On the 
other hand, our inflation target is slightly higher than our trading partners’ inflation targets. In the long 
run, this will be offset by a corresponding depreciation of the krone.1 
The international rise in prices for manufactured goods is lower than for services – around 1 per cent. 
The inflation target of 2½ per cent implies a depreciation of the Norwegian krone of around ½ per cent 
in the long term, because the target has been set somewhat higher than our trading partners’ inflation 
target. This means that goods prices measured in Norwegian krone must be expected to rise by about 
1½  per  cent  in  the  long  term.  With  wage  growth  of  4  -  4½  per  cent,  productivity  growth  in 
manufacturing must be about 2½ - 3 per cent to maintain profitability. For services, price inflation can 
be somewhat higher, about 3 – 3½ per cent, and productivity gains correspondingly lower. 
The size of the exposed sector will be affected by the portion of petroleum revenues that is absorbed 
into the Norwegian economy. In the long run, monetary policy cannot influence overall employment or 
its distribution across industries.  
Historically,  employment  in  the  internationally  exposed  sector  has  declined  in  waves.  The  sharpest 
declines in manufacturing employment were observed in the years between 1977 and 1984 and from 
1987 to 1992. Both periods were preceded by a considerable deterioration in cost competitiveness in 
manufacturing. There is a risk of a new period of decline in manufacturing.  
The restructuring in manufacturing may take place rapidly. Competitiveness has deteriorated by about 
10  per  cent  since  1996.  We  do  not  know  how  long  this  development  will  continue.  The  long-term 
requirements for improving the balance between wage growth and productivity growth may become 
apparent at an early stage. 
Developments  for  Norwegian  enterprises  do  not,  however,  have  to  be  negative.  Some  enterprises 
could be at the forefront of technological developments and increase efficiency more rapidly than the 
relatively high rate of growth in real wages in Norway. Many enterprises move large portions of their 
production  abroad.  Norwegian  manufacturing  companies  could  still  be  profitable  even  if  the 
significance of the manufacturing sector in the Norwegian economy is reduced. However, scaling back 
manufacturing  involves  a  risk.  It  makes  the  economy  more  vulnerable.  The  growth  potential  of  the 
economy – the basis for learning, innovation and development – may be impaired when less of the 
business sector is exposed to intense foreign competition. 
                                                       
1   Akram, Q.F. (2000): PPP despite real shocks: An empirical analysis of the Norwegian real exchange rate. Working Paper 
2000/7, Norges Bank, Oslo. 
BIS Review 20/2002 
 3
