 Bank of Japan’s January report of recent economic and financial 
developments1 
Bank of Japan, 17 January 2002 
 The Bank’s View2 
Japan’s economy is deteriorating broadly, as private consumption is weakening in addition to a decline 
in exports and business fixed investment. 
With regard to final demand, net exports (real exports minus real imports) keep on a declining trend 
and  business  fixed  investment  is  also  decreasing.  Housing  investment  remains  sluggish  and  public 
investment is on a downward trend. Moreover, private consumption is weakening. 
As for inventories, although the adjustment is progressing in many industries including electronic parts, 
a strong  excessiveness in  inventories still exists, mainly in materials.  Under this situation, industrial 
production  continues  to  decline  considerably.  Corporate  profits  are  falling  and  business  sentiment 
keeps on worsening. The weakness in household income is becoming noticeable amid the decrease 
in the hours worked and the rise in unemployment, and consumers are becoming cautious. 
Turning to the outlook, as for exporting conditions, even though final demand for IT-related goods still 
remains  stagnant,  the  view  that  inventory  adjustments  in  IT-related  goods  worldwide  will  be  mostly 
completed around this spring has become dominant. Furthermore, the yen’s depreciation is expected 
to  underpin  exports.  Still,  the  world  economy  continues  to  decelerate  and  there  is  considerable 
uncertainty about future economic developments especially in the U.S. Therefore, such concern still 
exists  that  downward  pressure  may  be  exerted  on  Japan’s  exports  and  production  once  again 
depending on the developments in overseas economies such as the U.S.  
Meanwhile,  with  respect  to  domestic  demand,  business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  follow  a 
downtrend amid the fall in corporate profits. Private consumption will also continue to be weak with 
deteriorating  employment  and  income  conditions  and  the  more  cautious  consumer  sentiment. 
Government  spending  is  basically  projected  to  follow  a  downward  trend  while  domestic  private 
demand generally weakens on top of the strong uncertainty about exporting conditions. Consequently, 
it may take quite a while for economic activity as a whole to stop declining, even though the decrease 
in  industrial  production  may  moderate  somewhat  in  line  with  the  progress  in  inventory  adjustments 
such as of IT-related goods.  
Overall, Japan’s economy will inevitably continue to deteriorate for a while. In this situation, continuous 
attention should be paid to the risk of a negative impact on the economy induced by developments in 
foreign and domestic financial markets. 
With  regard  to  prices,  import  prices  are  starting  to  rise  with  the  decline  in  international  commodity 
prices coming to an end and the yen weakening. Domestic wholesale prices continue to decline as a 
whole  mainly  in  machinery  and  chemical  products,  although  the  decrease  in  the  prices  such  as  of 
electronic  parts  seems  to  have  ceased.  Consumer  prices  are  weakening  reflecting  the  decline  in 
prices of imported products and their substitutes. Corporate service prices continue to decrease. 
As for the conditions surrounding price developments, the effects of the past decline in crude oil prices 
are likely to continue for a time. On the other hand,  the recent  yen’s depreciation is regarded  as a 
factor to support prices in the period ahead. However, as the economy continues to deteriorate, the 
balance  between  supply  and  demand  in  the  domestic  market  will  increasingly  exert  downward 
pressure  on  prices.  Furthermore,  in  addition  to  the  declining  trend  of  machinery  prices  caused  by 
technological  innovations, the decreases  in the prices of goods and services reflecting deregulation 
and  the  streamlining  of  distribution  channels  will  continue  to  restrain  price  developments.  Overall, 
prices are expected to follow a gradual declining trend for the time being. Moreover, given the high 
                                                      
1   This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
January 15 and 16, 2002. 
2   The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on January 15 and 16 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 4/2002 
 1
 degree of uncertainty regarding future economic developments, the possibility that weak demand will 
further intensify downward pressure on prices warrants careful monitoring. 
In the financial market, the overnight call rate continues to move around zero percent as the Bank of 
Japan provided further ample liquidity to the money market by aiming at maintaining the outstanding 
balance of the current accounts at the Bank at around 10 to 15 trillion yen due to the changes in the 
guideline for money market operations decided at the Monetary Policy Meeting held on December 19. 
Interest  rates  on  term  instruments  are  declining  on  the  whole  reflecting  additional  monetary  easing 
measures. The Japan premium remains negligible. 
Yields on long-term government bonds rose slightly and are mainly moving around 1.40-1.45 percent 
recently. As for the yield spreads between private bonds (bank debentures and corporate bonds) and 
government bonds, while spreads between bonds with relatively high credit ratings and government 
bonds remain mostly unchanged, those between bonds with low credit ratings and government bonds 
tend to expand. 
Stock prices rebounded somewhat towards the start of the year, but are weakening recently. 
In  the  foreign  exchange  market,  the  yen  depreciated  further  towards  the  start  of  the  year,  and  is 
currently being traded above 130 yen to the U.S. dollar. 
With regard to corporate finance, private banks appear to be more cautious in extending loans to firms 
with high credit risks while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. 
The  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions  as  perceived  by  firms  are  gradually  becoming  more 
severe.  In  corporate  bonds  and  CP  markets,  the  fund-raising  conditions  continue  to  be  generally 
favorable particularly for firms with high credit ratings as seen in a slight decline in CP issuance rates, 
but the issuing environment for those with low credit ratings is deteriorating on the whole. 
Credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  continues  to  follow  a  downtrend  mainly  because  firms  are 
decreasing their business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline at about 2 percent on a year-
on-year basis. As for the amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued, the year-on-year growth rate 
has been slowing due to a decrease in the issuance of corporate bonds with low credit ratings. The 
year-on-year growth rate of the amount outstanding of CP issued is declining recently, although the 
amount is still well above the previous year’s level.  
The year-on-year growth rate of money stock (M2 + CDs) continues to be around three to four percent.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole, although market funding 
costs for some firms and the long-term prime lending rate are rising somewhat. 
Overall,  the  recent  financial  environment  remains  extremely  easy  on  the  whole  in  terms  of  money 
market  conditions  and  interest  rate  levels:  additional  monetary  easing  measures  by  the  Bank  have 
increased liquidity in the money market and prompted declines in interest rates on term instruments 
and the issuance rate of CP with high credit ratings. However, the fund-raising conditions of firms with 
high credit risks, especially of small firms, are becoming severe as private banks and investors are 
becoming  more  cautious  in  taking  credit  risks  against  the  background  of  a  growing  number  of 
corporate  bankruptcies.  Hence,  the  developments  in  the  behavior  of  financial  institutions  and 
corporate financing need closer monitoring. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2002
