 Thirachai Phuvanat naranubala: How to create a stable financial environment in 
emerging market economies 
Remarks  by  Mr  Thirachai  Phuvanat  naranubala,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the 
International Conference of Banking Supervisors, Cape Town, 19 September 2002. 
 The title of “ How to create a stable financial environment in emerging market economies ” is almost a 
contradiction. The events in the past few decades will bear me out. It has been difficult for emerging 
market  economies  to  maintain  stable  financial  environment  over  a  long  period  of  time.  Crises  and 
disturbances  have  erupted  every  now  and  then,  resulting  in  losses  of  output,  employment  and 
livelihood.  
The problem is -- emerging market economies and stable financial environment do not always go hand 
in  hand.  Some  of  the  reasons  are  obvious.  Emerging  market  economies  are  the  countries  in  the 
process  of  integrating  themselves  into  the  new  environment  of  globalization.  They  are  invariably  at 
some points in their journeys in enhancing free trade, attracting foreign direct investments and capital 
inflows, adopting rule based supervision and control, and introducing market discipline. 
The  risks  to  stability  occur  because  they  have  to  learn  and  put  into  place  the  framework  and  the 
machinery  to regulate, supervise and monitor their financial markets in the  tight time span  of  years 
what developed countries had taken decades to do.  
For  the  emerging  markets,  globalization  is  like  sailing  out  of  the  inland  waterway  where  the 
environment  is  safe  and  calm  into  the  international  ocean  with  its  more  choppy  water.  The  risks 
multiply. 
What can one do about this? 
You can, of course, opt for the easy approach. You can continue to maintain tight controls and resist 
liberalization. But this will hinder the development of your domestic financial markets, and also the skill 
of the people involved, both the regulators and the commercial banks themselves. 
In my opinion, the right approach is for the emerging market to create, or improve and maintain the 
right fundamentals. In a way, instead of trying to extend your breakwater further and further, it is better 
to change from the less stable rowing boat to a more sturdy and seaworthy ship, one that can handle 
the rough ocean better. 
In this respect, there are three things that I wish to highlight. 
The first is the need to ensure that the country conducts proper macroeconomic policy. I mention this 
even though it is not directly the job of supervisors because it can overwhelm everything. To take the 
example  of  Thailand,  we  used  the  fixed  exchange  regime  for  too  long,  but  without  the  domestic 
flexibility  to  adjust  wages  and  prices  to  correct  lack  of  competitiveness.  We  therefore  could  not 
maintain  the  parity  for  long.  It  also  led  to  distortion  in  risk  perception  that  led  to  excessive  foreign 
exchange  risk  mismatch,  over  investment  in  the  non-traded  sector  and  damaging  speculation, 
especially in real estate. 
When we had to change to the flexible exchange regime, the exchange rate depreciated to a low point 
of  less  than  50%  of  its  pre-crisis  value  before  backing  up  to  above  60.  The  exchange  losses  that 
occurred was, among other things, one of the major factors causing the level of non-performing loans 
to go up to the peak of 45%. This was almost one out of every two dollars lent out. What stress test 
can really prepare us for such an event? 
The second is to have the right infrastructure for the domestic financial markets. This topic includes 
many things like 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
having the proper market rules, 
having the legal framework that facilitates the enforcement of creditors’ rights, 
having the laws and procedures to deal with bankruptcy,  
having  proper  accounting  and  auditing  standards  as  well  as  a  reliable  system  of  credit 
information on individual borrowers. 
BIS Review 52/2002 
 1
 I can still recall that during the 1997 crisis, the inter  bank market in Thailand ceased  up for fear of 
counter party failure. But the problem also extended to the system of commercial trade credit between 
ordinary companies, the sellers and buyers of goods. 
Today, five years after the event, the system of trade credit still has not regained its full recovery. This 
problem can be mitigated with the function of credit bureau that reports regularly on payment behavior 
of commercial firms. 
Third  is  to  ensure  that  there  exists  proper  supervision  of  financial  institutions.  The  country  has  to 
ensure that the agency entrusted with this task has sufficient power to act. I can still remember that in 
Thailand  long  ago,  when  government  successions  often  did  not  come  from  elections  but  through 
military  actions,  it  was  very  common  for  commercial  banks  to  have  army  generals  sitting  on  their 
boards. Banking supervision under such an environment was a challenge. 
But  the  biggest  challenge  is  what  to  do  when  banks  suffer  such  losses  that  they  are  unable  to 
continue. This happened when Thailand went into the crisis in 1997. We closed down two-thirds of our 
finance companies. As for the commercial banks, we had 15 local banks then. Six banks had to be 
taken over by the authority. 
The private shareholders were forced to take full losses, and new capital provided by the authority. 
Management was totally revamped. We have merged four of these banks into the others, and have 
carved out non-performing loans to a national asset management company. Two government-owned 
banks are now ready to be privatized to the general public. 
The  banks  that  remained  were  forced  to  recapitalize.  Three  of  them  were  unable  to  find  domestic 
capital, and decided to invite foreign strategic partners. We allowed the foreign banks to own majority 
shares and control management. 
Now  for  the  bad  news!  Despite  your  effort  in  trying  to  strengthen  your  ship,  it  may  not  always  be 
smooth sailing. I wish to point out two dangers that may crop up. 
The  first  danger  is  that  there  are  sharks  lurking  under  water--  in  the  form  of  highly  leveraged 
institutions and hedged funds. No matter how well you try to manage your economy, no matter how 
good  your  intentions,  there  will  often  be  some  things  out  of  synchronization.  This  will  cause  your 
currency or your stock market to be temporarily out of balance, or even wrongly perceived to be so. 
This is exactly when you need some time to work out the problems. But the attack by sharks can rob 
you of this precious time. 
I  asked  myself  --  how  can  these  sharks  create  so  much  trouble  for  the  emerging  markets?  The 
problem  is  that  these  sharks  are  often  able  to  command  oversize  resources  financed  by  large 
international banks. I strongly believe that these financing should be curbed.  
Leveraging beyond a certain threshold is particularly risky. I propose that the international banks that 
give credits to such institutions should be required to weigh these risks, in their capital requirement 
calculations, at a much higher rate than the 150 per cent currently being considered in the new Basle 
Accord. 
The second danger is that during good weather you tend to get assistance from many international 
banks.  They  will  give  you  tow  lines  hitched  to  their  catamarans  that  help  increase  your  speed. 
However, when your ship starts to leak, they tend to cut the lines just when you need them most. 
On  this  issue,  therefore,  I  strongly  support  the  idea  of  private  sector  involvement  that  the  IMF  is 
proposing. There should be ways for countries to cope with bank runs on the international scale. There 
should  be  opportunity  for  countries  to  renegotiate  their  debts  with  the  foreign  creditors,  without 
imposing an insurmountable handicap that will prevent them from returning to the market in future. 
In the case of Thailand, had such mechanism existed during the Asian crisis, our non-performing loan 
ratio would have been less. Actually we paid back all foreign debts owed by the government and by 
the banks in full, with interests. We never needed any hair cut, we just needed time. But many foreign 
banks did not roll over the debts that fell due, despite the fact that the authority guaranteed all foreign 
debts of the banks. 
The continuous repayment caused the currency to weaken more than it should. The exchange loss 
was therefore greater than should have been, and hence the non-performing loan ratio. At the same 
time, our weak currency also created pressure on the exchange rates of our neighbors, causing the 
interest rate to be kept high for longer than necessary, which in turn also fed into the non-performing 
loan ratio. 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2002
 I  am  therefore  attaching  a  lot  of  hope  to  the  Sovereign  Debt  Restructuring  Mechanism  now  being 
deliberated by the IMF members. I do hope that it will offer better solutions for this kind of problems in 
the future. 
I will close by saying this. Globalization is a two way street. Relationship in the international financial 
market  benefits  both  ways.  Funds  flow  to  emerging  economies  because  they  are  able  to  generate 
better return for savers in the developed economies.  
On the one hand, the emerging markets have to do their homework and preparation. But on the other 
hand,  when  things  get  temporarily  out  of  balance,  shouldn’t  there  be  tools  and  safeguards  to  help 
them deal with situations better? 
The good news is there could, if all the countries here want to!  
BIS Review 52/2002 
 3
