 Joseph Yam: The ADB challenge to help Asia return to stable and sustainable 
growth 
Statement  by  Mr  Joseph  Yam,  Alternate  Governor  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority,  at  the 
35th Asian Development Bank Annual Meeting, Shanghai, 10-12 May 2002. 
 Mr President, I would like to first congratulate you on your re-election as the President of the Bank. I 
would also like to thank the Government and the people of the People’s Republic of China for their 
hospitality in hosting this year’s Annual Meeting in this magnificent city of Shanghai, itself a powerful 
symbol  of  tradition  and  modernisation.  I  also  express  my  sincere  appreciation  to  the  Bank’s 
management and staff for the excellent arrangements made for this meeting. I join others in adding 
our special welcome to our new member of the Bank – Portugal. 
Poverty is reduced more extensively at times of fast economic growth but less so when growth slows. 
The  past  year  has  been  a  difficult  one  for  the  poor.  Amid  the  synchronised  slowdown  of  major 
industrial economies, economic growth has been slow and uneven in Asia. The terrorist attacks on the 
US on 11 September shocked the world. The Enron debacle and the Argentine economic crisis cast 
long  shadows  on  the  equity  and  financial  markets  worldwide.  Against  this  background,  the  task  of 
poverty reduction is made more daunting and pressing. 
However,  I  must  commend  the  Bank  for  meeting  the  challenges  of  last  year  by  mapping  out  and 
implementing  the  Long-term  Strategic  Framework.  The  framework  seeks  to  reduce  poverty  through 
three core areas of sustainable economic growth, inclusive social development and good governance. 
The strategy is a sound one as it does not focus solely on physical infrastructure, i.e. the building of 
roads, bridges and other “hardware”, but also on the “software” of policy and institutional reform in the 
public  and  the  private  sectors. The  Strategic  Framework  also  attaches  importance  to  private  sector 
development, particularly in the fields of finance, banking and corporate governance. 
The  quality  of  the  “software”  of  a  developing  economy  is  precisely  what  international  investors  are 
looking  for  as  they  return  to  Asia.  At  a  time  when  Asian  economies  are  showing  incipient  signs  of 
recovery against an improved external environment, international capital flows are triggering back to 
the region but in a more cautious and discriminate manner than before. Investors are now a lot more 
selective  about  who  may  lend  to  and  where  they  put  their  money.  International  capital  flows  from 
OECD markets to Asia, in the form of bank credits, foreign direct investment and portfolio flows, have 
dropped significantly in the last few years. In the case of bank credits, total flows declined by about 
US$200 billion during the 1997-1998 period, although the decline has been at a more moderate pace 
in the last two years. 
In the light of this, it is important that the Bank plays a catalytic role in mobilising resources within and 
outside of the region. One approach to this challenge would be for the Bank to return to basics and 
improve the three channels of financial intermediation, namely, banking, equity and debt, through a 
number  of  measures.  First,  the  Bank  could  increase  investment  in  the  financial  infrastructure  in 
Asia.  Just  as  physical  infrastructure,  such  as  airports  and  highways,  facilitates  the  movement  of 
people  and  goods,  financial  infrastructure,  such  as  the  payment  and  settlement  systems  for  the 
banking and securities sectors, facilitates the safe and efficient movement of money. The importance 
of  a  robust  payment  and  settlement  system  in  this  region  is  underscored  by  the  events  of 
11 September. 
Secondly,  the  Bank  could  expand  the  technical  assistance  programme  to  assist  economies  in 
restructuring the banking sector. Small and medium-sized enterprises employ the most workers in 
Asia and they are mostly dependent on bank financing. The banking sector in Asia, devastated by the 
Asian financial crisis, has not fully recovered. Banks understandably are adopting a very conservative 
lending  strategy  towards  companies  with  a  lower  credit  rating,  such  as  Small  and  Medium-sized 
Enterprises. The Bank’s assistance in speeding up the banking sector reform would help SMEs to get 
back on their own feet, thereby reducing unemployment and poverty. 
Thirdly,  the  Bank  could  expand  assistance  in  building  up  the  institutional  capacity  of  individual 
economies to improve corporate governance in the private sector. Emphasis should also be made 
to improve the auditing, disclosure and transparency standards of publicly-listed companies. As seen 
BIS Review 31/2002 
 1
 in the Asian crisis and again in the Enron incident, good corporate governance is critical to restoring 
investor confidence in the equity markets. 
Fourthly and lastly, the Bank could assist with the development of the bond market in Asia. Clearly 
the  financial  intermediation  process  cannot  be  dominated  by  one  or  two  intermediaries.  Earlier,  in 
1990, when it was the banks in the United States that seized up as a consequence of a collapse in the 
value  of  real  estate  collateral,  the  capital  markets  were  able  to  substitute  for  the  loss  of  bank 
intermediation. In Asia, there is considerable room to develop a bond market to serve as a back-up in 
case of any systemic disruption in the banking and equity channels. 
In  this  connection,  I  fully  support  the  Bank’s  Private  Sector  Development  Strategy  which  aims  at 
catalyzing private investment through direct financing, credit guarantee and development of financial 
intermediaries. I also note that the Bank’s loan contribution to the finance sector has seen significant 
increase, from 3% in 2000 to 11% in 2001. 
Mr President, I am confident that under your leadership, the Bank will help Asia return to stable and 
sustainable growth and to enjoy prosperity. Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2002
