 A H E M Wellink: EU expansion and EMU 
Address by Dr A H E M Wellink, President of De Nederlandsche Bank and President of the Bank for 
International  Settlements,  at  the  Nederlands  Genootschap  voor  Internationale  Zaken,  Utrecht, 
13 March 2002. 
 Introduction 
"We  Europeans  must  create  the  basis  for  a  broader  and  deeper  community  among  peoples  long 
divided by bloody conflicts and lay the foundations for institutions which will give direction to a destiny 
henceforward shared". 
These  lofty  words,  formulated  over  fifty  years  ago,  can  be  found  in  the  preamble  to  the  Treaty 
establishing the European Coal and Steel Community. Although they may strike you as slightly passé, 
the underlying thought has lost none of its poignancy.  
• 
To begin with, we sense a moral and historical duty to unite a long-divided continent in these 
words.  For  the  first  time,  countries  from  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  will  be  joining  the 
European Union, as from 2004.  
Secondly,  the  Preamble  states  that  Europe  should  have  sufficient  institutional  power  and 
cohesion to give direction to a shared destiny. As you know, the European Convention which 
has just started is dealing with this issue; I understand that Dick Benschop will be here next 
week to elaborate.  
Finally, the text speaks not just of a duty to form a close-knit and strong Europe, but also of 
the right of every European to share in the fruits of such an undertaking.  
  We are aware that the tensions between these three principles have grown, as evidenced by renewed 
power  politics  at  the  national  level  and  growing  discrepancies  between  large  and  smaller  Member 
States. The economic heterogeneity within the EU will only be augmented by the accession of new 
Member States. It is this very heterogeneity which is exacerbating the discussion on rights and duties 
and the need for cohesion within the Union. 
It  is  with  these  consideration  in  mind  that  I  will  be  discussing  the  economic  background  to  the 
expansion of the EU, with a special focus on Economic and Monetary Union. The central theme in my 
address will be the specific challenges to economic policy which the accession countries will be facing 
over the next few years. Given these challenges, the accession countries should, in my view, adopt a 
gradual approach towards the euro; they should first be properly embedded in the existing process of 
economic policy coordination. 
Situation with regard to expansion 
Today,  twelve  countries  are  negotiating  accession  to  the  EU:  the  Visegrad  countries  in  Central 
Europe,  the  Baltic  states  and  three  Balkan  countries:  Bulgaria,  Rumania  and  Slovenia.  These 
countries  must  all  pass  what  is  known  as  the  Copenhagen  test.  This  test  was  drawn  up  by  the 
European Council in Copenhagen in 1993, and consists of three criteria:  
• 
To  begin  with  accession  countries  must  have  political  and  democratic  institutions  along 
western lines before they can even enter into negotiations. That is why Turkey, the thirteenth 
accession country, finds itself in an exceptional position.  
Secondly,  the  potential  Member  States  must  subscribe  to  the  objectives  of  European 
integration.  This  means,  among  other  things,  that  they  must  adopt  and  implement  all 
European legislation and rules, in other words the Acquis Communautaire. Exceptions, such 
as those made in the past for the British and the Danes with regard to participation in EMU, 
will not be allowed.  
Finally, the Copenhagen criteria also encompass an economic test: the accession countries 
must have a functioning market economy and be capable of coping with market forces within 
the  EU.  In  my  opinion,  this  means  they  must  be  able  to  create  a  stable  macro-economic 
  BIS Review 19/2002 
 1
 climate, where market operators and consumers can take decisions and develop initiatives in 
a  predictable  and  reliable  environment.  This  presupposes  powerful  institutions  and 
supervisory  authorities,  a  full-fledged  physical  and  human  infrastructure  and  a  developed 
financial sector. It also means that economic sectors must be sufficiently competitive to be 
able to operate within the single market.  
An indicator of such competitiveness is provided by trade relations with the European Union. Over the 
past ten  years, these relations have tightened considerably. The geographical reorientation and  the 
abolition of trade barriers since 1990 have contributed to an increase in the trade volume between the 
accession  countries  and  the  EU.  Today  about  67%  of  these  countries’  exports  go  to  EU  Member 
States. It is worth noting that trade between the same sectors has also grown materially. There can be 
no doubt that this is largely the result of vast foreign investment in these countries. The adoption of 
European  rules  may,  however,  impair  the  competitiveness  of,  for  instance,  the  agricultural  and 
industrial industries. 
In  its  latest  evaluation,  of  November  2001,  the  Commission  concluded  that  all  accession  countries 
except  Rumania  and  Bulgaria  have  a  functioning  market  economy.  Of  these  countries,  the  Baltic 
states,  Hungary,  Poland,  Slovakia,  Slovenia  and  the  Czech  Republic  are  considered  capable  of 
holding their own within the single market, provided they continue to reform. Malta and Cyprus already 
fully meet the economic criterion. 
Subsequent to this Commission report, the European Council of Laeken indicated in December that 
eight to ten countries will be joining the EU as from 2004. The chances of a big bang scenario, with all 
accession  countries  except  Bulgaria  and  Rumania  joining  at  the  same  time,  has  thus  gained  in 
probability. Politically, this would be the preferred route, eliminating tensions between countries joining 
soon or at a later stage and facilitating the ratification process of individual accession treaties. 
On the other hand, a big bang scenario should not conceal the persisting – and sometimes substantial 
–  structural  differences  between  accession  countries.  There  is  a  correlation  between  potential 
problems  in  the  economic  structure  and  the  stage  of  transition  reached.  The  consequent  specific 
policy  challenges  will  continue  to  demand  attention  even  after  accession,  and  notably  when 
participation in the Monetary Union is considered. 
Policy challenges for accession countries on the road to convergence 
Let me begin by pointing out that over the past ten years the countries in Central and Eastern Europe 
have  engaged  in  a  highly  successful  catching-up  exercise.  Painful  reforms  were  enacted,  often 
attended by rampant unemployment. The necessary institutions, such as central banks, were built up 
from scratch. At the same time, the transition process from a centrally planned to a market economy 
usually proved more laborious than expected. 
The economic downturn was such that only a few countries have managed to regain the GDP level 
recorded before 1990. The growth potential may exceed the average in the European Union, but so 
far the margin has been slim. For instance, the Czech central bank puts the potential growth rate of 
the  Czech  economy  at  2-3%  per  annum.  Income  differentials  vis-à-vis  the  European  Union  will 
consequently persist for some time to come. 
In  fact  the  policy  challenges  of  the  accession  countries  lie  in  furthering  structural  reforms  aimed  at 
raising the growth potential. Economically, structural and real convergence towards the EU interact. It 
is  a  lengthy  process,  involving  such  measures  as  introducing  free  enterprise  and  corporate 
governance, as well as setting up social security systems and fighting abuse and corruption. In this 
context,  the  Commission  recently  announced  an  action  plan  intended  to  boost  the  institutional 
capabilities of the accession countries. 
Looking at my own field, I see that banking supervision  will need to be stepped up. In general, the 
financial  sector  is  not  developing  in  line  with  the  economy  as  a  whole,  and  plays  no  more  than  a 
limited  role  in  the  financing  of  local  enterprises.  The  capitalisation  rate  of  banks  and  share/bond 
markets  in  Poland  and  Hungary  is  less  than  a  third  that  in  the  EU.  Financial  intermediation  must 
clearly be stimulated if economic development and growth are to be boosted. In parallel, supervisory 
powers will have to be strengthened further. 
Finally, several accession countries face specific sectoral problems. Here the restructuring of heavy 
industry in Poland and Slovakia comes to mind, as do the depreciation of bad debts in Slovakia and 
the Czech Republic and the transformation of the vast and unproductive agricultural sectors in Poland 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2002
 and the Baltic states. The transition to a modern economy will clearly be attended by further economic 
and hence social friction. 
All in all, it seems to me that these structural problems are taken into account in the Copenhagen test, 
but that the ultimate test is a general and political one. Copenhagen is consequently no guarantee for 
a high measure of structural convergence towards the current EU Member States. This need not pose 
problems  so  long  as  the  structural  and  administrative  challenges  are  really  acknowledged  in  an 
expanded Union, an issue I will deal with in greater detail later. 
As  noted,  the  prospective  Member  States  face  a  major  challenge  in  that  they  need  to  boost  their 
prosperity, in other words, achieve real convergence with the current EU. The differences in prosperity 
between the accession countries and the EU are exceptionally large. 
Per capita income in Poland is less than 20% of that in the EU. By comparison, per capita income in 
Portugal, the poorest EU Member State, comes out at over 50% of that in the EU. Slovenia is currently 
the only accession country where this level is roughly achieved. In order to equal the average of the 
poorest three EU Member States, Portugal, Greece and Spain, Poland would have to record average 
annual growth percentages of around eleven percent. 
Such real convergence poses several specifical challenges for economic policy. I shall try to explain 
this without going into too much theory.  
• 
First of all, achieving the necessary high growth rate goes hand in hand with rising prices. In 
other words: the process of convergence makes inflation go up. This upward pressure can 
be  partly  offset  through  appreciation  of  the  exchange  rate.  Generally  speaking,  a  flexible 
exchange  rate  regime  can  alleviate  the  pressure  on  the  economy  generated  by  transition 
and  catching  up,  for  instance,  when  capital  inflows  are  considerable.  Under  such 
circumstances, flexible regimes give less rise to speculative attacks on the currency.  
In addition, fast-growing transition countries are generally vulnerable to asymmetrical shocks 
(affecting  only  the  country  concerned).  The  Baltic  states,  for  instance,  were  seriously 
affected by the Russian crisis of 1998. Another case in point is the Czech banking crisis of 
the mid-1990s, which ultimately resulted in a foreign exchange crisis.  
Maybe we should see the achievement of EU membership as a shock in its own right. After 
all, the considerable administrative and financial burden of adopting and complying with the 
Acquis  Communautaire  and  of  the  confrontation  with  competition  in  the  single  market 
constitute a major change to economic functioning. This calls for a flexible policy.  
  Given these specific challenges to policy posed by transition and convergence, it is worth noting that 
those accession countries which have made the most progress, such as Hungary, the Czech Republic 
and Poland, have switched to more flexible exchange rate regimes in recent years. This allows them 
to  exercise  greater  influence  on  real  appreciation  and  strong  capital  inflows,  to  reduce  potential 
speculative attacks on the currency and to partially absorb shocks. 
Policy challenges and participation in EMU 
What  is  the  relationship  between  the  challenges  posed  by  structural  and  real  convergence  and 
participation  in  Economic  and  Monetary  Union?  As  you  may  know,  countries  acceding  to  the 
European Union may begin to consider changing over to the euro after two years. The question arises 
whether under the given circumstances early introduction of the euro is always advisable. It must be 
remembered that the instrument of exchange rate flexibility is no longer available to countries which 
have joined the monetary union. 
There is furthermore a considerable chance that a new Member State  eager to change over to the 
euro  quickly  may  find  the  euro  area-wide  monetary  conditions  incompatible  with  its  specific 
circumstances.  On  the  one  hand,  an  accession  country  which  has  been  successful  in  its  efforts  to 
catch  up  will  temporarily  face  structurally  higher  inflation  levels.  On  the  other,  such  a  country’s 
economic weight is too insignificant to affect the ECB’s monetary policy. In such a situation, negative 
real interest rates, overheating of the economy and erratic economic cycles may occur, making very 
heavy demands on macroeconomic management and the flexibility of the economy, notably the labour 
market. This brings us back to structural convergence and the requirements and implementation of the 
Copenhagen test. 
BIS Review 19/2002 
 3
 New Member States in the European process of policy coordination 
Given these structural and real challenges to policy, it would seem advisable to continue to comply 
with the essence of the Copenhagen test following accession to the EU. This would give the accession 
process the necessary flexibility if a big bang scenario were actually enacted, so that transition periods 
might be considered for specific parts of the Acquis Communautaire. 
In fact, such an approach would also allay the fears voiced by the Scientific Council for Government 
Policy  regarding  potential  erosion  of  the  single  market.  Their  central  concern  is  that  new  Member 
States  should  not  only  incorporate  all  90,000  pages  of  the  Acquis  Communautaire  in  their  national 
legislation, but actually implement them. 
[As a matter of fact, the European Union is already paying the necessary attention to transition- and 
catch-up-related policy challenges in the financial and economic field. Both the European Council of 
Ministers  of  Finance  and  the  Eurosystem  have  entered  into  active  consultations  with  the  accession 
countries to discuss diverse issues such as the monetary policy strategy, financial stability and fiscal 
policy.  During  these  consultations,  the  EU  addresses  not  just  the  challenges  inherent  in  joining  the 
Union, but also the manner in which successful convergence can be continued after accession.] 
A major element in this surveillance is exchange rate poliy. Sooner or later the new Member States will 
take  part  in  the  European  exchange  rate  mechanism,  ERM  II.  The  Treaty  provides  for  a  minimum 
participation  period  of  two  years  before  changeover  to  the  euro  can  be  considered.  It  cannot  be 
sufficiently  stressed  that  apart  from  this  requirement,  participation  in  the  mechanism  can  offer  the 
necessary stability and flexibility for a successful convergence process. 
The ERM offers stability in the form of a central parity anchor against the euro, and flexibility in the 
shape of ample fluctuation margins and the option of central parity adjustments. Participation in ERM 
II should therefore not be perceived as an obligatory hurdle on the road to the euro, as some policy-
makers in Central and Eastern Europe unfortunately do. 
[Actually, the financial and economic dialogue with the accession countries could be incorporated into 
the regular process of European policy coordination and surveillance,  with special emphasis on the 
monitoring of transition periods, specific challenges to policy and administrative capacity. Changeover 
to the euro will eventually follow, when a sufficient degree of structural convergence can guarantee the 
desired  price  stability  in  an  environment  marked  by  an  irrevocably  fixed  exchange  rate  and  a 
centralised monetary policy.] 
Conclusion 
Having set out the specific policy challenges facing the accession countries consequent on accession, 
transition and convergence, I am coming to the end of this address. Obviously these challenges will 
continue to present themselves in some way or another to newly joined Member States. 
In this context, I warned against premature changeover to the euro. The surrender of exchange rate 
flexibility  and  the  euro  area-wide  orientation  of  monetary  policy  may  not  be  compatible  with  the 
challenges posed by structural and real convergence. It is important that these challenges (continue 
to)  be  explicitly  acknowledged  in  the  regular  process  of  European  policy  coordination.  This  will 
guarantee the successful economic integration of new Member States into the Union. 
Expanding the EU is a duty which ensues from the essence of the European integration process. At 
the  same  time,  both  the  cohesion  of  Europe  and  the  rights  which  European  citizens  derive  from 
Europe must be guaranteed. In this light, it is imperative, and in the interests of all, that new Member 
States  succeed  in  catching  up  economically.  The  current  participants,  on  their  part,  bear  the 
responsibility of preparing the Union for expansion. 
Permit  me,  in  this  context,  to  issue  a  warning  before  the  Genootschap’s  next  discussion,  on  the 
institutional powers of a heterogeneous Europe. There can be no doubt that European interests are 
Dutch interests. This means that we must reform the single agricultural policy and structural policy in 
Europe  before  the  EU  expands  any  further.  Moreover,  it  would  only  be  natural  if  a  new  European 
regional policy were to address only the poorest regions in an extended Union. 
Dutch  interests  are  best  served  by  a  strong  role  for  the  European  Commission  and  the  European 
Parliament,  especially  in  an  extended,  more  heterogeneous  Union.  I  would  therefore  like  to  warn 
against a French form of intergovernmental centralisation – a gouvernement economique. If such a 
power policy-based authority were established, the position of the Netherlands could become bogged 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2002
 down  in the trade-off between the  interests of large  Member States,  with  the  Netherlands receiving 
financial compensations on the periphery. And the greater the number of countries joining the Union, 
the larger the periphery.  
BIS Review 19/2002 
 5
