 T T Mboweni: Globalisation and implications for monetary policy in South 
Africa  
Speech by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the Gala Banquet of the 
Independent News & Media International Advisory Board, Cape Town, 6 February 2002. 
 Introduction 
1. 
In  December  last  year,  I  was  invited  to  give  evidence  on  globalisation  before  the  Economic  Affairs 
Sub-Committee of the House of Lords, Westminster. I was naturally pleased  with the  invitation  and 
took advantage of the occasion to engage the Lords and Ladies about how globalisation impacts on 
the fortunes of developing countries or the so-called emerging markets.  
All of us use the term globalisation everyday and so do the Lords and Ladies at the House of Lords. 
Everyone has their understanding of what the term is all about and how globalisation impacts on all of 
us. The Lords and Ladies wanted to know from me what the positives and negatives of globalisation 
were on South Africa.  
This  evening,  at  this  gala  banquet  for  such  a  gathering  of  eminent  persons  of  the  International 
Advisory Board of the Independent media group, I can only highlight certain aspects of globalisation in 
order  to  contribute  to  the  table  discussions,  fully  aware  that  after  such  intensive  meetings  all  of  us 
want a relaxed evening.  
I  have  of  late  often  wondered  what  the  difference  in  substance  is  between  globalisation  and 
imperialism.  After  some  casual  analysis,  it  seems  that  the  two  differ  with  respect  to  colonisation, 
division of the world into spheres of influence and the intensity and level of the dominance of finance 
capital in the world economy.  
Globalisation  could  generally  be  taken  to  encompass  the  more  liberalised  and  increased  flow  of 
goods, services, capital and finance across national economies. Globalisation is therefore not a new 
phenomenon.  The  degree  of  economic  integration  in  the  world  has  been  rising  over  time. 
Technological  progress  has  improved  transportation  and  communications,  enhanced  information 
awareness  and  information  processing,  and  has  set  the  stage  for  new  products  and  innovations. 
These developments make it much easier for national markets to be globally integrated. 
Although these markets still do not form a global village, they have  become so interdependent that 
they  are  changing  the  environment  in  which  economic  activity  takes  place.  This  new  economic 
environment  has,  however,  also  brought  about  certain  disadvantages,  such  as  large  reversals  in 
international  capital  flows  and  financial  contagion  even  on  those  countries  with  sound  economic 
fundamentals. These developments have led to protests against "global capitalism". Demonstrations 
against  globalisation  are  particularly  strong  at  meetings  of  the  IMF, World  Bank,  G8  and  the World 
Economic Forum. Despite these demonstrations, global economic integration today is far greater than 
it has ever been and is likely to become even stronger in the coming years. 
The impact of globalisation on South Africa 
2. 
The re-entry of South Africa into the globalised financial markets and the opening up to international 
competition  led  to  a  sharp  increase  in  the  participation  by  non-residents  in  the  domestic  financial 
markets. Non-residents are now responsible for about one-third of the turnover on the JSE Securities 
Exchange  SA  and  approximately  one-eighth  of  the  volumes  on  the  South  African  Bond  Exchange. 
This has caused share and bond prices, as well as the exchange rate of the rand to be increasingly 
influenced by developments in the rest of the world – particularly in emerging markets. 
These transactions by non-residents contributed materially to substantial increases in financial sector 
activity. Turnover on the  South  African Bond Exchange, for example, increased from R2,0 trillion in 
1995 to R12,4 trillion in 2001, while the total value of shares traded on the stock exchange rose from 
R63 billion to R606 billion over the same period. In the foreign exchange market volumes increased 
from a net average daily turnover of US$2,7 billion in 1995 to US$9,6 billion in 2001. Market activity 
was  still  fairly  brisk  in  November  and  December  last  year,  with  the  net  average  daily  turnover 
averaging US$8 billion.  
BIS Review 8/2002 
 1
 Integration  into  the  world  financial  markets  required  a  major  restructuring  of  the  institutional 
arrangements  in  the  South  African  capital  markets.  The  JSE  Securities  Exchange  SA  introduced 
reforms to provide for corporate ownership, foreign ownership of stockbrokers, dual capacity trading, 
negotiated  commissions,  and  electronic  screen  trading.  The  securities  exchange  is  continuing  to 
improve  its  facilities  by  providing  for  the  immobilisation  and  dematerialisation  of  shares,  and  for 
improved clearing and settlement arrangements. 
These  changes  and  the  substantial  increase  in  portfolio  investments  and  trade  finance  by  non-
residents  contributed  to  a  large  inflow  of  capital  but  also  resulted  in  greater  volatility  in  the  capital 
movements between South Africa and the rest of the world. A nearly consistent net outflow of capital 
of R48,3 billion in the period from 1984 to the middle of 1994 was turned around to a net inflow of 
capital  of  R61,3  billion  from  1995  to  2000.  However,  this  inflow  of  capital  fluctuated  sharply  from 
R16,6 billion in 1995 to R3,0 billion in 1996, R21,3 billion in 1997, R8,8 billion in 1998, R29,3 billion in 
1999 and R8,2 billion in 2000.  
The  large  inflow  of  funds  over  the  past  few  years  has  enabled  the  Reserve  Bank  to  increase  the 
official reserves of the country from the equivalent of 6 weeks’ worth of imports of goods and services 
in  1994  to  20  weeks’  worth  at  the  end  of  September  2001.  The  increase  in  the  country's  official 
reserves in recent years also made it possible to substantially relax exchange controls. 
South  Africa's  re-entry  into  the  international  economy  and  structural  changes  implemented  in  the 
country  provided  a  platform  for  improved  economic  growth.  An  uninterrupted  series  of  17  quarterly 
increases in the real gross domestic product came to an end in the third quarter of 1998 when total 
real  value  added  in  the  economy  declined  at  an  annualised  rate  of  12  per  cent.  This  setback  was 
short-lived  and  aggregate  output  recovered  in  subsequent  quarters.  For  the  period  1994  to  2000, 
growth in the real gross domestic product averaged 2½ per cent. 
Trade  reforms  and  the  restructuring  of  some  domestic  assets  increased  domestic  competition. 
However,  the higher growth in domestic production  was achieved  with  only  a  moderate increase in 
total employment, while employment in the formal non-agricultural sectors continued to decline – an 
issue of extreme concern to all of us.  
The re-integration of the South African economy was accompanied by shifts in the economic structure 
of the country. The relative share of agriculture in gross domestic product declined from 5 per cent in 
1994 to 4 per cent in 2000. The share of mining in  gross domestic product therefore declined from 
7½ per cent in 1994 to 6 per cent in 2000. 
Although the contribution of the manufacturing sector to GDP has declined from 21 per cent in 1994 to 
18,5 per cent in 2000, the real value added by this sector grew by an annual average of 2 per cent for 
the same period. The sector was buoyed by strong consumption spending from 1994 to 1997. Trade 
reform  increased  manufacturers'  access  to  international  markets,  but  at  the  same  time  increasingly 
exposed  the  sector  to  competition.  The  rollout  of  infrastructure  to  previously  disadvantaged 
communities ensured continued growth in the electricity, gas and water sector since 1994.  
The tertiary sector's share of gross domestic product increased significantly from 60 per cent in 1994 
to 65 per cent in 2000. This growth can be attributed to an expansion of the transport sector, improved 
telecommunications infrastructure and growth in the financial and business services sector. Growth in 
the latter sub-sector was driven by the intermediation of large capital inflows, a substantial investment 
in the local market by foreign financial institutions and an increased cross-border provision of financial 
services. 
Challenges of globalisation in South Africa 
3. 
Globalisation offers people the opportunity to improve the quality of their lives through increased trade 
and financial integration among countries, lower communication and transport costs and technological 
change. However, these opportunities are mainly available to those people who are highly educated or 
have  highly  developed  skills  and  have  access  to  well-functioning  labour  and  capital  markets.  Many 
people are not as privileged and are therefore excluded. South Africa's challenge has been to ensure 
that the marginalised parts of the community are included in the process of growth and development. 
Government’s  key  priorities  have  therefore  been  investing  in  people  through  better  schooling,  skills 
development,  extending  municipal  infrastructure,  targeting  support  for  industrial  clusters,  small 
business  development,  strategic  trade  linkages,  extending  electrification  and  telecommunication 
networks. 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2002
 Globalisation and monetary policy 
4. 
The  reintegration  of  South  Africa  into  the  world  economy  and  the  liberalisation  of  financial  markets 
also have important implications for structured finance. As Bill McDonough president of the New York 
Federal Reserve Bank pointed out in 1998: "The technology for processing information and making 
this  information  widely  available  has  fundamentally  altered  the  way  the  world  channels  saving  into 
investment. No longer does the global economy rely primarily on loans from commercial banks to meet 
its financing and investment needs. Rather, more than ever before, the global economy of today looks 
to funds from the fixed-income and related capital markets to intermediate its credit needs. Because 
the  global  capital  markets  have  become  so  important  in  the  credit  intermediation  process,  the 
economic well-being of us all depends on the orderly flow of funds in these markets. The flow of these 
funds, in turn, increasingly relies on price signals generated by trading activity that takes place daily in 
these  markets.  The  reliance  on  secondary  market  trading  for  price  discovery  constitutes  the 
fundamental difference between funds from securities markets and loans from banks." 
This change in the way that savings are channelled to investments has resulted in greater volatility in 
international capital movements. Recent non-resident transactions on our Bond Exchange are a clear 
reflection of this greater volatility in international capital flows. In such a situation, it is more important 
than ever before to create and maintain a sound environment for investment in a country. This makes 
it more imperative for monetary policy to pursue clearly stated objectives. Increasingly throughout the 
world, central banks are pursuing price stability as their basic policy focus. Where countries have high 
rates of inflation which are out of line with the rest of the world, disruptive capital flows could occur 
because of fears of currency misalignments.  
The closer integration of the world economy has therefore focused the ultimate objective of monetary 
policy and made it even more important to attain this objective. It should, however, also be realised 
that  such  a  policy  stance  does  not  provide  unconditional  protection  against  speculative  capital 
outflows. External economic shocks or perceived poor policy measures can still trigger a reversal in 
capital movements. Monetary policy cannot prevent these reversals. International investors make their 
decisions on the basis of a wide variety of developments, including price stability. The best approach 
that central banks can follow is to pursue financial stability in a transparent and accountable manner 
so that they can at least forestall any uncertainties in this regard. 
Although the objective of monetary policy has been better focussed within the context of globalisation, 
the integrated world economy has resulted in a more complex mechanism for transmitting monetary 
policy.  The  relationship  between  changes  in  interest  rates, money  supply  and  inflation  has  become 
less clear under these new conditions, compared with the period when South Africa was more isolated 
from external influences. As a result of large international capital flows, the effects of policy changes 
are being transmitted to a greater extent through critical indicators such as bond yields and exchange 
rates. 
These changes in the transmission mechanism of monetary policy have reduced the credibility of the 
money supply as an intermediate guideline for policy. The integration of financial markets and financial 
innovations  made  the  demand-for-money  function  less  stable.  This  was  clearly  reflected  in  a 
consistent decline in the income velocity of circulation of M3 of about 13 per cent from 1994 to 2000. 
The  income  velocity  of  circulation  of  M3  continued  to  decline  strongly  in  the  first  three  quarters  of 
2001. The money supply accordingly became a less reliable anchor for monetary policy. 
Volatile capital movements further complicate the transmission mechanism under floating  exchange 
rates,  because  of  the  impact  that  exchange  rate  changes  have  on  the  foreign  transactions  of  a 
country. In a closed economy, the transmission mechanism runs from increases in the repo rate and 
other  short-term  interest  rates  through  to  longer-term  interest  rates  and  asset  prices  and  then  to 
aggregate  demand  and  prices.  The  open  economy  version  of  the  transmission  mechanism  under 
floating  exchange  rates  runs  from  interest  rates,  to  nominal  exchange  rates,  to  the  absolute  and 
relative prices of tradeable goods and eventually to the prices of non-tradeable goods. 
In  view  of  this  more  complicated  transmission  mechanism  in  a  reintegrated  global  economy,  the 
Reserve Bank has had to reconsider the framework that it applied in pursuing price stability. Informal 
inflation targeting using intermediate money supply guidelines was obviously no longer suitable in the 
changed  international  environment.  In  February  2000  the  authorities  therefore  decided  to  adopt 
inflation  targeting  as  the  formal  monetary  policy  framework  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank.  In 
addition, considerable effort was made to increase the transparency of monetary policy. 
BIS Review 8/2002 
 3
 Conclusion 
5. 
Global economic integration has led to new and more complex relationships between macroeconomic 
variables. There have been significant changes in innovation and productivity which call for revisions 
of the existing economic models. Global economic integration allows new macroeconomic conditions 
to be transmitted rapidly and extensively through new channels. Central banks increasingly confront 
new  and  rapidly  changing  technologies  and  methods  of  payment.  There  are  several  kinds  of 
uncertainty and, therefore, different types of information are needed. These include information on the 
current state of the economy and information on how the monetary policy instruments affect inflation 
and economic activity.  
From the above discussion it is apparent that although the reintegration of South Africa in the world 
economy  has  brought  many  advantages  to  South  Africa,  it  has  also  forced  more  discipline  on  the 
management of the economy and on business enterprises. In an international economy any doubts 
about  the  appropriateness  of  economic  policy,  quickly  become  apparent  in  international  investors' 
decisions. Ill-judged economic policy measures can lead to painful adjustments forced on economies 
through the actions of participants in the markets. 
I remain optimistic about the benefits our country will derive from engaging in the globalisation process 
and the constructive role that monetary policy will play in this process by ensuring financial stability.  
We  are  also  witnessing  the  global  acceptance  by  political  leaders  of  the  independence  of  central 
banks as a critical factor for credible monetary policy. There are greater responsibilities on all sides. 
Just as the public sector is being called upon to change and improve codes of good practice, so too 
the private sector has to follow suit by complying with these international norms and codes of good 
practice. 
I thank you.  
4 
 BIS Review 8/2002
