 Bank of Japan’s April report of recent economic and financial developments1 
Bank of Japan, 12 April 2002. 
 The Bank’s view2 
Japan’s economy still continues to deteriorate as a whole, but the pace has moderated somewhat. 
With  regard  to  final  demand,  net  exports  (real  exports  minus  real  imports)  are  gradually  starting  to 
increase while overseas economies are clearly gaining momentum for recovery. Meanwhile, business 
fixed  investment  continues  to  decrease  and  private  consumption  remains  weak.  Moreover,  housing 
investment remains sluggish and public investment is also declining.  
Final demand overall is still weak, but exports—which have a large impact on production—are starting 
to  turn  up  recently.  Also,  inventory  adjustment  is  progressing  further  in  many  industries.  Reflecting 
these  developments,  industrial  production  appears  to  have  stopped  declining  and  also,  the 
deterioration  in  business sentiment of firms, mainly in manufacturing, has almost ceased. However, 
firms maintain their stance on reducing personnel expenses given persistently strong excessiveness in 
employment. Therefore, employment and income conditions of households continue to worsen, with 
the  ongoing  decrease  in  the  number  of  employees  and  the  growing  trend  in  the  rate  of  decline  in 
wages. 
Turning to the outlook, as for exporting conditions, the synchronized inventory adjustment in IT-related 
goods  worldwide  is  coming  to  an  end  except  for  some  goods  such  as  networking  equipment. 
Overseas economies, mainly in the U.S. and East Asia, are likely to follow a recovery path. Moreover, 
the yen is at low levels compared to last autumn. Under these circumstances, exports are expected to 
pick up moderately for the time being.  
Meanwhile,  with  respect  to  domestic  demand,  business  fixed  investment  is  expected  to  follow  a 
downtrend  for  a  while,  judged  mainly  from  leading  indicators  and  firms’  investment  plans.  Private 
consumption  is  also  likely  to  remain  lackluster  mainly  due  to  worsening  employment  and  income 
conditions.  In  addition,  government  spending  is  basically  projected  to  continue  a  downward  trend. 
While the recovery in exports and the weakness in domestic demand are mixed, industrial production 
is expected to remain almost flat for the time being. As for the further outlook, assuming that exports 
will  continue  to  recover  steadily,  the  economy  as  a  whole  will  eventually  hit  bottom  through  the 
increase in production and rebound in corporate profits, mainly in manufacturing.  
Overall, the economic deterioration in Japan is projected to stop steadily, as production stops declining 
and then turns up reflecting the improvement in exporting conditions. Still, the rebound in exports is 
expected to be modest for a while and there also remain various uncertain factors regarding the pace 
of recovery in overseas economies. In addition, domestic demand continues to be weak for some time. 
Consequently, it will take quite a while for the economy as a whole to stop declining evidently. While 
the  economy  continues  to  be  in  a  fragile  state,  continuous  attention  should  be  paid  to  the  fact  that 
unstable movements in the foreign and domestic financial markets are apt to have a negative impact 
on the real economy.  
With regard to prices, import prices are increasing reflecting the depreciation of the yen since around 
the end of last year and the rise in international commodity prices. The decline in domestic wholesale 
prices  is  contracting  against  the  background  of  the  increase  in  import  prices  and  the  progress  in 
inventory  adjustment.  Consumer  prices  continue  to  decline  with  the  persisting  effects  of  the  fall  in 
crude oil prices in the latter half of last year, while the prices of imported products and their substitutes 
keep on falling. Corporate service prices continue to decline. 
As for the conditions surrounding price developments, the depreciation of the yen from around the end 
of last year and the rise in international commodity prices including crude oil are regarded as factors to 
                                                      
1   This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
April 10 and 11, 2002. 
2   The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on April 10 and 11 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 23/2002 
 1
 support prices for the time being. However, since domestic demand is projected to remain weak for a 
time, the balance between supply and demand is expected to keep exerting downward pressure on 
prices. Furthermore, factors such as the ongoing technological innovations in machinery, deregulation, 
and the streamlining of distribution channels will restrain prices. In addition, the growing trend in the 
rate of decline in wages may also work as a factor to push prices downward, mainly in services prices 
which are apt to be influenced by this aspect. Overall, prices are expected to follow a gradual declining 
trend  for  the  time  being.  Moreover,  given  the  high  degree  of  uncertainty  regarding  future  economic 
developments,  the  possibility  that  weak  demand  will  further  intensify  downward  pressure  on  prices 
continuously warrants careful monitoring. 
As for the financial market, in the short-term money markets, the end-of-March outstanding balance of 
the current accounts at the Bank of Japan was 27.6 trillion  yen as the Bank provided further ample 
liquidity to the money market toward the fiscal year-end in reaction to the increase in liquidity demand. 
Under  this  condition,  the  overnight  call  rate,  including  transactions  beyond  the  fiscal  year-end,  is 
steadily  moving  around  zero  percent.  Moreover,  interest  rates  on  term  instruments  have  been 
declining since late March when pressures on fund-raising beyond the fiscal year-end alleviated. 
Yields on long-term government bonds are mainly  moving around  1.4  percent recently.  As for  yield 
spreads  between  private  bonds  (bank  bonds  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government  bonds,  the 
widening  since  last  fall  has  been  constrained  recently,  but  spreads  between  bonds  with  low  credit 
ratings and government bonds still remain wide. 
Stock prices are level on the whole. 
In the foreign exchange market, the yen is currently traded in the range of 130-133 yen to the U.S. 
dollar. 
With  regard  to  corporate  finance,  private  banks  are  becoming  more  cautious  in  extending  loans  to 
firms  with  high  credit  risks  while  they  continue  to  be  more  active  in  extending  loans  to  blue-chip 
companies.  The  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions  as  perceived  by  firms  are  becoming  more 
severe.  In  corporate  bonds  and  CP  markets,  the  fund-raising  conditions  are  generally  favorable 
particularly  for  firms  with  high  credit  ratings,  but  the  issuing  environment  for  those  with  low  credit 
ratings continues to be severe on the whole. 
Credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  continues  to  follow  a  downtrend  mainly  because  firms  are 
decreasing their business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline at about 2 percent on a year-
on-year  basis.  Meanwhile,  the  amount  outstanding  of  corporate  bonds  issued  is  growing  at  around 
2-3 percent on a year-on-year basis. The year-on-year growth rate of the amount outstanding of CP 
issued continues to decline, although the amount is still well above the previous year’s level.  
The  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  the  monetary  base  in  March  increased  further  due  to  heightened 
liquidity demand for the fiscal year-end, showing a significant increase of over 30 percent. The year-
on-year growth rate of the money stock (M2 + CDs) remained around 3.5-4.0 percent.  
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole, although market funding 
costs for some firms are rising somewhat. 
Overall,  the  recent  financial  environment  remains  extremely  easy  on  the  whole  in  terms  of  money 
market  conditions.  However,  the  fund-raising  conditions  of  firms  with  high  credit  risks,  especially  of 
small firms, are gradually becoming more severe as the stance of investors toward taking credit risks 
remains severe and the lending attitudes of private banks are becoming more cautious. Hence, the 
developments  in  the  behavior  of  financial  institutions  and  corporate  financing  continue  to  require 
closer monitoring. 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2002
