 Klaus Liebscher: The euro and European integration – an Austrian viewpoint  
Luncheon speech by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian Nationalbank, at the International 
Bankers Forum, Luxembourg, 9 April 2002. 
 Introduction 
It  was  with  great  pleasure  that  I  accepted  your  kind  invitation  to  address  such  a  distinguished 
audience  and  to  speak  about  the  Austrian  experience  with  European  integration.  In  former  times, 
Luxembourg has had a very turbulent past - often triggered by the Habsburgs - with countries taking 
turns in slicing pieces off the Grand Duchy. After World War II, however, Luxembourg together with the 
other founding countries of what is now the European Union (EU) symbolizes the building of a united 
Europe carried out in a spirit of negotiation and dialogue.  
For  me  as  an  Austrian  citizen,  Luxembourg  also  stands  for  all  of  the  benefits  especially  smaller 
countries  can  derive  from  the  EU.  It  may  still  be  the  tiniest  state  of  the  EU  according  to  size  but 
Luxembourg is also one of its most prosperous ones. The Grand Duchy is one of the three institutional 
centers of the Union and very often feeds new elements into the debate of and about the EU and as a 
result helps bigger countries to reach agreement. Thus, Luxembourg enjoys an influence  in the EU 
beyond its small size and is an example of European co-operation at every level. 
Successful euro changeover 
Since  March  1  of  this  year,  all  legacy  currencies  of  the  euro  have  been  phased  out  and  new  euro 
banknotes and coins have become the legal tender in 12 of the 15 Member States of the European 
Union (EU). Today, more than 300 million citizens in Europe share the same currency. The process of 
monetary  integration  as  laid  down  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty  has  found  its  tangible  expression  and 
culminating  point  in  the  everyday  life  of  the  citizens  of  the  euro  area.  From  my  point  of  view  this 
historic cash changeover has been completed very successfully with the broad - and often enthusiastic 
- support of the European citizens.   
The changeover of the old national banknotes and coins of the 12 countries of the euro area has been 
a highly challenging project - and its success has far exceeded our expectations. This is also true for 
Austria,  where  we  had  an  exceptionally  successful  cash  changeover.  The  Austrian  population 
accepted the new currency with unforeseen enthusiasm from the very beginning.  
Before  the  introduction  of  euro  banknotes  and  coins,  the  public    -  not  only  in  Austria  -  had  some 
concern  about  potential  inflationary  effects  due  to  the  rounding  up  of  prices,  long  queues  in  shops 
because of the new banknotes and coins or a reluctance to purchase consumer goods due to the new 
price levels. None of that in fact happened to a significant extent. 
As far it can be assessed today the contribution of the cash changeover to the increase in inflation in 
January and February is negligible. Indeed, rounding happened in both directions, up and down. And 
so far we have very little evidence of effects of the cash changeover on the average level of prices, 
neither  in  the  euro  area  nor  in  Austria.  This,  of  course,  will  not  make  us  complacent,  and  we  will 
continue to look vigilantly for the possibility of an impact on inflation rates in the months ahead. Over 
the medium term, however, downward pressures on prices should predominate within the euro area. 
The elimination of exchange rate risks and lower transaction costs - visible in the narrowing of bid/ask-
spreads  -  which  already  followed  the  introduction  of  the  virtual  euro  in  1999  have  conferred 
tremendous  advantages  on  European  businesses  and  consumers.  Now  we  have  the  chance  to 
promote the creation of more transparent markets and new opportunities for businesses. The euro will 
force firms to attain higher levels of efficiency and competitiveness. In return, companies are profiting 
due to bigger markets, improving financing conditions and a new variety of financing options. 
Austria’s experience with European economic and monetary integration 
This leads me to Austria’s position in the European monetary integration and to a brief review of our 
experience with the first three years of EMU: 
BIS Review 23/2002 
 1
            Following the turmoil and privation of World War II and the post-War period and the ensuing 
devaluation  of  the  Austrian  schilling,  Austria  chose  the  right  policy  mix  to  successfully 
reestablish monetary and economic stability and has managed to uphold this stability ever 
since.  This  process  was  a  vital  lesson  for  Austria  in  more  than  one  respect:  An  incisive 
monetary reform - and a restrictive economic policy course - were required to contain high 
post-War  inflation,  as  wage  and  price  agreements  no  longer  proved  sufficient  to  keep 
inflation at bay.  
The Federal Act on the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, which was adopted in 1955, reflected 
this  negative  experience  with  inflation:  it  contained  provisions  to  grant  the  OeNB  greater 
independence  and  to  oblige  the  OeNB  to  pursue  price  stability  long  before  these  notions 
became common currency for central banking legislation around the world.  
When the Bretton Woods System broke down for good in 1973, Austria had to decide on a 
monetary  regime  for  the  future,  and  in  the  years  that  followed,  Austria  opted  for  what 
became known as the hard currency regime.  
Long  before  the  concept  of  stabilizing  expectations  became  a  tenet  of  the  European 
Monetary System (EMS) at the European level, Austria's monetary policymakers chose an 
external  nominal  anchor  and  a  cooperative,  consensus-oriented  monetary,  income  and 
structural policy approach. In view of our positive experience with the hard currency policy, 
the advantages of deeper monetary integration were especially manifest for Austria.  
The careful sequencing of capital movement liberalisation in Austria between 1986 and 1991 
demonstrate  that  foreign  exchange  transactions  can  be  liberalized  smoothly  and  without 
entailing  monetary  crises  and  systemic  instability  on  financial  markets  –  provided  the 
domestic authorities have adequately prepared the process and that a country's economic 
fundamentals are sound.  
Austria  encountered  no  difficulties  when  it  joined  the  EMS  at  the  beginning  of  1995,  as  it 
continued to peg the schilling unilaterally to the Deutsche mark, and this link was tighter than 
the fluctuation bands within the EMS. 
This  success  story  of  the  stability-oriented  monetary  policy  culminated  in  a  smooth 
irrevocable fixing of the exchange rates of the euro area currencies on January 1, 1999, at 
the onset of Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union. 
But  Austrian  economic  policymakers  accomplished  another  important  step  in  the  past 
decades  when  they  succeeded  in  opening  up  Austria's  markets  and  in  subjecting  the 
economy to international competition.  
Nevertheless, in Austria government intervention efforts remained strong far into the 1980s 
and  even  1990s,  when  other Western  nations  had  already  scaled  back  state  intervention. 
But the reorientation, which had begun slowly in the 1980s, gathered speed from the mid-
1990s.  
Overall,  Austria's political  and  economic integration into the  international community made 
steady progress, which represented an additional aspect of the reorientation.  
With economic ties becoming stronger and with the process of European integration gaining 
speed, the realization that Austria could not afford to remain on the political sidelines finally 
clinched  the  breakthrough  to  EU  membership  in  1995.  Austria  thus  achieved  its  goal  of 
having a say in EU development rather than being a mere observer. This principle manifests 
itself  best  in  Economic  and  Monetary  Union,  the  area  in  which  European  integration  has 
progressed furthest, in that every member of the Governing Council of the ECB participates 
in  the  monetary  policy  decisions  of  the  Council  according  to  the  "one  person,  one  vote" 
formula.  
Austria and EU integration – a comparison 
If we compare these post-War developments in Austria with the progress in European integration, we 
will observe analogies as well as disparities. 
• 
With a learning curve steepening over the years, Austrian and EU policymakers alike came 
to emphasize monetary stability as an economic policy priority. In other words, drawing on 
2 
 BIS Review 23/2002
          many years of experience, European countries have learned to orient their monetary policies 
on price stability, and countries that pursued an exchange rate anchor did so entirely without 
an autonomous monetary policy.  
Hence years of practical experience and preparation preceded actual Monetary Union, which 
is  based  on  an  independent  system  of  central  banks  whose  policy  is  oriented  on  price 
stability and on irrevocably fixed exchange rates between the participating countries. With its 
“hard currency policy”, Austria acted as a trailblazer for these developments. It is interesting 
to note that both the EU and Austria deliberately employed monetary policy as a catalyst for 
economic reform. The hard currency policy, which represented a structural stimulus, as well 
as nominal convergence in the EMS and later in EMU have been such driving forces. Even 
so,  Austria  and  the  other  EU  Member  States  recognized  the  limits  this  strategy  came  up 
against in a world of liberalized capital transactions.  
The logical response was to back market sanction mechanisms by explicit rules, above all in 
the area of fiscal policy, by coordinating wage policies and by orchestrating structural policy 
measures.    
This leads me to the second aspect of my comparison between developments in Austria and 
the progress of European integration, namely the attitude toward free, open markets.  
Austria  shares  a  basic  scepticism  toward  giving  market  forces  too  free  a  rein  with  many 
continental  European  states.  Among  other  things,  this  scepticism  is  expressed  in  the 
emphasis on a "European model" for the economy, which differs from the "Anglo-American 
model" of a free market economy. Nevertheless, it is intriguing that in the past one and a half 
decades  the  EU  has  been  shifting  steadily  toward  the  free-market  concept.  This  may  be 
seen against the background of "eurosclerosis," a catchword of the 1970s and a condition 
which lasted into the 1980s, of the unrelenting rise in unemployment in the 1980s and 1990s, 
of stepped-up globalization, but also of the economic prowess the United States exhibited in 
the 1990s.  
The  EU's  Single  Market  program  and  the  economic  policy  programs  designed  to  support 
Economic and Monetary Union clearly point the way toward a strengthening of market forces 
and a restriction of discretionary macropolicies. Like many EU Member States, Austria took 
this  path  toward  a  market economy  not  so  much  by  choice  as  by  the  need  to  respond  to 
external demands.  
The  strength  of  the  link  between  the  European  economic  policy  reform  process  and 
monetary  policy  entails the risk that not meeting publicly  declared targets  will damage the 
currency's standing. Against this background, it is crucial for the future development of EMU 
and  the  euro  that  the  stability-oriented  foundation  of  EMU,  e.g.  the  absolute  priority  that 
monetary policy accords price stability or the importance of the Stability  and Growth Pact, 
continues to be upheld. 
A third angle for a comparison is the approach to European integration itself.  
After World War II, the European "core countries" very quickly occupied themselves with the 
project  of  European  unification,  driven  by  the  ambition  to  promote  reconciliation  through 
integration and cooperation. Phases of expansion and deepening followed the foundation of 
the European Union at various intervals.  
Considering  that  European  integration  is  quite  a  difficult  process  on  the  whole  and  that 
individual  Member  States'  conceptions  of  the  future  of  the  Union  diverge,  the  tenacious 
progress of this integration process is indeed extraordinary. 
Austria entered the European integration process at a relatively late stage. While the effort to 
join a larger Europe - first as a member of the European Free Trade Association EFTA, and 
later  as  an  EC  member  -  was  soon  part  of  Austria's  integration  program,  whole-hearted 
participation in European integration was a while in coming. I believe that now that Austria is 
a member of both the EU and the euro area, it has taken this decisive integration step. The 
enlargement of the European Union – a step of great significance for Europe and for Austria 
–  will  place  our  country  even  more  squarely  at  the  heart  of  this  integrated  Europe, 
geographically speaking.  
BIS Review 23/2002 
 3
 Opportunities and challenges for Austria’s economy 
From the Austrian economic perspective, EMU is tantamount to a 35-fold increase in the size of the 
common  currency  area  to  over  300  million  consumers.  This  opens  up  new  perspectives  and  the 
opportunity  to  proactively  address  the  challenges  of  globalization  and  heightened  competition.  The 
new framework benefits first and foremost the small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) in industry 
and trade, the pillars of growth and employment in the Austrian economy.  
To illustrate the change, according to the most recent figures, some 60% of Austria's imports came 
from  euro  area  countries  in  2001,  and  some  56%  of  its  exports  were  delivered  to  the  euro  area. 
Foreign trade with the euro area has, of course, been greatly facilitated by the single currency and by 
cost savings as a result, above all because there is no longer any exchange rate risk and because 
transaction costs are lower. Austria is doing very well in international markets: At nearly 34%, Austria 
recorded the highest export share of GDP ever in 2000. This ratio had come to only 25% when the 
country joined the EU and had risen to just under 30% before participation in EMU. 
Not only did EMU and the euro improve the external economic environment, it also required business 
and  industry  to  make  incisive  operational  and  technical  changes.  Companies  had  to  establish  new 
strategic  positions  on  their  markets  and  had  to  adjust  to  the  more  intense  competition,  which  has 
shifted more and more to quality considerations.  
The euro and the Single Market have boosted product and service innovation in many areas and have 
thus added to Europe's competitive strength.  
Turning  briefly  to  the  developments  during  the  first  three  years  of  EMU,  they  bear  impressive 
testimony  to  the  fact  that  the  smooth  interplay  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  provides  a  solid 
foundation  which  was  well  suited  to  weathering  the  economic  policy  challenges  of  this  period. 
Monetary Union and the euro have kept the euro area countries from being exposed to harmful intra-
European exchange rate tensions of the type that many countries used to suffer when external shocks 
occurred.  Some  of  you  may  have  not  so  fond  memories  of  the  EMS  crises  of  the  years  1992  and 
1993.  It  has  become  quite  obvious  that  Austria's  inclusion  in  the  stability-oriented  Economic  and 
Monetary  Union  has  protected  our  country  from  negative  shocks  much  more  adequately  than  was 
possible under past regimes. 
Beyond EMU – further political integration and enlargement 
EMU represents a quantum leap in integration, a key step in completing the Single European Market. 
Of course,  competition  is  most  pronounced  within  EMU  itself.  Monetary  Union  -  and  only  Monetary 
Union - guarantees that the Single Market can utilize the full potential of its economic power on the 
basis  of  a  stable  common  currency  and  that  the  growing  pressure  of  international  competition  on 
Europe is buffered. 
The deepening of the European Union that accompanies EMU and the euro is therefore not simply the 
most  suitable  response  to  internationalization  and  globalization,  but  also  a  bulwark  against  any 
maneuvers to reverse liberalization in Europe. Deepening of European integration is crucial especially 
for small open economies like Austria and Luxembourg. 
By  introducing  the  euro,  European  economic  policymakers  have  assumed  the  responsibility  for 
exploiting  the  opportunities  and  for  addressing  the  challenges  this  move  represents  for  Austria  or 
Luxembourg and for Europe as a whole.  
We  must  continue  to  observe  the  provisions  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  and  we  must 
demonstrate  the  ability  to  solve  integration  and  structural  policy  problems  to  boost  our  international 
competitiveness. 
The  single  currency  holds  out  the  promise  of  fostering  European  integration  in  areas  far  beyond 
Monetary  Union.  Of  course,  this  chance  manifests  that  there  are  many  questions  about  how  far 
political and institutional integration is to progress. We will probably have to wait until the events of the 
next few years provide us with the answers to these questions.  
What is certain, however, is that EMU is a harbinger of political union within Europe - as history shows, 
national  territories  and  currency  areas  are,  as  a  rule,  identical.  For  this  reason  it  is  fundamentally 
important that national interests be overcome in favour of a single European policy and that the co-
operation  between  Member  States  on  a  common  foreign  and  security  policy  and  internal  security 
policy be reinforced.  
4 
 BIS Review 23/2002
 I therefore, welcome the EU’s special constitutional convention. The assembled politicians and officials 
have the task of proposing a concept of the EU which will match our continental dimension and the 
requirements  of  the  21st  century.  I  acknowledge  that  this  convention  is  a  bold  experiment  in 
consultative democracy.  
However, we need to define what kind of institutional arrangements will be prerequisite to meet our 
aspirations, what kind of society and what kind of economy we want to build. I also do not think that 
the  real  question  is  of  federalism  versus  national  sovereignty.  The  EU  is  federal  already.  It  divides 
power  between  different  levels  of  authority.  The  questions  now  are  over  the  most  effective  and 
legitimate  way  to  divide  that  power,  so  that  national  sovereignty  is  preserved  within  an  integrated 
system. If those questions can be resolved, Europe will earn the voice it seeks on the world stage. 
This, however, does not mean that we have to give up our national identities. Their roots go very deep, 
and  it is  absolutely in the  European Union's best interest to preserve specific  national  and regional 
cultural  traits.  "Unity  through  diversity"  is  certainly  an  advantage  Europe  has  compared  to  other 
regions and economic areas. I am confident that - if we succeed in tapping the creative and problem-
solving potential of Europe's diversity to work on reaching common goals - Europe and its countries 
face a bright future. 
After successfully implementing EMU, the next major challenge Europe faces in the upcoming years is 
certainly  the enlargement  of European Union. This  integration project is just  as impressive and far-
sighted as EMU, and it also holds out enormous opportunities - as well as challenges that must not be 
underestimated.  
This  project  seamlessly  continues  an  European  integration  process  which  was  initiated  with  the 
foundation of the European Coal and Steel Community in 1951, continued with the establishment of 
the European Communities and the European Union, created one of the world's biggest markets and 
has for the time being culminated in the introduction of the euro, a stable currency that has established 
its reputation around the world. These integration steps were of great significance for our continent; 
they supported the political and economic stability of Europe, increasing security and welfare for every 
citizen  and  strengthening  Europe's  role  in  the  world.  Hence  I  am  firmly  convinced  that  a  diligently 
prepared  enlargement  of  the  EU  will  go  down  in  European  history  as  a  very  positive  step  toward 
integration.   
European  integration  will  only  be  truly  successful  if  it  reaches  out  to  the  whole  of  Europe.  It  is  the 
concept  of  stability  orientation  that  urges  us  to  complete  European  unification.  If  we  manage  the 
enlargement process successfully, this will also be conducive to our endeavor to guarantee stability for 
the whole euro area. Such a mutual improvement is desirable in a very broad sense: political stability, 
financial  market  stability,  macroeconomic  and  -  in  the  particular  interest  of  the  Eurosystem  -  price 
stability.  
EMU  and  the  euro  are  Europe's  strategic  response  to  global  competition  and  the  associated 
challenges  it  poses.  EMU  underpins  Europe’s  role  in  the  international  polity  and  strengthens  the 
position of our economy in the face of growing international competition.  
It  not  only  triggered  monetary  convergence,  but  a  real  convergence  of  our  economies.  Structural 
reforms  geared  toward  efficient  and  flexible  product,  capital  and  labor  markets,  as  well  as  sounder 
fiscal  policies  have  made  our  economies  more  shock-resilient  and  will  ultimately  increase  our  non-
inflationary growth potential.  
This positive and stabilizing influence is not only felt within the euro area, but also in those countries 
that  have  close  ties  to  the  euro  area,  such  as  the  countries  currently  conducting  accession 
negotiations with the EU. Thus, with the euro as a stable anchor, EMU creates a zone of stability that 
is even larger than the euro area itself.  
Conclusion 
In concluding I would like to reiterate that in many respects, Monetary Union and the euro have proved 
to be  a driving force for Europe's continued  economic and political integration.  The euro  will  play  a 
central role as a catalyst for the future economic and political integration of Europe, as an international 
stability anchor and finally as a token of identity for a modern, dynamic, open Europe. It is now up to 
all of us to continue along this successful path toward European integration, not merely to preserve 
what we have already reached, but to actively contribute to the development of a bright future for our 
Europe. 
BIS Review 23/2002 
 5
