 Alan Greenspan: Monetary policy and the economic outlook 
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System, before the Joint Economic Committee, U.S. Congress, Washington, 17 April 2002. 
 I  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  appear  before  the  Joint  Economic  Committee  to  discuss  the  current 
state of the economy.  
As we noted in our statement following the Federal Open Market Committee meeting in March, “The 
economy,  bolstered  by  a  marked swing  in  inventory  investment,  is  expanding  at  a  significant  pace. 
Nonetheless, the degree of strengthening in final demand over coming quarters, an essential element 
in sustained economic expansion, is still uncertain.” Little, if anything, has happened since the FOMC 
meeting to alter that assessment.  
This morning I  would like to elaborate on some of the forces that  are  likely to  shape  activity  in the 
months ahead.  
As  I  just  noted,  the  behavior  of  inventories  currently  is  the  driving  force  in  the  near-term  outlook. 
Stocks  of  goods  in  many  industries  were  drawn  down  significantly  last  year,  and  preliminary  data 
suggest  that  the  pace  of  liquidation  tapered  off  markedly  in  the  first  quarter.  This  development  is 
important  because  the  reduction  in  the  rate  of  inventory  liquidation  has  induced  a  rise  in  industrial 
production.  
The pickup in the  growth  of activity, however,  will  be short-lived  unless sustained  increases  in final 
demand  kick  in  before  the  positive  effects  of  inventory  investment  dissipate.  We  have  seen 
encouraging signs in recent months that underlying trends in final demand are strengthening, but the 
dimensions of the pickup are still not clear.  
A number of crosscurrents are likely to influence household spending this year. Through much of last 
year’s slowdown, housing and consumption spending held up well and proved to be a major stabilizing 
force.  But  because  there  was  little  retrenchment  during  the  cyclical  downturn,  the  potential  for  a 
significant  acceleration  in  activity  in  the  household  sector  is  likely  to  be  more  limited  than  in  past 
business cycles.  
One important source of support to household spending late last year--energy prices--will likely be less 
favorable  in  the  months  ahead. With  the  rise  in  world  crude  oil  prices  since  the middle  of  January, 
higher  energy  costs  are  again  sapping  the  purchasing  power  of  households.  To  the  extent  that  the 
increase  in  energy  prices  is  limited  in  dimension--with  prices  not  materially  exceeding  the  trading 
range of recent weeks--the negative effects on spending in the aggregate should prove to be small. 
However, a price hike that drove oil prices well above existing levels for an appreciable period of time 
would likely have more far-reaching consequences.  
In assessing the possible effects of higher oil prices, the inherent uncertainty about their future path is 
compounded by the limitations of the statistical models available to analyze such price shocks. When 
simulated  over  periods  with  observed  oil  prices  spikes,  these  models  do  not  show  oil  prices 
consistently having been a decisive factor in depressing economic activity. Yet, coincidence or not, all 
economic  downturns  in  the  United  States  since  1973,  when  oil  became  a  prominent  cost  factor  in 
business, have been preceded by sharp increases in the price of oil. This pattern leads one to suspect 
that the responsiveness of U.S. gross domestic product to energy prices is far more complex and may 
be  quite  different  when  households  and  businesses  are  confronted  with  abnormal  price  hikes. 
Macroeconometric  models  typically  are  specified  as  linear  relationships,  and  they  reflect  average 
behavior  over  history.  These  models  cannot  distinguish  between  responses  to  outsized  spikes  and 
normal price fluctuations and thus may not capture the effect of sudden and sizable shifts in oil prices 
on the economy.  
Another factor likely to damp the growth of consumer spending in the period ahead, at least to some 
extent,  is  the  change  in  overall  household  financial  positions  over  the  past  two  years.  Household 
wealth relative to income has dropped from a peak multiple of about 6.3 at the end of 1999 to around 
5.3  currently.  Econometric  evidence  suggests  that  wealth  is  an  important  determinant  of  spending, 
explaining  about  one-fifth  of  the  total  level  of  consumer  outlays.  Indeed,  about  nine-tenths  of  the 
BIS Review 24/2002 
 1
 decline in the personal saving rate from 1995 to 1999 can be attributed to the rise in the ratio of wealth 
to income, and the subsequent decline in that ratio is doubtless restraining the growth of consumption.  
Much of the movement in household net  worth in recent  years has been driven by changes on the 
asset side of the household balance sheet. But household liabilities have generally moved higher as 
well. Accordingly, the aggregate household debt service burden, defined as the ratio of households’ 
required  debt  payments  to  their  disposable  personal  income,  rose  considerably  in  recent  years, 
returning last year to close to its previous cyclical peak of the mid-1980s, where it has remained.  
Neither wealth nor the burden of debt is distributed evenly across households. Hence, the spending 
effects of changes in these influences also will not be evenly distributed. For example, increased debt 
burdens appear disproportionately attributable to higher-income households. Calculations by staff at 
the Federal Reserve suggest that the ratio of household liabilities to annual after-tax income for the top 
fifth of all households ranked by income rose from about 1.1 at the end of 1998 to 1.3 at the end of 
2001. The increase for the lower four-fifths was not quite half as large.  
Although  high-income  households  should  not  experience  much  strain  in  meeting  their  debt-service 
obligations,  others  might.  Indeed,  repayment  difficulties  have  already  increased,  particularly  in  the 
subprime  markets  for  consumer  loans  and  mortgages.  Delinquency  rates  may  well  worsen  as  a 
delayed result of the strains on household finances over the past two years. Large erosions, however, 
do  not  seem  likely,  and  the  overall  levels  of  debt  and  repayment  delinquencies  do  not,  as  of  now, 
appear to pose a major impediment to a moderate expansion of consumption spending going forward.  
Although  the  macroeconomic  effects  of  debt  burdens  may  be  limited,  we  have  already  observed 
significant  spending  restraint  among  the  top  fifth  of  income  earners--who  accounted  for  around  44 
percent of total after-tax household income last year--presumably owing to the drop in equity prices, 
on net,  over the past two  years. The effect of the stock market on other households’ spending has 
been  less  evident.  Moderate-income  households  have  a  much  larger  proportion  of  their  assets  in 
homes, and the continuing rise in the value of houses has provided greater support for their net worth. 
Reflecting these differences in portfolio composition, the net worth of the top fifth of income earners 
has dropped far more than it did for the remaining four-fifths over the two-year period.  
As a consequence, excluding capital gains and losses from the calculation, as is the convention in our 
national income accounts, personal saving for the upper fifth, which had been negative during 1999 
and  2000,  turned  positive  in  2001.  By  contrast,  the  average  saving  rate  for  the  lower  four-fifths  of 
households, by income, was generally positive during the second half of the 1990s and has fluctuated 
in a narrow range in the past few years. Accordingly, most of the change in consumption expenditures 
that resulted from the bull stock market and its demise reflected shifts in spending by upper-income 
households. As I noted earlier, the restraining effects from the net decline in wealth during the past two 
years presumably have not, as yet, fully played out and could exert some further damping effect on the 
overall growth of household spending relative to that of income.  
Perhaps most central to the outlook for consumer spending will be developments in the labor market, 
which has improved some in recent months. The pace of layoffs quickened last fall, especially after 
September  11,  and  the  unemployment  rate  rose  sharply.  But  layoffs  have  diminished  noticeably  in 
2002, and payrolls grew again in March. In typical cyclical fashion, the unemployment rate has lagged 
the pickup in demand somewhat, but it has remained between 5-1/2 and 5-3/4 percent of late, after 
rising rapidly in 2001.  
Over  the  longer  haul,  incomes  and  spending  are  driven  most  importantly  by  the  behavior  of  labor 
productivity.  And  here  the  most  recent  readings  have  been  very  encouraging.  Typically,  labor 
productivity declines when output is cut back and businesses are reluctant to proportionately reduce 
their workforces. However, output per hour continued to grow last year. Indeed, it rose at an annual 
rate  of  5-1/2  percent  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year  and  appears  to  have  posted  another  sharp 
advance in the first quarter. No doubt, some of the recent acceleration reflects normal statistical noise. 
More  fundamentally,  some  of  this  pickup  probably  occurred  because  businesses  have  remained 
cautious about boosting labor input in response to the surprising strength of demand in recent months. 
But  the  magnitude  of  the  gains  in  productivity  over  the  past  year  provides  further  evidence  of 
improvement in the underlying pace of structural labor productivity. This development augurs well for 
firms’ ability to grant wage increases to their employees without putting upward pressure on prices.  
In housing markets, low mortgage  interest rates  and  favorable  weather have provided considerable 
support  to  homebuilding  in  recent  months.  Moreover,  attractive  mortgage  rates  have  bolstered  the 
sales of existing homes and the extraction of capital gains embedded in home equity that those sales 
2 
 BIS Review 24/2002
 engender. Low rates have also encouraged households to take on larger mortgages when refinancing 
their homes. Drawing on home equity in this manner is a significant source of funding for consumption 
and  home  modernization.  The  pace  of  such  extractions  likely  dropped  along  with  the  decline  in 
refinancing  activity  that  followed  the  backup  in  mortgage  rates  that  began  in  early  November. 
Mortgage  rates  have  gone  back  down  again  in  recent  weeks  and  are  at  low  levels.  This  should 
continue to underpin activity in housing, but with perhaps less spillover to consumption more generally.  
The ongoing strength in the housing market has raised concerns about the possible emergence of a 
bubble in home prices. However, the analogy often made to the building and bursting of a stock price 
bubble is imperfect. First, unlike in the stock market, sales in the real estate market incur substantial 
transactions  costs  and,  when  most  homes  are  sold,  the  seller  must  physically  move  out.  Doing  so 
often entails significant financial and emotional costs and is an obvious impediment to stimulating a 
bubble  through  speculative  trading  in  homes.  Thus,  while  stock  market  turnover  is  more  than  100 
percent annually, the turnover of home ownership is less than 10 percent annually--scarcely tinder for 
speculative conflagration. Second, arbitrage opportunities are much more limited in housing markets 
than in securities markets. A home in Portland, Oregon is not a close substitute for a home in Portland, 
Maine, and the "national" housing market is better understood as a collection of small, local housing 
markets. Even if a bubble were to develop in a local market, it would not necessarily have implications 
for the nation as a whole.  
These  factors  certainly  do  not  mean  that  bubbles  cannot  develop  in  house  markets  and  that  home 
prices cannot decline: Indeed, home prices fell significantly in several parts of the country in the early 
1990s. But because the turnover of homes is so much smaller than that of stocks and because the 
underlying demand for living space tends to be revised very gradually, the speed and magnitude of 
price rises and declines often observed in markets for securities are more difficult to create in markets 
for homes.  
The technological advances contributing to the gains in productivity that we have achieved over the 
past  year  should  provide  support  not  only  to  the  household  sector  but  also  to  the  business  sector 
through a recovery in corporate profits and capital investment.  
The retrenchment in capital spending over the past year and a half was central to the sharp slowing in 
overall  activity.  These  cutbacks  in  capital  spending  interacted  with,  and  were  reinforced  by,  falling 
profits  and  equity  prices.  Indeed,  a  striking  feature  of  the  current  cyclical  episode  relative  to  many 
earlier  ones  has  been  the  virtual  absence  of  pricing  power  across  much  of  American  business,  as 
increasing globalization and deregulation have enhanced competition. Business managers, with little 
opportunity to raise prices, have moved aggressively to stabilize cash flows by trimming workforces. 
These  efforts  have  limited  any  rise  in  unit  costs,  attenuated  the  pressure  on  profit  margins,  and 
ultimately helped to preserve the vast majority of private-sector jobs. To the extent that businesses are 
successful in boosting profits and cash flow, capital spending should begin to recover more noticeably.  
Part of the reduction in pricing power observed in this cycle should be reversed as firming demand 
enables  businesses  to  take  back  large  price  discounts.  Though  such  an  adjustment  would  tend  to 
elevate  price  levels,  underlying  inflationary  cost  pressures  should  remain  contained.  A  lack  of 
pressures in labor markets and increases in productivity are holding labor costs in check, resulting in 
rising  profit  margins  even  with  inflation  remaining  low.  Although  energy-using  companies  will 
experience some profit pressures as recent increases in spot oil prices become imbedded in contracts, 
these effects should be limited unless oil prices increase appreciably further.  
To  be  sure,  over  time,  the  current  accommodative  stance  of  monetary  policy  is  not  likely  to  be 
consistent with maintaining price stability. But prospects for low inflation and inflation expectations in 
the period ahead mean that the Federal Reserve should have ample opportunity  to adjust policy  to 
keep inflation pressures contained once sustained, solid, economic expansion is in view.  
Improved profit margins over time and more assured prospects for rising final demand would likely be 
accompanied by a decline in risk premiums from their current elevated levels toward a more normal 
range. With real rates of return on high-tech equipment still attractive, the lowering of risk premiums 
should be an additional spur to new investment. Reports from businesses around the country suggest 
that  the  exploitation  of  available  networking  and  other  information  technologies  was  only  partially 
completed when the cyclical retrenchment of the past year began. Many business managers still hold 
the  view,  according  to  a  recent  survey  of  purchasing  managers,  that  less  than  half  of  currently 
available new and, presumably profitable, supply-chain technologies have been put into use.  
BIS Review 24/2002 
 3
 Recent  evidence  suggests  that  a  recovery  in  at  least  some  forms  of  high-tech  investment  is  under 
way.  Production  of  semiconductors,  which  in  the  past  has  been  a  leading  indicator  of  computer 
production, turned up last  fall. Expenditures on computers rose at a double-digit annual rate in real 
terms  in  the  fourth  quarter.  But  investment  expenditures  in  the  communications  sector,  where 
overcapacity was substantial, as yet show few signs of increasing, and business investment in some 
other sectors, such as aircraft, hit by the drop in air travel, will presumably remain weak in 2002. On 
balance, the recovery this year in overall spending on business fixed investment is likely to be gradual.  
The U.S. economy has displayed a remarkable resilience over the past six months in the face of some 
very significant adverse shocks. But the strength of the economic expansion that is under way remains 
to be clarified. Some of the forces that have weighed heavily on the economy over the past year or so 
have begun to dissipate, but other factors, such as the sharp increase in world oil prices, have arisen 
that pose new challenges. As a result, the course of final demand will need to be monitored closely.  
Still, there can be little doubt that prospects have brightened. Spending in the household sector has 
held up well, and some signs of improvement are evident in business profits and investment. Fiscal 
policy  continues  to  provide  stimulus  to  aggregate  demand,  and  monetary  policy  is  currently 
accommodative. With the growth of productivity well maintained and inflation pressures largely absent, 
the foundation for economic expansion has been laid.  
4 
 BIS Review 24/2002
