 Lars Heikensten: Swedish economic policy in the EMU 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Heikensten,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Swedish 
Academy of Engineering Sciences, Stockholm, 23 January 2002. 
 I  should  like  to  thank  the  Academy  of  Engineering  Sciences  for  inviting  me  to  talk  about  Swedish 
economic  policy  in  the  event  of  full  participation  in  the  European  Monetary  Union.  I  am,  of  course, 
particularly pleased to do so as a newly-elected member. 
Those of you who have visited the Continent since the turn of the year will no doubt have come into 
physical contact with the euro. Having previously existed only as an electronic means of payment in 
financial markets, the euro is now also a reality in the purses and wallets of the citizens of twelve of 
the European Union’s fifteen member countries. 
In Sweden this has revived the discussion about EMU, which makes it particularly stimulating to have 
an opportunity to talk about some related issues. Over the years in my present job I have made ten or 
so  EMU  speeches,  generally  in  the  light  of  what  I  have  learnt  and  experienced  by  working  on 
economic policy in Sweden as well as in the framework of EU cooperation. Interest in the subject has 
certainly varied but conditions now seem to be good again for a broad discussion about Sweden and 
the  monetary  union.  This  is  a  discussion  that  everyone  has  reason  to  encourage  before  the  time 
comes to make the political decisions. 
For clarity’s sake I should perhaps add that I am speaking in a personal capacity, not expressing an 
official position on behalf of the Riksbank. 
Some new conditions for economic policy 
If  Sweden  were  to  adopt  the  euro,  responsibility  for  monetary  policy  would  be  transferred  to  the 
European Central  Bank (ECB),  which acts,  not  in the interest of particular countries  but for what is 
appropriate  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  Thus,  Swedish  economic  policy  would  no  longer  have 
recourse to the short-term interest rate and the exchange rate. Tendencies to overheating and inflation 
just in Sweden could no longer be countered with the monetary alternative of raising the interest rate 
here, just as the interest rate could not be lowered to mitigate a marked slowdown in our economy. 
This is clearly a change in the conditions for economic policy that needs to be analysed and discussed 
in advance of a decision to adopt the euro. 
Having said that, the issue should not be seen too dramatically. The set-up for economic policy in a 
monetary union is much the same as in a country  with a fixed exchange rate. In Sweden that  was 
actually the case  in  73  of the past 100  years,  with results that  were excellent  in some periods  and 
considerably  worse  in  others.  It  is  important  to  learn  from  those  experiences. What  distinguishes  a 
monetary union is that the exchange rate is locked irrevocably. That means there is no room for the 
type of misguided economic policy that characterised the 1970s and ’80s, for example, when Sweden 
used repeated devaluations in an attempt to rectify the situation. Such failures must be avoided at any 
cost. 
Against this background it is not remarkable that the discussion about economic policy with EMU has 
focused on stabilisation policy. Even so, it is important to start from a broader perspective. The issues 
to do with stabilisation policy have featured prominently in the Swedish debate. This has to do with a 
strong  Keynesian  tradition  and  the  ability  of  Lars  Calmfors  and  his  former  colleagues  to  place  the 
so-called insurance argument in the centre of the whole discussion about a monetary union. The latter 
naturally has to do with the fact that the very dramatic crisis which hit Sweden in the early 1990s was 
so closely connected with stabilisation policy. It is hardly surprising that in many other countries the 
discussion took a very different course before they adhered to the EMU. 
It is extremely important that our discussion about economic policy – with or without the euro – does 
not  overlook  or  play  down  the  supply  side  of  the  economy.  Countries  that  create  conditions  for  a 
smooth  adjustment  of  labour  markets  and  a  favourable  development  of  productivity  will  almost 
certainly do well as members of the monetary union. Measures to this end are naturally warranted in 
any  event  –  they  promote  prosperity.  But  they  also  alter  the  conditions  for  stabilisation  policy  and 
reduce the need for ‘insurance’. 
BIS Review 6/2002 
 1
 In this context it may be worth recalling that the overheating that led up to the crisis in the early 1990s 
was by no means primarily due to the growth of demand being notably strong, though demand was 
certainly too high in relation to the economy’s productive capacity. Annual GDP growth from 1985 to 
1990 was actually no more than 2.4 per cent. What really mattered was poor conditions for growth; 
productivity rose only 1.1 per cent and employment in hours only 1.3 per cent. If productivity growth in 
the late 1980s and early 1990s had been half or one percentage point higher, things could have been 
very different. 
Our  tendency  to  concentrate  the  EMU  discussion  on  stabilisation  policy  means  that  a  number  of 
important  points  about  EMU  cooperation  are  overlooked.  They  concern  the  longer  run  and  aim 
precisely at improving conditions for growth and employment in this horizon. EMU has an important 
role  here.  Trade  will  be  facilitated  along  with  other  cross-border  activities  such  as  investment. 
Simplified price comparisons can led to stronger competition. We will also have a broader and deeper 
capital market. Moreover, EMU implies better conditions for a stable development in the Union as a 
whole.  Good  examples  are  the  crises  in  Asia  and  Russia  around  1998  and  last  year’s  abrupt 
slowdown in the American economy; had it not been for EMU, Europe’s financial markets would have 
been more turbulent. 
Policy frames in the European Union 
Before  discussing  economic  policy  in  Sweden  in  the  event  of  a  transition  to  the  euro,  something 
should be said about the European frames which this policy would have to comply with. These frames 
already affect the conditions for Sweden’s policy and will presumably do so even more in the future. 
Of the economic policy processes in the European Union, the most prominent are contingent on the 
Stability and Growth Pact from 1997. The primary purpose of the Pact is to ensure that budget policy 
in the member states is conducted so that no country encounters serious problems with debt because 
that could lead to costs for the Union as a whole and, in the worst case, to other countries being forced 
to bail out the ‘sinner’. The Pact contains binding rules and in well-defined extreme cases could even 
result in sanctions. In addition, there is a number of processes or rules whereby peer pressure and 
benchmarking are used to speed up the EU’s structural reforms. The central policy instrument is the 
general economic policy guidelines, which can be likened to a budget statement. Other instruments 
are, for example, the Luxembourg, Cardiff and Lisbon processes. All the above applies to Sweden, 
whether or not we adopt the euro, though the terms of the Growth and Stability Pact do differ in this 
respect; the rules for sanctions, for instance, do not apply as long as we are outside the euro area. 
There  is  much  to  be  said  both  about  the  actual  construction  of  the  processes  and  what  they  have 
achieved  to  date.  Moreover,  knowledge  of  these  matters  is  generally  lacking  in  Sweden.  Today, 
however, I shall be very brief. As I see it, there is a tendency towards an increased coordination of 
fiscal and structural policies. This takes many forms. The issues are discussed together, both at the 
highest  level  and  further  down  among  civil  servants  and  experts.  It  is  partly  a  learning  process,  an 
exchange of thoughts about good examples, a communication of ideas and so on. New, more specific 
knowledge is also being generated. At present, for instance, common principles are being drawn up 
for  the  measurement  of  budget  outcomes  and  capacity  utilisation.  This  is  necessary  for  effective 
surveillance of compliance with the Stability and Growth Pact. Similar work has begun in the field of 
pensions. These quotidian efforts should not be underrated. They help to make many problems more 
understandable and promote a consensus about how they should be handled. 
Sweden has much to gain from this kind of international collaboration. To exemplify how international 
discussions can influence matters I can mention that when we at the Ministry of Finance were aiming 
to alter the economic policy agenda in the late 1980s, we were greatly inspired by the work that had 
been done under the auspices of the OECD and others. In my opinion, the policy realignment owed at 
least as much to our international contacts as to the successful opinion-forming work by, for example, 
the Centre for Business & Policy Studies (SNS). 
Many  of  the  problems  and  measures  that  are  being  discussed  are  of  a  national  nature;  they  vary 
between countries and it is in each country’s interest to solve them. Moreover, due to differences in 
the  initial  situation,  the  solutions  may  have  to  differ,  too.  One  should  therefore  be  cautious  about 
imposing universal mandatory rules. Furthermore, solutions will presumably become more uniform as 
a result of increased trade and competition. It is likely, however, that fiscal and budget polices will be 
further  coordinated,  though  this  process  will  not  necessarily  be  driven  solely  by  principles  and 
intellectual arguments. I am more inclined to guess that circumstances will bring this about by degrees 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2002
 as  new  problems,  stemming  from  the  member  states  sitting  in  the  same  boat,  have  to  be  tackled, 
perhaps in some cases at rather short notice. 
Fiscal policy in Sweden 
The problems for stabilisation policy 
So what about the problems for stabilisation policy that arise if the euro is adopted? We would clearly 
have to do without an independent monetary policy. By itself, this may imply a risk of larger cyclical 
fluctuations  and  it  would  also  make  a  proper  crisis  more  difficult  to  manage  with  measures  of 
economic policy. As was the case in the early 1990s, a crisis can arise mainly from an inappropriate 
domestic  policy;  it  can  also  result  from  an  external  shock  that  hits  Sweden  more  strongly  than  the 
average  euro  country;  a  third  possibility  is  the  failure  of  one  or  more  Swedish  companies  of  vital 
importance for our economy. 
There  are  other  ways  in  which  the  conditions  for  economic  policy  can  be  affected.  As  a  euro 
participant, a country has somewhat more room for manoeuvre in fiscal policy. This is really only the 
other side of the arguments behind the Stability and Growth Pact. Financial markets would have less 
reason  to  follow  developments  in  Sweden,  with  the  attendant  risk  that  fiscal  and  budget  policies 
become less sustainable. Another question concerns the effect on wage agreements. Views differ on 
this. Some count on a more disciplined approach if Sweden adopts the euro; otherwise a failure could 
then  be  very  costly,  with  years  of  unduly  weak  competitiveness  and  growth.  Others  argue  that  as 
things are, the connection  between  wage outcomes and the interest rate  in Sweden is more direct. 
They sometimes refer, for example, to the outcomes of the latest round of wage negotiations and the 
effect on them of interest rate policy in autumn 1997. 
This undoubtedly warrants a closer look at what the framework for stabilisation policy should consist 
of. A major problem in this context is clearly that, for a number of familiar reasons, it is more difficult to 
use fiscal than monetary policy for active economic stabilisation. A crucial problem in both cases is not 
knowing in which direction the economy is moving. Here it will suffice to recall what most of us here 
were saying about the economy two years ago. Another, related problem has to do with the time lag 
before measures have an impact. In the case of monetary policy we usually allow for a lag of one to 
two years. Arriving at decisions also takes time, particularly in fiscal policy. Moreover, decisions are 
often swayed by other considerations than stabilisation policy, which is just why the implementation of 
monetary policy has been assigned to an independent institution. 
Firm principles for budget policy 
This speaks for the importance of not exaggerating what can be achieved with fiscal fine-tuning. What 
matters is that the fiscal policy framework is such that adequate reserves are built up. The combination 
of a stable public sector financial surplus over the business cycle and low debt provides a margin for 
the  government  finances  to  deteriorate  in  the  normal  way  when  activity  is  weakening  and  let  the 
automatic stabilisers work. If that functions properly, we will have made good progress. 
Given adequate reserves, Sweden will be in an unusually good position in this respect because our 
extensive  public  sector,  high  replacement  levels  in  transfer  systems  and  high  taxes  mean  that  the 
budget  balance  fluctuates  more  than  in  other  countries.  At  the  same  time,  it  should  perhaps  be 
mentioned that an economy contains many other types of stabiliser, not all of which are necessarily 
public. A system like ours, with high income taxes and transfers, naturally also influences the extent to 
which private safety-nets or reserves are built up. This includes everything from saving by households 
to contractual unemployment insurance. 
For the automatic stabilisers to function in full  during future downturns it is important to stick to the 
current rules for fiscal policy and ensure strict compliance when times are bad as well as good. There 
may also be grounds for being even more ambitious about the budget surplus and aim for a level of, 
say, 3 per cent over the business cycle. Debt could then be repaid more quickly, giving us more room 
for  manoeuvre  in  the  future.  The  spending  ceiling  has  functioned  well  both  by  breaking  what  was 
previously an almost automatic increase in government expenditure and by maintaining discipline in 
the  central  government  finances.  The  same  applies  to  the  requirement  that  the  local  government 
finances are balanced; there is less talk of this requirement in contexts like the present but it has been 
an  essential  part  of  the  framework  that  has  held  back  the  expansion  of  public  spending  in  recent 
years. It is therefore important that these rule systems are not eroded. On top of all this there may be a 
BIS Review 6/2002 
 3
 case  for  some  changes  in  the  arrangement  of  budget  work.  Some  of  the  proposals  put  forward 
recently  by Svante Öberg  can be considered as a way of strengthening the process still more. It is 
important, for example, to ensure that the budgeting margins are in fact handled so they can be used 
as intended. 
Notable progress has unquestionably been made in this field in recent years. This may be a problem 
in the ongoing discussion, which often seems to assume that consolidation is something that happens 
almost by itself. I do not believe that is so. The reason why everything has gone so well just in recent 
years seems to me to be that the crisis in the early 1990s is still in everyone’s minds and therefore 
makes a firm policy easier. Moreover, growth as well as inflation have been unexpectedly favourable 
for three to four years and this has consolidated budgets much sooner than had been foreseen. 
Looking ahead, the challenges are considerable. If the quality of publicly financed services such as 
school education and the health service is to be maintained at an acceptable level in the longer run, 
this  will  be  rather  costly.  That  is  because  productivity  in  activities  of  this  type,  be  they  produced 
publicly or privately, will not rise as quickly as in the production of goods. Moreover, Sweden has an 
ageing population. Together with any difficulties in sticking to a tax level that is internationally high, this 
would severely test the public finances. Under these circumstances it will be exceedingly important to 
make a thorough scrutiny of the social security system’s design; this is a question that has been on 
something  of  a  back  burner,  what  with  the  crisis  for  stabilisation  policy  in  the  1990s  and  the 
achievement  of  a  more  lasting  solution  to  the  issue  of  pensions.  In  such  a  discussion  about  social 
security systems that are effective and sustainable in the long term there is a place for the issue of 
cyclical stabilisation. Systems that are fully or partly funded, publicly or privately, can function well as 
stabilisers. Thus, it  is mainly  in this context  that I  would  like to  place the discussion that has taken 
place about various types of buffer fund. But the need to reform the social security system is primarily 
connected,  not  with  stabilisation  policy  but  with  being  able  to  guarantee  a  high  quality  of  publicly 
financed services without raising the tax take. 
Measures for influencing the business cycle 
Finally there are the questions of whether a more active, discretionary fiscal policy would be advisable 
and  whether,  to  function  better  in  the  future,  it  may  need  to  be  supported  by  new  institutional 
arrangements. First, let me stress that, for reasons I mentioned earlier, I do not have much faith in fine 
tuning. Of course that does not rule out trying not to accentuate fluctuations as far as possible when 
measures are taken primarily for other reasons. The central issue, however, is how more pronounced 
problems or crises for stabilisation policy are to be handled.  
One approach to this is to relate once again to our own experiences. As I see it, we have had to face 
problems of two types. One concerns a lack of knowledge about the direction in which the economy is 
moving. A dramatic example of this is the crisis in 1990, when neither the problem that was looming 
with the real interest rate nor the crisis in the financial system was identified in time by virtually any 
Swedish observer. The other problem is political and has to do with the difficulties in keeping policy 
sufficiently tight over the business cycle, particularly when demand exceeds long-term supply. A good 
illustration of this problem is the late 1980s. 
Perhaps  one  should  mention  a  third  problem,  namely  that  automatic  stabilisers  affect  demand 
regardless of the nature of the preceding shock. If demand in general has weakened on account of, 
say, a share price fall that has affected household wealth, all will be well; a part of the loss of demand 
will be compensated automatically. Things will be different if the shock comes from the supply side, for 
instance  as  an  oil  price  rise  or  a  change  in  productivity.  There  could  then  be  grounds  for  a 
discretionary policy move to adjust demand to the change in production capacity; this could be more 
difficult in the absence of an independent monetary policy. As a euro participant, however, Sweden 
would be in the same boat as other member states as regards many of what appear to be likely supply 
shocks, for instance oil price fluctuations. 
As regards the lack of knowledge, there are clearly no simple institutional solutions. But this does not 
mean  that  the  institutional  frameworks  for  conducting  policy  do  not  affect  the  accumulation  of 
knowledge. As I mentioned earlier, the Stability and Growth Pact has led to a rapid development of EU 
work to arrive at a better understanding of the interaction of public budgets and capacity utilisation. In 
Sweden,  the  acquisition  of  knowledge  about  potential  growth,  the  output  gap  and  so  on  has  been 
stimulated in that the Riksbank has been made accountable for safeguarding the value of money and 
we have placed this mandate in a clear intellectual framework that calls for deeper analyses. This in 
turn  has  had  consequences  for  how  both  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  National  Institute  of 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2002
 Economic Research are now working on these matters. Another reason why Swedish authorities have 
reason to be more involved in a broad discussion and analysis of questions such as these is perhaps 
that  euro  participation  could  lead  to  the  financial  markets  becoming  less  interested  in  analysing 
specifically Swedish conditions. 
I  consider  that  the  importance  of  a  high  level  of  competence  in  such  institutions  as  the  Finance 
Ministry,  the  Riksbank  and  the  National  Institute  should  be  emphasised.  Good  links  between  these 
institutions and the academic world are also desirable; in a European context I consider that in this 
respect we are already in the forefront. It is likewise important that we participate in the international 
work  on  these  issues,  primarily  in  the  context  of  the  European  Union  and  the  ECB  but  also  in  the 
OECD  and  the  IMF.  And  although  we  are  doing  relatively  well  internationally,  a  good  deal  is  being 
accomplished elsewhere that we can try out here in Sweden. As a member of the Governing Council 
of the ECB, the Riksbank will have cause to go on working on these issues at the European level. I 
also think it would be natural to continue to publish the Inflation Report twice a year; that would be a 
way  of  presenting  analyses  of  the  interplay  between  cyclical  activity,  monetary  policy  and  the 
government finances and thereby contribute to the discussion of economic policy. A qualified ongoing 
analysis  is  needed  for  a  small  country  like  Sweden  to  play  a  meaningful  role  in  the  international 
cooperation. Besides the traditional issues of stabilisation policy, there are grounds for the Riksbank 
continuing  to  be  deeply  engaged  with  developments  in  the  financial  sector,  for  instance  with  the 
Stability Report. A conceivable evolution of the existing structure as regards the basis for fiscal policy 
could be a more direct involvement of the Economic Council that is attached to development work in 
the Ministry of Finance. 
Handling  the  political problems to do  with a consistent,  long-term approach  to  stabilisation policy  is 
considerably  more  complicated.  In  practice  it  seems  to  be  mainly  a  matter  of  ensuring  that  budget 
policy sticks to the rules  in upward  phases, both  in  order to secure reserves for down-turns and  to 
avoid overheating, with its negative effects on wage formation, costs and so on. One possibility that 
has  featured  in  the  public  discussion  would  be  to  extend  the  function  of  the  Economic  Council,  for 
instance  by  formulating  opinions  about  the  formation  of  policy  on  behalf  of  the  Riksdag  (Sweden’s 
parliament).  At  a  general  level  I  can  see  no  crucial  objection  to  this;  one  more  voice  in  the  public 
discussion can do no harm. But as soon as one goes further than that, difficult issues arise. 
Time does not permit a long discussion of this question, which is not all that central. I just want to say 
that  it  touches  on  aspects  of  democracy  that  are  likely  to  become  even  more  tangible  in  that,  if 
Sweden adopts the euro, monetary policy will be conducted well beyond our borders. The difficulties 
are  compounded  in  that  in  questions  such  as  these  –  taxes,  cyclical  activity,  the  direction  of  fiscal 
policy – the distinction between knowledge and values tends to be indistinct. To exemplify this I can 
cite a discussion I had two years ago with representatives of the Ministry of Finance. At that time they 
considered  there  was  a  case  for  cutting  taxes  and  argued  on  the  basis  of  estimated  resource 
utilisation  that  this  was  feasible  without  risking  capacity  restrictions.  Our  estimations  suggested 
otherwise, though the differences should not be exaggerated. We still do not know who was right. But 
what we do know is that economic activity has declined far more than any of us foresaw and this has 
been accompanied by higher inflation. 
Concluding remarks 
Now for a brief summary of what I have said. 
Economic  policy  as  a  euro  participant  is  not  all  that  different  from  economic  policy  today.  When 
discussing stabilisation policy it should borne in mind that the best way for us to achieve a favourable 
development – inside or outside the euro area – is to create conditions for a smooth adjustment to 
various markets, primarily the labour market, and for a good productivity trend. In these respects there 
are measures we ought to take in any event. But euro participation can help us to move in the right 
direction. 
By adopting the euro we would relinquish our national monetary policy. That would make the formation 
of fiscal policy more crucial. There are risks here, as we know from our own experience in the 1970s 
and  ’80s,  when  policy  was  neither  consistent  nor  focused  on  the  long  term.  As  a  result,  cyclical 
fluctuations  were  accentuated  and  the  government  finances  gradually  weakened.  That  limited  the 
room for action when Sweden entered the 1990s. 
The main thing to do to prevent new crises for stabilisation policy is to develop and possibly reinforce 
the framework for budget policy that has applied in recent years. Government debt can then be run 
BIS Review 6/2002 
 5
 down more quickly and reserves can be built up so that the automatic stabilisers can be left to do their 
work. An important issue in this context is the construction of the social security system. Changes will 
be needed and there may well be reasons for increasing the element of funding. 
It may be asked whether some institutional changes are also needed to facilitate a discretionary fiscal 
policy.  This  is  certainly  not  a  minor  question  but  it  has  taken  up  too  much  of  the  discussion  about 
economic policy. The possibility of implementing a discretionary fiscal policy in a meaningful way is 
limited. The discussion should therefore concentrate on what can be done to manage situations when 
more serious shocks are likely to occur. 
The problem here has been a lack of knowledge, plus the difficulties in mobilising sufficient support for 
a restrictive policy when the economy is overheating. There are presumably some things that can be 
done to improve our knowledge, though it is mostly a matter of trimming an existing structure. But that 
must be done in the light of the limited competence for empirical economic analysis in Sweden and the 
numerous challenges that lie ahead in other respects than stabilisation policy. 
Perhaps  a  sharper  analysis  and  discussion  could  also  be  a  help  with  the  political  problems.  In  this 
context, an economic council along the lines put forward in the public debate might possibly play a 
part. 
6 
 BIS Review 6/2002
