 David Dodge: International financial architecture and the resolution of financial 
crises 
Speech by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Canadian Club of Ottawa and the 
Canadian Institute of International Affairs, Ottawa, Ontario, 14 May 2002. 
 I am pleased to be here today to talk about the Bank of Canada's contribution to international financial 
stability and the resolution of financial crises.  
The preamble to the Bank of Canada Act calls on us to promote the economic and financial welfare of 
Canada. In this context, we aim to foster good economic performance through monetary stability—that 
is to say, through low, stable, and predictable inflation. But no market economy can function properly 
unless it is also supported by an efficient and stable financial system. Sound financial institutions, a 
robust infrastructure, and well-functioning financial markets are necessary to facilitate transactions and 
to properly channel savings into investments.  
This is true for Canada's domestic economy. But in today's interconnected world, it is equally true for 
the global economy. Recent experience has shown that world events can have serious repercussions 
on national financial markets, including ours, and indeed on our entire economy. The Mexican crisis of 
1994–95 and the Asian and Russian crises of 1997–98 are cases in point. In both instances, Canada 
was sideswiped. And while the recent acute economic and social problems in Argentina have not had 
a major economic impact beyond that country's borders, they have nevertheless had implications for 
Canadian banks operating in, or holding claims on, Argentina.  
So  Canadians  have  more  than  a  passing  interest  in  a  healthy  global  financial  environment.  Sound 
macroeconomic  policies  and  sound  financial  systems  across  all  countries  are  becoming  even  more 
important as the world becomes more and more integrated.  
The  episodes  of  financial  stress  that  the  world  has  experienced  in  recent  years  have  revealed 
weaknesses in the foundation of the international financial architecture. Those problems have to be 
addressed, and the foundation fortified, if we want to reduce the incidence and the impact of global 
financial disturbances.  
In the aftermath of the crises of the late 1990s, the international community has acted to identify and to 
begin to deal with financial vulnerabilities.  
Canadians have been actively involved in this work. And we at the Bank of Canada have played our 
part. The Bank participates in several international forums where issues of financial stability are being 
debated.  And  we  work  closely  with  others  to  strengthen  the  international  financial  architecture  by 
developing frameworks for the prevention, management, and resolution of crises.  
Today, I would like to update you on some of the progress that has been made to date and on what 
remains to be done. But before doing that, it is important to briefly review the lessons we have learned, 
or ought to have learned, from recent financial disturbances.  
Crisis prevention—lessons and progress  
What are some of the factors that led to the serious problems experienced by Mexico, a number of 
Southeast Asian countries, Russia, Brazil, and, more recently, Argentina?  
In  various  combinations,  there  were  large  current  account  and  fiscal  deficits,  heavy  reliance  on 
short-term borrowing, weak banking systems, poor risk management, overvalued exchange rates, and 
lack  of  transparency  in  fiscal,  monetary,  and  financial  policies.  Moreover,  the  presumption  that  the 
international community would come to the rescue if things turned sour, appeared to offer some form 
of  protection  to  emerging-market  borrowers  and  lenders.  This  distorted  market  signals  and 
encouraged overborrowing and overlending.  
So what has been done, and what can be done, to minimize the risks of future crises?  
BIS Review 31/2002 
 1
 A sound macroeconomic policy framework  
It  is  now  broadly  recognized  that  sound  and  credible  macroeconomic  policies  are  the  best  defence 
against financial crises. As we know from our own experience in Canada, this means a fiscal policy 
focused  on  keeping  public  sector  deficits  and  debts  on  a  sustainable  track  and  a  monetary  policy 
focused on keeping inflation low and stable.  
A  viable  macroeconomic  framework  for  growth  requires  that  both  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  be 
credible. But many emerging-market countries lacked credibility. To provide an anchor for their policy 
framework, they chose to peg their currencies to another major international currency or a basket of 
currencies.  
But a peg can only provide temporary credibility. And when countries fail to develop appropriate fiscal, 
monetary, and regulatory policies, even small economic shocks can put pressure on the peg. Markets 
can then begin to question the authorities' commitment to the peg, and domestic and foreign investors 
can rush for the exits, triggering a crisis. In fact, that is exactly what happened in those economies that 
ended up in trouble during the past decade.  
So, many of these countries were forced to abandon the peg as an anchor and had to opt for a flexible 
exchange rate. But an anchor is still  needed. Otherwise, the freedom of the currency to float could 
undermine confidence in its value, both at home and on world markets. Targets for domestic inflation 
provide such an anchor for the currency.  
In  the  last  few  years,  a  growing  number  of  emerging-market  economies  have  moved  to  flexible 
exchange rate regimes, and have also adopted inflation targets. In several cases, Canada has played 
an important role in that process. Because of our long experience with flexible exchange rates and our 
strong  reputation  in  inflation-targeting,  several  emerging-market  central  banks  have  asked  for  the 
Bank of Canada's assistance in developing and operating frameworks based on inflation targets.  
A robust financial infrastructure  
Another important lesson drawn from recent crises is the need for a strong financial infrastructure.  
Weak banking systems were at the heart of nearly every one of the recent financial crises. To perform 
well their important role of intermediating between lenders and borrowers, banks and other financial 
institutions need to work within a strong framework—a framework distinguished by clear accounting 
and  disclosure  standards,  appropriate  regulatory  and  supervisory  practices,  and  well-defined 
bankruptcy rules. In many cases, these institutional arrangements were found wanting.  
The international community has done a lot to contribute to the strengthening of financial systems in 
emerging-market  economies  and  to  improve  risk  management  in  major  industrial  countries. 
International groups, such as the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF), the Group of Twenty (G-20), and the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), have worked hard to 
establish  globally  accepted  guideposts—codes  and  standards—for  the  sound  operation  of  financial 
institutions and systems.  
But  guideposts  are  not  much  use  if  they  are  not  followed.  So  it  was  also  essential  to  develop  the 
means for assessing adherence to key standards and for public disclosure of important economic and 
financial  information.  If  there  is  a  lasting  lesson  in  recent  history,  it  is  that  we  need  greater 
transparency. Better and more timely data should lead to more informed judgments about how risky 
certain  investments  are.  And  this  should  help  avoid  the  crises  that  can  be  set  off  by  the  sudden 
revelation of problems.  
As I said earlier, the Bank of Canada and the Government of Canada have fully participated in, and 
contributed to, many of these initiatives. I would highlight, in particular, our involvement with the FSF 
and  with  the  G-20,  until  recently  chaired  by  Finance  Minister  Paul  Martin.  The  Office  of  the 
Superintendent of Financial Institutions and provincial securities commissions have also been working 
with the FSF and with the BIS to identify system-wide weaknesses and to develop worldwide financial 
standards and codes.  
The Bank of Canada, together with the Bank of England, has also been promoting the idea of clear, 
upfront  limits  on  official  lending  (that  is,  lending  from  international  financial  institutions,  such  as  the 
IMF)  as  a  means  of  conditioning  the  expectations  of  creditors  and  borrowers  and  thus  helping  to 
prevent crises. I will have more to say about this in a moment.  
2 
 BIS Review 31/2002
 Before I move on, let me add that, in the context of assessments of how well countries are doing in 
strengthening  their  financial  systems,  Canada  was  the  first  industrial  country  to  place  its  financial 
system under IMF scrutiny. And we passed with flying colours. Of course, this does not mean that we 
can afford to rest on our laurels. On the contrary, it is vital that we continue to look for ways to improve 
the efficiency and soundness of our national financial systems.  
Crisis management and resolution: a work in progress with lots still to do  
As you can see, important preventative actions have been taken to reduce the risk of future crises.  
But of course, even with the best preventative efforts, we will not totally eliminate the possibility that, 
from time to time, there will be a crisis in some part of the world because of one shock or another. As I 
said before, when there is a shock, national macroeconomic policies must be adjusted in response. 
But this takes time. And where policies are not particularly credible and markets are getting jittery, the 
prospect of adjustment down the road may not be enough to restore confidence in the short run. So 
domestic and foreign investors and creditors may have a strong incentive to pull their funds out of the 
affected country. This could precipitate a crisis.  
If creditors can be encouraged to stay put and to negotiate a solution in an orderly fashion, it would be 
in their collective interest as well as that of the whole international community. But how can this best 
be accomplished?  
This has proven to be a rather contentious issue, with the debate centered on the proper roles and 
responsibilities  of  the  official  and  private  sectors  in  crisis  management  and  resolution.  The  key 
question here is how much emergency assistance should be presumed to be available from the official 
sector and how much should be left for private debtors and creditors to sort out by themselves.  
Traditionally, the IMF has been the main provider of emergency official assistance to a country that 
runs into financial difficulties. But IMF resources are limited. And when debtors or creditors presume 
that there will be large official bailouts, there is the possibility of "moral hazard"—debtors have less 
incentive to make adjustments, and creditors feel less pressed to use effective risk management. More 
importantly, with no limits on official money, there is less motivation for creditors to be careful with risk 
assessment when loans are made. And there is little motivation for early, serious discussions between 
a debtor and  its creditors when  problems begin  to arise. In fact, the only serious motivation comes 
when  the  crisis  is  full-blown  and  official  money  runs  out.  Clear  limits  would  encourage  better  risk 
assessment, earlier negotiations, and conceivably, a quicker and more orderly resolution of the crisis.  
Of course, one could eliminate official assistance altogether and leave debtors and creditors to work it 
all  out  on  their  own.  But  with  no  official  lending,  disorderly  defaults  could  occur  more  frequently, 
resulting in unnecessary output losses and financial-system disruptions in the affected countries and 
elsewhere.  
Over the past couple of years, the Bank of Canada and the Bank of England together have developed 
a "middle ground" approach, designed to encourage  private  lenders to  work closely  with debtors to 
find timely, orderly solutions.  
In our joint work with the Bank of England, we set out a framework for the resolution of international 
financial crises. This framework has three basic elements. First, official assistance should be limited, 
and the limits should be well known in advance. (These limits are often referred to as the "presumptive 
limits.") The second key element of our approach is the possibility of exceptional official lending in the 
unlikely  event  that  a  crisis  threatens  global  financial  stability.  But  such  lending  would  be  based  on 
explicit  criteria  and  procedures.  Third,  it  is  recognized  that,  under  certain  conditions,  an  orderly 
standstill  (that  is,  a  temporary  suspension  of  debt-service  payments)  may  be  appropriate  to  give 
distressed debtors some time to take steps, including debt rescheduling, to address their problems. In 
addition, the framework encourages greater use of what is known as "collective-action clauses." These 
clauses are intended to discourage "rogue" creditors from blocking or rejecting a reasonable offer for 
debt restructuring.  
Such  a  framework,  by  providing  greater  clarity  upfront  about  the  size  and  terms  of  the  official 
assistance available, allows debtors and creditors to form more realistic expectations. In so doing, it 
helps to prevent crises; and, should they occur, it creates the right incentives for their timely resolution.  
In  many  international  forums—IMF,  G-20,  G-7—Canada  has  been  working  hard  to  encourage  the 
adoption  of  such  a  framework.  And  last  month,  G-7  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors 
BIS Review 31/2002 
 3
 adopted an Action Plan that aims to address many of these issues. The current problems in Argentina 
have served as a catalyst to refocus the attention of the international community on what was needed 
"to increase the predictability and reduce the uncertainty about official policy actions in the emerging 
markets."  
The G-7 Action Plan identifies the key elements of a successful framework for crisis prevention and 
resolution, and how these elements fit together to help align incentives for debtors and creditors. First, 
it recognizes the need for limits on official lending. Second,  it recognizes the need for rules in loan 
contracts to allow a cooling-off or standstill period and prevent small groups of creditors from blocking 
a reasonable restructuring deal. The Plan also encourages the IMF to continue its important work to 
find some mechanisms for sovereign debt restructuring analogous to domestic corporate bankruptcy 
procedures, such as Chapter 11 in the United States and the Companies' Creditors Arrangement Act 
(CCAA) in Canada.  
The G-7 countries have pledged to work with borrowers and creditors to make sure that these ideas 
can be effectively put into practice. Clearly, a lot more needs to be done, including work on operational 
and legal issues. But let us not lose sight of why this work is important. The Action Plan, by helping to 
reduce  the  incidence  of  financial  crises  and  to  better  resolve  them  when  they  do  occur,  will  create 
conditions that encourage sustained and sustainable growth of private investment in emerging-market 
countries, thus helping to raise their living standards.  
Concluding thoughts  
To conclude, considerable progress has been made in defining the elements of a strategy to reduce 
the incidence of crises in the future.  
When it comes to crisis management and resolution, the international community is still hard at work. 
Many  issues  on  how  to  put  in  place  a  framework  for  promoting  orderly  debt  restructuring  remain 
outstanding. But significant progress is being made.  
The stakes are high—not only because of the economic costs, but because of the social costs and the 
human suffering caused by financial crises. And, in an increasingly integrated world, more than ever, 
we are all in this together.  
4 
 BIS Review 31/2002
