 David Dodge: Trust, transparency and financial markets 
Remarks by Mr David Dodge, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Greater Halifax Partnership, 
Halifax, Nova Scotia, 11 June 2002. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  to  you  today.  It  is  a  pleasure  to  come  to Halifax  and  see  the 
exciting  things  happening  in  this  city  and  this  province.  I’d  like  to  congratulate  the  Greater  Halifax 
Partnership  for  its  role  in  community  development.  You  have  been  recognized  for  your  outstanding 
work in community economic growth, and your innovative approach makes this partnership a model 
for private and public sector co-operation. 
Financial market efficiency 
My  remarks  today  will  concentrate  on  two  themes.  Later  on,  I  want  to  talk  a  bit  about  the  Bank  of 
Canada’s view of the economy. 
But first, I would like to address an important subject; that is, how to promote the efficient operation of 
Canada’s financial markets. Rather than approaching this topic in a detailed, technical way, I want to 
speak about two qualities that are essential to their efficient operation: trust and transparency. 
Let me take a few minutes to describe why these qualities are important to the Bank. I think this can 
provide a good illustration as to why these same qualities are equally important for the private sector, 
particularly in light of Enron, and related questions about corporate practices. 
I will start with a quick definition of what I mean by trust. It’s a term that’s closely related to two other 
very  important  words: confidence and credibility. Trust, as I will use the term today,  is more than a 
simple belief in something or someone without supporting evidence. Trust is what develops when a 
group of people share an understanding that the rules for behaviour governing their system or society 
work well and make things better for everyone. With trust, less effort is expended in keeping tabs on 
others, so systems can run more efficiently. With trust, people can develop confidence that others will, 
in fact, do what they say they will do. And over time, as trust builds, so does the credibility of those 
who are trustworthy. 
I can tell you from our own experience that trust is an important enabler for all of the Bank of Canada’s 
key functions. And nowhere is this more true or more relevant than in the conduct of monetary policy. 
We  have  worked  hard  over  the  past  decade  or  so  to  build  up  trust  in  our  policy  of  explicit  inflation 
targets. And this effort has been bolstered by our moves towards greater transparency. 
The economic benefits of establishing trust 
During  the  1970s  and  1980s,  the  Bank  of  Canada  had  ample  experience  with  operating  in  an 
environment where Canadians had significantly less confidence in the Bank’s ability to safeguard the 
domestic value of the currency. Inflation was choppy and unpredictable, and the Bank of Canada was 
struggling  to  come  up  with  an  appropriate  anchor  for  monetary  policy.  However,  in  recent  years, 
Canadians have gained confidence that we will keep inflation low, stable, and predictable, thanks to 
our system of explicit inflation targets and our success in meeting them. This trust can be thought of as 
a kind of social capital—a shared asset that benefits everyone, including the central bank. This capital 
is very valuable and must not be squandered. 
What  does  this  have  to  do  with  efficiency?  Quite  a  bit.  If  you  think  back  to  the  1970s  and  1980s, 
people spent a great deal of time and effort trying to hedge against inflation. Resources that should 
have been put to more productive uses were spent devising ways to protect the value of savings. 
Then,  in  1991,  the  Government  of  Canada  and  the  Bank  agreed  on  a  system  of  explicit  inflation-
control targets. As you may know, under the current agreement our target is the 2 per cent midpoint of 
a  1  to  3  per  cent  band  for  the  total  consumer  price  index.  Since  we  adopted  this  inflation-control 
system we have been consistently successful in meeting the target. As a result, inflation expectations 
have fallen in line with the target and are now well anchored, not just for the near term, but well into 
the future. 
BIS Review 37/2002 
 1
 With  this  trust  in  place,  this  social  capital  earned,  the  list  of  economic  benefits  for  Canada  is  long 
indeed. Less time, energy, and money is being spent on protecting oneself against inflation. Labour 
and  financial  contracts  have  lengthened,  while  the  amount  of  time  lost  to  strikes  and  lockouts  has 
dropped. 
What is more, the dynamics of the inflation process have been changed, to the point that inflation itself 
has become much more stable and predictable. Inflation expectations are less vulnerable to swings in 
the external value of the Canadian dollar, and to changes in key energy prices. 
All this allows the Bank to conduct monetary policy more easily. And it allows financial markets and 
businesses to operate more efficiently. 
Of  course,  the  economy  has  also  undergone  a  number  of  other  necessary  changes,  including  a 
massive restructuring of the private sector and a restoration of fiscal health. Together, these changes 
have led to better economic performance. 
Transparency supports the system 
Before I move on, I want to say a few words about transparency. Like many other major central banks, 
we  have  embraced  the  notion  that  it  is  better  for  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  if  people  can 
understand what their central bank is thinking and why. 
The Bank of Canada has dramatically increased the number of opportunities for updating Canadians 
on the economic outlook. We use our four Monetary Policy Reports and Updates, as well our eight 
fixed announcement dates each year, to share our thinking on the economy. We want Canadians to 
have a good grasp of what our goals are and of the framework we use to achieve those goals. 
Our explicit inflation target gives Canadians a yardstick for measuring how their central bank is doing. 
In our view, the less flexible the yardstick, the better. It is one thing to have a goal of “low inflation” or 
“price stability.” But the Bank and the Government of Canada agree that it is much more effective to 
have an explicit target for inflation so people know if we are meeting our commitment. So the result of 
all this effort at increased transparency is to give people a clear yardstick they can use to measure 
performance. 
All  of  this  enhances  the  Bank’s  accountability  and  reinforces  the  trust  we  have  fostered  through 
inflation targeting. After all, it’s a lot easier to have trust in an institution if it is open about its goals and 
strategies, and if it offers a clear way to measure its performance. 
Trust and the private sector 
This  is  relevant  not  just  to  central  banks  but  to  the  entire  business  and  financial  community. 
Trustworthy  business  standards  are  one  of  the  most  important  forms  of  social  capital.  Trust  is 
paramount to the efficient operation of financial markets. And financial markets are a key ingredient of 
a well-functioning economy. 
This trust includes confidence in the players involved—the people who run the companies, and those 
who  watch  them.  It  also  includes  trust  that  the  information  required  to  make  sound  investment 
decisions  is  disclosed  fully  and  accurately.  Moreover,  the  disclosure  must  be  fair—there  must  be 
confidence that insiders are not trading on information not available to everyone. Only when all these 
components  of  trust  are  in  place  can  we  have  healthy,  efficient  financial  markets  that  benefit 
everybody. 
Generally speaking, these components are in place in Canada. But the Enron collapse in the United 
States reminds us here that we cannot be complacent about our own situation. 
So what is lost when something like Enron occurs? Skepticism sets in about the truthfulness of routine 
financial disclosures. Companies find it more expensive to raise funds because once trust is broken, 
fewer investors are willing to participate, and those who remain demand a premium for the increased 
risk  of  being  misled.  A  lack  of  reliable  information  also  leads  investors  to  make  poor  investment 
decisions,  so  capital  is  misallocated.  In  short,  financial  markets  operate  less  efficiently,  with  fewer 
benefits for everyone. 
Avoiding a widespread loss of trust requires a systematic and coordinated effort to fix the flaws and 
weaknesses that can undermine investor confidence. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2002
 It  is  important  that  there  be  a  set  of  reasonable  rules—so  that  chief  executives,  boards,  and  their 
auditors  truly  and  fairly  disclose  the  financial  position  of  public  companies—and  that  the  investing 
public can rely on the truth, fairness, and completeness of that disclosure. 
Now, in spite of the specific flaws that the Enron collapse has revealed, it has become clear that much 
of the public’s confidence in the efficient operation of financial markets remains intact. But we must 
continue to be vigilant. 
Restoring confidence 
Financial statements form the foundation on which financial markets operate. I have already spoken of 
the way that a clear yardstick has helped the Bank improve its transparency. The same idea holds true 
for  financial  statements.  Clear  and  accurate  corporate  reporting,  together  with  other  reliable 
information  for  investors,  are  essential.  Equally  importantly,  information  must  be  presented  in  a 
straightforward manner. Earnings reports should be used to disclose information, not bury it. We can’t 
pretend that hundreds of complicated pages lead to the type of disclosure that facilitates efficiency. 
Next, confidence must be constantly earned by corporate managers and directors, auditors, analysts 
and investment advisors, rating agencies and regulators. Reputations have been threatened by events 
like Enron, and by the suspicion that some insiders have been feathering their nests at the expense of 
shareholders.  Obviously,  it  is  wrong  for  analysts  who  actively  own  shares  in  a  firm  to  use  their 
assessments to promote that firm. But there can be more subtle conflicts of interest that don’t involve 
illegal  or  fraudulent  activity—for  example,  auditors  who  are  not  truly  independent  of  the  companies 
they audit. 
Risk  assessment  is  another  issue  that  needs  more  attention,  particularly  by  companies  outside  the 
financial  sector.  This  involves  more  than  just  listing  in  a  financial  filing  all  the  things  that  could  go 
wrong. Companies need to tell investors how they are handling both the external risks that they face 
and the risks they have chosen to take on as part of their business strategy. After all, investors are 
required to sign a form that tells their broker about their risk tolerance before they buy a stock. Surely 
then, the company issuing that stock should be able to give those investors some honest disclosure of 
their assessment of the risks involved in that investment. 
The fallout from Enron has prompted debate about the need for tougher financial market rules. If it is 
determined that new rules need to be written, they must not be picayune regulations that simply give 
the unscrupulous a roadmap to evade the spirit of the rules. It is the observance of the spirit as well as 
the letter of the regulations that we all must aspire to achieve. 
And when unscrupulous market participants or practices are revealed, authorities must come down on 
them with full force. To do otherwise is to do markets a disservice. Only strict reprobation will restore 
and maintain confidence that the rules are being enforced. 
Regulatory and supervisory bodies around the globe have begun to deal with the fallout from Enron 
and other high-profile bankruptcies. In the United States, the Financial Accounting Standards Board is 
looking at proposals to determine when so-called “special-purpose entities” should be consolidated on 
company balance sheets. The Securities and Exchange Commission has proposed new rules for more 
detailed and timely corporate disclosure. 
Here  at  home,  the  Canadian  Institute  of  Chartered  Accountants  (CICA)  has  asked  its  Accounting 
Standards Oversight Council to closely monitor the accounting and financial reporting issues raised by 
Enron.  The  CICA  is  also  looking  at  ways  to  boost  auditor  independence.  I  am  also  aware  that  the 
accounting profession and its regulators are working to develop an oversight body to promote high-
quality audits of public companies. The Toronto Stock Exchange has made changes to its guidelines 
for effective corporate governance. Parliamentary committees such as the Senate Banking, Trade and 
Commerce  Committee  have  also  launched  their  own  investigations  into  the  Canadian  market 
post-Enron. 
The market is responding 
We have seen much self-evaluation by market participants in recent months. I am very encouraged by 
how  seriously  these  issues  are  being  taken.  The  market  is  enforcing  its  own  discipline.  Corporate 
boards are re-examining their roles and taking a closer look at what is being done in their companies. 
BIS Review 37/2002 
 3
 Investors are demanding greater reconciliation between pro forma financial statements and generally 
accepted accounting principles. 
Major  firms,  in  response  to  those  demands,  are  changing  their  corporate  reporting  methods.  For 
example, some firms have announced plans to include, as an expense, the cost of executive stock 
options. And Standard and Poor’s has introduced new benchmarks for reporting corporate earnings. 
Those changes aim to more accurately describe the revenues and costs associated with companies’ 
primary businesses. 
We feel steps like these are helpful in advancing the debate about the most fair and accurate methods 
for reporting a company’s true financial state. These are all positive examples of participants working 
together to enforce the spirit—not just the letter—of the rules under which financial markets operate. 
In the end, everyone needs to have trust in the financial markets—to know that the right rules are in 
place  and  that  those  rules  are  being  enforced. We must  continue  to  build  on  that  social  capital,  to 
promote the efficient operation of financial markets, and the benefits that those markets can bring to 
everyone in society. 
The current outlook for the economy 
Now, I  would like to say  a few  words on the Nova Scotia economy. Like the rest of Canada, Nova 
Scotia’s  economy  has  proven  to  be  stronger  than  expected  over  the  past  year.  Indeed,  Statistics 
Canada  reported  last  week  that  the  province’s  employment  rate  has  returned  to  an  all-time  high  in 
May.  Nova  Scotia  was  buoyed  by  strong  offshore  oil  and  gas  production  last  year.  The  study 
commissioned  by  the  Greater  Halifax  Partnership  paints  an  exciting  picture  of  the  future  impact  of 
offshore development. 
The province has also been making important strides in building other sectors to diversify its economy, 
and this bodes well for the future. We’ve seen tremendous expansion in the information technology 
and life sciences sectors. That includes commercializing some of the excellent research being done at 
Nova  Scotia  universities  and  fostering  technology  companies  to  capitalize  on  the  province’s 
telecommunications infrastructure. 
Turning to the outlook for Canada as a whole, the economy has been growing robustly—expanding at 
an annual rate of 6 per cent in the first quarter—well above expectations. And this has been reflected 
in the extraordinary number of jobs created since the beginning of the year. Employment has grown by 
almost a quarter of a million jobs in the past five months. 
Canada  is  demonstrating  clear  economic  momentum.  Consumer  spending,  particularly  on  interest-
sensitive  items,  continues  to  show  strength.  Business  investment  is  no  longer  acting  as  a  drag  on 
growth, and there are signs of the beginnings of a recovery in investment in machinery and equipment. 
Corporate profits are rebounding, which should continue to support business investment. 
While this domestic performance bodes well, geopolitical uncertainties and weaker profits among large 
multinational firms may inhibit a strong rebound in investment around the world for a period of time. 
Let me sum up. Canada’s economy is growing at a faster pace, and is operating at a higher level, than 
had been anticipated. And this means that it is moving towards full production capacity more quickly 
than  we  had  expected.  Core  inflation  has  also  been  running  slightly  higher  than  we  anticipated,  at 
2.2 per cent in April. 
Against this backdrop, last week, the Bank raised its target for the overnight rate by 25 basis points to 
2.50  per  cent.  This  was  the  second  increase  in  the  target  rate,  aimed  at  withdrawing  some  of  the 
substantial amount of monetary stimulus in the economy. With the domestic economy showing strong 
momentum, the Bank will take whatever action is necessary to keep inflation near its 2 per cent target 
over the medium term. And that is the best contribution the Bank of Canada can make to promoting a 
strong, sustainable economy for all of Canada. 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2002
