 David Dodge: Monetary policy choices: the Canadian experience 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Chambre  de  Commerce 
France-Canada and Les Canadiens en Europe (France), Paris, 12 March 2002. 
 It is a great pleasure to be with you today here in this wonderful and historic city. Canada and France 
share  important  links  that  cannot  be  weakened  by  time.  There  was,  of  course,  a  vibrant  French 
presence in North America long before there was a country called Canada. The French contribution to 
Canada  is  not  restricted  to  language  alone.  Canada's  legal  and  political  institutions,  as  well  as  our 
culture and way of life, retain a clearly visible French influence, and will continue to do so.  
Obviously, our economies and the economic links between our countries have come a long way over 
the years. The Chambre de Commerce France-Canada was established just after the Second World 
War.  The  Chambre  has  played  an  important  role  in  reinforcing  commercial  ties  between  our  two 
countries  that  reflect  the  historical  and  cultural  links  already  in  place.  Les  Canadiens  en  Europe  is 
another organization that seeks to strengthen the many ties between us. Today, France and Canada 
are both members of the G-7–partners at the forefront of the global economy.  
The  strong  links  between  our  two  countries  are  also  reflected  in  the  close  working  relationship 
between  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  Bank  of  France.  Since  becoming  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
Canada last year, I have been pleased to continue this relationship. I am happy to be working once 
again with Jean-Claude Trichet, the Governor of the Bank of France. Bank of Canada staff regularly 
attend the annual seminars hosted by the Bank of France. And I hope we will continue to strengthen 
the working relationship between our two institutions.  
Over the years, both Canada and France have had to make decisions about the framework guiding 
monetary policy. The authorities in the two countries have made choices that reflect the differences in 
our economies. Today I'd like to talk about some of these choices, and what they have meant for our 
countries. As well, I will give you a brief update on Canada's current economic situation and outlook.  
Inflation targeting  
In  the  early  1990s,  most  of  the  world's  central  banks  found  themselves  facing  a  common  problem. 
They needed to make sure that their economies did not return to the high and volatile inflation seen in 
previous decades. Further, they were looking for a way to keep inflation expectations under control. In 
general, central banks did a good job  with this. Certainly the  Bank of France was successful in the 
early 1990s in building credibility as an inflation-fighting central bank.  
At that time, the Bank of Canada and the Government of Canada had come to a shared appreciation 
of  the  damage  that  inflation  can  do.  So  they  made  an  important  decision  in  early  1991.  They 
announced a joint agreement to adopt explicit inflation-control targets. The agreement has been very 
successful in giving Canada low, stable, and predictable inflation. It has been renewed three times—
most recently for five years until the end of 2006.  
Today,  both  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  European  Central  Bank  are  working  to  strengthen  the 
economies in their jurisdictions. We both want to promote stable growth and rising living standards. 
And, importantly, we agree that promoting low and stable inflation is the best means to those ends. 
There are similarities between our inflation-control systems. For example, we both focus on inflation, 
and we both aim for price stability over the medium term. But there are also some differences that I 
want to highlight for you today.  
The Bank of Canada aims for price stability through its inflation target of 2 per cent. On the other hand, 
the  European  Central  Bank  has  an  inflation  ceiling  of  2  per  cent,  as  measured  by  the  Harmonized 
Index of Consumer Prices. This may look like a subtle difference, but it is important.  
For the Bank of Canada, 2 per cent is the midpoint of our 1 to 3 per cent inflation-control target range. 
It is a target, not a ceiling. Our focus on that midpoint makes it clear that we run monetary policy in a 
symmetrical way. That is to say, we pay equal attention to any significant movement away from 2 per 
cent—whether above or below.  
BIS Review 17/2002 
 1
 When demand is strong, it can push the economy against the limits of its capacity to produce. This will 
tend  to  raise  future  inflation  above  its  target  midpoint.  In  these  circumstances,  the  Bank  will  raise 
interest rates to cool off the economy, and return inflation to the target.  
But this process also  works in the  other direction. When demand is  weak, as we saw in 2001, this 
means  that  future  inflationary  pressures  are  likely  to  ease.  So  the  Bank  will  lower  interest  rates  to 
stimulate the economy, absorb economic slack, and return inflation to the target.  
By working in a symmetrical way in response to surprises in demand, our inflation-targeting system 
helps to smooth the peaks and valleys of the business cycle. This promotes sound, and generally less 
variable, economic growth.  
In our experience, we have found that operating this way around our inflation target is an effective way 
to  anchor  inflation  expectations.  Indeed,  in  recent  years,  inflation  expectations  have  become  firmly 
anchored on the 2 per cent target.  
This is important for the economy. With inflation expectations solidly  anchored, investors can better 
assess  the  future  value  of  their  investments.  Savers  can  be  more  confident  that  their  purchasing 
power  will  not  be  eroded  unexpectedly  by  inflation.  Similarly,  debtors  can  better  assess  the  real 
burden  of  their  interest  payments.  Wage  bargaining  can  become  less  contentious  so  labour 
disruptions decrease. The duration of wage and financial contracts can be lengthened considerably. 
All of this is possible because people are confident that inflation will neither greatly exceed, nor greatly 
fall  below,  2  per  cent  over  the  medium  term.  In  short,  the  real  economy  works  better  and  is  more 
stable.  
Moreover,  the  credibility  of  the  targets  has  changed  the  whole  dynamic  of  the  inflation  process. 
Sudden temporary swings in energy prices, or movements in the exchange rate, do not feed into other 
prices in the economy the way they did in the past. Again, this is because inflation expectations are 
well anchored.  
I should be clear that adopting the inflation targets was not the only thing that happened in the past 10 
years to improve Canada's economy. The federal government, and the provinces, proceeded to clean 
up their balance sheets. Because of that, our public debt-to-GDP ratio is on a sustainable downward 
path, even during a period of economic slowdown.  
This improvement in the public sector balance sheet has led to a sharp increase in national savings. 
As a result, our net foreign indebtedness fell from a peak of 44 per cent of GDP in 1993 to about 20 
per  cent  today.  It  is  important  that  we  continue  to  reduce  our  net  foreign  debt.  In  Canada,  it  is 
particularly important that we do this before the baby-boom generation retires.  
So, based on our experience, I can say that a monetary policy aimed at low, stable, and predictable 
inflation and a fiscal policy aimed at reducing the public debt-to-GDP ratio work well together. Prudent 
monetary and fiscal policies reinforce each other's credibility.  
The role of a flexible exchange rate  
Let me now turn briefly to the role of exchange rates. This is one area where our two countries have 
made different choices. France is one of a dozen European countries that have chosen a monetary 
union with a single currency.  
This remarkable effort reached a crucial milestone at the start of this year. After existing in electronic 
form  for  three  years,  the  euro  finally  began  to  circulate  as  notes  and  coins.  By  all  accounts,  the 
transition went extremely smoothly. The European Central Bank, and the 12 national central banks, 
deserve a great deal of credit for handling it so well.  
Indeed, the completion of the process has rekindled the debate in Canada: If it is advantageous for 
France and 11 other European countries to form a monetary union with a common currency, would a 
similar arrangement for Canada and the United States also be advantageous?  
After analyzing the costs and benefits, in my view, a separate, floating currency continues to make the 
most sense for Canada for the foreseeable future. Let me take a few minutes to explain why.  
A  floating  exchange  rate  is  beneficial  for  Canada,  primarily  because  our  production  and  trade 
structures are quite different from those of our major trading partner, the United States.  
2 
 BIS Review 17/2002
 Let me give you a couple of examples. Canada is a net exporter of primary commodities, while the 
United States is a net importer of commodities. And unlike the United States, Canada's auto industry 
is geared heavily toward exports. We produce two cars for every one that is sold in Canada.  
Because of the differences in our economic structures, major changes, such as large swings in relative 
prices, affect Canada and the United States differently. One way or another, the Canadian economy 
must  adjust  to  these  changes.  A  floating  exchange  rate  is  important  because  it  helps  the  economy 
adjust to economic disturbances, such as fluctuations in world demand for, and prices of, our products. 
Equally importantly, it also facilitates adjustments to changes in savings and investment flows.  
It is true that the Canadian and U.S. economies are becoming more integrated. It is also true that by 
forming a monetary union, there would be some savings for Canadians in terms of the transactions 
costs of converting currencies and hedging against currency movements. So the question might well 
be asked: Since most of Europe has moved to a monetary union with a single currency, what about 
North America?  
From  a  Canadian  perspective,  there  are  at  least  three  major  arguments  against  monetary  union  in 
North  America.  First,  in  Europe  you  have  single  markets  for  goods,  capital  and  labour.  In  North 
America, we do not have a single labour market.  
Second, the structures of the largest economies in the euro zone are more similar than the structures 
of the Canadian and U.S. economies.  
Finally,  the  euro  zone  is  a  collection  of  12  countries.  Although  they  differ  in  size,  no  single  nation 
dominates the group. In contrast, in North America, the United States is dominant, both in terms of 
population and economic power.  
So yes, North American economies are becoming more integrated. But it does not necessarily follow 
that  the  structures  of  our  economies  are  becoming  more  alike.  As  long  as  those  structures  remain 
different,  the  benefits  of  a  flexible  exchange  rate  will  outweigh  the  associated  transactions  and  risk 
costs. For Canada, our best choice is to have inflation targets as an anchor for our monetary policy, 
and a distinct, floating currency. As I have said before, this should remain the case for the foreseeable 
future.  
Now let me turn briefly to the current state of Canada's economy and the outlook for the future.  
Recent economic developments and prospects in Canada  
The immediate impact and the fallout from last September's tragic events in the United States led to a 
sharp increase in economic uncertainty around the world. This exacerbated the effects of the global 
economic slowdown, which had become more evident by last summer.  
In those circumstances, the Bank of Canada stepped up the pace of interest rate reduction that had 
begun earlier in 2001. The aim was to minimize the economic effects of the terrorist acts and to limit 
the loss of confidence at home. Since last September, we have cut the target for our overnight interest 
rate by 200 basis points. The total reduction since the beginning of 2001 has been 375 basis points.  
This substantial monetary easing will have its maximum impact as we move through this year and into 
2003. In addition, tax cuts implemented at the  beginning of last  year continue  to provide significant 
support  to  the  Canadian  economy.  Further  stimulus  will  also  come  from  spending  on  enhanced 
national  security.  Thus,  both  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  are  supporting  our  economy  as  we  move 
forward.  
Moreover,  there  has  been  an  improvement  since  last  autumn  in  the  geopolitical  climate  and  in 
consumer  confidence,  both  in  North  America  and  in  Europe.  Signs  are  increasing  that  the  global 
economy has turned the corner and will firm as the year progresses.  
For  these  reasons,  the  Bank  of  Canada  expects  that  the  Canadian  economy  will  gain  momentum 
through 2002. While growth in the first half will be moderate, it should accelerate in the second half—
to something like 3 to 4 per cent—and strengthen further in 2003.  
This means that later this year, our economy should start expanding at rates exceeding the growth of 
potential output. At that point, the slack that has built up over the past several months will begin to be 
absorbed. Still, it could be well into 2003 before the actual level of output in the Canadian economy 
will again reach its potential level.  
BIS Review 17/2002 
 3
 This implies that core inflation will probably average about 1 1/2 per cent in the second half of 2002. 
Total CPI inflation is expected to stay below the core rate until late 2002, if energy prices remain near 
their current levels. Given the profile for output growth, the Bank expects both total and core inflation 
to move back up to 2 per cent in approximately two years.  
Recent  economic  indicators  for  Canada  show  that  the  worst  of  the  downturn  is  over.  A  recovery  is 
underway.  There  were  several  positive  signs  in  the  fourth  quarter  national  accounts  data  published 
last  month,  including  strong  household  spending.  Overall,  Canada's  economy  grew  at  a  2  per  cent 
annualized rate in the fourth quarter of 2001.  
In addition, there was a sizable reduction of inventories in the fourth quarter. This bodes well for the 
coming months, because the lower level of inventories will underpin future production.  
Data for the first two months of this  year show that the Canadian economy has added 82,000 new 
jobs. Car sales are continuing to show strength, as is the housing sector.  
The Bank expects that fixed investment in Canada and the United States should start to pick up in the 
second  half  of  the  year.  But  we  are  very  much  aware  that  this  depends  on  a  recovery  in  business 
confidence, especially for large multinational enterprises. How quickly and how strongly profits and the 
confidence  of  those  firms  bounce  back  will  have  an  important  bearing  on  the  strength  and 
sustainability of the overall economic recovery.  
To sum up, Canada has made some difficult choices in recent years to face the challenges of today's 
globalized economy. We have found that our framework of a symmetrical inflation target and a floating 
exchange  rate  is  appropriate  for  our  economy.  We  have  a  solid  anchor  for  monetary  policy,  and 
inflation expectations are well grounded. Fiscal health has been restored and we will continue to make 
progress in bringing down our public debt-to-GDP ratio.  
Thanks to these improvements, the effects of last year's global economic slowdown on Canada were 
not as pronounced as they might have been. And with encouraging signs of a turnaround in the world 
economy and a domestic recovery underway, prospects for the Canadian economy are favourable.  
4 
 BIS Review 17/2002
