 Nout Wellink: The role of national central banks within the European system of 
central banks- the example of De Nederlandsche Bank 
Introduction by Dr Nout Wellink, President of De Nederlandsche Bank and President of the Bank for 
International  Settlements,  to  the  paper  ‘The  Role  of  National  Central  Banks  within  the  European 
System of Central Banks: The Example of De Nederlandsche Bank’, Oesterreichische Nationalbank 
Conference ‘Competition of Regions and Integration in EMU’, Vienna, 13-14 June 2002  
 Introduction 
I would first like to thank the Oesterreichische Nationalbank for inviting me to this conference and take 
up  the  challenge  of  discussing  the  role  of  national  central  banks  in  Europe.  Clearly,  this  role 
underwent  a  fascinating  metamorphosis  with  the  introduction  of  the  single  currency.  Suddenly,  a 
strong, European dimension was added to these institutions that were traditionally largely confined to 
national boundaries.  
Consequently, the national central bank in Europe is of a peculiar sort and has a double identity. On 
the one hand, it is deeply rooted in national tradition and sovereignty, which reflects specific national 
tasks and responsibilities. On the other hand, it is part of a system of central banks responsible for a 
fully supranationalised monetary policy and related, common tasks.  
Let me now briefly outline my paper on the role of national central banks in Europe. First, I will shortly 
discuss the general framework of the European System of Central Banks. Subsequently, I will touch 
on the System tasks and related national responsibilities. Here, I will specifically spend some time on 
financial  stability  and  supervision.  Clearly,  this  policy  area  has  seen  some  major  developments 
recently, both on the national and European level.  
The European System of Central Banks 
What  exactly  is  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks? What  explains  its  unique  institutional  and 
operational set-up? These are crucial questions in analysing the role of national central banks or, for 
that matter, understanding monetary union in general. Nevertheless, the questions are seldom asked, 
let alone answered. Since the Second World War, European integration has been a co-operative effort 
in which common objectives in principle override the size and power of the individual participants. 
The  European  System  of  Central  Banks  is  a  both  a  product  and  a  reflection  of  this  European 
Community of Member States. Hence, the fundamental notion  underlying the  System is a joint and 
equal responsibility to carry out the tasks assigned by the Treaty. In this set-up, the ECB operates as 
the legal entity that links the spokes of the system and thus makes the joint responsibility for tasks 
possible.  The  Governing  Council  is  the  highest  decision-making  body  of  the  ECB,  consisting  of 
executive board members and governors of the national central banks. 
Apart from the fundamental notion of joint responsibility, two guiding principles of the Treaty determine 
the  operational  side  of  the  System.  First,  subsidiarity  prescribes  that  the  responsibilities  lie  at  the 
lowest  possible  level.  In  the  context  of  the  European  Community,  this  principle  respects  national 
sovereignty  and  reflects  the  heterogeneity  of  its  Member  States.  Second,  the  Treaty  prescribes  an 
efficient allocation of resources. In other words, the System should be effective at the least cost. In 
practice,  there  may  be  trade-offs  between  the  principles  of  subsidiarity  and  efficiency,  but  gross 
inefficiencies should, of course, be avoided.  
Tasks of the European System of Central Banks 
Now, with this basic System framework in mind, let me turn to the actual tasks of the national central 
bank  that  follow  from  the  System.  In  the  paper,  I  cover  the  tasks  of  deciding  on  and  executing 
monetary  policy,  foreign  reserve  management,  the  collection  and  production  of  statistics,  external 
relations, and the operational aspects of payment systems and banknotes. Given time constraints, I 
will limit myself to the conduct of monetary policy. 
BIS Review 38/2002 
 1
 The  fundamental  notion  of  joint  responsibilities  adds  value  in  the  sense  that  it  offers  checks  and 
balances in the monetary policy process. For example, the participation of NCB-governors increases 
accountability  and  the  quality  of  decision-making.  Indeed,  given  their  joint  responsibility  for  price 
stability, all national central banks have not only the right, but also the obligation, to fully prepare their 
governor in his or her capacity as an ECB-Council member.  
Although fundamental to the System, the notion of joint responsibility allows for institutional flexibility 
when it comes to the effectiveness of monetary policy – as this clearly lies at the heart of monetary 
union. Let me first of all emphasise that the present size (18 members) of the Governing Council has 
never  been  a  stumbling  block 
for  effective,  and  where  necessary,  rapid  decision-making. 
Nevertheless, there is the perception that, with further EMU-enlargement, the size of the team could 
hamper the effectiveness of monetary policy.  
That is why the Treaty of Nice goes as far as to offer the possibility to restrict the number of votes in 
the Governing Council on monetary policy. Clearly, on the basis of the fundamental notion on which 
the  System  is  built,  all  governors  will  remain  equally  involved  in  future  monetary  policy  decisions. 
However, they may not all have a vote at the same time. Moreover, the participation of NCB-governors 
will continue to offer checks and balances and enhance the quality of decision-making. 
Let me turn to the guiding principle of subsidiarity. Clearly, the principle implies that, to a large extent, 
the spokes of the System take care of both inputs and outputs. Given the heterogeneity of the euro 
area,  this  bottom-up  approach  to  System  tasks  makes  sense.  Thus,  in  dealing  with  economic, 
structural, or even linguistic differences and national preferences, the spokes are better positioned in 
the operation of monetary policy. The same goes for managing payment systems or the collection of 
statistics  –  tasks  that  I  will  leave  aside  for  the  moment.  Moreover,  governors  and  their  respective 
central banks bring in specific local knowledge and enhance healthy competition within the System – 
for example in the area of research.  
Of course, as explained, we should be conscious of potential trade-offs between subsidiarity and the 
guiding principle of efficiency. As such, there is no denying that efficiency gains can be achieved in the 
production and distribution of banknotes. We need to pursue these possibilities.     
Financial stability and banking supervision – national tasks of NCBs 
This brings me to the central bank tasks that fall outside the exclusive domain of the European System 
of Central Banks. For the Dutch central bank, these tasks take up around half of its staff and relate to 
international financial relations, advising the government, financial stability and  banking supervision. 
Under the subsidiarity principle, these responsibilities lie close to the sovereignty of the nation state. 
Nevertheless, there are clear links and synergies with the tasks of the European System of Central 
Banks – which, in fact, is an important reason for national central banks having these tasks.  
Let  me  limit  myself  here  to  financial  stability  and  supervision  –  given  their  importance  in  recent 
European  discussions. According to the Treaty, the  European System of Central Banks as a whole 
shall  contribute  to  the  smooth  conduct  of  policies  pursued  by  competent  authorities  in  the  field  of 
prudential supervision and financial stability. The collective responsibility to contribute to these policies 
follows from the financial stability task of the national central banks. 
This involvement in financial stability is a natural reflection of other tasks, including monetary policy, 
payment systems and – to varying extent – banking supervision. Monetary policy relies on financial 
stability  in order to be effective. In addition,  in exercising  oversight over  national  payment systems, 
central  banks  guard  against  systemic  risks  that  could  be  transmitted  via  these  systems.  There  are 
therefore clear synergies between financial stability and other tasks. Central to these synergies is the 
wealth of knowledge on the financial system through the central bank´s active presence in financial 
markets.  Again,  the  structural  differences  in  financial  systems  across  the  euro  area  mean  that  the 
financial stability task is more appropriately located at the national level, although communication and 
co-ordination across borders are increasingly important.  
Whereas all national central banks have a financial stability task, not all have direct competence in the 
field of prudential supervision. The choice to delegate the supervisory task to the central bank is, of 
course, based on national circumstances and preferences. However, the important synergies between 
the financial stability and supervisory tasks should not be ignored. I will come back to this issue when I 
discuss the supervisory arrangements in the Netherlands. In general, it is important to stress that on 
both  a  national  and  European  level  the  national  central  banks  remain  involved  in  discussions  on 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2002
 prudential supervision. This is essential for the proper execution of their financial stability task and, as 
such, enables the System to contribute to the smooth conduct of supervisory policies. 
Recent developments in Europe regarding supervision 
Recently, the perception of increased cross sector and cross border financial integration has resulted 
in  demands  for  enhancing  the  supervisory  structure  in  Europe.  I  fully  subscribe  to  the  ambitions  to 
speed up the regulatory process of supervision in Europe. Moreover, the convergence of supervisory 
practices  would  serve  a  level  playing  field  in  European  financial  markets.  Last  year,  a  European 
committee  under  chairmanship  of  Mr  Brouwer  –  director  at  the  Dutch  central  bank  –  made  several 
recommendations on this point. As I explained, the involvement of national central banks will continue 
to offer welcome expertise in assessing the supervisory needs and challenges of financial integration. 
Concerning topics directly related to financial stability and systemic risks, the national central banks 
will be at the frontline of European discussions, together with their counterparts from the ministries of 
finance. 
However,  I  would  warn  against  the  suggestion  of  introducing  a  single  European  supervisor.  It  is  a 
misconception  to  expect  that  a  top  down  approach  to  the  design  of  supervision  in  Europe  would 
promote  financial  integration.  Clearly,  that  would  simply  ignore  the  structural  differences  on  the 
national  level.  Indeed,  the  practice  of  EMU  has  shown  that  a  critical  mass  in  integration  is  needed 
before institutional convergence (i.e. the introduction of the Euro) can work as a catalyst. Likewise, I 
would  warn  against  the  suggestion  that  from  a  financial  stability  perspective,  the  number  of 
supervisors should be consolidated. Here again, the principle of subsidiarity allows for the necessary 
checks and balances, which would be lost if we had one supervisory giant in Europe. 
Supervisory reforms in the Netherlands 
This brings me, as promised, to the supervisory arrangements in the Netherlands. In relative terms, 
the consolidation and integration of the Dutch financial sector are well-advanced. First, our experience 
shows that the future challenges to cross border supervision may not be merely European, but rather 
of a global dimension. Moreover, in the face of horizontal integration, the division of supervisory tasks 
in the Netherlands has recently been streamlined along functional lines. Thus, the organisational links 
between  the  Dutch  central  bank  (as  banking  supervisor)  and  the  insurance  supervisor  have  been 
strengthened.  This  allows  for  an  integrated  approach  to  prudential  supervision.  On  the  other  hand, 
issues  related  to  the  conduct  of  business  and  consumer  protection  have  been  concentrated  in  the 
Financial Markets Authority. 
These recent reforms in my country subscribe to the basic principles of effectiveness and subsidiarity I 
referred to  earlier. Thus,  there  was no case in terms of efficiency or effectiveness to reallocate the 
supervisory task already assigned to the central bank. Here, the synergies with the task of financial 
oversight have been acknowledged. Moreover, there is the link to our role as lender of last resort. With 
the  supervisor  in-house,  a  quick  and  effective  assessment  can  be  made  of  the  nature  of  crises  – 
including  whether  they  involve  liquidity  or  solvency  difficulties.  Consequently,  the  central  bank  has 
good  insights  into  the  risks  for  the  financial  system  at  large.  Finally,  the  necessary  checks  and 
balances – in particular regarding supervisory autonomy and accountability – were retained.  
Conclusion  
Let me conclude. It is likely that the European System of Central Banks will be continuously evolving in 
the interplay between hubs and spokes – exploiting efficiency gains to the extent that the principle of 
subsidiarity  allows.  However,  the  federal  shape  of  the  System  and  the  firmly  rooted  national 
component of central banks reflect the main driver of European integration – the nation state. In short, 
that  implies  that,  with  anything  short  of  political  union,  the  fundamental  principle  of  collective 
responsibility of the System remains in place. All central banks have to be fully involved if we are to 
fulfil this collective responsibility.  
Moreover, the unique structure of the European System of Central Banks and the double identity of its 
participants  add  important  value.  The  monetary  policy  process  gains  from  the  individual  expertise, 
knowledge and networks of the national central banks that improve the quality of decision-making and 
offer  checks  and  balances.  The  System  set-up  also  enables  great  synergies  with  the  execution  of 
BIS Review 38/2002 
 3
 national  central  bank  tasks.  I  referred  in  this  respect  to  the  national  responsibilities  for  financial 
stability, and – in case of the Dutch central bank – the task of supervision.  
I  am  convinced  that,  based  on  the  fundamental  notion  of  collective  responsibility  and  the  guiding 
principles of subsidiarity and efficiency, the System will continue to generate good joint and individual 
policies, provide proper checks and balances and even enhance the European integration process in 
general.  As  such,  the  national  central  bank might  even  contribute  to  loosening  the  roots  of  its  very 
existence  -  when  the  nation  state  would  dissolve  into  political  union.  But  even  then,  differences  of 
structure,  culture  and  language  will  remain,  and  there  will  be  a  need  for  similar,  regional  bodies  to 
keep  monetary  union  operational.  Referring  to  the  theme  of  this  conference,  perhaps  future 
generations will then witness the birth of a new entity – the regional central bank. 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2002
