 Eva Srejber: Inflation targeting and bubbles 
Speech  by  Ms  Eva  Srejber,  Second  Deputy  Governor  of  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the  Adam  Smith 
seminars, Paris, 9 July 2002. 
 Since  the  mid-1990s,  inflation  has  stabilised  at  very  low  levels  in  the  industrial  nations.  From  an 
average inflation rate of 6 per cent during the period 1975 to 1994, the rate of price increase has been 
slightly below 2 per cent over the past 6 years. This entails a return to the same low inflation rate as 
prior to  1970. Inflation has also been reduced considerably in most other countries in, for instance, 
Asia and Latin America. 
There  are  many  factors  that  have  contributed  to  this.  Firstly,  price  stability  has  become  an  explicit 
objective for monetary policy in many countries. An increasing number of central banks are orienting 
their monetary policy towards a fixed inflation target. This includes the Riksbank, which, after the fixed 
exchange rate was abandoned in November 1992, established an inflation target of 2 per cent with a 
deviation interval of plus/minus one percentage point. The orientation of monetary policy has in many 
countries  been  supported  by  a  fiscal  policy  aimed  at  budget  consolidation.  Independence  for  the 
central banks in Europe, convergence criteria for EMU membership, the stability pact in Europe and 
the ban on financing budget deficits through printing new banknotes are all examples of measures that 
have  helped  increase  confidence  in  the  price  stability  target.  Increased  competition  in  the  wake  of 
globalisation  has  probably  also  subdued  inflation  temporarily.  The  improvements  in  productivity 
registered in many countries at the end of the 1990s have further contributed to reducing inflation. 
While  inflation  has  stabilised,  the  fluctuations  in  asset  prices  and  exchange  rates  have  scarcely 
declined. The rise in asset prices, the decline in private savings and the credit boom that took place in 
many  countries  at  the  end  of  the  1990s  created  fears  that  major  financial  imbalances  would 
accumulate.  This  applied  in  particular  to  the  USA,  but  similar  patterns  were  demonstrated  in  other 
countries, including Sweden. There was concern that if asset prices fell, this could trigger processes 
that would eventually result in a very deep and prolonged economic downturn. If monetary policy were 
strictly  oriented  towards  an  inflation  target  and  inflationary  pressure  were  low,  this  would  lead  to 
relatively  low  nominal  interest  rates.  It  could  mean  that  the  scope  for  using  monetary  policy  to 
stimulate the economy in a deep recession was limited – problems with the “zero bound” could arise. 
Comparisons with developments in Japan  in the late 1980s and afterwards seem appropriate here. 
Even  in  a  minor  economic  downturn,  credit  restrictions  at  the  banks  caused  by  large  losses  could 
reduce the effectiveness of monetary policy. 
Measures  that  could  prevent  financial  bubbles  arising  and  reduce  their  consequences  were  thus 
discussed.  Was  there,  for  instance,  reason  and  opportunity  as  a  preventive  measure  to  take  into 
account asset prices when formulating monetary policy? Could solicitude for financial stability motivate 
interest  rate  changes?  What  role  was  played  by  the  supervisory  authorities  and  the  design  of 
regulatory systems in preventing serious effects on the real economy from asset price bubbles?  
Share prices have now fallen considerably since the middle of 2000. Recently the very inflated dollar 
rate has weakened considerably. Contrary to what many analysts feared earlier, the repercussions on 
the real economy nevertheless appear to be slight. Most economic analysts believe in a normal rate of 
recovery, after only one year of weak growth. Why has the fall in share prices had so little effect on the 
real economy? And what are the risks of lasting financial imbalances creating problems in the future?  
These are questions I intend to discuss in my speech. 
Why worry about asset prices?  
A  fundamental  issue  is  why  fluctuations  in  asset  prices  should  comprise  cause  for  concern.  In  a 
market economy the prices of both financial assets and goods and services have the role of providing 
information.  They  shall  give  signals  regarding  the  distribution  of  resources  in  the  economy.  This 
means that fluctuations in share prices and exchange rates are useful as long as they reflect changes 
in  expectations  regarding  the  fundamental  development  of  the  economy.  Optimistic  expectations  of 
future growth in the entire economy or in a particular industry can be expressed, for instance, in the 
form of rising share prices, as there are then expectations of a strong development in profits and a 
BIS Review 43/2002 
 
1
 high real return on  investment. A technological  innovation could thus motivate a large rise  in share 
prices. 
However, history shows that investors are often over-optimistic regarding future profits and that share 
prices  rise  more  than  is  later  proved  to  be  motivated.  Financial  bubbles  can  also  be  created  by 
imperfections in the financial markets. Bonus systems designed to enable brokers to benefit when the 
stock market rises, while others have to bear the costs of a fall in share prices, are examples of this 
type of imperfection. 
If households increase their consumption as a result of exaggerated increases in the value of shares 
and  property,  it  could  lead  to  the  build-up  of  large  real  and  financial  imbalances.  Companies  can 
increase their investments as a result of lower financing costs on a risk capital market with over-valued 
share  prices,  but  also  because  a  rise  in  the  value  of  the  companies'  assets  increases  their  credit 
ratings. At the same time, financing consumption, investment, property and financial assets through 
loans  will  lead  to  an  excessive  credit  boom.  The  liquidity  created  when  the  banks  increase  their 
lending can further push up asset prices. 
When  the  bubble  bursts  and  asset  prices  fall,  it  could  lead  to  heavily  indebted  households  and 
companies  increasing  their  savings  considerably  and  to  a  fall  in  consumption  and  investment.  A 
decline  in  demand  would  reduce  companies’  profits  and  increase  the  number  of  bankruptcies. 
Bankruptcies lead to losses in the banks, while the value of the assets taken as collateral for loans 
would  decline.  A  deterioration  in  bank  profits  can  reduce  the  supply  of  loans  and  mean  that 
investments that would have been profitable do not get off the ground. In the worst possible scenario, 
systemically-important banks would suffer a bank crisis. 
Falling  asset  prices  thus  risk  triggering  processes  that  could  eventually  lead  to  a  recession. 
Psychological  factors  strengthen  both  an  upturn  and  a  downturn  in  asset  prices  and  real  demand. 
Sweden,  like  many  other  countries,  as  you  know  has  experience  of  this  type  of  development.  The 
costs to society during the years following the bank crisis were very high. 
However, rapidly rising asset prices do not constitute a problem in themselves that requires measures. 
Deciding  factors  here  are  whether  there  is  reason  to  regard  asset  prices  as  fundamentally 
exaggerated and whether the bubble has led to excessive demand in the real economy, as well as 
misallocation of resources and excessive indebtedness. 
However,  a  financial  bubble  that  only  creates  winners  and  losers  among  the  financial  operators 
without spreading to the real economy is hardly cause for concern, as long as the financial system can 
carry out its tasks efficiently. 
Inflation targeting stabilises production 
Although  there  may  be  reason  in  certain  situations  to  counteract  exaggerated  asset  prices  and  the 
imbalances  they  create,  the  question  is  what  measures  are  available.  There  is  always  a  risk  that 
intervention by authorities may in itself create more problems than one is trying to solve. 
However,  first  and  foremost  I  would  like  to  point  out  that  monetary  policy  aimed  at  stabilising  the 
inflation rate should basically reduce the risk of over-valued asset prices leading to an exaggerated 
real  demand.  Fluctuations  in  the  level  of  resource  utilisation  and  in  the  output  gap  are  traditionally 
assumed to be reflected in the inflation rate. If inflated asset prices stimulate demand in the economy, 
without  a  corresponding  increase  in  the  potential  growth  rate,  inflation  will  rise.  If  the  central  bank 
anticipates this, monetary policy will normally be tightened to ensure that demand is compatible with 
long-term sustainable growth. And as long as demand in the economy increases at a rate compatible 
with long-term growth, there is less risk of exaggerated indebtedness. Inflation targeting should thus, 
at least in theory, reduce the risk of extensive financial imbalances accumulating. 
However,  even  with  an  otherwise  successful  inflation  target  policy,  real  and  financial  imbalances 
created by exaggerated asset prices can build up. 
If  there  are  exaggerated  expectations  regarding  growth  in  productivity  and  profits  in  a  particular 
country, this can lead to a strong inflow of capital and strengthening of the currency. The increase in 
real demand, which  is caused by  exaggerated increases in asset prices, can thus be partly met by 
increased imports, while the currency strengthens and domestic inflationary pressure is reduced. 
There are also other factors not connected with the expectations that push up asset prices and can 
temporarily  lead  to  the  increase  in  demand  that  is  created  by  exaggerated  asset  prices  not  being 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2002
 expressed  as  inflation  and  thus  not  being  counteracted  by  tighter  monetary  policy.  A  high  level  of 
credibility for the central bank can also create low and stable inflation expectations, which can mean 
that  inflation  will  not  rise  for  a  period  of  time,  despite  strained  resource  utilisation.  Deregulation  on 
globalised markets can also temporarily subdue inflationary pressure. 
Is there reason to change strategy? 
The  question  is  whether  it  is  possible  to  raise  ambitions  for  monetary  policy  to  prevent  financial 
bubbles arising? 
Most people advocate a strategy where asset prices are merely taken into account to the extent that 
they affect inflation forecasts during the normal forecast horizon. However, there are also advocates of 
a strategy where monetary policy also prevents the occurrence and effects of financial bubbles. 
Those who maintain that monetary policy cannot counteract the occurrence of financial bubbles point 
out  that  the  central  bank  has  no  possibility  of  determining  whether  or  not  asset  prices  are 
fundamentally motivated. They also point out that it is difficult to motivate an interest rate hike that is 
essentially  aimed  at  counteracting  an  excessively  large  expansion  in  credit  and  an  overly  high  real 
demand  if  the  assessments  of  inflation  do  not  at  the  same  time  show  that  the  target  level  will  be 
exceeded. Interest rates must be raised before overly large imbalances accumulate. The motive would 
be to reduce the risk of a recession and low inflation during the period following a fall in asset prices. If 
the central bank is successful, it is not possible to demonstrate afterwards that one has been right. A 
further argument is that it is difficult to determine what change in the interest rate is required to achieve 
the desired objective. 
However, the advocates of the more ambitious strategy, where monetary policy more explicitly takes 
asset prices into account, claim that although it is difficult to judge whether a bubble is involved, this is 
not more difficult than estimating potential growth, for instance. If one extends the target horizon, the 
inflation target may in itself motivate tightening monetary policy, despite the fact that this would mean 
that inflation fell below the target level for a period of time. Based on purely theoretical reasoning, the 
target horizon is the entire future. The problem is that forecasts become more uncertain the further 
ahead they look. Many central banks with a strict inflation target policy therefore talk as though the 
forecast and target horizon were the same. 
It is difficult to take a clear stand in favour of one of the strategies. None of the arguments can be 
dismissed. As always, this proves that monetary policy is more of an art than a science. One problem 
with  the  first  strategy  is  that  central  banks  in  practice  have  tended  to  rapidly  ease  up  on  monetary 
policy when there is a large fall in asset prices, in order to reduce the risk of a recession. When asset 
prices rise, there is  a tendency  to  wait until  one is more certain  this  will have an effect on  inflation 
before  raising  interest  rates.  An  asymmetrical  monetary  policy  entails  a  risk  of  indebtedness  and 
liquidity in the economy becoming too high, when regarded over a longer time period. Sooner or later 
there will be an adjustment and the risk is that the imbalances will have grown so large that the cost of 
adjustment will be high. 
One can thus conclude that the consequences for the real economy of an asset price bubble can be 
serious. In my opinion, there is thus good reason to analyse and assess to the best of our ability to 
what extent asset prices are fundamentally motivated, how households’ and companies’ real demand 
will be affected, and where the liquidity created by bank lending goes. If the analysis shows that there 
is a significant risk of very negative consequences for the real economy, there may be good reason in 
exceptional  cases  to  take  this  into  account  when  formulating  monetary  policy  –  even  if  the 
assessments for the immediate future show that inflation will be in line with the target level. One can 
say that there is sometimes reason to take account of what will happen beyond the normal forecast 
horizon. 
However, in order to uphold confidence in, and support for, monetary policy it is important to give a 
detailed report of when such factors are taken into account. This is a strategy the Riksbank follows. So 
far, the Riksbank has not found reason to take account of what happens beyond the normal forecast 
horizon  when  formulating  its  monetary  policy,  although  it  does  normally  produce  surveys  of  the 
economy  for  longer  periods.  However,  I  have  argued  on  several  occasions  in  1999  and  2000  that 
there  was  reason  to  raise  the  instrumental  rate,  taking  into  account  the  effects  in  a  longer  term 
perspective. 
BIS Review 43/2002 
 
3
 Nevertheless, asset prices should not be included in the formulation of monetary policy targets. There 
is  otherwise  a  risk  that  the  central  bank  would  counteract  adjustments  that  were  fundamentally 
motivated. This would reduce the efficiency of the resource allocation and probably subdue growth. 
Other measures 
In addition to price stability, most central banks have a responsibility for financial stability. According to 
a narrow definition, financial stability is equal to a lack of crises in systemically-important banks. The 
banks have important functions with regard to the payment system and the supply of capital. It is easy 
to see that without an efficient payment system and capital supply the economy would be unable to 
function. Monetary policy would have no effect in this situation. Large shocks to the functioning of the 
financial  system  would  also  reduce  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  as  the  transmission 
mechanism is affected by the efficiency of the capital supply and the mediation of payments. 
The fact that there are close links between the central banks' two tasks becomes particularly evident 
when the effects of financial bubbles are discussed. An important part of the process leading up to 
large  imbalances is credit  granting by the banks. The fact that households and companies demand 
loans for increased consumption and investment when asset prices are rising is one thing, but it also 
requires that the banks increase their supply of loans. If the banks have well-developed risk systems, 
and rules and supervision are designed to motivate the banks to utilise them, the risk of exaggerated 
lending will be reduced. 
The way that capital adequacy rules are designed and applied is of great significance. The new capital 
adequacy  rules,  Basel  2,  are  aimed  at  reflecting  to  a  greater  extent  than  now  the  risks  the  banks 
actually  take.  However,  valuating  credit  risks  over  a  whole  economic  cycle  is  very  difficult.  The 
indications are that both internal credit risk models and credit rating agencies tend to underestimate 
credit risks during an upturn in economic activity and to overestimate them during a downturn. There is 
thus a risk that the banks will tend to strengthen the fluctuations in economic activity, even with the 
new capital adequacy rules. To counteract this, there is discussion of alternatives such as using stress 
tests to a greater extent, making dynamic reservations and reducing the possibility to utilise an overly 
rapid increase in the value of an asset as collateral for a loan. 
The  connections  between  a  central  bank's  two  objectives  are  thus  many  and  complex.  There  is  a 
pressing need to increase our knowledge of these mechanisms. Interest in financial stability has also 
increased in recent years. The Riksbank has published regular reports on the financial stability of the 
banking system for several  years now.  Many have followed  our example,  which shows that  a large 
number of us realise the importance of maintaining stability in the financial system. 
Other economic policy implications 
In  most  of  the  financial  crises  that  have  occurred,  the  shaping  of  economic  policy  has  played  an 
important role both for the build-up of financial imbalances prior to the crisis and in triggering the crisis. 
The bank crisis in Sweden at the beginning of the 1990s can be seen as an example. It was preceded 
by deregulation of the financial markets, a tax system that favoured borrowers, an overly expansionary 
fiscal policy given the fixed exchange rate regime, and a monetary policy that could not be utilised to 
reduce  overheating,  credit  booms  or  the  rise  in  property  prices.  At  the  same  time,  the  banks  were 
unused  to  managing  credit  risk  and  the  supervisory  authorities  were  not  prepared  for  operating  on 
deregulated financial markets. 
When economic activity took a downturn, inflation fell, the tax system was altered so that interest costs 
after tax rose and interest rates were increased to defend the fixed exchange rate, the bank crisis was 
triggered. The central government debt, which was high at the start of the economic slowdown, soared 
even  further.  The  fixed  exchange  rate  policy  had  to  be  abandoned  and  was  replaced  by  inflation 
targeting. A tough period followed, when confidence in the low inflation policy had to be established. 
This required a consolidation of central government finances, high real interest rates and at the same 
time,  the  capital  supply  from  the  banks  did  not  function  fully  as  a  result  of  their  consolidation 
requirements. 
There are many lessons to be learned here. However, to sum up, one can say that the game rules 
need  to  be  as  predictable  as  possible  to  reduce  the  risk  of  imbalances  accumulating  over  a  long 
period of time. Balanced central government finances and price stability reduce uncertainty regarding 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2002
 the  future.  At  the  same  time,  the  regulatory  system  must  be  designed  to  prevent  overly  large 
differences  between  what  is  profitable  for  society  and  what  is  profitable  for  the  private  sector.  This 
creates good conditions to make realistic assessments of the future  and to take the right  decisions 
regarding investment, consumption and financial investments. 
A very topical issue is how the accounting and auditing rules should be designed to create the best 
possible  conditions  for  lenders  and  investors  to  form  an  opinion  of  a  company’s  future  profits  and 
ability to pay. It is never possible to completely prevent unlawful actions, but is there something that 
can  be  done  to  avoid  such  scandals  as  have  arisen  with  the  fall  of  Enron  and  Worldcom? 
Transparency must in any case be our guiding star! 
The present situation 
Finally, I should like to comment on the present situation. 
Quite contrary to what many feared, the downturn in economic activity following the unusually strong 
and prolonged upturn that was driven by the US economy appears to be moderate and short-lived. 
Growth appears to be on the way up already this year. The heavy fall on the stock markets, terrorist 
acts, the crisis in Argentina and the Enron affair do not seem to have had excessively negative effects 
on the global economy. There is still some uncertainty, particularly with regard to the capacity of the 
US economy to once again take on its role as engine for growth. This uncertainty is partly connected 
with  whether  we  have  really  seen  the  entire  downside  of  the  financial  bubble,  and  partly  with  the 
consequences of the terrorist attacks. 
Uncertainty has increased somewhat in recent weeks, but we can still assert that the turbulence in the 
financial markets does not appear to have had particularly major effects on the real economy. What 
could be the explanation for this? 
An important difference compared with earlier financial crises that have been preceded by high asset 
prices,  strong  growth  and  a  large  credit  boom  is  that  economic  policy  has  now  provided  better 
fundamental  conditions  for  stability  than  before.  Serious  financial  crises  have  often,  as  I  mentioned 
earlier,  been  reinforced  by  the  fact  that  various  types  of  economic  policy  change  have  contributed 
directly or indirectly to forcing indebted households and companies to reassess their future ability to 
pay.  The  game  rules  have  often  been  changed  in  a  way  that  has  meant  that  there  were  strong 
reasons for a downward revision of expectations for the future. The expectations on which companies 
and  households  have  based  their  loan-financed  consumption  and  investment  decisions  have 
afterwards proved to be overly optimistic. Banks which have not been able to predict these changes 
and which have also had under-developed risk management systems, with a strong concentration of 
their  assets in  particular  industries, have also been  important elements in most financial crises that 
have followed on from a financial bubble. A high central government debt and high inflation from the 
start have also reduced the possibilities for stimulating the economy. 
The optimism that pushed up share prices and growth during the previous economic boom was largely 
based  on  expectations  that  information  technology  would  increase  production  capacity  in  the 
economy. The over-optimism that arose was broken when companies could not demonstrate the profit 
levels that were expected, but no economic-policy game rules were changed. 
Although  there  have  been  many  overstatements  in  the  discussion  of  the  importance  of  IT 
developments, I believe that IT has the potential to increase the level of productivity in the economy. 
Computers and the Internet make gathering information simple, cheap and quick, as well as enabling 
contacts between buyers and sellers on almost all levels. Information technology should, for instance, 
reduce  the  cost  of  financing,  handling  inventories  and  procurement.  It  can  have  contributed  to  the 
fairly rapid return in households’ and companies’ confidence in the economy. 
Another  reason  why  the  slowdown  in  the  economy  appears  to  be  short-lived  is  the  stimulation 
contributed by both monetary policy and fiscal policy. Low inflation and stable inflation expectations 
when the downward turn came meant that there was scope to lower interest rates in most countries. In 
addition,  the  central  government  debt  had  been  reduced  in  most  countries,  which  meant  that  fiscal 
policy could also be used to stimulate the economy. 
It is possible that a further reason why the turbulence on the financial markets did not have such a 
large effect on the real economy was the development of risk management instruments and systems 
in  the  financial  markets.  Most  of  the  earlier  financial  crises  have  been  preceded  by  a  large  rise  in 
property prices, at the same time as the banks have been strongly exposed to this sector. This time, it 
BIS Review 43/2002 
 
5
 was the IT and telecommunications sector behind the stock market rise. The banks' exposure to this 
sector appears to be lower. New instruments and techniques for spreading risks probably lead to a 
general reduction in the risk of serious financial crises. 
All in all, there are many indications that the real economy effects of the severe stock market fall will 
be limited. However, at the same time, it is not possible to write off the risk of financial imbalances 
having  accumulated  that  could  create  problems  in  the  future.  It  is  possible  that  the  asymmetry  in 
monetary policy, which I have earlier mentioned, where the central banks act rapidly in response to a 
decline in asset prices, but have been more cautious when asset prices have risen, has contributed to 
this. 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2002
