 Lee Hsien Loong: Challenges in developing the Asian capital markets: the 
Singapore experience 
Address by Mr Lee Hsien Loong, Deputy Prime Minister of Singapore and Chairman of the Monetary 
Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  Euromoney  Asia-Pacific  Issuers  &  Investors  Forum,  Singapore, 
19 March 2002. 
 Introduction  
First, may I welcome all of you to the Euromoney Asia Pacific Issuers & Investors Forum, held for the 
first time here in Singapore. We are honoured to have here with us, a diverse and distinguished group 
of regional government officials, investors and issuers. 
Over the past few months, signs are emerging that the worst of the economic downturn may now be 
behind us. New orders, industrial output, consumer confidence and retail sales in the US have picked 
up. The swift policy response by the US Federal Reserve has helped restore liquidity and confidence 
to global financial markets, especially in the aftermath of Sept-11. Markets have also taken in stride 
the  adjustment  in  the  technology  sector,  the  synchronized  global  slowdown,  the  Sept  11  terrorist 
attacks, Argentina, and Enron.  
In  line  with  the  recovery  in  the  US  economy  and  the  global  electronics  industry,  the  Singapore 
economy  too  is  expected  to  pick  up  this  year,  after  the  most  severe  recession  in  decades.  Private 
sector  economists  are  revising  their  growth  forecasts  for  the  year  upwards.  The  government’s  own 
forecast is currently for 1-3% growth, which is a fair assessment of the prospects.  
Lessons from the Asian crisis 
Five years have passed since the Asian financial crisis began, prompting a major re-think of policies 
held  to  be  obvious  and  valid  before  the  crisis.  In  particular,  the  crisis  has  highlighted  three  major 
issues in Asian economic and financial systems.  
First, some analysts have questioned East Asia’s growth model, with its emphasis on high savings, 
reliance on foreign investment, and export growth. East Asian economies, it is argued, should instead 
lower  savings  rates,  in  order  to  stimulate  domestic  demand,  develop  indigenous  enterprise,  and 
insulate themselves from volatile external conditions.  
Second,  the  crisis  highlighted  the  dangers  of  liberalising  capital  markets  too  rapidly  and  without 
adequate  safeguards.  Before  the  crisis,  capital  account  liberalization  was  the  vogue.  Conventional 
wisdom  emphasized  benefits  rather  than  costs  of  free  capital  flows.  The  crisis  demolished  this 
complacent confidence. Undoubtedly, structural flaws and policy errors, especially in the financial and 
corporate  sectors,  contributed  to  the  crisis.  However,  the  financial  markets’  reaction  to  these 
weaknesses was out of proportion to the severity of the crime. Markets proved highly susceptible to 
contagion and herd behaviour. Crashes and panics shook seemingly sound economies to their roots.  
Third, the crisis demonstrated the dangers of over-reliance on bank-based financing. In many Asian 
countries prior to the crisis, capital markets were underdeveloped. Bond markets, in particular, were 
illiquid  or  nonexistent.  So  Asian  firms  relied  on  bank  loans  for  working  capital  and  to  fund  capital 
expenditure. When banks ran into trouble, firms were left without alternative sources of capital. More 
generally, the thin capital  markets in Asia  accentuated price movements when investor preferences 
shifted. This made Asian economies more vulnerable to financial shocks.  
So how have countries responded in the wake of the Asian crisis? On the East Asian growth model, 
no Asian country is abandoning exports or foreign investment as engines of growth, not even those 
countries which harbour reservations about the risks of globalisation. For small Asian economies, and 
Singapore in particular, the idea of relying on tiny domestic markets to stimulate growth and enterprise 
is inherently implausible. Larger economies may make more of their domestic markets, and indeed the 
ASEAN countries as a group need to integrate their markets in the ASEAN Free Trade Area, to make 
themselves more attractive to foreign investments. But no single domestic market can substitute for 
the world market, in an age where economies of scale are global, whether in industries like electronics 
and pharmaceuticals, or services like banking and telecommunications. 
BIS Review 19/2002 
 1
 Indigenous enterprise  is an important factor  in  economic development.  Strong local companies  add 
depth and resilience to the economy, while a spirit of entrepreneurship enables the population to seize 
new  opportunities  and  thrive  in  uncertain  times.  But  indigenous  enterprise  cannot  rely  on  the 
traditional family firms, doing small scale businesses on the margins of a modern economy. It requires 
firms which are strong in technology and know-how, with systematic managements and meritocratic 
practices, firms which can hold their own against foreign competition, and with the potential to grow 
into  significant  industry  players.  Even  then,  such  firms  will  complement,  not  replace,  foreign 
investments by MNCs. 
Following this philosophy, Singapore’s economic policies will therefore remain externally oriented. We 
will continue to push for free trade, welcome investments, and integrate into the global economy, even 
as  we  promote  entrepreneurship  and  seek  to  build  Singapore  firms  into  regional  players.  The 
pressures of globalisation can be uncomfortable, and the changes they force upon us can be painful. 
But globalisation has helped us to build a stronger, more resilient economy, one better prepared to 
hold our own against formidable competitors, and deliver a high and rising standard of living for our 
population.  
On  capital  account  liberalisation,  countries  are  now  acutely  aware  that  sound  macroeconomic 
management is a key prerequisite, without which no regime of exchange controls can deliver stability. 
They  also  realise  that  they  must  sequence  liberalization  judiciously,  and  strengthen  financial 
supervision and prudential safeguards as they liberalize.  
In  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  no  Asian  country  imposed  capital  controls,  apart  from  Malaysia.  But 
several tightened safeguards to reduce the risks of destabilising capital flows, and to shield domestic 
foreign  exchange  and  money  markets  from  speculative  pressures  emanating  from  abroad.  They 
improved monitoring, and discouraged trading in currencies that was not related to the real economy. 
A few countries went further, and sought to curb transactions in home currencies in offshore markets.  
At  the  same  time,  there  has  been  an  ongoing  effort  to  develop  bond  markets  in  Asia.  Issuance  of 
domestic government bonds has increased sharply in most Asian countries. Certainly, a large part of 
the increase reflected the spike in fiscal deficits resulting from the debt restructuring operations in the 
financial sector during the Asian crisis. Nonetheless, corporate bonds have also grown.  
There  is  a  trade  off  between  tightening  up  the  capital  account,  and  developing  the  bond  markets. 
Measures  to  restrict  offshore  foreign  currency  trading  have  been  effective,  in  so  far  as  reducing  or 
eliminating offshore markets is concerned. But these safeguards come at a cost – they also hinder the 
development of capital markets, especially the bond markets. Size and liquidity are essential attributes 
for  a  market  to  attract  international  interest.  Already  in  size  and  liquidity,  we  clearly  lag  behind  our 
counterparts in the West. If Asian markets are fragmented and unable to grow, they risk being ignored 
by global investors.  
In the immediate aftermath of the Asian crisis, countries that have suffered at the hands of the markets 
are understandably disinclined to err on the side of fewer restrictions, especially as the benefits from 
bond  market  development  are  not  likely  to  be  large  given  structural  problems  in  the  economy. 
However,  over  time  as  the  Asian  countries  make  progress  in  restructuring  their  economies  and 
strengthening their institutions, they will reassess the balance of risks, and perhaps modify some of 
these restrictions.  
Liberalisation of S$ policy  
In Singapore, we are subject to the same trade-offs. But our circumstances are somewhat different as 
we were less severely affected by the crisis. Our financial services sector is also relatively larger and 
more established, compared to other countries in the region. By 1997, we had decided that we were 
sufficiently well established to shift from our previous highly conservative and risk-averse regulatory 
approach  towards  the  financial  industry  and  instead  supervise  with  a  lighter  touch  and  accept 
calculated  risks  in  order  to  promote  its  development.  As  part  of  this  overall  liberalisation,  we 
progressively  relaxed  restrictions  on  the  Singapore  dollar,  and  fostered  the  growth  of  our  capital 
markets, throughout the Asian crisis.  
Our  monetary  policy  has  been  centred  on  the  exchange  rate  since  1981.  But  as  a  large  financial 
centre with open capital markets, we are exposed to large and sometimes, volatile capital flows. Thus 
we  have  long  maintained  an  explicit  policy  of  discouraging  the  internationalisation  of  the  Singapore 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2002
 dollar, in order to support our monetary policy framework. We limited the use of the Singapore dollar 
by non-residents for purposes unrelated to the Singapore economy, for example currency speculation.  
This  non-internationalisation  policy,  supported  by  our  strong  macroeconomic  fundamentals  and 
substantial foreign reserves, has helped us to maintain a stable Singapore dollar, and to avoid large 
swings  in  our  exchange rate  which  would  have severely damaged our economy. The trade-off was 
less vibrant capital markets. Indeed in some cases, the tight domestic restrictions fostered the growth 
of offshore markets in these restricted activities, undermining our purpose. 
Recognizing  this,  we  have  over  the  past  four  years  progressively  relaxed  the  S$  restrictions.  Our 
approach  has  been  a  cautious  one:  weighing  the  trade-off  between  development  and  the  risk  to 
exchange rate management, and feeling our way forward step by step. 
Our  efforts  have  yielded  encouraging  results.  The  outstanding  volume  of  Singapore  Government 
Securities (SGS) has doubled since 1998 and average daily turnover volume increased about three-
times. SGS outstanding volume in 2001 was S$54 billion and average daily turnover was S$1.9 billion. 
New  corporate  debt  issuance  has  continued  to  grow  strongly,  with  S$  and  non-S$  corporate  bond 
issuance  totalling  a  record  S$72  billion  in  2001.  This  was  an  almost  8-fold  growth  over  issuance 
volumes in 1998, spurred by exceptional merger and acquisition activities, but significant nevertheless. 
Outstanding corporate bonds have also more than doubled to S$80 billion.  
Besides higher volumes of issuance, we are also seeing a greater diversity of corporate bonds in the 
market. The tenors issued range evenly across a spectrum of maturity up to 15 years. The average 
size  of S$-bond  issues has also increased.  Last  year, there  were several bond deals of about S$1 
billion  from  domestic  corporate  issuers  successfully  placed  in  Singapore.  Structured  debt  products 
now  account  for  about  35%  of  the  total  S$  debt  issuance,  reflecting  a  move  towards  more 
sophisticated debt instruments.  
With deeper and more mature capital markets, and greater confidence and experience in managing 
larger S$ flows, we are now ready to make a further move. Since October last year, MAS has been 
seeking the views of key market participants on how we can facilitate the continued growth of the S$ 
capital  markets.  Following  these  dialogues,  we  have  reviewed  the  non-internationalisation  policy, 
taking into account their ideas and suggestions.  
We have decided to further liberalise the policy, to lift many of the specific restrictions on the use of 
the S$. Henceforth, we will retain only two basic guidelines: 
a. 
First, financial institutions may not extend S$ credit facilities exceeding S$5 million to non-
resident financial entities, where they have reason to believe that the proceeds may be used 
for speculation against the S$ exchange rate. This continues to be necessary, as we have 
no reason to allow offshore speculators to access the liquidity in our onshore FX swaps and 
money markets. 
Second,  when a non-resident entity  wishes to obtain a S$ loan, or tap our equity or bond 
markets  to  fund  overseas  activities,  it  must  swap  or  convert  the  S$  proceeds  into  foreign 
currency as and when it uses the proceeds offshore. This guideline is unlikely to stand in the 
way  of  market  development,  as  the  S$  is  not  a  currency  commonly  used  for  transactions 
abroad,  and  non-resident  entities  would  in  any  case  wish  to  swap  or  convert  the  S$ 
proceeds into a currency of their choice for overseas use.  
b. 
With this liberalisation, the following will now be possible. 
a. 
First,  MAS  will  exempt  all  individuals  and  non-financial  entities,  which  includes  corporate 
treasury centres, from the S$ lending restrictions of the non-internationalisation policy. This 
recognises  that  such  entities  are  not  usually  the  prime  drivers  of  destabilizing  currency 
speculation.  
Second, for non-resident financial entities that continue to be governed by the S$ policy, we 
will lift restrictions in the following financial activities: 
i.  Asset swaps, cross-currency swaps and cross-currency repos can now be transacted freely. 
MAS had hitherto treated such transactions as forms of S$ lending. It will no longer do so.  
ii.  Securities Borrowing and Lending (SBL) – Financial institutions in Singapore may now lend 
any  amount  S$-denominated  securities  in  exchange  for  both  S$  or  foreign  currency-
denominated  collateral.  MAS  will  lift  the  requirement  that  any  lending  of  S$  securities 
exceeding $5 million has to be fully collaterised by S$ collateral. 
b. 
  BIS Review 19/2002 
 3
   iv. 
iii.  S$  FX  options  –  Financial  institutions  may  also  freely  transact  S$  FX  options  with  non-
resident  entities.  FIs  no  longer  need  to  maintain  documentary  proof  showing  that  S$  FX 
option transactions with non-resident entities are for hedging purposes. 
Investments in financial assets and real estate – Financial institutions are no longer required 
to ensure that S$ credit facilities extended for investment purposes be withdrawn when the 
investments  are  either  wholly  or  partially  liquidated.  This  will  relieve  FIs  of  the  need  to 
institute additional arrangements to track their non-resident client's investments in financial 
assets.  
These measures, which take effect from tomorrow, should pave the way for even greater liquidity and 
range  of  activities  in  the  FX,  equity  and  debt  capital  markets.  They  should  also  attract  offshore  S$ 
activities back onshore.  
We  are  still  maintaining  the  two  core  requirements  of  the  non-internationalisation  policy  –  the 
restriction on lending for purposes of speculating on the S$, and the requirement to swap into foreign 
currency the proceeds of S$ loans, debt or equity issues if these proceeds are to be used offshore. 
Some market participants have suggested that we should go all the way and lift these requirements 
too,  but  we  continue 
to  maintain  a  basic  stance  of  not  encouraging 
internationalisation of the S$, through these two requirements. They are unlikely to hinder the activities 
of legitimate players. They will also provide us basic safeguards in case activity in currency markets 
turns out not to be self-stabilising, which from time to time seems to be the case. 
to  believe 
it  wise 
Conclusion 
The new financial landscape offers many opportunities for the astute market players and investors, but 
at the same time, presents many challenges for regulators and supervisors. In Singapore,  we have 
made much progress, but the task ahead remains challenging. We will continue to engage the industry 
and seek ways to develop our capital markets further. The key is to liberalise without compromising 
the soundness of the financial system or conduct of our monetary policy.  
I  am  optimistic  over  the  prospects  for  the  further  development  of  Asian  capital  markets  and  look 
forward to your exploring investment opportunities in this region. 
I wish you all an enjoyable and fruitful conference. 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2002
