 David Dodge: Economic and financial trends in the context of Canada’s 
inflation-control strategy 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  on  the  release  of  the 
Monetary Policy Report Update, 24 July 2002. 
 Today, we published our Update to the April Monetary Policy Report, in which we discuss economic 
and financial trends in the context of Canada’s inflation-control strategy. 
Canada’s economic recovery, which began in the last quarter of 2001, gathered momentum in the first 
half  of  2002.  Over  the  period  to  the  end  of  2003,  the  Bank  projects  continued  solid  economic 
expansion at an annual rate of 3 to 4 per cent. This will result in growth of close to 3 1/2 per cent on an 
annual average basis in 2002 and in 2003. Both the total and core rates of inflation are projected to be 
slightly above 2  per cent  in the second half of 2002, before steadying  out at close to 2  per cent  in 
2003. 
Given that the Canadian economy grew at a faster pace than anticipated in the first half of 2002, there 
is now less excess capacity than was projected in our April Report. The economy is expected to be 
operating at full capacity in early 2003 - sooner than previously anticipated. 
In light of these developments, the Bank has continued to reduce the amount of monetary stimulus in 
the economy, raising the target for the overnight interest rate by 25 basis points on three occasions - 
in April, June, and July - to bring the rate to 2 3/4 per cent. 
It remains the Bank’s view that the underlying economic situation will require further reductions in the 
amount of monetary stimulus. The timing and pace of policy adjustments will depend on the strength 
of the various factors at play and their implications for pressures on capacity, and thus on inflation. 
There  are  both  upside  and  downside  risks  to  the  outlook  for  Canadian  economic  growth.  On  the 
positive side, growth of domestic demand could turn out to be stronger than projected because of the 
substantial amount of monetary stimulus still in place. On the negative side, there are the uncertainties 
associated  with  global  corporate  and  financial  market  developments  and  their  potential  effects  on 
confidence and world economic growth. At this time, the risks to our projected rate of growth of 3 to 
4 per cent growth appear to be balanced. 
As we go forward, the Bank will remain focused on taking actions to achieve the 2 per cent inflation 
target.  Keeping  inflation  low  and  stable  is  the  best  contribution  that  monetary  policy  can  make  to 
sustained economic growth in Canada.  
 BIS Review 45/2002 
 1
