 Willem F Duisenberg: The euro as a catalyst for European integration 
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the 
conference "One money, one Euregional market", Maastricht, 6 February 2002.  
 Dear  Governor  of  the  Province  of  Limburg,  Dear  Mr.  Mayor,  Dear  Rector  Magnificus  of  Maastricht 
University, Dear Dean of the Faculty of Economics and Business Administration, Honoured speakers, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  honour  for  me  to  receive  the  biennial  prize  of  the  Faculty  of  Economics  and  Business 
Administration  of  Maastricht  University,  and  to  deliver  a  short  address  at  this  conference  today;  a 
conference  organised  on  the  eve  of  the  tenth  anniversary  of  the  Treaty  on  European  Union,  better 
known  as  the  "Treaty  of  Maastricht".  I  should  also  like  to  thank  the  speakers  for  their  kind  words. 
Sometimes it was even difficult to recognise myself in them. 
I should like to note today, on the eve of the Treaty's anniversary, that the establishment of Economic 
and Monetary Union and the introduction of the euro would not have been possible without this Treaty. 
Hence, allow me to say that I accept this prize also on its behalf. Indeed, together with the Treaties 
founding the European Communities, the Maastricht Treaty is one of the most important and visionary 
legal texts in the history of European integration. It has delivered tangible proof – the euro – of the 
vision and ambition of the founding fathers of the European integration process, which continues to 
bring  the  people  of  Europe  closer  together  by  fostering  economic  integration.  The  importance  of 
"Maastricht" for the process of monetary integration in Europe has also inspired the Governing Council 
of the ECB to hold one of its two yearly meetings outside Frankfurt in this city. The Governing Council 
will meet tomorrow in the very place where – in December 1991 – the European Council concluded 
the negotiations on the Maastricht Treaty. 
I  should  also  like  to  compliment  Maastricht  University  and  the  City  of  Maastricht  on  the  research 
project,  initiated  by  them,  focusing  on  the  impact  of  the  introduction  of  the  euro  on  Euregional 
integration. Indeed, the border regions of Europe have often been the testing grounds of the European 
integration process. They have also played a key role in initiating and promoting that process. 
One  of  the  important  conclusions  –  in  my  view  at  least  –  of  the  research  project  "one  money,  one 
Euregion" is that the introduction of the euro might act as a catalyst for further European integration in 
other policy areas. There are two reasons for this.  
First,  the  introduction  of  the  euro  has  increased  the  transparency  of  prices  between  countries  and 
regions. I am referring not only to the prices of goods and services, but also to other nominal factors 
which influence the price-setting process, such as taxes. This increased price transparency will trigger 
more cross-border  trade  and  commerce  and,  hence,  competition.  However,  people  will  then  realise 
that  the  Single  Market  is  not  perfect  yet.  For  instance,  even  if  people  in  Maastricht  see  that  it  is 
cheaper to buy a car in Germany, they  are not allowed to do so  without paying taxes to the Dutch 
authorities. That the Single Market still has room for improvement is also evident from the results of 
your research projects. Regulatory, administrative and legal impediments to trade, commerce and the 
mobility  of  labour  still  exist,  such  as  different  tax  regimes,  or  so-called  exclusive  distribution 
agreements, still allowed by the Treaty. These impediments surface especially in cross-border trade 
and commerce between the border regions within the euro area. Indeed, it is interesting to note that 
the  introduction  of  the  euro  –  one  reason  for  which  was  to  'crown'  the  establishment  of  the  Single 
Market – will help to identify those areas in which the Single Market has not yet been completed. 
Second, a currency is a very important symbol of national sovereignty. If the governments of the euro 
area voluntarily give up their national currency – as they have done – and if citizens of the euro area 
acknowledge the economic benefits of using one single currency in an enlarged economic area, these 
citizens will start asking themselves why it is possible to have a single currency, but not to eliminate 
other  barriers  between  the  countries  of  the  euro  area.  In  other  words,  European  integration  might 
become more of a "bottom-up" process, initiated by the citizens of Europe, and less a of "top-down" 
process driven by politicians and experts, which it is has been so far. 
Hence, the introduction of the euro will probably give new impetus to the initiatives taken in the 1980s 
to establish a single market. This means the elimination of more obstacles to cross-border activities, 
and – at the same time – either harmonisation or "mutual recognition" of standards, in order to avoid 
BIS Review 8/2002 
 1
 undesirable  competition  between  regions  and  countries.  The  well-known  textbook  example  is 
undesirable  tax  competition,  the  so-called  "race  to  the  bottom".  In  addition,  completing  the  Single 
Market would be a welcome contribution to structural reform in the euro area and the European Union. 
Speeding  up  the  process  of  structural  reform  as  well  as  deepening  reforms  are  the  key  challenges 
facing  the  European  Union.  Only  through  reforms  aimed  at  improving  the  functioning  of  the  market 
mechanism will it be possible to bring the potential level of growth in the Union to a structurally higher 
level.  
I should like to emphasise that although the euro will probably act as a catalyst for further European 
integration,  this  does  not  necessarily  imply  that  further  European  integration  is  a  prerequisite  for  a 
well-functioning monetary union. The current framework – laid down in the Maastricht Treaty – has so 
far proved to work well and will continue to do so in future.  
A key element of the institutional framework is the Stability and Growth Pact. The Pact provides a solid 
foundation for sound fiscal policies in individual countries as well as in the euro area as a whole. The 
ECB strongly supports the European Commission in its sustained effort to apply the rules of the Pact 
and  exert  peer  pressure  on  governments,  irrespective  of  the  size  of  the  countries  in  question.  In 
addition, I am – of course – particularly happy with the Treaty provisions regarding monetary policy. 
They  provide  the  ECB  and  the  national  central  banks  of  the  euro  area  with  a  clear  mandate  –  to 
maintain price stability – and clear independence from third parties to achieve this objective. In this 
way, the drafters of the Maastricht Treaty have taken into account the experiences of, especially, the 
1970s and early 1980s and the empirical research carried out in this area, which clearly show that the 
best  contribution  a  central  bank  can  make  to  economic  growth  and  welfare  is  to  maintain  price 
stability.  I  can  assure  you  that  some  people  in  this  room  –  in  particular  Hans  Tietmeyer  and  Cees 
Maas – fought like lions for this "monetary statute".  
Ladies and gentlemen, I should now like to bring my remarks to a conclusion. The European Central 
Bank  and  the  city  of  Maastricht  have  something  very  important  in  common.  Both  will  forever  be 
associated with the euro, our single currency. The decision of the Maastricht University and the city of 
Maastricht to initiate the research project "One money, one Euregion" and to organise this conference, 
as well as the hospitality of the city of Maastricht in receiving the Governing Council of the ECB, also 
bear witness to this city's continued interest in the euro. 
Thank you for your attention.  
 2 
 BIS Review 8/2002
