 Joseph Yam: Complaints against banks and the role of the HKMA 
Speech by Mr Joseph Yam, Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, at the Hong Kong 
Association of Banks Half-Yearly Dinner, Hong Kong, 24 June 2002. 
 I am delighted to have this opportunity to speak to you at this half-yearly dinner, and I am grateful to 
the organisers for choosing an evening that does not happen to coincide with the quarter-finals, semi-
finals or final of the World Cup. This has, I am sure you will agree, been an exciting tournament so far. 
One of its striking features has been the record number of yellow and red cards issued to players by 
referees  for  fouls,  unsporting  behaviour  and  other  forms  of  misconduct.  The  reasons  put  forward 
include  worsening behaviour on the playing field, stricter application of the rules by referees, and a 
greater tendency among players to complain about real or imagined grievances.  
Whether all this is good or bad for the game is a matter of debate: it certainly makes for interesting 
television. But it is not just in the world of football that we see a rise in grievances and complaints. It is 
a  phenomenon  affecting  many  areas  of  life  in  Hong  Kong,  including  the  relationship  between 
consumers  and  their  banks.  Complaints  against  banks  are  on  the  increase.  We  may  take  some 
comfort from the fact that, when set against the millions of banking consumer transactions that take 
place  every  day,  they  still  form  a  very  small  number.  There  are  also  many  ways  of  explaining  the 
increase before we start to point to the possibility of declining standards of service. But the increase is 
a matter of concern to the HKMA, not least because, although we are subject to just as much public 
scrutiny as the football referees, we do not possess their almost unlimited powers of decision.  
Around a year ago I spoke at your half-yearly dinner on the subject of consumer protection and the 
banking  industry.  In  that  speech  I  set  out  the  various  options  identified  by  the  HKMA  for  a  more 
effective  handling  of  consumer  complaints  against  banks.  Today  I  am  going  to  address  the  same 
subject. You might be wondering whether I am running out of topics, or whether the HKMA has got 
stuck in a groove. But I raise the subject again for three reasons:  
• 
First,  while  there  has  been  some  enhancement  and  standardisation  of  the  procedures  for 
handling complaints by the banks themselves, through the HKMA's guideline on the subject 
issued  in  February,  and  through  the  industry's  own  Code  of  Banking  Practice,  the  basic 
question  of  what  to  do  with  complaints  that  are  not  resolved  by  individual  banks  remains 
unanswered.  Other  than  the  courts,  there  is  no  external  dispute  resolution  mechanism for 
bank customers in Hong Kong. 
Secondly,  the  number  of  complaints  against  banks  received  by  the  HKMA  has  increased 
almost twofold in the first five months of this year compared with the same period last year. 
There has been an enormous surge in complaints since the last quarter of last  year. This 
rapid growth in the number of complaints could indicate that the quality of customer service 
is deteriorating. Whatever the reason, it is posing an additional burden on all concerned. 
And thirdly, the HKMA is finding it difficult to cope with this situation. We are having to divert 
staff resources from other important tasks at a time of retrenchment. Worse still, the fact that 
the HKMA has no explicit statutory responsibility to resolve consumer complaints has caused 
disappointment to some complainants. 
  I  am  pleased  to  see  that  debate  on  this  issue  has  revived  recently,  with  the  further  discussion  of 
consumer protection in the banking sector by the Legislative Council Financial Affairs Panel earlier this 
month. I should like this evening to contribute to that debate in two ways:  
• 
First, by setting out what I understand the powers of the HKMA to be - and not to be - under 
the Banking Ordinance in relation to dealing with consumer complaints against banks; and 
Secondly, by summarising, in the light of the recent debate, what I believe should be the next 
steps in improving the handling of complaints. 
 The Banking Ordinance is a complex statute of some 200 pages and it has been much amended since 
its  original  enactment  in  the  1960s.  The  mandate  of  the  HKMA  is,  however,  set  out  very  plainly  in 
section 7(1) of the Ordinance, which states that: 
BIS Review 39/2002 
 1
 "The principal function of the Monetary Authority under this Ordinance shall be to 
promote the general stability and effective working of the banking system." 
We pursue this mandate through licensing criteria and ongoing supervision of banks. We complement 
this supervisory work with a variety of initiatives under the banking reform and other programmes, the 
ultimate  intention  of  which  is  to  promote  general  stability  and  effective  working  of  the  system.  For 
example:  
• 
First,  the  deposit  insurance  scheme,  now  at  the  detailed  planning  stage,  will  promote  the 
general stability of the system by protecting individual depositors up to a certain limit. 
Secondly, the Commercial Credit Reference Agency, which is expected to be launched as a 
voluntary,  market-based  scheme  in  the  not-too-distant  future,  will  promote  the  effective 
working  of  the  system  -  and  the  larger  economy  -  by  helping  banks  channel  lending  to 
creditworthy small enterprises. 
Thirdly,  public  consultation  by  the  Privacy  Commission  will  soon  commence  on  broad 
proposals for the sharing of positive consumer credit data - a facility which, when and if it is 
introduced, will help in addressing an issue of concern to banking stability: the dramatic rise 
in consumer defaults and personal bankruptcies. 
  All of these measures have implications for individual customers of banks, but their rationale derives 
from the MA's principal function: to promote the general stability and effective working of the system. 
The important thing to note about this "principal function" of the MA under the Banking Ordinance is 
that  it  relates  to  general,  "macro",  systemic  issues,  to  the  safety  and  soundness  of  banks  and  the 
system as a whole, not to the relationship between individual consumers and their banks. The HKMA's 
involvement  in  promoting  and  encouraging  proper  standards  of  conduct  and  sound  and  prudent 
business  practices  under  section  7(2)  of  the  Banking  Ordinance  is  only  incidental  to  its  primary 
function of promoting the stability and effective working of the banking system. Nevertheless, even in 
the absence of an explicit legal mandate for consumer protection, the HKMA has become increasingly 
involved in this area, particularly in helping to develop the Code of Banking Practice and in enforcing 
banks' compliance with the Code.  
One recent real-life example of this is a quite appalling case of mistaken identity that recently came to 
our attention. The debt collection agency of a certain bank was pursuing debts against an innocent 
and entirely unconnected third party who happened to be living in the last known address of the real 
defaulter. The agent did not identify itself and the bank for whom it was acting when collecting debt. It 
kept on pestering the innocent third party for one month until after the Police had found out which bank 
it  was acting for and  a complaint  was lodged to the HKMA  against that bank. But the explanations 
given by the bank, both to the complainant and ourselves, about how the mistaken identity could have 
arisen and about what measures would be taken to prevent this sort of thing from recurring, were not 
satisfactory. Without going into details, these explanations raised more questions than they answered. 
This,  in  our  view,  gave  rise  to  general  supervisory  concerns  both  about  the  bank  and  its  business 
practices, and about practices relating to debt collection generally. We therefore took this matter up 
with the Code of Banking Practice Committee, and the industry associations have since reminded their 
members  to  improve  monitoring  of  the  performance  of  debt  collection  agencies.  We  have  also 
tightened up our own monitoring of this issue, as you are aware through our letter issued at the end of 
last month.  
More  than  half  of  the  complaints  we  receive  are  about  debt  collection:  not  all  are  necessarily  as 
extreme  as  the  case  I  have  described,  but  many,  in  our  view,  raise  similar  supervisory  concerns. 
Taking action on the question of bad business practices in the use of debt collection agencies was, in 
my view, clearly within the MA's powers under section 7(2), since it could threaten the reputation not 
only of the bank concerned but also of the banking system as a whole. However, it would be stretching 
these powers too far to apply them to the "micro" region of individual consumer complaints about the 
cost or quality of banking services. We frequently receive complaints about fees and charges made by 
banks  which  appear  unreasonable  to  the  complainant  -  for  example  the  imposition  of  charges  on 
dormant  or  small  deposit  accounts.  Our  practice  with  such  complaints  is  to  refer  them  to  the  bank 
concerned  and  to  ask  it  to  reply  direct  to  the  complainant.  As  long  as  we  are  satisfied  that  the 
transparency standards in the Code of Banking Practice have been met, then we take the view that 
fees and charges are commercial decisions and we do not intervene.  
In handling complaints about bank services, the HKMA's role is limited to ensuring that the process by 
which the complaints are handled by AIs is fair and efficient. We have a very limited role in dispute 
2 
 BIS Review 39/2002
 resolution.  Even  if  we  wanted  to  intervene  formally  in  such  cases,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how,  legally 
speaking, we could do so. The sanctions available in section 52 of the Ordinance - and the triggers 
specified  for  these  sanctions  -  make  it  clear  that  intervention  by  the  MA  against  an  AI  must  be  a 
response  to  issues  affecting  the  health  of  the  AI  as  a  whole,  or  the  interests  of  its  depositors  or 
creditors  as  a  whole,  or  the  broader  public  interest.  The  Ordinance  confers  no  powers  to  arbitrate 
disputes, to name and shame, or to require banks to pay compensation or rectify mistakes. There are 
no penalty kicks or  yellow  cards or red cards available under the Ordinance. To use the powers or 
sanctions available under section 52 to settle a consumer complaint would be rather like sending off 
the whole team for a simple case of offside.  
Needless  to  say,  the  present  arrangements  give  rise  to  a  certain  amount  of  frustration.  The 
complainants naturally assume that the body that supervises banks - the HKMA - can sort out their 
complaints against banks and recover financial losses. Not surprisingly,  not  every complainant  who 
discovers that we cannot do this is satisfied with the kind of explanation of our legal powers that I have 
given to  you this evening. Some get angry, and persist with their complaints. A few have taken the 
matter  to  other  authorities. We  have  diverted  staff resources  to  the  time-consuming  task  of  dealing 
with the rising number of complaints. But there is a limit to what we can do without affecting our main 
responsibilities under our mandate.  
Clearly, something needs to be done. What are the options available? What are the steps to be taken? 
An obvious solution is to tackle the problem at its source by reducing the grounds for complaint. This 
requires  the  banks  to  maintain  and  improve  the  quality  of  their  service  and  to  improve  their 
complaint-handling  procedures  so  that  customer  dissatisfaction  is  dealt  with  quickly  and  decisively. 
Initiatives by the banking industry in co-operation with the HKMA have been taken over the past year 
to promote this process. They include the major revisions to the Code of Banking Practice, setting out 
basic standards for personal banking services - and on issues such as debt collection - and placing an 
emphasis on transparency. They also include monitoring of compliance with the Code by the HKMA 
and specific guidance from the HKMA on the handling and processing of complaints. In view of the 
recent surge in number of complaints, both the HKMA and the industry associations have written to 
AIs to urge that sufficient resources be devoted to handling of complaints and to remind them to step 
up monitoring of the performance of their debt collection agencies.  
We  believe  that  these  initiatives  have  been  of  some  help  in  promoting  higher  standards  and 
consistency in the handling of complaints. We shall supplement these initiatives as appropriate. But, 
no  matter  how  high  the  quality  of  service,  or  how  smooth  and  efficient  the  handling  of  dissatisfied 
customers may become, there will always be complaints and misunderstandings. In fact, quite often 
the more easy it is to complain, the more the complaints - even at times when the general quality of 
service  may  be  improving.  Higher  expectations  on  the  part  of  the  public,  a  greater  complexity  of 
services and products all contribute to a greater volume of complaints. Less positively, a more difficult 
economic environment contributes to friction between banks and their customers, for example in the 
greater incidence of default on debt on the one hand and in the greater tendency among banks, in 
times  of  tighter  margins,  to  go  after  that  debt.  Whether  in  good  times  or  bad,  a  certain  volume  of 
complaints  is  a  healthy  phenomenon  because  it  encourages  improvements  in  service  where 
complaints  are  upheld,  and  improvements  in  transparency  where  misunderstandings  occur.  On  a 
subject  so  important  as  the  way  in  which  banks  handle  people's  money,  there  will  always  be 
complaints, and we need to continue to develop our machinery for dealing with them.  
Let me deal quickly with the options identified by the HKMA in its survey last year which, if I read it 
correctly, the debate within the industry and the community is ruling out. The first option of these is the 
establishment  of  a  separate  banking  ombudsman  along  the  lines  of  the  practice  in  some  other 
jurisdictions.  This  is,  in  some  senses,  a  Rolls  Royce  solution  in  that  it  would  provide  a  separate 
agency,  to  process  and  resolve  complaints,  with  powers  to  arbitrate  in  complaints  and  award 
compensation.  It  would,  however,  be  a  costly  solution,  and  it  would  take  a  considerable  time  to 
implement. Under such a  system, the process of handling complaints  would probably also  be  quite 
resource-intensive,  and  it  is  by  no  means  clear  that  it  would  be  able  to  address  the  full  range  of 
complaints being made. I think the consensus at present, as reflected in the recent discussion at the 
LegCo  Financial  Affairs  Panel,  is  that  neither  the  current  volume  and  nature  of  complaints  nor  the 
deficiencies in existing arrangements would justify the creation of such elaborate machinery.  
The second  option  would  be to give  the HKMA a clear mandate to arbitrate and resolve consumer 
complaints and the powers to impose sanctions. This option could go some way towards addressing 
the  current  gap  between  the  expectation  of  bank  customers  and  what  the  HKMA  can  do  for  them 
under its existing powers. However, I think there is a consensus that this is not the right time for the 
BIS Review 39/2002 
 3
   HKMA to be given such a role. It would require a considerable increase in resources and some form of 
cost recovery from the banking industry, and it would also require addressing concerns about conflict 
of interest between different branches of the organisation - a problem that is not insoluble, but which 
would nevertheless require some careful thought. This, at least for the time being, does not seem to 
be the preferred option.  
The weight of opinion seems, then, to fall on the third option, which is to rely mainly on the industry 
itself to ensure that complaints are properly handled. There are three things which banks can do in 
helping to promote self-regulation:  
• 
First, AIs should strictly follow the Code of Banking Practice, which is issued by their own 
industry  associations.  They  should  comply  not  only  in  form  but  in  substance  as  well.  For 
example,  in  relation  to  debt  collection,  it  is  not  enough  that  they  have  incorporated  the 
relevant provisions of the Code into the service agreement with their debt collection agents. 
They should also pro-actively check that their agents are actually following these provisions 
when collecting debts. 
Secondly, AIs should ensure that all complaints are dealt with fairly and thoroughly. Again it 
is not enough that there are efficient complaint handling policies and procedures in place. It 
is  more  important  that  such  policies  and  procedures  are  conscientiously  implemented  by 
their staff. Where a complaint  is justified,  AIs should be prepared to offer the complainant 
restitution or compensation. 
Thirdly,  AIs  should  ensure  adequate  levels  of  transparency  in  the  provision  of  banking 
products and services. This is very important given the proliferation of more innovative and 
sophisticated  products in the retail  banking market. AIs must let their customers know the 
true cost of credit and ensure that all advertising and promotional materials do not contain 
misleading information. 
Self-regulation would not be a success without the involvement of the industry associations. Over the 
past six months, the industry associations have taken on a much more active role in developing the 
Code of Banking Practice. They have set up the Code of Banking Practice Committee, which has so 
far  been  effective  in  enhancing  the  role  of  the  industry  in  self-regulation  of  market  conduct.  The 
Committee has responded effectively and promptly to public concerns about banks' business practices 
by providing appropriate guidance on interpretation of the Code or even amending relevant provisions 
of the Code.  
The question of the industry associations' involvement in resolving customer disputes, whether or not 
these are related to the Code, is more controversial. Although the HKAB Ordinance does provide the 
Association with certain powers in relation to conduct regulation, the principal concern is whether such 
an industry-run scheme would have the necessary credibility, since banks would effectively be policing 
themselves.  
The rapid growth in number of complaints is a cause of concern but not a cause for alarm. The current 
framework of self-regulation by the industry has worked reasonably well in the past and there is no 
reason why it cannot continue to do so with a bit of help from banks themselves. We should monitor 
the  situation  carefully  before  rushing  into  other  costly  options.  Meanwhile,  the  banks  must  help  by 
tackling  the  problem  at  source:  through  being  careful  to  avoid  giving  grounds  for  complaint  and 
through dealing with any complaints that do arise fairly and promptly.  
All of this does not rule out a role for the HKMA. How best can we participate? I believe we should 
continue to play a support and resource role, in the further development of tools, such as the Code of 
Banking Practice and guidance on procedures, for the handling of complaints, and a monitoring role in 
ensuring that the system of self-regulation developed by HKAB and its members is working effectively. 
We can also help from an educational point of view by clarifying the options that members of the public 
have  should  they  wish  to  complain  about  banks  and  by  disseminating  information  on  this  through 
leaflets,  our  website,  and  other  tools.  A  part  of  this  clarification  must  set  out  the  limits  on  what  the 
HKMA can and will do in the taking on of banking consumer complaints: we are currently working on 
such a clarification.  
Self-regulation in the market, with support and guidance from the regulator, is, in my view, a sensible 
and appropriate way forward for a market economy such as Hong Kong. I am therefore very pleased 
that the general consensus seems to point in this direction. Whether this approach succeeds depends 
very much on the effort and energy put into it by the banking sector. It will also be influenced by trends 
in complaints over the coming months - rising, falling or otherwise - in the light of the many factors that 
4 
 BIS Review 39/2002
 give rise to complaints. The HKMA, in partnership with HKAB, will be monitoring developments, and I 
note that the Legislative Council Panel will also be revisiting this issue in six months time.  
Let me conclude with one point, which I hope has become clear through the discussion of this issue. 
The outcome of this discussion may come as a disappointment to those who say that the HKMA has 
an evil plan for taking over the world by grabbing powers and responsibilities whenever it can. The fact 
is that, although we are not technically a "statutory" body, what we can and cannot do in pursuit of our 
policies is strictly controlled by legislation, which is a matter ultimately for the Legislative Council to 
decide.  
I  have,  I  hope,  shown  that  this  legislation,  as  it  now  stands,  does  not  permit  us  to  do  many  of  the 
things that many complainants  would expect  or  wish us to do. In setting  out  the various alternative 
approaches to complaint handling as objectively as we can, we have, I hope, made it clear that the 
HKMA does not seek, or even welcome, an expansion of its powers to satisfy these expectations. On 
the  contrary,  at  a  time  of  continuing  challenge  and  shrinking  resources,  we  think  it  sensible  to 
concentrate our energies on our core responsibilities. We therefore welcome the present consensus 
on this issue and, together with HKAB and other parties, shall do our best to ensure that it works.  
BIS Review 39/2002 
 5
