I J Macfarlane: What does good monetary policy look like? 
Speech  by  Mr  I  J  Macfarlane,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  at  the  12th  Colin  Clark 
Memorial Lecture, Brisbane, 21 August 2002. 
 I would like to start by thanking the University of Queensland for inviting me to deliver the 12th Colin 
Clark Memorial Lecture. It is an honour that I very much appreciate. I met Colin Clark very briefly at 
Monash University in the late 1960s when I was starting my professional career and he was finishing 
his and easing into retirement. 
He was a remarkable man who was widely respected by the world’s economics profession, but who 
received less recognition in Australia than he deserved. Previous speakers in the series have given 
accounts  of  his  career  so  I  will  confine  myself  to  two  anecdotes.  The  first  is  based  on  something  I 
spotted quite recently. Out of nothing more than idle curiosity, I looked up the journal Econometrica for 
1950 to see  one of John  Nash’s original  articles. While searching for it, I came across a  list of the 
eleven  members  of  the  Council  of  the  Econometric  Society  at  that  time.  It  was  the  cream  of  the 
economics profession, five of whom subsequently won Nobel Prizes, and all but one from prestigious 
universities. The exception was Colin Clark, who won acceptance into this august company yet listed 
his affiliation as the Queensland Bureau of Industry. 
The second anecdote is based on my memory of an article on India he wrote in the Melbourne Age 
more than 30 years ago. It provoked an angry response from a local Indian academic, the essence of 
which could be summed up as “what would you know about the subject?”. In his reply, Clark listed the 
people  with  whom  he  had  discussed  the  subject  over  the  previous  40  years  -  the  list  started  with 
Gandhi, Nehru and Mountbatten and continued from there. To some, it might seem to be a case of 
name-dropping, but to people who knew him it was just another illustration of his extraordinary breadth 
of experience and his endless search for knowledge. 
Monetary policy in the medium term 
Let me now turn to the topic of my address today which, not surprisingly, is about monetary policy. I 
want  to  start  with  the  apparently  simple  question,  “what  would  good  monetary  policy  in  a  healthy 
economy look like?” Usually, when people answer such a question, they end up by giving an account 
of  what  monetary  policy  should  set  out  to  do.  They  point  out  that  its  primary  focus  should  be  on  a 
nominal  variable  such  as  inflation  because  this  maximises  the  chances  of  achieving  sustainable 
economic growth. Sustainability is the key concept here; attempting to maximise growth in the short 
run is counter-productive, as is exclusive concentration on trying to smooth the business cycle, or the 
attempt to get the economy on to a trend growth path higher than its potential. 
I have no wish to argue with any of these propositions, and indeed they are all encompassed within 
our  inflation-targeting  approach  to  monetary  policy.  They  are  admirable  statements  of  the  aims  of 
monetary  policy,  but  they  are  not  descriptions  of  what  good  monetary  policy  in  a  healthy  economy 
would look like, i.e. they do not tell us how the instrument of monetary policy would behave. 
Perhaps it is best to start at a very simple level. Most people do not like very high interest rates and 
associate  them  with  bad  monetary  policy.  Of  course,  if  the  country  is  already  experiencing  high 
inflation, the high interest rates may be a necessary evil, and the alternative would probably be a lot 
worse in the long run. Be that as it may, we can hardly say that such a situation could be described as 
good monetary policy in a healthy economy, because the economy is not healthy - it is suffering from 
high  inflation.  This  all  seems  pretty  obvious,  but  the  obverse  is  not  so  obvious.  I  sometimes  hear 
people say “why don’t we have lower interest rates like country X?” as though the lower the interest 
rate, the better off we would be. On closer examination, we see that very low interest rates, although 
they may also be a necessary evil in the circumstances, usually indicate an unhealthy economy - one 
that is in recession or, even worse, deflation. We do not have to look very far to see examples of this 
over the past few years. 
So if very high is bad, and very low is bad, is there not a happy medium somewhere? Is this how we 
would recognise good monetary policy in a healthy economy? The answer is yes - that is certainly part 
of the story, but only part. I would now like to go on and tell the rest. 
BIS Review 47/2002 
 1
Twenty  or  thirty  years  ago  if  we  had  asked  my  simple  question,  the  answer  would  have  been 
something  like  the  following.  If  the  potential  growth  rate  of  the  economy  is,  say,  3½  per  cent  per 
annum  and  the  desired  rate  of  inflation  is  2½  per  cent,  then  the  long-term  trend  rate  of  growth  of 
nominal GDP will be about 6 per cent per annum. We should, therefore, aim to make sure that the 
supply of money grows at a constant rate which is consistent with this. The actual rate will depend on 
the trend in the velocity of circulation, but the important thing is that when we find the right rate, we 
stick to it. In this world, interest rates are determined as the residual - they rise or fall enough to ensure 
that the growth of money supply stays on its constant path. Note, of course, that economic growth will 
not be constant: its annual growth will fluctuate around the long-term trend. 
This is a very simple model and a very appealing one. Unfortunately, things were never really able to 
work  out  this  way.  The  assumed  stable  long-term  relationship  between  money  and  nominal  GDP 
broke down because of changes brought about by financial innovation and deregulation. But it is still a 
very  good  starting  point  for  discussions,  and  many  of  its  characteristics  still  hold  good  in  a  world 
without a stable demand for money. 
In the modern monetary policy framework as practised around the world, we cannot, and should not, 
directly “control” the supply of money and wait for interest rates to drop out as the residual. We now 
control  the  very  shortest  interest  rate  (the  cash  rate)  directly,  and  so  it  acts  as  our  instrument  of 
monetary policy. So how should its average level and its short-term movement behave in a healthy 
economy? The answer: very much as they would in the earlier example I gave with a stable demand 
for money. For example: 
• 
Nominal  interest  rates  would  not  show  either  a  rising  or  falling  long-run  trend.  Their 
fluctuations  would  be  around  a  stable  average  -  in  technical  terms,  they  would  have  the 
statistical characteristic known as stationarity. 
The numerical value of this long-run average would be the level that was consistent with a 
low-inflation sustainable growth path for the economy. 
For a healthy economy, the inflation rate would neither rise nor fall in trend terms, and so the 
long-run average real interest rate would also be stable. It is this rate which is often referred 
to as the “neutral rate of interest”. 
The  actual  real  rate  of  interest  would  rise  and  fall  as  it  responded  to  increasing  and 
decreasing inflationary  pressures in the economy. If the real rate of interest did not go up 
and down in response to these changing pressures, the underlying dynamics of the economy 
would be unstable for the reasons I outlined in my recent Giblin Lecture.1 The actual time 
path of real interest rates would closely resemble the time path that would occur in the stable 
money demand example I gave earlier. The difference is that it would result from a sequence 
of deliberate monetary policy decisions, rather than occurring as a residual. 
   This is the sort of behaviour of interest rates that has been observed in Australia over the past decade. 
A  stable  rate  of  inflation,  a  stable  average  growth  rate,  a  stable  average  short-term  interest  rate 
whether measured in nominal or real terms, but some variation in actual interest rates as monetary 
policy responds to alternating periods of inflationary or disinflationary pressures. That is, a stabilising 
monetary  policy  involves  interest  rates  moving.  It  is  entirely  consistent  with  the  inflation-targeting 
framework  we  employ,  and  it  is  employed  either  explicitly  or  implicitly  by  virtually  all  other  major 
countries.2 
Some current considerations 
What is the relevance of the foregoing for what is happening now? If we look around the world, we see 
some examples which illustrate some of these points. 
“The Movement of Interest Rates“, Reserve Bank Bulletin, October 2001. 
                                                      
1 
2  A technical addendum to the above might recognise that if the economy’s potential growth rate had increased, for example, 
as a result of faster productivity growth, then its neutral real rate of interest should be higher. This would, however, be very 
difficult to identify other than on a decade-by-decade basis. It would be further complicated by the fact that, in the short run, 
faster productivity growth could initially show up as reduced inflationary pressures. For these reasons, it is better to stick to 
the simple version as outlined in the text. 
2 
 BIS Review 47/2002
It is very hard to find examples of countries with very high interest rates, other than a few emerging-
market countries trying to stave off a currency crisis. Examples of very low interest rates come more 
readily to hand. The best example is Japan where the cash rate is zero; this is obviously a result of an 
economy experiencing deflation and a closely spaced series of recessions. In the United States the 
cash rate is 1.75 per cent, the lowest since the early 1960s. Again, this is an economy which has just 
been through a recession and is still experiencing the unwinding of the equity price bubble. In the case 
of the Euro area, the situation is closer to normality, but growth over the past year has been negligible; 
not surprisingly, the cash rate is still only 3¼ per cent. 
Then we come to a few countries like Australia, New Zealand, Sweden and the United Kingdom where 
conditions are relatively normal and the cash rate is in the range of 4 per cent to 5¾ per cent. I should 
also  mention  in  passing  that  this  group  of  countries  all  employ  inflation  targeting  as  their  monetary 
policy regime. Most of the countries in this group have raised interest rates this year,3 because there 
has been a good case to do so on domestic grounds. But, at the same time, they have been keeping a 
close watch on the global economy and global financial markets to see whether these developments 
could outweigh the domestic influences. 
That has clearly been our case over the past two months. In May, I told a Parliamentary Committee 
that, since the Australian economy was behaving normally, and the world economy was getting back 
to  normal,  our  interest  rates  should  also  be  moved  up  to  normal  (or  neutral).  That  is  still  a  good 
general guide to policy, and is consistent with what was said in the first part of this lecture. But policy 
always  has  to  retain  the  capacity  to  respond  to  unexpected  events,  and  hence  I  did  include  a 
qualification  to  this  guide  in  that  I  said  that  “as  long  as  nothing  intruded”.  Also,  I  did  not  specify  a 
timetable. 
As a result, the financial markets were not surprised when monetary policy was not tightened at the 
July and August Reserve Bank Board Meetings. Something clearly had intruded, as was obvious to 
anyone who kept abreast of world economic and financial developments. The expected development 
of  the  domestic  economy  was  still  on  track,  but  for  the  world  economy,  and  particularly  the  US 
economy,  some  serious  doubts  had  arisen. Whatever  guiding  principle  underlies  a  monetary  policy 
strategy, it has to contain the flexibility to absorb incoming information and be adjusted accordingly. So 
if unforeseen events intrude, they should correctly be allowed to delay the return to normality, or if the 
events were severe enough, they could in extremis overturn the direction of movement. Although the 
latter possibility has to be recognised, we think it is very unlikely. 
There has been more focus on equity markets over the past two years than any other time I can recall 
in the post-war period. Most of the focus is on the United States, but European markets have fallen 
just as far. Falls in equity prices are principally a concern to us because of the risk they pose to global 
economic recovery. The most obvious channel is through wealth effects to consumers, but business 
spending is also vulnerable to the rising cost of equity capital, and to the cost of debt as credit spreads 
widen. There may also be an increase in general uncertainty and preparedness to invest as a result of 
community disillusionment with some recent business practices. 
I want to stress that these risks come from international markets, not the domestic ones. Even though 
Australian share prices have fallen, compared  with others they have  done so by  a smaller amount, 
from a much lower peak, and the fall has been much more recent. Most importantly, we did not have a 
“bubble” in our stock market as Diagram 1 attests. Nor have we had anywhere near the widening of 
credit  spreads  in  debt  markets  that  has  occurred  in  the  United  States  (Diagram  2).  Our  business 
environment has not been without incident, as several prominent failures show, but with the exception 
of One.Tel, they have not been the result of a boom and bust in the share markets. 
                                                      
3  As has Canada, but it is a special case in that it followed US rates down to very low levels. It has since raised them three 
times this year, but they are still only at 2.75 per cent. 
BIS Review 47/2002 
 3
 Diagram 1 
Click to view larger 
Diagram 2 
Click to view larger 
The other thing I would like to mention before I close is another aspect of asset prices. We in Australia 
have been very fortunate in the current expansion in not having a boom or a bust in asset prices - the 
closest we come to such a situation would, I suppose, be the large rises that have occurred over the 
past five years in house prices. 
Now, many of you may be aware that this situation is one that we at the Reserve Bank are not entirely 
comfortable with. While it may give home owners a happy feeling, we cannot help but also think of the 
people - mainly in the younger age groups - who aspire to own a home, but are finding it increasingly 
difficult to do so 4 because rising prices are putting home ownership out of their reach. But since this is 
mainly a wealth distributional issue, rather than something that directly affects the economy’s ability to 
continue  its  low-inflation  economic  expansion,  it  is  not  something  that  can  or  should  be  directly 
                                                      
4  This  is  not the  first time the  Reserve  Bank  has  “bought  into” this issue.  See my speech,  “Inflation and  Changing  Public 
Attitudes“,  Reserve  Bank Bulletin,  December  1995,  which  made  the  same  points  during  a  period  when  there  was  some 
public dissatisfaction with the failure of house prices to rise! 
4 
 BIS Review 47/2002
addressed  by  monetary  policy.  As  always,  monetary  policy  has  to  be  directed  towards  how  the 
average of the whole economy is evolving, not to what a particular sector is doing. 
Although we should not allow our perceptions of developments in the housing sector to determine our 
stance on monetary policy, in our view that does not mean we should remain silent on the subject, and 
we  have  not.  The  situation  over  the  past  18  months,  where  more  than  half  of  the  total  increase  in 
housing loan approvals has gone into the investor market, is a very unusual one. When we see that 
this is occurring against a background where vacancy rates are rising, rents are stagnant or falling, 
and  a  large  increase  in  new  supply  is  coming  on  stream,  it  suggests  to  us  a  mis-allocation  of 
investment,  and  the  likelihood  of  a  shakeout  in  the  market,  at  least  in  the  major  cities.  If  that  is  to 
occur, it is better that it occur sooner rather than later. 
Conclusion 
My main conclusion is that in assessing monetary policy, it is important to see it in a medium or long-
term perspective. It is also important not to get the impression that monetary policy is only exerting an 
influence if it is changing. It is true that monetary policy only makes news when it is changing, but its 
influence  is  really  the  result  of  what  the  level  of  interest  rates  is.  It  is  quite  easy  to  conceive  of 
situations where monetary policy has not been changed for a considerable time, but where the level of 
interest rates is exerting a strong expansionary or contractionary effect on the economy. 
Once we recognise that the level is important, we inevitably have to ask what we should compare the 
current level with, and this leads us to think of the concept of normality or neutrality. Of course, we 
only  expect  interest  rates  to  be  normal  in  periods  when  the  economy  is  operating  in  a  normal  or 
healthy  way.  In  situations  where  it  is  under  either  sustained  inflationary  or  disinflationary  pressure, 
there are more important matters at hand than to ponder such theoretical concepts as the neutral level 
of interest rates. Fortunately, the Australian economy is in that small group of countries that can rightly 
be described as operating in a normal or healthy way; in fact, in many ways, we are the best example 
around at present. 
BIS Review 47/2002 
 5
