 Urban Bäckström: The monetary policy situation in Sweden 
Opening remarks by Mr Urban Bäckström, Governor of Sveriges Riksbank, to the Riksdag's Finance 
Committee, Stockholm, 19 March 2002. 
 First  I  want  to  express  my  thanks  for  this  opportunity  of  discussing  the  Swedish  economy  and 
monetary policy with members of the Finance Committee. The Riksbank is required by law to present 
your Committee with a written account of monetary policy at least twice a year. The first of this year’s 
accounts was handed over this morning. It contains a description of the Riksbank’s view of economic 
developments and the prospects for inflation. In my opening remarks I shall summarise the report and 
then  discuss the consequences the Riksbank’s Executive  Board  draws as regards monetary policy. 
Then I look forward to a discussion with members of the Committee and shall do my best to answer 
your questions. 
Brightening outlook for the world economy 
The discussion at our  previous meeting  last  autumn was coloured to a  high  degree  by  the terrorist 
attacks in the United States on 11 September and their effects. At that time there was considerable 
uncertainty about the extent to which economic activity, which was already weak, would be affected. 
There was a risk of the attacks making households and firms even more uncertain and eroding their 
confidence in the future, with negative consequences for demand. As inflationary pressure varies with 
the state of demand and resource utilisation, the events influenced the formulation of monetary policy 
in many countries, including Sweden. 
Six months later, however, we are now seeing more and more signs of an imminent improvement in 
activity  abroad.  The  attacks’  impact  on  the  global  economy  were  fortunately  limited,  though  certain 
sectors,  such  as  air  transport  and  insurance,  have  been  heavily  hit  by  the  attacks  and  their 
repercussions. Production last year was constrained by excessively large stocks but it now looks as 
though stock adjustments have come a long way, which is a good sign for output. A certain amount of 
optimism  is  beginning  to  spread.  Order  books  are  becoming  more  stable  and  in  some  cases  even 
improving. Then there is the additional impetus that comes from the expansionary economic policy in 
many countries. 
A proper global recovery that becomes increasingly strong does, however, presuppose a broad and 
sustained increase in demand. An increase in production that is generated solely by an end to stock 
reductions is liable to be relatively brief. In this respect there may be some uncertainty. There are still 
large  imbalances  in  the  American  economy  and  stock  market  values  are  high,  both  in  a  historical 
comparison and in relation to the current cyclical phase. 
Opinions differ somewhat about the imbalances in the United States. Many observers focus on and 
are worried about structural imbalances in the U.S. economy. The adjustment problems, after undue 
optimism among households and firms in the late 1990s had given rise to the imbalances, will lead to 
the  recovery  being  more  sluggish  than  usual.  Some  even  consider  there  could  be  a  more  drastic 
correction  that  breaks  a  global  upswing  in  the  coming  years.  Those  who  are  more  optimistic  point 
instead  to  the  U.S.  economy’s  productivity  growth;  if  this  remains  high,  there  is  less  cause  to  be 
concerned about the imbalances because a higher potential growth rate permits higher incomes with 
which to service the debt burden. 
The Riksbank’s current analysis does not envisage a quick correction of the imbalances. Still, there 
are grounds for supposing that growth in the American economy in the coming years will not be as 
high  as  in  the  late  1990s.  And  if  the  imbalances  were  to  be  adjusted  more  quickly,  the  Riksbank 
would, of course, have to take that into account in the formation of monetary policy. 
Turning now  to  Europe,  we see fewer signs of a recovery. The  prospects for  Germany, the largest 
economy in the euro area, are still uncertain. However, a look at the leading indicators does show that 
firms have become more positive. Imbalances like those in the United States have not accumulated in 
the  euro  area  and  this  may  benefit  a  recovery.  Moreover,  economic  policy  is  also  markedly 
expansionary in Europe, although the scope for fiscal measures is not as great as on the other side of 
the Atlantic. In addition, an upswing is likely to be held back by product and labour market rigidities. 
BIS Review 19/2002 
 1
 So all in all, it is hard to see how the coming economic upswing can be as rapid as earlier recoveries. 
But the world economic picture is now appreciably brighter than last autumn and the outlines of an 
upturn are becoming increasingly clear. 
Inflation in Sweden is high 
If the picture  we present  in the Inflation Report  holds good, the present cyclical  dip in the  Swedish 
economy  will  turn  out  to  have  been  the  mildest  for  over  thirty  years.  GDP  growth  was  admittedly 
subdued in 2001 but the figures from Statistics Sweden do not show any negative rates. Neither has 
the labour market deteriorated as much as usual. Nor have any serious imbalances arisen. So thus far 
there  is  reason  to  be  positive  about  the  economic  situation;  most  leading  indicators  point  to  an 
economic recovery, with an upturn in activity during 2002. 
There is, however, the problem that inflation has for a time been clearly above the Riksbank’s 2 per 
cent target. To a certain  extent the comparatively  high inflation can be explained by various supply 
shocks  that  have  raised  the  prices  of  electricity,  meat,  fruit  and  vegetables,  for  instance.  The 
background to these shocks includes the previous winter’s low precipitation for hydroelectric power, 
livestock diseases and poor harvests due to last autumn’s unusually cold weather in Europe. As I said, 
shocks  of  this  type  can  raise  the  general  price  level  and  lead,  as  in  these  cases,  to  a  transitory 
increase in the rate of inflation. 
But even if one disregards these price increases, inflation has risen. As we discussed in a number of 
Inflation  Reports  last  year,  this  probably  has  a  number  of  interacting  explanations.  One  is  that 
resource  utilisation  in  the  Swedish  economy  has  probably  been  somewhat  higher  than  envisaged 
earlier. This in turn no doubt explains why wage increases, particularly in domestic sectors, have been 
higher than expected. As this has been accompanied by weak productivity growth, mainly it seems for 
cyclical reasons, it has led to upward pressure on prices. A general contraction of profit shares in the 
economy as a whole has presumably helped to modify price increases in recent years. But this has 
also left firms with less room to “absorb” further additions to costs and weak underlying productivity 
growth. 
All  this  naturally  raises  questions  about  potential  growth  resource  utilisation,  inflationary  pressure, 
competition in various markets and the workings of the economy. 
Resource utilisation higher than expected 
Ever  since  inflation  expectations  closed  onto  the  target  some  time  after  the  mid  1990s,  a  very 
important  consideration  for  inflation  forecasts  and  thereby  for  the  formation  of  monetary  policy  has 
been resource utilisation. This indicator concerns the relationship between actual demand and what 
the economy is capable of producing in the longer run without price and wage increases accelerating. 
Let  me  point  out  first  that  neither  the  potential  growth  rate,  resource  utilisation  nor  the  inflation 
propensity  in  a  wide  sense  is  something  that  can  be  measured  directly.  For  some  years  now  the 
Riksbank has been drawing attention to questions of this type, analysing them and presenting detailed 
accounts  in  the  Inflation  Report.  Although  we  have  mainly  referred  to  various  supply  shocks  as 
explanations for inflation’s relatively high rate in the past year, we have also drawn attention to other 
conceivable factors right from the start. In the Inflation Report last May, for example, we wrote: 
The  risks  for  inflation  connected  with  domestic  demand  and  the  relationship  between  growth  and 
inflation in Sweden are somewhat more on the upside than foreseen in the March Report. The inflation 
forecast in the main scenario has admittedly been revised upwards in view of the unexpectedly high 
domestic inflation but this has been done mainly for the coming year. It is conceivable that the higher 
registered inflation is partly a sign that resource utilisation is more strained than assumed in the main 
scenario. (Inflation Report 2001:2, pp. 24–25) 
Some  upward  revision  of  resource  utilisation  is  incorporated  in  the  Inflation  Report  the  Riksbank  is 
presenting today. That was done partly because the underlying rate of price and wage increases has 
been  moving  gradually  upwards  for  a  time. This  resembles  our  response,  though  with  the  opposite 
sign,  when  inflation  repeatedly  turned  out  to  be  a  positive  surprise  in  the  late  1990s.  The  present 
adjustments imply that there are less unutilised resources that can be brought into production without 
this leading to a rising rate of price and wage increases. That in turn affects the prospects for future 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2002
 inflation, particularly as economic activity, in Sweden as well as elsewhere, seems to be improving and 
overall economic policy is expansionary. 
This analysis has ramifications in the labour market. The general weakening of demand during 2001 
did not show up in employment. Unemployment has been more or less stable. Both the economy as a 
whole and the labour market show signs of a dichotomy; industrial output and employment have fallen, 
accompanied by an increase in demand and jobs in the services sector. At the same time it is mainly 
in services that wages and prices have risen. 
Thus, in the light of what has been happening to prices and wages during the past year, the Riksbank 
has  gradually  arrived  at  a  somewhat  altered  view  of  the  Swedish  economy’s  inflation  propensity. 
Higher resource utilisation, together with higher wage increases and a weak exchange rate, has led to 
somewhat  stronger  inflationary  pressure.  This  affects  the  forecast  we  are  presenting  today. 
Meanwhile,  we  are,  of  course,  continuing  the  work  of  developing  our  analysis  and  interpreting  new 
data as they become available. 
Rising inflation 
All in all, in the Inflation Report the Riksbank notes that incoming statistics confirm the impression that 
activity  in  Sweden  has  probably  stopped  falling.  The  expansionary  fiscal  policy  is  contributing  to  a 
strong development of household disposable income in the coming years, providing a basis for higher 
private  consumption  as  well  as  increased  saving.  Exports  rise  during  the  forecast  period  but  the 
increase is relatively modest both on account of the international upswing being tentative initially and 
because the krona is expected to appreciate. GDP growth is judged to be 1.6 per cent this year and 
then accelerate to between 2.5 and 3 per cent in the coming years, which as fare as can be judged is 
somewhat  more  than  the  Swedish  economy  can  sustain  in  the  longer  run  without  giving  rise  to 
inflationary tensions. 
With the high resource utilisation, labour costs are judged to rise somewhat more than we foresaw in 
the  December  Report.  Partly  for  this  reason,  domestic  inflation  in  the  forecast  period  is  somewhat 
higher than foreseen earlier. CPI inflation stops at 2.2 per cent one year ahead and 2.4 per cent after 
two years. The corresponding forecast for inflation’s underlying rate, UND1X, is 2.2 per cent both one 
and two years ahead. Monetary policy focuses in the first place on the latter rate. 
In this price forecast, the supply shocks that are now leaving their mark on inflation are judged to drop 
out  of  the  twelve-month  change  figures  successively  during  the  late  spring.  Inflation  is  accordingly 
expected to approach 2 per cent in the early summer. After that, however, it is foreseen that the more 
strained resource utilisation connected with stronger economy activity will lead to a renewed increase 
in inflation. 
The  risk  spectrum  mainly  concerns  domestic  inflationary  pressure.  If  resource  utilisation  is  more 
strained than the Riksbank now assumes or if potential growth has been overestimated, there is a risk 
of  future  inflation  being  higher  than  in  the  main  scenario.  When  the  risk  spectrum  is  taken  into 
account, underlying inflation, measured by UND1X, amounts to 2.3 per cent both one and two years 
ahead. 
Monetary policy conclusions 
I should like to conclude with some words about monetary policy. 
In  the  light  of  increasingly  clear  signs  of  an  economic  recovery  and  resource  utilisation  that  is 
somewhat  more  strained  than  expected,  the  Riksbank  has  decided  to  raise  the  repo  rate  0.25 
percentage points, to 4.0 per cent. By safeguarding price stability, we aim to create conditions for a 
stable and sustainable development of production and employment in the Swedish economy. 
Last year’s higher inflation and our assessment that it was not solely transitory have already left their 
mark  on  monetary  policy.  That  was  the  case  not  least  last  summer,  when  we  raised  the  repo  rate 
because  of  concern  that  the  weak  exchange  rate  combined  with  comparatively  high  resource 
utilisation might lead to the higher inflation becoming entrenched. In September we, like other central 
banks,  cut  the  interest  rate  0.5  percentage  points;  later  in  the  autumn,  however,  we  were  more 
cautious  about  lowering  the  instrumental  rate  than,  for  example,  the  European  Central  Bank.  Since 
last  May,  the  risk  of  higher  domestic  inflation  has  been  weighted  into  our  decisions.  Whereas  the 
BIS Review 19/2002 
 3
 Swedish repo rate at the beginning of last year was lower than its counterparts in the euro area and 
the United States, it is now higher. 
Looking ahead, we have as usual not committed ourselves. What we do or refrain from doing with the 
repo  rate  will  depend  on  the  new  information  that  becomes  available  and  on  how  we  assess  and 
analyse  it.  What  happened  last  year  is  a  good  illustration  of  the  appropriateness  of  this  approach. 
Neither positive nor negative surprises can be ruled out. We have to be ready to cope with that. 
That said, we have inflation that is relatively high, even though we count on it becoming a good deal 
lower in the coming six months. Resource utilisation is probably relatively high, too. The path of the 
interest rate will then depend – as long as inflation expectations remain in place – on how economic 
activity develops. 
If  activity  continues  to  strengthen  as  expected  and  there  is  no  reason  to  reappraise  the  economy’s 
inflation  propensity,  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  the  repo  rate  in  Sweden  will  be  adjusted 
successively upwards. This does not come as a surprise to  participants in financial markets. It is a 
natural consequence of the Riksbank being in earnest about its task of ensuring a rate of price and 
wage increases that is in line with the inflation target in a situation where economic activity in Sweden 
is become gradually stronger. 
Here I am prompted to refer to what Knut Wicksell, the well-known political economist, pointed out in 
his day; it  is a matter of looking for the “natural” rate of interest at  which the economy can expand 
without prices and wages rising too quickly. 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2002
