 Alan Greenspan: Semi-annual monetary policy report to the US Congress 
Testimony of Mr Alan Greenspan, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal Reserve 
System,  on  the  occasion  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board’s  semiannual  monetary  policy  report  to  the 
Congress, before the Committee on Financial Services, US House of Representatives, 17 July 2002.  
 I appreciate this opportunity to present the Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Report to the Congress.  
Over the four and one-half months since I last testified before this Committee on monetary policy, the 
economy has continued to expand, largely along the broad contours we had anticipated at that time. 
Although the uncertainties of earlier this year are as yet not fully resolved, the U.S. economy appears 
to have withstood a set of blows--major declines in equity markets, a sharp retrenchment in investment 
spending, and the tragic terrorist attacks of last September--that in previous business cycles almost 
surely  would  have  induced  a  severe  contraction.  The  mildness  and  brevity  of  the  downturn,  as  I 
indicated earlier this year, are a testament to the notable improvement in the resilience and flexibility of 
the U.S. economy.  
But while the economy has held up remarkably well, not surprisingly the depressing effects of recent 
events  linger.  Spending  will  continue  to  adjust  for  some  time  to  the  declines  that  have  occurred  in 
equity prices. In recent weeks, those prices have fallen further on net, in part under the influence of 
growing  concerns  about  corporate  governance  and  business  transparency  problems  that  evidently 
accumulated  during  the  earlier  rapid  runup  in  these  markets.  Considerable  uncertainties--about  the 
progress of the adjustment of capital spending and the rebound in profitability, about the potential for 
additional revelations of corporate malfeasance, and about possible risks from global political events 
and terrorism--still confront us.  
Nevertheless, the fundamentals are in place for a return to sustained healthy growth: Imbalances in 
inventories  and  capital  goods  appear  largely  to  have  been  worked  off;  inflation  is  quite  low  and  is 
expected  to  remain  so;  and  productivity  growth  has  been  remarkably  strong,  implying  considerable 
underlying support to household and business spending as well as potential relief from cost and price 
pressures. In considering policy actions this year, the Federal Open Market Committee has recognized 
that  the  accommodative  stance  of  policy  adopted  last  year  in  response  to  the  substantial  forces 
restraining the economy likely will not prove compatible over time with maximum sustainable growth 
and price stability. But, with inflation currently contained and with few signs that upward pressures are 
likely to develop any time soon, we have chosen to maintain that stance pending evidence that the 
forces  inhibiting  economic growth  are  dissipating  enough  to  allow  the  strong  fundamentals  to  show 
through more fully.  
As has often been the case in the past, the behavior of inventories provided substantial impetus for 
the initial strengthening of the economy. Manufacturers, wholesalers, and retailers took vigorous steps 
throughout 2001 to eliminate an unwanted buildup of stocks that emerged when final demand slowed 
late in 2000. By early this year, with inventory levels having apparently come into better alignment with 
expected sales, the pace of inventory reduction began to ebb, and efforts to limit further drawdowns 
provided a considerable boost to production. The available evidence suggests that, in some sectors, 
liquidation may be giving way to a rebuilding of inventories. However, as inventories start to grow more 
in  line  with  sales  in  coming  quarters,  the  contribution  of  inventory  investment  to  real  GDP  growth 
should lessen. As a result, the strength of final demand will play its usual central role in determining 
the vigor of the expansion. While final demand has been increasing, the pace of forward momentum 
remains uncertain.  
Household  spending  held  up  quite  well  during  the  downturn  and  through  recent  months,  and  thus 
served as an important stabilizing force for the overall economy. Real consumer outlays and spending 
on residential construction each rose about 3 percent over the course of 2001, even as the growth of 
real  GDP  fell  off  to  only  ½  percent.  Household  spending  was  boosted  by  ongoing  increases  in 
incomes, which in turn were spurred by strong advances in productivity as well as by legislated tax 
reductions and, in recent months, by extended unemployment insurance benefits.  
Monetary policy also played a role by cutting short-term interest rates, which helped lower household 
borrowing  costs.  Particularly  important  in  buoying  spending  were  the  very  low  levels  of  mortgage 
interest  rates,  which  encouraged  households  to  purchase  homes,  refinance  debt  and  lower  debt 
BIS Review 44/2002 
 1
 service burdens, and extract equity from homes to finance expenditures. Fixed mortgage rates remain 
at  historically  low  levels  and  thus  should  continue  to  fuel  reasonably  strong  housing  demand  and, 
through equity extraction, to support consumer spending as well. Indeed, recent sizable increases in 
home prices, which reflect the effects on demand of low mortgage rates, immigration, and shortages of 
buildable land in some areas, have significantly increased the equity in houses that homeowners can 
readily tap through home equity loans and mortgage refinancing.  
But those sources of strength probably will be tempered by other influences. As we noted in February, 
because consumer and residential expenditures did not decline during the overall downturn, there is 
little  pent-up  demand  to  be  satisfied.  Consequently,  a  surge  in  household  spending  early  in  this 
recovery  is  unlikely.  Moreover,  the  declines  in  household  wealth  that  have  occurred  over  the  past 
couple of years should continue to restrain spending in the period ahead. Still, despite concerns about 
economic prospects, equity valuations, terrorism, and geopolitical conflicts, consumers do not appear 
to have retrenched in retail markets. Indeed, consumers responded strongly to the new interest rate 
incentives of motor vehicle manufacturers this month. Early reports indicate a significant improvement 
in sales over June. 
By contrast, business spending has been depressed. The recent economic downturn was driven, in 
large measure, by the sharp falloff in the demand for capital goods that occurred when firms suddenly 
realized  that  stocks  of  such  goods--both  those  already  in  place  as  well  as  those  in  inventory--were 
excessive.  The  resulting  declines  in  the  production  of  capital  goods  were  particularly  sizable  in  the 
high-tech  sector.  Monthly  shipments  of  computers  and  peripherals,  for  example,  fell  by  about  40 
percent  from  their  peak  in  1999  through  their  trough  in  2001.  Sales  by  communications  equipment 
producers slumped just as sharply. Outside the high-tech sector, production also declined. Assemblies 
of commercial aircraft slowed abruptly. In addition, the construction of office and industrial buildings fell 
off  noticeably.  The  collapse  of  many  Internet  firms  and  the  difficulties  of  the  high-tech  sector  more 
generally  led  to  a  significant  drop  in  the  demand  for  office  space  that  was  exacerbated  as  the 
economic  slowdown  widened  beyond  the  tech  sector.  Overall,  the  level  of  real  business  fixed 
investment plunged about 11 percent between its quarterly peak in the final months of 2000 and the 
first quarter of this year.  
With the adjustment of the capital stock to desired levels now evidently well advanced, business fixed 
investment may be set to improve. A recovery in this category of spending is likely to be gradual by 
historical  standards  and  uneven  across  sectors.  For  example,  an  upturn  in  production  of 
semiconductors  and  computers  has  been  under  way  now  for  nearly  a  year,  but  with  significant 
overcapacity still prevailing in some segments of the telecom industry, investment in communications 
equipment  is  likely  to  remain  subdued  for  some  time  to  come.  Overall  capital  expenditures  should 
strengthen with time. In particular, firms should respond increasingly to the expected improvement in 
the outlook for sales and profits, low debt financing costs, the heightened incentives resulting from the 
partial  expensing  tax  provisions  legislated  earlier  this  year,  and  especially  the  productivity 
enhancements offered by continuing advances in technology.  
Indeed,  despite  the  recent  depressed  level  of  investment  expenditures,  the  productivity  of  the  U.S. 
economy has continued to rise at a remarkably strong pace. In the nonfarm business sector, output 
per hour is currently estimated to have soared at an average annual rate of about 7 percent over the 
fourth quarter of 2001 and first quarter of 2002, and the available evidence points to continued gains 
last  quarter--though  not  at  the  frenetic  pace  of  the  preceding  half  year.  In  part,  these  increases  in 
productivity  reflect  the  very  cautious  attitudes  of  managers  toward  hiring.  But  the  magnitude  of  the 
recent  gains  would  not  have  been  possible  without  ongoing  benefits  from  the  rapid  pace  of 
technological  advance  and  from  the  heavy  investment  over  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s  in  capital 
equipment incorporating such advances.  
Despite  these  encouraging  developments  regarding  the  longer-term  prospects  for  the  economy, 
financial  markets  have  been  notably  skittish  of  late,  and  business  managers  remain  decidedly 
cautious. In part, these attitudes reflect the lingering effects of the shocks that our economy endured in 
2000 and 2001. Particularly given the dimensions of those shocks, some persistent uncertainty and 
concern are not surprising.  
Also  contributing  to  the  dispirited  attitudes  among  many  corporate  executives  is  the  intensely 
competitive business environment facing their firms. Increased competition, while producing manifold 
benefits  for  consumers  and  for  the  economy  as  a  whole,  clearly  makes  individual  firms'  operations 
more difficult. Past deregulation and, more recently, the enhanced speed and efficiency of information 
flows  resulting  from  technological  advances  are  strengthening  competition  domestically.  In  addition, 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2002
 globalization is intensifying competition in a broad range of markets and damping pricing power across 
developed and developing nations alike.  
Those businesses where heightened competition has engendered a loss of pricing power have sought 
ways  to  raise  profit  margins  by  employing  technology  to  lower  costs  and  improve  efficiency.  In  the 
United  States,  as  a  consequence  of  the  interaction  of  monetary  policy,  globalization,  and  cost-
reducing  productivity  advances,  price  inflation  has  fallen  in  recent  years  to  its  lowest  level  in  four 
decades, as has the recent growth rate of nominal GDP and consolidated corporate revenues.  
In part because nominal corporate revenues, although no longer declining, are growing only tepidly, 
managers seem to remain skeptical of the evidence of an emerging upturn. Profit margins do appear 
to  be  coming  off  their  lows  registered  late  last  year,  but,  unsurprisingly,  the  recovery  in  economic 
activity from a shallow decline appears less vigorous than in the past. The lowest sustained rates of 
inflation  in  forty  years  imply  that  nominal  growth  in  sales  and  profits  looks  particularly  anemic.  In 
contrast, in the 1950s and early 1960s, the last period of stable prices, populations and employment 
were growing considerably faster than the recent pace so that growth in nominal GDP, consolidated 
corporate sales, and profits was seen as still quite respectable. Reflecting concerns about the strength 
of the recovery, managers continue to limit capital spending to only the most pressing needs. 
Given  the  key  role  of  perceptions  of  subdued  profitability  in  the  current  period,  it  is  ironic  that  the 
practice of not expensing stock-option grants, which contributed to the surge in earnings reported to 
shareholders  from  1997  to  2000,  has  imparted  a  deceptive  weakness  to  the  growth  of  earnings 
reported to shareholders in recent quarters. As stock market gains turned to losses a couple of years 
ago,  the  willingness  of  employees  to  accept  stock  options  in  lieu  of  cash  or  other  forms  of 
compensation apparently diminished.  According to  estimates by Federal Reserve staff, the value of 
stock option grants for the S&P 500 corporations fell about 15 percent from 2000 to 2001, and grant 
values  have  likely  declined  still  further  this  year.  Moreover,  options  grants  are  presumably  being 
replaced over time by cash or other forms of compensation, which are expensed, contributing further 
to less robust growth in earnings reported to shareholders from its trough last year.  
In contrast, the measure of profits calculated by the Department of Commerce for the National Income 
and Product Accounts is designed to gauge the economic profitability of current operations. It excludes 
a number of one-time charges that appear in shareholder reports, and, importantly, records options as 
an expense, albeit at the time of exercise. Although this treatment of the cost of options is not ideal, it 
is  arguably  superior  to  their  treatment  in  shareholder  reports,  where  options  are  generally  not 
expensed  at  all.  NIPA  profits  closely  approximate  those  obtained  from  reports  submitted  for  tax 
purposes, and, for obvious reasons, corporations tend not to inflate taxable earnings. Consequently, 
NIPA profits have been far less subject to the spin evident in reports to shareholders in recent years. 
NIPA profits have increased sharply since the third quarter of last year, partly reflecting the dramatic 
jump in productivity and decline in unit labor costs.  
The  difficulties  of  judging  earnings  trends  have  been  intensified  by  revelations  of  misleading 
accounting practices at some prominent businesses. The resulting investor skepticism about earnings 
reports has not only depressed the valuation of equity shares, but it also has been reportedly a factor 
in the rising risk spreads on corporate debt issued by the lower rung of investment-grade and below-
investment  grade  firms,  further  elevating  the  cost  of  capital  for  these  borrowers.  Businesses 
concerned about the impact of possible adverse publicity regarding their accounting practices on their 
access  to  finance  could  revert  to  a  much  heavier  emphasis  on  cash  generation  and  accumulation. 
Such an emphasis could slow new capital investment initiatives.  
The recent impressive advances in productivity suggest that to date any impairment of efficiency of U. 
S.  corporations  overall  has  been  small.  Efficiency  is  of  course  a  key  measure  of  corporate 
governance. Nonetheless, the danger that breakdowns in governance could at some point significantly 
erode business efficiency remains worrisome. Well-functioning markets require accurate information to 
allocate  capital  and  other  resources,  and  market  participants  must  have  confidence  that  our 
predominately voluntary system of exchange is transparent and fair. Although business transactions 
are  governed  by  laws  and  contracts,  if  even  a  modest  fraction  of  those  transactions  had  to  be 
adjudicated, our courts would be swamped into immobility. Thus, our market system depends critically 
on trust--trust in the word of our colleagues and trust in the word of those with whom we do business. 
Falsification  and  fraud  are  highly  destructive  to  free-market  capitalism  and,  more  broadly,  to  the 
underpinnings of our society.  
In  recent  years,  shareholders  and  potential  investors  would  have  been  protected  from  widespread 
misinformation  if  any  one  of  the  many  bulwarks  safeguarding  appropriate  corporate  evaluation  had 
BIS Review 44/2002 
 3
 held.  In  too  many  cases,  none  did.  Lawyers,  internal  and  external  auditors,  corporate  boards, Wall 
Street  security  analysts,  rating  agencies,  and  large  institutional  holders  of  stock  all  failed  for  one 
reason or another to detect and blow the whistle on those who breached the level of trust essential to 
well-functioning markets.  
Why did corporate governance checks and balances that served us reasonably well in the past break 
down? At root was the rapid enlargement of stock market capitalizations in the latter part of the 1990s 
that  arguably  engendered  an  outsized  increase  in  opportunities  for  avarice.  An  infectious  greed 
seemed to grip much of our business community. Our historical guardians of financial information were 
overwhelmed. Too many corporate executives sought ways to "harvest" some of those stock market 
gains. As a result, the highly desirable spread of shareholding and options among business managers 
perversely created incentives to artificially inflate reported earnings in order to keep stock prices high 
and  rising.  This  outcome suggests  that  the  options  were  poorly  structured,  and,  consequently,  they 
failed  to  properly  align  the  long-term  interests  of  shareholders  and  managers,  the  paradigm  so 
essential  for  effective  corporate  governance.  The  incentives  they  created  overcame  the  good 
judgment of too many corporate managers. It is not that humans have become any more greedy than 
in generations past. It is that the avenues to express greed had grown so enormously. 
Perhaps  the  recent  breakdown  of  protective  barriers  resulted  from  a  once-in-a-generation  frenzy  of 
speculation that is now over. With profitable opportunities for malfeasance markedly diminished, far 
fewer questionable practices are likely to be initiated in the immediate future. To be sure, previously 
undiscovered  misdeeds  will  no  doubt  continue  to  surface  in  the  weeks  ahead  as  chastened  CEOs 
restate  earnings.  But  even  if  the  worst  is  over,  history  cautions  us  that  memories  fade.  Thus,  it  is 
incumbent upon us to apply the lessons of this recent period to inhibit any recurrence in the future. 
A major focus of reform of corporate governance, of course, should be an improved functioning of our 
economy. A related, but separate, issue is that shareholders must perceive that corporate governance 
is properly structured so that financial gains are fairly negotiated between existing shareholders and 
corporate officeholders. Shareholding is now predominately for investment, not corporate control. Our 
vast and highly liquid financial markets enable large institutional shareholders to sell their shares when 
they perceive inadequacies of corporate governance, rather than fix them. This has placed de facto 
control in the hands of the chief executive officer. Shareholders routinely authorize slates of directors 
recommended  by  the  CEO.  Generally,  problems  need  to  become  quite  large  before  CEOs  are 
dislodged by dissenting shareholders or hostile takeovers.  
Manifestations of lax corporate governance, in my judgment, are largely a symptom of a failed CEO. 
Having independent directors, whose votes are not controlled by the CEO, is essential, of course, for 
any effective board of directors. However, we need to be careful that in the process, we do not create 
a competing set of directors and conflicting sources of power that are likely to impair a corporation's 
effectiveness. The functioning of any business requires a central point of authority.  
In the end, a CEO must be afforded full authority to implement corporate strategies, but also must bear 
the  responsibility  to  accurately  report  the  resulting  condition  of  the  corporation  to  shareholders  and 
potential  investors.  Unless  such  responsibilities  are  enforced  with  very  stiff  penalties  for  non-
compliance,  as  many  now  recommend,  our  accounting  systems  and  other  elements  of  corporate 
governance will function in a less than optimum manner. 
Already existing statutes, of course, prohibit corporate fraud and misrepresentation. But even a small 
increase in the likelihood of large, possibly criminal penalties for egregious behavior of CEOs can have 
profoundly  important  effects  on  all  aspects  of  corporate  governance  because  the  fulcrum  of 
governance is the chief executive officer. If a CEO countenances managing reported  earnings, that 
attitude will drive the entire accounting regime of the firm. If he or she instead insists on an objective 
representation  of  a  company's  business  dealings,  that  standard  will  govern  recordkeeping  and  due 
diligence. It has been my experience on numerous corporate boards that CEOs who insist that their 
auditors  render  objective  accounts  get  them.  And  CEOs  who  discourage  corner-cutting  by 
subordinates are rarely exposed to it.  
I recognize that I am saying that the state of corporate governance to a very large extent reflects the 
character of the CEO, and that this is a very difficult issue to address. Although we may not be able to 
change the character of corporate officers, we can change behavior through incentives and penalties. 
That, in my judgment, could dramatically improve the state of corporate governance.  
Our most recent experiences clearly indicate, however, that adjustments to the existing structure of 
regulation  of  corporate  governance  and  accounting  beyond  addressing  the  role  of  the  CEO  are 
4 
 BIS Review 44/2002
 needed. In designing changes to our regulatory framework, we should keep in  mind that regulation 
and supervision of our financial markets need to be flexible enough to adapt to an ever-changing and 
evolving financial structure. Regulation cannot be static or it will soon distort the efficient flow of capital 
from savers to those who invest in plant and equipment. There will be certain areas where Congress 
will choose to provide a specific statutory direction that will be as applicable thirty years from now as 
today. In other cases, agency rule-making flexibility under new or existing statutes is more appropriate. 
Finally, there are some areas where private supervision would be most effective, such as that of the 
New York Stock Exchange, which requires certain standards of governance for listing.  
Above all, we must bear in mind that the critical issue should be how to strengthen the legal base of 
free  market  capitalism:  the  property  rights  of  shareholders  and  other  owners  of  capital.  Fraud  and 
deception  are  thefts  of  property.  In  my  judgment,  more  generally,  unless  the  laws  governing  how 
markets and corporations function are perceived as fair, our economic system cannot achieve its full 
potential. 
 A  considerable  volume  of  market  commentary  in  recent  weeks  has  suggested  that  concerns  about 
earnings  prospects  and  the  proliferating  revelations  of  serious  governance  and  accounting  issues 
have contributed not only to lower equity prices but also to a decline in the foreign exchange value of 
the dollar. And some of that commentary has extrapolated the trend of dollar weakness. As you know, 
the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  speaks  for  our  government  on  exchange  rate  policy.  But,  given  the 
recent intense interest in the future course of the dollar, I would like to raise a technical issue and a 
flag of caution regarding those forecasts--or, for that matter, any forecast of exchange rates. There 
may  be  more  forecasting  of  exchange  rates,  with  less  success,  than  almost  any  other  economic 
variable.  
The reason that it is so difficult is that an exchange rate is a very complex price that balances, on the 
one hand, the demand for, for example, dollars stemming from the demand for dollar investments and 
for  U.S.  exports  against,  on  the  other  hand,  the  demand  for  foreign  currencies  by  U.S.  investors 
desiring  to  acquire  foreign  assets  and  by  U.S.  importers  of  foreign  goods  and  services.  Hence, 
exchange-rate  movements  depend  on  shifting  perceptions  of  the  relative  returns  from  investing  in 
different countries and on the myriad influences on relative tendencies to import and export. The net 
effect  of  these  factors  over  any  future  time  period  is  extraordinarily  difficult  to  assess  in  advance. 
Although measures such as real interest rate differentials, differential rates of productivity gains, and 
chronic external deficits are often employed to explain exchange rate behavior, none has been found 
to be consistently  useful  in forecasting  exchange rates even over substantial periods of one or  two 
years.  
Our ability to attract foreign capital in coming years will help facilitate the increases in investment that 
will  promote  continued  gains  in  productivity  and  standards  of  living.  But  policymakers  should  also 
recognize  the  important  role  that  prudent  fiscal  policy  can  play  in  promoting  national  saving  and 
maintaining conditions conducive to investment and continued strong growth of productivity. Beginning 
in the  late 1980s,  impressive  progress  was made  in  reining  in federal expenditures and restoring  a 
better  balance  between  spending  and  revenues.  The  lower  federal  deficits  and,  for  a  time,  the 
realization  of  surpluses  contributed  significantly  to  improved  national  saving  and  thereby  put 
downward  pressure  on  real  interest  rates.  This,  in  turn,  enhanced  the  incentives  of  businesses  to 
invest in productive plant and equipment.  
Recently,  however,  some  of  those  gains  have  been  given  up.  To  a  degree,  the  return  to  budget 
deficits has been a result of temporary factors, especially the falloff in revenues and the increase in 
outlays associated with the economic downturn. Those influences should tend to reverse over the next 
year or two, other things equal, although the decline in revenues reflecting the drop in capital gains 
realizations,  including  those  on  options,  is  unlikely  to  be  fully  reversed.  And  the  necessary  rise  in 
expenditures related to the war on terrorism and enhanced homeland security has also played a role, 
as have the tax reductions legislated last year. Unfortunately, there are also signs that the underlying 
disciplinary mechanisms that formed the framework for federal budget decisions over most of the past 
fifteen years have eroded. The Administration and the Congress can make a valuable contribution to 
the prospects for the growth of the economy by taking measures to restore this discipline and return 
the federal budget over time to a posture that is supportive of long-term economic growth.  
To  sum  up,  the  U.S.  economy  has  confronted  very  significant  challenges  over  the  past  year  or  so. 
Those  problems,  however,  led  to  only  a  relatively  brief  and  mild  downturn  in  economic  activity, 
BIS Review 44/2002 
 5
 reflecting the underlying strength and increased resiliency that the economy has achieved in recent 
years. The effects of the recent difficulties will linger for a bit longer but, as they wear off, and absent 
significant  further  adverse  shocks,  the  U.S.  economy  is  poised  to  resume  a  pattern  of  sustainable 
growth. Indeed, the central tendency of Federal Reserve policymakers' forecasts is for expansion of 
real  GDP  over  the  four  quarters  of  2002  of  3-1/2  to  3-3/4  percent,  somewhat  above  the  rates 
anticipated in our February report. Economic growth is projected to be solid again next year, with real 
output rising 3-1/2 to 4 percent. Monetary policymakers anticipate that these gains should be sufficient 
to bring the  unemployment rate down  to  5-1/4  to 5-1/2 percent by the end  of next  year. Inflation  is 
expected to be subdued throughout, with prices for personal consumption expenditures increasing at 
only  a  1-1/2  to  1-3/4  percent  rate.  Our  prospects  for  extending  this  performance  over  time  can  be 
enhanced through implementation of sound monetary, financial, fiscal, and trade policies. 
6 
 BIS Review 44/2002
