 David Dodge: Macroeconomic stabilization policy in Canada 
Remarks by  Mr David Dodge, Governor of the  Bank of Canada,  to a symposium sponsored by the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, 31 August 2002.  
The references for the speech can be found on the Bank of Canada’s website. 
 What I propose to do on this panel today is to talk about stabilization policy and policy co-operation 
from  the  viewpoint  of  an  industrial  country  that  has  a  floating  exchange  rate  and  both  an  explicit 
inflation  target  for  monetary  policy  and  a  clear  objective  for  fiscal  policy. While  my  perspective  has 
been  particularly  influenced  by  my  time  as  Deputy  Minister  of  Finance  and  now  as  Governor  of 
Canada’s central bank, the broad outlines of my conclusions are widely shared, not only in those two 
institutions, but in Canadian academic and public policy circles as well. Moreover, I believe that our 
experience  and  the  lessons  that  can  be  drawn  from  it  are  applicable  to  all  open  economies  with 
flexible exchange rates.  
In  the  1990s,  the  Bank  of  Canada  and  the  Government  of  Canada  reached  a  series  of  joint 
agreements on inflation-control targets. As well, the government established a framework that greatly 
reduces  the  probability  of  running  a  fiscal  deficit  and  thus  puts  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  on  a  clear 
downward track.  
Initially, the credibility of these policies was not high; so it  was essential to demonstrate clearly  our 
resolve to achieve greater fiscal prudence and lower inflation until credibility was gained. Thus, it was 
sometimes  necessary  to  override  the  automatic  stabilizers  of  fiscal  policy  in  order  to  establish 
credibility. And for monetary policy it meant that we could not always implement the easing warranted 
by our inflation targets. But as the targets were achieved, the public’s trust that the authorities were 
going to do what they said they would do increased. That trust is tremendously important.  
Now that the credibility  of both monetary  and fiscal policies is firmly established, the stabilizers are 
able to do their job.  
I would like to begin by considering stabilization policy, then say a few words on policy co-operation.1  
Stabilization Policy  
Monetary policy and stabilization  
In aiming to achieve a 2 per cent inflation target over an 18- to 24-month horizon, Canadian monetary 
policy plays an important role in stabilizing the economy in response to demand and supply shocks.  
When  there  are  shifts  in  demand,  the  direction  of  changes  in  our  policy  interest  rate  is  quite  clear. 
Suppose that the economy is operating at its production potential and that inflation is at the 2 per cent 
target. A downward shift in demand would create excess supply in the economy, putting downward 
pressure on inflation. To bring inflation back to 2 per cent over a period of 18 to 24 months, the Bank 
of Canada would lower its target for the overnight interest rate. Through its effect on market interest 
rates and the exchange rate, this action would increase the level of output in the economy, moving it 
back  towards  production  potential.  Inflation  would,  therefore,  return  to  the  target  shortly  after  the 
excess supply disappeared from the economy. An upward shift in demand would, of course, generate 
symmetric responses.  
While  the  theory  is  clear  about  the  appropriate  response  to  demand  shocks,  the  magnitude  and 
persistence  of  shocks—and  hence  the  size  and  timing  of  interest  rate  adjustments—are  always 
difficult to judge. This is where the art of monetary policy-making comes into play.  
It  is  even  more  difficult,  of  course,  to  gauge  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  response  to  supply 
shocks—which take the form of higher (or lower) inflation than expected for a given level of demand. 
                                                      
1   The interaction of fiscal and monetary policies is covered more fully in Dodge (2002) 
BIS Review 48/2002 
 1
 The Bank’s framework for inflation targeting allows temporary supply shocks to be largely ignored, as 
long as they do not feed into inflation expectations. The credibility that has been established means 
that they typically no longer do so. Consider price surprises coming from the most volatile components 
of the consumer price index—components such as fruits and vegetables or fuel oil and natural gas. As 
our operating guide, we use a measure of core inflation that excludes these components. This gives 
us,  and  economic  observers,  some  confidence  that  we  are  looking  at  something  close  to  the 
underlying trend of inflation. Thus, our interest rate response to price shocks that are perceived to be 
temporary can be minimal. As a result, there will be little effect on output. In other words, monetary 
policy does not turn temporary supply shocks into something that is destabilizing for aggregate output.  
A  more  difficult  situation  occurs  when  persistent  increases  or  decreases  in  prices  coming  from  the 
most volatile components of the consumer price index threaten to keep the total index away from the 
target  for  a  significant  period  of  time.  Credibility  helps  here  too,  but  the  Bank  must  be  particularly 
cautious that these movements in inflation do not feed into inflation expectations.  
Supply shocks that take the form of a change in the level, or growth rate, of potential output are often 
hard to recognize. Here, however, the key is for the central bank to return the trend of inflation to the 
target if it has moved away. Since the trend of inflation relative to the target is the best indicator of 
where demand is relative to potential output, this will be consistent with moving demand back into line 
with the new path of potential output over the medium term.  
Fiscal policy and automatic stabilization  
In  Canada,  the  main  automatic  fiscal  stabilizers  are  various  types  of  tax  revenues,  as  well  as 
employment  insurance  payouts.  Some  of  these  fiscal  stabilizers  work  almost  immediately—for 
example,  personal  income  tax  deducted  by  the  employer.  Others,  such  as  employment  insurance 
payments, work with a fairly short lag.  
Comparing and contrasting automatic fiscal and monetary stabilizers  
Automatic fiscal stabilizers are very effective in dampening an output cycle. But they offset only part of 
the change in output.  
In contrast, monetary policy can fully offset a change in output, but it takes time to work, with the full 
impact on output normally felt only after 12 to 18 months.  
Discretionary stabilization policy  
While the automatic or quasi-automatic stabilization provided by monetary and fiscal policies is very 
desirable,  the  question remains as to whether there is a role for something further—a  discretionary 
stabilization policy.  
In the case of monetary policy, the nature of the response is the more or less automatic one described 
earlier.  As  I  implied  then,  judgment  is  key  to  the  process. That  is  particularly  true  in  times  of  great 
uncertainty, such as last autumn. But a clear inflation target means that, in principle, the discretionary 
choice for monetary policy-makers is limited relative to that of the fiscal authorities.2 
The arguments for and against discretionary fiscal policy as an important element in macroeconomic 
stabilization in an open economy tend to revolve primarily around lags and around the effectiveness of 
short-run fiscal policy relative to monetary policy.  
If the timing were close to perfect, fiscal policy measures that lasted for two or three quarters could, in 
principle, and under ideal circumstances, shorten the time it takes to move output back to its desired 
level. Thus, in principle, discretionary fiscal policy is a useful tool. But, as a practitioner, I can tell you 
                                                      
2   Some commentators have described inflation targeting as "constrained discretion," in the sense that there is a clear objective and a 
medium-term  framework  but  no  precise  rule  for varying  the  policy  interest  rate  (Bernanke  et  al.  1999).  That  is,  there  are many 
possible paths back to equilibrium. At the Bank of Canada, we have decided that the best way to implement inflation targeting is to 
have an acceptable trade-off between the variance of inflation around its target and the variance of output around its production 
potential. Thus, we have chosen an 18- to 24-month horizon for achieving the inflation target. We take into account all the relevant 
information, but we have no simple rule for setting interest rates. 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2002
 that the great problem here is that temporary measures are both difficult to initiate quickly when the 
need arises and extraordinarily difficult to stop once the need is past.  
Thus, as a practical matter, not a philosophical one, there are some severe limitations to the use of 
discretionary fiscal policy as a stabilizer.3,4  
My views about this have been reinforced by the way the business cycle in Canada has developed 
over the last 18 months or so. In early 2001, we were expecting that the slowdown in both the U.S. 
and Canadian economies would be modest. In Canada, an earlier announced tax cut was fortuitously 
coming into effect. It was not until the middle of last summer that it became evident that the Canadian 
economy was undergoing a more pronounced slowdown than we had expected. Between January and 
August  2001,  we  had  lowered  our  policy  interest  rate  by  175  basis  points.  Even  the  most  ardent 
supporters  of  discretionary  fiscal  policy  would  not  have  thought  about  doing  anything  major  until 
August. With the horrific events of 11 September, economic forecasters marked down their forecasts 
for 2001 and 2002 significantly. We, like other major central banks, accelerated the pace at which we 
were cutting interest rates—from September through January 2002, we lowered our policy interest rate 
by a further 200 basis points.  
Fortunately,  the  Canadian  government  added  only  a  small  amount  to  spending  in  its  budget 
announcements  in  late  2001—and  that  consisted  mainly  of  necessary  spending  for  security  and 
border issues. I say "fortunately" because, based on the national accounts published at the end of May 
2002,  growth  in  the  Canadian  economy  actually  rebounded  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2001  and 
accelerated to about 6 per cent in the first quarter of this year.  
Thus,  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  it  is  evident  that  there  was  more  underlying  strength  in  the 
economy than we expected. Combined with the large amount of monetary stimulus that was applied, 
this meant that the economy could recover rapidly. Therefore, added fiscal stimulus was not necessary 
to get the economy going. And the monetary stimulus provided is proving much easier to turn around. 
Since  mid-April,  we  have  raised  our  policy  rate  by  75  basis  points.  To  be  sure,  other  uncertainties 
have arisen and will continue to arise in the future. Our best judgment about these uncertain factors 
will continue to be taken into account. But, overall, this episode is clearly showing that monetary policy 
actions can be used more flexibly than fiscal policy actions.  
I would stress that discretionary fiscal policy can also get governments into trouble if it leads them to 
neglect  their  long-run  fiscal  anchor—particularly  since  discretionary  action  is  more  likely  to  be 
associated with an easing in policy than a tightening. This neglect would risk eroding fiscal credibility—
the trust that the public has that the fiscal targets will be met.  
Policy Co-Operation and Stabilization  
Now let me turn to the issue of policy co-operation and policy coordination.  
Our inflation targets are joint targets. They are not just the Bank’s targets—they are the targets of the 
Government of Canada as well.  
Our view is that, essentially, "coordination" came through the joint agreement on inflation targets. With 
clear agreement on the medium-term policy objectives and with a shared understanding of the policy 
framework,  there  is  no  need  for  coordination  on  the  setting  of  interest  rates  and  fiscal  policy 
instruments.  
The  economic  literature  on  policy  coordination  tends  to  be  about  situations  where  the  fiscal  and 
monetary  authorities  have  one  or  more  of  the  following:  very  different  views  of  economic  welfare,5 
                                                      
3   This is also the view of Cecchetti (2002) and Taylor (2000). For an opposing view, see Seidman (2001). Much earlier, Boulding 
(1969) summarized an academic session on recent experiences in the use of fiscal policy with a poem including the following lines, 
". . . Policy may follow Fillip’s Law—Too little and too late, too much too soon . . . ." 
4   For  the  Canadian  federal  government,  the  limitation  of  discretionary  fiscal  policy  as  a  stabilizer  is  compounded  by  the fact  that 
Canadian provincial governments taken together represent a larger share of the economy than the federal government does, and 
their spending structure (which includes more spending on capital than the federal government) better lends itself to discretionary 
spending for stabilization purposes. 
5  That is, their "loss functions" are very different. 
BIS Review 48/2002 
 3
 inconsistent policy objectives, policy that is totally discretionary, or a tendency to get involved in game-
like behaviour with one another. None of these applies in Canada—and none should apply anywhere.  
Given our policy framework, when the government changes fiscal policy, it needs to think of how these 
changes will affect inflation and, consequently, interest rates. Similarly, the Bank of Canada needs to 
consider how changes in fiscal policy will affect demand and inflation, and thus its setting of interest 
rates.  Therefore,  it  is  to  the  mutual  benefit  of  both  parties  to  co-operate  in  sharing  information  and 
analysis as they adjust their policy settings.  
Co-operation between the Bank and the federal Department of Finance occurs on a number of levels. I 
have frequent discussions with the Minister and Deputy Minister. And there are meetings at the staff 
level to share, for example, information from economic forecasts, surveys, and contacts with various 
groups and organizations. One of the key reasons for our regular discussions has been to ensure that 
each  institution  understands  the  details  of  the  framework  within  which  the  other  one  is  pursuing  its 
objectives and how this framework is being implemented with respect to current economic surprises.  
The Bank also keeps in close touch with provincial fiscal authorities.  
Thus  far,  I  have  not  said  anything  about  the  appropriate  mix  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  when 
talking  about  coordination  and  co-operation.  Quite  simply,  with  explicit  frameworks  in  place  for 
monetary and fiscal policies, the whole issue of policy mix becomes moot. The fiscal and monetary 
authorities are both adjusting their policy instruments to attain their respective objectives. There is no 
other mix of interest rates and fiscal thrust that the authorities will perceive as consistent with meeting 
the monetary and fiscal objectives.  
Concluding Thoughts  
Clear monetary and fiscal objectives, combined with clear accountability for meeting those objectives, 
provide the background for policy co-operation and stabilization in Canada. The monetary and fiscal 
policy frameworks have created an environment where co-operation in the form of sharing information 
and analysis is most effective. Fiscal and monetary credibility is high. In other words, economic agents 
trust that the monetary authorities and the fiscal authorities will maintain these frameworks.  
With trust in place and with expectations well anchored, the automatic fiscal stabilizers can be allowed 
to  operate  fully  and  monetary  policy  actions  can  be  directed  to  achieving  the  inflation  targets.  In 
addition,  when  major  shocks  occur,  with  trust  in  place,  there  can  be  a  temporary  overshoot  or 
undershoot  of  the  fiscal  or  monetary  targets  without  unhinging  confidence  in  the  framework  or  in 
expectations that the targets will be met over time.  
I  believe  that  Canada’s  experience  and  the  lessons  we  have  learned  about  having  clear  policy 
objectives and supportive, transparent policy frameworks have broad applicability in open economies 
with a flexible exchange rate.  
4 
 BIS Review 48/2002
