 Svein Gjedrem: The role of the Central Bank 
Address  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  to  the  Fafo 
Institute  for  Labour  and  Social  Research  and  the  Norwegian  Power  and  Democracy  Project,  Oslo, 
6 September 2002. 
 fiscal policy oriented towards full employment 
regulation of credit within limits specified in a separate credit budget 
channelling of loans through the state banks 
regulation of capital movements 
low nominal interest rates stipulated by the government authorities 
a fixed, though adjustable, krone exchange rate 
use of price regulation 
an active business policy through state ownership and state grants and subsidies 
The way in which economic policy is oriented today reflects the experience gained and the lessons 
learned in the 1970s and 1980s. In Norway, efforts to develop an economy under strong centralised 
coordination  and  control  culminated  in  the  1973  proposal1  to  establish  an  incomes  policy  council. 
According to the proposal, the social partners would undertake a commitment through the council to 
keep negotiated wage increases within specific limits. It was also stipulated that demand management 
policy should be included as part of incomes policy. 
The proposal to establish an incomes policy council was logical. It was the last wall in the building that 
was constructed after the war. Coordination and control were important key words. Other components 
were: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The proposal to establish an incomes policy council did not receive support. There was just too much 
control and coordination. Now, only 30 years later, very little of this system remains. The building was 
not  solid  enough.  We  know  from  experience  that  fiscal  policy  alone  cannot  ensure  a  high  level  of 
employment.  The  structure  of  the  labour  market  and  of  wage  formation  is  probably  of  greater 
importance. The direct regulation of credit, interest rates and capital movements broke down and was 
phased  out  in  the  1980s.  The  krone  is  floating.  Price  regulation  no  longer  plays  a  role  as  a 
macroeconomic instrument. The scope of business policy has become more general. State ownership 
in  the  Norwegian  business  sector  remains  extensive,  but  the  management  of  ownership  has  been 
totally  revised  following  the  negative  experience  of  companies  in  Kongsberg,  Mo  i  Rana  and 
Syd-Varanger. 
I would like to highlight two factors that have taken on considerable importance for economic policy. 
One  of  these  factors  is  that  economic  agents  look  to  the  future  when  they  make  decisions  about 
consumption  and  investments,  wages  and  prices,  and  want  to  take  account  of economic  policy  not 
only  as  it  is  today,  but  also  as  they  expect  it  to  be  tomorrow  and  in  the  future.  This  is  particularly 
evident in foreign exchange and financial markets, where exchange and interest rates are influenced 
when participants shift large amounts partly on the basis of their expectations concerning economic 
policy  and  economic  developments.  Financial  market  expectations  concerning  economic  policy  are 
entirely different today from what they were 20-30 years ago. 
Behaviour can change from being very rational to herd behaviour. The issues that receive attention, 
and  that  govern  movements  in  exchange  and  interest  rates,  change.  It  is  thus  important  that  the 
authorities  do  not  sow  doubt,  but  on  the  contrary  act  in  a  long-term  and  predictable  manner.  The 
authorities must be credible and inspire confidence. There must be a good match between the stated 
objectives of economic policy and what is actually done to achieve them. This is the most important 
reason why the implementation of monetary policy has been delegated to the central bank in Norway, 
                                                      
1  Cf. Official Norwegian Report (NOU) 1973:36 (price problems). 
BIS Review 50/2002 
 1
 as  has  been  the  case  in  other  comparable  countries.  In  Norway,  the  responsibility  for  interest  rate 
decisions was delegated to Norges Bank in 1986. 
The  other  factor  is  the  special  challenges  to  stabilisation  policy  posed  by  petroleum  revenues. 
Norway’s  export  revenues  and  government  revenues  can  be  expected  to  be  very  high  as  long  as 
production  remains  high,  and  as  long  as  the  global  market  allows  producing  countries  to  extract 
substantial  economic  rent.  At  the  same  time,  we  know  from  experience  that  revenues  may  vary 
sharply from year to year. As a result of the high level of earnings and fluctuations in these revenues, 
the  most  important  contribution  fiscal  policy  can  make  to  stabilising  the  Norwegian  economy  is  to 
provide  a  sound,  long-term  plan  for  the  use  of  petroleum  revenues.  Attempts  to  use  the  central 
government budget to fine-tune economic activity may, at  worst, have a destabilising effect if these 
attempts are perceived as being a departure from the long-term plan for the phasing in of petroleum 
revenues.  It  is  necessary  to  show  that  fiscal  policy  can  be  applied  symmetrically  in  periods  of 
economic expansion and contraction. 
A year and a half ago, the Government and the Storting adopted new guidelines for economic policy, 
which  call  for  an  annual  use  of  petroleum  revenues  equivalent  to  the  expected  real  return  on  the 
Government Petroleum Fund. At the same time, the Government issued a new operational mandate 
for  monetary  policy.  Norges  Bank  shall  set  the  key  rate  with  a  view  to  maintaining  low  and  stable 
inflation. 
Monetary Policy Regulation (1)
• Monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the 
Norwegian krone's national and international value, 
contributing to stable expectations concerning 
exchange rate developments. Monetary policy shall 
also underpin fiscal policy by contributing to stable 
developments in output and employment.
• Norges Bank is responsible for the implementation of 
monetary policy.
Fafo og Makt- og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002
 Norges Bank’s mandate reads as follows: 
Monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the Norwegian krone’s national and international value, 
contributing  to  stable  expectations  concerning  exchange  rate  developments.  At  the  same  time, 
monetary  policy  shall  underpin  fiscal  policy  by  contributing  to  stable  developments  in  output  and 
employment. 
2 
 BIS Review 50/2002
 Monetary Policy Regulation (2)
• Norges Bank's implementation of monetary policy 
shall, in accordance with the first paragraph, be 
oriented towards low and stable inflation. The 
operational target of monetary policy shall be 
annual consumer price inflation of approximately 
2.5 per cent over time.
Fafo og Makt- og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002
 Norges  Bank’s  implementation  of  monetary  policy  shall,  in  accordance  with  the  first  paragraph,  be 
oriented towards  low  and  stable  inflation. The operational target  of monetary policy shall  be annual 
consumer price inflation of approximately 2.5 per cent over time. 
The first paragraph of the mandate sets forth an objective. The last paragraph specifies what Norges 
Bank shall do. 
The first sentence in the mandate refers to the value of the krone. Stability in the national value of the 
krone implies that inflation must be low and stable. Low and stable inflation fosters economic growth 
and stability in financial and property markets. 
The regulation also states that monetary policy shall be aimed at stability in the international value of 
the krone. The krone exchange rate fluctuates from day to day, from week to week, and from month to 
month. We have free international trade and free capital movements. We do not have the instruments 
for  fine-tuning  the  exchange  rate.  But  when  monetary  policy  is  oriented  towards  low  and  stable 
inflation, this will contribute to a stable krone exchange rate over time. 
Relationships in monetary policy
Exchange rate
Imported
price inflation
Norges 
Bank's
interest
rates
Consumption
Investment
Labour market
Wages and margins
Consumer
price
inflation
Fafo og Makt- og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002
 The interest rate influences inflation indirectly via domestic demand for goods and services and via its 
effect on the exchange rate. When interest rates rise, it is more profitable to save and more costly to 
borrow. This has a dampening impact on consumption and investment. Lower demand in turn curbs 
the rise in prices and wages. 
BIS Review 50/2002 
 3
 Higher  interest  rates  also  make  it  more  attractive  to  take  krone  positions  and  borrow  in  foreign 
currency. As a result, higher interest rates normally lead to an appreciation of the krone. This reduces 
prices for imported goods. In addition, a strong krone curbs activity, profitability  and the capacity to 
cover labour costs in the internationally exposed sector. 
Implementation of monetary policy
• If it appears that inflation will be higher than 2½ per 
cent, with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate 
will be increased.
• If it appears that inflation will be lower than 2½ per 
cent, with unchanged interest rates, the interest rate 
will be reduced.
• It is just as important to avoid a rate of inflation that 
is too low as it is to avoid a rate that is too high.
Fafo og Makt- og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002
 The mandate implies that the interest rate must be adapted to the outlook for the Norwegian economy. 
If it appears that inflation, with unchanged interest rates, will be higher than 2½ per cent, the interest 
rate  will  be  increased.  If  it  appears  that  inflation,  with  unchanged  interest  rates,  will  be  lower  than 
2½ per cent, the interest rate  will  be reduced. This  orientation  of monetary policy  will  normally  also 
contribute to stabilising production and employment. 
Monetary  policy  functions  with  considerable  and  variable  lags.  The  current  inflation  rate  does  not 
provide  sufficient  information  to  determine  the  level  at  which  interest  rates  should  be  set  now.  Our 
analyses indicate that a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change will occur within two 
years. Two years is therefore a reasonable time horizon for attaining the inflation target. 
It  is  nevertheless  conceivable  that  in  a  situation  with  a  high  rate  of  inflation  and  weak  economic 
developments, Norges Bank may decide to apply a somewhat longer time horizon than two years to 
reach the target of 2½ per cent. Nor do we need to be in any hurry to raise the level of inflation in a 
situation where inflation is very low, while economic activity is high. By influencing inflation over time, 
monetary policy will not in itself cause unnecessary disturbances in the economy. A precondition for 
applying a longer time horizon is that financial market participants have strong confidence in low and 
stable inflation over time, and that wage formation has a nominal anchor. 
Flexible inflation targeting provides a framework for the use of monetary policy instruments that both 
ensures that the economy has a nominal anchor and allows monetary policy to smooth fluctuations in 
the  economy  that  are  due  to  changes  in  demand  for  goods  and  services.  At  the  same  time,  the 
budgetary  guidelines  state  that  “...[in  fiscal  policy]  considerable  emphasis  must  be  placed  on 
stabilising fluctuations in the economy with a view to ensuring appropriate capacity utilisation and low 
unemployment.”2 We can see here that there is  an overlap between the tasks monetary policy and 
fiscal policy are intended to perform. This naturally raises the issue of whether there is after all a need 
to coordinate fiscal and monetary policy decisions. 
Is  there,  for  example,  a  risk  of  a  situation  arising  where  Norges  Bank  tightens  monetary  policy  to 
achieve the inflation target, while at the same time the central government authorities increase the use 
of  petroleum  revenues  (more  than  implied  in  the  fiscal  policy  guideline)  in  order  to  increase 
employment and reduce unemployment? 
                                                      
2  Report 29 (2000-2001) to the Storting: Guidelines for economic policy. 
4 
 BIS Review 50/2002
 There  are  various  factors  that  can  prevent  the  interplay  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  from 
functioning.3  Interplay  functions  well  when  the  decision-making  bodies  are  conscious  of  how  one 
body’s decisions influence the decisions of the other.  Unless this fact is recognised, a decision will not 
produce  the  result  that  was  planned.  The  economy  may  move  in  a  very  undesirable  direction,  with 
high interest rates, sluggish economic growth and deterioration in the state’s financial position. 4 
However, even without continuous coordination, a fairly good result may be achieved if fiscal policy 
acts as “leader” and monetary policy as “follower”, to use expressions taken from game theory.5 The 
authorities  determine  fiscal  policy  knowing  how  monetary  policy  will  react.  Today’s  flexible  inflation 
targeting  establishes  a  firm  framework  for  monetary  policy  and  provides  clear  guidelines  on  how 
monetary  policy  is  to  respond  in  different  situations.  The  fiscal  policy  authorities  can  internalise  the 
monetary policy response pattern. This is only natural, since the mandate for monetary policy was laid 
down by the Government and the Storting. 
In  other  words,  the  conditions  exist  for  delegating  the  interest  rate  decision,  but  the  central  bank’s 
response pattern must be known, so that the fiscal authorities can take this into account. 
When the response pattern in monetary policy is known and remains unchanged over time, the social 
partners can also take any monetary policy response into account when wages are being determined. 
The “leader” in this interplay - the social partners - can take the “follower’s” - Norges Bank’s - response 
into  account.  This  view  is  most  relevant  in  centralised  wage  formation.   In  decentralised  wage 
formation,  monetary  policy  will  instead  affect  wage  growth  via  market  mechanisms  by  stabilising 
aggregate  demand.  The  current  monetary  policy  guidelines  will  function  well  whether  wages  are 
determined centrally, locally or individually. 
The outcome of this year’s wage settlement, and the debate that followed, may indicate that the social 
partners have not yet internalised the response pattern in monetary policy ensuing from the mandate 
laid  down  by  the  Government  and  the  Storting.  Perhaps  a  stumbling  block  has  been  the  choice  of 
wage settlements at industry level and the large wage increases for employees outside the two largest 
employer/employee organisations (NHO and LO). On the other hand, the choice of settlement type is 
probably influenced by the participants’ assessment of the economic outlook. The high wage growth 
awarded  to  groups  whose  wages  are  determined  through  individual  agreements  indicates  that  the 
labour market has been tight. However, the rise in salaries for white-collar workers may also reflect 
weak cost control in enterprises and organisations following a long period of expansion. 
A precondition for interplay that functions well is that monetary policy is known and remains firm. The 
best  thing  Norges  Bank  can  do  to  contribute  to  good  interplay  between  the  various  components  of 
economic  policy  and  wage  formation  is  therefore  to  be  transparent  about  its  analyses  and 
assessments of economic developments. 
                                                      
3  Various  game  situations  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  are  described  in  the  literature.  Some  of  these  games  are 
discussed in Kai Leitemo (2000): “Samspillet mellom penge- og finanspolitikken under et underliggende inflasjonsmål for en 
liten åpen økonomi” (The interplay between fiscal and monetary policy under an underlying inflation target for a small, open 
economy)  in  Norsk  Økonomisk  Tidsskrift  No.  2/2000,  and  in  Erling  Steigum  (2000):  “Samspillet  mellom  penge-  og 
finanspolitikken ved et inflasjonsmål” (The interplay between fiscal and monetary policy with an inflation target) in the book 
Perspektiver på pengepolitikken (Perspectives on monetary policy), edited by Jan F. Qvigstad and Øistein Røisland. 
4  This is the game theory known as the Cournot-Nash equilibrium. 
5  Cf. descriptions in the Stackelberg equilibrium game theory. 
BIS Review 50/2002 
 5
 Labour costs in Norway and among trading partners1)
Percentage growth
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Norway
Trading partners
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
Hourly labour costs in manufacturing
1)
Source: Statistics Norway, TRCIS/IMF and Norges Bank
Fafo og Makt- og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
 For  a  long  time,  a  stable  exchange  rate  and  labour  costs  among  our  trading  partners  formed  an 
anchor  for  wage  determination.  Since  1998,  however,  the  rise  in  labour  costs  in  Norway  has  been 
around 2 percentage points higher than that of our trading partners. High wage growth, combined with 
the global downturn and a strong krone, is having a severe impact on manufacturing. 
Sustainable wage growth
• The 'Solidarity Alternative' (Aukrust model)
Wage growth among trading partners
(+Productivity growth in Norway - productivity growth abroad   0
= Scope for wage growth in Norway
3-4 per cent
3-4 per cent
• Inflation target
The Government's inflation target
+ "Normal" productivity growth
= Scope for wage growth in Norway
Fafo og Makt- og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002
2½  per cent
2  per cent
4½ per cent
 Over  time,  growth  in  real  wages  must  be  consistent  with  growth  in  labour  productivity.  An  inflation 
target of 2½ per cent and trend productivity growth of around 2 per cent, according to updated national 
accounts  figures,  imply  annual  nominal  wage  growth  of  about  4½  per  cent.  These  figures  are 
consistent with developments in the 1990s, when wage growth averaged 4½ per cent. This resulted in 
inflation of 2½ per cent. The krone exchange rate was stable. 
In general, an unexpected upward shift in labour costs will prompt an increase in interest rates in order 
to avoid higher inflation. With a floating exchange rate and unchanged interest rates, an increase in 
wage  growth  of  one  percentage  point  will  eventually  translate  into  a  comparable  increase  in  price 
inflation,  unless  this  increase  is  based  on  higher  productivity.  The  magnitude  of  the  interest  rate 
increase must be adapted to this. First, the nominal interest rate must be increased to maintain the 
real interest rate. Second,  the real interest rate must also be  increased in  order to prevent  inflation 
from accelerating. 
6 
 BIS Review 50/2002
 Key rates
September 
2002
8
Key rates and rise in labour costs1) 2)
Per cent
Iceland
Norway²)
6
4
2
0
Euro area
Sweden
UK
Denmark
Finland
US
Japan
0
2
4
Hourly wage growth in manufacturing
Figures for Norway from the Technical Reporting Committee on Income Settlements
1)
2)
Sources: OECD, TRCIS and Norges Bank
Fafo og Makt- og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002
8
Rise in labour costs, 1998-2002
6
 When wage growth reaches a level that is inconsistent with the inflation target, the result over time will 
be higher interest rates, lower employment and higher unemployment. Similarly, lower wage growth 
will  normally result in  lower interest rates, higher employment and  lower unemployment. There is a 
relationship  between  wage  growth  and  interest  rates.  The  lower  wage  growth  is,  the  lower  interest 
rates will be, and vice versa. Japan represents the one extreme, with an interest rate of zero and no 
wage growth. At the other extreme are Iceland and Norway, with high wage growth and a high key 
rate. 
Annual wage growth1) and unemployment2)
Per cent
8
6
4
2
Annual wage
growth
Unemployment rate
8
6
4
2
0
1 9 9 3
1)  Average for all groups, including the cost of additional vacation days
2)  Registered unemployed and on labour market programmes as a percentage of the labour force
1 9 9 9
2 0 0 1
1 9 9 5
1 9 9 7
0
Sources: TRCIS, Directorate of Labour and Norges Bank
Fafo og Makt- og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002
 High  wage  growth  affects  the  exposed  business  sector  in  two  ways.  First,  it  erodes  earnings  and 
reduces employment. Second, monetary policy has to be tightened. This leads to an appreciation of 
the krone, with a further reduction in earnings and employment. 
BIS Review 50/2002 
 7
 Annual wage growth in enterprises in the 
Confederation of Norwegian Business and Industry
8
6
4
2
0
1 9 9 3
Salaried
employees1)
Total employees1)
1 9 9 5
1 9 9 7
1 9 9 9
2 0 0 1
1) Includes costs of additional vacation days
Sources: TRCIS and Norges Bank
Fafo og Makt- og demokratiutredningen 6. september 2002
8
6
4
2
0
 It is combined wage growth for all groups that influences the outlook for inflation. However, substantial 
wage  increases  for  some groups  can  trigger  wage  spirals. Wages for salaried  staff  in  the  business 
sector have exhibited sharp growth over several years. This year, it appears that wage increases will 
be especially high in the public sector and in parts of the private service sector. 
Although it is too early to draw final conclusions, there are some indications that wage formation in 
Norway is changing: 
• 
The  social  partners  do  not  appear  to  be  placing  as  much  emphasis  as  previously  on 
developments in wage growth among our trading partners. 
There are also signs that the social partners may be placing less emphasis on the impact on 
total unemployment when negotiating wages. 
Some  features  of  this  year’s  wage  settlement  point  to  a  somewhat  greater  degree  of 
decentralisation  in  wage  formation.  An  example  of  this  is  the  municipal  sector,  where  the 
Federation of Professional Associations will, as from this year, hold local negotiations on pay 
increases. On the other hand, centrally negotiated pay increases were very high this year. 
In  public  sector  wage  settlements,  little  emphasis  appears  to  have  been  placed  on  the 
assumptions concerning wage growth on which government allocations are based. This has 
a negative impact on service production in many areas of the public sector. 
   The  experience  of  this  year’s  wage  settlement  also  indicates  that  profitability  in  the  internationally 
exposed sector has been given less emphasis in wage negotiations than earlier. A shortage of labour 
in  more  sheltered  industries  may  thus  have  a  greater  influence  than  previously  on  overall  wage 
growth. Inflation would then be determined by domestic factors to a greater extent than in the past. 
The  Norwegian  economic  system  has  undergone  substantial  changes  over  the  past  ten  to  twenty 
years.  The  model  based  on  detailed  control  of  capital,  credit  and  interest  rates  and  centralised 
coordination  has  been  abandoned.  Less  emphasis  is  placed  on  having  discretionary  scope  for 
manoeuvre and on using surprise decisions to influence economic developments. It is recognised that 
the structure of the labour market and of wage formation has a decisive impact on developments in 
employment.  Monetary  policy  is  delegated  in  Norway  and  in  comparable  countries.  The  monetary 
policy  guidelines  provide  a  foundation  for  building  credibility  and  creating  confidence  in  economic 
policy, thereby making it more effective. 
8 
 BIS Review 50/2002
