 Y V Reddy: Evolving role of gold – recent trends and future direction 
Address by Dr Y V Reddy, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at a conference organised 
by World Gold Council, New Delhi, 21 March 2002. 
Dr Reddy is thankful to Mr P R Ravi Mohan, Dr A Prasad and Mr S Durganand Swamy for their assistance. 
 Mr. Chairman, Mr. Tarapore, Distinguished visitors and friends, 
I am thankful to the World Gold Council (WGC) for inviting me to participate in this meeting on the 
future  direction  of  the  gold  market.  This  is  the  third  conference  of  WGC,  with  which  I  am  being 
associated and I do notice that all of these are held in New Delhi. It shows that though Mumbai is the 
financial capital and a major centre for gold market in India, the directions of gold policy have been 
and  will  continue  to  be  rightly  decided  by  Government  of  India  (GOI)  from  New  Delhi  in  close 
consultation with Reserve Bank of India (RBI). Though my association with such conferences can be 
traced to the WGC conference in 1996, my association with gold policy in India and management of 
gold  reserves  with  RBI  goes  back  to  1991.  In  some  capacity  or  other,  I  happened  to  participate  in 
almost  all  the  legislative,  policy  and  procedural  changes  relating  to  gold  policy  from  the  Ministry  of 
Finance and from the RBI for over a decade. In the recent years, I have had the benefit of excellent 
advice from the Standing Committee on Gold and Precious Metals in RBI which has participation from 
Ministries of Finance and Commerce of GOI.  
I find in this gathering, outstanding experience on world gold markets, and hence my initial narration of 
recent global developments would be brief with focus on the official sector. However, I will recall in 
detail, recent developments in regard to gold markets and gold policy in India in the second part. The 
third  part  will  capture  some  aspects  viz.,  consideration  of  risk  and  return  on  investments  in  gold  in 
India; results of recent research on gold markets and consideration of some proposals relating to gold. 
The  fourth  part  will  review  India’s  experience  with  gold  policy  and  help  set  some  parameters  for 
medium-term gold policy. The concluding part will briefly explore future directions of gold policy and 
markets in India. 
Recent global developments: focus on official sector 
According to the available data in public domain, the events during the last decade in the international 
bullion market were dominated by the official sector mainly by central banks, especially through sales 
and leasing, with consequential impact on gold prices. On the supply side, mine production during the 
first 5 years was almost flat, while in the latter half of the decade, it gradually went up. Official sector 
sales  recorded  substantial  increases  and  amounted  to  about  450  to  500  tonnes  in  the  year  2000. 
Addition to supply from hedging ranged from a low of 100 to a high of 500 tonnes each year. Mining, 
official sector sales and leasing together have provided reasonable liquidity to the market. As regards 
demand, data indicates that up to 1995, annual demand on account of jewellery fabrication was of the 
order of 2,600 tonnes which zoomed by about 30 per cent in 1997, and in the last 3 years, it averaged 
3,150  tonnes.  The  most  important  factor  on  both  the  supply  and  demand  sides  was  that  mine 
production  and  demand  for  jewellery  fabrication  remained  flat  during  1988-2000  on  an  average  at 
2,550 and 3,250 tonnes, respectively. Yet, there has been abundant liquidity.  
Flat demand and declining prices in addition to institutional developments, may have had much to do 
with  the  changed  attitude  of  central  bankers,  particularly  in  Europe.  The  official  sector  sales,  which 
amounted  to  130  tonnes  in  1994,  progressively  went  up  and  recorded  470  tonnes  in  2,000.  More 
importantly, the official sector leasing, which was just below 1,000 tonnes in 1991 went up to about 
4,800 tonnes, adding to liquidity in more than ample measure with some impact on the prices. Low 
inflation  and  soft  interest  rates  in  the  recent  years  have  brought  about  a  greater  sensitivity  among 
central banks regarding returns on their portfolios.  
The steady decline in gold prices in recent years against the background of low inflation raised doubts 
in some quarters, on the importance of gold as a safe haven investment and hedge against inflation. 
Some  central  banks  have  resorted  to  off  loading  substantial  quantities  of  gold,  which  they  held  as 
reserves. Another significant development of the 1990s was the spurt in central bank lending of the 
precious  metal.  Central  banks  are  lending  their  idle  stocks  with  a  view  to  enhancing  returns  on 
BIS Review 21/2002 
 1
 reserves,  which  is  bringing  in  good  liquidity  to  the  market  to  bridge  the  gap  between  supply  and 
demand. A notable development in this regard is the signing of the Washington Agreement by some 
central  banks  in  September  1999,  which  has  placed  an  effective  cap  on  such  operations  of  central 
banks.  
As a result of the clear trend that emerged in recent years of increased amount of central banks’ sales 
as well as lending, the official sector’s holdings as a percentage of total above-ground stocks fell from 
about 30 per cent in 1996 to 23 per cent in 2000. The central banks across the world were holding 
about 33,000 tonnes as at the end of 2000 as compared to about 36,000 tonnes at the beginning of 
1991,  which  reflects  substantial  sale  by  many  European  central  banks.  The  Reserve  Bank  of  India 
(RBI)  holds  357.75  tonnes  of  gold  forming  about  6  per  cent  of  the  current  value  of  its  total  forex 
exchange  reserves.  Our  reserves  management  as  regards  gold  can  be  termed  as  passive  and 
conservative as RBI does not sell gold or trade in gold. 
Recent developments in India 
WGC has estimated that the annual Indian demand for the precious metal in recent years has been in 
excess of 800 tonnes. Most of it appears to be meant for jewellery fabrication, and the rest, estimated 
at  10  to  15  percent,  is  possibly  meant  to  meet  demand  on  account  of  investment  and  industrial 
processes.  A  major  step  in  the  development  of  gold  markets  in  India  was  the  authorization  in  July 
1997  by  the  RBI  to  commercial  banks  to  import  gold  for  sale  or  loan  to  jewellers  and  exporters. 
Initially, 7 banks were selected for this purpose on the basis of certain specified criteria like minimum 
capital adequacy, profitability, risk management expertise, previous experience in this area, etc. The 
number of banks later went upto 18. On a review, since five banks had not evinced adequate interest 
in this business in terms of activity, the RBI did not find it appropriate to renew their licences for this 
purpose. At present, 13 banks are active in the import of gold. The quantum of gold imported through 
these banks has been in the range of 500 tonnes per year.  
Import  of  gold  by  banks  authorised  by  the  RBI  has  succeeded  to  a  large  extent  in  curbing  illegal 
operations  in  gold  and  in  foreign  exchange  markets.  It  has  also  resulted  in  reducing  the  disparity 
between international and  domestic prices of gold from 57 per cent during 1986 to 1991 to 8.5 per 
cent in 2001.  
The  import  duty  on  gold,  which  was  Rs.220  per  ten  grams  upto  January  1999,  was  increased  to 
Rs.400 per ten grams, and with effect from April 2001 has been reduced to Rs.250 per ten grams. The 
estimates of duty realised from gold imports indicate an annual amount varying from about Rs. 1,000 
to Rs. 2,000 crore per annum since 1997.  
Even  though  the  country  consumes  more  than  800  tonnes  of  the  metal  every  year,  the  system  of 
assaying  and  hallmarking  has  not  gained  the  desired  importance.  The  low  quality  of  gold  jewellery 
being  sold  in  the  country  and  the  resultant  losses  being  incurred  by  the  consumers  are  being 
recognized  now.  Recent  surveys  conducted  by  the  Bureau  of  Indian  Standards  (BIS)  jointly  with 
Central  Consumer  Protection  Council  in  5  major  cities  reveal  that  more  than  80  per  cent  of  the 
jewellery being sold in the market was of lower purity than claimed and charged for. In some cases, 
the gold articles sold were 38.6 per cent short in purity in monetary terms. The low purity results in a 
loss of around 16 per cent to gold jewellery. 
In  the  recent  past,  RBI  has  been  actively  pursuing  the  issue  of  upgrading  the  quality  of  trade  and 
products through a system of assaying and hallmarking with Government of India and BIS. The major 
objectives  of  introducing  a  proper  assaying  and  hallmarking  system  in  the  country  are  enabling 
consumer  protection,  developing  export  competitiveness  of  the  gold  jewellery  industry,  introducing 
gold based financial products, which will help in mopping up the vast dormant gold resources with the 
domestic sector and developing India into a leading gold market centre in the world. 
Ministry of Commerce had held meetings with the trade representatives in 1997. Based on the views 
emerging out of these consultations, BIS formulated a scheme of hall marking in 1998, as a Voluntary 
Certification  Scheme,  with  a  combination  of  quality  certification  and  BIS  Laboratory  recognition 
schemes. The BIS-recognised laboratories would affix/stamp/hall mark jewellery manufactured by BIS 
certified jewellers and BIS in turn would maintain the required surveillance.  
As a culmination of further efforts by all concerned, BIS launched the scheme of hallmarking in April 
2000  under  the  BIS  Act,  1986.  Under  the  Scheme,  12  firms  of  jewellers  have  been  certified  as 
2 
 BIS Review 21/2002
 assaying and hallmarking centres so far. Consumer awareness campaign highlighting the advantages 
of going in for hallmarking jewellery is being conducted by BIS. 
The Government of India announced the Gold Deposit Scheme in 1999 and RBI issued guidelines to 
the banks intending to launch the scheme in October 1999. Five banks have launched their schemes 
under  the  guidelines  and  the  quantum  of  gold  mobilised  so  far  has  been  about  7  tonnes. 
Unfortunately, the scheme has not evoked the expected response. A number of reasons can be cited 
for the low response, prominent among them being depositors’ losing the making charges spent on 
jewellery (as the banks would convert them into primary form before accepting as deposits), the low 
caratage of jewellery, low rate of return on deposit (as seen by the depositors) and the absence of any 
amnesty.  
Some aspects of gold market in India 
Risk and Return on Gold Investments 
The return from investments in gold may be compared with the return on investment in Government 
bonds in the Indian markets. Illustratively, if gold had been purchased at end-February 1996 and sold 
at end-February 2002 at the prevailing rates in the local bullion market, the average annualised return 
would work out to be negative. On the contrary, investment in a liquid risk-free Government security on 
the  same  date  would  have  fetched  a  comfortable  positive  return,  and  in  case  capital  gains  through 
marked to market is also taken into account, the annualised average return could be as high as 15 per 
cent.  
Recent Research in Gold Markets 
A DRG study (Gold Mobilisation Instrument as an External Adjustment) prepared in the RBI in 1992, 
tested five factors for their influence on demand for gold: they are, generation of large market surplus 
in rural areas as a result of all round increase in agricultural production, unaccounted income/wealth 
generated  mainly  in  the  service  sector,  comparative  rate  of  return  available  on  alternative  financial 
assets like bank deposits, units of UTI, small saving schemes etc., price variation in gold and price of 
other  commodities.  The  study  led  to  the  conclusion  that  the  first  two  factors  i.e.  rural  surplus  and 
unaccounted  income  in  the  service  sector  have  far  more  influence  on  gold  demand  than  the  other 
factors. 
In another analysis made by Shri Vaidyanathan in 1999, (Economic and Political Weekly, February 20, 
1999) the factors determining the demand for gold were studied. The parameters taken into account 
were  GDP,  ratio  of  household  financial  savings  to  national  product,  domestic  price  of  gold,  GDP 
deflator, index of ordinary share prices and the difference between domestic and foreign price of gold 
as percentage of international prices. The study established that gold imports tend to be higher when 
domestic  gold  prices  rise  relative  to  those  of  ordinary  shares  and  international  gold  prices;  but,  the 
effect of these two variables was pronounced during 1991-96 as compared to 1970-90.  
Dr.  Saumitra  Chaudhuri  (Financial  Express,  November  26,  2001)  made  an  analysis  of  the  possible 
choices  for  a  saver  between  interest  bearing  financial  instruments  and  gold.  He  advocates  that  in 
Indian conditions, a return of less than 6 per cent for a saving instrument would induce the saver to 
invest in gold. 
Mr. N.A. Mazumdar, in many of his articles, has been holding the view that a capital starved country 
like India cannot afford to utilize foreign exchange on a commodity like gold. He holds the opinion that 
the consequences of the gold liberalization policy could be alarming, especially in view of the fact that 
such imports of gold are unrelated to India’s exports of jewellery. 
Some Proposals Relating to Gold 
A proposal was made for setting up a Gold Index Fund by mobilising gold through collection centres in 
major cities, swapping the gold for US dollars and investing the US dollar funds in corporate debt and 
high yielding off-shore investments. The average return envisaged was 20 per cent for the depositors. 
RBI’s view was that the off-shore high yielding investments as contemplated would be too risky for the 
institution mobilising gold and there is a risk that it may not be able to service the gold deposited by 
BIS Review 21/2002 
 3
 the  customers  without  a  loss  to  itself.  It  was  also  felt  that  a  financial  institution  without  adequate 
branch network may not succeed in mobilisation of adequate quantities of gold. 
Proposal from certain banks for launching Gold Accumulation Plan Certificate was considered by the 
Standing Committee on Gold and Precious Metals. However, it has not been pursued further in view of 
the poor response to Gold Deposit Scheme.  
Another  proposal  related  to  issue  of  gold  bonds  with  a  5-year  tenure  and  liquidity  provided  by  an 
international investment company. This scheme was designed to enable higher yield pick-up on the 
country’s gold reserves. The proposal was not pursued since it may not be appropriate to lock up gold 
for a long tenor of 5 years, and such bonds were being issued for the first time by the institution. 
Yet another proposal for substituting the gold imports by borrowing gold on lease on long-term basis 
was also posed and it was decided that the proposal is not practical as huge quantities of gold will not 
be available for lease on  a long term basis, apart from the fact that such lease will only amount to 
borrowing in gold with attendant foreign currency risk as well as gold price risk. 
Proposals  for  location  swap  of  the  gold  stock  in  RBI’s  reserves  with  bullion  banks  and  institutional 
swap (swapping our gold with gold imported by authorized banks) have also been made as means of 
enhancing  the  quality  of  gold  to  internationally  acceptable  standards,  but  these  are  not  pursued  in 
view of passive approach to the policy. 
Gold Policy: Review of Experience  
Our experience with various policy measures may be reviewed in terms of gold control, prohibition of 
gold imports, gold sales, gold mobilisation and liberalised gold policy. 
The  evolution  of  the  gold  control  policy  since  independence  was  centered  around  some  major 
objectives, viz., weaning away people from gold, regulating the supply of gold, reducing the domestic 
demand and prices and curbing smuggling. In the wake of the Chinese war, it was felt in some circles 
that it would be feasible to make a frontal attack on demand for gold in India. Accordingly, the Gold 
Control Order 1962 was issued, banning the making and selling of jewellery above 14 carats, making it 
compulsory  for  gold  smiths  to  be  licensed  and  submit  accounts  of  all  gold  received  and  utilised  by 
them  etc.,  The  measures  met  with  lot  of  resistance  and  criticism.  This  coupled  with  administrative 
complexities resulted in the failure of the Gold Control order.  
Bullion  imports  and  exports  were  also  banned  but  restrictions  on  import  of  gold  into  the  country 
resulted in the flourishing of smuggling and unofficial transactions in foreign exchange. Official imports 
to  discourage  smuggling  was  first  mooted  in  1977  but  viewed  against  the  forex  reserves  available 
then, it was thought as an impossible proposition. The Government decided to sell confiscated gold in 
small quantities through the RBI. However, it did not have any major impact on smuggling.  
Various  schemes for mobilisation  of  idle  gold  holdings  have  been  implemented  by  the  Government 
and  RBI  in  the  past,  but  with  little  success.  The  15-year  Gold  Bonds  at  6  1/2  per  cent  (November 
1962) could mobilise only 16.70 tonnes. A second attempt to garner gold was made through the 7 per 
cent Gold Bond 1980 Scheme (March 1965) which could mobilise only 6.1 tonnes. The third series 
designated as National Defence Gold Bonds 1980 (1965) garnered 13.7 tonnes and the Gold Bond 
Scheme 1993 garnered 41 tonnes of gold. Even after two years of launching the scheme under the 
recent Gold Deposit Scheme (1997) the mobilization is around seven tonnes only. Thus, attempts to 
mobilise gold under various schemes have not evoked the desired response.  
Currently,  gold  import  is  permitted  through  three  official  channels  viz.,  special  import  licences,  non-
resident Indians and authorized banks and institutions. Import of gold through Special Import Licence 
(SIL) has been negligible after gold import through banks was permitted. It is but natural that NRI route 
had become less attractive after the banks have been permitted to import gold. 
The liberalized gold policy has certainly brought to the official sector what originally was an unofficial 
sector.  Without  doubt,  it  has  eliminated  illegal  transactions  and  profiteers  out  of  such  illegal 
transactions with attendant socio-economic impact of such large scale and high value market involving 
cross-border operations. At the level of managing external sector and forex markets, the elimination of 
large unofficial market in forex has improved the policy effectiveness. It may also be noted that the 
Indian consumer of gold has been spared of huge transaction costs amounting to thousands of crores 
of rupees on account of the existence of the unofficial sector in the past. Further, duty realization is 
significant  at  a  time  when  realization  through  customs  duty  on  other  commodities  is  coming  down. 
4 
 BIS Review 21/2002
 However,  there  are  some  who  argue  that  ban  on  gold  imports  should  be  re-imposed,  while  a  few 
others argue that the duty be hiked on the assumption that such measures would curb the total import 
bill on account of gold. Past experience does not seem to favour this negative view. In this regard, 
there  is  another  view  which  holds  that  both  gold  import  and  export  should  be  totally  freed,  but  this 
argument ignores the fact that gold has some characteristics of a currency.  
Parameters for Medium-term Policy  
In the light of the experience gained in the global trends in the gold market, and more particularly the 
recent trends in gold policy and gold markets in India, it is possible to suggest five broad parameters 
that could govern the medium-term policy in regard to gold. 
A  positive  approach  to  gold  appears  to  be  demonstrably  less  disruptive  and  more  consistent  with 
socio-economic conditions in the country than a negative approach to gold, as amply demonstrated by 
the ineffectiveness as well as disruptive nature of the control framework in the past. The response to 
measures  aimed  at  discouraging  utilisation  and  possession  through  schemes  such  as  gold 
mobilisation and gold deposits have also not worked.  
A positive approach significantly reduces transaction cost as evident, for example, from the reduction 
in difference in price between world markets and Indian gold markets after liberalisation. As mentioned 
earlier,  a  liberalized  policy  has  added  the  comfort  to  public  finance  and  management  of  external 
sector. Further, a non-positive attitude towards the use of gold on the presumption of the expenditure 
being productive or non-productive would be inconsistent with the liberalised framework of economic 
management. Thus, it would be inconsistent to allow consumption of luxury items or perfumes through 
imports, but not gold. Moreover, unlike tobacco and to some extent liquor, gold does not have adverse 
impact  on  health,  environment  or  family  life.  In  other  words,  it  would  not  be  proper  to  make  any 
judgement about the desirability or productive nature of gold consumption to weave the policy around 
such  a  value  loaded  judgement.  It  would  be  appropriate  to  assess  the  Indian  reality  and  the 
implications of large preference for holding gold and take appropriate policy measures. On the basis of 
such  an  assessment,  a  positive  approach  will  have  several  dimensions  viz.  macro  policy,  financial 
markets, external sector and protection of consumer interest. 
In terms of macro policy, the objective of reduced recourse to gold would be automatically served in 
the  long  run  through  economic  development,  though  the  immediate  effect  of  increased  prosperity 
could be preference for investment in gold. Spread of literacy, particularly female literacy, could also 
help in reducing the preference for gold. Above all, availability and easy access to different forms of 
financial savings on an extensive scale, particularly for women, to protect the traditional “Streedhan” 
may prove to be the most viable policy option to encourage non-gold form of savings. Of particular 
relevance to monetary authorities, price stability and reasonably low but stable interest rates are in the 
medium-term, likely to contribute to reduced preference or recourse to gold as a form of savings as 
well as investment. 
As regards the role of gold in financial markets, the policy has to recognise that the Indian gold market 
has always been linked to international gold market in view of large requirements of imported gold. 
Recognition of such integration as an inevitable reality and taking appropriate institutional measures, 
would  reduce  the  transaction  cost  and  impart  stability  to  the  Indian  gold  market.  Further,  gold  has 
been  virtually  insulated  from  the  local  financial  market  in  terms  of  financing  of  the  gold  or  gold 
transactions by the banking sector. Gold-linked financial instruments are not prevalent in the Indian 
market and forward markets in gold are virtually prohibited. Given the inevitable integration between 
the  global  and  local  gold  markets,  there  is  considerable  merit  in  following  the  global  practice  of 
integration of gold markets with financial markets. The role of banks in the context of gold market has 
already  been  recognised,  but  banks  are  playing  the  role  of  essentially  being  canalising  agencies. 
While  such  a  risk  free  approach  is  defensible  from  a  prudential  angle,  banks  could  fund  financial 
instruments  without  taking  a  risk  on  their  own  balance  sheet,  thus  improving  efficiency  in  the  gold-
linked financial markets. 
In respect of the external sector, the liberalisation of import of gold has helped the removal of non-
official  transactions  to  a  significant  degree.  However,  the  export  of  gold  jewellery  is  still  somewhat 
insulated  from  the  domestic  market.  The  economic  opportunities  for  considerable  liberalisation  of 
exports  could  be  considered  as  appropriate.  Special  treatment  of  gold  export  will  no  longer  be 
consistent with the positive approach to gold policy coupled with a vibrant role of gold in external trade. 
BIS Review 21/2002 
 5
 Finally, studies have shown that the consumers on an average would be paying Rs. 8,000 crores extra 
each year by virtue of the questionable quality of gold sold to them. In particular, the rural and middle 
class  and  women  are  specially  vulnerable  to  the  low  quality  of  gold.  Special  consumer  protection 
measures - both educational and legal through appropriate enforcement of Consumer Protection Act - 
should make a positive contribution to the protection of consumer and improvement of the industry. 
Future Directions 
The broad parameters for medium-term policy  would by themselves suggest several actions for the 
future.  It  may  be  appropriate  to  consider  discussion  and  debate  on  the  parameters  of  the  policy 
indicated. However, on an illustrative basis, it is possible to identify broad areas for future direction in 
this regard.  
First, there may be scope for further rationalisation of policy relating to import of gold. Experience has 
shown that select large institutions, particularly banks, contribute effectively to efficient import of gold. 
However, as a hangover of the past, a number of facilities are available for NRI individuals to import 
gold. There is considerable merit in reviewing the policy with a view to removing such individual-based 
special  facilities.  When  gold  is  imported  through  NRIs,  it  may  not  be  easy  to  track  the  origin  or 
destination, hence making it vulnerable for misuse. Prohibiting such imports may also be consistent 
with other initiatives such as prevention of money laundering, since unlike in the banking system, the 
transactions are not easily traceable. Similarly, import of gold through special import licence may need 
review. At the same time, consistent with a positive approach to gold, the current restrictions on import 
of gold as part of personal baggage by returning Indians could be reviewed. Gold may not be treated 
differently from any other commodity in respect of eligibility as personal baggage within the allowance 
and levy of the standard duty on import in excess of permissible limit on par with other goods.  
Second,  as regards exports, consistent  with the positive approach,  it should be possible to remove 
special restrictions on gold jewellery export-oriented units and treat them like other units. Mechanisms 
such as customs bonding etc. may no longer be necessary, if the purchase of gold is documented and 
export proceeds realised are fully documented. The strategy adopted by Italy for a number of years 
and more recently by Turkey to dominate gold jewellery markets may have to be studied in depth for 
adoption in India 
Third, in regard to development of gold market, the establishment of a Gold Exchange would help in 
efficient price discovery and emergence of healthy and transparent practices in the market. The basic 
framework for such an exchange already exists with 13 banks active in import of precious metals. Five 
of them have launched the Gold Deposit Scheme also. They are exploring possibilities of introducing 
‘paper gold’ products like Gold Accumulation Plans. These banks are fully authorised to sell/lease gold 
to the market players. They can also enter into forward contracts in a limited way. A committee set up 
by the RBI has studied the feasibility of introducing Futures Trading in Gold and this is being examined 
by the Forward Markets Commission. Once the banks start trading among themselves, with MMTC, 
STC and also with big traders according to the demand/supply dynamics, a formal move towards a 
Gold Exchange is appropriate. They can even use the infrastructure available with an existing stock 
exchange like National Stock Exchange (NSE) for this purpose.  
Fourth,  as  part  of  the  positive  approach  to  consumers,  the  present  initiatives  by  BIS  may  be 
supported, strengthened for improvement, reviewed and further measures considered. For example, 
several  banks  and  other  institutions,  which  are  currently  importing  gold  in  large  measures,  could 
consider establishing a Gold Market Development Agency as a voluntary self regulatory organisation 
with participation from gold trade and BIS to devise mechanisms by which the efficiency of the market 
and the integrity of the products are ensured and augmented. For example, banks can play a role by 
prescribing different margins for loans extended against the pledge of gold with hallmark and those 
without. Similarly, the banks could take into account, the practice of issuing Gold Content Guarantee 
Certificates by the gold jewellers while extending credit. This would also help banks in making proper 
assessment of the inventories of the traders. 
Finally, with a full recognition of the importance of gold, not only in the Indian economy, in terms of 
import, export, or consumption, employment, etc., but also in the Indian society, it would be desirable 
to encourage research and policy studies on various aspects relating to a positive approach to gold 
markets and gold policy. Illustratively, these may cover three broad areas, viz., gold reserves and their 
role in the forex reserves; the development of gold markets in conjunction with financial markets; and 
6 
 BIS Review 21/2002
 the macro economic implications of gold policy and gold markets, especially in the context of financial 
savings. 
Let me again thank the organizers for giving me this opportunity and we in RBI as usual look forward 
to benefiting from the deliberations. 
BIS Review 21/2002 
 7
