 Roger W Ferguson, Jr: The proposed check clearing for the 21st Century Act 
Speech by Mr Roger W Ferguson, Jr, Vice-Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Financial  Institutions  and  Consumer  Credit  of  the 
Committee on Financial Services, U.S. House of Representatives, 25 September 2002. 
 I  would  like  to  thank  the  subcommittee  for  inviting  me  to  discuss  H.R.  5414,  the  proposed  Check 
Clearing for the 21st Century Act. This bill, which is similar to a proposal the Board sent to Congress 
late last year, removes existing legal barriers to the use of new technology in check processing and 
holds the promise of a more efficient check collection system. The Board commends Representatives 
Ferguson and Ford for introducing this bill.  
Technological Advances in Check Processing 
Check processing is far more efficient than it once was. Less than fifty years ago, clerks hand sorted 
millions of checks each day. In the 1960s, the banking industry began to use mechanical high-speed 
check  processing  equipment  to  read  and  sort  checks,  which  had  been  redesigned  for  automated 
processing. Today, banks, thrifts, and credit unions, which I will collectively refer to as banks, process 
the more than 40 billion checks that consumers, businesses, and the government write each year.  
Legal  impediments,  however,  have  prevented  the  banking  industry  from  fully  using  these  new 
electronic technologies, such as digital imaging, to improve check processing efficiency and provide 
improved services to customers. This is because existing law requires that the original paper checks 
be  presented  for  payment  unless  the  banks  involved  agree  otherwise.  We  can  see  how  this 
requirement  constrains  technological  adoption  by  following  a  check  through  the  collection  process. 
After a bank's customer deposits a check with his or her bank, the bank typically transports the check 
from  the  branch  or  ATM  where  it  was  deposited  to  a  central  operations  center.  The  check  is  then 
usually  sent  to  one  or  more  intermediaries  --  such  as  a  Federal  Reserve  Bank  or  a  correspondent 
bank  --  or  a  clearinghouse  for  collection  before  it  is  ultimately  delivered  to  the  bank  on  which  it  is 
drawn  for  payment.  During  each  step  of  this  process,  the  check  must  be  physically  shipped  to  its 
destination  by  air  or  ground  transportation.  Of  course,  banks  can  agree  to  accept  checks 
electronically, but the large number of banks in the United States makes it infeasible for any one bank 
to obtain such agreements from all other banks or even a large proportion of them. Therefore, legal 
changes  are  needed  to  facilitate  the  use  of  technologies  that  could  improve  check  processing 
efficiency,  which  should  lead  to  substantial  reductions  in  transportation  and  other  check  processing 
costs. H.R. 5414 makes such changes.  
Proposed Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act 
The proposed Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act solves a longstanding dilemma -- how to foster 
check truncation early in the check collection or return process without mandating that banks accept 
checks in  electronic form. The term check truncation refers to any  of a number of arrangements in 
which the original paper checks are removed from the collection or return process. Currently, under 
typical check truncation arrangements, electronic information about a truncated check is presented to 
the bank on which it is drawn rather than the original paper check. The act facilitates check truncation 
by  creating  a  new  negotiable  instrument  called  a  substitute  check,  which  would  permit  banks  to 
truncate the original checks, to process the check information electronically, and to deliver substitute 
checks to banks that want to continue receiving paper checks.  
A  substitute  check,  which  would  be  the  legal  equivalent  of  the  original  check, would  include  all  the 
information contained on the original check -- that is, an image of the front and back of the original 
check as well as the machine-readable numbers that appear on the bottom of the check. Under this 
act, while a bank could no longer demand to receive the original check, it could still demand to receive 
a paper check. Banks would likely receive a mix of original checks and substitute checks. Because 
substitute checks could be processed just like original checks, a bank would not need to invest in any 
new technology or otherwise change its current check processing operations.  
BIS Review 54/2002 
 1
 Banks  could  use  the  new  authority  provided  in  this  legislation  in  a  number  of  different  ways.  For 
example, a bank would no longer need to send couriers every afternoon to each of its branches and 
ATMs to pick up checks that customers have deposited. Instead, digital images of checks could be 
transmitted electronically from those locations to the bank's operations center for processing. Not only 
would this be quicker and more efficient, but it could permit banks to establish branches or ATMs in 
more remote locations and to provide later deposit cut-off hours to their customers.  
Moreover, the act would give a bank the flexibility to transmit checks electronically over long distances, 
and create substitute checks at locations near their ultimate destination, for example to the bank on 
which  the  checks  are  drawn,  substantially  reducing  the  time  and  cost  associated  with  physical 
transportation. By enabling the banking industry to reduce its reliance on physical transportation, the 
proposed  act  would  also  reduce  the  risk  that  checks  may  be  lost  or  delayed  in  transit.  Today,  bad 
weather routinely  delays check shipments and there  have been occasions when checks have been 
destroyed  in  plane  crashes.  The  banking  industry's  extensive  reliance  on  air  transportation  was 
underscored in the aftermath of the September 11 tragedy, when air transportation came to a standstill 
and  the  flow  of  checks  slowed  dramatically.  During  the  week  of  the  attacks,  the  Federal  Reserve 
Banks' daily check float, which is normally a few hundred million dollars, ballooned to more than $47 
billion. Had the proposed legislation been  in effect at that time and had banks been  using  a robust 
electronic infrastructure for check collection, banks would have been able to collect many more checks 
by  transmitting  electronic  check  information  across  the  country  and  presenting  substitute  checks  to 
paying banks.  
Finally, many banks hope to use the authority provided by this legislation to streamline the processing 
of  checks  that  they  must  return  unpaid.  Today,  after  a  bank  processes  its  incoming  checks  and 
determines which checks to return, it has to reprocess all of the incoming checks to pull out the less 
than one percent of checks that are to be returned unpaid. Many banks have indicated to us that they 
would find it more cost effective to use their image systems to generate substitute checks for return 
rather than to outsort the returned checks from all the checks presented.  
The act might also better position banks to provide new and improved services to their customers. For 
example,  banks  might  allow  some  corporate  customers  to  transmit  their  deposits  electronically. 
Because the act will likely encourage greater investments in image technology, banks might also be 
able to expand their customers' access to enhanced account information and check images through 
the Internet. In addition, banks might be able to resolve customer inquiries more easily  and quickly 
than today by accessing check images.  
The act is designed to provide banks with additional flexibility in processing checks by requiring banks 
to accept substitute checks in place of original checks. The act does not, however, require banks to 
accept checks in electronic form nor does it require banks to use the new authority granted by the act 
to  create  substitute  checks.  This  market-based  approach  permits  each  bank  to  decide  whether  to 
make  use  of  this  new  authority.  This  decision  will  be  based  on  the  bank's  internal  business  case 
analysis, which will assess the costs and benefits of using the new authority.  
We believe the market changes arising from these revisions to check law will result in substantial cost 
savings. Clearly, because substitute checks can be processed in the same manner as original checks, 
recipients  of  substitute  checks  should  incur  little  or  no  additional  processing  costs.  Recipients, 
however,  will  incur  some  additional  costs  relating  to  the  act's  customer  protection  and  disclosure 
requirements.  It  is  difficult,  however,  to  estimate  the  overall  cost  savings.  Different  banks  will  take 
different approaches toward using the new authority granted by the act. Each bank's use of the new 
authority will depend on its technology infrastructure and strategy, its physical infrastructure, and its 
customer and business profiles. Thus, the magnitude of the cost savings,  which will depend on the 
rate at which banks begin using the new authority, is difficult to determine.  
We  recognize  that  the  most  challenging  policy  issue  in  the  proposed  law,  and  the  aspect  of  this 
legislation that  has generated the most spirited  discussion, relates to customer protections. Current 
check law protects customers if there is an unauthorized debit to their accounts. A customer already 
has a claim against its bank for an unauthorized charge, and the bank may be liable for interest on the 
amount  of  the  unauthorized  charge  and  consequential  damages  for  the  wrongful  dishonor  of  any 
subsequently  presented  checks.1  The  proposed  legislation  applies  these  existing  protections  to 
substitute checks. There are, however, differing views as to whether additional customer protections 
are necessary for substitute checks and, if so, how extensive those protections should be. We believe 
                                                      
1   U.C.C. §4-401(a) and §4-402 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2002
 that, in determining the form these protections should take, the associated benefits and costs will need 
to be carefully balanced.  
Federal Reserve Board Authority to Regulate the Payments System 
We understand that there is some debate regarding whether the Federal Reserve Board already has 
sufficient statutory authority to adopt by regulation the concepts embodied in this proposed legislation. 
Although Congress has given the Board authority to regulate the check system and other aspects of 
the payments system, we do not believe that this authority is sufficiently broad to enable us to adopt 
regulations that accomplish the purposes of the act.  
In  the  1987  Expedited  Funds  Availability  Act  (EFAA),  Congress  gave  the  Board  broad  authority  to 
regulate "any aspect of the payment system, including the receipt, payment, collection, or clearing of 
checks; and any related function of the payment system with respect to checks" in order to carry out 
the EFAA.2 The EFAA also provides that the Board's regulations supersede any inconsistent provision 
in state law, including the Uniform Commercial Code.3 In the EFAA, Congress directed the Board to 
consider requiring, by regulation, a number of measures to improve the check system.4 Many of these 
measures focused on improving the process by which unpaid checks are returned to the bank of first 
deposit. Other suggested measures related to check truncation.  
The  Board  has  used  its  authority  under  the  EFAA  to  make  several  important  improvements  to  the 
check system.5  The  Board's  ability  to  adopt  some  rules  to  improve  the  check  system  is  hampered, 
however,  by  the  EFAA's  limitation  on  the  Board's  ability  to  impose  or  allocate  the  risks  of  loss  or 
liability  related  to  payment  transactions.6  The  EFAA  authorizes  the  Board  to  impose  on  or  allocate 
among only depository institutions the risks of loss or liability, and only up to the amount of the check 
giving rise to the loss or liability, except where there is bad faith. These limitations have prevented the 
Board  from  adopting  by  regulation  some  important  innovations  that  could  substantially  improve  the 
efficiency of the check system. For example, the Board cannot adopt by regulation the changes called 
for in the proposed Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act, because the bill affects the rights of the 
end  users  of  checks  (including  businesses  and  consumers),  in  particular  their  right  to  receive  their 
original checks, and allocates liability for not only the amount of the check but also interest, litigation 
costs, and in some cases consequential damages.  
Conclusion 
In conclusion, although an increasing number of payments are being made electronically, it is clear 
that checks will continue to play an important role in the nation's payments system for the foreseeable 
future. We believe that, over the long run, the concepts embodied in the proposed Check Clearing for 
the 21st Century  Act  will spur the  use of new technologies to  improve the  efficiency of the  nation's 
check collection system and provide better services to bank customers. Because the act should result 
in  substantial  cost  savings,  it  would  also  be  desirable  to  begin  obtaining  these  savings  in  the  near 
future, ideally before the bill's proposed 2006 effective date.  
There are some technical matters in the current version of the bill that could be improved or clarified, 
and we look forward to working with the Committee as it further considers this legislation. Thank you 
for your time and I would be happy to answer your questions.  
                                                      
2   12 U.S.C. §4008(c) 
3   12 U.S.C. §4007(b) 
4   12 U.S.C. §4008(b) 
5   The  Board  has  adopted  rules  that  substantially  revise  the  process  by  which  banks  return  unpaid  checks,  which  has 
expedited the receipt of those checks by depositary banks and ensured prompt notice of large-dollar returned checks. In 
addition,  the  Board  has  adopted  rules  that  enhance  the  legal  abilities  of  private-sector  banks  to  obtain  same-day  final 
settlement  for  checks  presented  by  a  specified  time,  which  has  spurred  competition  in  the  provision  of  check  clearing 
services, improved efficiency, and sped the collection of many checks. 
6   Section 611(f) of the EFAA states "The Board is authorized to impose on or allocate among depository institutions the risks 
of  loss  and  liability  in  connection  with  any  aspect  of  the  payment  system,  including  the  receipt,  payment,  collection,  or 
clearing of checks, and any related function of the payment system with respect to checks. Liability under this subsection 
shall not exceed the amount of the check giving rise to the loss or liability, and, where there is bad faith, other damages, if 
any, suffered as a proximate consequence of any act or omission giving rise to the loss or liability." [12 U.S.C. §4010(f)] 
BIS Review 54/2002 
 3
