 Svein Gjedrem: Economic policy challenges 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), to the Executive 
Board of the Confederation of Norwegian Business and Industry, 19 September 2002. 
Charts for the speech can be found on the Norges Bank’s website. 
 A year and a half ago, the Government and the Storting adopted new guidelines for economic policy, 
which  call  for  an  annual  use  of  petroleum  revenues  equivalent  to  the  expected  real  return  on  the 
Government Petroleum Fund. At the same time, the Government issued a new operational mandate 
for  monetary  policy.  Norges  Bank  shall  set  the  key  rate  with  a  view  to  maintaining  low  and  stable 
inflation. 
The  first  sentence  in  the  monetary  policy  mandate  refers  to  the  value  of  the  krone.  Stability  in  the 
national value of the krone implies that inflation must be low and stable. This is the best contribution 
monetary  policy  can  make  to  economic  growth  and  prosperity  and  is  a  necessary  precondition  for 
stability in the financial and property markets. The regulation also states that monetary policy shall be 
aimed at stability in the international value of the krone. The krone exchange rate fluctuates from day 
to day, from week to week, and from month to month. We do not have the instruments for fine-tuning 
the exchange rate. 
The first paragraph of the mandate sets forth an objective. The last paragraph specifies what Norges 
Bank shall do. The inflation target is set at 2½ per cent. Monetary policy that is oriented towards low 
and  stable  inflation  will  contribute  to  a  stable  krone  exchange  rate  over  time.  If  we  take  steps  to 
counteract  an  appreciation  of  the  krone  when  there  are  pressures  in  the  economy,  we  reduce  the 
possibility of curbing inflation and increase the risk of fluctuations in the economy. Maintaining stability 
in the internal value of the krone must thus take precedence. 
The implementation of monetary policy has been delegated to Norges Bank. Norges Bank sets the 
interest rate on the basis of our understanding of the regulation. Our interpretation places emphasis on 
the Government’s rationale behind the regulation, on the objective as formulated in the first paragraph 
and  on  our  knowledge  about  the  relationships  between  the  interest  rate,  the  krone  exchange  rate, 
output, employment and inflation. 
The  interest  rate  influences  price  inflation  indirectly  via  domestic  demand  and  via  its  effect  on  the 
exchange rate. When interest rates rise, it is more profitable to save and more costly to borrow. This 
has  a  dampening  impact  on  consumption  and  investment.  Lower  demand  in  turn  curbs  the  rise  in 
prices and wages. Higher interest rates make it more attractive to take krone positions and borrow in 
foreign currency. As a result, higher interest rates normally lead to an appreciation of the krone. This 
reduces  prices  for  imported  goods.  In  addition,  a  strong  krone  curbs  activity,  profitability  and  the 
capacity to cover labour costs in the internationally exposed sector. 
It is important to be aware of the relationships between employment, output and inflation. If there is a 
shortage of labour and other economic resources, a tight monetary policy stance will reduce inflation 
through its effect on prices for imported goods and on aggregate demand for goods and services and 
for labour. When monetary policy  is aimed at stabilising inflation, it  will also contribute to stabilising 
aggregate output and employment. 
If it appears that inflation, with unchanged interest rates, will be higher than 2½ per cent, the interest 
rate  will  be  increased.  If  it  appears  that  inflation,  with  unchanged  interest  rates,  will  be  lower  than 
2½ per cent, the interest rate will be reduced. 
Monetary policy functions with considerable and variable lags. Therefore, the current level of inflation 
does  not  provide  an  adequate  basis  for  determining  the  level  at  which  interest  rates  should  be  set 
today. Our analyses indicate that a substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change will occur 
within two years. Two years is therefore a reasonable time horizon for attaining the inflation target. 
It is nevertheless conceivable  that in a situation  with a high rate  of inflation  and sluggish  economic 
growth, Norges Bank may decide to apply a somewhat longer time horizon than two years to reach the 
inflation target of 2½ per cent. By influencing inflation over time, monetary policy will not in itself cause 
unnecessary disturbances in the economy. 
BIS Review 51/2002 
 1
 Norges Bank has one instrument: the interest rate. Changes in the interest rate have a broad impact. 
Monetary  policy  can  therefore  not  be  oriented  towards  stabilising  developments  only  in  the 
internationally  exposed  sector,  as  has  been  advocated.  This  could  easily  create  considerable 
imbalances in the Norwegian economy. 
The low interest rate policy  and devaluations in the  1970s and  1980s are examples of how such a 
policy can fail. Monetary policy was geared towards preventing a deterioration of competitiveness in 
manufacturing.  The  krone  was  devalued  on  several  occasions.  But  wage  growth  accelerated  to 
compensate for higher inflation. The result was a wage and price spiral that hit the entire economy. At 
the same time, there was a sharp rise in the demand for loans, which created tensions in our financial 
system in the 1970s and in the 1980s. 
Monetary  policy  can  be  an  effective  means  of  influencing  aggregate  demand  in  the  economy. 
However,  there  is  little  monetary  policy  can  do  to  counter  disturbances  on  the  output  side  of  the 
economy.  Changes  in  wage  formation,  a  decline  in  productivity  growth  or  a  sharp  rise  in  prices  for 
important  factor  inputs  must  instead  be  countered  by  measures  to  improve  the  way  the  economy 
functions. 
Fiscal  policy  places  emphasis  on  smoothing  fluctuations  in  the  economy  with  a  view  to  ensuring 
appropriate  capacity  utilisation  and  low  unemployment.  There  is  an  overlap  between  the  tasks  that 
monetary policy and fiscal policy are intended to perform. This makes it natural to raise the issue of 
whether there is a need to coordinate fiscal and monetary policy decisions. Several reasons may lead 
to the interplay between monetary and fiscal policy failing to function. Interplay functions well when the 
decision-making  bodies  are  conscious  of  how  one  body’s  decisions  influence  the  decisions  of  the 
others.  Unless  this  fact  is  recognised,  a  decision  will  not  produce  the  result  that  was  planned.  The 
economy may move in a very undesirable direction, with high interest rates, sluggish economic growth 
and a deterioration in the state’s financial position. 
Without coordination, a good result may still be achieved if fiscal policy acts as “leader” and monetary 
policy  as  “follower”,  to  use  expressions  taken  from  game  theory.  The  fiscal  policy  authorities  can 
internalise the monetary policy response pattern. The central bank’s response pattern must of course 
be known so that the fiscal authorities can take this into account. 
The  social  partners  can  similarly  take  any  monetary  policy  response  into  account  when  wages  are 
being determined. The “leader” in this interplay - the social partners - can take the “follower’s” - Norges 
Bank’s  -  response  into  account.  This  view  is  most  relevant  in  centralised  wage  formation.  In 
decentralised wage formation, monetary policy will instead affect wage growth via market mechanisms 
by stabilising aggregate demand. 
A precondition for interplay that functions well is that monetary policy is known and remains firm. 
The outcome of this year’s wage settlement indicates that the social partners have not internalised the 
monetary policy response pattern. Perhaps one of the stumbling blocks has been the choice of wage 
settlements  at  industry  level  and  the  large  wage  increases  for  employees  outside  the  two  largest 
employer/employee organisations (NHO and LO). 
The  high  wage  growth  awarded  to  groups  whose  wages  are  determined  through  individual 
agreements  indicates  that  the  labour  market  has  been  tight.  The  rise  in  salaries  for  white-collar 
workers and managers may also reflect weak cost control in enterprises and organisations following a 
long period of expansion. 
For  a  long  time,  a  stable  exchange  rate  and  labour  costs  among  our  trading  partners  formed  an 
anchor  for  wage  determination.  Since  1998,  however,  the  rise  in  labour  costs  in  Norway  has  been 
around 2 percentage points higher than that of our trading partners. High wage growth, combined with 
the global downturn and a strong krone, is having a severe impact on manufacturing. 
It is the combined wage growth for all groups that influences the inflation outlook. However, substantial 
wage  increases  for  some groups  can  trigger  wage  spirals. Wages for salaried  staff  in  the  business 
sector have exhibited sharp growth. This year, it appears that wage increases will particularly be high 
in the public sector and in parts of the private service sector. 
Over time, growth in real wages must be consistent with growth in labour productivity. With an inflation 
target of 2½ per cent and trend growth in the economy of 2 per cent, there will be scope for annual 
nominal  wage  growth  of  about  4½  per  cent.  These  figures  are  consistent  with  developments  in  the 
1990s. Wage growth averaged 4½ per cent and productivity growth 2 per cent in this decade. This 
resulted in an inflation rate of 2½ per cent combined with a stable krone exchange rate. 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2002
 An unexpected upward shift in labour costs will require an increase in interest rates in order to avoid 
higher inflation. When wage growth reaches a  level that  is inconsistent  with  the inflation target,  the 
result over time will be higher interest rates, lower employment and higher unemployment. There is a 
relationship  between  wage  growth  and  interest  rates.  The  lower  wage  growth  is,  the  lower  interest 
rates will be, and vice versa. The differences between interest rates in various countries reflect to a 
large extent differences in wage growth. Japan represents the one extreme, with an interest rate of 
zero and no wage growth. At the other extreme are Iceland and Norway, with high interest rates and 
high wage growth. The relatively high wage growth in Norway is the result of a tight labour market. In 
other  countries,  the  situation  is  different,  with  sluggish  economic  growth  and  abating  inflation.  As  a 
result, the interest rate is higher in Norway than in other countries. 
Households  are enjoying strong growth  in  income and are borrowing heavily.  Wage growth  is high. 
Financial savings are  low.  There is strong  growth in  retail sales measured in current prices. House 
prices  are  high.  Petroleum  investment  is  also  high.  On  the  other  hand,  we  expect  to  see  weak 
developments in exports and for example in investment in commercial buildings. 
The Norwegian krone has appreciated markedly this year. Developments in wage settlements have 
probably  been  an  important  driving  force.  High  wage  growth  leads  to  high  interest  rates,  making  it 
attractive to take krone positions. As a result, the Norwegian krone appreciates. 
We must be prepared for fluctuations in the krone exchange rate in line with that observed in other 
countries. There is free trade in goods and services and free capital movements. The krone is floating. 
This  means  that  economic  agents  cannot  assume  that  the  krone  will  be  stable  against  the  euro, 
against the dollar or against a weighted average of foreign currencies. 
The  krone  does  not  fluctuate  any  more  or  less  than  other  currencies.  A  large  share  of  petroleum 
revenues is invested in foreign equities and bonds through the Petroleum Fund. Changes in oil prices 
influence the size of the Fund, but have little effect on the domestic use of petroleum revenues. The 
Petroleum  Fund  thus  serves  as  a  buffer  against  fluctuations  in  oil  prices  and  shields  the  krone 
exchange rate. Nevertheless, we have been prepared for fluctuations in the krone exchange rate on a 
par with changes in other countries. 
Over  the  last  two  years,  the  appreciation  of  the  krone  has  been  driven  by  the  wide  and  increased 
interest rate differential between Norway and other countries, which reflects the relatively high level of 
wage growth in Norway. 
The  interest  rate  differential  reflects  high  demand  growth  and  high  wage  growth.  There  is  a  clear 
relationship  between  wage  growth,  interest  rate  expectations  and  the  krone  exchange  rate.  The 
appreciation of the krone dampens inflation, and at the same time weakens profitability, employment 
and the capacity to cover labour costs in the internationally exposed sector. 
The krone can move in both directions. It will not appreciate indefinitely. Sustained lower wage growth 
will  be  accompanied  by  a  narrower  interest  rate  differential  and  it  may  reverse  movements  in  the 
exchange rate. 
A declining level of wage growth would provide a strong impetus to the internationally exposed sector. 
The  interest  rate  could  be  reduced.  This  would  lead  to  a  depreciation  of  the  krone,  with  a  further 
improvement in earnings and employment. 
Over  the  last  thirty  years,  manufacturing  has  been  scaled  back  in  waves.  There  was  substantial 
downscaling in the years from 1977 to 1984 and 1987 to 1992 in particular. In the years leading up to 
the periods of contraction, profitability deteriorated in the manufacturing sector. It can take time before 
such  a  deterioration  translates  into  lower  output  and  employment.  But  when  the  turnaround  does 
occur, it tends to be swift and hard-hitting. It now appears that a new period of downscaling is under 
way. 
Several  factors  point  to  this:  First,  productivity  growth  is  higher  in  manufacturing  than  in  other 
industries. This has resulted in a trend decline in the numbers employed in manufacturing in Norway, 
as it has in other OECD countries. 
Second, manufacturing costs have increased sharply since 1998. Up to the summer of 2000, this cost 
increase was to some extent offset by a weaker krone. The appreciation of the krone has highlighted 
and  exacerbated  the  deterioration  in  cost  competitiveness.  On  balance,  it  appears  that  cumulative 
wage growth in Norway will be a good 15 per cent higher than in other countries from 1998 to 2003. 
The krone is now about 7 per cent stronger than the average for the 1990s. 
BIS Review 51/2002 
 3
 Third,  as  a  result  of  the  fiscal  guideline,  the  internationally  exposed  sector  is  subject  to  additional 
pressure. Over time, the phasing in of petroleum revenues will lead to restructuring and the transfer of 
resources from the exposed to the sheltered sector. 
Fourth, the response patterns in stabilisation policy function in a different way from previously. Under 
the “Solidarity Alternative”, the response pattern consisted of countering labour market pressures and 
strong  wage  growth  by  reducing  growth  in  public  spending  (or,  if  appropriate,  by  strengthening 
government  revenues).  This  had  a  beneficial  impact  on  manufacturing  industry.  Today,  monetary 
policy shoulders more of the burden. This may sometimes result in a strong krone exchange rate. 
Fifth, growth in the global economy is sluggish while, at the same time, oil prices are high. The fall in 
share  prices  curbs  economic  growth  among  our  trading  partners.  Markets  for  Norway’s  export 
industries  are  stagnating,  but  at  the  same  time  high  oil  prices  are  providing  a  stimulus  for  some 
sectors of the Norwegian economy. 
Interest rates were assessed by the Executive Board of Norges Bank yesterday. Interest rates were 
left unchanged. Norges Bank’s key interest rate, the sight deposit rate, therefore remains at 7 per cent. 
According to Norges Bank’s assessment, with an unchanged interest rate, the probability that inflation 
two years ahead will be higher than 2½ per cent is the same as the probability that it will be lower. 
A sharp rise in  labour costs is contributing to a relatively high rise in prices for goods and services 
produced in Norway. A persistently strong krone will contribute to keeping down prices for imported 
goods.  The  strong  krone  will  have  consequences  for  activity  in  the  internationally  exposed  sector. 
Together with prospects for low inflation internationally, the strong krone is the most important force 
acting as a counterweight to the sharp rise in domestic costs. 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2002
