 Klaus Liebscher: Monetary integration and EU enlargement 
Speech by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the Vienna International 
Summer University, Vienna, 26 July 2002. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  was  with  great  pleasure  that  I  accepted  the  invitation  to  participate  in  the  Vienna  International 
Summer University 2002, and I would like to congratulate the organizers on the well-chosen topic.  
One of my colleagues from an Eastern European country once remarked that delivering speeches was 
an easy  task for central bankers. They could  always stick to three items: First, inflation is too high. 
Second, interest rates are too low. Third, if anything goes wrong, blame the minister of finance.  
Well, although I might be tempted to concentrate on these issues, I would like to focus my speech on 
two broader issues, namely on the principles which are essential for the Third Stage of Economic and 
Monetary  Union  (EMU)  and  on  how  we  can  pass  on  our  experience  to  countries  in  transition  and, 
above all, to countries which have applied for EU membership.  
Since January 1st of this year, more than 300 million European citizens have been using the same 
new euro banknotes and coins for their daily transactions. The high speed of the changeover and the 
enthusiastic reception of the new currency units in all 12 euro area countries has been remarkable. It 
represents  a  big  leap  forward  in  the  process  of  European  integration,  which  now  finds  a  visible 
expression in the daily life of its citizens. Every coin and every banknote bear the map of Europe. The 
citizens literally carry Europe in their hands.  
The idea of a common currency based on sound economic policies is proving attractive beyond the 
borders  of  the  euro  area.  I  am  not  only  referring  to  the  Central  and  Eastern  European  accession 
countries, which show a keen desire to participate in the "success story" of the euro, but especially to 
the three EU countries that have not yet adopted the common currency - Great Britain, Denmark and 
Sweden. I am convinced that they will not want to be on the sidelines for long. According to opinion 
polls,  popular  support  for  the  euro  has  increased  significantly  in  these  countries  after  the  physical 
introduction of the currency.  
However, it is important to stress that the euro was not created overnight, but rather in a demanding 
process of convergence that took many years to complete. The first ideas for a European monetary 
union came up in the late 1960s. However, the terms and conditions for such a challenging project 
were  not  yet  mature  -  neither  in  political  nor  in  economic  terms.  Thus,  only  in  the  late  1980s  new 
progress was made that led to the Treaty of Maastricht more than 10 years ago (on February 7, 1992). 
The exact timetable and the name for the new currency were determined by the heads of state at the 
end of 1995. Finally, the euro was introduced to financial markets in 1999, and three years later at the 
retail level as a physical currency.  
As  a  result  of  these  decisions,  and  in  order  to  get  in  shape  for  the  proposed  monetary  union,  the 
member countries embarked on  a remarkable  process of economic convergence. Fiscal policy  was 
tightened, inflation declined to low single digits, and the legal systems were brought in line.  
The creation of EMU was a careful process that built on international best practices, and on a large 
body of economic research. It was of utmost importance to ensure the trust of the markets in as large 
and diverse a geographical area as the euro area.  
Thus, in order to foster the market´s trust in "monetary stability," the Eurosystem was built around the 
principle  of  price  stability.  Its  framework  was  laid  down  in  international  treaties  and  enjoys 
constitutional status in all member countries.  
Of its many features, I would like to stress the following five principles, which I consider essential for 
the success of EMU:  
Independence of the central bank 
1) 
First of all, the Treaty of Maastricht has endowed the European System of Central Banks (ESCB) with 
a very high  degree of political  independence. This came as a recognition of the empirical evidence 
BIS Review 46/2002 
 1
 that good inflation performance around  the  world  is linked to central bank independence. While the 
economic  profession  had  started  to  subscribe  to  this  view  a  long  time  ago,  the  issue  was  more 
contentious at the political level. The European monetary union comprises countries with very different 
macroeconomic policy traditions. In some countries, the objective of price stability was subordinate to 
other economic goals, and often the financing needs of the state dominated monetary policy. This was 
not the case in a second group of countries, where price stability ranked high in the eyes of the public, 
and  legal  systems  set  barriers  to  fiscal  incursions  into  the  central  bank.  The  last  decade  saw  a 
remarkable convergence around this second, stability-oriented approach, which is fully reflected in the 
design of the ESCB.  
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  is  the  central  decision-making  body  of  the  independent 
Eurosystem.  It  brings  together  the  6  members  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  ECB  and  the  12 
governors  of  the  national  central  banks  currently  participating  in  monetary  union.  The  Governing 
Council normally takes decisions with a simple majority according to the principle "one member, one 
vote." In other words, all the members of the Governing Council are on an equal footing irrespective of 
the size of their country, which reflects a key principle of the Maastricht Treaty.  
Decentralization is at the root of the Eurosystem, i.e. strategic decisions are taken in the Governing 
Council. They are then implemented decentrally by the central banks of the Eurosystem. The OeNB 
thus remains a national institution which, however, also fulfills tasks at the European level.  
Clear Priority: Price Stability 
2) 
According to the Treaty of Maastricht, the Eurosystem´s primary objective is to maintain price stability 
and, by that, the purchasing power of more than 300 million people. The Treaty leaves no doubt about 
this  priority,  even  as  it  retains  operational  flexibility  in  the  choice  of  the  instruments  of  monetary 
control. The emphasis on price stability is important, since it reduces uncertainty and sends a clear 
signal to the markets.  
Our  two-pillar  monetary  policy  strategy  allows  us  -  and  compels  us  -  to  follow  closely  and 
systematically  a  wide  range  of  monetary,  economic  and  financial  indicators  which  point  to  possible 
risks  of  future  inflation.  After  more  than  three  years  of  EMU  we  can  observe  that  the  Governing 
Council of the ECB has to date performed very well in safeguarding price stability. In addition to the 
elimination of exchange rate fluctuations among the former currencies of the euro area, price stability 
has been the main contribution of EMU to sustained long-run growth, employment creation and better 
standards of living.  
Fiscal Discipline 
3) 
In order to ensure stability, the institutional framework of EMU extends beyond monetary policy. A key 
ingredient is the Stability and Growth Pact, which intends to promote sound fiscal policies at the level 
of individual member countries. Fiscal discipline plays a crucial role in keeping pressure off monetary 
policy. As a last resort, unsustainable debt burdens would always be monetized. Economic history has 
shown time and again that monetary policy cannot be truly independent if fiscal policy is not sound.  
True price stability can only be ensured if budgets are broadly balanced over the medium term. This 
policy  will  reduce  the  ratio  of  public  debt  to  GDP  over  time  and  keep  real  interest  rates  low.  It 
encourages  the  "crowding  in"  of  private  investment  and  frees  resources  for  the  most  productive 
sectors that are the engines of economic growth.  
Finally, the progressive ageing of the population will result in a considerable burden on future budgets. 
Intense strain on Europe´s pension systems will start to be felt in this decade still. On this matter, time 
is not on our side, and the possible size of the problem calls for precautionary actions already today. 
Fiscal prudence is thus not an end in itself, but also an investment into the well-being of the current 
working population and of our children.  
It  is  important  to  note  that  all  euro  area  countries  must  honor  the  commitments  made  to  achieve 
budgets  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus  by  2003/2004.  Fiscal  targets  have  to  embody  sufficiently 
ambitious structural consolidation efforts and have to be based on realistic growth assumptions. Any 
weakening of the elements of the Stability and Growth Pact would raise concerns about the credibility 
of EMU and could erode the confidence in the stability-oriented policy framework of the euro area.  
2 
 BIS Review 46/2002
 Structural Policies 
4) 
Structural  reform  is  the  third  pillar  of  success for  Europe's  monetary  union,  especially  in  the  longer 
term. Structural reform is needed both for its indirect effects on monetary policy via the budget, and for 
the direct impact it has on the competitiveness of the euro area.  
Competitiveness  includes  increasing  the  flexibility  of  the  labor  market,  creating  a  more  efficient  tax 
system  that  encourages  job  creation,  and  reducing  the  overall  tax  burden  on  the  economy.  The 
process  of  coordinating  structural  reform  in  member  countries,  which  was  started  by  the  European 
Council of Lisbon and continued by the Council of Barcelona this March, must be strengthened and 
deepened.  The  European  Single  Market  needs  to  be  completed  and  extended  to  public  utilities  by 
opening them up to international competition.  
The introduction of the euro has increased transparency for consumers who can now easily compare 
prices across countries. Thus, monetary union is contributing to the pressure for accelerating structural 
reform. People are beginning to wonder why large price differentials still exist, and markets will find 
ways  to  erode  them.  However,  where  price  differentials  are  the  result  of  regulatory  impediments  to 
trade, people will start to question the regulations and press for change. The introduction of the euro 
will give new impetus to eliminating obstacles to the Single Market. Structural reform - and European 
integration in general - may become more of a "bottom-up" process that is driven by the citizens of 
Europe, as opposed to the "top-down" process it has been so far and which is driven by experts and 
politicians.  
Public involvement 
5) 
This  leads  me  to  the  fifth  and  last  pillar  of  success  for  monetary  union,  the  high  degree  of  public 
awareness. The deliberate transparency of EMU institutions fosters close involvement of the citizens. 
The Treaty of Maastricht has imposed extensive reporting requirements on the ECB and on member 
countries in order to ensure transparency and accountability. The ECB itself goes to great lenghts to 
keep the public at large well informed. Monetary policy decisions are explained in press conferences 
at  least  once  month.  A  large  collection  of  economic  data  is  provided  to  the  interested  public  in  the 
"Monthly  Bulletin"  and  in  corresponding  publications  of  national  central  banks.  The  ECB  reports  in 
regular hearings to the European Parliament. Finally, it is integrated closely into the decision-making 
structures of the EU, as the president of the ECB is a member of the Ecofin Council, and the Ecofin 
president  participates  in  the  meetings  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB.  In  sum,  the  ECB  is 
probably one of the most transparent central banks worldwide.  
Both  the  policy  of  deliberate  transparency  and  the  broad  popular  support  for  European  integration 
have helped making the physical introduction of the new currency remarkably smooth. The public was 
well-prepared  for  the  euro  changeover  and  has  greeted  the  new  banknotes  and  coins  with  more 
enthusiasm than anyone anticipated.  
Beyond EMU - Further Political Integration and Enlargement 
EMU represents a milestone in European integration, a key step in completing the Single European 
Market. Of course, competition is most pronounced within EMU itself. Monetary union guarantees that 
the Single Market can utilize the full potential of its economic power on the basis of a stable common 
currency and that the growing pressure of international competition on Europe is buffered.  
The deepening of the European Union which accompanies EMU and the euro is therefore not simply 
the  most  suitable  response  to  internationalization  and  globalization,  but  also  a  bulwark  against  any 
maneuvers to reverse liberalization in Europe. Deepening European integration is crucial especially for 
small open economies, no matter whether they are already Member States like Austria or accession 
countries.  
By introducing the euro, European economic policymakers have assumed the responsibility for both 
exploiting the opportunities and addressing the challenges this move represents for the  EU  and for 
Europe as a whole.  
The  single  currency  holds  out  the  promise  of  fostering  European  integration  in  areas  far  beyond 
monetary  union.  Of  course,  this  chance  also  implies  that  there  are  many  questions  about  how  far 
political and institutional integration is to progress. The events of the next few years may well provide 
us with the answers to these questions.  
BIS Review 46/2002 
 3
 What is certain, however, is that EMU is a harbinger of political union within Europe - as history shows, 
national  territories  and  currency  areas  are,  as  a  rule,  identical.  For  this  reason  it  is  fundamentally 
important that national interests be overcome in favor of a single European policy and that the Member 
States  step  up  their  cooperation  on  a  common  foreign  and  security  policy  as  well  as  an  internal 
security policy.  
I therefore welcome the EU's special constitutional convention. The assembled politicians and officials 
have the task of proposing a concept for the EU which will match our continental dimension and the 
requirements  of  the  21st  century.  I  acknowledge  that  this  convention  is  a  bold  experiment  in 
consultative democracy.  
However, we need to define what kind of institutional arrangements will be prerequisite to meet our 
aspirations, what kind of society and what kind of economy we want to build. I also do not think that 
the real question is about federalism versus national sovereignty. The EU is federal already. It divides 
power between different levels of authority.  
The  questions  now  are  about  the  most  effective  and  legitimate  way  to  divide  that  power,  so  that 
national  sovereignty  is  preserved  within  an  integrated  system.  If  these  questions  can  be  resolved, 
Europe will earn the voice it seeks on the world stage.  
This, however, does not mean that we have to give up our national identities. Their roots go very deep, 
and  it is  absolutely in the  European Union's best interest to preserve specific  national  and regional 
cultural  traits.  "Unity  through  diversity"  is  certainly  an  advantage  Europe  has  compared  to  other 
regions and economic areas.  
I am therefore confident that - if we succeed in tapping the creative and problem-solving potential of 
Europe's diversity to work on reaching common goals - Europe and its countries face a bright future.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
After  having  EMU  implemented  successfully,  the  current  major  challenge  which  Europe  faces  is 
certainly  the enlargement  of European Union. This  integration project is just  as impressive and far-
sighted as EMU, and it also holds out enormous opportunities - as well as challenges that must not be 
underestimated.  
The process of integration has given Western Europe a period of political and economic stability not 
known before in its history. I am therefore deeply convinced that the enlargement of the Union will be 
to the advantage of all countries on the continent, especially Austria, and will be regarded as a great 
step in the history of Europe in the years to come.  
Accession  negotiations  began  in  1998  and  are  now  being  conducted  with  a  total  of  12  candidate 
countries. The progress of the talks is encouraging, and many applicant countries have made striking 
efforts to get their economies in shape for membership in the EU.  
With regards to the monetary aspects of integration, at present a three-step procedure is envisaged:  
In a first step, the country becomes a new member of the European Union and adopts the body of 
community law. This includes laws that guarantee the independence of the central bank and prohibit 
monetary financing of government deficits. Also, international capital flows have to be fully liberalized. 
Upon  accession,  the  new  member  countries  will  join  EMU  with  the  status  of  "countries  with  a 
derogation"  and  their  central  banks  will  become  part  of  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks 
(ESCB). A second step is the participation in the so-called Exchange Rate Mechanism II, ERM II for 
short.  This  implies  maintaining  a  stable  exchange  rate  within  a  band  of  +/-15  percent  vis-à-vis  the 
euro. Successful participation in the ERM II band for at least two years is required before the country 
can introduce the euro. The mechanism serves as a trial period to determine how well the economy 
copes with the loss of exchange rate flexibility and monetary independence. The third and last step 
before the integration of the central bank into the Eurosystem is a strict and sustained adherence to 
the Maastricht criteria for economic convergence, especially price stability, sound fiscal policies and 
low long-term interest rates.  
The European Commission and the ECB are monitoring progress closely. The criteria will be applied 
equally and fairly to all candidate countries, and there will be no discrimination between old and new 
members of monetary union. Convergence criteria serve as an instrument to ensure sustainable and 
stability-oriented  policies  in  the  long  run.  Speed  must  not  come  at  the  expense  of  quality  in  this 
process, in the interest of both the candidate countries and the present members of EMU.  
4 
 BIS Review 46/2002
 Independently of the process of EU enlargement, the euro has become a currency of reference for 
many countries in the region and beyond. Almost all candidate countries already use the euro in one 
way or another as their monetary anchor. At present, the accession countries are following a variety of 
exchange  rate  strategies,  covering  the  full  spectrum  from  currency  boards  to  free  floats.  Their 
monetary strategies differ widely, too, as they use inflation targets, exchange rate targets and targets 
for  monetary  aggregates.  Even  countries  that  are  not  among  the  group  of  membership  candidates 
have adopted a close monetary arrangement with the euro. In some cases, the euro has replaced an 
existing peg to the Deutsche mark or the French franc, as for instance in the countries of the Western 
and  Central  African  Monetary  Union.  In  other  cases,  especially  in  the  Balkans,  the  euro  has  been 
unilaterally adopted as legal tender. Overall, the euro has become the monetary anchor for about 50 
countries all around the world.  
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
Having outlined this general institutional framework, let me now turn to some more specific issues and 
challenges that accession countries face on their way to euro.  
Although a lot has been achieved, accession countries will still need to further advance the process of 
bringing down inflation rates, while not delaying the much needed relative price adjustments within the 
economy. Such price adjustments are part of the transition process and of structural real convergence 
and will typically entail inflation rates that may, for some time, range above those prevailing in the euro 
area. Hence, accession countries are well advised to properly sequence the disinflation path toward 
the Maastricht criteria and in some cases delayed entry into the euro area could be an optimal policy 
choice.  
The objectives of nominal and real convergence should be pursued in parallel. Progress in nominal 
and real convergence will imply an orderly closing of the gap between the accession countries and the 
euro area  economy, both in terms of per capita income and price levels. In  order to reinforce each 
other,  nominal  and  real  convergence  paths  must  be  properly  sequenced  and  mutually  balanced.  A 
fast-track  move  toward  full  nominal  convergence  and,  in  particular,  toward  complete  monetary 
convergence could prove counterproductive in the pre-accession period.  
An  important  element  of  structural  real  convergence  is  further  development  of  financial  services 
structures, which were practically non-existent when transition started a decade ago. The main tasks 
are bank privatization, the development of a sound credit culture and the transformation of banks into 
efficient and competitive financial intermediaries. The three pillars of a functioning banking system are 
high-quality  corporate  governance  of  banks,  market  discipline  in  accordance  with  best-practice 
standards  and  efficient  banking  supervision.  Especially  in  transition  economies,  it  makes  sense  to 
locate banking supervision with the central banks, at least for the time being, as central banks have 
the  necessary  funds  to  perform  this  task,  have  established  their  reputations  and  are  already 
concerned with systemic risk issues.  
The  strict  implementation  of  EU  Treaty  obligations,  in  particular  those  concerning  the  independent 
status  of  central  banks,  will  be  of  fundamental  importance.  Institutional,  personal  and  financial 
independence  are  constitutive  elements  of  central  bank  independence  which  are  not  an  end  in 
themselves but are instrumental in attaining functional independence. All the accession countries have 
either revised their central bank acts in the past few years or are amending them so as to meet the EU 
requirements.  So  far,  progress  has  been  considerable.  In  addition  to  the  revision  of  the  respective 
central bank statutes, it is also important to ensure that the revised laws are indeed fully implemented 
and that central bank independence is not only ensured formally but also respected in the day-to-day 
conduct of policy. The process of adjusting the central bank statutes has not been smooth in all cases. 
More recently, the parliaments in Hungary and Poland have discussed or introduced amendments to 
their  respective  central  bank  statutes  that  could  de  facto  limit  the  degree  of  central  bank 
independence. The passage of amendments that, in substance, weaken central banks in their pursuit 
of price stability would cause serious concerns in the accession process. Moreover, great importance 
should  be  attached 
transparency  as  a  counterpart  of 
independence. To sum up: The accession countries  have made remarkable progress over the past 
few years in macroeconomic stabilization. The prospect of EU accession and - thereafter - adoption of 
the euro has already served as an anchor for all policy areas concerned. Nevertheless a crucial point 
on the path toward EU and EMU membership is the development of a "stability culture," i.e. reaching a 
broad consensus within a country that the principal and most important task of monetary policy is to 
ensure  price  stability  -  a  necessary  condition  for  sustainable  growth  and  hence  for  the  catching-up 
process.  This  primacy  of  stability  has  to  be  recognized  and  accpted  by  all  relevant  political  forces, 
to  responsibility,  accountability  and 
BIS Review 46/2002 
 5
 which in turn calls for the respective central banks to do a lot of explaining and convincing - a process 
that  has  to  start  as  early  as  possible.  Without  such  a  consensus,  a  successful  integration  into  the 
Union, and even more so into the euro area, cannot be achieved or will be very difficult, to say the 
least.  Therefore,  this  "convergence  of  minds"  is  just  as  important  as  the  other  formal  convergence 
criteria.  
Finally,  I  would  like  to  mention  that  future  membership  of  accession  countries'  central  banks  in  the 
ESCB  and  the  Eurosystem  requires  not  only  a  strengthening  of  central  banking  policies,  but  also 
significant  technical  preparation,  for  instance,  of  payment  and  securities  settlement  systems,  in  the 
field of statistics, and IT.  
Ladies and Gentlemen! 
Let me stress that I welcome the conclusions of the Seville European Council meeting which renewed 
the commitment of the European Union as well as of the individual Member States to the enlargement 
process. The institutional reform work within the European Union is approaching a stage which makes 
the Union ready for enlargement. I am pleased to hear that Denmark, now holding the EU presidency, 
has the firm intention to continue this process and to tackle some of the core issues during the second 
half of 2002.  
My own institution, the Osterreichische Nationalbank has been an active partner for central banks in 
transition  countries  since  the  very  start  of  transition.  Initially,  our  contribution  to  institutional 
development consisted in technical assistance. Gradually, this has evolved into technical cooperation 
and  finally  into  working  relationships.  By  now,  these  relationships  have  become  integrated  in  joint 
efforts of the whole European System of Central Banks. Being a member of this system, my bank has 
complemented its bilateral relations by actively promoting a dialogue between the Eurosystem and the 
central banks of the accession countries. In addition, I would like to point out that those of you who are 
interested in getting more information about all these issues may consult the most recent editions of 
the  "Focus  on  Austria"  as  well  as  the  "Focus  on  Transition"  of  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank, 
whose general theme ties in with the topic of this year's Vienna International Summer University. Both 
publications provide a number of interesting and high-quality papers related different aspects of EU 
enlargement.  
Conclusion 
In concluding, I would like to reiterate that EMU and the euro are in many respects Europe's strategic 
response to global competition and the associated challenges it poses. EMU underpins Europe's role 
in  the  world  and  strengthens  the  position  of  our  economy  in  the  face  of  growing  international 
competition.  
EMU  triggered  not  only  monetary  convergence,  but  also  the  real  convergence  of  our  economies. 
Structural reforms geared toward efficient and flexible product, capital and labor markets, as well as 
sounder fiscal policies have made our economies more shock-resilient and will ultimately increase our 
non-inflationary growth potential.  
This positive and stabilizing influence is not only felt within the euro area, but also in the countries that 
have close ties to the euro area, such as the countries currently conducting accession negotiations 
with the EU. Thus, with the euro as a stable anchor, EMU creates a zone of stability that is even larger 
than  the  euro  area  itself.  In  this  way,  the  euro  is  a  catalyst  for  the  future  political  and  economic 
integration of Europe.  
Thank you for your attention!  
6 
 BIS Review 46/2002
