 Y V Reddy: Developing bond markets in emerging economies - issues and 
Indian experience 
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Y  V  Reddy,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the  Asian 
Conference, jointly hosted by FIMMDA, PDAI, and Thai BDC at Bangkok on 11 March 2002.  
Dr Reddy is thankful to Dr A. Prasad, Mrs Usha Thorat and officers of Internal Debt Management Cell of the RBI for 
their assistance. 
 Governor Dr. Tarisa Watanagase, Dean, Yoshitomi, Dr. Nachiket Mor, Mr. Joshi & friends, 
It  gives  me  great  pleasure  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  at  the  Asian  Bond  Conference  organised 
jointly by the Thai Bond Dealing Centre (Thai BDC), Fixed Income Money Market Dealers Association of 
India (FIMMDA) and Primary Dealers Association of India (PDAI). It is a matter of significance that some 
of the major self-regulatory organisations (SROs) in the debt markets of Asia have taken this initiative to 
exchange  ideas  and  experiences  of  the  emerging  economies  from  Asia  and  I  am  sure  that  this 
Conference  would  be mutually  beneficial  as each one of us gains valuable insights by  absorbing the 
experience of other countries.  
The importance of developing domestic bond markets to diversify risks in the financial system is being 
realised since the crisis in Asia in 1997, and development of the Government Securities Market is of 
course integrally linked to the development of bond markets. Worldwide, interest in the subject in the 
recent  past  is  evident  from  several  initiatives  taken.  For  example,  the  Asia  Pacific  Economic 
Co-operation (APEC) has launched a collaborative effort on the subject. The IMF and the World Bank 
are  currently  finalising  guidelines  on  public  debt  management.  The  IMF  is  also  conducting  select 
country  studies  in  public  debt  management  and  India  has  agreed  to  be  a  case  for  study.  The  Asian 
Development  Bank  Institute  (ADBI)  recently  released  its  policy  recommendations  for  Designing  New 
and Balanced Financial Market Structures in Post-crisis Asia. I am happy that Mr. Yoshitomi will share 
the recommendations later this afternoon. The theme for the Deputy Governors Meeting at the Bank for 
International  Settlements  (BIS)  last  December  was  Development  of  Debt  Markets  in  Emerging 
Economies. I would draw heavily from these discussions in flagging issues for consideration while the 
Indian  experience  would  illustrate  the  complexities  in  addressing  some  of  these  issues  in  a  specific 
country context. 
My address today initially provides an overview of the reasons advocated for the development of a bond 
market, followed by a second section giving the possible motivations for development of bond markets. 
The  third  section  explains  the  rationale  for  development  of  Government  Securities  market  and  the 
justification for the central bank to be actively involved in it. While section four outlines the key issues 
relating to the market for Government Securities, the fifth section mentions some aspects relating to the 
non-Government or corporate bond market. The sixth section on select institutional issues deals with 
the  role  of  institutional  investors,  self-regulatory  organizations,  banks  in  bond  markets,  credit  rating 
agencies  and  tax  regime.  The  concluding  section  makes  a  few  observations  on  the  road  ahead  for 
development of debt markets in India.  
Why develop debt market? 
1. 
First,  the  basic  philosophy  of  developing  a  diversified  financial  system  with  banks  and  non-banks 
operating  in  equity  markets  and  debt  markets  is  that  it  enhances  risk  pooling  and  risk  sharing 
opportunities  for  investors  and  borrowers.  More  specifically,  the  case  for  ensuring  the  presence  and 
development of debt markets is made on several grounds. First, in the absence of a debt market, the 
banking system would be larger than it otherwise would be. Prevalence of a domestic debt market can 
move a crisis outside the banking system making it easier for the Government to stand back. As Alan 
Greenspan has argued, coexistence of domestic bond market and banking system helps each to act as 
a backstop for the other. In the past, countries like Japan have developed with almost total reliance on 
bank  intermediation  but  the  risks  of  such  excessive  reliance  are  more  in  a  relatively  open  economy 
since non-bank intermediation may get located outside the country. It is also argued that domestic bond 
market helps in avoiding the double mismatches of currency and maturity. 
BIS Review 16/2002 
 1
 Second,  it  is  argued  that  debt  markets  facilitate  efficient  financial  intermediation  as  they  use  market 
mechanism  for  allocating  and  pricing  of  credit.  In  particular,  debt  markets  are  expected  to  facilitate 
availability  of  long-term  funds  for  specific  uses  such  as  for  infrastructure.  They  also  infuse  greater 
transparency  in  the process of credit allocation in view of the information that is contained in market 
determined rates. In fact, e-commerce makes information sharing less costly, and hence it is easier to 
develop bond market infrastructure in the current environment for facilitating transparent market-based 
allocation  of  credit.  It  may  be  difficult  for  Government  to  intervene  through  debt  market  for  directed 
subsidised  lending  as  compared  with  the  banking  system.  Hence,  it  is  claimed  that  debt  markets 
facilitate  the  reduction  of  bad  loans.  Furthermore,  since  debt  instruments  are  mostly  rated,  investor 
awareness and monitoring is greater, which mitigates the moral hazard arising out of deposit insurance 
as in the case of banks.  
Third, debt market can help develop the derivatives market thereby facilitating hedging mechanisms and 
enabling greater diversification of risks by participants. Also, the variety of instruments possible in the 
domestic debt market may result in gains to savers and borrowers.  
It is also essential to recognise that domestic debt markets may not be able to deliver in reality all that is 
sought  from  them.  The  efficiency  of  bond  markets  would  depend  on  the  efficiency  of  credit  rating 
agencies  (CRAs),  standards  of  accounting,  auditing  and  disclosures,  institutional  infrastructure, 
prevalence  of  an  environment  for  enforcement  of  contracts,  etc.  Bond  markets  may  not  necessarily 
reduce systemic risk since banks themselves could be major players in bonds as issuers, investors and 
underwriters.  Development  of  a  debt  market 
instruments  would  also  require 
complementarity of policies such as flexibility in interest rates, enabling legal environment, etc. Though 
higher  degree  of  transparency  is  to  be  expected,  it  has  been  argued  that  where  sophisticated 
instruments  like  options  exist,  transparency  in  debt  markets  may  not  be  automatically  ensured. 
Furthermore, a domestic bond market by itself need not necessarily address the fundamental issues of 
risk management and pricing of risk.  
On balance, the current realities would lead one to believe that the banking system will continue to be at 
the centre of the financial system in emerging economies. In fact, banks are likely to have significant 
direct  or  indirect  presence  in  the  debt  market  as  issuers,  investors  or  underwriters.  If  the  overall 
environment in the financial sector contains problems in pricing of risks by banks, bond markets too can 
suffer infirmities in pricing. As the financial system is evolving, bank loans and bond contracts must be 
treated as complementary  and to some extent as substitutes. In view of the undeniable benefits of a 
multi-institutional financial structure, a number of countries are rightly devoting considerable resources 
and attention to the development of domestic bond markets, though each country may have different 
motivations for doing so. 
long-term 
for 
Motivations for development of domestic debt markets  
2. 
The main provocation for undertaking the task of development of debt markets would depend to some 
extent on the different histories and cultures of countries, but predominantly on economic factors such 
as experience with high inflation, transition from Planning, restructuring economies after crisis, etc. More 
specifically,  and  in  the  context  of  the  financial  system,  the  objectives  may  relate  to  financing 
Government  deficit,  funding  bank  restructuring,  creating  a  more  complete  financial  markets,  avoiding 
banks from taking on excessive credit, risk diversification in the financial system, conducting monetary 
policy, sterilising capital inflows, providing a range of long-term assets for pension funds, etc.  
The  impetus  in  Hong  Kong  for  instance,  seems  to  have  come  as  a  market  development  strategy 
towards  achieving  efficient  financial  intermediation  and  making  the  market  more  complete.  Similarly, 
Singapore  reportedly  views  the  debt  market  as  a  means  of  financial  intermediation  to  help  credit 
allocation, and development of corporate bond market was given high priority as an alternative funding 
source in order to reduce reliance on bank intermediation.  
In a restructuring economy like Hungary, the motives appear to have been different, viz., reducing the 
monetisation of Government deficit, increasing competition to banks which had wide spreads between 
deposits and advances and encouraging foreign investment in Government debt in domestic currency. 
In the second half of the 1990s, monetary policy considerations relating to the information content of the 
yield  curve  and  concerns  with  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  must  have  added 
impetus to the development of debt markets.  
Recapitalisation of banks appears to have been the driving force in Indonesia. In Chile, the debt market 
developed mainly as an offshoot of pension reforms. The growing pool of savings needed Government 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2002
 instruments for investments, whereas the Government had a surplus. The history of over hundred years 
of inflation seems to have created a demand for inflation indexed bonds.  
China  views  Government  borrowing  as  the  most  important  reason  for  financial  deepening  and  the 
Government  Securities  market  provides  the  lead  in  development  of  the  bond  market.  Furthermore,  it 
would  be  possible  to  develop  the  corporate  bond  market  with  an  efficient  benchmark  of  Government 
Securities.  
In India also, large Government borrowings have provided the impetus for development of bond market. 
A system of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) funding on an automatic basis, the Government’s budget 
deficit  at  concessional  rates  of  interest  was  replaced  in  April  1997  by  a  system  of  RBI  financing  the 
temporary  mismatches  between  expenditure  and  revenue  of  Government  at  market  aligned  interest 
rates.  Consequent  to  the  dismantling  of  the  administered  interest  rate  regime,  the  borrowing 
requirements  of  the  Government  are  now  largely  raised  from  the  market  at  market  related  rates.  As 
India experienced capital inflows and considered intervention or addition to foreign exchange reserves, 
it  used  domestic  eligible  marketable  bonds  in  its  portfolio  whenever  it  wanted  to  sterilize  the  money 
expansion. A deep and liquid debt market naturally facilitates this process and in this sense the linkage 
between capital inflows, sterilization and development of debt markets can also be considered to be an 
additional reason for development of debt market.  
Need for widening and deepening the Government Securities market 
3. 
The  relevance  of  Government  Securities  can  be  viewed  from  three  points  of  view,  namely  from 
Government  which  wants  to  borrow;  from  their  role  in  financial  markets  especially  debt  markets  and 
from the operation of monetary policy. First, from the viewpoint of the Government/fiscal authorities, the 
development  of  a  deep  and  liquid  Government  Securities  market  facilitates  public  borrowings  at 
reasonable costs and avoidance of automatic monetisation of Government deficit by the central bank. 
Broad  and  well-functioning  secondary  markets  are  particularly  important  where  the  Government's 
borrowing needs are substantial. A well developed Government Securities market provides flexibility to 
the debt management authorities to exercise various options to optimize maturity as well as interest cost 
to the Government, to minimize the market impact of large or lumpy Government debt operations and, 
facilitate better co-ordination between monetary policy and debt management. 
Second, the Government Securities market provides the backbone of most fixed income markets across 
the world since it helps pricing of various debt instruments through creation of a benchmark, enables a 
proper  evaluation  of  risk  and  acts  a  conduit  for  convergence  of  interest  rates  in  other  markets.  In 
addition, the gilts market acts as the channel for the integration of various segments of the domestic 
financial market and help establish inter-linkages between internal and external financial markets. It is 
sometimes argued that it is not always necessary to develop a Government securities market. Some 
countries  do  not  have  Government  Securities  market  because  their  Governments  have  no  funding 
requirements and in such countries, alternate benchmarks have developed so that price discovery has 
shifted from a single Government market to a range of non-Government markets. Thus, inter bank repo 
rates,  collateralised  obligations,  interest  rate  swaps  and  top  rated  corporate  bonds  have  gained 
acceptance as benchmarks in such markets. 
Third, a number of countries are moving away from the use of direct instruments to indirect instruments 
such as repos and direct open market operations. Government Securities facilitate the development of 
implementing indirect instruments of monetary policy. Typically, Treasury Bills and Government Dated 
Securities are ideal instruments for conducting repos in many emerging economies. While the T-Bills 
market serves the objective of raising finances for the Government, it also spurs the development of the 
money market. An important ingredient in the development of money market is the terms under which 
liquidity is available from the central bank. If liquidity adjustment support is available  with certainty  in 
regard to quantity and price, it could impede the development of the money market as banks will desist 
from entering into transactions with each other. In fact, the link between development of money market 
and the Government Securities is an important aspect of development of debt markets.  
The primary interest of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) in financial markets is because of their criticality 
in  acting  as  the  transmission  channel  for  monetary  policy  especially  while  RBI  is  moving  towards 
reliance  on  indirect  instruments  of  monetary  policy.  The  Government  Securities  market  is  the 
predominant part of the overall debt market and interest rates in this market provide benchmarks for the 
system  as  a  whole.  Currently,  the  RBI  is  the  monetary  authority,  regulator  of  Government  securities 
market,  issuer  and  manager  of  Government  borrowings,  for  both  the  Centre  and  the  States,  and 
BIS Review 16/2002 
 3
 regulator  of  money  markets  as  well  as  forex  markets.  The  RBI's  concern  in  development  of  the 
Government Securities market should be seen in this light, while recognising that the regulation of debt 
market as a whole, in the context of public issues by corporates and trading in stock exchanges where 
debt is traded, is in the regulatory jurisdiction of the Securities Exchange Board of India. In India, the 
RBI considers that well functioning markets for Government Securities are necessary for both effective 
Government  debt  management  and  monetary  management,  while  serving  the  broader  interest  of 
development of financial markets in general and debt markets in particular. Accordingly, RBI has taken 
a  number  of  initiatives  in  developing  both  the  primary  and  secondary  markets  for  Government 
Securities. 
Key issues relating to the Government Securities market 
4. 
There  are  several  motivations  for  and  objectives  in  a  central  bank  being  interested  in  developing 
Government  Securities  market  and  hence  the  issues  involved  vary  in  significance  from  country  to 
country as also in the context of the stage of development of markets. The key issues are: relevance of 
the  money  market,  operational  aspects  relating  to  the  primary  market,  significance  of  secondary 
markets, policy conflicts in debt and monetary management and dilemmas in market intervention. 
Relevance of development of money market 
A  money  market  supports  the  bond  market mainly  through  the  process  of  liquidity.  In  addition  to  the 
importance of money market for financing positions, money market prices liquidity and anchors the short 
end of the yield curve. The existence of a repo market helps the development of an active Government 
Securities market and vice-versa since lending and borrowing under a safe environment can be fostered 
through repos. Where interest rates are liberalised and debt management and monetary policy functions 
are  with  the  central  bank,  policy  coordination  needs  to  be  maintained  between  the  Government 
Securities and money markets.  
In  regard  to  the  money  market  in  India,  the  basic  objective  in  recent  years  has  been  to  develop  a 
short-term yield curve with deep liquidity. A four-fold strategy has been adopted in this regard. First, a 
liquidity adjustment facility has been in operation, comprising repo and reverse repo operations through 
auctions  conducted  with  a  view  to  equilibrating  the  liquidity  and  keeping  the  short-term  interest  rates 
within  an  informal  corridor.  Second,  the  call  money  market  is  being  developed  as  a  pure  inter-bank 
market with a phased withdrawal of non-bank participants who are currently lenders in the call money 
market.  Third,  the  traditional  sector-specific  refinance  support  is  being  rationalized  and  additional 
recourse  to  the  established  liquidity  facilities  is  being  made  increasingly  market-based.  Removal  of 
established facilities on fixed terms and moving to a full-fledged Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) is on 
the  active  agenda.  Fourth,  the  other  money  market  segments,  especially  the  repo  market  are  being 
developed  with  lending  as  well  as  borrowing  access  to  the  non-banks  in  these markets. To  help  the 
process, a Clearing Corporation of India Ltd. (CCIL) has been established.  
Operational issues relating to primary market 
Ensuring efficient price discovery process is a dominant objective of operations in primary markets and 
for this purpose putting in place credible systems and ensuring transparent mechanisms are critical. 
Auction Technique and Central Bank Participation in Auctions 
Auctions are the most common method for sale of Government Securities, though securities are also 
distributed  through  tap  sales,  syndication  and  book  building  process.  In  many  countries,  direct 
participation in auction is restricted to select investors while a larger investor base is permitted to enter 
auctions through designated intermediaries such as banks and Primary Dealers. The actual modalities 
of reaching the  investor base  would  be governed by pragmatism and in fact even choices  in auction 
techniques  or  even  combination  of  techniques  may  in  some  circumstances  be  linked  to  permitted 
pattern  of  participation.  As  regards  technique,  discriminatory  price  auctions  keep  away  investors 
because of the winners curse, whereas there are dangers of irresponsible bidding and of collusion in a 
uniform  or  Dutch  type  of  auction.  Countries  have  moved  between  discriminatory  and  uniform  price 
auctions, but there is no settled wisdom as to which type of auction is better. An interesting variant that 
merits further consideration is a combination of the features of both auctions, i.e., discriminatory price 
auction with a ceiling, in order to mitigate winners curse.  
4 
 BIS Review 16/2002
 In general, central bank participation in auctions is best avoided, but if it becomes necessary, a central 
bank ought to participate without competing with other bidders. There is a distinction between a central 
bank buying Government Securities on its own accord and being compelled to do so. In many countries, 
either there are laws prohibiting central bank participation in primary auctions such as in Indonesia and 
Peru  or  central  banks  voluntarily  restrict  themselves  from  participation  as  in  the  case  of  Malaysia, 
Philippines and Hungary.  
In India, auction method  has been the most favoured, though such  auction could be based on  yield, 
price or discount, with or without some underwriting commitment of Primary Dealers at the discretion of 
RBI. Both discriminatory and uniform price auction techniques are used but the former is dominant and 
multiple price auction format is predominantly used for Government Securities issuances while uniform 
price  auction  is  used  for  91-Day  T-Bills.  In  the  context  of  the  need  to  attract  retail  investors,  bids 
received on non-competitive basis within the notified amounts are cut-off at the weighted average yields 
derived in an auction. 
The question of central bank participation as an outsider in primary auction does not arise in India since 
the RBI itself conducts the auction. The RBI, however, used to take private placements liberally in the 
past but more recently it does so only in extraordinary situations, and it has also decided to voluntarily 
move out of devolvements on itself. The Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Bill,  which is 
under consideration, proposes an explicit provision that prohibits the RBI from purchasing Government 
Securities in the primary market.  
Instruments 
Countries have experienced with different types of instruments, to suit their unique circumstances, to 
broaden  the  markets.  Hungary  for  instance  has  gradually  moved  away  from  short  maturity  bonds  to 
long-term  fixed  rate  Government  bonds  enabled  by  the  fact  that  it  avoided  hyper-inflation.  Similarly, 
Israel favoured the simple plain vanilla bonds although there is a presence of a variety of instruments 
such as (Consumer Price Index) CPI-linked, fixed-rate and variable-rate bonds and it has progressively 
lengthened maturities. Chile favours inflation-indexed bonds. 
The  RBI  has  experimented  with  different  types  of  instruments  such  as  the  fixed  coupon  bonds,  zero 
coupon  bonds,  capital  indexed  bonds  and  more  recently  floating  rate  bonds.  Most  of  the  bonds, 
however, are of the fixed coupon variety though recently Floating Rate Bond issues have proved to be 
attractive.  
Maturity Profile 
On  the  maturity  profile,  there  is  no  ideal  solution,  but  trade-offs  between  long-term  and  short-term 
maturities  on  considerations  of  market  preference,  cost  to  Government,  bunching  of  maturities,  and 
development of yield curve should be recognised. Development of Government benchmark securities is 
an essential element of a well functioning Government Securities market and this requires the issuer to 
make  conscious  efforts  to  avoid  fragmentation  and  where  necessary  consolidate  issuance.  Typically, 
benchmark securities in domestic markets are 2, 3, 5 and 10 years, while countries like the USA issue 
securities up to 30 years.  
In  India,  Government  revived  borrowing  at  market  rates  in  1992-93,  and  most  of  the  new  maturities 
were compressed below 10 years. This was necessary at the time as it coincided with the period of the 
high interest rate cycle, and the successful implementation of the auction system in the early stages of a 
move to market related rates of interest required a shortening of the maturity structure. This resulted in 
bunching of maturities as well as rendering liquidity management difficult. In the last two to three years, 
the RBI’s preference has been towards longer maturities, at fixed rates to bring about a balance in the 
maturity structure. There would be times when Government is reluctant to lock in what it perceives to be 
high  rates,  and  the  banks  face  larger  asset  liability  mismatches  and  greater  interest  rate  risk. 
Recognising this, the RBI has reintroduced floating rate bonds and is attempting to develop the STRIPS 
market in the Government Securities segment. As regards consolidation, RBI has extensively used the 
technique  of  re-openings  of  existing  securities  on  the  basis  of  price-based  auction.  Thus,  advantage 
was  taken  of  large  gross  borrowing  programme  to  lengthen  the  maturity  profile  and  consolidate  the 
profile.  
Issuance Calendar 
Based  on  first  principles,  it  is  better  to  provide  a  clear  and  timely  information  about  the  borrowing 
programme  through  an  issuance  calendar,  in  addition  to  maturity  profile  of  outstanding  stock, 
BIS Review 16/2002 
 5
 redemption  calendar,  etc.  In  operational  terms,  issuance  of  a  calendar  has  to  tackle  the  trade-off 
between certainty to the market and flexibility to the issuer in terms of market timing.  
The uncertain trends in terms of cash flow pattern of the Government of India constrains the publication 
of issuance calendar. In respect of T-Bills, a pre-announced issuance calendar for auctions has been 
evolved. Recognising that a large market borrowing programme and uncertainties in cash flows make 
issuance of full-fledged calendar somewhat difficult at this stage, the Finance Minister announced in the 
budget speech recently, that there will be a calendar of auctions of Government from the financial year 
beginning April 2002.  
Role of Primary Dealers 
Many countries have established a system of licensed Primary Dealers (PDs) in Government Securities 
as  important  intermediaries  to  promote  activity  in  Government  Securities  market.  Typically,  PDs  are 
assigned specific responsibilities like minimum bidding requirements, giving two-way quotes, providing 
market  information  to  the  central  bank,  etc.  In  some  cases,  PDs  have  been  given  exclusive  right  to 
primary  auctions,  or  some  special  facilities  in  money  market  operations,  open  market  operations, 
underwriting commission, etc. PDs can play a vital role in the development of the secondary market. By 
being in the market, their prices discount all available information, they take up trading positions, and 
also  render  valuable  assistance  to  the  central  bank  by  providing  it  with  latest  market  information, 
designing  new  instruments,  etc.  Since  PDs  are  generally  highly  leveraged,  regulatory  oversight  over 
PDs  appears  to  be  warranted  and  a  common  feature  among  central  banks  has  been  to  periodically 
review the performance of PDs and make the continuation of their operations performance-based. An 
interesting feature that merits notice is a rating of PDs as established in Poland. 
The institution of PDs has been adopted in India in 1996 for developing both primary and secondary 
markets in Government Securities. The main objectives of promoting the institutional mechanism of PDs 
are  to  strengthen  institutional  infrastructure  in  the  Government  Securities  market  in  order  to  make  it 
vibrant,  liquid  and  broad  based  and  to  ensure  development  of  underwriting  and  market  making 
capabilities  for  Government  Securities  outside  the  RBI  so  that  the  latter  could  gradually  shed  these 
functions. In other words, the marketisation of Government borrowings and vacation of RBI from primary 
market in an environment of large borrowing programme were facilitated by a conscious development of 
the  institution  of  PDs.  PDs  obligations  include  giving  annual  bidding  commitment,  underwriting  the 
primary issuance and offering two-way quotes. In return, the PDs are extended liquidity support by the 
RBI and access to call money market as borrowers and lenders. 
Incidentally, RBI experimented with a system of Satellite Dealers (SDs) from 1996 to serve as a second 
tier  to  PDs  in  the  Government  Securities  market  with  the  particular  objective  of  promoting  retail 
segment. However, on a review it was found to be not as useful as was expected and is being given up.  
Gilt Mutual Funds  
Mutual funds dedicated almost exclusively to investments in Government Securities called Gilt Mutual 
Funds were established in India in April 1996. Currently, there are 13 such mutual funds in the country. 
Mutual  funds  are  regulated  by  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI).  In  tune  with  the 
developments  that  have  taken  place  in  the  debt  markets  since  1996,  the  scheme  of  Gilt  Funds  is 
currently being reviewed by the RBI. Given the small size of the repo market during that period and the 
consequent uncertainty regarding availability of liquidity from the market, Gilt Funds were given limited 
liquidity support by the RBI. Considering that the liquidity support was introduced as an extraordinary 
measure and the fact that the repo market has developed and is expected to become more liquid with 
the operationalisation of the CCIL, there is a case for reviewing the liquidity support to Gilt Funds from 
RBI. 
Significance of secondary markets 
A  diversified  investor  base  with  varied  demand,  maturity  profile  and  risk  preference  is  admittedly 
important  for  ensuring  high  liquidity  and  stable  demand  in  the  market.  Apart  from  banks,  PDs  and 
mutual funds, retail investors and foreign investors can also play a role in widening the investor base. 
Catering to the needs of retail investors is often an essential part of the overall strategy to develop a 
more diversified investor base. Retail investment can also contribute to stable demand for Government 
Securities and can provide a cushion for the impact on volatility.  
6 
 BIS Review 16/2002
 Development of repo markets, short selling, the role of benchmarks and marked to market valuation, 
etc.,  do  contribute  to  boosting  of  secondary  market  liquidity.  The  practice  of  short  selling  securities 
facilitated by securities lending and borrowing has been prohibited in some emerging markets and it is 
necessary to recognise the rationale for this. No doubt, the ability to sell short has a positive effect by 
increasing the market liquidity and price efficiency since it enables participants with differing views on 
the market to trade actively, but short sales, have the potential to increase market volatility and risks 
especially if the market assumes larger position than what it is capable of handling.  
As regards benchmarks, many countries have been taking efforts towards consolidation and creation of 
benchmarks and the procedures depend on the composition and stock of existing debt and how much 
debt  is  proposed  to  be  raised.  Another  issue  relates  to  whether  a  move  to  marked-to-market  for 
investments  raises  any  risks  in  terms  of  stop-loss  sale,  etc.  While  marked-to-market  serves  to 
encourage secondary market trading, it is necessary to have a liquid market to correctly price securities. 
The RBI has taken a number of measures to enhance the secondary market liquidity in the Government 
Securities market. These include permitting a diversified participant base, improved fungibility of bonds 
through  reopenings,  stabilizing  money  market  through  Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility  (LAF),  developing 
the repo market, encouraging the operationalisation of the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd., initiating a 
negotiated  dealing  system  for  trading,  enforcing  marked-to-market  requirement  for  valuation  of 
investments,  ensuring  a  Delivery  Vs  Payment  system  for  settlement  of  Government  Securities  in 
scripless  form,  and  disseminating  detailed  information  to  the  public  on  a  daily  basis  in  respect  of  all 
Government Securities traded in the market.  
In India, initially the RBI was announcing the yield curve to the market for year-end valuation. Currently, 
FIMMDA,  a  self-regulatory  organisation,  announces  the  yield  curve,  the  methodology  of  which  was 
approved by the RBI. Incidentally, although the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) for the banking system is 
25  per  cent,  banks  are  voluntarily  holding  37  per  cent  of  their  liabilities  in  Government  Securities. 
Recognising the risks involved in such large exposures, the Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has created a 
path for banks to reach a targeted investment fluctuation reserve over a period. 
Policy conflicts in debt and monetary management 
Irrespective  of  whether  the  debt  management  function  is  vested  with  the  central  bank  or  not, 
coordination is important to avoid conflicts between cash and debt management of the Government and 
central bank operations. The timing and amounts of Government Securities issuance may not always 
coincide with the compulsions of the central bank's monetary policy. The Government may wish to issue 
securities at a time when the market is illiquid and the central bank needs to consider whether or not 
and to  what extent it  will provide additional liquidity.  Liquidity can be provided through the secondary 
market or where the central bank is both the debt and monetary manager, it has the option to operate 
through the primary market.  
Currently, almost all central banks are harmoniously co-ordinating with the fisc, both at the policy and 
operational levels  with regard to debt management.  There is general agreement that being the fiscal 
agent creates problems for central bank and separation of debt management function from the central 
bank would remove the friction. In a situation of high fiscal deficit and lack of fiscal assurances on its 
responsibility, separation of the two functions could increase the risk of macro instability. Controlling the 
fisc,  developing  financial  markets  and  setting  in  place  institutional  and  technological  infrastructure 
ideally should precede such separation. 
The monetary policy statement of the RBI of October 2001 had clearly indicated the intentions in this 
regard  and  the  conditions  that  would  need  to  be  fulfilled  to  make  this  separation  possible.  The  RBI 
acknowledged that although it is desirable in principle, separation of debt and monetary management 
functions  is  a  medium-term  process  that  is  dependent  on  the  fulfillment  of  three  conditions,  viz., 
development  of  financial  markets,  reasonable  control  over  the  fiscal  deficit  and  necessary  legislative 
changes.  Of  course,  institutional  arrangements  for  establishing  a  separate  Debt  Office  need  to  be 
thought through. The Federal nature of the country adds another dimension to the issue namely should 
each State and Central Governments have a public debt office while replacing RBI. One method could 
be  to  set  up  an  independent  corporate  entity  structure  to  manage  the  debt  of  both  Centre  and  the 
States.  
BIS Review 16/2002 
 7
 Dilemmas in intervention in markets  
On the proposition that since markets are maturing there is a case for central bank intervention to even 
out price volatility, there is a general consensus against intervention in the normal course. There are 
many  central  banks that  never intervene in the bond markets to smoothen  volatility. In fact,  lowering 
volatility impedes secondary market development by preventing hedging instruments from developing, 
which in turn are necessary to deal with volatility. 
There are however, situations justifying an interventionist approach by central banks. For instance, the 
September 11, 2001 incident required the Federal Reserve to be involved intimately in the market. India 
has had many such situations like the border conflicts and US sanctions, etc. where the RBI had shown 
its willingness to be present in the market without creating expectations of being a market maker. Thus, 
there  is a need to  differentiate between normal market conditions and  exogenous shocks in taking a 
view on intervention. While in the case of exogenous shocks, intervention or expression of intention to 
do may be necessary, during normal market conditions the option should always be available but, actual 
exercise  is  to  be  convincingly  dictated  by  evolving  circumstances  with  a  directional  preference  to 
strengthen market forces.  
On the intervention policy of RBI, three areas need to be highlighted. First, in the money market, the 
RBI  is  concerned  mainly  with  liquidity  management  through  the  Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility  and 
effectively operates an interest rate corridor between the repo and reverse repo rates. Second, in the 
context  of  market  borrowing  programme,  the  RBI  intervention  is  through  private  placement  under 
extraordinary  circumstances  since  the  RBI  has  the  responsibility  to  raise  Government  debt.  In  other 
words,  if  in  the  RBI’s  assessment  the  market  would  not  be  in  a  position  to  absorb  the  debt  without 
disruption,  it  resorts  to  private  placement.  Third,  when  the  bids  in  auction  are  unacceptable,  the  RBI 
takes on a devolvement, which in actual practice has been negligible during the last two years. Primary 
Dealers underwrite issues of Government paper for which they are paid underwriting commission. Thus, 
the  twin  combination  of  high  fiscal  deficit  and  a  narrow  and  not  so  liquid  market  necessitates  RBI 
intervention in the interest of financial stability. There are, however, no rules regarding sale of securities 
taken on private placement in terms of maximum period of holding etc. It is at the RBI’s discretion to 
offload securities taken on private placement when conditions are conducive.  
When  capital  flows  occur  and  the  capacity  to  monetise  Government  debt  is  circumscribed  by 
sterilisation,  the  maneuverability  to  conduct  market  borrowing  is  constrained.  In  the  current  financial 
year,  for  instance,  the  RBI  has  added  $  8  billion  to  its  foreign  currency  reserves. To meet  externally 
induced shocks in forex markets, the RBI had in the past conducted extraordinary operations and in the 
process  considered  it  essential  to  create  a  firewall  to  prevent  its  transmission  to  the  bond  market.  A 
by-product of erecting firewalls was that, whenever the central bank has resorted to monetary actions 
on exchange market considerations, or even when bond yields have moved sharply on sentiments, it 
has tended to create expectations of liquidity action in the bond markets. These are complexities that all 
concerned learn to live with.  
Development of corporate bond market 
5.  
To  develop  corporate  bond market,  the  authorities  have  to  actively  consider  increasing  the  supply  of 
high  quality  paper,  creating  adequate  institutional  investor  base,  ensuring  a  variety  of  instruments  of 
differing maturities and mounting supporting infrastructure, etc. Emphasis also needs to be placed on 
efficient  legal  systems  as  important  infrastructure  for  deep  and  liquid  bond  markets.  Among  legal 
reforms,  bankruptcy  laws  or  capacity  to  seize  collaterals  are  particularly  important.  Experience  also 
indicates that in many emerging countries, since the risk is transferred to the creditor in bond markets 
as compared to banks, there is a preponderant bias towards bank deposits among household savers in 
many countries. In other words, development of domestic corporate debt market is bound to be a long 
drawn process and banks will have to continue to be special and dominant in the financial systems of 
most emerging economies. 
In Mexico, while the experience is that larger companies issue bonds abroad, the smaller companies 
prefer to borrow from banks. In Chile, there is some substitutability between bank and bond financing as 
a few companies raise bonds to prepay bank debt. Pre-crisis, Korea had a large corporate bond market 
and  the  biggest  lesson  from  the  episode  was  that  too  much  Government  intervention  (either  in 
exchange rate or implicit or explicit guarantees) resulted in serious distortion of markets. 
In many emerging economies, the corporate bond markets are fragmented. Poland for example has a 
fragmented and illiquid corporate bond market characterised by private placement and cross holdings. 
8 
 BIS Review 16/2002
 Peru is experiencing a situation where good credit was going to banks while bad credit was going to 
bond markets; hence there is a justified reluctance to invest in bonds. On the other hand, this raises the 
contrary view-point that if bond markets are developed, bad credit could go to banks. There is, however, 
no evidence of this so far and moreover ex ante there are only well-priced and badly-priced loans.  
There is a recognition of the need to develop securitization market as a related issue. Securitization as 
an instrument acts as a risk transfer mechanism that could work to the advantage of both banks and 
investors. In Korea, non-performing loans spurred this market; Hongkong has established a Mortgage 
Corporation. In many countries, this market is in nascent stage,  either because it  needs complicated 
legal changes or the credit environment does not enable securitization. For instance, Hungary has no 
non-performing loans nor mortgage in household; hence no mortgage exists to warrant securitisation to 
be involved in the development of this market. 
The Reserve Bank of India's role in development of corporate bond market is indirect and governed by 
its interest in monetary policy transmission, Government Securities, and stability as well as efficiency in 
financial  sector  as  a  whole.  As  mentioned,  the  major  preoccupation  has  been  with  Government 
Securities market for all the reasons explained. The corporate bond market commenced in a significant 
way with Public Sector Undertakings being encouraged to take recourse to them in late eighties, but the 
private corporate sector's debt requirements were met largely by development financial institutions and 
banks.  With  developments  in  capital  market  and  establishment  of  rating  agencies,  corporates  and 
development  financial  institutions  themselves  started  taking  recourse  to  debt,  since  the  reform 
commenced.  More  recently,  special  purpose  vehicles  to  fund  infrastructure  promoted  by  some  State 
Governments have come to the fore especially since they are backed by State Government guarantees.  
Corporate debt market in the sense of private corporate sector raising debt through public issuance in 
capital markets is only an insignificant part of Indian debt market. When we talk of debt markets in India, 
we  are  really  referring  to  the  Government  Securities  market,  which  accounts  for  75  per  cent  of  the 
outstanding stock and nearly 95 per cent of the volumes traded in the secondary market. About 90 per 
cent of the corporate debt market is privately placed. In the privately placed market, 58 per cent of the 
issuances are by financial institutions and banks, both in the public and private sector and about 26 per 
cent represents issues of public sector undertakings and central/state government guaranteed bonds. 
Two-thirds of the total issues are accounted for by the public sector. 20 per cent of the total corporate 
debt issuance is by the private non-financial sector.  
Most issuers in the corporate debt market are AAA or AA rated borrowers and about 10 per cent may be 
unrated. The investors are mostly institutions with very few retail investors. Hence, at the first stage of 
development of the bond markets, while securitisation takes place, the disintermediation process is only 
partial.  Transparency  is  limited  both  in  the  primary  and  the  secondary  markets,  liquidity  is  poor  and 
many bonds are held till redemption. The legal recourse in case of non-payment of interest and principal 
is  complicated  and  bankruptcy  laws  afford  little  comfort.  The  legal  and  regulatory  requirements, 
accounting and auditing standards for issuers and the infrastructure for trading, clearing and settlement 
need to be developed much more in case the market has to become deep and liquid.  
As  the  non-transparent  practices  in  this  market  is  a  matter  of  concern,  RBI  had  issued  guidelines  in 
June 2001 regarding the due diligence to be undertaken, the disclosures to be obtained and the credit 
risk analysis to be made in regard to privately placed investments especially for unrated instruments. 
Banks have been  advised to adopt an internal system of rating for issues of non-borrowers, whether 
rated or otherwise, and adopt prudential limits to mitigate adverse impact of concentration and illiquidity. 
Banks  have  been  also  advised  to  put  in  place  proper  risk  management  systems  for  capturing  and 
analysing the risks so as to take timely remedial measures. A further review of non-SLR investments in 
the light of recent developments reveals that the ease of mobilising funds through privately placed debt 
issues could lead to the use of such funds for risky purposes other than what is disclosed in the offer 
document. 
In order to contain the risks arising out of non-SLR investment portfolio of banks and FIs, in particular 
through the private placement route, it was proposed by the RBI to issue further prudential guidelines to 
be  observed  by  banks.  The  draft  guidelines  were  circulated  to  the  banks  and  FIs  in  October  2001. 
These  guidelines  primarily  focus  on  the  need  for  strengthening  of  internal  rating  systems,  fixing  of 
prudential  limits  and  sub-limits,  review  of  rating  changes  in  respect  of  issuers  and  non-performing 
investments; and most important, disclosures in ‘Notes on Accounts’ regarding issuer composition and 
non-performing investments.  
As announced in Mid-Term Monetary and Credit Policy for the year 2001 – 2002, the RBI constituted a 
Working  Group  under  the  chairmanship  of  Mr.S.R.Iyer,  Chairman  Credit  Information  Bureau  of  India 
BIS Review 16/2002 
 9
 Ltd., to evolve a framework for collecting and sharing of banks/ FIs of information on private placement 
of debt and prescribing minimum requirements for issuers to meet before banks/FIs consider investment 
in such debt. The Report is due very soon.  
The major pre-occupation of the RBI in regard to corporate debt is to ensure that banks and financial 
institutions  are  protected  from  the  risks  in  the  current  state  of  markets  as  also  aid  the  process  of 
qualitative changes in the corporate debt markets. 
Institutional issues 
6. 
There are several institutional issues related to debt markets and each of them is critical but they are 
not  necessarily  interrelated.  These  are  many,  but  this  section  focusses  on  some  of  them,  namely, 
institutional investors in debt markets, self-regulatory  organisations, banks, credit rating agencies and 
the tax regime. 
Role of institutional investors 
There is wide consensus regarding the need for institutional building for development of debt markets, 
though  countries  have  approached  it  differently.  The  notion  of  pension  reforms  as  an  important 
instrument  in  the  process  is  generally  upheld  although  there  is  a  case  for  regulatory  limits  on  their 
investments in riskier assets in the interest of financial stability.  
There are several approaches to improving institutional investors' interest in domestic debt markets. For 
example, Indonesia is currently embarking on substantial regulatory reforms to encourage institutional 
investors. Hungary  is emphasizing development of mutual funds. Some countries like Philippines  are 
concentrating on market for securitisation. Hong Kong prefers a portfolio approach, a greater role for 
credit rating agencies, to build Collective Investment Vehicles and to explore other options like credit 
enhancements, rather than increase the supply of Government or quasi-Government paper to whet the 
appetite of pension funds (PFs). In general, PFs are encouraged to invest in Government Securities as 
in the case of Chile, Indonesia and Singapore although some countries like Hungary and Philippines are 
permitting some portfolio diversification by allowing investment within limits, in non-Government paper. 
It  is  also  observed  that  many  pension  or  provident  funds  voluntarily  invest  in  Government  Securities 
above the minimum requirements.  
In the case of India, investments by Provident Funds are governed by Government Regulation, which 
indicates that 40 per cent of their incremental accretions each year are invested in Central and State 
Government Securities. This is followed by 40 per cent in bonds/securities of public financial institutions 
and  Certificate  of  Deposits  issued  by  public  sector  banks  of  which  a  maximum  of  10  per  cent  is 
permitted in rated private  corporate debentures. Investment in this category is  usually mopped up by 
development financial institutions, which are themselves financial intermediaries. Moreover, the pension 
funds themselves being conservative, prefer to invest in Government Securities. Thus, the resources of 
the PFs are preempted by the Government and DFIs, making the linkage between PFs and corporate 
debt market tenuous. 
Role of self-regulatory organisations  
Self-regulation is fast emerging as a viable co-operative framework for both the regulator and market 
participants  to  come  together  towards  the  fulfilment  of  common  goals  and  objectives.  By  creating  a 
unique combination of private interests and official oversight, SROs have emerged as an effective and 
efficient  form  of  regulation  for  the  complex  and  dynamic  financial  services  industry.  International 
experience  with  self-regulation  suggests  that  the  power  of  self-regulatory  organisations  vary 
significantly.  In  its  most  complete  form,  self-regulation  encompasses  the  authority  to  create,  amend, 
implement and enforce rules of conduct with respect to the entities subject to the SRO’s jurisdiction and 
to  resolve  disputes  through  arbitration  or  other  means.  Typically,  this  authority  is  derived  from  a 
statutory delegation of power to a non-governmental entity. In some countries, SROs do not have formal 
regulatory status but nevertheless provide codes of good conduct and master agreements and perform 
important  roles  in  the  standardisation  of  common  practices  without  any  formal  regulatory  status.  It  is 
necessary  to  recognise  that  exercise  of  authority  in  any  form  by  SRO  does  raise  some  fundamental 
issues such as their accountability and monopoly status. There is merit in constantly reviewing both the 
representative nature of SROs and responsiveness to overall public interest considerations.  
10 
 BIS Review 16/2002
 In the context of Indian debt market, self-regulatory  bodies like the Fixed Income Money  Market and 
Derivatives Association of India (FIMMDA) and the Primary Dealers Association of India (PDAI) have 
been encouraged in the recent past, as part of reform process to give an impetus to the development of 
the  bond  and  money  markets  in  India.  These  bodies  have  served  as  crucial  layers  between  the 
regulator  and  market  and  have  contributed  to  developing  new  benchmarks  and  products  besides 
providing training and development support to participants. They have formulated guidelines for dispute 
resolution mechanisms and are also involved in the process of developing standard practices and codes 
of conduct. Both PDAI and FIMMDA are represented in the Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) of the 
Reserve Bank of India on Government Securities and Money Markets. FIMMDA is involved in the task 
of valuation of all Central  Government Securities. The daily  yield curve based  on benchmark Central 
Government bonds is fast emerging as an accepted benchmark to price securities. In addition to this, 
FIMMDA  has  also  been  contributing  to  developing  guidelines  for  documentation  of  repo,  securitised 
debt and several other debt market instruments. The activities of both SROs are closely co-ordinated 
with policies of RBI while their functioning is also carefully and constantly observed by RBI.  
Banks and bond markets 
The relationship between banks and bond markets is complex especially in emerging countries where 
the  dominance  of  banks  in  financial  intermediation  is  set  to  gradually  decline  but  banks  do  have  a 
critical  role  in  development  of  debt  markets.  Banks  operate  as  issuers,  investors,  underwriters  and 
guarantors.  Banks  may  also  securitise  loans  and  thus  participate  in  long-term  debt  markets.  In  the 
process, the regulator of banks has a responsibility to ensure that banks' participation in debt markets, 
both as issuers and investors is consistent with their risk management. The vagaries of debt markets do 
impact the balance sheets of banks, while banks’ confidence and participation in debt markets influence 
the growth and liquidity in the markets. In some countries, banks have been active participants in equity 
markets but their small presence in debt markets may be partly explained by the less developed nature 
of debt markets, particularly in Asia. 
In  India,  the  banking  system  which  incidentally  has  been  dominated  by  the  public  sector,  played  a 
pioneering  role  in  initiating  growth  of  mutual  funds,  merchant  banking  and  other  financial  services. 
Structurally,  banks  have  been  permitted  to  operate  through  subsidiaries  as  asset  management 
companies, PDs, merchant banks and mutual funds. The Development Financial Institutions also played 
a  role  but  they  dominated  in  promoting  credit  rating  agencies,  sponsoring  national  stock  exchanges, 
depositories, etc. In regard to Government Securities segment of the market, which accounts for about 
75 per cent of the stock, about 60 per cent of the stock is held by the banking system. As regards the 
corporate debt segment, both private placement and public issue, over half of the issuance is by banks 
and  financial  institutions.  The  corporates,  especially  the  large  corporate  segment  move  in  and  out  of 
bank advances and debt markets just as banks also participate in both.  
In this background, the RBI continuously reviews the nature and extent of linkages and adopts a wide 
range of mechanisms to enhance efficiency and impart stability. Phased deregulation of limits for banks' 
investments  in  non-Government  debt  instruments  was  accompanied  by  exposure  norms,  other 
prudential guidelines, valuation norms for debt instruments and asset liability management guidelines. 
The  maturity  profile  and  issue  of  innovative  instruments  in  Government  Securities  market  were  also 
attuned to meet varying portfolio needs. In addition to risk weights for interest rate risks, a target has 
been  indicated  for  establishing  investment  fluctuation  reserve.  Legal  changes  have  also  been 
announced in the budget to create a market for securitisation. Development Financial Institutions have 
also been permitted greater flexibility to operate on their liabilities and asset sides in debt instruments. 
Role of credit rating agencies 
Banks  do  possess  intimate  and  specialised  knowledge  of  the  borrowers  and  are  thus  in  a  unique 
position to assess the risks in advances, while in the case of large number of investors in debt markets, 
such knowledge and skill are usually lacking. Credit Rating Agencies (CRAs) help mitigate this problem 
of  asymmetric  information  and  the  dissemination  of  information  by  the  CRA  incidentally  makes  the 
regulator's task less onerous. CRAs have also faced a number of criticisms in recent years, especially 
after the Asian crisis. The independence of ratings has been questioned, especially when ratings are 
paid  for  their  services.  Questions  are  also  raised  about  the  accountability  of  CRAs,  the  potential  for 
herding by investors and frequent changes in ratings causing volatility. Excessive reliance on CRAs is, 
under these circumstances to be eschewed and in any case the quality of ratings by CRAs continuously 
assessed. Some regulators prescribe that pension funds invest in debt instruments of investment grade 
BIS Review 16/2002 
 11
 only. Credit rating has also been prescribed by regulators as the basis for exemption from registration 
norms for issuers of asset backed securities. Some regulators insist on a minimum rating for corporates 
to  become  eligible  for  issuance  of  Commercial  Paper.  Furthermore,  specific  credit  rating  limits  have 
been made on the eligibility criteria for issuance of bonds in some countries.  
In India, there are four CRAs and each of them has collaboration with internationally renowned CRAs to 
supplement the local knowledge and skills. The RBI prescribes a number of regulatory uses of ratings. 
Of those related to the money and debt markets, a corporate must get an issue of Commercial Paper 
rated and may issue such paper subject to a minimum rating. SEBI, which incidentally is the regulator of 
CRAs  has  stipulated  that  ratings  are  compulsory  on  all  public  issues  of  debentures  with  maturity 
exceeding 18 months. Pension funds can only invest in debt securities that have high ratings, as per the 
stipulations of Government.  
A trend over the last few years in India is the preference for CRAs to extensively rate private placement 
resulting in financial institutions' distinct preference for investment in rated paper often through private 
placement  and  sometime  over  normal  credit.  Such  a  trend  of  abdicating  the  responsibility  for 
assessment  of  risk  is  not  desirable  from  the  point  of  view  of  banks.  RBI  has  been  issuing  detailed 
guidelines  to  banks  and  financial  institutions  in  regard  to  exercising  their  judgement  and  risk 
assessment  while  taking  into  account  the  CRAs  ratings.  The  latest  guidelines  emphasise  the 
importance  of  such  internal  assessments  even  when  the  rated  paper  happens  to  be  backed  by 
guarantees of Government. Thus, while CRAs are necessary, their presence is not a sufficient condition 
for development of sound debt markets. 
Tax regime and debt markets 
An  efficient  tax  regime  should  ensure  that  it  does  not  create  an  impediment  to  the  development  of 
secondary debt market. Distortions may be created if, without clear justification, some participants are 
exempted from tax as compared to another, certain instruments are taxed while others are exempted 
and procedures for calculating tax or deducting tax at source distorts prices. Similarly, lack of clarity in 
provisions  could  also  hamper  trading  in  certain  segments  of  the  debt  market.  While  the  process  of 
reform would have to be initiated in a given tax regime, with the evolution of reform, and as the market, 
institutions  and  instruments  develop,  the  tax  regime  would  need  to  be  modified  to  suit  the  changing 
circumstances. 
The removal of tax deduction at source (TDS) on Government Securities market in a way heralded the 
beginning  of the taxation reforms in debt markets. The result  was the  end to the practice  of voucher 
trading  in  the  Government  Securities  market  thus  removing  pricing  distortions  in  the  market.  The 
incidence  of  stamp  duty  had  been  for  a  long  time  a  major  impediment  to  the  development  of  debt 
markets.  The  amendments  to  the  Indian  Stamp  Act,  1899  have  exempted  debt  instruments  dealt  in 
demat form from the applicability of stamp duty (Government Securities as such are exempted from the 
stamp duty). This encouraged demat holding/transactions in debt instruments, as also trading in debt 
instruments.  
In the latest Budget, some more rationalisation measures in the tax regime were announced. First, the 
earlier  exemption  to  equity  mutual  fund  from  the  dividend  tax  placed  the  debt  mutual  funds  at  a 
disadvantage. The recent Finance Bill, has however, proposed the abolition of the distribution tax of 10 
per cent on companies and mutual funds on the dividends or income distributed by them. Such income 
will henceforth be taxed in the hands of the recipients at the rates applicable to them and subject to 
TDS. The dividend tax exemption available to the equity-oriented mutual funds, however, is withdrawn 
and the dividends will be taxable in the hands of the recipients at 10 per cent. This move has to some 
extent reduced the disadvantages faced by the debt-oriented funds. 
Second, the recent amendments to Section 47 of the IT Act, facilitating securities lending and borrowing 
operations will ensure safe and smooth settlement through the recently established CCIL. 
Third, the prevailing tax treatment for zero coupon bonds resulted in distorting trading practices in these 
instruments. The recent notification issued by Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT) in bringing about 
rationalisation in the tax treatment for the deep discount bonds, apart from removing the distortions will 
keep the market in readiness for the development of STRIPS in Government Securities and facilitate a 
zero coupon yield curve. 
For  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  the  Expert  Committee  to  Review  the  System  of  Administered 
Interest  Rates  and  other  Related  Committees  (2002)  has  made  certain  recommendations  on  the  tax 
regime, which if implemented would remove some distortions and ensure a level playing field among 
12 
 BIS Review 16/2002
 participants and instruments in the financial markets. These measures coupled with the decision to align 
the  administered  interest  rates  with  market  rates  of  interest  should  pave  the  way  for  significant 
improvement in the environment for debt markets. 
Road ahead for Indian debt markets 
7. 
There  have  been  several  occasions  when  measures  contemplated  in  India  for  development  of  debt 
markets especially Government Securities markets have been articulated by RBI. In this concluding part 
of my address, I will list the milestones to be reached within one- or two-year time span. 
On the legal side, several measures are under way. First, as the Finance Minister, in his Union Budget 
2002-03, has announced, a new Government Securities Bill, which has since received the concurrence 
of all the State legislators, replacing the existing Public Debt Act of 1944, would be introduced in the 
current  session  of  the  Parliament.  The  new  Act  will  facilitate  wider  participation  in  Government 
Securities markets as it will provide necessary protection to the beneficial owners through Constituent 
Subsidiary  General  Ledger  (SGL)  accounts,  enable  lien  marking  and  pledge  of  securities  for  raising 
loans against Government securities, recognition of electronic form of record maintenance, enlargement 
of dematerialization facility through Bond Ledger Accounts, liberalisation of norms relating to nomination 
and legal representation, facilitate easier transfer and allow for stripping of securities.  
Second, the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Bill which has already been considered by 
the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Finance is also expected to be introduced in the Parliament 
in this session. The Bill seeks to limit the fiscal deficit, place limits on public debt and eliminate RBI’s 
participation  in the primary market issue of dated Government Securities, thereby paving the  way for 
separation of debt management from monetary management. The amendments to the RBI Act, which 
are under consideration of the Government, would take away the mandatory responsibility of RBI to act 
as  debt  manager  to  Government  of  India  and  thereby  facilitate  such  separation,  which  is  one  of  our 
major medium-term objectives.  
Third,  in  pursuance  with  the  recommendations  of  the  Expert  Committees  set  up  by  RBI  and 
Government  of  India.  a  new  Bill  is  also  proposed  to  be  introduced  in  the  Parliament  to  strengthen 
creditors’ right to foreclosure and enforcement of securities by banks and financial institutions. This Bill 
will also enable securitisation of money locked up in long-term loans, thereby further strengthening the 
legal basis for transactions in such new debt securities. 
For  development  of  the  market  and  to  encourage  retail  participation,  particularly  by  mid-segment 
investors like urban co-operative banks, NBFCs, trusts, etc., non-competitive bidding scheme allowing 5 
per cent of the amount issued under select auctions by Government was introduced in January 2002. 
The amount could be revised to 10 per cent keeping in view, the response. Floating Rate Bonds (FRBs) 
were reintroduced recently in two launches in November and December 2001. Certain percentage of 
total Government borrowings could be earmarked for such FRBs to provide good hedging instruments 
to banks/other investors to minimise their interest rate risk. With clarifications issued by Government of 
India recently in the tax treatment of zero coupon bonds, decks have been cleared to introduce STRIPS 
which  would  satisfy  the  segmental  needs  of  the  market.  Necessary  preparatory  work  for  software 
development is being taken up. To provide transparency and stability in the market, as announced by 
the Finance Minister in the recent Union Budget, a calendar of primary issues for the first half of the next 
fiscal will be announced soon. 
On the institutional development side, the Clearing Corporation of India Limited (CCIL), which was set 
up  in  April  2001,  has  commenced  its  operations  since  February  15,  2002.  CCIL,  acts  as  the  central 
counter  party  in  Government  Securities  for  trades  accepted  for  clearing  and  settlement  through 
Negotiated Dealing System (NDS) with automated connectivity with the Delivery versus Payment (DvP) 
settlement  system.  It  provides  guaranteed  settlement  of  transactions  in  Government  Securities  now. 
The reduction in number of transactions for settlement with RBI will bring down the associated risk, cost 
and time in completion of settlement. The establishment of CCIL is expected to pave way for entry of 
non-SGL  participants  for  repos  market  and  repos  in  corporate  debt  instruments  thereby  improving 
liquidity in debt market. We hope this will become possible within the next one year. The CCIL will also 
act as a central counter party for settlement of forex transactions. This is expected to be put in place 
within the next six months.  
On the technology side, as part of NDS-PDO computerisation project, Negotiated Dealing System which 
provides for screen based electronic dealing system for trading in Government Securities and money 
market instruments including repos and electronic bidding in the primary auction of Central and State 
BIS Review 16/2002 
 13
 Government Securities/Treasury Bills has also commenced its operations since February 15, 2002. At 
this  stage,  it  has  been  possible  to  invite  bids  for  primary  auctions  on  the  NDS  for  daily  repos  under 
Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) and for reporting secondary market trades on near real time basis. 
The submission of manual SGL form has been done away  with and  direct links established  between 
reporting of transactions, their confirmation and settlement in a DVP 2 system. By end of 2002, we can 
expect a centralised PDO with connectivity to all 15 centres of RBI, complete automation of all services 
for investors and completion of primary market operations with seamless linkages to settlement system. 
Very  soon,  we  also  intend  to  place  on  real  time  basis,  information  available  on  NDS  in  the  public 
domain.  This  will  facilitate  transparency  and  also  enable  banks/PDs  to  service  their  clients  better  at 
various parts of the country.  
To facilitate faster funds transfer for debt market settlements, Electronic Fund  Transfer (EFT) facility, 
which is now available at 13 centres covering more than 8,000 branches, will be available at 40 centres 
in the next 6 months after integration with SBI managed clearing houses covering almost 75 per cent of 
the transactions. Contract for a state of the art Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS) has been 
awarded in October 2001 and it is expected to be operationalised in the first quarter of 2003, thereby 
facilitating  funds  settlement  at  real  time  gross  basis,  which  will  ensure  finality  of  settlement.  By  next 
year, securities trading and settlement will link to the RTGS. 
Conclusion 
8. 
The road ahead for the next year is thus fairly clear but on the way forward, there are several issues 
which  need  to  be  addressed.  Let  me  at  this  stage  flag  a  few  of  these  issues  for  the  benefit  of  your 
deliberations.  
First,  heterogeneity  of  market  participants  in  terms  of  transaction  needs,  risk  assessments  and 
investment  horizons  needs  to  be  encouraged  to  lend  greater  stability  to  the  market.  With  the 
liberalisation and activation of insurance sector, long-term saving through debt instruments is bound to 
increase  and  the  debt  market  will  have  an  important  role  to  play  in  this  regard.  Mr.Rangachary, 
Chairman  of  the  Insurance  Regulatory  Development  Authority  (IRDA)  had  raised  the  issue  of 
lengthening  of  maturities  of  Government  Securities  and  the  RBI  had  assured  fulfillment  of  this 
requirement  of  the  insurance  sector.  Also,  pension  reforms  have  made  a  start  in  the  recent  Union 
Budget. This is bound to result in an increased demand for long-term debt securities. In addition, the 
SLR requirements of cooperative banks and NBFCs  are increasing.  It  would  be necessary to  ensure 
easy availability of Government Securities to meet this demand.  
Second, in the above context of greater thrust on market players with different perceptions, retailing of 
Government Securities assumes great importance. A three-pronged strategy would seem ideal viz., a 
greater  role  by  PDs  in  providing  liquidity  so  that  exit  route  is  available  always  for  the  retail  investor; 
banks  and  major  custodians  to  facilitate  investment  and  ease  of  transactions  for  retail  demand;  and 
establishing order-driven trading system in stock exchanges with adequate safeguards. 
Third, in view of the in-principle decision taken to discontinue the system of Satellite Dealers, time is 
appropriate  for  a  review  of  the  system  of  PDs  in  terms  of  their  number  in  the  system,  obligations, 
activities and regulation. In this regard, a decision in the RBI has already been taken to bring the PDs 
under the supervision of Board for Financial Supervision of the RBI. 
Fourth, as regards non-Government debt markets, the major issue of private placements will have to be 
squarely  addressed  sooner  than  later.  In  this  context,  ensuring  greater  transparency,  adequate 
disclosures,  enhanced  efficiency,  and  proper  accounting  standards  would  be  in  the  larger  interest  of 
development of debt markets.  
Let me conclude by submitting that we in RBI are keen to understand theory and practice of debt market 
but  eschew  ideological  extremes.  We  want  to  gain  from  the  experience  of  others  but  chart  our  own 
course of action. We are aware of the complexities and the difficult road ahead. We approach the tasks 
with caution, humility and flexibility, but with determination to reach international best practices as suited 
to India's evolving needs.  
Let  me  wish  the  deliberations  all  success  and  we  look  forward  to  learning  from  the  expertise  and 
experience of the distinguished participants.  
Thank you. 
14 
 BIS Review 16/2002
