 Bank of Japan’s June report of recent economic and financial developments1 
Bank of Japan, 13 June 2002. 
 The Bank’s view2 
Japan’s  economy  shows  signs  of  stabilizing  with  a  distinct  increase  in  exports  and  a  pick-up  in 
production, although domestic private demand remains weak. 
With  regard  to  final  demand,  business  fixed  investment  continues  to  decrease  and  private 
consumption,  despite  some  resilience,  remains  weak  as  a  whole.  Moreover,  housing  investment 
remains sluggish and public investment is on a downtrend. Meanwhile, net exports (real exports minus 
real  imports)  are  increasing  markedly  due  to  the  recovery  in  overseas  economies  and  also  to  the 
effects of restocking abroad, mainly in IT-related goods. 
Industrial  production  is  picking  up,  reflecting  the  increase  in  exports  and  completion  of  inventory 
adjustment. The rebound in production is beginning to affect employment conditions, albeit marginally, 
with  an  increase  in  overtime  working  hours  and  in  new  job  offers  mainly  for  part-time  workers. 
Nevertheless, firms are still maintaining their stance on reducing personnel expenses from a longer 
term perspective and as a consequence, household income continues to decrease noticeably. In sum, 
employment and income conditions of households overall remain severe. 
Turning to the outlook, exports are projected to continue to trend up mainly in IT-related goods amid 
the ongoing recovery in overseas economies, especially in the U.S. and East Asia. However, the pace 
of  recovery  is  likely  to  become  somewhat  slower  in  the  future  than  at  present,  as  the  effects  from 
overseas  restocking  dissipate.  Supported  by  this  upturn  in  exports  and  also  by  the  completion  of 
inventory  adjustment,  industrial  production  is  expected  to  accelerate  momentarily  followed  by  a 
gradual uptrend. 
Meanwhile, with respect to domestic demand, public investment is projected to follow a declining trend 
and private demand is likely to remain weak for the immediate future. Nevertheless, if the increase in 
exports and production mentioned above continues, corporate profits  will recover, particularly  in the 
manufacturing sector, and this will gradually have a positive impact on domestic private demand such 
as business fixed investment. 
Overall, Japan’s economy is projected to stop declining as a whole since an increase in exports and 
production  will  lead  to  an  improvement  in  corporate  profits  and  in  turn,  domestic  private  demand. 
However, considering that forces restraining the economy stemming from excessive employment and 
debt are still persistently at work, it will take a while for the positive momentum to spread across the 
nonmanufacturing  sector,  small  firms  and  households.  The  outlook  for  overseas  economies, 
particularly  for  the  U.S.  economy,  is  also  accompanied  by  various  uncertain  factors.  Amid  the 
persisting fragility and uncertainty of the economy, it should continue to be borne in mind that unstable 
movements in the foreign exchange and financial markets at home and abroad would easily exert a 
negative influence on the economy. 
On the price front, import prices become almost unchanged because the continued upward pressure 
from  the  rise  in  crude  oil  prices  around  early  spring  is  offset  by  the  recent  appreciation  of  the  yen. 
Domestic wholesale prices are also almost flat since the decline in machinery prices and the reduction 
in electricity charges are offset by the effects of the increase in import prices in the past and of the 
progress in inventory adjustment. However, consumer prices and corporate service prices continue to 
decline. 
As  for  the  conditions  surrounding  price  developments,  the  balance  between  supply  and  demand  is 
expected to still keep exerting downward pressure on prices amid persistently weak domestic demand 
for  a  while,  although  the  progress  in  inventory  adjustment  will  support  prices  to  some  degree. 
Moreover, factors such as the ongoing technological innovations in machinery, deregulation, and the 
                                                      
1  This report is based on data and information available at the time of the Bank of Japan Monetary Policy Meeting held on 
June 11 and 12, 2002. 
2  The Bank’s view of recent economic and financial developments, determined by the Policy Board at the Monetary Policy 
Meeting held on June 11 and 12 as the basis for monetary policy decisions. 
BIS Review 37/2002 
 1
 streamlining  of  distribution  channels  will  continue  to  restrain  prices.  Under  these  circumstances,  as 
import prices are likely to turn down, domestic wholesale prices, which are sensitive to import prices, 
will edge down after remaining flat a little further. On the other hand, consumer prices are expected to 
stay on a declining trend for the time being at the current gradual pace. This is partly because while 
the slower growth in imports of consumer goods is expected to alleviate the downward pressure on 
prices to some extent, the faster pace of decline in wages may possibly reinforce the ongoing decline 
in prices, especially for services prices. 
As for the financial market, in the short-term money markets, the outstanding balance of the current 
accounts  at  the  Bank  of  Japan  is  recently  moving  around  15  trillion  yen  as  the  Bank  continues  to 
provide ample liquidity to the money market. 
In  these  circumstances,  the  overnight  call  rate  continues  to  move  around  zero  percent.  Moreover, 
interest rates on term instruments remain steady. 
Yields  on  long-term  government  bonds  are  mainly  moving  in  the  range  of  1.3-1.4  percent  recently. 
Yield  spreads  between  private  bonds  (bank  bonds  and  corporate  bonds)  and  government  bonds 
continue to contract. However, spreads between bonds with low credit ratings and government bonds 
still remain wide. 
Stock prices are level on the whole and are basically moving in the range of 11,000-12,000 yen. 
In the foreign exchange market, the yen continued to appreciate reflecting the overall downtrend in the 
U.S.  dollar,  but  has  been  mixed  thereafter  since  late  May  due  mainly  to  the  news  on  yen-selling 
intervention by the Japanese monetary authority. 
With regard to corporate finance, private banks are becoming cautious in extending loans to firms with 
high credit risks while they continue to be more active in extending loans to blue-chip companies. The 
lending attitudes of financial institutions as perceived by firms are becoming severe. In the corporate 
bonds and CP markets, the issuing environment for firms with low credit ratings remains severe, but 
the environment for firms with high credit ratings is on an improving trend. 
Credit  demand  in  the  private  sector  continues  to  follow  a  downtrend  mainly  because  firms  are 
decreasing their business fixed investment while continuously reducing their debts. 
Amid these developments, private banks’ lending continues to decline by about 2-3 percent on a year-
on-year basis. The year-on-year growth rate of the amount outstanding of corporate bonds issued is 
decreasing  somewhat.  The  year-on-year  growth  rate  of  the  amount  outstanding  of  CP  issued  is 
declining recently, although the amount is still well above the previous year’s level. 
The monetary base continued to increase substantially by around 30 percent from the previous year’s 
level in May, although the growth rate slowed slightly due partly to the abatement of liquidity demand 
prompted by a system failure of a major bank group. The year-on-year growth rate of the money stock 
(M2 + CDs) remained around 3.5 percent. 
Funding costs for firms continue to be at extremely low levels on the whole. 
Overall,  the  recent  financial  environment  remains  extremely  easy  on  the  whole  in  terms  of  money 
market conditions. The deterioration in the funding situation of firms is coming to a halt. However, the 
stance  of  investors  toward  firms  with  high  credit  risks  remains  severe  and  the  lending  attitudes  of 
private  banks  are  becoming  more  cautious.  Hence,  the  developments  in  the  behavior  of  financial 
institutions and corporate financing continue to require close monitoring. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2002
