 Willem F Duisenberg: The first nine months of the euro cash era 
Speech by Dr Willem F Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, on the occasion of the 
International Imaging Industry Summit, Schloss Bensberg, Bergisch-Gladbach, 24 September 2002. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure for me to be invited to the International Imaging Industry Summit, on the eve of 
the world's leading trade fair "for the photographic and imaging sector", as the website says. Let me 
start by drawing a parallel between the Photokina and central banking, which, I must admit, is not an 
easy task. Both activities – and this is an important point – are future-oriented. In fact, a key objective 
of the Photokina exhibitors is to present "the future" here and now, in the shape of new products and 
new technologies. Also for central bankers, a future-oriented decision-making is crucial; in fact, it is an 
important element of a successful monetary policy.  
A forward-looking approach was also taken by the creators of the euro. The single currency has been 
used as a non-cash payment instrument and unit of account since the start of 1999 and as a physical 
payment instrument since the beginning of this year. The introduction of the banknotes and coins was 
the  last  step  in  a  process  which  formally  started  at  the  European  Council  held  in  Maastricht  in 
December 1991 and led to the signing of the Maastricht Treaty in 1992. Euro cash has now been in 
circulation for almost nine months and, according to a recent survey by the European Commission, 
around 85% of the population of the euro area countries found the changeover to the new money a 
straightforward process. It was completed by the end of February 2002, when the euro banknotes and 
coins became the sole legal tender in the 12 countries.  
In my speech today, I shall not only look to the future, but shall also look back a little, over the first nine 
months of the euro cash era. Putting more than eight billion banknotes and close to 39 billion coins 
into circulation was a logistical operation of truly gigantic proportions. That it went off so smoothly was 
thanks to the joint efforts of all parties involved and especially to the currency's good reception by the 
public. First, I shall address developments in currency in circulation before, during and after the cash 
changeover.  Second,  I  shall  consider  the  use  of  the  euro  outside  the  euro  area.  In  fact,  there  is 
evidence of considerable  demand for euro banknotes also outside  the  euro  area and particularly in 
countries neighbouring the EU. Finally, I'll be talking about a major concern of people in the euro area, 
namely  the  perceived  impact  of  the  euro  banknotes  and  coins  on  inflation,  or  the  "teuro"  as  this 
phenomenon  is  popularly  called  in  Germany.  While  it  is  true  that  in  some  sectors,  especially  in 
services, price increases have been made for various reasons, the across-the-board impact on overall 
consumer price developments has been small. I will come back to this later as well.  
Currency in circulation and banknote developments before, during and after the cash 
changeover 
Let me first of all consider  what happened to the currency  in circulation and  euro banknotes  in the 
months before, during and after the cash changeover. 
The  period  before  the  euro  cash  changeover  saw  a  significant  decline  in  currency  in  circulation; 
currency in circulation is defined as the value of banknotes and coins held by non-banks – which in 
turn means currency holdings by residents of the euro area not belonging to the euro area banking 
sector  and  by  non-residents.  From  December  2000  to  December  2001,  the  volume  of  national  or 
"legacy" currency circulating in each of the euro area countries decreased by around 30%.  
In  the  first  two  months  of  this  year,  currency  in  circulation–  was  strongly  influenced  by  the  cash 
changeover. Both euro banknotes and legacy banknotes were used in parallel to make payments. In 
addition, in order to make it easier to give change in the first two weeks after the cash changeover, 
retailers  held  large  amounts  of  small  euro  banknotes,  especially  the  EURO 5  and  10  banknotes. 
These holdings led to a steep increase in currency in circulation in January. In February, the amount of 
legacy banknotes held by non-banks as well as the precautionary holdings of small euro banknotes 
declined, leading to an overall reduction in currency in circulation. 
Banks also held more banknotes than usual as a precaution and, in part, for logistical reasons. Higher 
priority was given to supplying new euro banknotes to customers than to returning legacy banknotes to 
BIS Review 54/2002 
 1
 their  respective  national  central  bank,  and  so  the  latter  process  took  some  time.  As  a  result,  the 
number of euro banknotes in circulation reached its peak on 15 January 2002 [8.1 billion banknotes]. 
Thereafter, the number of euro banknotes in circulation fell until the end of August 2002 [to 7.3 billion 
banknotes].  In  particular,  the  number  of  EURO 5  banknotes  in  circulation  declined  by  51%  and  the 
number of EURO 10 banknotes by 30% between mid-January and the end of August. 
In  contrast  to  the  decline  in  the  number  of  small  banknotes  in  circulation,  the  demand  for  large 
denominations increased steadily in the first eight months of 2002. The strongest rise in demand was 
for the EURO 500 banknotes, which more than doubled between mid-January and the end of August 
[+120%].  Demand  also  rose  during  this  period  for  the  EURO 100  banknotes,  by  no  less  than  60%. 
This shows that there was a rapid increase in the hoarding of banknotes in the first months of the euro 
cash era. Evidently, the denominational structure of the banknotes in circulation is still developing in 
response to the banknote requirements of cash users. 
Related  to  the  substantial  rise  in  large  banknotes,  from  March  onwards,  currency  in  circulation 
increased by around EUR 10 billion each month. While the volume of currency in circulation so far has 
remained  below  the  level  in  January  2001,  this  development  indicates  that  economic  agents  are 
quickly re-building their currency holdings.  
Let me also say a few words on the euro coins. As a large quantity of euro coins was transferred to 
banks and other professional groups prior to 1 January 2002, the increase in the number of euro coins 
in  circulation  during  the  first  two  weeks  of  the  changeover  period  was  only  small  [2.6%].  The 
circulation of euro coins reached its peak in mid-January 2002 [38.6 billion coins]. At the end of August 
2002, there were around 36.7 billion coins in circulation, worth EUR 11.5 billion. 
The successful introduction and acceptance of euro cash has been certainly aided by the high quality 
of the euro cash. The euro banknotes incorporate a variety of modern security features that are easy 
to check. Their effectiveness is proven by the fact that in the first half of this year the number of euro 
banknote counterfeits amounted to less than 7% of that of the legacy currency counterfeits circulating 
in the same period last year. I can assure you that banknote research and development work within 
the Eurosystem is ongoing and aims to maintain the integrity of euro banknotes. 
First estimates of the use of the euro outside the euro area 
Let me now turn to the demand from outside the euro area for the euro in the first half of this year, in 
terms of cash and deposits. I should point out that, because of the anonymity of cash, central bankers 
are not usually able to determine exactly where the banknotes they have issued are circulating. Some 
indications are provided by cross-border transfers of banknotes via banks, but banknotes which are 
carried across borders by individuals are not registered.  
Of  all  the  legacy  currencies  circulating  outside  their  "home"  territory,  it  was  the  Deutsche  Mark 
banknotes which accounted for the largest proportion. Moreover, people living outside the euro area 
also used to a certain extent some of the other legacy currencies, such as the French franc, the Italian 
lira, the Austrian schilling and the Spanish peseta. A large share of the legacy currencies was believed 
to be circulating in central and south-east Europe as well as in Turkey. Therefore, the introduction of 
euro cash at the beginning of 2002 was a major event not only for the euro area but also for a number 
of neighbouring countries where legacy banknotes from the euro area were circulating. 
The euro cash changeover and its aftermath offered a unique opportunity for the European Central 
Bank to collect first-hand information on the foreign circulation of the euro. Such information can be 
derived from data on the frontloading of euro banknotes to destinations abroad, from data on cross-
border shipments of euro banknotes by banks, which probably comprised the main outflow in the first 
months  of  the  euro  cash  era,  as  well  as  from  evidence  provided  by  a  number  of  central  banks  in 
countries neighbouring the EU. All in all, although the available data and estimates are characterised 
by various degrees of uncertainty, there is evidence that the euro is used in neighbouring countries to 
a significant extent, either in cash or deposit form. 
Let's consider cash first. The cash changeover outside the euro area started as early as 1 December 
2001, in order to facilitate the conversion to the euro of legacy currency banknotes held by non-euro 
area residents from 1 January onwards. Non-euro area central banks and international banks abroad 
received  euro banknotes to enable  them to meet the initial cash needs of the public and business. 
Banknotes worth almost EUR 5 billion were shipped outside the euro area in December 2001, more 
than  half of them destined for eastern and central  Europe,  and Turkey.  Since  January, banks have 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2002
 continued to ship euro banknotes outside the euro area in order to replace legacy currency banknotes 
and to meet new demand. Between December 2001 and June 2002, an accumulated net amount of 
around EUR 23 billion euro banknotes was shipped abroad via the banking system. 
In  the  mid-1990s,  the  Bundesbank  estimated  the  Deutsche  Mark  banknotes  circulating  outside 
Germany to be worth between EUR 32 and 45 billion. If this is taken as a rough approximation of the 
amount  of  legacy  currency  banknotes  held  outside  the  euro  area,  then  the  available  evidence 
suggests that a considerable part of this has already been converted into euro banknotes.  
Let's now consider euro-denominated bank deposits. They also played an important part in the cash 
changeover  outside  the  euro  area.  Indeed,  before  the  cash  changeover,  several  non-euro  area 
countries encouraged households to deposit their legacy currency cash holdings in euro-denominated 
accounts,  rather  than  exchange  them  directly  for  euro  banknotes.  Credit  institutions,  particularly 
foreign-owned  banks,  widely  advertised  euro-denominated  accounts  at  attractive  conditions.  This 
strategy  was  intended  to  reduce  both  the  logistical  and  transaction  costs  related  to  changeover 
operations. In some cases, especially in south-east Europe, another objective was to boost confidence 
in banking systems. In co-operation with a number of central banks in countries neighbouring the euro 
area, the ECB has gathered data on the scale of these developments. Overall, in around 30 countries, 
euro-denominated deposits increased by a total of more than EUR 13 billion in 2001. Information for 
the  first  months  of  2002  suggests  that  this  may  be  a  lasting  phenomenon  as  euro-denominated 
deposits decreased only slightly.  
In a nutshell, the available evidence tends to indicate that most of the legacy currency banknotes have 
been converted into euro, either in cash or deposit form. This suggests that the euro has successfully 
replaced the legacy currencies in the regions neighbouring the EU.  
Let me add that – despite the considerable amount of euro banknotes transferred abroad – foreign 
circulation of euro banknotes only constitutes a limited proportion of the total currency in circulation. 
The estimated amount of euro banknotes circulating outside the euro area at the end of June accounts 
for only 8% of total currency in circulation and only 0.4% of the monetary aggregate M3. Therefore, 
while  the  ECB  monitors  these  developments  closely,  they  currently  play  no  significant  role  in  the 
assessment of monetary developments in the euro area with regard to price developments. 
Demand for euro banknotes over the longer term 
Let me also take a somewhat longer-term perspective with regard to the demand for the euro in the 
euro area and outside.  
As already mentioned, a preliminary interpretation based on developments in the first months of the 
euro cash era suggests that the negative trend of currency in circulation which was observed before 
the  cash  changeover  is  being  reversed  relatively  quickly.  It  would  seem  that  currency  holdings  for 
transaction purposes, but also for hoarding, are being built up fairly quickly by people in and outside 
the  euro  area.  But  as  the  demand  for  cash  has  not  yet  taken  full  shape,  it  is  too  early  to  assess 
whether the cash changeover will have a long-term impact on the use of cash by the general public 
and, if so, in which direction. Certainly, a number of domestic as well as foreign factors will play a role 
in the longer-term demand for euro banknotes:  
First, with regard to domestic demand, the introduction of the single currency itself has facilitated the 
use of cash across the euro area countries. At the same time, however, the introduction of the euro 
makes it possible in general to economise on cash holdings for cross-border uses, which might lead to 
lower cash holdings. 
Second, in most of the euro area countries, the euro banknote denominations are higher than those of 
the national legacy currencies. This might lead to changes in cash holding habits.  
Third, the further integration of the financial sector in the euro area tends to work in favour of lower 
cross-border  transaction  costs  for  electronic  payment  instruments  such  as  credit  cards.  This  might 
encourage greater use of electronic payment instruments in the euro area. At the same time, however, 
these factors also tend to result in lower fees for cross-border cash withdrawals. 
Finally,  regarding  foreign  demand  for  euro  banknotes  and  coins,  the  close  financial,  economic  and 
institutional  links  between  the  euro  area  and  its  neighbours  suggest  an  ongoing  and  perhaps 
increasing foreign demand for euro banknotes, in particular, although probably not exclusively, in the 
EU's neighbouring countries. 
BIS Review 54/2002 
 3
 Consequently,  as  these  factors  work  in  different  directions,  it  is  difficult  to  foresee  the  longer-term 
trend in banknote developments. 
Impact of the cash changeover on price developments 
Let me now turn to an issue which has attracted much publicity over recent months. There has been a 
controversy  in many  euro  area countries about  whether the  introduction  of the euro banknotes and 
coins has led to  an increase in prices.  According to  a recent survey by the European Commission, 
more  than  60%  of  euro  area  inhabitants  believe  that  prices  in  all  sectors  have  increased  since 
January. Another 15% think that prices have risen in some sectors of the economy.  
Let me first say that it is very difficult to separate out the impact of the cash changeover on prices with 
any degree of precision. Any price change could be due either to the changeover itself, because of, for 
example, rounding up to new eye-catching prices or the pass-through of cash changeover costs, or it 
might  reflect  a  change  in  other  cost  factors,  like  wages  or  import  prices.  This  implies  that  any 
estimation of the cash changeover effect on prices is surrounded by uncertainty.  
In order to get some evidence on price changes which might be related to the cash changeover, it is 
informative to look at the sector level. Indeed, for specific services items, prices have increased more 
than usual, which could be related to the introduction of the euro. For example, eating out, having a 
haircut or having clothes dry-cleaned became significantly more expensive in the first few months of 
2002,  and  many  people  in  the  euro  area  have  noticed  this,  including  myself.  In  general,  price 
increases have mainly taken place in sectors with a low level of competition and where products are 
rather differentiated.  
At the same time, however, it is important to realise that there have also been price increases due to 
factors  unrelated  to  the  euro.  For  example,  in  the  early  months  of  this  year,  the  extreme  winter 
weather in the euro area, particularly in the Mediterranean countries, led to severe supply shortages 
and  thus  to  higher  vegetable  prices.  Likewise,  the  rise  in  petrol  prices  in  the  first  quarter  of  2002 
cannot be attributed to the cash changeover, but was the result of higher oil prices on the world market 
and,  in  some  countries,  higher  taxes.  The  same  applies  to  cigarette  prices  in  several  euro  area 
countries. 
Moreover,  it  has to  be taken into  account  that the Harmonised Index  of Consumer Prices, which is 
used for measuring consumer prices in the euro area, is a broad index covering a very comprehensive 
basket of goods purchased by households. While it cannot and is not supposed to reflect the cost of 
living of each single household, it reflects the average cost of living of a representative household in 
the  euro  area.  Therefore,  while  some  items  in  this  goods  basket may  have  gone  up  in  price  partly 
because of the cash changeover, many other items in the basket have not shown any significant price 
increases.  In  fact,  some  goods  have  actually  become  less  expensive  over  recent  months.  One 
example  which  might  be  of  particular  interest  to  you,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  is  the  price  level  of 
photographic and cinematographic equipment: in July this year the prices of these goods were almost 
3½ percent lower than in July 2001 across the euro area. Telephone calls have also become cheaper 
over  this  period.  In  other  areas  where  competition  is  strong  there  were  also  price  reductions 
associated with the euro. 
Overall,  it  does  not  appear  that  the  cash  changeover  has  been  a  major  factor  in  the  overall 
development  of  euro  area  consumer  prices.  Eurostat,  the  official  statistical  agency  of  the  EU,  has 
estimated  a  cash  changeover  effect  for  the  euro  area  on  HICP  inflation  in  the  first  half  of  2002  of 
between 0 and 0.2 percentage points. Studies at the country level also point to limited overall effects, 
with some possible euro-induced price increases in certain sectors. For example, Germany's Federal 
Statistical  Office,  jointly  working  with  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  stated  recently,  that  "the  euro 
introduction has not had a considerable impact on the cost of living as a whole"(1) in Germany. While 
the effects may have  varied across euro area countries and sectors, the overall impact of the cash 
changeover on the overall price level in the euro area has been contained. 
This  evidence,  however,  contrasts  sharply  with  the  concerns  and  discussions  in  many  euro  area 
countries  about  the  impact  of  euro  cash  on  consumer  prices.  One  reason  for  the  gap  between 
empirical findings and public opinion might be the fact that the general perception of price changes is 
more  strongly  influenced  by  the  prices  of  small-ticket  goods  and  services  purchased  on  an  almost 
                                                      
1  
"Six months after the introduction of euro cash - an intermediate stock-taking in official price statistics", DESTATIS press 
release, 2 July 2002. 
4 
 BIS Review 54/2002
 daily basis. Coincidentally, prices of some of these frequently purchased items, like tomatoes, petrol 
and tobacco products, went up, for the various reasons I have mentioned (such as winter weather, oil 
prices and taxes), at the same time as the introduction of euro banknotes and coins. Although these 
price increases were unrelated to the cash changeover, many people have unfortunately associated 
them with the changeover. 
But  it  is  important  to  realise  that  a  complete  picture  can  only  be  obtained  by  looking  at  a 
comprehensive  measure  of  prices,  including  the  prices  of  less  frequent  purchases.  In  fact,  overall 
consumer price inflation has been around 2% during recent months, a level which is very similar to 
that in December 2001, just before the introduction of the euro banknotes and coins. In addition, the 
price prospects for the coming months point to a rate of around 2% in the euro area.  
Over a longer period of time, the greater transparency resulting from the introduction of the euro and 
the  move  to  exclusive  euro  pricing  will  strengthen  competition  in  the  retail  sector  and  contain  price 
pressures in the euro area. These permanent benefits and efficiency gains from introducing the euro 
will far outweigh the generally very small changeover effects on inflation.  
Concluding remarks 
Let me sum up. The introduction of the euro banknotes and coins has been a major success which 
was made possible by the thorough preparations of all parties involved and the good reception by the 
public. The euro banknotes make visible the Monetary Union and the close financial integration of the 
twelve euro area countries. We are very satisfied that the banknotes were immediately accepted by 
the  public  in  the  euro  area.  And  as  the  foreign  demand  for  the  euro  banknotes  shows,  the  euro  is 
much  sought  after  outside  the  euro  area  as  well.  Finally,  even  though  there  have  been  effects  on 
certain goods and services prices, the permanent benefits of the single currency and efficiency gains 
of introducing the euro will far exceed any short-term effects on inflation.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I would like to thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 54/2002 
 5
