 Eva Srejber: Future issues for the housing market in Sweden against the 
background of Basel II 
Speech by Ms Eva Srejber, Second Deputy Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the annual meeting 
of the Swedish Association of Municipal Housing Companies (SABO), Taeby, 8 January 2002. 
 Introduction 
I should like to begin by thanking you for the invitation to come here and the opportunity to discuss this 
evening’s theme of future issues for the housing market. 
At the beginning of May 2001 I gave a talk to SABO Byggnadsförsäkrings AB on the property market 
and economic trends in Sweden. I then took up the question of why and how the Riksbank monitors 
the property market. The focus for this evening will be on what the future may hold for the property 
market and granting of credit for the purchase of property and housing. My talk should therefore be 
seen (and heard) as a complement to, or continuation of, my earlier talk. 
My talk this evening will primarily deal with our view of the housing market and the role it plays with 
regard  to  financial  stability  and  potential  growth.  I  will  then  go  on  to  describe  the  credit  granting 
process and current changes that  will  affect this process. I  will conclude  with  a look towards future 
developments. 
the 
from 
largest 
individual  borrowers 
The role of the housing market for financial stability and potential growth 
Let me begin, however, with brief description of the housing market from the Riksbank’s perspective. 
Those  who  wish  to  go  into  this  subject  in  more  depth  can  read  our  most  recent  Financial  Stability 
Report. As we know, the property sector consists of two parts: the housing market and the commercial 
property market. The Riksbank studies the property sector for two main reasons. One reason is that 
property  companies  comprise 
the  banking  groups  - 
approximately  15  per  cent  of  the  banks’  lending  is  to  property  companies.  Properties  are  also  the 
dominant form of collateral for loans. Loans with property as collateral comprise almost 50 per cent of 
the bank’s lending against collateral. The health of the companies in the property sector therefore has 
repercussions for financial stability. 
The growth rate for credit has remained at an average level of just over 6 per cent a year for the past 
four  years,  which  exceeds  annual  GDP  growth  by  a  few  percentage  points.  It  could  be  considered 
cause for concern to have a higher growth in credit than in fundamentals, i.e. GDP, and it is easy to 
recall  developments  at  the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  but  since  then  there  has  been  a  change  in  the 
focus  of  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  towards  macroeconomic  stability.  At  the  same  time,  the 
effects of earlier as well as new structural reforms, such as the tax reform, the pension reform and 
deregulation, have also contributed to the Swedish economy becoming less sensitive to disturbances 
now than it  was  in the 1980s. In addition, the  experiences of the financial crisis have also  led to a 
change  in  behaviour  in  the  financial  sector.  The  financial  situation  appears  stable  and  the  banks' 
increase in lending is not so high that it can be interpreted as greater risk-taking in the financial sector. 
Approximately  SEK  420  billion  of  the  total  lending  by  mortgage  institutions  comprises  loans  to 
purchase apartment blocks. This is a large percentage, almost 40 per cent of the total lending by these 
institutions. However, the figures on lending during the 1990s show that both the percentage and the 
volume of lending in this area is declining. Statistics provided by the mortgage institutions with regard 
to gross flows of loans for various purposes with apartment blocks as collateral confirm this picture. In 
1991 new building was the reason for most of the lending, while renovation and extensions accounted 
for  only  a  minor  part.  During  2001,  on  the  other  hand,  new  building  accounted  for  a  small  part, 
renovation and extensions for even less, while the largest percentage was for other purposes. 
Why is this? Naturally, it is related to the way the sub-markets function. The market for single-family 
dwellings  functions  well  with  buyers  and  sellers  agreeing  on  a  market  price  when  houses  are  sold. 
Once a single-family dwelling has been built, the market functions well without any major disturbances 
from restrictions or regulations. 
BIS Review 2/2002 
 1
 The market for apartment blocks, on the other hand, is more complex, as it is affected by a number of 
different regulations and restrictions. This has led, for instance, to the relationship between rents and 
prices  in  this  market  not  being  stable.  Normally,  there  should  be  a  connection  between  the 
development  of  prices  and  rents  for  apartment  blocks,  as  the  future  cash  flows  that  constitute  the 
basis for the valuation of the property are primarily governed by rent income. However, the statistics 
regarding prices and rents for apartment blocks show that the rise in prices of apartment blocks has 
been clearly higher than the rises in rents since 1995. A similar development took place between 1987 
and 1990, although the price rise  was much more rapid then. The price increase at  the end  of the 
1980s  was  driven  by  expectations  of  future  price  rises.  Regulations  in  the  form  of  the  utility  value 
system and central rent negotiations provide modest changes in rent every year. The changes in rents 
do  not  vary  substantially  in  connection  with  economic  activity  and  demand.  These  regulations  may 
have  a  stabilising  effect  on  the  property  sector  in  that  they  stabilise  income  flows,  given  that  the 
vacancy  rate  for  housing  is  low  and  does  not  vary.  Stable  income  flows  are  a  good  thing  from  the 
lender’s perspective. 
Do these regulations cause any problems? I can see two main problems, which I shall discuss. The 
first  is  that  price  formation  for  rental  properties  in  relation  to  tenant-owned  properties  is  distorted, 
which means that the stock of tenant-owned apartments may come to comprise an overly large part of 
the total apartment stock. This could be negative for growth, as it could mean that, for instance, young 
people and other groups with a shortage of capital may experience difficulty in entering the housing 
market and moving to where the jobs are. Prices of apartment blocks are largely governed by prices 
for tenant-owned apartments, as apartment blocks are currently sold most often in connection with a 
changeover from rental property to tenant-owner associations. This means that as long as the utility 
value principles apply for apartment rents and prices for tenant-owned apartments remain high, the 
difference between the development in rents and prices will remain. As the utility value system limits 
the income a rental property can generate, the market value of rental property is also limited, and both 
the owner of the rental property and the future tenant owners profit if the property is transferred at a 
price  somewhere  between  the  market  value  for  rental  properties  and  the  market  value  for  tenant-
owner apartments. Despite the fact that prices for tenant-owned apartments have fallen slightly, the 
difference between the price of apartment blocks sold to tenant-owner associations and the price of 
rental  properties  indicated  by  rent  levels.  One  explanation  could  be  that  when  property  owners  sell 
rental  properties  for  conversion  to  tenant-owner  associations,  they  take  a  larger  part  of  the  price 
difference between the two property types. 
While  the  utility  value  principle  has  certainly  contributed  to  an  evening  out  of  rent  levels  over  the 
economic cycle, it has also contributed to making it more profitable to allow apartment blocks of rented 
apartments  to  be  converted  to  tenant-owner  apartments  than  to  sell  them  to  another  owner  and 
continue to run them as rental properties. 
The second problem is that the regulation of rents, in connection with a number of other institutional 
factors, is holding back new production of rental properties where there is a demand for housing. The 
way prices on apartment blocks develop in future will depend on the supply and demand situation, as 
well as on regulations. The total growth in demand is steered mainly by population growth, while the 
distribution  of  demand  around  the  country  is  steered  by  where  growth  occurs.  In  general,  housing 
construction  has  been  much  lower  during  the  1990s  than  in  previous  decades.  According  to  the 
National Board of Housing, Building and Planning’s most recent nation-wide forecast for the number of 
apartments  in  apartment  blocks  where  construction  has  begun,  just  under  11,000  apartments  had 
been started last year and just under 13,000 will be started this year, from a level of just over 9,000 in 
2000. This can be compared with almost 42,000 new apartments in apartment blocks begun in 1990, 
immediately prior to the property crisis. Residential construction of apartments in apartment blocks in 
relation to the population increase has been lowest in Stockholm county, followed by Skåne county 
and Västra Götaland county. 
One ray of hope is that the number of building permits granted for apartment blocks is continuing to 
increase, which indicated a continued increase in new production of apartment blocks. Factors such 
as  regulated  rents  for  rental  properties,  i.e.  the  utility  value  system,  a  lack  of  land  with  planning 
permission in growth regions, the construction of the municipal tax equalisation system, the imbalance 
between  traffic  situations  and  housing  in  growth  regions  and  long  planning  processes  probably  all 
contribute to the relatively low level of residential construction, even in areas where demand is high. A 
further  restriction  is  the  lack  of  competition  in  the  construction  sector.  This  is  demonstrated  in  the 
developments in prices and wages in the sector. Construction workers’ wages have increased more 
than  those  of  industrial  workers  in  recent  years.  Another  example  is  that  the  costs  of  construction 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2002
 materials,  which  constitute  approximately  one-third  of  total  construction  costs,  have  shown  price 
increases over and above other industrial products for some time now, with price rises even during 
periods  of  low  demand.  One  important  explanation  for  this  is  the  fact  that  the  construction  trade  is 
concentrated to a small number of large companies. In some markets, for instance, those for cement, 
reinforcement steel and plasterboard, one company accounts for more than 50 per cent of total sales. 
This can mean that utility value rents do not cover total production costs in growth regions where land 
and construction costs are relatively high. 
It is evident that the total regulatory framework does not contribute sufficiently to ensuring that supply 
follows demand. 
The low level of construction and the high level of immigration to metropolitan regions contribute to 
prices in the market for apartment blocks being relatively little affected by the current lower level of 
economic  activity.  Property  companies’  earning  capacity  should  thus  be  relatively  stable,  which  is 
positive from the point of view of both the company owners and creditors. However, the weak level of 
residential construction has led to sluggishness in the housing market. The fact that it is possible to 
move between residential areas and between regions stimulates mobility among the labour force and 
flexibility  in  the  functioning  of  the  labour  market,  which  affects  economic  developments.  A  clear 
example of this is the Stockholm region,  which  has a housing shortage. This has probably led to  a 
lower growth for the Stockholm region than would have otherwise been the case. As 25 per cent of 
Sweden’s  economy  lies  in  Stockholm,  this  affects  the  entire  country’s  growth  potential.  A  housing 
sector that does not function properly will thus affect the country’s potential growth, as it will become 
more difficult for labour to move to where the jobs are. For this reason, it is in my opinion important 
that  a  review  is  made  of  the  total  complex  of  regulations  governing  the  functioning  of  the  housing 
market,  in  order  to  allow  it  to  function  better.  From  the  Riksbank’s  point  of  view,  a  higher  potential 
growth  means  that  demand  in  Sweden  can  be  higher  at  the  same  time  as  price  stability  can  be 
maintained. 
The credit granting process 
If the housing market can become more flexible, it will enable new construction where housing is most 
needed. These new investments will need to be financed. It is therefore important to be aware of the 
professionalisation  of  the  credit  granting  process  that  has  occurred  within  the  financial  institutions 
following the bank crisis. This is reinforced by the new capital adequacy rules that are being worked 
out. The modern credit granting process focuses more on the individual borrower’s cash flows. This 
individualisation means that the interest paid will to a greater extent reflect the market’s valuation of 
the profitability of the individual object, e.g. a particular property. 
Does the banks’ setting of interest rates vary between different borrowers and credit objects? How is 
credit granted today? How do the banks assess a loan application? I shall not explain these processes 
in detail, but outline the most important elements. Credit granting is part of the banks’ core business. It 
involves mediating savings to borrowers. As managers of our savings, the banks have always needed 
to  be  able  to  assess,  measure  and  manage  the  risks  inherent  in  these  operations.  The  four  major 
banks regularly monitored by the Riksbank have similar procedures with regard to granting corporate 
loans.  The  bank  assesses  the  risk  in  a  particular  loan  on  the  basis  of  two  aspects:  the  customer’s 
ability  to  repay  and  the  collateral  that  can  be  offered.  The  customer’s  ability  to  repay  is  the  more 
important  of  these  two  aspects.  For  obvious  reasons,  loans  without  collateral  are  assessed  more 
stringently. The fact that the banks now focus more on the ability to repay than on the value of the 
collateral is a lesson learned from the bank crisis in the 1990s. 
Before a loan is granted, it is necessary to assess the risk of default in the form of a suspension of 
payments or bankruptcy. This means that the banks consider stable cash flows to be more interesting 
than  whether  a  project  can  provide  a  higher  yield  than  expected.  On  the  basis  of  the  bank’s 
assessment,  the  borrower  is  assigned  a  risk  classification.  This  classification  contains  both 
quantitative and qualitative factors and the risk grade is reviewed annually. The quantitative analysis is 
based on the company’s profit and loss statements and balance sheets, while the qualitative analysis 
is based, for instance, on the company’s competitiveness and the quality of its management. When 
making the decision to grant a loan, the assessment of the customer’s ability to repay is supplemented 
with  information  on  the  specific  loan,  for  instance,  the  amount  of  the  loan  and  the  collateral  the 
borrower can offer against the loan. The most common form of collateral is mortgage deeds, but other 
types of collateral do exist. In addition to these internal assessments, the banks may supplement their 
analysis  with external credit assessments. There are some independent external credit assessment 
BIS Review 2/2002 
 3
 companies  in  the  market.  These  use  various  means  to  estimate,  for  instance,  the  likelihood  of 
bankruptcy in almost all Swedish companies. 
The risk involved in a loan can also be affected by the terms of the loan agreement signed by the bank 
and the customer. This is because the loan agreement can contain certain clauses entailing specific 
measures to be triggered in the event of various credit events. Examples of such events could be that 
the  company’s  solvency  falls  below  a  particular  predetermined  level  or  that  the  owner  conditions 
change. If one of these events occurs, it may comprise grounds for renegotiating the loan agreement. 
The starting point for the  banks’ pricing  is an overall assessment of the customer. This means that 
pricing  is  not  solely  dependent  on  the  bank’s  risk  classification  of  the  loan,  but  also  on  the  other 
income  the  customer  may  be  expected  to  provide.  What  the  banks  lose  on  the  swings,  they  may 
regain on the roundabouts. The banks’ pricing can take into account risk classes and collateral, but 
there is not always a direct connection between prices and risk classes. However, developments in 
regulations and on the capital market favour a stronger connection between interest rates on loans 
and risk classification of the borrower. 
The banks’ credit assessment procedure is not a static process. The major Swedish banks currently 
have well-functioning organisations, methods and systems for assessing loans and managing credit 
risk. Developments in financial theory  and rapid advances in IT over the past  decade have created 
new and improved conditions in this field, and the banks have made good use of this. 
As  a  borrower  it  is  important  to  be  aware  that  the  individualisation  in  the  modern  credit  granting 
process  has  also  been  taken  up  in  the  shaping  of  the  new  capital  adequacy  rules,  where  it  will  be 
possible to price loans more fairly. 
Why do we have capital adequacy rules? As the banks play such a central role in the payment system, 
and the costs of disturbances in the system and in the credit market would be very large and have to 
be borne not only by the borrowers and lenders, but by society as a whole, the banks have long been 
subject  to  scrutiny  and  oversight  with  regard  to  their  risk-taking.  Since  1988  we  have  had  an 
international agreement, the Basel Accord on capital adequacy rules. This involves, in simple terms, 
regulations as to how much capital a bank must hold with regard to different borrower groups for each 
hundred krona it lends out. It is much more costly for the banks to finance themselves by holding their 
own  capital  than  through  borrowing,  just  as  for  other  companies.  A  higher  capital  adequacy 
requirement for taking bigger risks will thus lead to the banks being forced to charge more for lending 
money  to  higher  risk  borrowers.  This  is  a  regulatory  system  that  is  used  by  120  countries  and  it 
contributes to financial stability around the world. 
However,  the  current  capital  adequacy  rules  from  1988  are  divided  into  4  fairly  rough  risk  classes, 
which  do  not  very  well  reflect  the  risk  with  various  borrowers.  For  instance,  the  risk  classification 
means that all companies are in the same risk class, despite the fact that they can differ markedly from 
one another. There has therefore been intensive work on further developing these rules by the Basel 
Committee,  in  which  both  the  Riksbank  and  Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  financial  supervisory 
authority) participate. 
The  idea  with  the  new  rules  is  that  the  risk  weighting  will  better  reflect  the  actual  credit  risk.  This 
means that the banks will become more thorough in assessing the relationship between the risk in the 
credit and its yield. An increased risk will therefore be marked in the banks’ pricing of loans, i.e. the 
interest rate. There are both advantages and disadvantages with the proposed capital adequacy rules. 
The  proposed  rules  mean  that  the  banks  must  hold  more  capital  if  the  risks  in  their  given  loans 
increase. If they do not have more capital than the rules require, they must either acquire more capital 
or reduce the risks in their lending. In this type of situation, the bank may choose not to renew loans, 
which  could  have  extremely  negative  consequences  for  the  borrowers.  The  new  rules  thus  risk 
reinforcing the sequence of events. However, there are many positive consequences; a more sound 
and individual risk assessment, which will better protect savings and reduce the risk that taxpayers, 
through the central government, will have to step in, opportunities for cheaper loans to borrowers who 
constitute a low risk but also increased interest rate costs for companies that are high risk. A fairer 
pricing of loans, in other words. 
Unlike shares, where it may  be considered exciting to take risks and hope for a high return, boring 
loans are cheap loans for borrowers. By this I do not mean that loans for apartment blocks are boring, 
but they are normally considered stable and durable. Characteristic for loans is a small expected profit, 
but  with  the  low  risk  of  very  large  losses.  Loans  that  cost  a  low  interest  rate  are  therefore  slightly 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2002
 boring loans with stable cash flows that generate stable interest payments and regular repayments, in 
other words, low risk. 
So  how  will  the  new  capital  adequacy  rules  affect  loans  and  credit  granting  to  public  utilities 
companies? A first reflection is that the banks will study credit objects and the companies concerned in 
a more individual manner than before. A second thought is that the banks, when pricing loans, will look 
at the cash flow from the loan, which in this case can be equated with the company’s cash flow. In 
most cases, your companies have a large value in their properties as collateral and this will continue to 
be a positive thing for you, but as I said earlier, the banks today focus firstly on the customer’s ability 
to repay and then on the collateral offered. 
What is important to a company that has loans? 
• 
Meticulous balance sheets and profit and loss accounts for the present time and going back 
a number of years. 
Low vacancy rates in the housing stock and rents that are paid on time. 
The banks will not merely evaluate the size of the cash flows, but also their stability. 
Orderly and well cared for property stock, i.e. property management is important. 
• 
• 
• 
It is therefore important to have good knowledge of the bank’s actions and method of working. The 
difference in interest rate between borrowers of varying risk classes will be greater in future than it is 
today.  It  will  therefore  be  important  for  companies  applying  for  loans  to  present  themselves  as 
attractive borrowers to the bank or the capital market. If they want a low interest rate on their loans as 
a result of their negotiations with the bank, it is important to be able to demonstrate a company that 
has  been  stable  and  well  managed  for  a  number  of  years.  The  proposed  changes  in  the  capital 
adequacy rules will apply with effect from 2005, but developments in the capital market could very well 
lead  to  the  banks’  credit  granting  being  adapted  gradually  to  the  new  rules  in  advance  of  their 
introduction.  It  is  therefore  important  for  capital-intensive  operations  to  prepare  now  for  a  more 
individualised credit assessment in future. The opportunities for finding competitive financing on the 
loan  market  at  a  low  interest  rate  will  be  available  to  those  who  can  convince  lenders  that  their 
operations will generate stable future income. Higher risks, e.g. in the form of varying income flows will 
cost more. 
Looking towards the future 
I can see two important issues for the industry to consider for the future. The first is the financing of the 
new construction that is needed, where the effects of the modern credit granting process and the new 
capital adequacy rules will affect SABO’s operations. It will be a sensitive issue for housing companies 
in municipalities with high vacancy rates and declining populations, particularly in the light of your own 
report issued just before Christmas. Previously, municipalities and municipal operations with municipal 
guarantees have been able to obtain loans on improved terms. In addition to the property as collateral, 
a  municipal  housing  company  has  been  able  to  use  the  municipality’s  guarantee  as  collateral.  In 
future, it is not so certain that this will lead to improved loan terms to the same extent as now. For one 
thing, the municipality’s credit rating could fall because it takes on another large credit commitment, 
which would lead to higher loan costs for both the municipality and the housing company. For another 
thing, there are some credit providers who have already ceased granting loans to municipalities with a 
poor  ability  to  repay.  This  situation  will  probably  be  accentuated  by  the  advent  of  the  new  capital 
adequacy rules, with more individual assessments of each borrower. Given this, it will be even more 
important to consider the four points I mentioned earlier. 
The other important issue is to implement a review of housing policy, as it is important to obtain the 
construction needed in the regions where jobs are available. This will enable Sweden’s economy to 
develop well. One example of possible changes is the introduction of market-adapted utility value rents 
or the complete disappearance of the utility value system. 
It  is  possible  that  more  market-adapted  rents  would  contribute  to  increased  production  of  new 
properties  as  a  result  of  increased  demand,  unlike  the  current  utility  value  regulated  rents  where 
increases in demand do not result in sufficiently large new production of apartment blocks of rental 
apartments  in  growth  areas.  It  is  often  said  that  a  changed,  market-adapted  system  would  lead  to 
higher  rents,  but  the  question  is  whether  this  scenario  would  not  only  apply  to  the  more  attractive 
residential areas of the metropolitan regions and university towns. There are currently approximately 
BIS Review 2/2002 
 5
 22,000  apartments  vacant  throughout  the  country  and  scenarios  indicate  that  the  vacancy  rates  in 
certain areas may increase further. What would market rents involve for areas in Sundsvall, Karlskoga, 
Boden or Bergsjön in Gothenburg? Would the rents in a market-adapted system be reduced in these 
areas  to  be  able  to  compete  with  the  single-family  dwelling  market?  Yes,  that  is  possible,  but  the 
question is whether the vacancies would be filled in all of the “emigration” regions? It would probably 
only apply to regions within commuting distance of jobs. However, if market rents and other changes 
in  the  regulations  may  mean  that  housing  is  built  where  it  is  needed,  which  will  enable  the  labour 
market to function better, this could in any case improve Sweden’s potential growth. 
There  are  indeed  a  number  of  important  future  scenarios  that  need  to  be  considered  by  both  the 
housing companies themselves and the banks as lenders. 
6 
 BIS Review 2/2002
