 Glenn Stevens: The economic outlook in 2002 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to CEDA Economic 
and Political Outlook Conference, Adelaide, 18 February 2002. 
 It is a pleasure to be invited to speak to CEDA’s Economic and Political Outlook in Adelaide. I have 
taken part in CEDA functions at this time of the year in other cities, but it is particularly nice to come to 
Adelaide.  
I would like to note at the outset, for the benefit of the local audience, that the Bank has undertaken a 
considerable  increase  in  the  resources  put  into  "on  the  ground"  economic  intelligence  around  the 
country. During 2001, we established Regional Offices in Victoria, Western Australia and Queensland. 
In  those  States,  the  Bank’s  branches  had  earlier  been  closed  because  their  original  functions  – 
banking and registry operations, currency distribution – were either no longer demanded by customers 
or  had  been  overtaken  by  improved  technology.  The  purpose  of  the  Offices  is to  retain  some  RBA 
presence and, more fundamentally, to gather information about  local economic conditions. In South 
Australia, of course, the Bank still has a presence in the form of a Branch operation which conducts 
banking business for the South Australian Government. So as part of the process of strengthening our 
liaison effort, during last year we re-positioned one of our economists from Head Office to the Adelaide 
Branch.  
The  local  staff  are  in  continual  contact  with  the  Economic  Group  in  Head  Office  and  they  take  an 
active part in the assessment of the economy in the preparation for the monthly Board meetings. We 
have found the information gathered at the local level to be extremely helpful and are very grateful for 
the way businesses, government departments and agencies and other groups have responded to our 
questions. 
The South Australian economy has turned in a reasonably strong performance over the past year, with 
growth in household demand running above the national average. In common with some of the other 
States,  South  Australia’s  export  exposure  no  doubt  means  that  businesses  here  will  be  keeping  a 
watchful eye on events abroad. Equally, the apparent intention of the mining sector to begin raising its 
capital spending, according to the available surveys, will probably be good for South Australia. 
I  do  not  intend  to  attempt  a  detailed  analysis  of  local  economic  conditions.  Instead,  most  of  my 
remarks will be about the global and national scenes. The world economy presents no fewer sources 
of uncertainty, and hence no less potential for surprises, than it has for a number of years now, though 
from the perspective of the international business cycle, there are some quite encouraging signs at 
present of a turning point. In Australia, the economy has clearly coped with the international downturn 
pretty well so far, and there are good reasons for confidence about its performance over the coming 
year.  
As  it  happens,  the  Bank  has  just  published  a  Statement  on  Monetary  Policy,  containing  our 
comprehensive analysis of the international and Australian economies. My task today is to elaborate 
some of the themes in that document, rather than to bring any new messages. 
The US business cycle 
On 26 November 2001, the US National Bureau of Economic Research announced that, according to 
the  methodology  they  use  for  dating  business  cycles,  the  US  economy  had  reached  the  end  of  a 
decade-long expansion in March 2001, after which it had been in a period of contraction. 
That  pronouncement  effectively  ended  the  debate  about  whether  there  would  or  would  not  be  a 
recession  –  defined  by  the  NBER  as  “a  significant  decline  in  activity  spread  across  the  economy, 
lasting  more  than  a  few  months,  visible  in  industrial  production,  employment,  real  income,  and 
wholesale-retail trade”. One had apparently been under way for eight months.  
  1
 It is not that unusual, by the way, for such classifications of recession and expansion to lag the actual 
event by a good few months. In fact, it is not unknown for a recession to be actually finished by the 
time  the  data  make  it  clear  that  one  had  begun  (though  the  fact  that  it  had  finished  was  itself,  of 
course, not known until later). This was the case in the early-1990s recession in the United States. 
Note also that there have not, as yet anyway, been two consecutive quarters of declining GDP in the 
United States – the definition of "technical" recession so beloved of the headline writers.  
 
Debate  quickly  moved  on,  focusing  briefly  on  the  role  of  the  September  11  events  affecting  the 
economy. Clearly, those events did not cause the recession. All the dynamics typically associated with 
a contraction  in output  were in  train prior to mid September – otherwise  the  NBER  would not have 
been able to decide by November that there was a recession under way. Moreover, the direct impact 
of the attacks themselves was, despite the horrifying images, not all that large on the US economy. 
Arguably, though, they came at a time when the US economy was already contracting and accelerated 
the adjustments by businesses to the underlying reality which was emerging. Certainly, the event was 
a  watershed  for  commentators.  Those  voices  saying  there  would  not  be  a  recession  went  quiet 
immediately, some weeks before the NBER’s pronouncement. But a business cycle contraction was 
definitely under way prior to September 11.  
The NBER’s statement was only 12 weeks ago. Between late November and today, many observers 
have begun talking about a US recovery. Financial market prices reflected this change relatively early 
on, as they tend to do. Share markets rallied strongly through the last weeks of 2001 and into the early 
part of this year, though the shine has come off a little since then. Bond markets pushed up long-term 
interest rates somewhat, and credit spreads for corporate bonds have tended to decline. Forecasts of 
economic growth in the United States appear to have stopped falling, and the latest actual figure for 
GDP,  while  weak  in  an  absolute  sense,  was  stronger  than  most  had  expected,  and  much  stronger 
than many feared in the early days after September 11.  
To no small extent, this reflects the fact that the underlying US economy weathered the impact of the 
terrorist attacks themselves very well. Post-attack, the financial system was up and running again very 
quickly, especially given the destruction of physical infrastructure at the heart of the system. And while 
American  corporations  have  cut  their  investment  spending  very  sharply  indeed,  households  have 
continued  to  increase  their  spending  on  consumer  goods  and  services.  Macroeconomic  policy  has 
been supportive,  with a tax cut affecting household  incomes during the second half of 2001 – right 
when  it  was most needed  – and a  very rapid easing of monetary policy  beginning  in  early January 
2001, and continuing with force right through the year.  
In fact, if one were to adopt the view that a recession began last March and, noting that recessions 
typically (if there is a typical recession) last about a year, to set about looking for signs that an upturn 
might  be  near,  one  would  find  some  evidence  in  the  real  economy  to  support  that  view.  Inventory 
adjustment, part of the classical business cycle story – and very much a part of this recession in the 
"new economy", especially in the production of IT goods themselves – began quite early, and is by 
now well advanced. The adjustment to investment spending has been quick. Signs of a bottoming in 
parts of the tech sector have begun to emerge. The adjustment to business payrolls may also have 
gone a long way towards completion, judging by recent labour market data.  
  So an analysis of the normal business-cycle dynamics does increasingly suggest that the US economy 
could well begin a new expansion soon. If it does, the US recession would have been no deeper, and 
probably  shallower,  than  the  one  in  1990–91,  which  was  the  mildest  recession  in  the  past  three 
decades.  
 
Such an outcome is by no means yet assured, and it is entirely possible that there will be setbacks, 
and associated fluctuations in sentiment. Those inclined to a pessimistic view would, of course, point 
to some other features of the US economy which I have not, as yet, mentioned. It seems likely, for 
example, that there was excessive investment in certain areas during the height of the euphoria over 
returns  to  information  technology.  Even  though  new  investment  has  been  slashed,  an  overhang  of 
past  investment  might  remain  –  and  hence  scope  for  an  early  return  to  rising  business  investment 
spending may be limited, though this depends on the speed with which equipment becomes obsolete, 
which is much higher for ITC-type investment than for, say, buildings. To the extent that a good deal of 
the investment was simply "wasted", there is presumably not much overhang – but in that case the 
question is whether the full extent of the lost wealth entailed is yet apparent. We could also add that 
the true state of corporate balance sheets is more uncertain in general, as highlighted by the recent 
revelations  of  accounting  irregularities  in  some  high-profile  US  firms,  and  that  American  share 
valuations  still  seem  high  by  historical  standards,  supported  by  exceptionally  strong  forecasts  of 
earnings growth.  
Households have expanded spending beyond the rise in their income over the past year – indeed they 
have done so over a number of years. That can be sustained only for so long, especially given more 
subdued  gains  in  wealth.  Can  the  household  sector  keep  the  US  economy  ticking  over  while  the 
business  sector  sorts  itself  out?  Or  will  the  loss  of  wage  income  resulting  from  the  higher 
unemployment dampen consumers’ enthusiasm?  
Opinions  on  these  and  other  uncertainties  differ.  The  weight  of  opinion  has,  I  think  rightly,  become 
more optimistic lately, but the pessimists who doubt that a recession can be over so quickly are not 
without  their  reasons.  Even  some  of  those  who  are  relatively  optimistic  might  concede  that  factors 
such  as  these  may  well  mean  that  the  rate  of  expansion  is  initially  relatively  modest,  and  certainly 
slower than the growth seen in the late 1990s.  
Other areas of the world economy 
What of other regions? 
  3
 I  think  we  can  see  evidence  in  a  number  of  countries  in  east  Asia  that  the  contraction  in  industrial 
production came to an end during the closing months of 2001. These countries were hit very hard by 
the  global  tech  sector  slump  during  2000  and  2001,  which  affected  their  exports.  Some  countries 
which were not badly affected by the Asian crisis in 1997 and 1998, but which have very extensive 
exposure to technology production, such as Singapore and Taiwan, have suffered much more on this 
occasion than they did three or four years ago. But for east Asia as a whole, the impact has not been 
as serious. In contrast to events during the Asian crisis, macroeconomic policies on this occasion have 
acted in a way which has cushioned, rather than reinforced, the impact of global events. Exchange 
rates have been allowed to decline, and monetary and fiscal policies have generally been eased.  
 
Activity  seems  to  have  stabilised  recently.  Semi-conductor  prices  have  firmed  appreciably,  having 
collapsed over the first nine months or so of 2001. As an example of the roller-coaster ride producers 
in this area have experienced, consider the price of memory modules published by a web-site called 
DRAMexchange.com.  In  October  2000,  the  price  quoted  for  a  128mb  SDRAM  module  was  about 
US$10. By October 2001, it had fallen to US$1. Some of the fall was, no doubt, the decline over the 
(very  short)  life  span  of  high-technology  components  with  which  we  are  familiar  –  driven  by 
productivity improvement and competition. However, much of the fall presumably reflects the cyclical 
dynamics. Over the past few months, prices have risen to around US$3.50. It is encouraging for the 
small east Asian countries to see this, and  to see hopeful signs  of expansion  in the  United States, 
which remains such a powerful force driving the business cycle for externally oriented economies. 
In Europe, growth slowed noticeably in 2001. However, in some surveys one can see very early signs 
of what should turn out to be an improvement in economic conditions over the year ahead.  
Japan, unfortunately, is in quite a different position. Japan was affected by the tech sector slump, but it 
is  also  afflicted  with  very  powerful  forces  at  work  in  its  domestic  economy.  Deflating  asset  prices, 
associated pressure on corporations and banking sector asset quality, and generalised price deflation 
in producer prices and even consumer prices, make for a very difficult situation. These dynamics have 
been  in  operation  for  some  years,  but  appear  to  have  intensified  over  the  past  year  or  so. 
Conventional macroeconomic policies have been pushed to their limits. Structural reform is necessary 
but will be painful in the short term. While attention has been (understandably) fixed on developments 
in  the  United  States,  the  biggest  threat  to  the  world  economy  in  terms  of  the  drag  on  aggregate 
economic activity may well be Japan. How things will play out there remains extremely uncertain. 
   
But overall, barring a sudden and major further intensification of contractionary forces in Japan, there 
are reasons to think that global economic activity will begin to improve this year. A pretty strong policy 
stimulus  has  been  applied,  led  by  the  United  States,  in  a  timely  fashion.  Global  short-term  interest 
rates are unusually low. In addition, the price of oil, which played an important role in producing the 
slowdown,  has  fallen  substantially  over  the  past  year.  These  two  factors,  plus  the  outworking  of 
inventory overhangs, would usually be enough to produce a cyclical upturn. As I have sketched above, 
we can see evidence beginning to appear which is consistent with that view. For these reasons, as our 
recent Statement on Monetary Policy made clear, some of the pessimism about the United States, and 
hence the world economy, that existed a few months ago has waned.  
The question may soon be, not whether there is an upturn, but how strong and durable it will prove to 
be. At this stage, that is unclear, and it probably will remain so for a while. 
Implications for Australia 
It  is  well  recognised  that  the  Australian  economy  has  been  quite  resilient  in  the  face  of  the  global 
recession.  Growth  through  the  first  three  quarters  of  2001  ran  at  an  annualised  rate  of  4  per  cent. 
Even  a moderate  increase in GDP  in the December quarter,  which is  what most observers expect, 
would mean that growth through the full year would be of the order of 3½ per cent. That compares well 
with the growth for the United States of about zero for the same period, and with the outcome for the 
major countries as a group, which was also about zero.  
In past periods of global downturn, Australia has rarely outperformed the major countries; historically, 
our tendency was to have a period of weakness that was, if anything, more pronounced than those of 
the  G7  group.  This  time  it  has  been  different,  though  not  because  the  global  recession  has  not 
affected Australia: the impact on exports has become increasingly clear over the past six months or 
so.  The  value  of  exports,  which  was  growing  at  25-30  per  cent  per  annum  at  one  point,  is  little 
changed now compared with a year ago. The contribution to growth in GDP from net export volumes 
ran to about 2 percentage points in the year to June 2001, but was negative during the second half of 
2001.  
  5
  
So two questions can be posed. First, why is it that on this occasion, so far at least, we have done 
better than on others? And second, will it continue?  
A lot has been made of the housing upswing which is currently increasing activity and employment in 
the construction sector and associated parts of manufacturing. It is true that this is helping growth at 
present, and that it will most likely fade from the middle of the year. But of course it is equally true that 
we "paid for" this boost with a large contraction – of unprecedented size, in fact – during the second 
half of 2000. We took a brief but very large housing downturn at a time when the world economy was 
still doing acceptably well, and then got the benefit of an upswing in housing as the world slowed. The 
timing of this was not, of course, something over which we had any control.  
Looking  through  the  ups  and  downs  of  the  housing  sector,  it  is  still  the  case  that  the  Australian 
economy  has  performed  better  than  in  other  episodes  of  global  recession.  This  is  not  to  deny  that 
growth has declined – in some underlying sense, stripping out the housing fluctuations, growth might 
have run at something like 2½ per cent over each of 2000 and 2001. That is noticeably slower than 
the  outcomes  for  1998  and  1999  (which  were  exceptional).  But  it  is  still  a  better  performance  than 
those  in  the  US  and  most  other  major  countries,  and  better  than  an  extrapolation  of  historical 
experience in previous global downturns might have suggested.  
 
We should also, of course, keep in mind that the full effects of the global downturn on Australia are 
probably not yet apparent. Even so, as we begin to get the very early pieces of economic information 
for 2002, it seems that business and consumer confidence has held up quite well, and there are some 
signs of improvement in demand for labour. All this is consistent with growth continuing thus far. So 
the question remains as to why that has occurred.  
One major factor which has helped has been that few of the problems which have dogged us in past 
episodes, and hence exacerbated business cycle downturns, have been present on this occasion.  
The  obvious  one  which  a  central  banker  would  nominate  is  inflation,  which  has  increased,  but  not 
beyond  manageable  levels.  Core  inflation  picked  up  from  about  1½  per  cent  in  1998  and  1999,  to 
about 3¼ per cent, on our reading, in 2001. As I am sure you know, the centre-piece of Australia’s 
monetary  policy  regime  is  an  inflation  target  of  2-3  per  cent,  on  average.  This  system  has  been  in 
place since 1993, and has worked well for Australia over that period. It requires the Bank to move our 
policy instrument so as to keep medium-term inflation outcomes consistent with the target.  
During 1997 and 1998, inflation was below target. Monetary policy’s response was to ease, seeking 
interest rates low enough to engender a stronger expansion of aggregate demand in the economy. 
The intention of this was to allow inflation to increase a little, back up to the target. By the second half 
of 1999, it was apparent that the period of below-target inflation was drawing to a close. In anticipation 
of higher inflation, policy began to move interest rates up from unusually low levels to more "normal" 
levels, a process which continued through to August 2000.  
   During 2001, even as inflation was still increasing, ultimately moving above our target, monetary policy 
was eased substantially. We felt that the previous tightening phase had done enough to ensure that 
this rising trend would not persist, and therefore that we had some latitude to offer support to growth in 
the face of the contractionary shock heading our way from abroad. Even though the recent CPI figure 
was interpreted by many as a bit on the high side, we still think that the outlook is for inflation to return 
to target over the next four to six quarters. The reasoning behind that is set out in the Statement. For 
our  purposes  here  today,  the  point  is  that  the  flexibility  to  put  interest  rates  down  pre-emptively  is 
earned by being prepared to put them up when a rise in inflation is on the cards. Policy has operated 
in such a fashion.  
Another imbalance we have managed to avoid on this occasion is excessive investment. Here there is 
a distinct contrast with the United States, where business investment spending was exceptionally high 
by historical standards until 2000, and then slumped sharply. It is that item of spending which, more 
than  any  other  component  of  aggregate  demand,  pushed  the  United  States  into  recession.  In 
Australia,  business  investment  as  a  share  of  GDP  peaked  as  far  back  as  1998,  and  has  gradually 
declined for three years. While some people might look at this and say that that is a terrible outcome, I 
tend to look at it and say that it won’t fall further. Indeed, with investment at historically low levels, a 
rise is more likely than a fall in the next couple of years. The forward-looking data provided by the ABS 
survey say the same thing.  
To the above we could add that the Australian share market was never characterised by the extent of 
excesses  seen  elsewhere,  and  that  household  and  corporate  balance  sheets  are,  by  and  large,  in 
pretty good shape – though households are now carrying a good deal more debt than they did in the 
past. Prior financial excesses would be highly likely to play a part in worsening any downturn if and 
when it occurred; having avoided the worst of such excesses is a big help. We can further add that 
fiscal policy expansion during 2000 was remarkably well-timed from the perspective of stabilising the 
business cycle. Yet another factor is that Australia’s terms of trade have not slumped in the way they 
have so often done in the past; indeed, until quite recently the terms of trade had been rising. This is 
  7
 of  some  importance  in  that  it  supports  domestic  incomes,  at  a  point  in  the  cycle  when,  historically, 
those incomes have been reduced by global price developments.  
Then  there  is  the  exchange  rate.  The  decline  in  the  currency  in  the  first  half  of  2000  was  not  well 
explained at the time, but there is no doubt it has conferred an advantage on Australian producers of 
tradeable goods and services. There is, however, more to the exchange rate story than that. A floating 
exchange  rate  system  means  that  an  adverse  change  in  capital  markets’  sentiment  towards  the 
country is not automatically reflected in tighter domestic financial conditions: the exchange rate can 
take at least some of the adjustment. That means that domestic demand is not crunched because of 
pressure on the currency. This particular piece of our economic structure helps the economy adapt to 
shocks in international capital markets more effectively than the alternative, of a fixed exchange rate, 
would  allow.  That  flexibility  is  not  without  limit,  of  course,  and  needs  to  be  complemented  by  an 
effective  monetary  policy  strategy  to  provide  an  anchor  for  the  system  –  which  is  where  inflation 
targeting comes in.  
So a number of factors have assisted the economy in coping with the external shock. Can this good 
performance continue?  
To state the obvious, it depends how long the international economy remains weak. No economy can 
remain insulated from global problems indefinitely. But if the consensus view of global growth – that 
things  will  begin  to  improve  as  2002  progresses  –  is  correct,  then  Australia’s  prospects  are  pretty 
good. The general effects of low interest rates will still be filtering through the economy for some time 
yet.  Prospects  for  an  upswing  in  business  investment  would  be  good  in  this  scenario,  which  would 
help to counteract the impact on domestic demand of a waning in the housing cycle. The good growth 
seen in 2001 will help to put a floor under the labour market, and in due course, improved conditions 
abroad would offer better prospects for exporters. This does not rule out a temporary weak period for 
Australian  growth  at  some  point  during  this  year,  but  if  the  world  economy  is  improving, 
macroeconomic policies are supporting growth and investment is beginning an upswing, it would be 
unlikely that activity would fall away very sharply or for long.  
None of this is assured, in large part because the global recovery itself, while apparently more likely 
than  it  was,  is  no  sure  thing.  But  then  nothing  is  ever  assured.  What  appears  to  have  changed  in 
recent months is that the balance of risks to global growth and to the Australian economy is no longer 
"tilted to the downside", in the way it was. It is still possible to conceive of a weaker outcome than the 
consensus  expects  –  but  for  the  first  time  in  over  a  year,  it  is  also  just  possible  to  conceive  of  the 
possibility that things could be stronger than generally expected.  
Conclusion 
The  year  2001  saw  a  major  change  in  perceptions  about  the  health  of  the  world  economy,  with 
recessions or near-recessions in several major countries. As of early 2002, it appears that the point of 
deepest gloom is behind us, and that people are starting to think about the shape of a renewed period 
of expansion which will probably get under way this year. This improvement is not assured and there 
could be setbacks. But the position we are in now is, in most respects, decidedly preferable to that of a 
year ago.  
For Australia, this is good news, even though the benefits of it will show up with a lag. The economy 
has held up quite well in the face of international weakness, and it should continue to do so, for some 
time  at  least.  If  the  recent  hopeful  signs  of  a  global  pick-up  do  turn  into  a  sustained  period  of 
expansion, even if only at a moderate pace, Australia will be well placed to continue turning in good 
macroeconomic outcomes over the slightly longer term.  
 
 