 Glenn Stevens: Inflation, deflation and all that 
Speech  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  Australian 
Business Economists 2002 Forecasting Conference Dinner, Sydney, 4 December 2002. 
 Introduction 
In the formative years of the current generation of economists, inflation was considered to be one of 
the most pressing macroeconomic problems. That's not surprising, since most of the net rise in prices 
that has occurred in human history took place between the late 1940s and about 1990, as a plot of 
any price index in any industrial country would show.  
 
 In Australia's case, it was observable during the 1950s that, in periods of business cycle downturn, 
prices stopped rising but didn't actually fall. This was in contrast to the pre-World War II experience, 
where price levels did fall during recessions. By the second half of the 1960s, it was even clearer that 
the price level had acquired a persistent upward trend, and around that time it became normal to look 
at the price level in its first difference form (i.e. the inflation rate) rather than its level.1  
As all of us here remember only too well, inflation reached nearly 20 per cent during the mid 1970s. 
Thereafter polices aimed at reducing it, with mixed success at first, but more lasting success in the 
aftermath of the early-1990s downturn. A number of other countries had more clearly broken the back 
of serious inflation in the early 1980s; we took a little longer. But in general it could be said that the 
period of really serious inflation in the western world lasted from the late 1960s until the early 1990s. 
The subsequent decade has been a period of low inflation almost everywhere. Most recently, with a 
global business cycle downturn, inflation globally has declined further, and is currently low to very low 
in most places. So it is natural to ask whether, after a generation worrying about inflation, we might be 
faced with deflation. Certainly the word 'deflation' is used with much greater frequency than it has been 
for a long time. Its use usually conjures up some vague notion of the Great Depression, which was the 
last time a widespread deflation occurred. So it is worth examining this in more detail. I want first to be 
clear what we mean by deflation, then to ask whether it is in fact occurring. Then I want to ask whether 
we should worry about it, and if so, what we might do to counter it.  
                                                      
1   As a gauge of this I consulted successive RBA Annual Reports. Throughout the 1960s, the level of the CPI was plotted in 
charts. The first time it appeared in changes was in the Report for 1969/70. 
BIS Review 71/2002 
 1
 Let me be very clear at the outset, and I will repeat this more than once in what follows, that Australia 
is not experiencing deflation now, and is unlikely to do so any time soon. The issue is an international 
one much more than a domestic one, but given its prominence it is worth some consideration. 
What is deflation, and why would it be a problem? 
1.  
Deflation is a generalised and persistent decline in most, if not all, prices for goods and services. More 
likely than not this, if it occurred, would be accompanied by declines in prices for many real assets and 
pressure for, even if not the actuality of, declines in wage and salary incomes. 
A situation where we observe declines in the prices of some products does not qualify as deflation in 
this sense. It is nearly always the case that prices for some things are falling, while prices for other 
things are rising. Were we to look at the 100-odd expenditure classes in the Australian consumer price 
index, we would find that about 30 of them record a decline in any particular quarter. This has been a 
feature of the low inflation era since 1990. Even in the high inflation period of the 1970s and 1980s, it 
was  normal  to  see  10  to  15  per  cent  of  expenditure  classes  recording  price  declines  in  any  given 
quarter. 
 This kind of relative price change is the price mechanism at work in the market economy, and is to be 
distinguished  from  general  deflation  where  prices  of  most  or  all  things  decline.  A  simple  but  useful 
working definition of deflation, then, is when the prices of enough goods and services decline to cause 
aggregate price indexes like the CPI to record a fall. 
Deflation  of  that  general  nature  was  once  a  not-uncommon  event.  For  example,  in  the  nineteenth 
century, it was normal to think of a relatively stable average price level over fairly long periods, but with 
noticeable fluctuations around the mean over periods of some years – with periods of inflation being 
followed by periods of deflation. In Australia, up to 1914, deflation occurred in almost half the years for 
which we have data, an outcome not dissimilar to those seen in other countries (see following table). It 
was really only in the last few decades of the twentieth century that we became accustomed to the 
idea that the price level normally rises, even in times of peace, and almost never declines.  
2 
 BIS Review 71/2002
   Proportion of years in which CPI fell (year-average basis) 
Deflation 
Post War 
1.8 
1.8 
0.0 
3.5 
1.8 
7.0 
3.5 
1.8 
3.5 
5.3 
1.8 
12.3  
1.8 
3.5 
1.8 
8.8  
Inter-War 
36.4 
40.9 
36.4 
50.0 
22.7 
31.8 
45.5 
40.9 
40.9 
22.7 
31.8 
36.4 
54.5 
50.0 
50.0 
50.0  
1870-1914 
45.5 
31.8 
38.6 
25.0 
50.0 
43.2 
54.5 
34.1 
59.1 
38.6 
45.5 
31.4 
31.8 
36.4 
43.2 
31.8  
Australia 
Canada 
United Kingdom 
United States 
Austria 
Belgium 
Denmark 
Finland 
France 
Germany 
Italy 
Japan 
Netherlands 
Norway 
Sweden 
Switzerland 
Source:  1870-1980  from  Angus  Maddison  (1991)  Dynamic  Forces  in  Capitalist  Development,  Oxford  University  Press,  Oxford.Subsequently,  national 
sources. 
Deflation need not be harmful. In cases where exceptionally strong productivity growth accompanies 
very  strong  demand  growth,  the  price  level  can  fall  even  as  incomes,  profits  and  economic  activity 
expand.  This  sort  of  'good'  deflation  can,  in  principle,  be  seen  in  the  aftermath  of  some  sort  of 
technology  breakthrough,  or  perhaps  the  opening  up  of  a  previously  over-regulated  or  closed 
economy to the incentives of the competitive market place. No-one is likely to worry much about this 
sort of deflation, as it will coincide with a feeling of increasing prosperity. 
Why might deflation be harmful? The main reason is because of fixed nominal contracting of wages, 
debts, etc. The real value of a dollar is higher after deflation than it was before. So if you owe a dollar, 
your debt burden is higher. If you are owed a dollar, or earning a dollar, your real wealth or income is 
higher. Price changes of this nature, if they are unanticipated, lead to a different distribution of wealth 
and income than people had banked on when they made their contracts. Usually, this is disruptive to 
the economy (not to mention unfair). This is a problem of exactly the same nature as those which arise 
with inflation, except in reverse. In time, of course, people learn that price changes are occurring, and 
adjust their behaviour accordingly. But adjusting incomes downward for deflation is typically harder to 
do  than  adjusting  them  upwards  for  inflation.  So  percentage  point  for  percentage  point,  deflation  is 
arguably a bit more painful than inflation. 
Harmful deflation typically occurs in parallel to developments in prices for assets and balance sheets. 
This is usually in the aftermath of a boom accommodated by a big run up in debt, involving a large 
increase in capacity in response to very optimistic expectations about future sales and profits. When 
the  optimistic  expectations  cannot  be  met,  it  is  apparent  that  firms  are  over-invested  and  over-
leveraged. They are then under pressure to shore up their balance sheets. Asset prices fall, as firms 
seek to disinvest. Banks and other lenders find that the quality of their assets has deteriorated, and 
are tempted to reduce the flow of new credit in order to conserve their own capital. Aggregate demand 
in the economy declines, and prices for goods and services fall. This is the 'debt deflation' described 
by Irving Fisher many years ago. Depending on the size of the preceding boom, and on the policies 
pursued during the bust, this process can be exceedingly painful. 
BIS Review 71/2002 
 3
 In the case where expectations of ongoing deflation become strongly held, moreover, it is possible that 
some  fairly  serious  problems  of  economic  management  can  emerge.  Expectations  that  prices  will 
continually  fall  may  lead  people  to  postpone  spending,  which  of  course  amplifies  the  deflationary 
pressure.  The  rate  of  deflation  might,  in  extreme  circumstances,  also  mean  that  attempts  to  boost 
growth by reducing interest rates run into the problem that the nominal interest rate cannot fall below 
zero, which might mean that the real interest rate is too high for the economy's needs. I return to this 
below. 
Is deflation happening? Might it happen more widely? 
2. 
Deflation is certainly not happening in Australia. For the year just past, the CPI rose by about 3 per 
cent.  Underlying  measures  rose  slightly  less  than  that.  About  70  per  cent  of  the  items  in  the  CPI 
basket recorded increases, while 30 per cent of them fell, which as I noted above is fairly typical of the 
experience  of the  past  decade. In the part of the  economy  where prices  are  determined by market 
forces (as opposed to being subject to direct influence of government), prices for goods rose by about 
2 per cent, while prices for services rose by nearly 5 per cent. In the period ahead, our forecast is that 
inflation will continue to be about where it is now. 
 
 Nor is deflation happening, by any normal definition, in North America or Europe. The US CPI rose by 
about 1½ per cent over the past year. Goods prices declined by about 1 per cent, partly as a result of 
the strength of the US dollar, but services prices rose by over 3½ per cent. In Europe, the CPI rose in 
core terms by a bit over 2 per cent, with goods prices up a little over 1 per cent, and services prices by 
over  3  per  cent.  The  lowest  rates  of  price  increase  are  occurring  in  Germany  and  Belgium,  with 
inflation of about 1 per cent in both cases. So there is no deflation here on average, or even in the 
lower tail of the distribution. 
Rates  of  price  increase  are,  however,  pretty  low  around  the  world.  The  chart  shows  some 
characteristics of the set of inflation outcomes for a group of countries, 48 in all, classified by the IMF 
as advanced industrial countries or emerging market countries. The median inflation rate here is about 
2½ per cent, which is down from about 6½ per cent in 1990. The twentieth percentile inflation rate in 
this simple unweighted distribution is about 1½ per cent – i.e. one country in five in this sample has 
inflation of 1½ per cent or lower. The eightieth percentile inflation rate is about 5½ per cent, compared 
with about 25 per cent in 1990.  
4 
 BIS Review 71/2002
  Given the central tendency for  inflation to  be this low,  it  is not surprising that, when  we  look to the 
lower tail of the distribution for this broader group, we find that a handful of countries have deflation. 
Interestingly, they are all in Asia.2 The chart shows annual average inflation rates which hide some of 
the  short-run  dynamics.  But  one  can  count  about  five  countries  in  Asia  whose  annual  CPI  inflation 
figures are now, or at some point within the past year have been, below zero. These are China, Japan, 
Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan. 
One  could  debate  in  each  individual  case  what  the  proximate  causes  of  this  are,  and  whether  it  is 
'good' deflation or bad. China's deflation is arguably a candidate to be classified as 'good' deflation, 
since  it  seems  to  be  associated  with  rapid  overall  growth  and  rising  living  standards.  Hong  Kong's 
deflation is partly necessitated by the peg to the strong US dollar, though of the cumulative decline of 
about 13 per cent in Hong Kong's CPI since mid 1998, about half is due to declining rents, which is 
more associated with the decline in housing values after the earlier boom there. Of course, Hong Kong 
has an impressive capacity to adjust to these shocks, but even so it is a painful process. There is no 
doubt that Japan's deflation is of the bad kind. Various factors are at work in the other countries. 
But standing back from the individual cases, there is something of a pattern. While this hardly amounts 
to widespread deflation, or a deflationary spiral, it is clear that instances of falling prices are now a little 
more common, and tend to be a little more persistent, than used to be the case. 
Nor  is  the  process  of  declining  inflation  necessarily  finished.  According  to  IMF  forecasts,  the  world 
economy grew by less than average in 2001 and is doing so again in 2002, while 2003 is forecast to 
see roughly average growth. In other words, crudely measured, global spare capacity is increasing, 
and will remain elevated next year. Short of some inflationary shock occurring on the supply side, it 
would not be unreasonable to expect global inflation on average to decline over the next year or two. 
So a year or two from now, average inflation could be very low indeed, and there could easily be more 
countries  in  the  lower  tail  of  the  distribution  of  outcomes  that  experience  deflation.  For  the  major 
countries apart from Japan, deflation does not seem to be the most likely outcome, but a dip below 
zero  for  the  inflation  rate  is,  perhaps,  within  the  distribution  of  possible  outcomes  in  some  cases.  So 
even  though  this  outlook  could  not  be  classed  as  general  deflation  in  a  global  sense,  there  will 
probably be enough instances of deflation around that people will be talking about it for a year or two.  
 
                                                      
2   Argentina was in deflation prior to the collapse of the currency board arrangement early this year, but that has now been 
followed by the rather more familiar problem of inflation, accompanied by a host of other serious difficulties. 
BIS Review 71/2002 
 5
  Should we worry about deflation? 
3. 
I have already said that it seems unlikely that anyone will worry much about 'good' deflation, given that 
it  is  part  of  a  story  of  rising  prosperity.  It  is  obviously  the  other  kind  of  deflation  that  people  worry 
about. This is a symptom of a sick economy, where profits are poor and hence prospects for near-term 
growth are relatively weak, unless consumers or government can be induced to expand their spending 
more quickly than they have been doing to date. 
But to the extent that this kind of deflation is a symptom of a problem of weak demand, it is more that 
weakness which should  worry us  than the  deflation  per se. Imagine two scenarios. The first is  one 
where inflation has been, and is expected to remain, at a steady 3 per cent. Everyone's behaviour is 
fully  adjusted  to  that  expectation.  Then,  as  a  result  of  a  period  of  temporary  demand  weakness, 
inflation falls to 1 per cent. The second is one where inflation has been, and is expected to remain, at 
a steady 1 per cent, with everyone's behaviour fully adjusted to that expectation. Then, as a result of a 
period of temporary demand weakness of the same extent as that in the first scenario, inflation falls to 
-1 per cent. Apart from the absolute numbers, these two cases are identical. Should we worry about 
the latter more than the former, simply because the zero line has been crossed?3  
                                                        
3  
I am obviously abstracting here from Australian circumstances. If the target inflation rate is 2½ per cent, then were inflation 
to fall to -1 per cent, that would  be a serious miss of the target. That would be reason for concern – every bit as big  a 
concern as inflation going to 6 per cent – but it is mostly the deviation from the target rather than the negative sign which 
would be the worry. 
6 
 BIS Review 71/2002
 On  a  first  pass,  it  is  not  clear  that  we  should.  Both  outcomes  are  caused  by  weak  demand,  which 
should worry us equally in both cases. Both have inflation 2 percentage points lower than anticipated – 
which  means  that  income  and  wealth  are  behaving  differently  to  people's  expectations.  That  is 
disruptive and is of equal concern in each case. In both cases, the outcome is, of course, cause for 
action to expand demand. There may be sufficient nominal rigidity around zero that the adjustment to 
a temporary period of unexpectedly low inflation is more awkward in the second case. If true, this is a 
reason not to aim at inflation of only 1 per cent to start with – but that's another story. But apart from 
that,  a  temporary  drop  below  the  zero  line  due  to  a  cyclical  period  of  demand  weakness  in  an 
otherwise healthy economy is not obviously cause for much more concern than crossing the 2 per cent 
line would be in the other imaginary economy here.  
At  least,  that  is  so  provided  that  the  drop  is  temporary,  and  that  expectations  about  future  price 
changes  remain  well-anchored  at  a  bit  above  zero.  But  what  happens  when  expectations  about 
ongoing deflation take hold? That is different. Here is the scenario which I think people worry most 
about: not the kind of mild temporary deflation which is a symptom of a period of short-term economic 
weakness,  but  the  kind  of  deflation  which  might  itself  be  a  cause  of  further  economic  weakness  in 
future. The reason they get so concerned is the possibility that it may not be easy to escape from such 
a situation. 
To put this at its most stark, imagine an economy in which deflation is strongly expected to continue, at 
a rate which exceeds the natural real interest rate in the economy – that is the equilibrium return on 
real capital. In that situation, because nominal interest rates cannot fall below zero, the real interest 
rate set by the central bank cannot go below the natural or 'neutral' rate. Since conventional monetary 
policy works in an expansionary direction by lowering interest rates in the financial sector below the 
neutral rate, it follows that conventional monetary policy is rendered incapable of applying stimulus to 
an economy in this situation. The real interest rate is too high, which means that policy remains too 
contractionary,  prolonging  the  deflationary  pressure.  There  is  a  'deflation  trap',  or  what  we  learned 
about in undergraduate economics as a 'liquidity trap'. 
Some have argued that this is the right diagnosis of Japan's situation.4 The question is: how likely is it 
that other countries will get into this sort of problem? My view is that it is less likely to occur in most of 
the other more dynamic economies of Asia. These countries must have tremendous opportunities for 
profitable investment in future. On that assumption, the natural interest rate is almost certainly much 
higher than the present or likely future rate of deflation. So while deflation or very low inflation in these 
countries is probably a sign of temporarily weak demand, which is something that policymakers there 
presumably  wish  to  address,  it  still  does  not  seem  all  that  likely  that  they  will  find  themselves  in  a 
deflation trap of the kind sketched out above. 
What about the US? We have been told for years that returns to capital are high, associated with the 
stronger productivity growth. For most of the late 1990s, markets certainly behaved as though that was 
their expectation. If it were still thought that prospective returns are pretty good, then one would be 
unlikely to worry about getting into a deflation trap. It would take a pretty large, persistently expected 
deflation rate to spring such a trap. Of course, if there has been an excessive build-up of capital, then 
returns might be poor for a while, so that the natural rate might be very low during the period it takes 
for that excess to be worked off. That case can be made for some of the investment in information 
technology and communications made in the second half of the 1990s in the US and elsewhere. But 
large chunks of the 'old economy' probably  have reasonable, even if not spectacular, prospects for 
returns, so it does not obviously follow that the US economy is in danger of the kind of deflationary 
experience  which  would  be  very  awkward  to  stop.  That  is  not  to  say,  of  course,  that  US  monetary 
policy can necessarily work miracles to return the US economy to full health and strength in a hurry – 
that always takes time, even with policy effectiveness. The point is simply that we should not conclude 
that monetary policy has, as yet, lost all its potency. 
Perhaps the case is a little less clear cut in parts of Europe, where various economic rigidities may 
constrain business profitability in some countries. But many of the countries on the periphery of the 
euro  area,  or  potential  entrants  to  the  common  currency,  would  appear  to  have  strong  investment 
opportunities. If this is at the expense of investment in some of the core countries, that is a matter of 
                                                      
4  
I am going to skip the issue of whether 'quantitative'measures are of any help here. 
BIS Review 71/2002 
 7
 adjustment (including in relative price levels, as Charlie Bean5 recently pointed out). It does not look 
like a generalised deflation trap. 
Widening  our  perspective  to  a  global  one,  while  we  can  observe  excess  supply  in  many  global 
industries, it is hard to believe that there is too much capital everywhere, or that where there is excess 
there will be no rationalisation. Is the US, for example, satiated with infrastructure in airports, roads, 
electricity generation, to name a few? Are all the world's emerging markets so satiated? And has the 
process of innovation and development of new products and markets ground to a halt? That's unlikely. 
It's more likely that the medium term holds many opportunities for profitable deployment of capital, just 
in different places to those which were the rage in the late 1990s. 
What to do if deflation does occur? 
4. 
To summarise the above discussion: 
• 
• 
Deflation is a widespread, persistent decline in the level of prices.  
It is not happening in Australia, nor is it likely to do so in the foreseeable future. It has been 
happening  in  Japan  for  several  years.  It  is  not  happening  in  the  other  major  countries, 
though  inflation  rates  are  quite  low  there  now,  and  deflation  is  a  little  more  common 
internationally  than  it  has  been  in  the  past  few  decades.  It  is  quite  possible  that  more 
countries will experience a mild degree of deflation at some point in the next few years, and 
not entirely inconceivable that one or two of the major countries might be among them.  
In the majority of cases deflation clearly is a symptom of weakness of demand and output, or 
would be if it occurred, and is a matter of concern for that reason.  
In  relatively  few  cases  is  it  likely  that  expected  deflation  will  itself  cause  further  economic 
weakness. Japan is arguably in that position, but few if any of the other countries currently 
experiencing deflation seem likely to find that the natural rate of interest is so low that policy 
rates cannot get below it. Whether or not one thinks the zero interest rate constraint is likely 
to bind in the US or the euro area, were they to experience deflation, hinges on one's view 
about the outlook for returns to capital. These might be poor in some sectors, but it does not 
follow that they are that poor across the board.  
  Having said all that, Japan's experience shows that deflation can happen, and so we should still ask: 
what should be the response of policymakers given the possibility, or the reality, of deflation? 
The first thing to say is that, for most countries, deflation is an outcome which is to be avoided, just like 
inflation is to be avoided. Stability in the general level of prices, interpreted in practice as a low but 
positive rate of price increase, is the appropriate goal. Forward-looking monetary policies should be 
seeking to maintain inflation above zero, just as actively as they look to keep it below some maximum 
rate. So, to state the obvious, the first order of business is: set out to avoid deflation. 
Second, if some deflation occurs unexpectedly, it is not the end of the world. Don't panic. But in most 
countries  it  would  probably  signify  insufficient  aggregate  demand  relative  to  supply.  Demand 
management policies, if they could not pre-empt this situation, should respond forcefully to it ex post.  
Third, the thing to be avoided most strenuously is a persistent deflation which becomes embodied in 
expectations. It is in this situation where questions of deflation traps become relevant, particularly in 
countries  where  the  natural  interest  rate  has  come  down  to  very  low  levels.  Policy  must  work  at 
keeping price expectations from falling too far, just as hard as it worked to get expectations down from 
excessive levels in earlier times, by articulating goals clearly, and being seen to take action consistent 
with achieving those goals. 
Fourth,  if,  despite  the  efforts  of  monetary  policy,  persistent  deflation  does  become  embodied  in 
expectations  and  the  zero  interest  rate  does  become,  or  threaten  to  become,  a  binding  constraint, 
there will be a role for other policies. If there are structural rigidities which reduce the returns to capital, 
                                                      
5   See  'The  MPC  and  UK  Economy:  Should  we  fear  the  D-words?',  speech  by  Charles  Bean,  Chief  Economist,  Bank  of 
at 
Emmanuel 
November 
available 
London, 
2002 
25 
 England, 
Society, 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speeches/speech182.pdf 
The 
to 
8 
 BIS Review 71/2002
 for example, in a deflationary environment, these things will hamper macro policy's efforts to engender 
recovery.  So  policies  which  address  any  such  problems  would  be  important.  These  would  include 
making sure that excess capacity is rationalised by allowing the failure of the weakest suppliers, so 
that the most efficient surviving producers can expect to earn a reasonable return. 
Further, the active use of fiscal policy to promote recovery would be quite in order in the case of an 
entrenched deflation, especially in countries where fiscal consolidation had been achieved during the 
good times. In a situation where investors saw little return to private investment, it is hard to believe 
there  would not be  good economic and social returns to various forms of public investment. Hence 
there would be, in this scenario, a strong case on short-term stabilisation grounds for the government 
to borrow and invest. 
Conclusion 
I am not sure there is any more one can sensibly say about deflation at present. The fact that we are 
talking about the possibility of it at all is a remarkable change from only a few years ago. Insofar as 
that means that the 'great inflation'is well and truly finished, that is a good thing, provided of course 
that we are alert to the new sorts of risks which can emerge. 
There is probably a bit too much emotive baggage which is carried about with the word 'deflation'. For 
the average country, a short-lived experience with mild deflation, if it occurred, would be not the end of 
the  world,  nor  even  unprecedented.  It  would  just  be  a  sign  that  there  is  a  problem  of  insufficient 
aggregate  demand  which  ideally  should  have  been  avoided,  but  which,  failing  that,  should  be 
addressed quickly. The observed deflation would be telling us the same thing as various real activity 
indicators: things are weak and the economy needs encouragement to grow. 
The bigger concern would be the possibility of a ‘deflation trap’ where conventional monetary policy 
would become largely  ineffective. It seems to me that in most countries this is  not all that likely  an 
outcome anyway, but good policies all round should be able to lessen the probability of it further. Even 
were a country to find itself in such a situation unexpectedly, it should not be beyond the capacity of 
policymakers to devise ways of getting out of it, although they would want to have the full armoury of 
policies at their disposal. 
Australia would be one of the last economies in the world where deflation would be expected. In the 
remote possibility that it did occur here, we could expect that there would still be plenty of investment 
possibilities. So unless the corporate and financial sectors' financial structures had become seriously 
flawed – something of which there is no sign at present – there would be ample scope for monetary 
policy  stimulus  to  be  effective.  In  the  (even  more  unlikely)  event  that  that  were  not  enough,  a 
government sector with an exceptionally strong balance sheet would be well-positioned to use fiscal 
policy to assist the economy, in this extreme situation.  
I hope that this has helped us to have a realistic and balanced assessment about deflation, in what 
ways we should be concerned about it and how it should affect our thinking about policies. Thank you 
for your attention. 
BIS Review 71/2002 
 9
