 Klaus Liebscher: International institutions and financial market stability 
Speech by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the Centre for the Study of 
International Institutions (CSI) Conference 2002, Innsbruck University, Innsbruck, 22 November 2002. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  today’s  liberalized  and  universal  character  of  financial  markets  and  capital 
flows has made it impossible for even the strongest national states to handle the governance of global 
finance on their own. Thus, various networks of intergovernmental consultation and cooperation have 
developed in parallel with the accelerated globalization of finance during recent decades. 
Ensuring financial market stability can, therefore, be regarded as a global public good. This rests on 
the simple observation that banks and other financial institutions operate in many different jurisdictions 
very  often  without  due  cognizance  of  the  consequences  they  may  create.  This  requires  that 
international  agreements,  cooperation  and  coordination  ensure  international  public  control,  so  that 
negative externalities such as systemic risk or the possible negative impact on economic growth due 
to financial instability are prevented as far as possible. In addition, international cooperation helps to 
ensure that a regulatory “level playing-field” exists such that the possibility of regulatory arbitrage is 
avoided.  International  financial  integration  and  its  governance  thus  implies  that  central  banks  and 
other national authorities have to develop policies that foster financial stability not only on a domestic 
but also on an international level. Let me give you an example to underline my point by referring to the 
tragic  events  of  9/11.  Without  cooperation  between  the  Eurosystem  of  Central  Banks,  the  Federal 
Reserve and other international central banks, we may, indeed, have had a very negative impact upon 
the international financial system and even worse repercussions on global growth. 
In the past decades, an impressing number of policy measures and initiatives have been made on the 
European and the international level to govern issues of financial market stability and - in a broader 
context  -  of  economic  policy.  On  an  international  level  we  witnessed  efforts  to  achieve  global 
convergence in what are considered “good economic policy measures”; on a European level Monetary 
Union represents a very successful model of inter alia instilling stability into the financial system; hard 
work has been put into forward-looking measures to prevent crisis in the financial system like Basle II 
or the IMF’s Financial Sector Assessment Programs (FSAPs). 
Let me outline a few  of these international  efforts in  coordination  and cooperation  in more detail  to 
you. 
Convergence of economic policy measures 
The  meetings  of  international  economic  policy  makers  in  the  various  institutions  and  fora  have 
produced  a  remarkable  convergence  of  ideas  concerning  domestic  economic  management.  The 
general approach to economic management within developing, emerging, and transition economies as 
well  as  within  the  industrial  world  can  perhaps  be  summed  up  as  “macro-economic  stability  and 
supply-side flexibility”. These objectives pertaining to both monetary and fiscal policy were agreed to at 
the 1994 Annual Meeting of the IMF in Madrid. 
The emphasis since then is on price stability as the immediate goal of macro-economic policy. This is 
not  simply  an  end  in  itself  but  measures  the  balance  between  aggregate  demand  and  underlying 
supply in the economy as a whole. In effect the aim of monetary policy in particular is to moderate, 
rather  than  aggravate,  the  economic  cycle,  and  so  to  provide  the  basis  for  sustainable  growth  at 
around the underlying rate of potential growth. In relation to fiscal policy, the emphasis is to limit public 
sector borrowing, and the outstanding level of public sector debt, to levels that can be sustained into 
the  medium  and  longer  term  without  the  need  for  increasing  taxes  or  the  imposition  of  rising  real 
interest  rates.  You  will  have  noticed  that  these  principles,  already  formalized  before  the  Madrid 
Declaration, are also the ones underlying European Monetary Union. 
This  aim  of  macro-economic  stability  brings  into  sharper  focus  the  structural,  supply  side,  of  the 
economy.  Here,  too,  there  has  been  a  strengthening  international  presumption  in  favor  of  open 
markets  and  free  competition  -  both  domestically  and  internationally  -  with  a  continuing  strong 
presumption  against  predatory  trade  or  the  use  of  competitive  devaluation.  The  justification  is  that 
undistorted competition contributes to potential global economic growth through increased efficiency 
BIS Review 67/2002 
 1
 and  the  more  effective  allocation  of  productive  resources.  Faster  growth  in  turn  provides  a  more 
favorable context for addressing social concerns, including the issue of poverty. 
Monetary Union: the European dimension 
With  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  the  economic  weight  of  the  single  market  has  risen  to  a  level 
matching that of the USA. And the single currency has gained an important international dimension: 
The euro segment of the global money market has risen to about 25%. In the bond market, too, the 
euro plays a crucial role in fostering a deeper and more liquid market. The introduction of the euro 
paved the way for issuers to access a broader base of investors. 
Investors too have gained access to a wider spectrum of investment opportunities. The euro’s share in 
net issuance currently amounts to 39%. Regarding its use as an official reserve currency, the euro has 
already attained the same weight as its predecessors. 
Within the euro area, Monetary Union has kept member countries from being exposed to harmful intra-
European exchange rate tensions of the type that many countries used to suffer when external shocks 
occurred. It has become quite obvious that Austria’s inclusion in the stability-oriented Economic and 
Monetary  Union  has  protected  our  country  from  negative  shocks  much  more  adequately  than  was 
possible under past regimes. Moreover, the almost four years of EMU bear impressive testimony to 
the  fact  that  the  stability-oriented  interplay  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  provides  a  solid 
foundation which was well suited to weathering the economic policy challenges of this period. 
With  the  euro  the  EU  successfully  supplies  an  important  international  public  good  in  the  form  of  a 
stability anchor with deep and attractive financial markets. This is especially relevant with a view to 
enlargement of the EU. European integration will only be truly successful if it reaches out to the whole 
of Europe. If the EU manages the enlargement process successfully, this will also be conducive to the 
Eurosystem´s  goal  to  guarantee  stability  for  the  whole  euro  area.  Such  a  mutual  improvement  is 
desirable in a very broad sense: political stability, financial market stability, macroeconomic and - in 
the particular interest of the Eurosystem - price stability. 
Already  today,  the  euro  is  a  key  currency  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe.  In  most  of  the  CEECs’ 
monetary policy strategies, exchange rates play  a  vital role and,  wherever they are  not a formal or 
informal intermediate target, they are at least a key monetary policy indicator. It is the euro upon which 
the CEECs’ currencies are oriented, or to which they are formally linked. Thus, EMU and the euro are 
already an anchor for stability for CEECs. Moreover, enlargement will thus extend the zone of stability 
in  Europe,  strengthen  Europe’s  international  competitive  position  and  will  contribute  substantially  to 
prosperity, security and peace in the long term. 
Integration of financial services markets in the EU 
Beyond  Monetary  Union  a  huge  amount  of  work  has  been  undertaken  in  the  EU  to  improve  the 
functioning  of  the  single  market  and  the  international  financial  system.  By  abolishing  national 
boundaries and harmonizing different legislations, European integration has fostered the development 
of  a  single  financial  market  in  Europe.  But  the  current  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  still 
strongly relies on national responsibilities. 
The EU’s Brouwer Report found that there is a need to enhance arrangements for cross-border and 
cross-sectional  co-operation,  to  improve  the  alignment  of  supervisory  practices  and  to  reinforce  the 
collaboration  between  supervisory  and  central  banking  functions.  The  EU’s  regulatory  roadmap  to 
integration  is  the  Financial  Services  Action  Plan.  It  contains  more  than  40  legislative  and 
non-legislative measures. The deadline agreed by the European Council for implementing the entire 
Plan is 2005, with an earlier deadline of 2003 for the securities and risk capital markets. Moreover, 
considerable  progress  has  been  made 
the  Lamfalussy 
recommendations in the field of security market regulation. Consistent and efficient implementation of 
regulatory rules has been promoted by new institutional arrangements delegating rule-making powers 
to  a  committee  or  regulators  whereas  implementation  at  the  national  level  is  undertaken  through  a 
committee of supervisors. 
These two examples illustrate that initiatives are under way and debate is ongoing. However, not all of 
the recommendations of the Brouwer Report have been implemented and many other issues still need 
further investigation and debate. But developments show that we are heading in the right direction. 
in  recent  attempts 
implement 
to 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2002
 The  increasing  integration  of  the  European  financial  markets  is  only  one  further  example  that 
economic  policy  has  become  a  subject  of  common  interest  in  the  European  Union.  It  also  requires 
putting financial stability in an EU-wide perspective alongside the still important national point of view. 
Accordingly, enhanced cooperation in the field of financial supervision, both nationally  and between 
EMU Member States, can minimize the risks involved in deepening of financial market integration so 
that its indisputable advantages can take effect. 
At the national level we have been observing various proposals to reorganize and restructure financial 
markets supervision. In Austria, the legal foundations as well as the practice of supervision have been 
evolving  rapidly  to  respond  to  developments  in  the  financial  sector,  to  implement  the  EU  financial 
sector  directives,  and  to  introduce  ongoing  improvements  in  international  best  practice.  The  most 
visible  change  in  supervision  and  regulation  has  been  the  establishment  of  a  single  financial 
supervisory agency. Since April 1st, 2002, the Financial Market Authority performs banking, securities, 
insurance and pension fund supervision. 
The  Financial  Market  Authority  is  autonomous.  It  operates  independently  and  is  not  bound  by  any 
instructions. The restructuring was aimed at establishing a high-quality, effective and at the same time 
cost-efficient supervisory regime. 
Given  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank’s  far-reaching  operational  integration  in  banking  and 
financial  market  supervision,  the  Austrian  central  bank  can  fulfill  its  manifold  macroprudential  tasks 
also within the Eurosystem and can thus contribute to safeguarding financial stability. 
The close involvement of central banks in the supervisory process has various advantages. It gives 
the central bank a much clearer picture of the economic reality that is behind the numbers visible in 
the books of banks. This information facilitates its role in safeguarding financial stability and creates a 
special  advantage  in  spotting  early  warning  indicators  of  financial  crises  and  potential  situations  of 
economy-wide financial distress. Moreover, as a part of the Eurosystem central banks are integrated 
in  an  already  functioning  network  of  national  and  supranational  institutions.  Such  a  network  is  of 
decisive importance in the light of the structural change in European financial markets that already has 
taken place or is likely to come in the near future. 
International financial system: transparency and crisis prevention 
The integration of international financial markets is not a new phenomenon. What is unprecedented is 
the  short-term  nature,  the  high  turnover  and  the  many  financial  market  agents.  This  evolution  has 
been  actively  encouraged  by  public  policymakers  and  academics,  alike.  In  addition  to  an  improved 
international allocation of capital, internationally integrated markets are thought to provide a welcome 
discipline to domestic policymakers. 
The stability of financial market rests, in essence, on three pillars: institutions, market participants and 
infrastructure. A financial system is only as strong as its governing practices, financial soundness of its 
institutions, and efficiency of its market infrastructure. Installing and using sound governance practices 
is  a  shared  responsibility  of  the  market  participants  and  the  regulatory  agencies.  Indeed,  recent 
experiences with systemic or significant financial sector crises have underlined the importance of good 
governance  on  the  part  of  regulatory  agencies.  In  nearly  all  financial  crises  of  the  past  decade  - 
Venezuela,  Mexico, East  Asia, Russia, Ecuador  and Turkey - political  interference in the regulatory 
and  supervisory  process,  weak  regulations,  inefficient  supervision  and  lack  of  public  sector 
accountability and transparency, have been identified as contributing factors to the depth and size of 
the systemic crises. 
Many  of  the  major  initiatives  the  international  community  had  been  taking,  occured  in  reaction  to 
financial crises in the 1990s. Based on this, policy-makers have been trying to become more forward-
looking to avoid potential difficulties. In particular, three areas of concern have emerged: 
First,  many  of  the  international  fora  are  issuing  internationally  applicable  “Core  Principles”  or 
“Standards  of  Best  Practice”.  These  should  encourage  improved  practices  in  the  economic  and 
financial  policies  not  only  of  emerging  markets  but  industrial  countries  alike.  Some  noteworthy 
progress has been made in this area and many initiatives are emanating from the IMF. 
The  main  vehicle  for  evaluating  regulatory  governance  practices  in  the  overall  context  of 
macroeconomic stability is the joint IMF-World Bank Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP). 
Aimed at identifying the risks, vulnerabilities, and development needs in the financial system, one of 
the main principles underlying the FSAP is that quality and efficacy of regulatory governance impacts 
BIS Review 67/2002 
 3
 on  the  overall  governance  practices  within  a  financial  system,  and  hence  on  its  functioning  and 
stability. 
The FSAP provides an assessment framework that offers “peer review” of national financial systems, 
and a common platform for policy advice and technical assistance from the Bank and the Fund. The 
main  instrument  through  which  regulatory  governance  practices  are  assessed  under  the  FSAP  is 
through the assessment of the key international financial sector standards. Since the inception of the 
FSAP in 1999, public sector governance issues have been assessed in nearly 45 countries, through 
over  200  standards  assessments.  Given  the  positive  impact  FSAPs  have  made  and  the  changes 
within Austrian supervisory structures with the establishment of the Financial Market Authority (FMA), 
the Austrian authorities decided to apply for such an assessment themselves. 
Second,  transparency  on  the  part  of  all  economic  agents  is  deemed  to  improve  the  functioning  of 
international  markets  and  lead  to  greater  financial  stability.  Much  has  been  said,  and,  more 
importantly, achieved in the area of transparency in recent years. Indeed, there has been an explosion 
of codes and standards on different aspects of economic and financial policy. So much so, that some 
countries  are  claiming  that  the  process  needs  to  slow  down. We  should  realize  that  standards  and 
codes cannot be universal to a certain extent since some of them may not be appropriate for countries 
at a certain stage of development. Therefore, standards and codes should reflect different stages of 
development. The IMF’s initiative on Reports on the Observance of Standards and Codes (ROSCs) is 
a welcome step in this direction. I deem it critical that monitoring of the observance of standards and 
codes be fully integrated into IMF surveillance under Article IV. 
Third,  and  most  important  is  how  to  turn  principles  of  good  behavior  into  good  practice.  The 
international  fora  and  institutions  that  I  have  mentioned  do  not  have  the  power  to  enforce  those 
principles.  Only  the  IMF  has  some  leverage  in  monitoring  compliance  given  its  legitimacy  and  the 
Article  IV  consultation  process  but  has  only  real  bite  in  program  countries.  Peer  pressure, 
internationally  accepted  codes,  and  market  discipline  seem  viable  ways  forward.  Yet  in  the  end, 
enforcement and compliance is still at the discretion of nation states. 
International institutions and fora geared towards financial market stability 
The  institutional  architecture  of  the  current  governance  of  global  finance  is  both  multilayered  and 
dispersed. It involves complex networks of state, suprastate, substate, and private-sector actors. The 
challenge  ahead  is  certainly  to  coordinate  this  network  more  efficiently.  Let  me  give  you  a  few 
examples. 
The  IMF  due  to  its  near  universal  membership  of  currently  184  countries  is  probably  the  only  true 
international organization with legitimacy. Its mandate encompasses the promotion of macroeconomic 
stability  and  sustained  noninflationary  growth  among  its  members.  The  Fund  contributes  to  good 
governance  through  its  policy  advice,  technical  assistance,  and  program  conditionality.  It  does  so 
within  its  areas  of  expertise  which  covers  the  effective  and  transparent  management  of  public 
resources,  and  the  maintenance  of  a  stable,  economic,  regulatory  and  legal  environment.The  Fund 
took a leading role in the management of the Third World debt crisis in the 1980s and the emerging 
market financial crises of the 1990s. Since 1996 the IMF has promoted data standards - the SDDS - 
that aim to make information on and for financial markets more reliable and accessible. Recently the 
Fund’s International Monetary and Financial Committee (IMFC) has served as an important forum for 
intergovernmental  consultations  regarding  the  international  financial  architecture,  drawing  upon 
discussions in the FSF and the G20. At present, the IMFC is for example engaged in drawing up the 
fundaments  for  a  sovereign  debt  restructuring  mechanism  (SDRM)  which  should  allow  for  a  better 
resolution of external sovereign debt crises. 
Central bank governors of the Group of Ten (G10) advanced industrial countries have met regularly at 
Basle  at  the  BIS  since  1962  to  discuss  monetary  and  financial  matters  of  mutual  concern. 
Unfortunately  Austria  is  not  a  direct  member  of  this  group,  but  we  surely  have  profited  from  their 
initiatives. 
Most important for international financial governance has been the Group of Seven (G7) summits, held 
annually  since  1975.  From  time  to  time,  G7  leaders  have  given  orientation  for  important  policy 
initiatives. 
The G10 and the G7 have from time to time set up working parties to explore specific issues related to 
global  finance.  The  best-known  example  is  the  Basle  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS), 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2002
 formed as a standing group of the G10 in 1975. Most significantly, the BCBS has formulated the Basle 
Capital  Accord,  a  framework  first  issued  in  1988  for  assessing  the  capital  position  of  international 
banks, which is now under revision (Basle II), and Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision, 
published in 1997. 
On a more specific problem, the G7 created the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) in 1989 to combat 
drug-related  money  laundering  and  more  recently  has  been  involved  in  the  combat  against  the 
financing of terrorism. After the Asian and Russian financial crises, the G7 promoted the establishment 
of the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), which first convened in April 1999. The forum’s mandate was 
an  important  step  towards  better  identification  of  vulnerabilities  that  affect  the  international  financial 
system  and  for  improvement  of  coordination  and  information  exchange  among  the  big  authorities 
responsible for financial stability. 
While we greatly welcome the work of this important committee, we are not completely satisfied with 
the trend of moving important discussions out of the main International Financial Institutions, where all 
countries are represented, into special fora with a selective membership. 
Private sector initiatives 
The  financial  sector  presents  an  outstanding  example  of  another  major  trend  in  contemporary 
governance, namely, the turn to nonofficial mechanisms of regulation. A number of national securities 
and exchange commissions have lain in the private sector for some time, of course, and IOSCO also 
includes  over  fifty  securities  exchanges  and  dealers  associations  as  Affiliate  Members.  Meanwhile 
several industry associations have promoted the international harmonization of standards and devised 
a number of self-regulatory instruments for bond and equity business in global financial markets. 
These  bodies  include  the  International  Council  of  Securities  Associations  (ICSA),  the  International 
Federation of Stock Exchanges (FIBV), the International Primary Market Association (IPMA), and the 
International Securities Market Association (ISMA). The ISMA indeed describes its task as ‘regulation 
by the market, for the market’. In addition, private bond-rating agencies like Moody’s Investors Service 
and  Standard  &  Poor’s  -  and  the  financial  markets  whose  sentiments  they  reflect  -  have  come  to 
exercise considerable disciplining authority over many national governments. 
Private  industry  plays  an  important  role  as  a  disciplining  device  in  the  specific  area  of  conduct  of 
business in securities markets. This is probably due to the ability shown by the securities industry, until 
recently, to discipline itself effectively and in line with public objectives. However, this ability is being 
put into question by the increasing complexity of financial markets and instruments, as the Enron case 
shows. Indeed, a tendency to reinforce public authorities’ vis-à-vis self-regulatory organisations can be 
observed in Anglo-Saxon countries, in response to this concern. 
Private-sector inputs to the governance of global finance also figure outside the securities area. 
For example, nongovernmental groups like the Group of Thirty or the Derivatives Policy Group have 
taken  a  lead  in  developing  rules  for  derivatives  markets.  Two  other  private-sector  bodies,  the 
International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC) and the International Federation of Accountants 
(IFAC), have devised the main accountancy and auditing norms currently in use for global business. 
However,  this  past  year  has  brought  widespread  questioning  of  the  quality  and  integrity  of  the 
information available to markets - and the behavior of some corporate executives. 
Both  the  private  as  well  as  the  public  sector  have  a  stake  in  the  healthy  functioning  of  financial 
markets. Therefore, we have to foster a new public/private partnership in the governance of financial 
markets. Moreover, we also need international public partnerships to avoid arbitrage of ‘standards’. 
Conclusion 
First, standard-setters have, by-and-large, passed the initial stage of establishing continuity and have 
created mutual recognition and trust among their members. There are, however, clear differences in 
the level of ambition across the standard-setters. 
Second,  whenever  market  forces  fail  to  remove  relevant  obstacles  to  integration,  public  authorities 
have to intervene either to remove the obstacles, or to act as a catalyst to complete the integration 
process. Moreover, they have to act to provide genuine public goods. Hence, public agents need to 
have  a  broad  view  of  the  necessary  policies  in  support  of  integration,  focus  not  just  on  lifting  the 
BIS Review 67/2002 
 5
 remaining regulatory obstacles, but also on the cooperative arrangements among private agents and 
maintaining effective competition to the benefit of market participants. 
Third, the achievement of a public good can refer to the national jurisdiction of the public authorities, 
while  the  overall  global  optimum  may  not  be  achieved.  Thus,  national  authorities  have  to  take  into 
account the externalities of their actions on an international level. 
Fourth, the euro and the European integration process have greatly enhanced our capacity to absorb 
shocks  and  to  react  quickly  in  situations  of  financial  turmoil.  There  are  still  tasks  and  room  for 
improvement ahead  us, but  we have done a  lot in recent  years to constantly  optimize  our financial 
infrastructure. On this way, we have kept our own European style and still have worked successfully 
on  gaining  a  strong  voice  in  international  fora,  which  are  proliferating  all  around  in  the  process  of 
constant buildup of an international financial governance system. 
A great deal of progress has already been made in strengthening the central pillars of the international 
financial  system:  institutions,  markets  and  infrastructure. What  is  also  clear  is  that  further  progress 
remains  to  be  made  in  implementing  internationally  many  practices  already  recognized  as  being 
desirable. Many years of effort, both at the domestic and at international levels, will be required on the 
part  of  central  bankers  as  well  as  many  others  to  ensure  that  the  international  financial  system 
demonstrates the proper balance between efficiency and stability. 
6 
 BIS Review 67/2002
