 David Dodge: Dollarization and North American integration 
Remarks  by  Mr  David  Dodge,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Chambre  du  commerce  du 
Québec, Sherbrooke, Quebec, 5 October 2002. 
 Good morning, ladies and gentlemen. Thank you for inviting me to this Congress, and for choosing to 
spend part of your weekend listening to the discussion on this important topic. 
The question before us sounds straightforward: “should Canada adopt the U.S. dollar?” But the issues 
are complicated. I will not pretend that I can cover all the nuances of this topic in my allotted time. So I 
am running the risk that I may oversimplify matters. I should also say that I want to stick to economic 
facts and arguments. There is, of course, a big political dimension to the question, but I will leave that 
to the politicians. I want to confine my arguments today to the field of economics. 
Choosing an exchange rate regime 
In the years following World War II, many countries operated under an exchange rate regime that one 
might  call  “fixed  until  further  notice.”  This  system,  known  as  the  Bretton Woods  system,  saw  most 
countries peg the external value of their currencies to some other currency, most often the U.S. dollar. 
But for a number of reasons, this system of “fixed until further notice” exchange rates proved unstable. 
It  has  been  abandoned  by  many  countries  in  favour  of  one  of  two  options  -  either  a  floating-rate 
regime or the use of another currency. Most have chosen a floating-rate regime. A few countries have 
decided to join some kind of monetary union or to use a foreign currency to replace their own. 
Canada was one of the first countries to adopt a floating-rate regime. It did so at the beginning of the 
1950s and, generally, this regime has served us well. But with increasing integration of the Canadian 
and U.S. economies, the question now being asked is whether Canada might be better off giving up 
the Canadian dollar, either through dollarization or by entering into a monetary union with the United 
States. 
What  I  want  to  do  today  is  to  discuss  the  benefits  and  costs  of  a  floating  exchange  rate  versus 
dollarization  at  the  present  time,  given  the  current  degree  of  integration  of  the  U.S.  and  Canadian 
economies. Then I will talk briefly about the implications for our floating exchange rate should the two 
economies become more integrated. 
Let me just add here that Canada is not being inevitably drawn into adopting the U.S. dollar, or being 
de facto dollarized, as some have claimed. Recent research conducted at the Bank of Canada shows 
clearly that, if anything, Canada is now less dollarized than it was two decades ago. We are not drifting 
towards dollarization. If we go down that road, it will be a deliberate choice. 
When choosing an exchange rate regime, it is crucial to remember that monetary policy needs to have 
a nominal anchor. In Canada, monetary policy is anchored by our use of an explicit inflation target. If a 
country chooses not to float its currency,  it essentially  adopts the monetary policy  of the country to 
which it is tied. This may, or may not, provide an effective nominal anchor. 
Let  me  briefly  explain  how  the  floating  exchange  rate  fits  into  Canada’s  monetary  framework.  Our 
monetary policy aims to keep inflation at the 2 per cent midpoint of a 1 to 3 per cent target range. We 
protect  the  domestic  purchasing  power  of  our  currency  by  keeping  inflation  low,  stable,  and 
predictable.  By  doing  so,  we  support  the  conditions  necessary  for  strong,  sustainable  economic 
growth. 
With a floating currency, our exchange rate acts as a mechanism that allows the Canadian economy 
to  adjust  to  important  economic  changes,  or  what  economists  call  “shocks.”  These  can  include 
movements in relative world prices, changes in capital flows, or divergent economic conditions across 
countries. 
Consider commodity prices, for example. As you know very well, Canada is an important producer of 
commodities  such  as  metals,  paper,  and  chemicals.  When  the  world  prices  of  these  goods  rise,  it 
means  that  Canadian  producers  receive  more  income.  This  rise  provides  a  boost  to  the  Canadian 
economy.  When  commodity  prices  fall,  it  means  less  income  for  Canadian  producers.  This  has  a 
negative impact on the economy. 
BIS Review 56/2002 
 1
 Changes in these sorts of relative prices are a signal to shift real resources out of some sectors and 
into others. The Canadian economy needs to respond to such signals. Under a floating-rate regime, 
movements  in  the  currency  help  to  smooth  that  process  and  attenuate  the  adjustments  in  output, 
employment, wages, and prices. 
Without a floating currency, the Canadian economy would still need to absorb the effect of changes in 
relative  prices.  But  the  burden  would  fall  initially  on  output  and  employment  and,  eventually,  on  all 
wages and prices. This would be a far more difficult and costly process for many. 
There  will  always  be  economic  shocks  that  require  adjustments.  But  because  the  structures  of  the 
U.S.  and  Canadian  economies  are  so  different,  the  two  economies  often  require  very  different 
adjustments to shocks. Canada’s floating exchange rate facilitates these adjustments by reducing the 
amount of lost income and output during the adjustment process. 
Weighing the costs and benefits 
Our  empirical  analysis  shows  that  these  adjustment  benefits  are  quite  large  during  periods  of 
significant shocks. But there is no free lunch. There are costs involved in choosing a floating currency, 
and these could be avoided under dollarization. These include the costs of currency transactions and 
the need to mitigate currency risk - costs that can be considerable. At the present time, however, the 
adjustment benefits clearly outweigh the costs. This is an empirical statement, not a philosophical one. 
It is possible that, at some future time, the structures of our two economies could converge to the point 
that  the  reverse  would  be  true.  But  for  now,  and  as  far  into  the  future  as  I  can  see,  the  floating 
exchange rate is the best choice for Canada given the degree of integration of the Canadian and U.S. 
markets for goods and services and labour. 
The question can then be asked: “would further integration of Canadian and U.S. markets change this 
assessment?” The fact that the structures of the Canadian and U.S. economies are so different argues 
against using the same currency. But this could conceivably be overcome if there was much greater 
integration of all markets between Canada and the United States. It is this integration that could help 
us reduce the costs of adjusting to shocks that I described earlier. 
Specifically, the markets for goods and services, and particularly for labour,  would need to become 
much more unified with those in the United States before it would make economic sense to adopt the 
U.S.  dollar.  Right  now,  our  capital  markets  are  fairly  well  integrated.  Our  markets  for  goods  and 
services are supposed to be deeply integrated under NAFTA. But as any exporter will tell you, we are 
not quite there. There is always the threat that the United States could take a countervailing or anti-
dumping action. In addition, NAFTA does not cover all goods and services. 
Still, by far the largest problem is the labour market. Wages tend to be “sticky”; that is, adjusting wages 
often takes time. So,  under dollarization, the  brunt of the  economic adjustment to shocks would  be 
borne by the labour market. This would create a huge problem if workers were not free to move across 
the  border  in  both  directions.  At  times  it  would  create  periods  of  much  higher  unemployment  in 
Canada  than  would  otherwise  be  necessary,  and  at  other  times  it  would  lead  to  periods  of  labour 
shortages.  One  important  feature  of  the  U.S.  labour  market  and,  in  my  opinion,  perhaps  the  most 
important source of the U.S. economy’s success, is that workers do, in fact, migrate easily - not just 
from job to job, but also from place to place within the United States. We would need to share in that 
flexibility. 
But clearly, Canada and the United States are a long way from integrating their labour markets, and 
further integration of markets for goods and services is proving difficult. If these markets - for labour, 
capital, and goods and services - became much more highly integrated, then the benefits from having 
a  separate  currency  could  decline  enough  to  make  considering  the  adoption  of  the  U.S.  dollar 
worthwhile. 
Here, the European experience is relevant for us. Some observers look at the successful launch of the 
euro and suggest that this shows that Canada could easily adopt the U.S. dollar. But the euro marked 
the end of a long process of political and economic integration, not the beginning. The countries in the 
euro zone undertook a massive effort to integrate their markets for goods and services, capital, and 
labour, and to harmonize their fiscal and regulatory policies. Only after all of this was in place did they 
move  to  launch  the  common  currency.  It  would  not  have  made  economic  sense  to  go  through  the 
process  in  reverse.  It  would  not  make  sense  in  North  America  either. We  would  first  need  to more 
2 
 BIS Review 56/2002
 closely  integrate  trade  in  goods  and  services,  and,  particularly,  our  markets  for  labour.  Only  then 
would it make sense to deal with the currency issue. 
Concluding comments 
As  I  said  at  the  beginning,  this  is  an  important  topic  for  discussion  and  research.  At  the  Bank  of 
Canada, we have been contributing to this debate for some time by laying out the economic facts and 
by promoting the research needed to determine the facts and carry out our analysis. We will continue 
to do this. But right now, our analysis tells us that Canada derives a significant benefit from having a 
floating currency - a benefit that far outweighs the costs. This system helps the economy to adjust to 
economic shocks, and allows us to have a monetary policy accountable to all Canadians. The floating 
exchange rate system serves the interests of all Canadians very well. 
BIS Review 56/2002 
 3
