 X P Guma: Monetary policy transparency and openness  
Speech delivered by Dr X P Guma, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, on behalf of 
Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the launch of the labour markets 
and social frontiers publication series, 15 October 2002. 
 Honoured guests, colleagues of the South African Reserve Bank and members of the media. 
As you are already aware, formal inflation targeting was introduced in South Africa in February 2000. 
One of the hallmarks of inflation-targeting is the greater degree of transparency it requires regarding 
monetary  policy.  A  major  determinant  in  the  success  of  the  inflation-targeting  framework  hinges  on 
whether  the  Bank's  actions  are  fully  understood  by  and  have  credibility  with  labour,  business, 
government  and  other  social  players  in  our  economy.  I  have  mentioned  this  in  the  past,  but  I  am 
compelled to stress it again, that monetary policy transparency and openness are essential in order to 
enhance the understanding and credibility of our policies. 
This commitment to transparent monetary policy has resulted in numerous initiatives to improve the 
communication  of  our  policies  to  the  public.  In  March  2001,  the  Bank  published  and  distributed  its 
inaugural Monetary Policy Review, which is now published twice a year. We make statements, which 
are  broadcast  live  on  SABC,  at  press  conferences  shortly  after  each  Monetary  Policy  Committee 
(MPC) meeting. And we simultaneously release a detailed written statement in which reasons for the 
Bank's stance is explained. Monetary Policy Forums (MPFs) are held twice a year at various venues 
around  the  country  to  create  a  platform  for  discussion  on  monetary  policy  and  general  economic 
developments, both domestically and internationally. The Bank also reports regularly to Parliament on 
monetary policy. Over and above all of this, I am frequently invited by various organisations to address 
various groups and forums, ranging from businessmen and women to universities, HIV/AIDS donors 
and caregivers, and I use every opportunity to bring the Bank and its work closer to the people. 
Today, I am proud to officially launch another initiative that is ground-breaking for the South African 
Reserve Bank and which I believe ranks it as a leader among central banks. The Bank realises that 
the  effects  of  monetary  policy  impact  on  labour  markets  and  social  development  issues.  While  we 
acknowledge  that  sometimes  these  linkages  are  not  blatant,  we  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that 
some of the trickle-down effects are real and warrant more in-depth interrogation. 
It is for this reason in particular that we thought it necessary in February 2001 to establish a Labour 
Markets and Social Issues Unit as part of the Research Department. The unit's mandated task is to 
conduct research into the inter-relationship and interaction of monetary policy with labour markets and 
social development issues, and to inform the Bank and other relevant partners of their findings. The 
publication that is being launched here today originates from this unit, in collaboration with numerous 
internal  and  external  experts  and  editors.  We  believe  that  a  wealth  of  valuable  research  and 
information exists amongst independent stakeholders, but the greatest contribution to society is when 
this  information  can  be  shared  in  a  manner  that  impacts  on  policy  and  is  accessible  to  the  greater 
populus in a form that is easily comprehensible. It is hoped that this publication will serve as a ‘melting 
pot’ in which this purpose may begin to crystallise. 
Through publications such as this new series, Labour Markets and Social Frontiers, the Bank aims to 
facilitate  a  number  of  objectives.  The  Bank  will  engage  with  broader  labour  market  and  social 
development  issues  in  order  to  develop  a  holistic,  more  integrated  knowledge  base  and  policy 
oversight.  This  series  offers  stakeholders  the  opportunity  to  share  their  perspectives  on  monetary 
policy  vis-à-vis  labour  markets  and  social  development  debates.  Through  this  initiative  we  are 
encouraging a wider readership base to include a broader spectrum of labour, community and social 
partners. We also aim to create an awareness of how monetary policy interacts with labour markets 
and social development dynamics. 
A pilot edition of the publication was released in March this year to “test the waters” in a sense. We 
included a questionnaire to solicit responses about the publication so that it could be improved as a 
channel of labour and social dialogue and debate. The openness of the Bank is evidenced by the fact 
that this edition includes four articles from experts outside the Bank. An invitation to submit articles to 
be published in this initiative is extended to you again today, in a bid to draw wider public research, 
comments and opinions closer to the Bank and to better inform monetary policy.  
BIS Review 62/2002 
 1
 One cannot say with certainty what the future holds for any organisation, but I am confident that the 
South African Reserve Bank is progressing steadfastly in its quest to become more transparent to the 
public. We urge our partners, especially those in labour, business and the social sectors, to support us 
as we endeavour to strive for the real values of openness, democracy and accountability. It is very 
easy to make challenging statements in chorus from a distance. What really counts and matters is true 
commitment. 
In inviting you to be a part of our publication, Labour Markets and Social Frontiers, we acknowledge 
that we have heard your cry - we are prepared to take you seriously and we embrace you as we join 
together to make a concerted effort in making a meaningful difference to all South Africans. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 62/2002
