 Nout Wellink: Current issues in European monetary policy 
Address  by  Dr  Nout  Wellink,  President  of  the  Nederlandsche  Bank  and  President  of  the  Bank  for 
International Settlements, at the Euro Seminar: “A test of faith” in Tokyo, Japan, 26 November 2002. 
 It is always satisfying for those of us who have been closely involved in the birth of the euro to see 
how widespread the interest in the new currency is. Actually, the birth of a new currency is in some 
respects similar to the birth of a child. You can prepare for both, but you soon have to learn that you 
cannot fully control how it develops. Both children and currencies develop a life of their own – and you 
are  frequently  faced  with  unexpected  challenges.  Similarly,  you  are  pleased  when  others  take  an 
interest in your child. 
I think that I can safely say that we are now through most of the birth pains of the new currency and 
can  now  concentrate  on  the  ‘normal’  challenges  of  monetary  policy.  My  colleagues  at  the  Bank  of 
Japan are certainly well aware of the fact that challenges continue to develop. In that respect we have 
much to learn from each other. 
Consistent  with this observation, my comments today will not be on the immediate outlook for euro 
area  monetary  policy.  Instead  I  will  dwell  on  some  issues  that  are  –  to  a  large  extent  –  topical  in 
discussions on central banking around the world. They include the risk of deflation, risks to financial 
stability,  how  to  cope  with  oil  price  hikes,  fiscal  policy  developments  and  the  enlargement  of  the 
monetary union. I hope that my comments will provide insights into the way we approach these issues 
within the Eurosystem. 
Is there a risk of deflation? 
Let  me  begin  by  responding  to  the  question  of  potential  deflation  in  the  euro  area.  A  number  of 
countries around the world are currently experiencing falling prices. In contrast, Alan Greenspan has 
noted that he considers that the US is not close to the deflation cliff. Before discussing the euro area 
situation, let me first note that persistent deflation is damaging – at least as damaging as persistent 
inflation, and the risks are non-linear. A small fall in prices need not be damaging, but an ongoing fall 
certainly is. There is no need to dwell on that here – you know that better than I do. This aversion for 
deflation is captured in the ECB’s definition of price stability. We define price stability as a year on year 
increase  in  consumer  prices  of  less  than  2%  and  seek  to  maintain  that  over  the  medium  term.  In 
practice,  we  have  a  preference  for  inflation  lying  within  a  range  between  around  1  and  2%.  This 
reflects potential measurement error in price indices as well as our desire to avoid deflation. 
Having flagged our aversion to persistent deflation, let me turn to the substance of the question. My 
answer is clear – in the present situation I see no immediate risks of deflation in the euro area, albeit 
for  the  wrong  reasons.  Service  price  inflation  accounts  for  around  40%  of  the  HICP  index  and 
competition in this sector is rather low. In addition, the sizeable government sector has a role in price 
setting  in  many  areas.  Both  factors  tend  to  put  a  floor  under  price  increases.  Our  wage  and  price 
setting mechanisms are simply not flexible enough to allow widespread or persistent deflation in the 
absence  of  a  severe  or  prolonged  recession.  Although  formal  wage  indexation  in  Europe  is 
considerably lower than in earlier decades, we are not at the point where nominal wage cuts are likely 
to be broadly accepted. Similarly, nominal price declines are also rather rare. 
Deflationary risks generally arise from one or more of the following factors – the bursting of an asset 
price bubble, difficulties in the financial sector or ongoing losses by businesses. Clearly these triggers 
are generally interconnected, and can reinforce each other. These interdependencies make deflation 
such  a  difficult  problem  and  its  impact  widespread  and  corrosive.  Turning  to  a  discussion  of  these 
triggers, a prolonged or severe recession is not what we are currently experiencing. In fact, we are in a 
situation where the relatively quick recovery we observed in early 2002 seems to have stalled. Part of 
the reason why we continue to feel that we are in a difficult situation is that we had hoped that the 
recovery would be rapid. At the beginning of this year we expected that economic growth would be 
close to trend by the end of this year. In fact, growth will remain substantially below potential this year 
and  the  recovery  is  unlikely  to  gain  much  momentum  until  next  year.  I  do  not  want  to  go  into  the 
reasons  behind  that  now.  My  point  is  simply  that  the  current  downturn  is  not  sufficiently  severe  to 
BIS Review 69/2002 
 1
 generate deflationary pressures. And as I will argue below, the same conclusion holds as regards the 
other possible triggers for deflation – asset price declines or financial sector fragility. 
Overall, therefore, I am confident that Europe will not experience a period of persistent deflation – and 
the associated problems that this could cause. I can also assure you that we are aware of the risk. In 
particular, we are aware that it is difficult to put the deflation genie back in the bottle once it has come 
out. If signs of widespread problems emerge, we will act swiftly to counter them. An advantage of our 
measured monetary policy response to date is that we have plenty of policy room available to react if 
necessary. 
Is there a risk to financial stability 
Closely related to the question of deflation is the issue of financial stability. A period of deflation could 
be caused by,  or contribute to, financial stability problems as real  debt burdens rise and borrowers 
struggle to service their debt commitments. Again, I expect that you know more about this than I do. 
However, let me give you my interpretation of recent developments in Europe and their implications for 
financial stability. 
Asset price declines 
One concern has been that recent stock price declines could trigger financial instability by weakening 
balance sheets across the economy. Clearly there has been a significant adjustment in stock prices 
around the world over the past year or so. Europe has also been affected. European stock prices are 
now back around the levels seen in 1998 and have fallen by around 30% since the beginning of this 
year. Nevertheless, to put this fall in perspective, stock prices remain well above 1996 levels, which 
was when Chairman Greenspan made his comments on irrational exuberance. This holds true even 
when you adjust for inflation. Regardless of whether or not stock prices are too high, a decline of the 
magnitude we have seen is bound to have some impact on the macroeconomy. At the Dutch central 
bank we have estimated that a sustained decline of 30% would have a cumulative negative impact of 
just  over  ½  %  on  European  growth  over  three  years.  Our  model  implies  that  there  will  be  an 
insignificant  impact  on  prices.  However,  these  estimates  are  for  the  direct  influence  of  lower  stock 
prices only and abstract from confidence effects. 
As  an  aside,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  wealth  effects  from  changing  share  prices  are 
considerably stronger in the United States. For example, a fall of 30% in US share prices results in a 
cumulative negative impact of over 3½ percent of GDP over the same three year period. There would 
also  be  a  negative  impact  on  consumer  prices  of  a  little  over  ½%  over  three  years.  The  different 
impacts  stem  largely  from the  lower  extent  of  share  ownership  in  Europe  than  in  the  US.  Although 
direct share ownership is gradually spreading in Europe, it remains considerably less widespread than 
in the United States. In addition, market capitalisation as a percentage of GDP is around 70% higher in 
the United States than in Europe. 
House  prices  are  the  other  major  component  of  household  wealth.  Any  widespread  and  significant 
decline  in  house  prices  would  have  a  more  substantial  effect  than  stock  price  declines.  This  is 
particularly  true  for  the  euro  area,  where  homeownership  is  more  widespread  than  direct  share 
holdings. Estimates suggest that a 30% fall in house prices would have a cumulative negative impact 
on GDP of over 1% in the euro area. For the US the comparable figure is over 3%, although I should 
note that these house price estimates are very imprecise. There are signs that the rapid house price 
increases some of the smaller euro area countries have experienced are coming to an end – that is 
certainly  the  case  in  the  Netherlands.  However,  actual  declines  in  house  prices  seem  to  be 
concentrated in only a few segments of the housing market in some euro area countries. In particular, 
they  are  concentrated  in  the  more  expensive  end  of  the  market,  where  there  is  likely  to  be  an 
interdependence with the adverse demand effects stemming from capital losses in the stock market. I 
do not expect substantial declines in house prices to be widespread across the euro area. 
Banking system concerns 
The banking system in some parts of the world  is being tested as a result of the current economic 
slowdown  and  the  associated  credit  losses.  Still,  the  European  banking  sector  shows,  broadly 
speaking, no sign of any widespread distress of the sort that might lead to financial stability concerns. 
In  fact,  the  banking  system  has  come  through  the  recent  decline  in  share  prices,  crises  in  Latin 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2002
 America,  and  the  economic  slowdown,  rather  well.  European  banks  generally  have  smaller 
shareholdings than Japanese banks, so their exposure to falling share prices is lower. Some consider 
that the German banking system is vulnerable, although I think that it remains fundamentally sound. 
There  are  signs  of  increasing  risk  aversion,  as  lenders  distinguish  more  carefully  between  rating 
classes. This is showing up in wider credit spreads and in some cases in limits on lending volumes. 
Supervisors  are  alert  to  these  trends.  In  the  Netherlands  we  continue  to  conduct  a  range  of  stress 
tests to assess the vulnerability of the financial system to further shocks. We closely monitor exposure 
in particular markets, including in real estate, which have been a cause of problems in some countries 
in  the  past.  Stress  tests  and  monitoring  have  the  further  advantage  of  making  the  management  of 
financial institutions more aware of the risks they face. Discussions at Basel on the new capital accord 
also place more attention on stress testing. 
My conclusions on financial stability are therefore clear. There are no signs of financial instability in the 
euro area. I hope, and central banks throughout the Eurosystem are committed to ensuring, that this 
will remain the case. Problems that may be experienced at a few banks are not indicative of problems 
across  the  euro  area  as  a  whole.  In  any  event,  central  bankers,  including  myself,  are  continuously 
assessing financial stability risks. I will not pretend that we will always be able to prevent instability 
occurring.  The  world  and  financial  markets  change  rapidly  and  the  lessons  that  we  can  learn  from 
earlier  experiences  need  to  be  updated.  However,  I  do  hope  that  we  can  reduce  the  chance  of 
instability.  
Oil prices, conflict in the Middle East and the impact on monetary policy 
Let me now turn to a risk that points to higher, rather than to lower, inflation. Oil prices have been one 
of the most significant influences on inflation over the past three years and they remain volatile. Given 
the impact that even relatively moderate oil price changes can have on inflation, this volatility poses an 
ongoing  challenge  for  monetary  policymakers.  The  possible  consequences  of  any  conflict  in  the 
Middle East only increase the uncertainty as we look ahead. 
Oil  prices  currently  incorporate  a  risk  premium,  to  an  unknown  extent,  regarding  a  possible  Middle 
East conflict. Therefore, the additional impact on prices from a conflict is unknown. It is also possible 
that oil prices could decline within a short period of time. Any conflict might also result in an exchange 
rate  reaction,  although  the  direction  and  size  of  this  is  unknown.  It  is  possible  to  develop  plausible 
arguments both for and against a strengthening of the US dollar. 
Given these uncertainties, I am not going to try to forecast the exchange rate. If I could do that with 
any degree of accuracy, I would probably be sitting on your side of the room as an analyst or trader, 
rather than standing here as a central banker. Whichever way the exchange rate moves, its impact 
could  be  critical  in  determining  monetary  policy  reactions  –  not  only  in  Europe,  but  also  in  other 
countries. Policy makers with appreciating currencies will have less need to tighten policy – or more 
room to ease – than those confronted by depreciating currencies. 
So, instead of trying to achieve the impossible task of describing the precise policy response to any 
conflict, I will say something briefly about the framework we use in assessing the issue. An obvious but 
sometimes overlooked point is that ECB monetary policy is based on an comprehensive assessment 
of the outlook for price stability. This is affected, but not solely determined, by movements in oil prices. 
To the extent that oil prices do alter the outlook for price stability, we try to look through the so-called 
first  round  impact,  but  try  to  counter  any  second-round  impact.  In  the  oil  crises  of  the  1970s,  we 
learned  that  we  need  to  prevent  an  upward  wage-price  spiral  developing.  Luckily  this  is  nowadays 
easier to achieve for two reasons. Firstly, there is less wage indexation so such a spiral is slower to 
develop. Having inflation expectations anchored at low levels also helps. The second key factor is that 
our dependence on oil is now lower. 
Fiscal policy developments and the Stability and Growth Pact 
Let me now turn from issues closely connected to monetary policy decisions, to two that form part of 
the environment within which we operate. The first is fiscal policy. While all central bankers sometimes 
face challenges from fiscal policy makers, I think that those in the euro area are rather unique – and 
stem from the fact that we are a monetary union of sovereign states. Within Europe there is clarity and 
consensus  about  the  institutional  framework  covering  the  relationship  between  fiscal  and  monetary 
BIS Review 69/2002 
 3
 policy.  Despite  this  consensus,  discussions  continue  about  the  detailed  implementation  of  the 
framework. 
As you know, a number of countries have made insufficient progress towards fiscal consolidation in 
recent years. Some countries are not going to reach a balanced-budget position by 2004, as intended. 
More  seriously,  several  have,  or  are  likely  to,  post  deficits  exceeding  3%  of  GDP.  The  lacklustre 
economic climate obviously plays a part in explaining this fiscal slippage. Equally obviously, several 
countries  failed  to  make  sufficient  consolidation  efforts  during  the  earlier  period  of  robust  economic 
growth.  Instead,  they  took  advantage  of  the  growth  years  to  lower  taxes  and  raise  spending  in  the 
mistaken belief that the good years would never end. Sadly, one of life’s lessons is that all good things 
eventually come to an end. Countries that did not follow the rules are now suffering the consequences. 
Again, the analogy with children comes to mind. As any parent knows, children need clear rules – and 
these rules need to be enforced. Both parents and monetary policy makers understand the need to be 
consistent if credibility is to be maintained. We’ve learned that the hard way. The same rules of life 
apply to fiscal policy. Credibility suffers if you do not do what you promised to do. Moreover, if these 
rules  are  not  adhered  to,  problems  could  also  develop  in  other  areas  of  common  European  policy. 
Enforcement mechanisms will lack credibility. 
In a sense, it is this risk of the loss of credibility that is most concerning about current developments in 
euro area fiscal policy. Everyone agrees that there can be no return to the large fiscal deficits of the 
1970s. That simply crowded out private sector investment. The importance of reaching a sound fiscal 
position  is  reinforced  by  the  need  to  plan  ahead  for  the  fiscal  consequences  of  population  ageing. 
Postponing  the  adjustment  will  not  make  it  any  easier  –  and  nor  will  the  problem  disappear.  Had 
countries undertaken the necessary fiscal consolidation in the good years and reached a position of 
fiscal balance, the 3% deficit limit imposed by the Treaty would have been sufficient to deal with the 
slowdown. However, we should keep the current events in perspective. The budget deficit for the euro 
area as a whole is expected to just over 2% of GDP in 2002 and 2003. By way of comparison, the US 
deficit is expected to be over 3% in both years. 
Enlargement of the European Union and the European Monetary Union 
The last issue that I want to discuss today concerns European enlargement. As you know, up to 10 
countries are likely to join the European Union in 2004. Two years later, at the earliest, these countries 
could be eligible to join the monetary union and to participate in the decision making processes within 
the ECB. 
Some commentators have argued that enlargement could prove damaging for the expanded monetary 
union. Two main arguments seem to be given. The first is that decision making will prove impossible 
within  such  a  large  group.  The  second  is  that  if  economic  conditions  in  accession  countries  are 
different  from  those  in  the  rest  of  the  euro  area,  and  their  governors  vote  on  the  basis  of  national 
economic  circumstances  rather  than  euro  area  developments,  monetary  policy  settings  will  be 
incorrect. 
Let  me  first  cover  the  discussion  about  the  number  of  decision  makers.  In  comparison  with  other 
central banks, the current size of the ECB’s Governing Council is large. We have 18 members. That 
has not been a problem in taking interest rate decisions to date. In fact, my experience is that we are 
able to efficiently discuss the key issues and reach our decisions. Nevertheless, we cannot continue to 
expand the Council without limit. 
However, the problem is, in my view, largely one of perception. There are concerns that we will be 
unable  to  take  decisions  efficiently  and  that  enlargement  may  lead  to  a  focus  on  national 
developments, rather than on the euro area as a whole. To address these concerns, a rotation model 
might be introduced that would restrict the number of national central bank governors with a vote at 
any point in time. The United States Federal Reserve uses a form of rotation for their Federal Open 
Market Committee. However, let me stress that I do not expect the substance of our discussions or 
decisions to change. The fact that we will all continue to participate in discussions, even if we have no 
vote, will facilitate this continuity. Our focus will continue to be on the euro area as a whole. 
4 
 BIS Review 69/2002
 Conclusions 
Looking at the key issues currently facing us at the ECB, it seems to me that our new currency has 
rapidly ‘grown up’. Our challenges are no longer those uniquely associated with the birth of the euro. 
Instead, we are mostly concerned with issues that are challenges for central banks around the world. 
That  doesn’t  make  our  job  easier,  but  does  at  least  mean  that  we  are  moving  out  of  uncharted 
territory. 
Of course, financial market analysts and the media have also had to get used to the issues we are 
confronted with, and our style of dealing with those issues. I think that our coming of age as a currency 
is  also  reflected  in  the  comments  we  now  attract  from  analysts  and  the  media.  There  seems  to  be 
increasing understanding about what we are trying to do and how we go about it. There is, naturally, 
always  room  for  improvement.  I  hope  that  my  comments  today  have  made  a  contribution  in  this 
respect  by  adding  to  your  understanding  of  how  we  go  about  monetary  policy  formulation  within 
Europe. 
BIS Review 69/2002 
 5
