 Nicholas C Garganas: The European financial marketplace 
Speech by Mr Nicholas C Garganas, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at The Economist Conference: 
Private Banking and Asset Management, Athens, 22 October 2002. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Let me start and by thanking The Economist for inviting me to speak at this conference. 
In  recent  years,  there  has  been  a  visible  acceleration  in  the  development  and  integration  of  EU 
financial markets. In what  follows, I  will discuss, first, why financial  integration is desirable, second, 
why it has occurred, third, trends toward financial integration in the EU, and fourth, the role of public 
policy in supporting integration.  
Why is financial integration desirable? I think it fair to say that the main function of the financial system 
is to serve the needs of the real economy, encouraging productive investments, allowing risks to be 
diversified,  mobilising  savings,  monitoring  firms’  use  of  funds,  etc.  To  this  end,  the  development  of 
both markets and sound financial institutions plays a key role. To the extent that increased financial 
integration allows the tasks of markets and institutions to be completed more efficiently, it will bring 
about  greater  benefits  through  two  main  channels:  increased  capital  accumulation  and  higher 
productivity of capital. Through these two channels, the greater efficiency of an integrated EU financial 
system will lead to increased economic growth and a higher standard of living for EU citizens. 
Three  main  interrelated  factors  have  underpinned  the  acceleration  of  integration  of  EU  financial 
markets.  The  first  factor  is  globalisation.  The  integration  of  financial  markets  in  Europe  is  part  of  a 
wider global development. Globalisation has many dimensions, all of which have been stimulated by 
the decline in costs of communication, transportation, data processing, and transactions. The second 
factor is the advances in creating a common regulatory framework across the EU as part of the effort 
to complete the Internal Market in financial services. The adoption of a common EU policy has been 
accompanied  by  liberalisation  of  financial  markets  in  the  Member  States.  As  I  will  discuss  shortly, 
however, there is still some distance to travel in this respect.  
The third factor is the adoption of the euro. Before January 1999, the need to operate in many national 
currencies  was  a  major  obstacle  to  financial  integration  in  the  Union.  The  presence  of  a  sizeable 
exchange risk limited the attractiveness of cross-border investment, reduced the incentive to proceed 
with  regulatory  harmonisation  at  the  EU  level,  and  dampened  competitive  pressures  in  Member 
States' home markets.  
The  introduction  of  a  common  currency  for  twelve  Member  States  has  altered  this  situation 
dramatically. The euro has eliminated exchange risk as a source of fragmentation in the EU financial 
system.  It  has  also  increased  price  transparency,  stimulating  competition.  As  a  result,  deeper 
integration has led to more homogeneous markets, a wave of consolidation among intermediaries and 
exchanges, and the emergence of new and innovative products and techniques.  
The  introduction  of  a  common  currency  –the  euro--  has  perhaps  had  its  biggest  impact  on  the 
unsecured money market, that is the interbank deposit market. There is now virtually full convergence 
in interest rates across the euro area with little or no differences in the rates wherever the funds are 
exchanged.  This  outcome  is,  to  a  significant  extent,  a  consequence  of  monetary  union  as  all  the 
regional money markets existing before EMU formed a large euro area money market. The ability to 
move funds across the euro area enabled the emergence of a deep, liquid and homogeneous money 
market.  
Despite  recent  progress,  however,  the  EU  financial  system  remains  fragmented.  Member-State 
financial structures have evolved over time under the influence of specific national preferences with 
regard to legal and regulatory frameworks. For example, progress in integrating the secured money 
market,  that  is,  the  market  in  which  money  is  exchanged  for  collateral  and  repos,  or  repurchase 
transactions, and which includes the markets for T-bills and CDs, has been hampered by differences 
in  national  rules  about  collateral,  settlement  and  matters  concerning  the  handling  of  insolvency. 
Nonetheless,  a  large  increase  in  gross  issues  in  euros  by  monetary  financing  institutions, 
non-monetary  financial  corporations  and  nonfinancial  corporations  has  occurred  (see  Figures  1-3). 
Whilst  the  levels  of  monthly  issues  differ  across  groups  (reflecting  the  fairly  recent  recourse  by 
BIS Review 60/2002 
 1
 involves 
nonfinancial corporations in Europe to short-term securities markets in contrast to banks’ use of the 
CD market to raise funds), there is no doubt that the advent of the euro has contributed to a marked 
change.  
Bond markets, both government and corporate, remain even less integrated. In the former case, yields 
have converged significantly, with remaining differences reflecting either credit risk or liquidity risk. In 
particular,  smaller  countries  often  have  difficulties  in  generating  deep  markets  across  the  whole 
maturity spectrum. One solution that has been proposed is greater coordination of debt issues. This 
proposal, however, has met with some resistance, not least because national debt issuance is affected 
strongly by national-specific fiscal characteristics. With regard to markets for corporate debt, the lack 
of  integration  reflects  the  fact  that  euro-area  companies  have  traditionally  relied much  less  on  debt 
raised in financial markets than have their Anglo-Saxon counterparts. Financial intermediaries play a 
much more important role in the euro-area than in Anglo-Saxon financial systems.  
Finally, equity markets remain fragmented despite several mergers between exchanges, the increased 
use  of  electronic  trading  and  higher  positive  correlations  between  share  price  movements  across 
exchanges. The current, bearish climate in equity markets appears to be delaying further integration 
through the creation of integrated networks which can facilitate cross-border trading. 
The introduction of the euro is also providing new impetus to competition between financial institutions. 
Wholesale  banking  markets  have  been  integrated  for  some  time  now,  but  retail  markets  remain 
fragmented. Banks have tended to concentrate on domestic consolidation and have expanded cross-
border by signing agreements with banks in other countries so as to facilitate the supply of services to 
their largely domestic customers. 
Since some EU financial markets remain fragmented despite the benefits of financial integration, let 
me now turn to actions that can be taken to create an integrated EU financial market. In this regard, 
what is the role of public policy?  
In  my  view,  there  are  two  major  areas  where  public  policy  action  can  contribute  to  more-effective 
financial integration. The first relates to the need to remove remaining legal or regulatory barriers. The 
second 
raised  by  a  more 
financially-integrated environment.  
Regarding the need to remove existing barriers, the need of action in this area has been recognised at 
the highest political level. Successive European Councils have declared the integration of EU financial 
markets as a high priority of economic reform in the EU. This priority is reflected in a coherent policy 
strategy at the EU level and in the urgency which has been attributed to its implementation. The issue 
is being  addressed mainly within the context of the  Commission’s Risk Capital Action Plan (RCAP) 
and the Financial Services Action Plan (FSAP).  
The  RCAP  focuses  on  improving  the  provision  of  finance  to  new  enterprises,  often  working  in  high 
technology, high risk areas. These firms often cite a lack of external finance as a major impediment to 
their expansion. Given the dynamism they provide to an economy, measures to alleviate the shortage 
of  finance  are  crucial  in  meeting  the  wider  goals  of  the  EU  member  states,  namely  increasing 
employment, productivity and growth. At the Cardiff European Council in June 1998, financial services 
were given a high profile and the European Commission was asked to prepare a framework for action. 
The  result  was  the  Financial  Services  Action  Plan,  a  package  of  42  policy  initiatives  aimed  at 
improving the functioning  of the  EU financial system by  2005. Among the objectives  underlying  the 
plan  are  the  creation  of  a  single  wholesale  financial  market  in  the  EU  and  open  and  secure  retail 
markets.  In  general,  the  emphasis  is  on  promoting  financial  markets,  which  are  considered  to  be 
underdeveloped  in  Europe.  Although  more  than  half  of  the  FSAP  initiatives  have  been  adopted  or 
finalised, much work remains as agreement is proving difficult in some areas. One such area is that of 
methods  of  corporate  governance.  A  wide  variety  of  systems  exists  at  present,  varying,  in  part, 
according  to  the  role  of  banks  versus  markets  in  corporate  governance  and  the  extent  to  which 
corporate governance mechanisms associated with growth of financial markets can co-exist with other 
methods  based  on  institutions.  The  EU  is  sensitive  to  such  differences.  However,  the  greater 
development  of  markets  necessitates  the  implementation  of  rules  to  regulate  market  behaviour,  for 
example, in the areas of takeovers and takeover bids. Such differences need to be overcome quickly if 
the aim of implementing the FSAP by end-2005 (and the RCAP by end-2003) is to be realized. In this 
connection, the recent adoption by  the Commission  of a Directive  on  Prospectuses  will introduce a 
truly  single  passport  for  issuers.  Also,  a  Commission  Regulation  has  recently  been  adopted  on  the 
application  of  International  Accounting  Standards  (IAS)  in  the  EU.  It  requires  that  all  EU  listed 
companies prepare their consolidated accounts in accordance with IAS from 2005 onwards.  
responding  appropriately 
the  new  challenges 
to 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2002
 Aside from the stumbling blocks in specific areas, there is also the more general question of the extent 
to  which  the  infrastructure  required  for  the  smooth  operation  of  a  cross-border  financial  system  will 
tend to emerge naturally through the operation of market forces and the extent to which it needs to be 
actively promoted by the authorities. I am inclined to think that a more proactive role for the authorities 
is needed to encourage the development of pan-European settlement and clearing systems, securities 
depositories, etc. Market forces may be impeded by the existence of strong national interests (existing 
national organisations often have strong monopoly powers which operate to prevent change) and/or 
the  presence  of  diverse  regulatory  and  legal  environments  (if  a  pan-European  institution  has  to 
observe many different national regulations, depending on the nature of the transaction, then little will 
be gained by such an institution’s existence).  
Further  financial  integration  brings  not  just  benefits,  but  also  challenges  in  terms  of  the  measures 
needed to secure financial stability and to protect consumer and investor interests. A number of the 
measures in the FSAP address issues such as liquidation of financial institutions, the capital adequacy 
of banks and the question of how to deal with financial conglomerates. The EU has long been involved 
in strengthening cross-border cooperation among the member states in the area of supervision. The 
first  two  Brouwer  reports,  published  in  2000  and  2001,  examined  supervisory  procedures  in  some 
detail.  In  the  second  report,  emphasis  was  placed  on  the  need  to  coordinate  supervision  across 
sectors (banking, insurance, securities) in the face of the creation of large financial conglomerates. A 
third  Brouwer  report  was  published  in  September  of  this  year  which,  inter  alia,  suggested 
recommendations  for  the  procedures  by  which  Community  regulation  is  agreed,  drawn  up  and 
adopted in an attempt to speed the presently rather cumbersome process.  
Financial  markets  cannot  function  properly  cross-border  without  a  co-ordinated  regulation  and 
supervision  for  banking,  insurance  and  securities  markets  as  well  as  across  these  markets.  The 
current  set  of  committees  is  structured  by  sector  and  includes  committees  for  discussion,  advisory 
committees  and  committees  with  regulatory  powers.  Following  the  introduction  of  the  Lamfalussy 
decision-making  process  in  the  securities  markets,  the  current  structure  of  committees  came  under 
scrutiny.  In  this  connection,  the  Lamfalussy  process,  which  was  originally  designed  to  establish  a 
unified  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  for  the  securities’  sector,  is  to  be  extended  to  cover 
banks,  insurance  companies,  and  financial  conglomerates.  This  framework  will  lead  to  closer 
coordination of supervisory practices.  
In conclusion, I think it fair to say that European financial integration has come a long way. Yet, the 
process is far from complete. EU financial integration is one of the cornerstones of the effort to boost 
the  dynamism  of  the  European  economy.  A  more  efficient  and  integrated  EU  financial  system  will 
increase  the  availability  of  capital  and  increase  the  productivity  of  capital,  with  positive  knock-on 
effects on output growth and employment creation. 
BIS Review 60/2002 
 3
