 European Central Bank: Press conference - introductory statement 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Willem  F  Duisenberg,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and 
Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the press conference held in 
Frankfurt, 10 October 2002. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I will report on the outcome of today's meeting of the 
Governing Council of the ECB. 
Today,  the  Governing  Council  continued  its  in-depth  examination  of  monetary,  financial  and 
economic  developments,  incorporating  in  its  assessment  the  new  evidence  that  has  become 
available  over  recent  weeks.  Our  conclusion  is  that  risks  to  price  stability  are  at  present  balanced. 
Based on our overall assessment, we have kept the key ECB interest rates unchanged. 
As regards the analysis under the first pillar of our monetary policy strategy, the three-month average 
of the annual growth rates of M3 was 7.1% in the period from June to August 2002, compared with 
7.3% in the period from May to July 2002. Hence, monetary growth remained strong and liquidity in 
the euro area ample. Recent monetary developments, however, should be interpreted with care. On 
the one hand, monetary trends have been influenced by considerable uncertainty in financial markets 
and therefore partly reflect strong liquidity preferences among investors. On the other hand, the low 
level of short-term interest rates has tended to stimulate monetary expansion, reflected particularly in 
the increase in the narrow aggregate M1. At the same time, loans to the private sector appear to be 
stabilising at growth rates above 5%, a rate of expansion which, in real terms, is in line with the long-
term average. Considering all the evidence relating to the first pillar, from a medium-term perspective, 
more  liquidity  is  available  than  would  be  needed  to  finance  sustainable,  non-inflationary  growth. 
However,  given  the  current  environment,  we  do  not  see  the  risk  of  this  translating  into  inflationary 
pressure in the near future. 
Concerning the second pillar, the latest data and survey results confirm that economic activity in the 
euro area remains subdued. These data and results also suggest that real GDP growth in the third 
quarter of 2002 may turn  out to be similar to that of the first two quarters,  when quarter-on-quarter 
expansion  reached  0.4%.  Against  this  background,  previous  expectations  of  an  acceleration  in 
economic growth in 2002 will not materialise. At the same time, a significant degree of uncertainty has 
been building up over recent months owing, in particular, to the sharp decline in stock prices and their 
potential detrimental effects on the economy, as well as to geopolitical tensions as reflected in surging 
oil prices.  
Nevertheless,  the  main  scenario  for  the  euro  area  is  a  return,  in  the  course  of  2003,  to  economic 
growth rates in line with those of potential, as also reflected in forecasts by international organisations. 
However,  the  uncertainty  surrounding  the  economic  outlook  is  high.  Sources  of  downside  risks  - 
including oil prices, imbalances in the global economy, financial market uncertainties and their impact 
on consumption, investment, and thus on employment – will be monitored closely. At this juncture, it is 
particularly difficult to offer a precise assessment of the timing and strength of the economic upswing, 
both in the euro area and globally. 
Turning to price developments, in August annual HICP inflation was 2.1%. Eurostat's flash estimate for 
September  indicates  an  annual  HICP  inflation  rate  of  2.2%. While  no  detailed  information  is  as  yet 
available for individual HICP sub-components, the recent increase is likely to reflect the rise in energy 
prices.  These  developments  generally  remain  in  line  with  previous  expectations  of  inflation  rates 
hovering at around 2% for the remainder of the year, but short-term trends could be affected by future 
oil price developments.  
Looking further ahead, the euro exchange rate, which has strengthened since early this year, and the 
overall economic environment should contribute towards reducing inflationary pressure. In addition, we 
expect rates of perceived inflation, which are currently high, to move closer to actual rates. However, 
the assessment that inflation rates will fall and remain below 2%, depends on the development of oil 
prices  and  the  prevalence  of  wage  moderation.  In  this  respect,  earlier  this  year  we  pointed  to  an 
upward  trend  in  wage  growth  which,  according  to  preliminary  indications,  may  have  come  to  a  halt 
only recently. In the same vein we have noted the inertia of consumer price developments in the euro 
area, as reflected in the stubbornness of the annual rate of inflation excluding unprocessed food and 
BIS Review 57/2002 
 1
 energy. This rate was 2.5% in August, only marginally lower than early this year; therefore, vigilance is 
warranted. 
Overall,  monetary  policy  will  remain  geared  towards  maintaining  price  stability  and  will  continue  to 
focus on the medium-term, thereby  providing a reliable  anchor for consumers and  investors. At the 
current  juncture,  aggregate  demand  and  exchange  rate  developments  should  contribute  towards 
easing inflationary pressure, while monetary developments, wage trends and oil price developments 
could  point  to  risks  in  the  opposite  direction.  Consequently,  all  factors  which  could  influence  the 
balance of risk to price stability will be monitored closely. 
Regarding fiscal policies in the euro area, the Governing Council notes with concern that there is still 
insufficient ambition in some countries to bring budgets to positions close to balance or in surplus over 
the  medium  term.  The  current  fiscal  problems  in  some  countries  arise  from  the  fact  that  these 
countries did not take the opportunity to improve substantially on their fiscal positions when economic 
growth  rates  were  considerably  higher  than  is  currently  the  case.  Given  that  this  opportunity  was 
missed,  there  is  now  no  alternative  but  for  all  countries  with  remaining  imbalances  to  make  firm 
commitments to avoid excessive deficits, in keeping with the Treaty provisions, and to attain budgetary 
positions  close  to  balance  or  in  surplus,  as  required  under  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  Swift, 
decisive  action  is  necessary  in  order  to  set  up  credible  adjustment  paths  based  both  on  realistic 
assumptions  on  the  economic  environment  and  on  well-specified  consolidation  measures.  Such 
adjustment paths must entail significant yearly improvements in the cyclically adjusted budget balance, 
and must be followed strictly and be completed within the shortest possible time-frame. To underpin 
this process, the ECB calls for strict monitoring procedures for the implementation of the consolidation 
strategies, the full use of the excessive deficit procedure and the application of rigorous accounting 
rules. 
Fiscal consolidation is not detrimental to the outlook for economic growth. The attainment of budgetary 
positions in line with the Stability and Growth Pact will gradually create scope for dealing  with age-
related issues and their impact on public finances. In any case, in the short term, the Pact does not 
place  constraints  on  those  member  countries  already  in  compliance,  although  it  does  call  for  the 
transition to be completed in the few remaining countries. Direct effects on short-term demand are to 
be  counteracted  by  higher  credibility  of  the  conduct  of  fiscal  policy  –  boosting  confidence  and  thus 
private spending.  
We also urge governments to overcome the inertia in implementing structural reforms, both within 
the area of fiscal expenditures and revenues and in labour and product markets. Any further delay in 
tackling, with greater determination, the underlying reasons for limited growth in potential output over 
the medium term, and for only partially exploiting the current potential, is costly. It would also make it 
increasingly difficult to reach the objectives set in the Lisbon Agenda. Structural reforms take time to 
unfold  fully  their  benefits  and  should  therefore  be  frontloaded.  Under  the  current  circumstances, 
frontloading is particularly needed as it would support confidence.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2002
