 T T Mboweni: A review of economic and financial developments in South Africa 
during 2002  
Address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the dinner for Heads of 
Foreign Missions, Pretoria, 10 December 2002. 
 Mr El-Herfi, Acting Dean of the Diplomatic Corps, 
Ambassadors, 
High Commissioners, 
Heads of International organisations, 
Senior management of the Department of Foreign Affairs, 
Senior management of the Reserve Bank 
and honoured guests, all protocol observed 
Introduction 
1. 
Integrating dinner with discussions of finance is not unfamiliar to central bankers. The key ingredients 
are good food and brevity and relevance of the discussion. I will do my best to adhere to the latter two 
ingredients. The former is out of my hands. 
The global economy in 2002 
2. 
The developed countries were already experiencing a slowdown in economic activity in 2001 when the 
events of 11 September shocked the world. Transport and tourism in particular were hit very hard, with 
some fallout continuing to this day. World growth in 2002 has been subdued and for the full year is 
expected to amount to around 2,8 per cent, slightly better than the 2,2 per cent recorded in 2001 but 
still way below the 4,7 per cent recorded in 2000. 
Alongside the uninspiring growth performance, however, inflation has been very low. In Japan prices 
are in fact falling, while in the Euro area the latest average inflation rate is 2,2 per cent. In the United 
States, inflation is running at 2,0 per cent. 
Beyond  the  lacklustre  world  growth  and  low  inflation,  there  were  a  number  of  key  events  in  2002. 
Argentina's  one-to-one  peg  of  the  peso  to  the  American  dollar,  that  had  led  to  a  significantly 
overvalued peso, collapsed. Against the one-to-one rate at the end of last year, the current exchange 
rate is 3,54 peso per dollar. The Argentinian economy has been contracting, while their inflation rate 
has accelerated to more than 40 per cent. 
Brazil  experienced  some  problems,  partly  related  to  the  country's  high  government  debt  and  its 
linkages with troubled Argentina. IMF funding is helping to soften the adjustment process. 
In  the  Northern  reaches  of  the  American  continent,  the  demise  of  Enron  led  to  disillusionment  with 
corporate governance and accounting practices. This has led to a greater awareness of the need for 
sound structures and practices, revised codes of conduct and a sharpening of regulation. 
And,  closer  to  home,  there  were  unfavourable  climatic  conditions  in  large  parts  of  Southern  Africa 
together  with  policies  in  some  of  our  neighbouring  countries  which  disrupted  food  production.  As  a 
result, the region is becoming dependent on large-scale imports of food. 
The South African economy in 2002 
3. 
The exchange rate of the rand has been at the centre of most discussions of economic developments 
this year. Against a basket of currencies the rand lost 34 per cent of its value during 2001 - mostly in 
the  final  two  months  of  the  year.  Its  gyrations  were  the  topic  of  an  official  enquiry  led  by  Judge 
Myburgh. Not surprisingly, it  was found that  quite  a  number of factors could have contributed to its 
sharp depreciation. Some of these factors reinforced each other, causing an exceptional overshooting 
of the exchange rate. At one stage importers speeded up payment for imports, afraid that they would 
otherwise have to pay even more rand for their import consignments, while at the same time exporters 
BIS Review 72/2002 
 1
 delayed repatriating their export proceeds, expecting that by doing so they would be able to exchange 
their  foreign  earnings  for  even  more  rand  later  on.  Of  course,  this  could  not  last  indefinitely.  With 
imports becoming horrendously expensive and with South African exports extremely price-competitive, 
supply and demand fundamentals came to the fore and the exchange rate had to turn around. From 
the beginning of 2002 to date the rand has appreciated by 24 per cent against a basket of currencies. 
To  illustrate  what  happened  to  the  rand's  international  purchasing  power,  in  terms  which  may  be 
diplomatically  familiar:  a  25  pound  dinner  in  a  London  restaurant  would  have  set  a  South  African 
diplomat  back  R280  at  the  beginning  of  2001.  Just  before  Christmas  2001,  it  would  have  cost  the 
diplomat R500. Today, the same meal's bill will amount to R360.  
Looking back at 2002, the competitiveness gained by the South African economy on account of the 
(overdone)  exchange  rate  depreciation  helped  to  smooth  domestic  production  and  income  during  a 
period of general weakness in the world economy. Import substitution progressed and South African 
exports  penetrated  various  markets  quite  successfully.  This  was  helped  along  by  improved  market 
access.  In  this  regard,  the  Africa  Growth  and  Opportunity  Act  of  the  United  States  should  be 
mentioned,  along  with  the  European  Union  Free  Trade  Agreement  and  the  Southern  African 
Development  Community  Free  Trade  Agreement.  Most  importantly,  numerous  South  African 
companies are reorienting their strategies, aiming to structurally raise their share of output flowing to 
the export market. In the process, upcoming markets such as China and India are also receiving due 
attention. 
Tourism  is  also  doing  well  in  spite  of,  and  perhaps  even  because  of,  the  unease  following  the 
September  11  attacks.  South  Africa  is  a  pleasant  destination.  The  number  of  non-residents  visiting 
South Africa rose from 4,8 million in the first 10 months of 2001 to 5,3 million in the same period of 
2002.  Visitor  numbers  from  virtually  all  countries  have  increased  significantly,  with  the  exception  of 
Argentina  -  the  worsening  of  the  exchange  rate  in  that  instance  caused  a  decrease  from  13  000 
persons in the ten months to October last year to 4 000 this year.  
Under these circumstances, South Africa maintained a healthy growth rate in the first three quarters of 
2002. It seems likely that growth in real gross domestic product this year will amount to around 3 per 
cent, compared to 2,8 per cent in 2001. It is also heartening that the growth is spread across virtually 
all sectors of the economy. 
A  further  gratifying  aspect  of  the  economy's  current  performance  is  the  acceleration  in  real  fixed 
capital  formation,  so  necessary  to  boost  the  future  production  potential  of  the  economy.  From  a 
contraction in 1999, real fixed capital formation reversed to 0,8 per cent growth in 2000, 3,6 per cent 
growth  in  2001  and  7,6  per  cent  year-on-year  growth  in  the  third  quarter  of  2002.  Once  again,  the 
acceleration is fairly widely spread over the various sectors of the economy.  
The accusation is often heard that South Africa grows, but without creating jobs for the huge number 
of unemployed people. However, in the second quarter of 2002 our quarterly surveyed non-agricultural 
employment series picked up, rising by about 0,6 per cent. This may be early days, but it stands in 
welcome contrast to the declining trend in such employment recorded since 1989. 
Sadly, the 2001 fall in the external value of the rand caused a strong surge in inflation in 2002. This 
was  first  and  foremost  visible  in  production  prices,  which  accelerated  from  a  twelve-month  rate  of 
increase of 7,8 per cent in September 2001 to double-digit rates right from January 2002, peaking at 
15,4 per cent in both August and September. In October it abated somewhat to 14,6 per cent. 
Consumer price inflation took longer to pick up. Twelve-month CPIX inflation accelerated from 5,8 per 
cent in September 2001 to double-digit levels from August 2002, reaching 12,5 per cent in October. 
Both  at  the  production  and  consumer  level,  food  price  inflation  picked  up  dramatically,  reaching 
maximum year-on-year levels of 30 and 20 per cent respectively. This was related to the exchange 
rate depreciation coupled with the need to import grain into the Southern African region. 
In the face of these inflationary forces, and given the imperative to work inflation down again to the 
6 to  3  per  cent  target  range,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  responded  by  tightening  monetary 
policy.  On  each  occasion,  in  January,  March,  June  and  September  2002,  the  Reserve  Bank's 
repurchase  rate  was  raised  by  one  percentage  point,  leading  to  corresponding  increases  in  the 
interest rates charged by commercial banks. The banks' prime overdraft rate for instance rose from 
13 per cent at the beginning at the year to 17 per cent at present. At that level, the public is clearly 
feeling the impact of monetary policy. Our assessment is that this will be sufficient to bring inflation 
down in a fairly dramatic fashion during the course of next year. But dishing out this medicine doesn't 
make the Bank very popular.  
2 
 BIS Review 72/2002
 Partly in reaction to the tighter monetary conditions, growth in credit extension has come down from a 
twelve-month rate of 15,6 per cent in January 2002 to 8,8 per cent in October. Growth in M3 has been 
more sticky, receding from 19,7 per cent to 17,8 per cent over the same period. This still doesn't leave 
any  room  for  complacency,  but  calls  for  ongoing  scrutiny  of  all  available  information  about  our 
economy. 
An  extremely  positive  element  of  our  financial  situation  is  the  reduction  in  the  Reserve  Bank's 
exposure  to  foreign  exchange  rate  risk,  as  captured  in  the  decrease  in  the  our  net  open  foreign 
currency position (NOFP). This has receded from US$23,2 billion in September 1998 to $4,8 billion at 
the end of 2001 and $1,7 billion at present. At the same time, South Africa's foreign exchange reserve 
level is quite strong at around 20 weeks' worth of imports, double as much as 5 years ago.  
It is my pleasant duty to also point out that South Africa's government finances are in a healthy shape, 
with tax revenue again exceeding earlier projections and the deficit before borrowing for 2002/03 now 
projected to amount to only 1,6 per cent of GDP. 
Less pleasant to point out are the setbacks to our banking system in early 2002. One troubled bank's 
business was eventually sold off to other institutions, while a second medium-sized bank was acquired 
by one of the big four banks. This episode tested numerous depositors' and bankers' nerves to the 
extreme;  many  elderly  investors  now  choose  to  keep  their  deposits  with  more  than  one  institution, 
which is a wise move. 
Financial markets 
4. 
South  Africa's  financial  markets  are  robust,  liquid  and  well-developed.  Turnovers  remained  brisk  in 
2002 to date. In the bond market, for example, the value of turnover in a single month is approximately 
equal to South Africa's annual gross domestic product of one trillion rand. Non-residents also take a 
keen interest in these markets. In an average month non-residents buy more than a R100 billion in 
bonds and R18 billion in shares on our bourses. They of course usually sell bonds and shares of a 
roughly equal amount, but some net inflow or outflow is recorded from month to month. During the first 
half  of  2002  nonresidents  bought  a  net  amount  of  R13  billion  in  shares  and  bonds  on  the  South 
African formal exchanges, but sold R17 billion during the third quarter. Further net sales in October 
were  followed  by  net  purchases  in  November.  Predicting  foreign  portfolio  capital  flows  is  clearly 
dangerous, only to be surpassed by bargaining on net inflows from that source.  
South  African  share  prices  performed  well  up  to  May  2002,  but  then  fell  back  sharply,  partly  in 
sympathy  with foreign bourses as Enronitis took hold. In rand terms, the JSE overall price index  is 
currently 10 per cent down on its value at the end of last year. Nonresidents, because of the 24 per 
cent stronger exchange rate of the rand, nevertheless made substantial profits on the JSE in foreign 
currency terms. Those who had invested in South African bonds or real estate in early 2002 of course 
recorded even better returns, since in contrast to shares those asset prices also rose handsomely in 
rand terms. 
But beyond these events on the formalised exchanges involving portfolio capital flows, South Africa 
has an important role to play in the area of foreign direct investment. In particular, numerous direct 
investment projects into other parts of Africa are being undertaken, fitting in under the broad NEPAD 
initiative.  South  Africa's  involvement  ranges  from  the  Mozal  smelter  in  Mozambique  to  SAA's 
participation in Tanzania, and includes hotels, factories, cellphone operators and shops in numerous 
countries on the African continent. South Africa's investments in Africa at the end of 2000 exceeded 
R24 billion.  
Other continents are also attracting the attention of South African companies that are leaders in their 
respective fields and some of these companies have sought listings on foreign exchanges. Companies 
like the resources giants Anglo American and Billiton, the financial services companies Investec and 
Old Mutual, the brewer SABMiller and Sappi, the pulp and paper company now have global reach and 
are making their presence felt beyond their home market. 
Conclusion 
5. 
In short, then, the South African economy is in fairly good shape, with the exception of the inflationary 
consequences of the 2001 exchange rate depreciation. And the four interest rate increases as well as 
the notable appreciation of the rand in 2002 will in due course brake the inflation spiral decisively. 
BIS Review 72/2002 
 3
 While my address tonight focused on broad macroeconomic trends, it is worthwhile to stress that the 
macroeconomy is  built up  from the microeconomic decisions  and actions of millions of participants. 
Real  life  happens  at  the  microeconomic  level.  As  diplomats  you  will  know  that  it  is  your  individual 
encounter with the businessperson or potential tourist that counts - where interest in South Africa or in 
your country is either nurtured, or nipped in the bud. A sparkling, enthusiastic, well-informed diplomat 
is a catalyst forging friendship and economic ties across borders. Indifference or ignorance sabotages 
these linkages. 
Accordingly, I would like to challenge  you to continue deepening  your knowledge of our country, its 
people,  its  economy,  its  incentives,  rules  and  regulations,  its  magnificent  places.  True  expert 
knowledge takes many years to build up, plus a lifetime of ongoing study to maintain. But it enables 
one to sparkle, to catch the attention of the key investor or potential tourist, to make things happen. I 
wish you well in 2003 and beyond in sparkling for your fraternal countries, forging links that are crucial 
to our mutual economic success and our ability to understand and appreciate one another. 
Once again it is our honour and privilege to host you at this function which has become one of the 
highlights  of  the  calendar  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank.  May  the  friendships  between  South 
Africa and your countries continue to go from strength to strength.  
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2002
