 Klaus Liebscher: The euro - an anchor of stability in the international financial 
architecture 
Speech by Dr Klaus Liebscher, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the International Financial 
and Economic Forum, Vienna, 14 November 2002. 
 It is a pleasure for me to be with you today and to address this highly distinguished audience on the 
euro and its role as an anchor of stability in the international financial architecture. 
Since March 1st of this year, euro banknotes and coins have been the sole legal tender in as many as 
12 out of the 15 Member States of the European Union, i.e. for as many as 300 million people. The 
completion of monetary integration in those 12 countries, as mapped out in the Maastricht Treaty, truly 
represents a culminating point in the process of European integration. With the use of euro cash, the 
single European currency has finally become a tangible reality for the citizens of the euro area - part 
and  parcel  of  their  everyday  lives.  It  is  gratifying  to  note  that  this  historic  cash  changeover  was 
completed  most  successfully  with  the  broad  -  and  often  enthusiastic  -  support  of  the  European 
citizens, including the people of Austria, of course. 
With  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  the  economic  weight  of  this  single  market  has  risen  to  a  level 
matching that of the USA. Thus, the single currency has gained an important international dimension. 
The number of principal actors in the international financial system has now been reduced to three - 
the USA, Europe and Japan. At present, Europe is still trying to find its own,  distinguished  voice in 
international financial matters. But it  is a fact even now that  the introduction  of the euro has had  a 
stabilizing  influence  in  the  international  financial  system,  as  was  successfully  demonstrated  in  the 
wake of September 11, 2001.  
A number of indicators point to the  growing international role of the euro: The euro segment of the 
global money market has risen to about 25%. In the bond market, too, the euro plays a crucial role in 
fostering a deeper and more liquid market. The introduction of the euro paved the way for issuers to 
access  a  broader  base  of  investors.  Investors  too  have  gained  access  to  a  wider  spectrum  of 
investment opportunities. The euro’s share in net issuance currently amounts to 39%. Regarding its 
use as an official reserve currency, the euro has already attained the same weight as the predecessor 
currencies.  
Within the euro area, Monetary Union has kept member countries from being exposed to harmful intra-
European exchange rate tensions of the type that many countries used to suffer when external shocks 
occurred. It has become quite obvious that Austria's inclusion in the stability-oriented Economic and 
Monetary  Union  has  protected  our  country  from  negative  shocks  much  more  adequately  than  was 
possible under past regimes. Moreover, the almost four years of EMU bear impressive testimony to 
the  fact  that  the  stability-oriented  interplay  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  provides  a  solid 
foundation which was well suited to weathering the economic policy challenges of this period. 
The  stabilizing  effects  of  the  euro,  however,  go  beyond  providing  an  anchor  in  the  exchange  rate 
regimes of not only EU accession countries but, all in all, about 50 countries within the gravity zone of 
the  euro  area.  By  providing  price  stability  the  euro  contributes  towards  more  stability  in  the 
international financial system.  
The  goal  of  maintaining  price  stability  over  the  medium  term  lies  at  the  core  of  the  independent 
Eurosystem’s monetary strategy. After almost four years of EMU we can observe that the Eurosystem 
has to date performed very well in preserving price stability. The euro area has achieved low inflation 
and low interest rates, which should stimulate further investment and contribute to sustainable growth 
in the euro area.  
In order to ensure stability, the institutional framework of EMU extends beyond monetary policy. A key 
ingredient is the Stability and Growth Pact, which intends to promote sound fiscal policies at the level 
of  individual  member  countries.  By  fostering  fiscal  discipline,  it  contributes  substantially  to  the  non-
inflationary growth potential of the euro area. Prudent fiscal policies reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio and, 
consequently,  the  interest  burden  on  governments;  they  increase  investors’  confidence  in  the  euro 
area,  keep  interest  rates  lower  than  they  would  otherwise  be,  and  lead  to  a  crowding-in  of  private 
investment.  
BIS Review 64/2002 
 1
 Therefore  it  is  essential  that  all  member  countries  remain  credibly  committed  to  the  framework  of 
Treaty  and  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  In  this  regard,  it  is  important  to  recall  that  fiscal  targets 
should  embody  sufficiently  ambitious  structural  consolidation  efforts  and  should  also  be  based  on 
realistic growth assumptions.  
Thus,  the  current  economic  slowdown  should  not  distract  governments  from  pushing  ahead  with 
reforms related to the size and structure of public expenditures and revenues, taking into account the 
need to create room for tax cuts and to absorb the cost of an ageing population. 
Apart  from  fiscal  policy,  further  structural  reform  is  another  improtant  ingredient  for  the  success  of 
EMU, especially in the longer term. Structural reform is needed both for its indirect effects on monetary 
policy via the budget, and for its direct effects on the international competitiveness of the euro area. 
Competitiveness  includes,  among  others,  increasing  the  flexibility  of  the  labor  and  product  markets 
and creating a more efficient tax system that encourages job creation.  
As a stable anchor for Europe the euro contributes to the stability of the international financial system. 
As the financial system is crucial in the allocation of resources by channeling funds from households to 
enterprises, an economic environment in which these functions can be fulfilled smoothly and efficiently 
is essential for the welfare of an economy. Financial markets can only work smoothly and efficiently if 
they can rely on a complementary legal and regulatory infrastructure. Thus, the economic integration 
of financial markets has to be accompanied by the necessary adoptions of regulatory frameworks and 
regimes.  
In  today’s  globalized  world  there  is  no  doubt  about  the  importance  of  a  strong  and  well-regulated 
financial sector. The crises that have swept a number of emerging markets in recent years indicate the 
dangers  that  a  weak  financial  sector  poses  to  economic  stability.  Therefore,  the  international 
community has set a range of initiatives to strengthen the international financial architecture. After all, 
global financial stability needs to be promoted through both national action and enhanced international 
cooperation. 
In the international arena,  the IMF has  played a central role in the effort to establish internationally 
accepted standards and codes as "rules of the game" for the global economy. The IMF and the World 
Bank  have  worked  together  with  central  bankers  and  regulators  to  develop  the  "Financial  Sector 
Assessment  Program"  as  a  systematic  way  to  identify  weaknesses  and  sources  of  vulnerability  in 
national  financial  sectors.  It  is  designed  to  help  countries  to  enhance  their  resilience  to  crises  and 
cross-border contagion, and to foster growth, by promoting financial system soundness and financial 
sector diversity. Austria has declared its interest to participate in this program and will thus have its 
financial sector systematically monitored with respect to its resilience to shocks. 
Let  me  next  turn  to  the  debate  about  the  European  regulatory  framework.  By  abolishing  national 
boundaries and harmonizing different legislations, European integration has fostered the development 
of a single financial market in Europe.  
The introduction  of the euro, the single monetary policy,  the existence of a single payment  area all 
have undoubtedly accelerated and reinforced the process of financial market integration and structural 
change as well as the growing process of European financial and banking integration.  
However, in the recent past the speed of integration has slowed down. As a case in point, all those 
structural factors that the Eurosystem some time ago identified as hampering further financial market 
integration  are  still  in  place.  This  is  regrettable  since  the  degree  of  financial  market  integration  in 
Europe is still clearly below the level efficiency considerations would suggest. The national economic 
policies  of  the  EU  Member  States  are  a  big  obstacle  to  further  integration;  in  other  words,  a  great 
number of regulatory, tax and legal barriers continue to impede stronger financial market integration. 
But the current regulatory and supervisory framework still strongly relies on national responsibilities. 
The Brouwer Report found that there is a need to enhance arrangements for cross-border and cross-
sectional  co-operation,  to  improve  the  alignment  of  supervisory  practices  and  to  reinforce  the 
collaboration between supervisory and central banking functions.  
The  EU’s  regulatory  roadmap  to  integration  is  the  Financial  Services  Action  Plan.  It  contains  more 
than 40 legislative and  non-legislative measures. The deadline agreed by the  European Council for 
implementing the entire Plan is 2005, with an earlier deadline of 2003 for the securities and risk capital 
markets.  
Considerable  progress  has  been  made 
the  Lamfalussy 
recommendations in the field of security market regulation. Consistent and efficient implementation of 
in  recent  attempts 
implement 
to 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2002
 regulatory rules has been promoted by new institutional arrangements delegating rule-making powers 
to  a  committee  or  regulators  whereas  implementation  at  the  national  level  is  undertaken  through  a 
committee of supervisors. 
These two examples illustrate that initiatives are under way and debate is ongoing. However, not all of 
the recommendations of the Brouwer Report have been implemented and many other issues still need 
further investigation and debate. But developments show that we are heading in the right direction.  
The  increasing  integration  of  the  European  financial  markets  is  only  one  further  example  that 
economic  policy  has  become  a  subject  of  common  interest  in  the  European  Union.  It  also  requires 
putting financial stability in an EU-wide perspective alongside the still important national point of view. 
Accordingly, enhanced cooperation in the field of financial supervision, both nationally  and between 
EMU Member States, can minimize the risks involved in deepening of financial market integration so 
that its indisputable advantages can take effect. 
At the national level we have been observing various proposals to reorganize and restructure financial 
markets supervision. In Austria, the legal foundations as well as the practice of supervision have been 
evolving  rapidly  to  respond  to  developments  in  the  financial  sector,  to  implement  the  EU  financial 
sector directives, and to introduce ongoing improvements in international best practice.  
The most visible change in supervision and regulation has been the establishment of a single financial 
supervisory agency. Since April 1st, 2002, the Financial Market Authority performs banking, securities, 
insurance  and  pension fund supervision. The Financial Market Authority  is autonomous. It operates 
independently  and  is  not  bound  by  any  instructions.  The  restructuring  was  aimed  at  establishing  a 
high-quality, effective and at the same time cost-efficient supervisory regime.  
Given  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank’s  far-reaching  operational  integration  in  banking  and 
financial  market  supervision,  the  Austrian  central  bank  can  fulfill  its  manifold  macroprudential  tasks 
also  within  the  Eurosystem  and  can  thus  contribute  to  safeguarding  financial  stability.  The  close 
involvement of central banks in the supervisory process has various advantages. It gives the central 
bank a much clearer picture of the economic reality that is behind the numbers visible in the books of 
banks.  
This information facilitates its role in safeguarding financial stability and creates a special advantage in 
spotting early warning indicators of financial crises and potential situations of economy-wide financial 
distress. Moreover, as a part of the Eurosystem central banks are integrated in an already functioning 
network of national and supranational institutions. Such a network is of decisive importance in the light 
of the structural change in European financial markets that already has taken place or is likely to come 
in the near future. 
After  successfully  implementing  EMU,  the  next  major  task  Europe  faces  in  the  upcoming  years  is 
certainly the enlargement of the European Union. This integration project is just as impressive and far-
sighted  as  EMU,  and  it  offers  both  enormous  opportunities  and  challenges  that  should  not  be 
underestimated. I am firmly convinced that a diligently prepared enlargement of the EU will go down in 
European history as a very major step toward integration and peacekeeping. 
European  integration  will  only  be  truly  successful  if  it  reaches  out  to  the  whole  of  Europe.  It  is  the 
concept  of  stability  orientation  that  urges  us  to  complete  European  unification.  If  we  manage  the 
enlargement process successfully, this will also be conducive to our endeavour to guarantee stability 
for  the  whole  euro  area.  Such  a  mutual  improvement  is  desirable  in  a  very  broad  sense:  political 
stability, financial market stability, macroeconomic and - in the particular interest of the Eurosystem - 
price stability. 
BIS Review 64/2002 
 3
