 Jarle Bergo: Oil revenues, monetary policy and economic cycles 
Lecture  by  Mr  Jarle  Bergo,  Deputy  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  at  the 
Telemark University College, Bø, 13 November 2002. 
The text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation.  
The lecture is based on the assessments presented at Norges Bank’s press conference following the Executive 
Board’s monetary policy meeting on 30 October and on previous speeches.  
 Petroleum activities constitute an important part of the Norwegian economy. A sound economic policy 
and high oil prices have contributed to the highest current account and budget surpluses that have 
been recorded in any OECD country. In 1998 when oil prices were down to USD 10 per barrel, we 
also recorded a surplus that came to 4 per cent of GDP measured in terms of government net financial 
investment. 
Societies that suddenly gain access to wealth have a tendency to spend the money and then fall into 
decline.  Access to an abundance  of natural resources can result in slower growth. The explanation 
may be that time and resources are spent on grabbing as large a share as possible of the acquired 
wealth. Historical experience therefore suggests that it is important to have decision-making systems 
to provide protection against individual groups gaining strong control over Norway’s petroleum wealth.  
In addition we must maintain and develop incentives to acquire knowledge and engage in innovative 
work. 
It is also important to be aware that the bulk of Norway’s national wealth consists not of oil, but of the 
country’s  labour  force.  Should  our  oil  wealth  lead  to  our  working  a  little  less,  or  being  a  little  less 
productive,  the  decline  in  Norway’s  remaining  wealth  would  rapidly  become  as  great  as  our  entire 
petroleum wealth. 
On  29  March  2001,  the  Stoltenberg  Government  issued  new  guidelines  for  monetary  policy  and 
presented  a  guideline  for  fiscal  policy.  The  guideline  for  fiscal  policy  implies  that  the  central 
government budget deficit shall be equivalent over time to the expected real return on the Government 
Petroleum Fund. The guideline thereby provides a long-term anchor for fiscal policy. The Petroleum 
Fund thus serves as a buffer against fluctuations in petroleum revenues and the Norwegian economy. 
The alternative, to allow the government budget to fluctuate in pace with petroleum revenues, would 
have resulted in abrupt, unpredictable shifts in economic policy from year to  year. The result would 
have been greater uncertainty. The guideline provides a stable framework that contributes to curbing 
uncertainty. 
The  phasing  in  of  petroleum  revenues  will  contribute  to  stimulating  activity  in  Norway.  The  fiscal 
guideline  implies  that  the  non-oil  deficit  will  increase  in  the  years  ahead,  thereby  providing  a 
substantial fiscal stimulus each year. 
The phasing in of petroleum revenues will have implications for Norway’s industry structure. Increased 
spending  of  petroleum  revenues  on  goods  and  services  that  are  dependent  on  domestic resources 
requires an increase in employment in the sheltered sector. This labour has to be recruited from the 
exposed  sector,  or  through  the  natural  increase  in  the  labour  force  finding  its  way  to  the  sheltered 
sector. 
Over time, the size of the internationally exposed sector will be affected by the portion of the petroleum 
revenues that is absorbed into the Norwegian economy. The size of the internationally exposed sector 
is independent of monetary policy. An appreciation of the krone may, nevertheless, affect the speed at 
which changes occur in the business and industry. 
To  maintain  balance  in  the  Norwegian  economy,  the  phasing  in  of  petroleum  revenues  must  be 
countered by a monetary policy stance that is tighter than it would otherwise have been. This may be 
accomplished  by  keeping  interest  rates  higher  than  they  would  otherwise  have  been,  or  by  an 
appreciation of the krone, or both. 
A  clear  monetary  policy  target  is  a  necessary  complement  to  the  fiscal  guideline  with  a  view  to 
ensuring  reasonable  macroeconomic  stability.  Monetary  policy  is  oriented  towards  low  and  stable 
inflation. The inflation target is set at 2½ per cent. 
BIS Review 66/2002 
 1
 If evidence suggests that inflation will be higher than 2½ per cent with unchanged interest rates, the 
interest rate will be increased. If it appears that inflation will be lower than 2½ per cent with unchanged 
interest rates, the interest rate will be reduced. Inflation in Norway is determined by both domestic and 
international  inflationary  impulses.  Domestic  inflationary  impulses  are  influenced  by  the  state  of  the 
Norwegian  economy.  International  inflationary  impulses  are  generated  via  prices  for  imported 
consumer  and  intermediate  goods.  These  inflationary  impulses  will  partly  be  influenced  by 
developments in international commodity and consumer prices and by the exchange rate. 
Interest rates influence inflation through their impact on domestic demand and on the market for NOK. 
When  interest  rates  rise,  it  is  more  profitable  to  save  and  more  costly  to  borrow.  This  dampens 
consumption and investment and hence aggregate demand. Lower demand in turn curbs the rise in 
prices and wages. 
 Higher interest rates make it more attractive to take krone positions and borrow in foreign currency. 
As a result, higher interest rates normally lead to an appreciation of the krone. This reduces prices for 
imported  goods.  In  addition,  a  strong  krone  reduces  activity  and  profitability  in  the  internationally 
exposed sector.  
 It is important to be aware of the relationships between employment, output and inflation. If there is a 
shortage of labour and other economic resources, a tight monetary policy stance will reduce inflation 
by affecting aggregate demand. Conversely, when unemployment is high, low interest rates stimulate 
demand, which will contribute to stable wages and prices. A monetary policy stance that is aimed at 
stabilising inflation will thus also contribute to stabilising aggregate output and employment. 
In the long term, monetary policy determines the average level of inflation. Output is determined by the 
supply  of  labour,  capital  and  technology  and  by  productivity  growth.  Attempts  to  increase  output 
beyond the total capacity of the economy will lead to inflation in the long run. 
What monetary  policy can do is to maintain stability  without  unnecessary fluctuations in output  and 
employment.  Overall  employment  is  also  influenced  by  wage  formation.  If  wages  increase  at  an 
unsustainable  pace,  employment  will  decline  and  unemployment  will  gradually  increase.  Monetary 
policy cannot prevent an increase in unemployment that is due to a wage-driven cost shock. 
When there is confidence that monetary policy will contribute to low and stable inflation over time, it 
can contribute  in the short term - under certain conditions - to smoothing fluctuations in output and 
demand. In the short term, there is a trade-off between the objectives of inflation stability on the one 
hand, and output and employment stability on the other.  An aggressive monetary policy will rapidly 
bring inflation to the target. This will cause wide fluctuations in the real economy. The interest rate can 
also be changed more gradually,  which  will  have  less impact on the real economy but cause more 
pronounced fluctuations in inflation.  By influencing inflation over time, we can ensure that an overly 
aggressive monetary policy does not in itself cause unnecessary disturbances to the economy. 
The impact of monetary policy occurs with considerable and variable lags. Our analyses indicate that a 
substantial share of the effects of an interest rate change will occur within two years. Two years is thus 
a reasonable time horizon for achieving the  inflation  target.   It is nevertheless conceivable  that  in  a 
situation  where  a  very  high  rate  of  inflation  is  accompanied  by  sluggish  economic  growth,  Norges 
Bank may decide to apply a somewhat longer time horizon than two years to reach the inflation target 
of 2½ per cent. 
The  choice  of  monetary  policy  time  horizon  reflects  the  fact  that  there  are  real  economic  costs 
associated with bringing inflation rapidly back to the target.  This horizon is thus an indirect expression 
of the trade-off between the objectives of, on the one hand, stable output, and on the other hand, low 
and stable inflation. 
Historical  data  for  Norway  and  other  countries  show  that  interest  rate  changes  affect  aggregate 
demand fairly quickly. Using the RIMINI model, we have estimated the effects of a 1 percentage point 
increase in interest rates over a period of two years. The chart shows that, in isolation, an interest rate 
increase of this magnitude may reduce mainland GDP by ¾ -1 per cent after two years. 
The effect will depend on a number of factors, such as household loan debt and corporate profitability. 
Household and business expectations may also play a part in determining the impact of interest rates. 
The band in the chart illustrates some of this uncertainty as shown by our models. 
In practice, it is often difficult to determine how long the interest rate will be kept at high or low level. 
The associated effects, for example on the exchange rate, will inevitably change if the interest rate is 
changed for a shorter or longer period than in our analysis. Experience shows that the time it takes for 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2002
 a change in interest rates to have an impact will also vary. For example, the interest rate increases in 
1998 had an impact on wage growth as early as the following spring. In other situations, it may take 
longer. 
The impact on consumer price inflation is also uncertain. The inflation rate is reduced by an estimated 
0.20-0.35  percentage  point  after  two  years  and  0.30-  0.40  percentage  point  after  three  years.  The 
result  will  depend  partly  on  how  the  exchange  rate  reacts  to  the  increase  in  interest  rates.  All  the 
above  estimates  are  based  on  the  assumption  that  monetary  policy  credibility  remains  firm.  For 
example, if an interest rate decrease reduces credibility, the impact on the exchange rate and inflation 
may be substantially stronger than indicated here. However, it is impossible to quantify these effects. 
Sizeable  interest  rate  changes  could  theoretically  influence  monetary  policy  credibility.  The  above 
estimates are therefore based on small interest rate changes. Pronounced interest rate changes could 
have a different impact from that described here. 
Forward rates reflect the market expectation of future levels of short-term interest rates. The difference 
between  German  and  Norwegian  forward  rates  reflects  different  inflation  expectations  and  a  risk 
premium. During the period when the objective of monetary policy was a stable exchange rate against 
the  euro,  the  difference  between  Norwegian  and  German  long-term  interest  rates  was  about  ½ 
percentage  point  less  than  it  is  today.   The  difference  between  Norwegian  and  Germany  10-year 
forward rates widened by about ½ percentage point after the introduction of the inflation target. This 
indicates that the market previously assumed that in the long term price inflation in Norway would be 
on  a  par  with  that  in  the  euro  area,  i.e.  around  the  ECB’s  objective  of  less  than  2  per  cent  rate  of 
increase in prices. 
The members of Norges Bank’s Executive Board are collectively responsible for the Bank’s decisions. 
The  Executive  Board  meets  every  three  weeks.  At  every  second  meeting,  the  Executive  Board 
discusses monetary policy in depth. Decisions regarding changes in the interest rate will normally be 
made at these monetary policy meetings. The Executive Board discusses the economic outlook at a 
separate  meeting  three  weeks  before  the  Inflation  Report  is  presented.  On  the  basis  of  preliminary 
projections for the report, the Executive Board assesses the outlook for inflation two years ahead and 
the uncertainty surrounding these projections. The following day, the Executive Board summarises its 
discussions  and  assesses  the  consequences  for  monetary  policy  for  the  next  four  months.  This 
assessment  constitutes  an  important  internal  reference  when  the  Executive  Board  later  makes  a 
decision  regarding  the  interest  rate.  It  will  also  provide  the  basis  for  our  external  communication 
through speeches and the media. 
Growth forecasts have been revised downwards as a result of the interest rate increase in July. GDP 
growth will pick up, but will remain below the growth potential next year. The internationally exposed 
sectors  of  the  economy  are  moving  on  a  different  path  from  some  sheltered  industries.  Whereas 
private  consumption  is  buoying  demand  growth,  scaling  back  is  expected  in  the  manufacturing 
industry. Frictional unemployment is expected to rise. High real wage growth is resulting in divergent 
developments between private and public consumption. A large share of the growth in public spending 
will go to covering higher labour costs in the central and local government sector. As a result there will 
be  little  scope  for  increased  activity  in  the  public  sector,  and  instead  high  growth  in  private 
consumption. 
A time horizon of two years for interest rate setting allows monetary policy to contribute to stabilising 
production. This horizon prevents monetary policy  in  itself from causing unnecessary fluctuations in 
the economy. As an alternative, we could have sought to achieve the inflation target of 2½ per cent 
using a time horizon of six months to one year. We would then have had to reduce the interest rate 
sharply this summer. This would have amplified the pressures in the Norwegian economy that are so 
clearly reflected in wage developments and household demand for loans. In all likelihood, this would 
have  required  marked  interest  rate  increases  one  to  one  and  a  half  years  ahead.  Strict  inflation 
targeting of this type would thus have resulted in more pronounced fluctuations in the interest rate and 
in aggregate demand and production. 
BIS Review 66/2002 
 3
