 Hermann Remsperger: Monetary stability - institutions matter 
Speech  by  Professor  Hermann  Remsperger,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Deutsche 
Bundesbank and Chairman of the Supervisory Board of the Monetary Stability Foundation, at the first 
conference of the Monetary Stability Foundation, Frankfurt, 5 December 2002. 
 The  first  conference  of  the  Monetary  Stability  Foundation  is  dealing  with  the  role  of  institutions  for 
monetary stability. This is certainly not a new topic. Economists have thought about this for centuries 
and have come up with a wide range of answers. While the questions remain the same, the answers 
change as the monetary and financial system evolves.  
Rather than going into the details of each of the sessions, let me start the conference off by referring 
to two issues. The first concerns the involvement of central banks in safeguarding the stability of the 
financial  system.  The  second  is  the  relationship  between  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  in  a  monetary 
union.  
In  my  view,  a  good  opportunity  to  start  thinking  about  price  and  financial  stability  is  a  paper  by 
Friedrich  A.  Lutz  on  “The  Basic  Problem  of  the  Monetary  Constitution”,  first  published  as  early  as 
1936. Its starting point is the observation that money and credit are essentially two sides of the same 
coin as money results from bank lending.  
On the credit side, competition between banks should ensure an optimal allocation of resources. On 
the money side, however, this competition could lead to an excessive creation of money and hence to 
inflation  and  instability  of  the  financial  system.  As  a  consequence,  money  is  best  controlled  by  a 
monopolist, while credit is best granted by competing banks. 
The  key  idea  of  the  Lutz  paper  is  still  interesting  today,  because  it  explicitly  recognizes  the  link 
between price stability  and financial stability. As Lutz himself emphasized, having two very  different 
principles of order for each side of the balance sheet in the banking system does not appear to be a 
problem in normal times.  
In  periods  of  crisis,  however,  a  problem  appears.  To  quote  Lutz  once  more:  State  guarantees  for 
deposits and bailouts nationalize bank liabilities, while keeping the asset side in competition. To put it 
in today’s words: The result is a considerable moral hazard.  
Lutz‘s insight may not be surprising given that he wrote in the aftermath of the severe banking crises in 
Germany and the US of the early 1930s. It is perhaps more of a surprise that his discussion seems to 
have  been  somewhat  forgotten  afterwards.  As  recently  as  in  the  early  1990s,  conventional  wisdom 
appears to have been “keep prices stable and you will minimize the danger of a financial crisis”.  
After  several  financial  crises,  and  in  particular  with  the  Japanese  experience  in  mind,  few  would 
subscribe to this view. We have learned that it is not only movements in the general price level that 
matter, but also movements in a specific class of prices, namely asset prices.  
The  example  of  Japan  shows  that  the  price  stability  of  the  late  1980s  was  not  sufficient  to  ensure 
financial  stability  in  the  decade  that  followed.  Conversely,  financial  instability  can  lead  to  price 
instability, in particular deflation. 
Financial stability is therefore an essential condition for a successful monetary policy. Any central bank 
that wants to take its price stability mandate seriously also needs to have a direct interest in financial 
stability. We are therefore interested in developing tools that help us to ensure the stability of financial 
markets and financial institutions. Without financial stability, price stability cannot be guaranteed. 
Still focussing on banks’ balance sheets I would like to add that the money creation process through 
the  asset  side  of  the  banks  can  be  dampened  or  even  endangered  by  a  high  volume  of  non-
performing loans. That’s what we have learned from the Japanese experience.  
And  the  experience  in  the  Eurosystem  has  made  clear  that  a  strong  expansion  in  monetary 
aggregates is not necessarily the result of a high increase in bank lending. A large increase in money 
supply may reflect a low monetary capital formation, which is heavily dependent on the expectations in 
the financial markets.  
BIS Review 72/2002 
 1
 Thus we have to take account of the fact that the financial system has become much more complex. In 
Germany, this has had essentially two effects. First, the role and size of financial markets have grown 
dramatically,  providing  both  new  sources  of  finance  and  investment  opportunities.  Although  banks 
remain  at  the  centre  of  the  financial  system,  they  are  much  more  dependent  on  financial  market 
conditions than in the past.  
Second, our financial system is far more closely integrated with the rest of the world than it used to be. 
On the one hand, this provides both profit opportunities and permits a more ample diversification of 
risk. On the other hand, it makes us more sensitive to shocks from abroad.  
Against  this  background,  I  believe  it  is  worthwhile  expanding  the  basic  problem  of  the  monetary 
constitution as described by Lutz. Whereas he concentrated on bank balance sheets we have to pay 
special  regard  to  the  ever  increasing  importance  of  financial  markets.  There  might  be  a  conflict 
between the interplay of market forces in the financial markets on the one hand, and financial stability 
on  the  other,  just  as  there  could  be  a  clash  between  competition  in  bank  lending  and  monetary 
stability.  
The past has taught us that it is important to adopt a fairly broad approach when developing tools to 
protect the stability of the financial system. In particular, we cannot discuss this topic without looking at 
the institutional framework. Institutions matter. Any discussion that ignores this is of little use to the 
real  world.  Two  issues  are  important.  The  first  is,  the  design  of  the  individual  institution,  and  the 
second is the relationship between different institutions.  
Let me focus on the second of these issues. The classical view of the relationship between institutions 
is  to  let  each  institution  concentrate  on  its  own  task.  For  example,  price  stability  would  fall  into  the 
responsibility  of  the  central  bank,  while  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  would  be  the  task  of 
another government agency. Separating tasks, it is argued, makes institutions more accountable and 
helps to limit agency problems. While there is much merit in this view, we have become aware that 
tasks often cannot be separated so clearly.  
Let us recall the example of the central bank and financial supervision. Under certain circumstances, 
there  may  be  a  short-term  conflict  of  interest  between  price  stability  and  financial  stability.  In  some 
cases, low inflation may call for a cut in interest rates, while financial imbalances may warrant a rate 
hike. What should the central bank do?  
If you take the idea of separating responsibilities to the extreme, the central bank should simply cut 
interest rates and forget about the impact on the financial system, the protection of which would be the 
regulator’s job. Few would consider such a policy optimal.  
The reason for this is that a conflict between price stability and financial stability is not necessarily an 
agency  problem.  Instead,  we  may  be  faced  with  a  short-term  trade-off  between  price  stability  and 
financial  stability.  Strictly  separating  these  two  tasks  could  thus  lead  to  worse  outcomes  than 
coordinating the tasks between institutions.  
Most  non-Europeans  would  stop  here.  In  Europe,  we  have  to  consider  an  additional  factor:  the 
geographical  dimension.  Different  institutions  are  subject  to  different  jurisdictions.  For  example, 
prudential supervision is at the national level, monetary policy at the EMU-12 level, and the regulatory 
framework within which both supervision and monetary policy take place at the EU-15 level.  
Let  me  turn  now  to  the  relationship  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  It  is  not  too  long  ago  that 
interest rates in many countries were set by the finance ministry. One of the reasons behind combining 
monetary and fiscal policy decisions in a single institution was the idea that this would result in a better 
policy mix.  
Today, in contrast, virtually all central banks in the developed world are independent, and it is hard to 
think of a country were the treasury decides on the level of interest rates. The last two decades have 
witnessed an enormous paradigm change on the role of central banks in monetary policy. 
What  are  the  reasons  behind  this  paradigm  shift?  A  key  insight  was  the  expectation-augmented 
Phillips curve. It said that monetary authorities may have an incentive to trigger off a boom by relaxing 
monetary policy. However, you cannot surprise agents too often. They soon will learn to anticipate this 
expansionary  bias  and  adjust  their  behaviour  accordingly.  The  result  is  high  inflation  and  no 
expansion. The way out of this time-inconsistency trap is to install a “conservative” central banker who 
sets interest rates independently.  
2 
 BIS Review 72/2002
 Central bank independence reduces the time-consistency problem, but it cannot prevent the possibility 
that monetary policy may be dominated by an unsustainable fiscal policy and thus be ineffective. This 
was first shown by the “unpleasant monetarist arithmetic” of Sargent and Wallace in the 1970s and, 
more recently, by the “fiscal theory of the price level”.  
At  the  EMU-level,  the  relationship  between  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy  becomes  even  more 
complex.  There  is  only  one  monetary  policy  for  the  whole  euro  area,  yet  there  are  as  many  fiscal 
policies  as  there  are  countries.  As  a  consequence,  in  addition  to  the  problem  of  a  possible  fiscal 
dominance, there is a free-rider problem as it is possible for countries to reap all of the benefits while 
bearing  only  some  of  the  costs  of  an  unsustainable  fiscal  expansion.  This  shows  how  quickly  the 
geographical dimension turns into a political dimension, with important implications for sovereignty. 
The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  is  the  mechanism  designed  to  mitigate  this  problem  and  thus  an 
important part of our monetary constitution.  
Let me conclude by saying that monetary stability consists of both price stability and financial stability. 
From this perspective the two-pillar approach of the ECB provides an excellent analytical framework. It 
does not only allow the ECB to integrate asset prices as an indicator of other variables in the second 
pillar. The ECB’s approach also allows it to analyse some aspects of financial stability within the broad 
framework of the first pillar.  
As financial  instability  is  very  often created by a credit expansion that  is too rapid,  we  have  to  pay 
particular attention to the counterparts of money supply. That is what Lutz told us many  years ago. 
And that’s one of the reasons why I support the first pillar. In my view, the macro prudential element in 
the first pillar should be emphasized more than has been the case in the past.  
BIS Review 72/2002 
 3
