Sheku Sambadeen Sesay: Economic overview, trends and challenges 
Statement by Mr Sheku Sambadeen Sesay, Governor of the Bank of Sierra Leone, at the 
Governor’s annual dinner, Freetown, 28 January 2011. 
 His Excellency, The President, Dr. Ernest Bai-Koroma and Mrs Sia Koroma,  
Honourable, Vice President, Chief Alhaji Sam Sumana and Mrs Khadija Sumana,  
Honourable Cabinet Ministers,  
Honorable Speaker and Members of Parliament,  
Her Lordship, the Chief Justice,  
Your Worship, the Mayor of the Municipality of Freetown,  
Your Excellencies, Members of the Diplomatic and Consular Corp,  
Chairmen of the Board of Directors and Chief Executives of Commercial Banks and Other 
Financial Institutions,  
President of the Sierra Leone Chamber of Commerce, Agriculture and Industry,  
Representatives of the Private sector,  
Members of the Fourth Estate,  
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen.  
On behalf of the Board of Directors, Management and staff of the Bank of Sierra Leone, I am 
honoured by your presence once again at the Bank’s Annual Dinner, my second as Governor 
of the Bank of Sierra Leone. As our country celebrates 50 years of independence, it is but 
appropriate that the Bank of Sierra Leone marks this milestone in the company of H.E. The 
President, the Hon. Vice President, the First Lady and Wife of the Hon. Vice President, along 
with other dignitaries.  
Before  I  proceed,  kindly  permit  me  to  request  you  to  stand  and  join  us  in  observing  a 
moment’s silence in memory of our departed colleagues and pensioners who were with us 
last year. May their souls rest in peace.  
Your  Excellency,  distinguished  guests,  it  is  indeed  an  occasion  for  all  stakeholders  of  the 
Bank – the Government, Civil Society and the public at large – to be updated on the progress 
of  the  Bank,  its  diverse  contributions  to  the  economic  and  social  development  of  Sierra 
Leone  and  the  challenges  that  lie  ahead.  This  is  also  a  fitting  occasion  to  re-dedicate 
ourselves to the original mandate that the founding fathers adopted at the inception of the 
Bank in 1964 namely; to achieve and maintain monetary stability and, without prejudice, to 
maintain a sound, vibrant and stable financial system.  
In this regard, I will be speaking on the theme “Repositioning the Bank of Sierra Leone to 
Meet the Challenges of the Financial Sector”. As part of the global economic and financial 
system, Sierra Leone has not been entirely insulated from the shocks of the crisis and as the 
global  economy  reevaluates  and  repositions  itself  to  achieve  full  recovery,  it  is  but  fitting, 
especially as our nation marks its 50th independence anniversary, that the Bank spearheads 
efforts to ensure that the financial system is robust enough to withstand any future shocks. In 
doing  so,  let  us  recall  the  developments  on  the  global,  regional  and  sub  regional  levels 
before examining the initiatives to reposition the Bank.  
Global financial developments  
Your  Excellency,  distinguished  guests,  as  mentioned  in  my  speech  last  year,  the  global 
economy  is  recovering,  though  at  a  slower  and  unbalanced  pace.  According  to  the  IMF’s 
World Economic Outlook, global growth was projected at 4.8 percent in 2010 with Asia and 
Latin  America  experiencing  strong  growth.  Africa  was  also  expected  to  experience  robust 
growth, but growth in Europe was sluggish whilst in the United States, it remained subdued. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
This uneven scenario in global growth has created several downside risks, including risks to 
the  financial  sector.  There  is  no  guarantee  that  the  problems  in  the  financial  sector  have 
been adequately addressed, but there have been concerted efforts to ensure that they do not 
recur. The introduction of new rules, in particular Basel III is expected to help in this direction, 
as Basel III will address issues including strengthening risk coverage of capital for banks, the 
buildup  of  capital  buffers  and  the  introduction  of  global  minimum  liquidity  standards. 
However, countries are now realizing that in addition to these new rules there is the need for 
better supervision and the creation of crisis resolution mechanisms.  
Your Excellency, distinguished guests, despite the down side risks to the global economy, 
there is room for optimism which stems from the progress being made to repair and reform 
the financial sector, including developing macro prudential approaches to limit systemic risks. 
Monetary policy in the developed economies should remain accommodative in order to serve 
as the first line of defense in the event of a future shock. Exchange rate policies are expected 
to be designed to support rebalancing of global demand, while structural reforms to enhance 
access to finance by small and medium scale enterprises (SMEs), should help boost growth 
and reduce unemployment. Finally, better policy coordination among all stakeholders should 
help alleviate liquidity constraints and rebuild confidence.  
Regional financial trends  
Your Excellency, distinguished guests, Africa has been reasonably unaffected by the crisis 
due to the low level of exposure of its economies to international trade and financial flows. 
The continent experienced encouraging growth in 2010 not only on account of a recovery in 
exports and commodity prices, but also due to implementation of prudent policies by some of 
our economies prior to the global down turn. In addition, the effect of reduced foreign inflows 
from aid, foreign direct investments and remittances was far less than originally anticipated. 
The  increase  in  global  demand  and  hike  in  oil  prices  benefitted  oil-producing  African 
countries with Nigeria and Angola, the two largest oil producers experiencing strong growth 
of around 6 percent.  
In spite of the encouraging trends, risks to Africa’s economic prospects remain, particularly 
given  the  faltering  global  economy.  It  was  recognized  that  the  crisis  originated  from  the 
financial systems and this has underscored the need for a more robust and effective financial 
sector supervision framework in African countries that can withstand potential future shocks.  
At a meeting of the Association of African Central Banks held in Dakar, Senegal, in August 
2010,  it  was  generally  recognized  that  African  central  banks  should  adopt  policies  which 
should ensure a move towards macro prudential surveillance of the whole financial system 
and  ensure  that  there  are  early  warning  signals  and  adequate  remedial  measures  to  deal 
with any crisis.  
Sub regional financial developments  
Your  Excellency,  distinguished  ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  you  are  aware,  the  West  African 
Monetary  Institute  (WAMI)  is  spearheading  efforts  to  establish  the  Eco  as  the  single 
currency, with a West African Central Bank and common monetary and financial policies for 
the Zone. However, as a result of the recent financial crisis, member states could not meet 
the macroeconomic convergence criteria which are part of the requirements, and a decision 
was taken by Heads of State and Government to postpone the launch of the single currency 
and the establishment of a West African Central Bank to not later than 1st January 2015.  
In  spite  of  these  difficult  conditions,  the  West  African  Sub  region  has  shown  remarkable 
resilience to the onslaught of the crisis mainly due to the region’s low integration with global 
financial  markets.  However,  in  the  post  crisis  period,  indications  are  that  economic  growth 
would  continue  to  remain  robust,  averaging  around  7  percent  for  countries  of  the  West 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
African Monetary Zone. In spite of this, lessons should be learnt from the effects of the crisis 
in other regions and, going forward as a single monetary zone, policies are being designed 
and implemented to prepare us to cope better with any threats to our financial systems. We 
must also recognize that there are peculiar risks to our zonal financial sector which are being 
addressed through new initiatives. Since the signing of a joint memorandum on cross border 
supervision,  as  I  informed  you  in  my  speech  last  year,  Governors’  of  the  West  African 
Monetary Zone have signed an additional memorandum for the establishment of a College of 
Banking Supervisors in July 2010.  
In  2010,  Liberia  attained  full  membership  of  the  West  African  Monetary  Zone  (WAMZ), 
increasing  the  membership  from  five  countries  to  six,  and  has  now  been  integrated  into  a 
number of projects including the Payments System, Financial Sector Integration, and Trade 
Policies.  
Developments on the domestic front  
Economic developments in 2010  
Your Excellency, distinguished guests, on the domestic economic front, projected real GDP 
growth in 2010 was higher at 4.5 percent, compared to 3.2 percent in 2009, a reflection of 
government’s  effort  to  stimulate  economic  activities  through  investments  in  agriculture, 
energy  and  infrastructure.  There  was  also  an  increased  global  demand  for  agricultural 
commodities  and  mineral  exports  which  also  improved  the  country’s  balance  of  payments 
position.  Furthermore,  new  mining  lease  agreements  have  been  signed  with  foreign 
companies  which  would  increase  returns  in  this  sector  in  the  medium  term.  Also, 
government’s drive towards improving electricity supply and distribution, with the completion 
of  the  Bumbuna  Hydroelectric  Power  Plant  and  additional  thermal  plants,  contributed  to 
increased productivity particularly in the manufacturing sector. However, going forward, there 
is a need to achieve a higher growth rate to stimulate economic activities and create more 
employment.  
Your  Excellency,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  state  of  the  economy  was  presented  by  the 
Honourable Minister of Finance and Economic Development, in his statement of Economic 
and  Financial  policies  for  2011.  During  2010,  fiscal  policy  was  geared  towards  enhancing 
revenue  mobilisation  to  support  government’s  expanded  capital  expenditure  requirements. 
Emphasis was therefore placed on improving tax administration by reducing inefficiencies in 
tax  collection  and  increasing  the  levels  of  compliance.  The  performance  of  the  newly 
introduced  Goods  and  Services  Tax  (GST)  was  encouraging,  with  a  compliance  rate  of 
60 percent. This is an indication of hope for future revenue performance in Sierra Leone.  
On  the  other  hand,  expenditures  exceeded  the  budgetary  targets  due  to  salary  increases, 
expenditure on the health sector and infrastructural outlays. In this regard, the Bank would 
like  to  stress  that  the  global  financial  crisis  has  resulted  in  global  austerity  measures 
worldwide, and Sierra Leone should not be left behind in making difficult financial choices. 
Compared to 2009, the year 2010 reflected a wider deficit which was financed mainly from 
the drawdown of Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) resources, some external financing 
and  domestic  borrowing  mainly  through  Ways  and  Means  Advances.  Despite  this 
accommodating monetary policy, we have not lost sight of our key mandate of maintaining 
price and exchange rate stability, thus the need to strike an elusive golden balance. On this 
note, the Bank continues to pursue an active monetary and exchange rate policy to achieve 
these objectives.  
The inflation rate remained in double digits in 2010 with a year-on-year rate of 18.3 percent 
in November 2010. This was attributable to the impact of the introduction of the Goods and 
Services Tax (GST) in January 2010 coupled with the increases in fuel prices as a result of 
the gradual withdrawal of subsidies and the depreciation of the Leone. However, on the back 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
of enhanced liquidity management by the Bank of Sierra Leone, and given that the impact of 
the introduction of the GST is a one off, which took us to a higher platform, inflation is now 
expected to decline to single digit in 2011. Current transient increases in global food prices 
are  expected  to  subside  as  the  domestic  supply  situation  improves  and  are  therefore  not 
expected to impact significantly on prices in Sierra Leone.  
Your  Excellency,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  in  order  to  ensure  more  efficient  monetary  policy 
management,  the  Bank  intensified  efforts  to  deepen  inter-bank  market  activity  and  also 
developed a benchmark interest rate which would guide the commercial banks in fixing their 
various interest rates.  
Despite the above developments, monetary policy management was significantly challenged 
in  2010,  owing  to  delays  in  external  donor  disbursements  and  government’s  expansionary 
fiscal  policies  which  had  to  be  accommodated  by  the  Bank.  The  weekly  foreign  exchange 
auctions  were  utilised  to  complement  monetary  operations  in  order  to  sterilize  liquidity,  in 
addition to providing much needed foreign exchange to businesses. The amount allocated 
for  private  sector  support  through  the  weekly  auction  in  2010  was  US$47.6  million,  which 
was  lower  than  the  US$67.7  million  in  2009.  This  reduction  was  necessary  to  cater  for 
government’s  infrastructural  development  needs  whilst  maintaining  the  required  level  of 
reserves to absorb endogenous and exogenous shocks.  
As  you  are  aware,  the  Bank  has  been  providing  foreign  exchange  through  the  auction 
system but with our import bill increasingly higher than our export earnings, pressure on the 
Leone  has  intensified.  There  is  therefore  the  need  for  a  concerted  effort  in  ensuring  that 
export  proceeds  are  repatriated  into  the  country  to  ease  these  pressures.  The  Bank  will 
therefore  be  embarking  on  a  drive  to  ensure  maximum  compliance  with  the  laid  down 
procedures with exports and its attendant receivables from abroad. The depreciation of the 
Leone in 2010 was only 7.7 percent compared to almost 30 percent in 2009. It is expected 
that with the promotion of an interbank foreign exchange market, stability of the Leone will be 
enhanced in 2011.  
In  addition  to  the  above,  I  am  pleased  to  inform  you  that  our  external  reserves  are 
comfortable  and  our  external  debt  is  manageable.  Gross  external  reserves  increased  to 
US$345.23 million at end 2010 compared to US$336.3million at end 2009, which could cover 
six months of imports and cushion the country against external shocks. External borrowing 
was  directed  towards  highly  concessional  loans  that  met  rigorous  criteria.  The  level  of 
external debt increased from US$680.0mn in 2009 to US$722.1mn in 2010 but remains at 
modest risk and is sustainable compared to levels before our eligibility to the Highly Indebted 
Poor Countries Initiative (HIPC) in 2006.  
Following  the  successful  completion  of  the  IMF’s  Poverty  Reduction  and  Growth  Facility 
(PRGF)  –  supported  Programme  in  December  2009,  the  country  adopted  a  successor 
Extended  Credit  Facility  (ECF)  programme  beginning  July,  2010  and  was  able  to 
successfully complete the first review on 6th December 2010.  
Financial sector developments in 2010  
Your  Excellency,  distinguished  ladies  and  gentlemen,  allow  me  to  take  you  through  the 
status of financial sector developments during 2010:  
 
On the banking sector, the number of commercial banks was reduced from 14 to 13 
with Procredit Bank being taken over by EcoBank, due to an increase in the capital 
requirements which did not fit in with the Procredit Bank’s business model.  
Provisional figures for the banking industry in November 2010, reveal an 18 percent 
increase in total assets in the last twelve months to almost Le2.0 trillion.  
The industry profits increased by 238 percent based on unaudited figures, with five 
of the commercial banks recording a loss compared to seven last year.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
  4 
    The  total  deposit  base  of  the  banking  system  increased  by  23  percent  to  Le1.7 
trillion as of November 2010.  
Total private sector credit increased by 30.4 percent in 2010, lower than the 46.2 
percent  recorded  for  2009,  with  non-performing  loans  declining,  albeit  slightly,  to 
about 16 percent of total loans by November 2010.  
Domestic  interest  rates  remained  generally  stable,  with  the  exception  of  interest 
rates  on  government  securities,  which  rose  due  to  increased  borrowing  by 
Government. This development, which is currently being addressed by the Bank of 
Sierra Leone and the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development could have a 
rippling effect on commercial banks’ lending rates.  
in 
Your Excellency, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, in the early part of 2010, I summoned 
a series of meetings with board members and managing directors of all commercial banks to 
review various aspects of their operations, including profitability and corporate governance. 
The aims of these meetings were to ensure that all commercial banks were brought on board 
the  central  bank’s  plan  to  reinvigorate  the  financial  sector  by  creating  stronger,  more 
profitable and efficient institutions and to ensure that individual bank practices do not pose 
risks to the entire banking system as has been the case in other parts of the globe. On the 
whole, our discussions were quite fruitful, with some of the issues raised such as governance 
structure,  compliance  with  statutory  requirements,  prudence 
lending  operations, 
capitalization, and others related to deposit and credit concentration were deeply discussed. 
The  commercial  banks  also  gave  valuable  comments  which  were  very  useful  in  resolving 
some of the effects of the global financial crisis on our economy.  
Your Excellency, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, you may recall that six pilot community 
banks  were  established  by  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone.  However,  given  the  problems 
encountered  by  the  community  banks,  a  committee  comprising  the  chairmen  of  the 
community banks was setup by the Bank of Sierra Leone to review the poor performance of 
these  banks.  As  a  result  of  the  study,  corrective  action  was  taken  by  the  central  bank  in 
collaboration  with  the  International  Fund  for  Agricultural  Development  (IFAD)  to  develop  a 
rescue plan of action to comprehensively address distressed community banks and enhance 
the efficiency of their operations.  
As part of our currency  management drive, the  Bank of Sierra Leone issued on 14th May 
2010,  a  new  four-note  series  of  resized  banknotes  to  improve  security  features  and  help 
denomination-recognition  for  the  visually  impaired  and  illiterate.  The  design  themes  and 
portraits of the previous series (which date back to early 1990s) have been retained, but the 
Bank has taken the opportunity to make the notes more secure. By resizing the notes, the 
Bank of Sierra Leone has also addressed the problem of criminal bleaching of genuine notes 
and their redenomination to higher values. Durability has also been enhanced in the form of 
a  post-print  vanish,  to  provide  a  defense  against  the  rigours  of  Sierra  Leone’s  tropical 
climate, heavy usage in a cash-dependent society, and poor handling by the public.  
In this regard, the Bank of Sierra Leone has expressed concern over the manner in which the 
nation’s currency is handled and we have cautioned the public that although the new series 
of notes have been treated with vanish to enhance their durability, it is the responsibility of 
the Public to observe “proper handling” to increase their circulation life. Furthermore, it is the 
nation’s civic responsibility to know their bank notes and to handle them properly. During the 
introduction of the notes, we allowed a 12-month transition period during which the old and 
the new notes co-circulated. The Bank will shortly advise the public as regards the deadline 
for the co-circulation of these notes. In the meantime, I am pleased to inform you that over 
93%  of  the  old  notes  have  already  been  withdrawn  and  Sierra  Leoneans  now  have  notes 
they can be proud of.  
During  2010,  the  Bank  made  substantial  progress  in  setting  up  a  credit  reference  bureau 
which will allow the banks to exchange information on customers in an effort to reduce the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
incidence of nonperforming loans, reduce the interest rates on loans and stimulate private 
sector  credit  flows.  The  relevant  bill  has  been  drafted  and  forwarded  to  parliament  for 
enactment,  and  draft  guidelines  have  been  developed.  Staff  of  the  Bank  have  also  been 
trained  in  the  management  of  the  credit  reference  bureau  and  an  office  has  been 
established.  
Your Excellency, distinguished guests, the Bank continues to be vigilant in the supervision of 
the financial system and I shall now outline policies geared towards repositioning the Bank to 
meet the challenges of the financial sector.  
Repositioning the Bank of Sierra Leone to meet the challenges of the financial sector  
Your Excellency, distinguished guests, before I start on the current activities of repositioning 
the Bank, I would like to acknowledge the efforts of past Governors in reforming the financial 
sector through the implementation of various IMF/ World Bank programmes, since this dinner 
coincides  with  the  50th  Independence  anniversary.  In  this  regard,  we  pay  tribute  to  Mr. 
Gordon Hall, the very first Governor and Mr. Sylvanus Nicol-Cole, the first Sierra Leonean 
Governor. We also want to remember two former Governors who sadly passed away whilst 
in active service; late Messrs. Sam Bangura and Victor Bruce (may their souls rest in peace). 
Permit me to pay tribute to all other former Governors who have contributed immensely to 
our institutional development over the years. I want to take this opportunity to thank them all 
for their contributions in reforming the Bank and upholding the dignity and effectiveness of 
our noble institution.  
Your Excellency, distinguished guests, the recent global economic and financial crisis was a 
wake-up call to the realisation that low and stable inflation, a sound banking system, as well 
as high and sustainable economic growth, though necessary, are not sufficient conditions for 
financial  stability.  As  you  are  aware,  the  Bank  had  developed  the  Financial  Sector 
Development  Plan  (FSDP)  which  was  approved  by  cabinet  in  2009,  to  address  the 
shortcomings  in  the  financial  sector.  It  is  expected  that  funding  for  the  FSDP  would  be 
provided under a basket fund arrangement with development partners, including KfW, GTZ, 
and  AfDB,  with  the  World  Bank  assuming  a  leading  role.  The  Bank  is  in  the  process  of 
setting up a secretariat for successful implementation of the FSDP for which the Head has 
been appointed.  
Your  Excellency,  distinguished  ladies  and  gentlemen,  permit  me  to  proceed  with  the 
discussion on the highlights of the reform policies to reposition the Bank and the current state 
of their implementation.  
Strengthening the supervisory role of the Bank of Sierra Leone  
Your Excellency, distinguished guests, even though the Bank was granted legal sanction by 
the Bank of Sierra Leone Act 2000, its powers and operational autonomy are limited. In order 
to strengthen its powers in the conduct of monetary policy, its supervisory role and to ensure 
financial  stability  especially  with  the  multiplicity  of  banks,  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone  Act  is 
being reviewed with technical assistance from the IMF. The Banking Act 2000 is also being 
reviewed to protect the interests of depositors and shareholders and to further strengthen the 
Bank’s supervisory and enforcement powers. The Bank of Sierra Leone has broadened its 
regulatory and supervisory frameworks to include a number of “other financial institutions” in 
accordance with the provisions of the Other Financial Services Act 2001, which is also being 
amended to ensure compliance with international regulatory standards.  
The Bank has issued revised prudential guidelines governing the operations of commercial 
banks.  These  guidelines  have  clearly  specified  requirements  to  address  issues  relating  to 
capital adequacy, asset quality, liquidity, corporate governance, market risks, etc, which will 
be  strictly  enforced.  The  Bank  has  also  adopted  the  International  Financial  Reporting 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Standards  (IFRS)  as  its  financial  reporting  framework  and  has  requested  the  commercial 
banks to do likewise.  
Furthermore,  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone  has  adopted  two  complementary  approaches  to 
address  governance  and  risk  management  issues.  Firstly,  the  Bank  has  focused  on  risk 
factors originating within the financial system and secondly, mechanisms are being adopted 
and  implemented  to  address  risks  originating  mainly  from  unlicensed  financial  institutions. 
Therefore,  the  Bank’s  supervisory  strategy  is  shifting  from  compliance  –  based  to  risk  – 
focused supervision.  
Your Excellency, distinguished guests, with the increase in the number of banks, the Bank of 
Sierra Leone has taken steps to ensure that commercial banks are adequately capitalized to 
absorb  shocks  and  enhance  their  capacity  to  extend  credit.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  has 
increased the required minimum paid-up capital from Le15 billion in 2009 to Le30 billion over 
a five year period and preliminary indications are that most commercial banks have met this 
minimum capital as at end December 2010.  
Cross-border challenges  
Your  Excellency,  distinguished  ladies  and  gentlemen,  as  investors  extend  their  investment 
outreach  across  national  frontiers,  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone  has  in  addition  to  signing  a 
memorandum  of  understanding  for  information  sharing  last  year  in  the  WAMZ  member 
states,  has  also  seen  the  need  for  further  action  to  enhance  cooperation  with  other 
supervisory bodies in the sub region. To this end, Sierra Leone became a member of The 
College of Supervisors of the West African Monetary Zone in 2010, an institution set up to 
coordinate  and  harmonize  supervisory  information  and  practices  among  central  banks  of 
WAMZ member countries. At its recent meeting held in Accra, the College agreed, amongst 
others that:  
 
Capacity building through training to be delivered by WAIFEM, should be central to 
its future operations;  
A common supervisory framework for member countries should be established;  
Financial Stability Reporting should be standardized and uniform; and  
Regional corporate governance guidelines should be developed.  
 
 
 
Your  Excellency,  distinguished  guests,  given  the  menace  of  the  growing  trend  in  drug 
trafficking  in  the  sub-region,  the  Bank,  under  its  obligation  to  comply  with  all  international 
standards on Anti-Money Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT), 
has  in  collaboration  with  its  partners,  reviewed  the  Anti-Money  Laundering  Act  2005  to 
address its inadequacies. The AML/CFT Bill 2009 has been approved by Cabinet and is now 
awaiting  legislative  enactment.  In  the  meantime,  the  Bank  is  enforcing  the  current  Anti-
Money Laundry Act through its Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU). In this regard, the Bank in 
close  collaboration  with  the  Anti  Corruption  Commission  is  examining  the  possibility  of 
signing  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  for  investigation  and  prosecution  in  relation  to 
money  laundering  and  other  financial  crimes  that  involve  suspicious  transactions  and 
politically exposed persons.  
Oversight of the payments and settlement system  
Your  Excellency,  distinguished  guests,  the  Bank,  with  the  support  of  its  development 
partners, has embarked on modernization of the payments, clearing and settlement systems 
by implementing A SWIFT FIN Copy Service in April 2010. This will enable the settlement of 
large value interbank transactions faster and reduce the risk element.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
With  supervision  by  WAMI  and  funding  from  the  African  Development  Bank  (AfDB),  the 
following payments system reforms are at various stages of implementation:  
 
The infrastructure of the Bank is being upgraded to state-of-the art IP-based data 
communication networks, supported by a reliable uninterrupted power supply;  
The state of preparedness of the commercial banks for connectivity to BSL in a bid 
to ensure the efficiency of the payments system is in the process of being reviewed;  
The payments system components of core banking application, automated cheque 
processing (ACP), automated clearing house (ACH), real time gross settlement and 
scriptless security settlement are currently being deployed;  
The  proposed  deployment,  by  a  private  company,  of  fibre  optic  for  connectivity 
between the commercial banks and the Bank of Sierra Leone is in progress.  
   Financial Inclusion for poverty reduction and growth promotion  
Your Excellency, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, the Bank seeks in its operations to go 
beyond  monetary  policy  to  promote  poverty  reduction,  create  employment  and  growth 
through  enhancing  access  to  finance  in  the  rural  areas  which  constitute  a  significant 
proportion of the economy. The Bank welcomes the growth in the number of microfinance 
institutions (MFIs), Financial Services Associations (FSAs), the opening of new branches of 
banks  and  the  introduction  of  mobile  banking  in  a  move  to  improve  rural  financial 
intermediation.  As  the  number  of  these  institutions  increases,  the  challenge  would  be  to 
effectively supervise and regulate them.  
Other financial sector issues  
Your  Excellency,  distinguished  guests,  one  of  the  major  limitations  to  investment  in  Sierra 
Leone is the non availability of medium to long term funds. The Bank in the context of the 
FSDP intends to address this issue in consultation with insurance companies, NASSIT and 
other potential medium to long term fund holders to see how such funds could be mobilized. 
Also, the establishment of the stock exchange could serve as a source of funds through the 
collective investment scheme. In the mean time, the Bank is working closely with the Ministry 
of  Finance  and  Economic  Development  for  the  issuance  of  long  term  bonds  to  assist 
Government in financing its development programmes. We hope that when these bonds are 
issued,  the  public  will  respond  positively  to  our  development  initiatives.  Another  area  of 
concern is the absence of specialized institutions that finance activities in key sectors that 
contribute to growth. This is being addressed by the Bank in consultation with the relevant 
ministries. Furthermore, the Bank is also considering options on how funds from the formal 
sector can be used to assist the informal sector.  
Strengthening the regulator  
Your Excellency, distinguished ladies and gentlemen, the Bank has made notable progress 
in strengthening its governance structure and corporate management system. There is also 
broad  harmony  and  genuine  cooperation  among  all  stakeholders  of  the  Bank  as  well  as 
among the various regulatory bodies of the commercial banks.  
In the area of human resource management, a more open and transparent system has been 
introduced.  Pay  and  benefits  structures  have  been  adjusted  in  line  with  practices  of  sister 
institutions to enable the Bank attract high calibre staff. We have also developed a new staff 
evaluation system which rewards competence and performance. More importantly, the staff 
and  management  have,  on  their  own,  adopted  a  set  of  core  values  following  international 
standards by developing a Code of Conduct.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Framework for financial stability analysis  
Your  Excellency,  Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  even  though  the  Bank,  in  its 
response to the global financial crisis, has sought to address numerous issues of concern to 
the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  many  more  challenges  remain  to  be  addressed.  The 
adoption of a financial stability analysis framework through which potential vulnerabilities in 
the system can be identified and gauged, is key to safeguarding the long-term stability of the 
financial system.  
The Bank is aware of these requirements, and has set up a unit in the Research Department 
to monitor and periodically report on financial stability. Efforts are still at a transitory stage but 
going forward, the Bank is seeking to develop a full-fledged financial stability framework. As 
part of the risk assessment drive, the Bank, with technical assistance from the IMF, plans to 
undertake  stress  assessment  of  the  banking  system  to  determine  the  resilience  of  their 
portfolios to various shocks. This exercise will be conducted in 2011.  
With these measures, the bank will be in a better position to detect systemic threats and put 
in place remedial measures to ensure continued soundness of the financial system.  
Conclusion  
Your  Excellency,  distinguished  guests,  the  Bank  of  Sierra  Leone  has  indeed  made  much 
progress  since  its  establishment.  While  many  challenges  remain,  there  can  be  little  doubt 
that the Bank has over the last years built up its financial, technical and institutional capacity 
to continue to provide major support to the developmental efforts of Sierra Leone. Today, all 
stakeholders would find in the Bank of Sierra Leone a unique symbol of their partnership and 
an institution in which they can take immense pride. In the years ahead, the Bank can be 
expected  to  play  a  critical  role  including  the  maintenance  of  a  stable  financial  system  in 
helping Sierra Leone tackle its many developmental challenges. It is therefore incumbent on 
all  stakeholders  to  strengthen  this  unique  institution  by  helping  it  to  grow  further  and  to 
assume its role as an apex institution.  
Your Excellency, ladies and gentlemen, in concluding, I wish to thank our numerous partners 
with whom we enjoy good relations, especially our international, regional and sub regional 
partners, for their support and assistance to the Bank. The Bank has benefitted from capacity 
building, training, technical assistance, and funding from:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The African Development Bank (AfDB);  
The Association of African Central Banks (AACB);  
The British Department for International Development (DFID);  
The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS);  
The European Union (EU);  
The German Technical Cooperation (GTZ);  
The International Monetary Fund (IMF);  
The International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD);  
The Reconstruction Credit Institute (KFW);  
The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP);  
The West African Monetary Agency (WAMA);  
The West African Monetary Institute (WAMI);  
The West African institute for Financial and Economic Management (WAIFEM); and  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
The World Bank  
His Excellency, The President Dr. Ernest Bia-Koroma  
The Honourable, Vice President Chief Alhaji Sam Sumana  
The Minister of Finance and Economic Development  
The Honourable Speaker and Members of Parliament  
The President of the Bankers’ Association  
 
This list is by no means exhaustive.  
We want to assure these organisations of our cooperation at all times and we know that with 
their continued support we shall maintain the course despite the challenges of our time.  
I am most grateful to  
 
 
 
 
 
The  many  Heads  of  States  and  Governments,  many  former  Governors,  heads  of  financial 
institutions, as well as heads of international and regional organisations that have contributed 
to enhancing the role of the Bank in promoting economic and social progress, in particular, 
financial  stability  in  Sierra  Leone.  Their  varied  contributions  are  a  testimony  to  the 
achievements of the Bank and the high esteem it is held today. They also underscore the 
major reforms that the Bank, supported fully by all the stakeholders, has implemented since 
1964, covering operational, financial, and governance matters.  
I would like to thank members of the Board of Directors, the Deputy Governor, Management 
and  Staff  of  the  Bank  for  the  guidance,  support  and  cooperation  throughout  2010.  Let  me 
also extend my gratitude to my family and friends for their prayers, continued support and 
guidance,  not  forgetting  the  Fourth  Estate  for  the  work  they  have  done  in  sensitizing  the 
public on the role and policies of the Bank.  
I thank you for your attention. My very best wishes to you all for a peaceful 2011 and hope 
that it brings good health and contentment together with prosperity. God bless.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
