Barry Whiteside: Financial literacy 
Speaking notes for Mr Barry Whiteside, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the Launch 
of the Financial Literacy Mascot, Suva, 19 August 2011. 
 Good afternoon ladies and gentlemen, members of the media and fellow staff of the Bank, 
Tomorrow  marks  the  opening  of  the  Hibiscus  festival,  and  the  beginning  of  the  school 
holidays for our students and teachers around Fiji. An enjoyable time for many! 
This  Saturday  at  the  RBF  Hibiscus  Microfinance  Village,  the  official  mascot  for  financial 
literacy will be making his debut in Suva. We have invited you here this afternoon to get a 
sneak preview, and to seek your support for a very important initiative that is aimed at lifting 
financial literacy levels in our communities in Fiji. 
Financial literacy, ladies and gentlemen, is a life skill that is needed by everyone – some of 
us may be better at it than others. Financial literacy is the ability and understanding that we 
all  need  so  that  we  make  the  best  decisions  when  it  comes  to  managing  our  money.  We 
believe that if everyone has access to some form of financial education, they are more likely 
to make better financial choices. 
Developing this a little further, we need to share and talk more often with our children, our 
families and friends and get a better understanding of the little things we can do to improve 
our own money management skills. These include such things as planning and budgeting, 
saving and investing for the medium and longer term, retirement planning and last, but by no 
means the least, managing our debts. 
This year the Financial Literacy Working Group has once again taken the opportunity to raise 
public  awareness  on  the  importance  and  need  for  financial  literacy  for  all  our  people.  The 
Financial Literacy Working Group, ladies and gentlemen, is one of three Working Groups that 
report  to  the  National  Financial  Inclusion  Taskforce.  These  Groups,  working  under  the 
banner of the Taskforce, are made up of representatives from the public and private sectors, 
NGOs  and  various  donor  agencies.  They  represent  stakeholders  working  in  partnership  to 
ensure that everyone in Fiji has access to appropriate financial services and products that 
they need. 
Coming back to the Financial Literacy Working Group, I must say they are all a passionate 
lot, ably led by Mr. Narasimhan Krishnan. The Group has been tasked with three important 
goals over the next few years. These are: 
1. 
To develop a National Strategy towards financial literacy – This would first require a 
stock-take  and  assessment  of  current  financial  literacy  programs  out  there  and 
includes a national financial literacy survey; 
To  develop  and  implement  a  financial  education  curriculum  to  be  offered  in  all 
schools at both the primary and secondary levels; and 
To develop financial competencies at the household level. 
3. 
I am pleased to say that significant progress is being made in all three areas and I am quite 
sure that we are on target towards achieving these goals. 
May I add, ladies and gentlemen, that these goals form part the Money Pacific 2020 goals 
which were agreed by Pacific Island leaders and Central Bank Governors back in November 
2009. 
It is not an easy task, but it has been recognized that by lifting the financial capability of our 
communities  in  the  region,  positive  spin  offs  are  created.  These  often  generate  a  greater 
2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
demand  for  financial  services  and  products,  create  new  jobs,  and  enable  people  to  buy 
assets, grow their wealth and improve living standards. 
We  sincerely  hope  that,  over  time,  people  will  really  appreciate  the  necessity  for  financial 
literacy  for  all,  and  support  these  initiatives  by  Government,  the  Reserve  Bank  and  other 
stakeholders, to foster greater economic development and growth in Fiji. 
Ladies and gentlemen, with these remarks I have now great pleasure in introducing 
our Financial Literacy Mascot, “Vuli the Vonu”. 
Vinaka 
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
