Deepak Mohanty: Monetary policy response to recent inflation in India 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Guwahati, 3 September 2011. 
 The assistance provided by G.V. Nadhanael is acknowledged.  
I thank the Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Guwahati and Mr. Ankit Khemka, Convenor, 
Techniche 2011, for inviting me to address such a talented and bright group of youngsters. I 
propose to speak to you about inflation which is a matter of concern to all of us. It has been 
about two years since October 2009 that the Reserve Bank of India announced its exit from 
the  crisis-driven  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance.  However,  inflation  continues  to 
remain elevated, despite sustained monetary policy action. Headline inflation, measured by 
year-on-year changes in the wholesale price index (WPI), averaged 9.6 per cent in 2010–11 
and it has continued to be over 9 per cent in the current financial year so far. This spell of 
high  inflation  has  been  the  longest  since  the  mid-1990s.  It  has,  therefore,  posed  a  major 
challenge for policymakers, especially for the Reserve Bank as the key objective of monetary 
policy is price stability. 
Why  do  we  need  to  worry  about  inflation?  How  did  the  inflation  dynamics  evolve  over  the 
past two years? What was the monetary policy response? These are primarily the questions 
that I will address. 
Why do we need to worry about inflation? 
We need to be concerned about inflation as it has adverse impact on the real economy. First, 
high and persistent inflation imposes significant socio-economic costs. Given that the burden 
of  inflation  is  disproportionately  large  on  the  poor,  high  inflation  by  itself  can  lead  to 
distributional inequality. Therefore, for a welfare-oriented public policy, low inflation becomes 
a  critical  element  for  ensuring  balanced  progress.  Second,  high  inflation  distorts economic 
incentives by diverting resources away from productive investment to speculative activities. 
Third,  inflation  reduces  households  saving  as  they  try  to  maintain  the  real  value  of  their 
consumption.  Consequent  fall  in  overall  investment  in  the  economy  reduces  its  potential 
growth.  Fourth,  as  inflation  rises  and  turns  volatile,  it  raises  the  inflation  risk  premia  in 
financial transactions. Hence, nominal interest rates tend to be higher than they would have 
been  under  low  and  stable  inflation.  Fifth,  if  domestic  inflation  remains  persistently  higher 
than those of the trading partners, it affects external competitiveness through appreciation of 
the real exchange rate. Sixth, as inflation rises beyond a threshold, it has an adverse impact 
on overall growth. The Reserve Bank’s current assessment suggests that the threshold level 
of inflation for India is in the range of 4–6 per cent1. If inflation persists beyond this level, it 
could  lower  economic  growth  over  the  medium-term.  These  costs,  therefore,  necessitate 
monetary policy response to control inflation. 
How did the inflation dynamics change? 
It is important to appreciate the background in which the inflation surge has occurred. The 
current phase of high inflation followed the global financial crisis, which affected the India’s 
economy, though not with the same intensity as advanced countries. Managing inflation in an 
                                                 
1   Reserve Bank of India Annual Report 2010–11. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
economy which is recovering from a downturn is much more complex because of associated 
uncertainties than managing inflation under normal conditions. 
Prelude to current inflation surge 
In the initial phase of the crisis, it appeared that emerging market economies (EMEs) were 
better positioned to weather the storm created by the global financial meltdown on the back 
of  their  substantial  foreign  exchange  reserve  cushion,  improved  policy  frameworks  and 
generally  robust  banking  sector  and  corporate  balance  sheets.  However,  any  hope  about 
EMEs  escaping  unscathed  could  not  be  sustained  after  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in 
September  2008  which  triggered  global  deleveraging  and  heightened  risk  aversion. 
Eventually,  EMEs  were  also  adversely  affected  by  the  spillover  effects:  first  through 
contraction in world trade and then from reversal in capital flows. 
India,  though  initially  somewhat  insulated  from  the  global  developments,  was  eventually 
impacted  significantly  by  the  global  shocks  through  all  the  channels  –  trade,  finance  and 
expectations channels. In response, the Reserve Bank swiftly introduced a comprehensive 
range of measures to limit the impact of the adverse global developments on the domestic 
financial  system  and  the  economy.  The  Reserve  Bank,  like  most  central  banks,  took  a 
number  of  conventional  and  unconventional  measures  to  augment  domestic  and  foreign 
currency liquidity, and sharply reduced the policy rates. In a span of seven months between 
October 2008 and April 2009, there was unprecedented policy activism. For example: (i) the 
repo rate was reduced by 425 basis points to 4.75 per cent, (ii) the reverse repo rate was 
reduced by 275 basis points to 3.25 per cent, (iii) the cash reserve ratio (CRR) of banks was 
reduced by a cumulative 400 basis points of their net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) to 
5.0 per cent, and (iv) the total amount of primary liquidity potentially made available to the 
financial  system  was  over 
  5.6  trillion  or  over  10  per  cent  of  GDP.  The  Government  also 
come up with various fiscal stimulus measures. 
In October 2009, it was not easy to exit from the excessively accommodative monetary policy 
stance for two main reasons. First, the year-on-year headline WPI inflation had just barely 
turned positive and was entirely driven by food inflation. Industrial production had started to 
pick up but exports were still declining. Hence, recovery was not assured. Second, globally, 
most central banks were in favour of continuing stimulus. On the other hand, domestically, 
consumer price inflation was high, households’ inflation expectations were rising and surplus 
liquidity  was  substantial  as  reflected  in  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Liquidity  Adjustment  Facility 
(LAF) window. These developments had inflationary consequences. 
In its Second Quarter Review of Monetary Policy for 2009–10, the Reserve Bank after wider 
consultations provided the arguments for and against beginning reversal of monetary easing. 
On  balance  of  considerations,  the  Reserve  Bank  judged  that  the  time  was  appropriate  to 
sequence the exit in a calibrated way so that while the recovery process was not hampered, 
inflation expectations remained anchored. The exit process thus began with the closure of 
the  special  liquidity  facilities  instituted  during  the  crisis.  This  amounted  to  withdrawal  of 
potential liquidity to the tune of ` 1.7 trillion.   
Phases of Inflation 
The evolution of the inflation process since the beginning of the exit in October 2009 can be 
characterised  into  four  different  phases:  Phase  I  –  October  2009–March  2010;  Phase  II  – 
April–July  2010;  Phase  III  –  August–November  2010;  and  Phase  IV  –  December  2010 
onwards.  As  the  drivers  of  inflation  changed  over  the  phases,  the  response  of  monetary 
policy  was  calibrated  on  the  basis  of  changing  dynamics  of  inflation  as  also  the  growth-
inflation balance and the evolving global economic conditions.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Phase I. October 2009–March 2010 
The year-on-year headline WPI inflation accelerated from under 2 per cent in October 2009 
to above 10 per cent by March 2010 (Chart 1).  
 
A  major  part  of  this  increase  in  inflation  was  attributed  to  the  waning  of  base  effect.  In 
addition,  the  price  pressures  largely  emanated  from  food.  There  was  severe  deficiency  in 
rainfall  during  2009–10,  which  adversely  affected  the  food  prices.  Moreover,  global 
commodity  prices  rebounded  from  the  trough  reached  during  the  crisis.  Fuel  prices  rose 
significantly during this period. Manufactured non-food products inflation also reverted to its 
medium-term trend (Chart 2). 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  
The  Reserve  Bank,  in  its  Second  Quarter  Review  of  monetary  policy  in  October  2009, 
highlighted  the  need  for  exit  from  crisis-time  monetary  policy  stimulus  and  withdrew  the 
unconventional liquidity support measures and restored the statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) of 
banks  to  the  pre-crisis  level.  At  the  same  time,  monetary  policy  had  to  recognise  that  the 
economic  growth  was  recovering  from  the  crisis  time  slowdown  and  any  aggressive 
monetary tightening at that point would have affected the recovery. Subsequently, in January 
2010,  the  CRR  was  raised  by  75  basis  points  of  banks’  net  demand  and  time  liabilities 
(NDTL), and policy rates were increased for the first time in March 2010 by 25 basis points. 
The  transmission  of  rate-based  monetary  policy  actions  was  weak  during  the  periods  of 
surplus liquidity in the financial system and, therefore, bringing down liquidity levels was the 
crucial challenge. 
The Reserve Bank’s policy action during this period was effective in terms of bringing down 
the overall surplus liquidity available within the system to the levels consistent with monetary 
policy stance. At the same time, the recovery in economic growth was not dented as was 
seen  from  the  trend  in  growth  in  industrial  output,  which  picked  up  during  this  period 
(Chart 3).  
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 
Increase  in  headline  inflation  during  this  period,  however,  caught  up  with  the  households’ 
inflation expectations (Chart 4). 
  
During the initial months of this phase, the major challenge for monetary policy was, on the 
one hand, to remain supportive of recovery while on the other hand to keep a vigil on the 
build-up  of  inflationary  pressures  which  were  getting  amplified  by  the  deficit  in  monsoon 
rainfall. Subsequently, increases in global commodity prices, especially fuel, emerged as a 
key risk. At the same time, consolidating recovery necessitated a shift in the monetary policy 
stance from “managing the crisis” to “managing the recovery”.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Phase II. April–July 2010 
During this phase, year-on-year WPI inflation remained stubborn around 10 per cent and the 
index advanced by 3.4 per cent (Chart 5).  
  
It was expected that with a normal monsoon during 2010–11, food inflation would moderate. 
But,  contrary  to  expectations,  the  major  driver  of  inflation  in  this  period  was  food.  In  fact, 
inflation in cereals, pulses and vegetables was significantly lower in July 2010 as compared 
with  the  March  2010  levels  indicating  that  the  good  monsoon  indeed  had  a  moderating 
impact  on  these  items.  However,  food  inflation  did  not  decline  as  price  pressures  were 
emanating from the protein-rich items such as milk, egg, meat and fish, whose output was 
less responsive to monsoon (Chart 6). The demand for these items has been growing with 
increasing  per  capita  income  and  changing  dietary  patterns.  In  the  absence  of  adequate 
supply response, price pressures were substantial. Another major contributor to increase in 
WPI during this period was the increase in administered prices of petroleum products and 
deregulation of petrol prices in June 2010. The major contribution to inflation thus emanated 
from food and fuel. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  
During this period, the key policy rates were increased gradually with a narrowing of the LAF 
interest rate corridor in order to reduce volatility in the overnight interest rate. While the level 
of inflation had increased, industrial production was showing a declining trend (Chart 3). On 
the  global  front,  the  weak  US  recovery  and  concerns  over  sovereign  debt  sustainability  in 
euro  area  during  this  period  raised  fears  of  a  double  dip-recession  and  global  commodity 
prices  declined  marginally.  Moreover,  the  pressure  on  inflation  during  this  period  emerged 
largely  from  food  and  administered  price  revisions.  Given  the  limitations  of  demand 
management  policies  to  address  supply  shock  induced  inflation,  monetary  policy  actions 
were  geared 
inflation 
expectations.  During  this  period,  policy  rates  were  raised  thrice  and  the  CRR  was  raised 
once (Table).  
towards  normalisation  of  policy  rates  as  well  as  anchoring 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
By the end of this period, the liquidity in the system turned into deficit as was evident from 
banks borrowing from the LAF of the Reserve Bank. Therefore, effective policy rate showed 
an additional increase by the width of LAF interest rate corridor, i.e., 100 basis points, as the 
repo rate became the policy rate. The transition of liquidity situation from surplus to deficit 
mode also set the stage for improved monetary transmission. 
Phase III. August–November 2010 
This phase was marked by slowing down of price pressures as headline inflation declined to 
8.2 per cent by November 2010 from above 10 per cent in the preceding phase (Chart 7). 
The increase in WPI during this phase by just 2.0 per cent was also moderate compared to 
the previous two phases. Of the increase in WPI, a major part emanated from the primary 
non-food articles, mostly raw cotton and minerals. The build-up in primary non-food articles 
prices, however, contained the risk in that they might pass-through to manufactured products 
inflation, depending on the prevailing demand conditions, the signs of which were first seen 
in November 2010. 
 
  
Moderate  softening  of  price  pressures  during  this  period  also  reflected  that  the  calibrated 
approach of monetary policy was having an impact on demand in a non-disruptive manner. 
The available data then on industrial production from the old-base IIP series indicated that 
there  was  a  slowdown  in  overall  IIP  growth.  However,  inflation  expectations  remained 
elevated. Global commodity price rebound in this period was largely driving the industrial raw 
material prices (Chart 8). But, monetary policy had to be cautious as mixed signs on growth 
sustainability were becoming evident coupled with gradual decline in inflation. At the same 
time, as inflation remained significantly above the comfort level, monetary policy had to act to 
anchor  inflation  expectations.  Thus,  the  trend  of  moderating  inflation  and  consolidating 
growth in the second and third quarters of 2010–11 justified the calibrated policy approach of 
the Reserve Bank.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 
Transmission  of  monetary  policy  improved  significantly  during  this  period  as  liquidity 
continued  to  remain  in  deficit  with  significant  increase  in  banks  borrowing  from  the  repo 
window  (Chart  9).  Rates  in  all  the  segments  of  the  financial  market  increased  during  this 
period with more prominent increase in the call money rate. 
 
 Phase IV. December 2010 Onwards 
The  moderately  declining  trend  in  inflation  changed  course  significantly  during  this  period: 
first, on account of a spurt in food inflation as unseasonal rains in some parts of the country 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
caused significant damage to output of vegetables and subsequently on account of stronger 
than expected pass-through of increase in input costs to output prices (Chart 10).  
The contribution of non-food manufactured products inflation to overall increase in WPI rose 
significantly during this period. The inflation in this group reached a high of 8.5 per cent in 
March  2011  and  remained  at  or  above  7  per  cent  thereafter  indicating  generalised  price 
pressures. Consequently, the share of non-food manufactured product inflation rose sharply 
during this phase (Chart 11). 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Given the high global commodity prices and their likelihood to remain firm, the threat to price 
stability from global inflation continues to persist. The faster than expected increase in core 
inflation suggested that high inflation was becoming increasingly persistent. There was also 
evidence  of  demand  pressure  from  increase  in  real  wages  besides  high  fiscal  deficit. 
Monetary  policy  also  had  to  recognise  that  over  the  long-run,  high  inflation  is  inimical  to 
sustained growth. It slows investment by creating uncertainty and thus poses significant risks 
to future growth. It was indicated by the Reserve Bank that bringing down inflation, given its 
generalised  nature,  even  at  the  cost  of  some  growth  in  the  short-run,  should  take 
precedence.2 
Taking  into  account  these  emerging  factors,  monetary  policy  was  continuously  tightened 
during this period both in terms of the number of increases as well as in terms of the stepped 
up magnitude of increase in the policy rate (Table). The increasing generalisation of inflation 
indicated that the supply shocks had morphed into a more generalised inflation process. 
Conclusions 
First,  inflation  in  India  has  remained  elevated  and  persistent  over  18  months  now.  The 
inflation  path  was  influenced  by  a  number  of  domestic  and  international  supply  shocks. 
Monsoon failure in 2009–10 and sharp increase in international fuel and commodities prices 
accentuated domestic inflationary pressures. 
Second, the evolution of inflation so far from its low level in October 2009 can be seen in four 
phases: first, driven by food prices and then by fuel and industrial raw material prices, and 
finally  spilling  over  to  a  generalised  inflation  process.  In  fact,  inflation  was  on  a  declining 
trajectory  between  August  and  November  2010  before  reversing  course  in  December  and 
getting generalised. 
Third, monetary policy response began early in October 2009 in anticipation of the likely path 
of  the  inflation  trajectory  as  also  on  consideration  of  its  source  and  composition.  The 
background of calibrated monetary policy response is important as policy was reversed from 
its  highly  stimulative  stance  with  policy  interest  rates  at  the  historically  lowest  levels  and 
liquidity  was  high.  During  this  period,  the  global  economy  remained  mired  in  uncertainties 
and domestic recovery was also not assured.  
Fourth, the initial rounds of monetary policy response was in the nature of normalisation from 
an  excessively  stimulative  stance  in  a  non-disruptive  manner.  The  policy  response  was 
calibrated  to  the  domestic  growth-inflation  dynamics.  As  growth  took  hold  and  inflation 
became  more  generalised,  monetary  policy  response  was strengthened.  Initially,  monetary 
transmission  was  weak  as  systemic  liquidity  was  in  surplus.  But  once  liquidity  turned  into 
deficit in July 2010, monetary transmission improved.  
Fifth, since October 2009, the cash reserve ratio (CRR) has been raised by 100 basis points. 
The policy repo rate has been raised by a cumulative 325 basis points. As the liquidity in the 
system  transited  from  surplus  to  deficit,  the  effective  tightening  has  been  of  the  order  of 
475 basis points. Thus, the cumulative monetary policy action would have the desired impact 
on  inflation.  It  is  expected  that  inflation  would  moderate  towards  the  later  part  of  2011–12 
and come down to around 7 per cent by the end of the year. The current monetary stance 
remains anti-inflationary. 
Sixth,  inflation  imposes  real  costs  which  are  borne  disproportionately  by  the  different 
segments of the economy. Prolonged high inflation, even if originating from the supply side, 
could  give  rise  to  increased  inflation  expectations  and  cause  general  prices  to  rise.  As 
                                                 
2   Monetary Policy Statement 2011–12, May 3, 2011, Reserve Bank of India. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
inflation is inimical to growth, it becomes necessary for monetary policy to respond to contain 
inflation and anchor inflationary expectations.  
Seventh, the medium-term objective of the Reserve Bank is to bring down inflation to 3.0 per 
cent  consistent  with  India’s  broader  integration  into  the  global  economy.  In  this  direction, 
monetary policy aims to contain perceptions of inflation in the range of 4.0–4.5 per cent with 
a particular focus on the behaviour of the non-food manufacturing component. This objective 
is  consistent  with  the  estimated  threshold  level  of  inflation  of  4–6  per  cent  suggesting  the 
absence of a “new normal” for inflation in India. 
Finally,  at  the  end  of  my  talk  what  advice  can  I  give  to  this  gathering  of  bright  minds?  I 
believe, innovation and enterprise coupled with the spirit of youth will rapidly propel India to 
its rightful place in the global economy in the coming years. So unless you dare the frontiers, 
we will not know what lies beyond.  
Thank you for your kind attention.  
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
