Jürgen Stark: The global financial crisis and the role of monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at  the  13th  Annual  Emerging  Markets  Conference  2011,  Washington  DC,  24  September 
2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, I am very pleased to address this distinguished audience. 
Looking  back  over  time,  we  see  that  the  role  and  conduct  of  monetary  policy  has  often 
changed  in  response  to  economic  and  financial  crises.  In  fact,  the  international  central 
banking  community  has  always  been  eager  to  learn  from  past  developments  and 
experiences, also with respect to different experiences across countries. Of course, this does 
not imply that monetary policy in the past has always been the same everywhere. Certainly, 
differences exist in the way monetary policy is conducted across countries. But it is precisely 
because of the open-mindedness in discussing and the willingness to learn from each others’ 
experiences  during  the  past  century  that  monetary  policy  making  went  through  an 
evolutionary process: an evolutionary process that improved the conduct of monetary policy 
over time and led to a great deal of convergence across countries.  
Let me in my remarks briefly review this process. I will then discuss the specific lessons that 
we  can  learn  from  the  recent  episode  of  financial  and  economic  turbulence,  and  conclude 
with the challenges ahead not only for monetary policy, but also for economic policies more 
generally.  
It was in response to the major bank panics of the first half of the nineteenth century that the 
Bank  of  England  adopted  the  “responsibility  doctrine”  proposed  by  Walter  Bagehot.1  This 
required the Bank to lend freely on the basis of any sound collateral, but at a penalty rate to 
prevent moral hazard. Half a century later, the Federal Reserve System was established in 
the United States in response to frequent banking crises, in particular the crisis of 1907, to 
serve as a lender of last resort similar to the Bank of England.  
Under the gold standard gold convertibility served as the economy’s nominal anchor and was 
used  as  a  way  to  ensure  trust  in  a  currency.  Before  the  establishment  of  central  banks, 
private  banks  and  governments  issuing  banknotes  had  often  overextended  their  gold 
reserves. In a sense, early central banks were strongly committed to price stability. However, 
from the 1920s onwards many central banks fell under public control. The Great Depression 
led to a major reaction against central banks, which were accused of exacerbating the crisis. 
In virtually every country, monetary policy was placed under the control of the Treasury and 
fiscal policy became dominant. In many countries, central banks followed a low interest rate 
policy to both stimulate the economy and to help the Treasury in marketing its debt.  
In the 1950s independent monetary policy making by central banks was restored, and this 
was  accompanied  by  a  brief  period  of  price  stability  until  the  mid  1960s.  The  belief  that 
unemployment could be permanently reduced at the expense of higher inflation resulted in 
very accommodative monetary policy in the 1970s, which led to an increase in inflation as 
inflation  expectations  started  to  rise.  Only  a  few  countries,  such  as  Germany,  were  an 
exception to this rule, as the Bundesbank’s emphasis on monetary aggregates resulted in a 
much tighter monetary policy. By the end of the 1970s, central banks put renewed emphasis 
on credibility and started to tighten monetary policy so that inflation decreased significantly. 
                                                 
1   See Bordo M. (2007), “A Brief History of Central Banks,” Economic Commentary, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Cleveland. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In many countries central banks were granted independence and were given a mandate to 
keep inflation low. As a result, stable prices have become a fact of life for billions of people.  
Today we are experiencing the worst economic and financial crisis of the post-war period. I 
am convinced that the knowledge gained as a result will again change and further sharpen 
the way we conduct monetary policy. So let me now share with you some thoughts on the 
direction in which I expect – and hope – monetary policy thinking to change in response to 
the current crisis.  
The role of monetary policy and lessons from the financial crisis 
I think it is fair to say that there was a widespread consensus over some key elements of the 
pre-crisis  monetary  policy  paradigm.2  In  particular,  against  the  background  of  the  high 
inflation  experience  of  the  1970s  in  many  industrialised  countries,  the  central  bank 
consensus comprised three key elements: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
In addition, not least against the background of the “Great Moderation”, that is, the period of 
low  inflation  and  macroeconomic  stability  in  most  industrialised  countries  which  was 
observed during the 20 years before the crisis, the central bank consensus also emphasised 
three elements, to which the ECB has never subscribed. These are: 
1. 
Central bank independence as a corner stone for an effective monetary policy; 
Price stability as the primary objective of central banks; and 
Solidly anchored inflation expectations on the basis of transparent communication.  
Monetary policy has a primary role in the management of aggregate demand in the 
short-run; 
Money and credit indicators can be disregarded; 
Monetary policy should react to asset price busts; not to asset price booms. 
2. 
3. 
Let me discuss how I see these elements from today’s perspective, particularly in the context 
of the recent experience of the global financial and economic crisis, and draw conclusions 
with regard to the usefulness of these elements for the future conduct of monetary policy.  
Let me start with my general conclusion: In my view, the first three elements have proven to 
be  very  valuable  assets  during  the  crisis  and  I  view  them  as  absolutely  essential  to  the 
success of monetary policy. The latter three elements of this consensus should be seriously 
reconsidered.  I  think  the  crisis  has  made  a  convincing  case  for  a  more  medium  term 
orientation  of  monetary  policy,  which  takes  into  account  information  in  money  and  credit 
indicators, and which tries to lean against the wind as financial imbalances start to develop 
and pose risks to price stability in the medium term.  
Let me now elaborate on the above elements and draw some conclusions: 
Firstly,  the  crisis  has  –  in  my  view  –  crucially  underlined  the  importance  of  central  bank 
independence as a corner stone of credible and effective monetary policy making. Of course, 
central bank independence is a precondition of effective monetary policy at all times. It is an 
important lesson which is not only evidenced by events in the history of central banking, but 
also by the academic literature, that any blurring of responsibilities can potentially lead to a 
                                                 
2   See Goodfriend (2007), “How the World Achieved Consensus on Monetary Policy,” The Journal of Economic 
Perspectives, 21, 47–68; Mishkin F. (2007), “Will Monetary Policy Become More of a Science?,” Finance and 
Economics  Discussion  Series,  Federal  Reserve  Board,  2007–44;  Woodford  M.  (2009),  Convergence  in 
Macroeconomics:  Elements  of  the  New  Synthesis,”  American  Economic  Journal:  Macroeconomics,  1,  
267–279. 
2 
 the  anchoring  of 
the  objective  of  price  stability  and 
loss  of  credibility  for  the  central  bank.  Such  a  situation  would  ultimately  undermine  the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy.3  The  effectiveness  of  monetary  policy  on  the  basis  of 
institutional  and  operational  independence  was,  however,  fundamental  during  the  crisis. 
During the turbulent market conditions that we experienced central banks had to implement 
extraordinary  measures,  both  in  terms  of  reducing  policy  rates  to  levels  that  are 
unprecedented,  and  in  terms  of  unconventional  liquidity  measures.  If  these  measures  
– untested as they are – are to be expected to exert any impact on economic decisions, they 
have  to  be  seen  by  market  participants  as  the  result  of  an  autonomous  decision  by  the 
central  bank.  They  have  to  be  seen  as  consistent  with  its  overall  policy  framework,  rather 
than as the result of pressures from fiscal authorities. The reason is simple. If a central bank 
comes under pressure in times of crisis, and succumbs to that pressure, it is very unlikely to 
exit  from  such  extraordinary  measures  in  a  timely  manner.  This  may  unanchor  inflation 
expectations and thus undermine the effectiveness of the measures implemented during the 
crisis.  
Secondly,  regarding 
inflation 
expectations,  the  crisis  taught  us  that  well-anchored  inflation  expectations  can  act  as  an 
automatic  stabiliser  when  uncertainty  becomes  destabilising.  This  is  always  true,  in  good 
times as well. In fact, well-anchored inflation expectations in the euro area were instrumental 
in avoiding large interest rate hikes before the crisis, when commodity prices rose sharply. At 
the height of the crisis, they became a policy instrument in their own right. Thanks to well-
anchored  inflation  expectations  we  could  avoid  deflationary  spirals  and  real  interest  rates 
could be reduced in tandem with nominal rates. It is noteworthy that if inflation expectations 
are  well  anchored,  and  are  not  affected  by  transient  shocks  to  actual  inflation,  there  is  no 
need to manipulate monetary policy frameworks: there is no need to increase the inflation 
target  as  a  means  of  resisting  deflationary  risks  in  times  of  macroeconomic  distress.4 
Opportunistic  manipulations  of  the  monetary  policy  framework  of  course  damage  the 
foundations on which that framework rests. So, being able to rely on the stabilising effect of 
inflation expectations is clearly a preferable option.  
Let me now turn to the elements of the consensus that are, from the perspective of the ECB, 
somewhat more controversial.  
Firstly,  the  crisis  has  demonstrated  that  a  monetary  policy  aimed  at  fine-tuning  short-term 
objectives  carries  serious  risks.  Before  the  crisis,  there  was  a  widely-held  conviction  that 
monetary policy could focus more on short term demand management because inflation was 
firmly under control. Proponents of this view found support in the phenomenon of the “Great 
Moderation”  observed  in  the  twenty  years  before  the  crisis,  a  time  of  widespread 
macroeconomic stability and low inflation in most industrialised countries. Nonetheless, there 
were clear signs – and also warnings – that this short-term orientation could have negative 
side  effects  in  the  medium  to  long  term.5  As  you  know,  these  side  effects  manifested 
themselves  in  a  spectacular  build-up  of  monetary  and  financial  imbalances.  Although 
monetary  policy  frameworks  oriented  towards  the  medium  term  could  probably  not  have 
completely prevented the current crisis, I am convinced that they would have helped to make 
it less disruptive.  
                                                 
3   See Kydland F. and E. Prescott (1977), “Rules Rather than Discretion: The Inconsistency of Optimal Plans”, 
Journal of Political Economy, 85, pp. 473–492; and Barro R. and D. Gordon (1983), “Rules, Discretion and 
Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy”. Journal of Monetary Economics, 12, pp. 101–121. 
4   See for instance Blanchard O., Dell’Ariccia G. and P. Mauro (2010), “Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy”, IMF 
Staff Position Note, No 10/03. 
5   See Rajan R. (2005), “The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future,” speech delivered at the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City Symposium on “Rethinking Stabilisation Policy,” Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Typically, policies of short-term demand management rely heavily on inflation forecasts and 
output  gap  measures.  Experience,  especially  prior  to  the  crisis,  has  revealed  the  risks  of 
constructing policy on indicators and variables which are not sufficiently robust. Let me take 
the output gap as an example. As the literature has clearly shown, the empirical proxies used 
to capture the output gap are subject to constant revisions.6 Policy-makers who base their 
decisions mainly on such assessments of the cyclical position can be led very much astray. 
For  instance,  The  Great  Inflation  of  the  1970s  occurred,  to  a  large  extent,  due  to 
measurement  errors  in  the  real-time  estimates  of  the  output  gap  combined  with  an 
overreaction to output gap measures when assessing the state of the economy.7 Arguably, 
the  same  can  be  said  of  the  low  interest  rates  implemented  for  a  prolonged  period  in  the 
middle of the previous decade.8 
Monetary  policies  aimed  at  fine-tuning  short-term  objectives  also  run  a  serious  risk  of 
inducing too much policy forbearance for too long. Exiting an extraordinary accommodative 
mode too late can sow the seeds of future imbalances. As the economy recovers from an 
exceptionally  deep  recession,  real  time  output  gap  estimates  and  estimates  of  structural 
unemployment  or  the  non-accelerating  inflation  rate  of  unemployment  (NAIRU)  are 
particularly uncertain.  Potential  output  is  likely to  have  fallen  for  a  variety  of  reasons.  This 
could be due to a mismatch between the skills of workers that lose their jobs and the skills 
required  in  new  vacancies.  Another  phenomenon  is  that  economic  growth  after  a  financial 
crisis tends to be much slower due to the debt overhang.9 While emphasis on measures of 
the output gap can give the impression that output could be increased by monetary means, it 
becomes an illusion if the problem is due to a mismatch of skills or a debt overhang. Only 
structural policies can address these problems. 
Second,  with  respect  to  the  claim  that  money  and  credit  do  not  matter  for  successful 
monetary  policy  making,  the  experiences  of  the  past  three  years  have  proven  that  this 
conventional  wisdom  is  simply  wrong.  By  including  an  analysis  of  money  and  credit 
developments  in  their  monetary  policy  strategy,  central  banks  can  ensure  that  important 
information  stemming  from  money  and  credit,  typically  neglected  in  conventional  cyclical 
forecasting  models  of  the  economy,  is  considered  in  the  formulation  of  monetary  policy 
decisions. There is compelling empirical evidence showing that, at low frequencies – that is 
over  medium  to  longer-term  horizons  –  inflation  shows  a  robust  positive  association  with 
money growth.10 
Monitoring  credit  growth  can  also  be  useful  in  identifying  other  sources  of  unsustainable 
credit  developments,  even  if  some  of  them  cannot  necessarily  be  eliminated  by  monetary 
policy  tools,  and  would  instead  require  action  of  a  macro-prudential  nature.  After  years  of 
oblivion, macroeconomic theory seems to have caught up with reality and shifted its attention 
                                                 
6   See  Orphanides  A.  and  S.  van  Norden  (2002),  “The  Unreliability  of  Output-Gap  Estimates  in  Real  Time,” 
Review  of  Economics  and  Statistics  84,  pp.  569–583;  and  Orphanides  A.  and  S.  van  Norden  (2005),  “The 
Reliability of Inflation Forecasts Based on Output Gap Estimates in Real Time,” Journal of Money, Credit, and 
Banking, 37, pp. 583–601. 
7   See  ECB  (2010),  “The  “Great  Inflation”:  Lessons  for  monetary  policy”,  Monthly  Bulletin,  May  2010;  and 
Orphanides  A.,  (2002),  “Monetary  Policy  Rules  and  the  Great  Inflation,”  American  Economic  Review,  92, 
pp. 115–120. 
8   See  Taylor  J.  (2007),  “Housing  and  Monetary  Policy,”  in  Housing,  Housing  Finance,  and  Monetary  Policy, 
Proceedings of Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. 
9   See Reinhart C. and V. Reinhart (2010), “After the Fall,” NBER working Paper Series, No 16334. 
10   See  Benati  L.  (2009),  “Long-run  evidence  on  money  growth  and  inflation”,  ECB  Working  Paper  Series, 
No 1027. 
4 
 to credit and leverage as critical parameters that a central bank should consult regularly to 
measure the pulse of the economy.11 
The ECB had consistently used these indicators even when they were derided as relics of a 
defunct  monetary  doctrine.  They  proved  useful.  They  gave  information  about  financing 
conditions and the financial structure, as well as about the condition and behaviour of banks, 
when  these  sources  of  information  were  critical  to  the  assessment  of  the  health  of  the 
transmission mechanism and, more broadly, the state of the business cycle. This dimension 
of monetary analysis has proven particularly valuable in shaping the ECB’s response to the 
financial  crisis.  There  is  indeed  evidence  in  support  of  the  fact  that,  without  duly  taking 
monetary analysis into account, inflation in the euro area would have been distinctly higher at 
times of financial exuberance and would have fallen deep into negative territory in the wake 
of the financial markets’ collapse, starting in the autumn of 2008. The economy as a whole 
would have been more volatile.12 
And thirdly, with regard to the pre-crisis consensus on monetary policy not to act on asset 
price bubbles, the crisis has vividly demonstrated that bursting asset price bubbles can be 
extremely costly. The public policy response to the crisis has – even when being successful 
in  attenuating  the  immediate  impact  of  a  financial  crisis  on  the  real  economy  –  carried 
substantial fiscal costs and has led to significant output losses. To confine ourselves to “ex-
post”  policies  is,  therefore,  not  enough  and  calls  for  effective  “ex-ante”  policies.  The  main 
policy  tools  in  this  regard  are,  of  course,  appropriate  regulatory  and  supervisory  policies. 
Before the crisis, these preventive tools were insufficient to deal with the build up of asset 
price imbalances in the pre-crisis period. Lessons have been learned, and with the re-design 
of  the  supervisory  architecture  in  many  countries  around  the  world,  and  the  Basel III 
regulatory reforms, enhanced preventive tools are underway.  
But  also  from  a  monetary  policy  perspective,  greater  emphasis  on  “ex-ante”  prevention  is 
warranted. To the extent that financial imbalances are accompanied by excessive monetary 
and credit growth with possible implications for the medium term outlook on inflation, central 
banks do indeed have an obligation to take appropriate action. With respect to the ECB, our 
focus on medium term definitions of price stability, as well as the use of money and credit in 
our  monetary  pillar,  already  provides  some  “leaning”  against  the  build  up  of  asset  price 
imbalances. Therefore, in my view, a cautious leaning against excessive money and credit 
growth  and  building  up  of  financial  imbalances  as  part  of  our  general  monetary  policy 
framework  cannot  only  contribute  to  financial  stability,  but  most  importantly  to  achieve  our 
primary objective of maintaining price stability. 
Let me now turn to the economic challenges lying ahead of us, and the role monetary policy 
should play in overcoming these challenges. 
The challenges ahead and the role for monetary policy 
The global financial crisis is far from over. By now the global financial crisis has gone through 
a  number  of  different  phases.  Initially  the  crisis  started  in  the  sub-prime  mortgage  market 
during the summer of 2007, and became very intense in September 2008 with the default of 
                                                 
11   See Adrian T. and H. S. Shin, (2010), “Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics”, Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York Staff Reports, No 398; and Brunnermeier M. and L. Pedersen (2010), “Market Liquidity and 
Funding Liquidity,” The Review of Financial Studies, 22, pp. 2201–2238; and Geanakoplos J. (2010), “Solving 
the Present Crisis and Managing the Leverage Cycle,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy 
Review, pp. 101–131. 
12   See Fahr S., Motto R., Rostagno M., Smets F. and O. Tristani (2010), “Lessons for monetary policy strategy 
from  the  recent  past,”  paper  presented  at  the  6th  ECB  Central  Banking  Conference,  Frankfurt  am  Main,  
18–19 November 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Lehman Brothers. Subsequently, financial woes spilled over into the real economy, resulting 
in recessions in almost all industrialised countries. Monetary and fiscal policy countered this 
with  unprecedented  vigour.  Monetary  policy  responded  with  very  low  interest  rates  and  a 
wide range of non-standard measures. Fiscal policy allowed public deficits to widen and set 
up  rescue  packages  for  troubled  financial  institutions.  To  a  large  extent  thanks  to  these 
measures,  economic  activity  rebounded  in  2010.  But  at  the  same  time,  countries  that  had 
entered the financial crisis with large public and private debt burdens started to have serious 
problems accessing sovereign debt markets. In 2011 the tensions in sovereign debt markets 
intensified further due to increasing concerns about long-term debt sustainability in various 
parts of the world. These developments have further threatened financial stability as financial 
institutions hold a significant share of troubled countries’ government bonds. 
Here,  the  onus  is  clearly  on  governments  to  engage  in  the  necessary  fiscal  corrections. 
However,  this  does  not  only  mean  exiting  from  the  fiscal  stimulus  and  support  measures 
taken in response to the crisis. Even with these measures reversed, fiscal policy still faces at 
least  three  important  challenges.  First,  excluding  crisis-related  stimulus  measures,  most 
advanced  economies  are  still  left  with  historically  high  deficit-to-GDP  ratios,  which,  in  the 
context of today, are largely structural in nature. To put it another way, given the lower actual 
and potential post-crisis output and correspondingly lower post-crisis tax revenues, pre-crisis 
spending levels are no longer affordable. Secondly, government debt-to-GDP ratios are now 
much higher than before the crisis, and the guarantees provided to the financial sector have 
added  to  the  potential  liabilities.  Thirdly,  over  the  next  two  to  three  decades,  governments 
face  rising  costs  related  to  ageing  populations.  Due  to  the  combination  of  these  factors, 
questions are – unsurprisingly – being asked about the ability of some governments to bring 
their public finances onto a sustainable path over the medium term.  
In  this  regard,  let  me  point  out  that  the  state  of  public  finances  in  the  euro  area  differs 
significantly  across  countries.  According  to  the  IMF  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  ranges  from 
6 percent in Estonia to 152 percent in Greece in 2011, while the aggregate debt-to-GDP ratio 
for the euro area stands at 87 percent. But let me also emphasise that restoring sound public 
finances is not only a challenge for the euro area. As I mentioned before, government deficits 
and  debt  levels  in  many  advanced  economies  outside  the  euro  area  have  also  risen  to 
historically  high  levels,  at  least  in  a  time  of  peace.  For  the  largest  industrialised  countries 
such as the US, UK and Japan, according to the IMF the debt-to-GDP ratio in 2011 ranges 
from 83 percent in the UK, to 100 percent in the US and 229 percent in Japan. 
The state of public finances clearly matters for central banks. At least from a theoretical point 
of view, one of the reasons is that monetary policy could in principle be used – or abused – 
to  alleviate  a  government’s  budgetary  woes.  The  regime  that  has  prevailed  in  advanced 
economies over the last three decades has been a regime of monetary dominance, under 
which  central  banks  can  pursue  price  stability-oriented  policies  without  having  to  take  into 
account  the  government’s  budget  constraints.  Central  banks  have  been  given  an  explicit 
mandate to maintain price stability and have been protected by legal provisions guaranteeing 
their independence.  
Credible, stability-oriented monetary policy frameworks are assets that have been difficult to 
acquire  and  must  not  be  put  at  risk.  As  I  have  pointed  out,  monetary  policy  thinking  went 
through  a  remarkable  evolutionary  process  during  the  last  century  which  resulted  in  price 
stability  for  billions  of  people.  As  serious  questions  have  arisen  about  the  medium  term 
sustainability of public finances in a significant number of industrialised countries, we cannot 
but  conclude  that  the  same  evolutionary  process  did  not  happen  to  fiscal  policy  making. 
Fiscal policy making has not managed to converge to a framework with clear principles and 
medium term objectives.13 Growing doubts about governments’ ability to deliver sustainable 
                                                 
13   See Leeper E. (2010), “Monetary Science, Fiscal Alchemy,” NBER Working Paper Series, No 16510. 
6 
 public  finances  could  at  some  point  also  cast  doubt  on  the  sustainability  of  the  prevailing 
regime of monetary dominance. This would lead to an increase in inflation expectations or at 
least heightened uncertainty about the inflation outlook in the medium term. 
It is a fallacy to think that loose monetary policy can solve the large structural problems we 
are facing. Central banks must not become the victims of their own success and should not 
become  overburdened.  Historically,  whenever  policy  makers  tried  to  broaden  the  role  of 
monetary policy beyond its original role as a guardian of the value of a currency, it had to 
compromise  on  its  objective  of  price  stability.  For  monetary  policy  to  remain  effective,  its 
responsibilities must remain within clear limits. 
Instead, we need a growth model that is different from the one during the years before the 
financial  crisis.  We  need  economic  growth  that  is  based  on  a  genuine  increase  in 
productivity,  and  not  on  low  interest  rates  and  the  accumulation  of  debt.  The  unlimited 
accumulation of private and public debt before the financial crisis has now become a burden 
on  economic  growth  and  should  be  reduced  progressively.14  To  achieve  this  we  need  far-
reaching  structural  reforms  that  increase  competition  in  labour  and  goods  markets,  more 
financial supervision, and a stronger fiscal policy framework.  
We  must  reform  financial  supervision  and  strengthen  economic  governance  so  that 
economic  policy  becomes  less  pro-cyclical.  Basel  III  is  a  very  important  step  in  the  right 
direction,  as  it  should  provide  for  higher  minimum  capital  requirements  and  better  risk 
provisions  by  financial  institutions.  Still,  regulation  of  the  banking  system  and  financial 
markets  has  not  yet  progressed  sufficiently.  Fiscal  policy  should  be  more  grounded  in  a 
rules-based  framework  with  clear  medium  term  objectives,  similar  to  monetary  policy.  The 
adoption  of  fiscal  rules  by  some  countries  is  clearly  an  improvement.  In  the  euro  area,  a 
number of steps have been undertaken to strengthen economic governance so that concerns 
about  competitiveness  and  fiscal  policy  can  be  addressed  pre-emptively.  But  for  the  ECB 
these steps do not go far enough. For rules and sanctions to be fully credible they should be 
stricter and automatic – not subject to the political process – so that countries have the right 
incentives to address their problems. 
                                                 
14   See Cecchetti S., Mohanty M. and F. Zampolli (2011), “The real effects of debt,” paper presented at the 2011 
Annual Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium, 25–27 August; Rother, P., L. Schuknecht and J. Stark, 
(2010) The Benefits of Fiscal Consolidation in Uncharted Waters, ECB Occasional Papers, No 121. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
