K C Chakrabarty: Non-financial reporting – what, why and how – Indian 
perspective 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
National  Conference  on  “Non-Financial  Reporting  and  Risk  Management  for  Financial 
Institutions  in  India”,  jointly  organised  by  GIZ,  SIDBI,  Global  Reporting  Initiative  (GRI), 
IIM Bangalore and NextGen, Mumbai, 6 June 2011. 
 Mr  Stefan  Helming,  Country  Director,  GIZ  India,  Mr  Rakesh  Rewari,  DMD,  SIDBI,  Prof 
Rajeev  Gowda,  Chair,  Centre  for  Public  Policy,  IIM-Bangalore,  Ms  Karin  Ireton,  Director, 
Group Sustainability Management, Standard Bank, Dr Aditi Haldar, Director, GRI, India, Ms 
Richa  Bajpai-  co  founder  NextGen,  distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen.  It  is  a 
pleasure  to  be  here  at  this  National  Conference  on  “Non-Financial  Reporting  and  Risk 
Management  for  Financial  Institutions  in  India”  jointly  organised  by  GIZ,  SIDBI,  Global 
Reporting  Initiative  (GRI),  IIM  Bangalore  and  NextGen.  I  congratulate  the  organisers  for 
having  chosen  this  theme  as  the  importance  of  non-financial  reporting  in  the  overall 
assessment of a company’s performance, its risk-return trade off is steadily gaining ground, 
both globally and in India. Conference such as these help to create awareness among the 
financial  services  industry  players  about  the  importance  and  benefits  of  Non-Financial 
Reporting (NFR). 
What is sustainability reporting or non-financial reporting? 
2. 
I have borrowed the topic of my address “Non-Financial reporting- What, Why and 
How-  Indian  Perspective”  from  the  theme  of  one  of  the  conference  sessions.  Let  me  start 
from what is reporting? Well, very broadly speaking, you would all agree that it is a structured 
way  of  presenting  information  about  ones  performance.  If  the  information  is  financial  in 
nature,  such  as  financial  position,  profits,  cash  flows  of  an  enterprise  then  it  constitutes 
financial reporting which is beneficial to a wide range of users e.g. stakeholders, investors, 
regulators, etc. This then brings us to Non-Financial (NFR) or Sustainability Reporting (SR) 
which, as you are aware, is the practice of measuring, disclosing and being accountable to 
internal  and  external  stakeholders  for  organisational  performance  towards  the  goal  of 
sustainable and inclusive development. There has been a general perception that right from 
the  time  of  Industrial  Revolution,  economic  development  has  come  at  the  cost  of 
environment and has brought about large scale destruction of nature and growth process has 
not been inclusive. Due to the negative externalities of economic development, the practice 
of  non-financial  reporting  started  largely  in  response  to  pressure  from  non-governmental 
organisations  (NGOs)  and  civic  society,  which  claimed  that  many  firms  lacked  social  and 
environmental responsibility. It epitomises that a company’s financial health is dependent on 
much more than the assets on its balance sheet and the movements on its profit and loss 
account.  Non-financial  reporting  is  an  opportunity  to  communicate  in  an  open  and 
transparent way with stakeholders. In their non-financial reports, firms volunteer an overview 
of  their  environmental  and  social  impact  during the  previous  year.  The  information  in  non-
financial reports contributes to building up a company’s risk-return profile. 
Why is it important? 
3. 
To be able to truly appreciate the importance of non-financial reporting, we have to 
step back in time to recollect how the parameters for evaluation of corporate performance 
have been changing over the years. During the initial phases, when business was organized 
as  sole  proprietorship  or  partnership  firms,  profit  was  the  dominant  indictor  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the 
formation  of 
joint  stock  companies  and 
the 
performance.  Subsequently,  with 
development of stock markets, corporate performance was judged by market capitalization, 
share price and certain financial ratios such as Earnings Per Share (EPS), Return on Equity 
(ROE),  etc.  Now  in  the  21st  century,  corporate  performance  will  be  judged  by  corporate 
social responsibility (CSR) whose disclosure will fall under non-financial reporting. One of the 
critical parameters to be evaluated in this context would be the value created by the firm for 
society  and  whether  such  value  creation  is  going  to  be  enduring  in  nature.  While  the 
foregoing  is  true  for  any  corporate,  as  far  as  banks  are  concerned,  since  they  are  highly 
leveraged  institutions  dealing  with  public  money  and  public  confidence,  there  is  a  greater 
responsibility  for  value  creation.  As  a  result,  non-financial  reporting  will  be  extremely 
important for financial institutions such as banks and its relevance is only going to increase in 
times  to  come.  Just  as  financial  reporting  is  not  only  concerned  with  returns  but  the  risk-
return trade-off, similarly, non-financial reporting is also about the risks that one creates in 
the society. I also want to draw a fine distinction between sustainability and CSR. While very 
often these terms are used inter-changeably, what normally goes in the name of CSR are 
few acts of philanthropy like donation, setting up educational facilities, health services, etc. 
and a part of the profit is used for that. But charity is not CSR; charity is not sustainability. 
Sustainability means business has to be undertaken in a sustainable and profitable manner, 
and not create undue pressure. 
Having said that, sustainability reporting has become more relevant and important in today’s 
context not only from social or environmental concerns, but because, globally, we have come 
to realize that our goal is not just growth and profits, but we are looking at inclusive growth. 
And, if the growth process is not equitable, it cannot be sustainable. If inclusive growth has to 
be a permanent agenda item in our growth process, then it has to be sustainable. Today, 
many of world’s problems have been attributed to the lack on inclusive growth. I would like 
the participants in this Conference to debate on this how this inclusive growth agenda can be 
brought in Sustainability Reporting. Finally, reporting has to be credible. It must be audited. If 
we do not make credible reporting systems, then it would not be meaningful. I would like the 
forum to also debate on this aspect as to how do you improve the standards of non-financial 
reporting. 
How sustainable reporting is to be done – reporting framework 
4. 
Studies  reveal  that  the  structure  of  reporting  has  changed  substantially  over  the 
years. Whereas in the 1990s, most reports focused on environmental indicators only, today, 
reports tend to be more comprehensive and bring together economic and social as well as 
environmental data, or triple line reporting. John Elkington coined the term “triple bottom line” 
to describe social, environmental and financial accounting, and his sustainable development 
think-tank,  “SustainAbility”,  released  its  first  survey  benchmarking  non-financial  reporting.  I 
would  venture  to  say  that,  maybe,  we  can  coin  a  new  phrase  “quadruple  bottom  line” 
reporting to explicitly include inclusive development. But, reporting frameworks keep evolving 
and one does not have to wait for some finality before starting to report. 
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) is a global initiative to standardize NFR which the 
5. 
institutions adopt and has become the de-facto standard internationally. GRI is a long-term, 
multi-stakeholder,  international  process  whose  mission  is  to  develop  and  disseminate 
globally  applicable  Sustainability  Reporting  Guidelines.  These  Guidelines  are  for  voluntary 
use by organizations for reporting on the economic, social and environmental dimensions of 
their  activities,  products  and  services.  The  aim  of  the  Guidelines  is  to  assist  reporting 
organizations  and  their  stakeholders  in  articulating  and  understanding  contributions  of  the 
reporting organisations to sustainable development. 
6. 
One of the most widely used frameworks for reporting on sustainability is the Global 
Reporting Initiative’s G3 Guidelines. This framework has been used in nearly 7500 reports to 
report on sustainability worldwide and more than 100 GRI reports have been published by 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Indian companies so far. These guidelines also include a sector supplement, which specially 
focuses on the financial services sector. 
The drivers and levers behind NFR 
7. 
When analysing the factors that influence NFR trends, it is instructive to differentiate 
between drivers and levers. To better understand the two concepts, it is helpful to consider 
the  metaphor  of  a  car.  A  lever  is  a  mechanism  employed  to  induce  action  indirectly,  for 
example, by pressing the gas pedal. Drivers, on the other hand, are direct forces, such as 
the fuel that sets an engine in motion. The strategic management of brand and reputation 
seems by far the most significant driver behind NFR for institutions. Further, another driver 
behind  NFR  is  stakeholder  pressure  on  companies  to  become  more  transparent  and 
accountable about their environment and social behaviour. Thus, it is not surprising that the 
most  publicly  criticized  sectors,  in  particular  chemicals  and  mining,  should  display  the 
strongest  growth  in  the  use  of  NFR.  Pressure  from  competitors,  pressure  from  NGOs, 
responding to pressure from financial industry etc. seem to be the other drivers behind NFR. 
8. 
The  role  of  Governments/regulators  in  pushing  NFR  could  be  one  of  the  most 
powerful levers but is also one of the most controversial aspects of international sustainability 
debates.  While  most  of  the  private  sector  is  opposed  to  active  Government  involvement, 
many in the NGO community and general public see mandatory reporting rules as the only 
way to turn NFR into mainstream practice. 
Critics to the mandatory approach to NFR maintain that government regulation is not 
Mandatory versus voluntary 
9. 
In most parts of the world, NFR remains a voluntary practice. So far, France is the 
only country to enact specific legislation requiring publicly listed companies to produce non-
financial  reports  covering  economic,  social  as  well  as  environmental  dimensions.  Various 
other  countries  mandate  detailed  reporting  for  specific  industry  sectors.  Additionally,  some 
stock exchanges like the South African Stock Exchange now make NFR a requirement for 
listed companies. A number of stakeholders have called for sustainability reporting to be a 
mandatory  requirement  aimed  at  increasing  corporate  accountability,  the  argument  being 
that  most  companies  will  generally  not  report  of  their  own  accord  or,  when  they  do,  such 
reporting will be incomplete and rarely material to stakeholder interests. 
10. 
needed in this area since: 
• 
• 
Other market-based drivers exist that provide sufficient incentives for firms to report.  
Pushing  the  regulatory  track  will  lead  to  a  host  of  diverse  national  NFR  regimes, 
thereby  making  international  comparisons  of  non-financial  reports  difficult  (if  not 
impossible)  and  adding  significant  regulatory  burdens  on  companies  that  operate 
across national borders.  
The approach would not allow for the continuous updating and improvement of NFR 
frameworks since the practice of NFR is still relatively young and requirement of a 
legislative process to effect changes would result in long delays. 
Innovation  in  the  area  of  NFR  will  be  reduced.  Innovation  is  likely  to  occur  if 
companies  push  for  higher  benchmark  standards  in  order  to  produce  superior 
reports to those of their competition. In a mandatory framework, such completion is 
far less likely.  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
There  are  multiple  advantages  to  both  report  preparers  and  report  readers.  The 
Advantages of NFR 
11. 
advantages to the report preparers are: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
Advantages to the report readers are: 
• 
• 
• 
To sum up: 
• 
Tool for increased comparability and reduced cost of sustainability  
Brand and reputation enhancement  
Differentiation in the market place  
Protection from brand erosion due to action of suppliers or competitors  
Fosters innovations in order to make processes environment friendly.  
Useful benchmarking tool  
Corporate governance tool  
Avenue for long-term dialogue with reporting organisation.  
Corporates that focus on Sustainability Reporting outperform their peers in the long 
run and help in consolidating their market position 
In  view  of  reliable  correlation  between  business  integrity  and  above  average 
financial performance, NFR demonstrates ongoing business integrity and enhances 
investor and stakeholder confidence. 
Helps  to  acquire  national  and  international  listing  and  gain  access  to  otherwise 
restricted markets 
Helps  to  attract  finance  through  transparent  relationship  with  credit  providers, 
improve management systems and employee motivation and customer satisfaction. 
   Banks and financial institutions and NFR 
12. 
Banking  and  finance  institutions’  immediate  environmental  and  social  impacts  are 
relatively  low  because  most  of  those  impacts  are  delivered  through  the  activities  of  other 
businesses  that  rely  on  financial  institutions  –  the  businesses  in  a  loan  or  investment 
portfolio. But they have a paramount role in ensuring that businesses that borrow from them 
and depend on them for financing understand the risk their business may pose for society 
and  follow  a  sustainable  agenda.  So,  despite  the  relatively  indirect  nature  of  their 
environmental  and  social  impacts,  banks  need  to  examine  the  effects  of  their  lending  and 
investment decisions. All business activities have some environmental and social impact that 
typically results from substandard environmental and social practices, including: 
over-use and wastage of natural resources  
• 
environmental damage caused by continuing polluting activities  
• 
persistent damage caused by past polluting practices  
• 
damage caused by accidents and mishaps  
• 
use of environmentally sensitive materials  
• 
13. 
All these impacts have ramifications to business. The risks that such impacts create 
can be legal, financial, and reputational, and banks themselves are increasingly accountable 
for the effects their portfolios have on the environment and society. The costs that can be 
incurred by a business operating without regard to environmental and social issues include: 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
14. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
pollution clean up costs  
fines  
increased waste handling costs  
costs from damaged assets with reduced value  
legal claims  
regulatory delays  
reduced public regard, and reduced sales  
The risks that often get transferred to financial institutions include: 
increased loan defaults  
decreased value of investment and loss of collateral due to decreased asset values  
liability for damages arising from negligent investment advice  
loss of reputation and standing as a result of association with polluting businesses.  
Position in India 
15. 
The  level  of  sustainability  reporting  in  India  is  in  its  infancy  and  still  evolving.  In 
India, there are various drivers behind the increase in dialogue, discussion and publication of 
sustainability reports – drivers that are somewhat different from other parts of the world. For 
example, pressure from the NGO sector is low in India when compared to other countries. 
Pressure originates rather from increasing involvement in the global business environment. 
Many companies issuing CSR corporate communications now actively report on the social 
dimension as well. One thing is clear however, and that is, we cannot sacrifice growth. If our 
society has to survive, then it has to achieve a double digit growth for the next several years. 
If we bring the environmental and social concerns at the cost of growth, then it will not be 
acceptable. What would change the balance is how we integrate these concerns keeping our 
overall inclusive growth agenda intact. It will make SR more palatable and acceptable in our 
context. In the Indian context, it is relevant to note that a beginning has been made by Yes 
Bank  becoming  a  member  of  United  Nations  Environment  Programme  –  Finance  Initiative 
(UNEP FI), which is an initiative to promote the integration of environmental considerations 
into all aspects of the financial sector’s operations and services. While SIDBI has released a 
report as per GRI Guidelines, a few Indian banks are beginning to consider reporting on their 
non-financial  parameters.  In  other  international  initiatives  for  sustainable  development, 
corporate social responsibility and non-financial reporting also, the involvement of our banks, 
financial institutions, etc. is peripheral or at a very nascent stage. 
16. 
For institutions in India’s financial and banking sector, one of the primary drivers of 
their  involvement  in  activities  in  social  and  environmental  spheres  is  their  reputation  and 
branding.  This  is  fuelled  by  the  fact  that  these  institutions  have  high  visibility  in  every 
business  sector  and  industry.  Moreover,  in  emerging  markets  such  as  India,  financing 
projects that focus on clean production, good corporate governance and sustainable energy 
are being increasingly identified as potential business opportunities for financial institutions. 
Furthermore,  many  financial  institutions  are  also  actively  publicising  their  philanthropic 
activities  under  the  corporate  social  responsibility  banner.  All  these  initiatives  point  to  the 
sector’s move toward financial institutions banking on their brand and reputation, to make a 
difference in the community in which they operate as well as, in their new risk management 
strategies that reflect the socio-environmental aspects of their investments. 
17. 
There  are  many  reasons  for  this  change  in  mindset.  Foremost  is  the  increasing 
globalization  of  business.  As  more  Indian  companies  expand  internationally  and  acquire 
interests overseas, whilst at the same time, there is a rapid increase in foreign investment in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Indian  Corporates,  demands  on  transparency  from  a  more  “global  audience”  have  put 
pressure on Indian companies to start reporting on sustainability issues. Within India, there 
has also been a change in the mindset and attitudes of stakeholders on issues relating to 
environmental  and  social  responsibility.  Recently,  government  faced  public  protests  and 
pressure to refuse entry to foreign ships that were brought to India for decommissioning, as 
they contained large amounts of asbestos and other harmful substances. While the general 
public opinion on sustainability issues is still evolving, companies taking the first steps can 
expect intense public scrutiny, which again highlights the need for transparent reporting on 
operations.  Another  significant  push  factor  has  been  the  role  of  government  as  a 
stakeholder.  India  has  historically  had  stringent  laws  on  labour,  environment,  health  and 
safety.  Over  the  past  few  years  the  government  has  become  increasingly  proactive  in 
addressing  enforcement. 
Intense  media  attention  and  scrutiny  on  corporate  social 
responsibility  has  also  led  to  companies  taking  more  cognisance  of  their  activities  and 
engagement with stakeholders. 
Reporting standards 
18. 
While currently there are no officially recognized guidelines or reporting standards 
on sustainability reporting (by accounting or regulatory bodies), there has been an increasing 
trend  amongst  companies  to  publish  a  variety  of  information  relating  to  themes  such  as 
community,  corporate  social  responsibility,  environment,  health  and  safety. 
Indian 
companies, therefore, present diversity in content and format under the overall umbrella of 
sustainability reporting. Traditionally, while many organizations both in the public and private 
sector  practice  some  sort  of  corporate  social  responsibility  programmes,  reporting  has  not 
been a common practice. A survey conducted in 2003 by “Partners In Change” showed that 
70 per cent of the participating companies do not have a CSR policy, but are nevertheless 
doing  “good  work”.  However,  over  the  past  few  years,  there  has  been  an  increasing 
awareness and activity in the CSR field and many companies have started some reporting 
on sustainability issues, albeit in limited and diverse formats. 
19. 
Many  organizations  in  India  have  certified  environmental  management  systems, 
based  on  ISO  14001.  Consequently,  data  on  environmental  indicators  are  more  readily 
available  and  many  companies  have  started  reporting  by  issuing  environmental  reports 
which also include health and safety data. It is only after this initial phase that companies in 
general  start  developing  reporting  formats  that  conform  with  the  GRI  Guidelines.  In 
accordance  with  global  trends,  some  Indian  companies  have  also  started  seeking 
independent assurance on their sustainability reports. 
Reporting under environmental legislation 
20. 
One  of  the  fundamental  features  of  India’s  ancient  philosophy  has  always  been 
respect  for  the  environment.  The  Indian  Constitution  is  amongst  the  few  in  the  world  that 
contains  specific  provisions  on  environmental  protection.  State  policy  principles  explicitly 
enunciate  the  national  commitment  to  protect  and  improve  the  environment.  The  national 
environmental  policy  framework  is  the  responsibility  of  the  Ministry  of  Environment  and 
Forests.  Implementation  is  undertaken  by  the  Central  Pollution  Control  Board  (CPCB)  and 
the State Pollution Control Board (SPCB) at the Central and state levels respectively. The 
Department  of  Environment  at  the  Central  level  supports  the  SPCBs.  The  Environment 
(Protection) Act of 1986, considered as the “Umbrella Act”, was formulated for the protection 
and improvement of the quality of the environment and prevention, control and abatement of 
environmental  pollution.  The  Act  is  also  an  “enabling”  law,  which  articulates  the  essential 
legislative  policy  on  environmental  protection  and  delegates  wide  powers  to  competent 
authorities to frame necessary rules and regulations. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  In  terms  of  this  Act,  each  covered  organization  should  submit  an  annual 
“environmental audit report” (in a prescribed format) to the relevant SPCB. 
Reporting  in  the  environmental  statement  includes  parameters  such  as  water  and 
raw material consumption, pollution generated (along with variations from prescribed 
standards), quantities and characteristics of hazardous and solid wastes, impact of 
pollution  control  measures  on  conservation  of  natural  resources  and  on  cost  of 
production, and additional investment proposals for environmental protection. At this 
stage,  the  statement  is  not  required  to  be  audited.  The  legal  requirement  on  its 
preparation and submission helps ensure that data on environmental measures is 
collated, categorized and analysed by all businesses covered under the legislation. 
Many organizations in India have started to audit these statements internally with a 
view to improving their environmental performance and as a matter of good practice. 
Reporting under the Companies Act 
21. 
The Companies Act in India governs the overall regulation of companies in India and 
includes  sections  on  disclosure  and  reporting  on  various  aspects  of  company  operations. 
Section  217  of  the  Act  stipulates  that  the  Board  of  Directors’  Report  (attached  to  every 
balance-sheet  tabled  at  a  company  annual  general  meeting)  shall  contain  information  on 
conservation of energy. The latter is expected to include: 
• 
• 
Energy conservation measures taken; 
Additional investments and proposals, if any, being implemented for reduction of the 
consumption of energy; 
Impact  of  the  measures  taken  above  for  reduction  of  energy  consumption  and 
consequent impact on the cost of production of goods; and 
Total energy consumption and energy consumption per unit of production in respect 
of specified industries. 
  Reporting on social matters 
22. 
Traditionally, there has been a very thin line of demarcation between socially aware 
entrepreneurship  and  philanthropy.  Businesses  today  are  becoming  more  aware  of  the 
business  case  that  social  responsibility  is  not  limited  to  acts  of  charity  and  that  it  requires 
internalization and systemic expression. In 1980, Tata Steel released a “Report of the Social 
Audit Committee” which explored whether the company had fulfilled the objective contained 
in  the  Articles  of  Association  regarding  its  social  and  moral  responsibilities  to  consumers, 
employees,  shareholders,  the  local  community  and  society.  Since  then,  there  has  been  a 
growth  and  consistent  improvements  in  the  quality  of  reporting  of  Indian  companies. 
Discussions reveal that sustainability reporting  in India often starts as a voluntary  initiative 
amidst  limited  pressure  from  local  NGOs/civic  society  to  publish  sustainability  reports. 
Reports are often produced and used for internal purposes. 
23. 
The  GRI  has  been  working  with  the  Confederation  of  Indian  Industry  (CII)  for  a 
better understanding of the Indian context of reporting and ways of applying the international 
framework standard domestically. 
The main challenges for sustainability reporting in India are the following: 
• 
• 
Lack of a specific sustainability/CSR reporting legislation or guidelines; 
Companies find it challenging to report how they conduct business in the absence of 
clear guidance based on local conditions; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  to  be 
focused  and  reporting 
Following  early  experimentation,  efforts  need 
standardized.  Typically,  companies  tend  to  report  their  community  initiatives  on  a 
few  pages  in  their  Annual  Reports  rather  than  providing  detailed  information  on 
internal practices and issues such as transparency, risk, and social or environmental 
impacts; and 
Synergizing social and business interests needs top priority. Corporate philanthropy 
needs  to  transform  into  the  realm  of  core  business  and  corporate  social 
responsibility.  
Initiatives of RBI 
24. 
Recognising the contribution of financial institutions including banks to sustainable 
development  considering  the  crucial  role  they  play  in  financing  the  economic  and 
developmental activities, the RBI had drawn the attention of banks to their role in Corporate 
Social  Responsibility,  Sustainable  Development  and  Non-Financial  Reporting  in  its  circular 
dated  December  20,  2007.  Since  the  loan  management  in  banks  is  in  their  operational 
domain,  banks  were  exhorted  to  keep  abreast  of  the  developments  in  this  regard  and 
dovetail / modify their business strategies in the light of developments. Apart from this, even 
internal efforts to make their day-to-day operations cleaner, greener and more efficient can 
help.  However,  as  remarked  earlier,  the  position  continues  to  be  in  early  stages  of 
development and lot of work is needed in this direction. 
25. 
One of the key initiatives of RBI and where we are different from any other regulator 
is  in  the  area  of  sustainability  reporting  and  financial  inclusion.  Sustainability  has  been  an 
integral part of our inclusive growth agenda. We have tried to convey to banks that they must 
have an objective of financial inclusion. All the banks have been advised to prepare a board 
approved financial inclusion plan. As we are following a bank-led inclusive growth agenda, 
they  must  demonstrate  their  commitment  to  do  so.  That  will  give  sustainability  a  greater 
depth and penetration. Now, whether we make NFR mandatory – make it a part of disclosure – 
has been engaging our attention. But, in so far as directing banks that sustainable growth can 
be an important agenda for banks, guidelines have been issued. 
Sustainability reporting-way forward for banks and financial institutions 
26. 
The progress of sustainability reporting in India is slow, but a significant and sound 
start has been made. The Institute of Chartered Accountants of India – Accounting Research 
Foundation  (ICAI  ARF)  Committee  is  working  on  a  new  set  of  rules  on  CSR  and,  CII  is 
developing a green rating system for Indian companies. The pressure to adopt sustainability 
has  further  intensified  with  the  launch  of  Sustainable  Development  Funds  and  Indices  in 
India such as CRISIL, S&P ESG Index. 
Role of society 
27. 
The role that the society plays in nudging financial institutions to adopt NFR can be 
catalytic. As a society, while judging a financial institutions’ performance, we must appreciate 
their  contribution  to  social  responsibility.  As  an  illustration,  when  Best  Banks’  Awards  are 
given, only financial parameters like CRAR, ROA, RoE, NPA, etc. are considered. But are 
the banks judged on parameters like responsible ethical lending? How they meet their social 
responsibility?  How  they  are  faring  in  serving  below  poverty  line  people?  How  many 
customers served? What is the intermediation cost? What is the treatment meted to small 
customers? Are the charges levied for such small customers exorbitant in nature? Do they 
have  a  policy  of  reducing  carbon  foot  print?  When  these  aspects  are  not  taken  into 
consideration, and if the society does not appreciate these while rewarding the banks, how 
do you expect that these will be reflected in corporate performance? Were such factors taken 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
into  account,  then  the  recipients  of  Best  Banks  Awards  would,  probably,  be  very  different 
from the actual recipients of today. 
28. 
Banks  and  Financial  institutions  would  benefit  by  developing  a  sustainability 
management  and  reporting  framework,  which  covers,  but  is  not  limited  to,  identification  of 
material  issues  and  risks,  conducting  stakeholder  engagements  as  well  as  environment, 
health  safety  and  social  (EHSS)  audits,  mapping  the  carbon  footprint  of  a  company’s 
operations and developing sustainability reports. 
Conclusion 
29. 
To conclude, I once again congratulate NextGen and GRI for having organised this 
Conference  which  provides  an  important  platform  for  creating  awareness  and  sensitising 
financial institutions about non-financial reporting. It is a concept whose time has come but it 
has  to  transform  into  a  movement.  RBI  has  been  encouraging  banks  to  adopt  greater 
environmental  and  social  disclosures  apart  from  financial.  But  not  much  has  happened  on 
this front, although, on the inclusive agenda front, there has been progress but it has not yet 
formed part of non-financial disclosures. In order to make an impact, banks need to integrate 
the  concepts  of  inclusive  growth  and  their  risk  management  processes  for  assessing 
performance,  CSR  and  NFR  with  their  business  strategy.  As  society  starts  rewarding  and 
judging performance of financial institutions by their social, environmental performance and 
inclusive growth agenda, apart from economic, financial institutions would be more motivated 
to  voluntarily  adopt  NFR.  I  wish  the  deliberations  all  the success.  I  hope  that  some  of  the 
issues that I have raised are discussed in this Conference and if any action point emerges 
which we can address in furthering our sustainable and inclusive growth agenda, we would 
look forward to receiving it. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
