Stefan Ingves: Basel III – much-needed regulations for a safer banking 
sector 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Swedish Society of 
Financial Analysts, Stockholm, 1 February 2011. 
 More than two years have passed since the collapse of the major US bank Lehman Brothers 
triggered panic on the global financial markets and we were close to a widespread financial 
meltdown. We will never know what would have happened if the authorities had prevented 
Lehman  Brothers  from  going  bankrupt.  We  do  know,  however,  that  financial  turbulence 
spread  like wildfire  throughout  the world.  Market  agents  lost  confidence  in  each  other  and 
liquidity on the funding market was severely impaired. Many banks therefore found it difficult 
to fund their operations and suffered an acute liquidity shortage.  
In  order  to stabilise  the  situation  on  the  financial  markets,  governments  and  central  banks 
around the world were forced to take exceptional measures. By offering loans on favourable 
terms, providing capital injections and setting exceptionally low policy rates, they managed to 
prevent  a  total  collapse.  But  this  has  not  been  free,  and  it  is  not  over  yet.  To  date,  the 
Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank have lent millions of dollars and euros to 
the banking system to stop the crisis. In addition to this there have been a great number of 
national  rescue  measures.  These  have  largely  been  funded  by  governments  borrowing 
money.  In  this  way,  debts  in  the  financial  system  have  been  converted  into  central-
government  debts.  For  some  countries,  not  least  Ireland,  the  debt  mountain  has  grown  to 
unmanageable heights and the financial crisis has changed form to become a sovereign debt 
crisis.  
Sweden has also been affected by the financial crisis. But, unlike many other countries, we 
have emerged from the crisis in fairly good shape. Growth in the Swedish economy is back 
to  pre-crisis  levels  and  other  indicators,  such  as  the  level  of  investment  and  household 
consumption, are also positive. I would say that this is mainly due to two factors. First, the 
Swedish banks, with the crisis of the 1990s fresh in their minds, have been less risk-inclined 
than many international banks, although of course with the exception of their operations in 
the  Baltic  countries.  Second,  the  unusually  sound  condition  of  the  Swedish  economy  has 
made it possible for Swedish authorities to take extraordinary measures without putting our 
public finances at risk. 
However,  even  if  Sweden  has  coped  relatively  well  with  the  crisis  this  time,  we  should 
remember that as a small, open economy Sweden is highly dependent on what happens in 
the rest of the world. This also applies to the Swedish banks as a considerable part of their 
funding  comes  from  international  financial  markets.  The  international  operations  of  the 
Swedish  banks  have  also  increased  significantly  over  the  last  ten  years.  This  means  that 
events  abroad  have  an  increasing  impact  here  in  Sweden.  This  is  also  the  case  for  most 
other  countries.  The  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  is  just  one  of  many  examples  of  how  a 
bank with problems in one country can constitute a threat to banks all over the world.  
The crisis revealed the lack of effective regulations  
In  an  increasingly  globalised  world  it  is  important  to  have  well-designed  global  rules  and 
regulations that contribute to stable financial sectors in all countries. It has been obvious for 
quite some time that this is not the case. But a crisis was required to eradicate any doubts 
that reforms are necessary. This is a good aspect of crises. They have the capacity to unite 
decision-makers and to provide an impulse to processes for change.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Consequently,  over  the  last  two  years,  considerable  resources  have  been  devoted  to 
determining  why  the  crisis  arose  and  how  we  can  reduce  the  likelihood  of  a  similar  crisis 
occurring in the future. Politicians and decisions-makers have left almost no stone unturned. 
They  have  discussed  everything  from  bonus  systems  and  the  role  of  accounting  in  the 
financial  crisis  to  shortcomings  in  financial  supervision  and  weaknesses  in  derivatives 
trading.  Above  all,  however,  they  have  discussed  bank  regulation.  As  a  result  they  have 
realised that the current regulatory framework has a number of fundamental weaknesses that 
must be dealt with. The Basel Committee1
 has therefore drawn up new, revised regulations 
for capital and liquidity, the so-called Basel III regulations. I intend to devote today’s speech 
to describing what the new regulations entail, explaining the effects we can expect them to 
have in Sweden and presenting my view of the regulations. This means that several parts of 
the  speech  will  be  rather  technical,  but  a  thorough  review  is  necessary  to  clarify  what  the 
new regulations actually entail.2
Before I begin I would like to point out that although there has been a great focus on drawing 
up regulations that promote a more stable financial sector it is important to remember that 
the sector must be effective so that it can continue to manage deposits, provide loans and 
conduct payments. Finding a good balance between stability and effectiveness is always an 
important task. In my view, we have managed to achieve this balance. 
 Why we must develop Basel II  
Capital inadequate in terms of quantity and quality  
A basic problem with the current regulations is that they allow the banks to hold far too little 
risk-bearing capital, and in many cases capital that is of far too poor quality.  
According to the Basel II regulations the capital base consists of two parts: Tier 1 (or primary) 
capital and Tier 2 (or supplementary) capital. Together, these should correspond to at least 
eight per cent of the banks’ risk-weighted assets, of which Tier 1 capital must constitute at 
least four per cent. In addition, the regulations state that share capital and retained earnings, 
so-called Core Tier 1 capital, should make up the main part of the Tier 1 capital as it is these 
types of capital that can best cover losses.  
This vague ruling on how much Core Tier 1 capital a bank must have has led to a number of 
problems. Not least, it has enabled regulatory bodies around the world to stretch the rules to 
satisfy the banks and has thus started a race to the bottom – that is a race to low capital 
levels. Many countries have accepted Core Tier 1 capital levels as low as two per cent. This 
means that it has been possible to make up the remaining six per cent with cheaper capital 
instruments of poorer quality. Unlike ordinary share capital and retained earnings, these so-
called hybrid instruments have debt-like properties which mean that they can only be used to 
cover losses when a bank has failed. Core Tier 1 capital, on the other hand, can be used to 
cover losses under normal circumstances when a bank survives.  
Not only have the generous capital requirements helped to undermine the ability of the banks 
to  absorb  losses,  they  have  also  made  it  possible  for  banks  to  substantially  expand  their 
                                                 
1   The  Basel  Committee  is  the  international  body  that  has  established  frameworks  for  bank  regulation  since 
1974.  The  committee  consists  of  27  member  states  represented  by  national  central  banks  and  supervisory 
authorities. Decisions are made by the governing body “The Group of Central Bank Governors and Heads of 
Supervision”  (GHOS)  which  is  made  up  of  the  central  bank  governors  and  the  heads  of  the  supervisory 
authorities from the 27 member states. 
2   A more general description of the Basel III regulations and the Riksbank’s view of them can be found in the 
speech that Barbro Wickman-Parak made on 26 November 2010 – “New international regulations for banks – 
a welcome reform”. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
balance sheets by borrowing. Before the crisis began, no one raised their eyebrows at banks 
with debt levels of more than 30 times their equity. However, as you well know, low levels of 
capital and high levels of debt turned out to be a catastrophic combination. When the crisis 
broke out and it was realised that the ability of hybrid capital to cover losses was extremely 
limited, the highly leveraged banks were left more or less defenceless. It was not long before 
many of them were forced to turn to the governments and the taxpayers who had to inject 
capital and become part-owners. The rest is history.  
Basel II underestimates the risks in banking operations  
Another weakness of the current Basel II regulations is that they do not sufficiently capture 
the  banks’  risks.  There  are  many  examples  of  this.  One  is  that  the  regulations  and 
supervision have focused too much on risks in individual banks and too little on risks in the 
system as a whole. We refer to this as the lack of a macroprudential perspective.3 In general, 
we have not taken enough account of systemic risks; that is risk that can spread throughout 
the financial system. In a capital adequacy context, the lack of a macroprudential perspective 
is reflected in the fact that the banks have calculated their capital adequacy requirements on 
the basis of the risks to their own operations. They have thus ignored the negative external 
effects that banks may have on the system as a whole. This has led to a banking system with 
too high a level of risk and too small buffers in terms of capital and liquidity. It has also led to 
the risk of distorted market prices for risk, capital and liquidity. 
Another  example  is  that  the  models  that  the  banks  have  used  to  calculate  their  capital 
requirements for market risks systematically underestimate the risk of losses under stressed 
market conditions. As a result, the calculated capital adequacy requirements have been too 
low to enable the institutions concerned to manage the losses that occur in serious economic 
downturns, like the one we have just experienced.  
A third and closely-related example is that the banks have not held sufficient capital for the 
counterparty risks that they are exposed to in their derivatives trading. As financial assets, 
including derivatives, are accounted in accordance with the real value principle, changes in 
counterparty risks enter the banks’ balance sheets via their income statements. The fact that 
the  banks  are  not  equipped  to  manage  this  type  of  risk  became  evident  when  Lehman 
Brothers  collapsed  in  the  autumn  of  2008  and  the  financial  problems  spread  like  wildfire 
between the market agents.  
A fourth and final example is that Basel II has in many cases overlooked the risks that have 
developed off the banks’ balance sheets, and this is something that many banks have taken 
advantage  of.  By  selling  their  mortgages  to  special  companies  that  they  have  set  up 
themselves off their own balance sheets, the banks have been able to sell their own credit 
risks and thus reduce their capital requirements. The problem with this is that the banks have 
not  been  entirely  separated  from  these  special  companies.  During  the  crisis,  the  risks 
therefore moved directly back onto the banks’ balance sheets where there was no capital to 
cover the losses that arose. This problem was particularly evident in the United States.  
                                                 
3   The term macroprudential indicates that something – for example regulation, supervision or inspection – aims 
to limit the risk of serious disruptions to the financial system as a whole. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 Inadequate standards for liquidity management  
Another  important  lesson  from  the  crisis  is  that  the  regulations  have  paid  far  too  little 
attention to the banks’ liquidity management. In the present Basel regulations, there are no 
binding regulations on how banks should manage their liquidity risks.4
As banks usually lend at long maturities while their funding is short term, liquidity risks are a 
natural part of their operations. In the years prior to the crisis, we could see that many banks, 
including  the  Swedish  banks,  exposed  themselves  to  increasing  liquidity  risks,  partly  by 
increasing  their  lending  and  partly  by  choosing  to  fund  their  lending  on  the  markets  to  a 
greater extent rather than basing it on their deposits. As market borrowing is often short-term 
in  nature,  the  banks  became  very  sensitive  to  disruptions  on  the  financial  markets.  This 
became obvious during the crisis. The banks lost confidence in each other and they became 
extremely cautious about lending money to other banks. Market rates rocketed and a large 
number of banks experienced an acute liquidity crisis. Several central banks, including the 
Riksbank, chose to supply liquidity to the interbank markets to ease the stressed situation. It 
is  of  course  not  reasonable  that  government  authorities  should  have  to  provide  massive 
loans  to  ensure  that  the  markets  work  properly.  With  hindsight,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  the 
regulations have focused too little on liquidity risks.  
The procyclical effects of Basel II contributed to the crisis  
Finally, it has also been noted that the procyclical tendencies in Basel II contributed to the 
crisis. The explanation for this is the regulatory framework’s strong links to risk. During the 
upturn  that  preceded  the  crisis,  when  risks  were  low,  banks  were  able  to  expand  their 
balance  sheets  and  present  good  capital  adequacy  figures,  despite  the  fact  that  they  held 
relatively little capital. When the downturn then began and the risks increased, more capital 
was required to reach the stipulated minimum level of capital. With the increase in risks and 
the loss of confidence between the banks, the markets’ capital adequacy requirements also 
increased.  In  order  to  meet  these  requirements,  banks  in  many  countries  were  forced  to 
reduce their balance sheets. This led to a fall in lending to companies and private individuals. 
This in turn triggered a downward  spiral with a fall in demand and in investment capacity, 
which reinforced the downturn in global economic activity.  
When you list the problems in this way it becomes pretty clear that we need to revise the 
existing  regulations.  The  Basel  Committee  has  done  a  lot  of  hard  work  to  correct  these 
shortcomings and I welcome their proposals on a new international regulatory framework for 
banks.  
Basel III – what is new?  
Basel III comprises global minimum regulations and aims to strengthen the banks’ ability to 
manage losses and reduce the probability of new financial crises. To achieve this, the banks 
will be required to hold more and better-quality capital. An important task for the decision-
makers involved has thus been to increase the international capital adequacy requirements 
But  Basel  III  is  not  just  about  capital.  On  the  contrary,  Basel  III  has  many  important 
components,  including  completely  new  requirements  concerning  the  banks’  liquidity 
management  and  limits  for  debt  levels.  The  new  regulations  will  be  implemented  over  a 
period of six years, starting in 2013.5
 In some cases, however, the banks may be forced to 
meet the requirements earlier due to the demands of the market and individual countries. I 
                                                 
4   Basel II states the liquidity risk is a central factor in the banks’ risk management and that risk management 
should comprise adequate systems and calculation methods for the correct assessment of the extent of the 
risk. 
5   For a detailed schedule for the implementation of Basel III see Financial Stability Report 2010:2. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
will discuss all of the components of Basel II in more detail, but let me begin with perhaps the 
most fundamental change, the revised capital regulations.  
Higher capital levels and a new definition of capital  
The changes in the new regulations mainly affect Tier 1 capital and Core Tier 1 capital. I will 
therefore focus on these two components. An important new feature is the stipulation of a 
minimum level for Core Tier 1 capital. In contrast to the present vague wording about the role 
of equity in the capital base, Basel III makes it clear that all banks must have at least 4.5 per 
cent  of  their  risk-weighted  assets  in  share  capital  and  retained  earnings.  In  addition,  the 
lowest permitted level for total Tier 1 capital is raised from four per cent to six per cent.  
Basel  III  also  introduces  a  capital  conservation  buffer  of  2.5  per  cent,  consisting  of  Core 
Tier 1 capital. This means that the banks should have a Core Tier 1 capital holding of at least 
seven per cent. If a bank falls below the seven per cent limit, its entitlement to pay dividends 
and  to  conduct  share  buy-backs  will  be  restricted.  The  proportion  of  profits  that  must  be 
retained within the bank increases the further below the seven per cent limit the bank goes. 
The  idea  behind  this  is to  force  the  banks to  accumulate  their  profits as  capital  instead  of 
paying them as dividends to the shareholders.  
However, this will not affect Sweden, at least not directly. Swedish banks are well capitalised 
and  have  a  quota  for  Core  Tier  1  capital  that  is  already  above  seven  per  cent.  We  will, 
however,  see  effects  at  the  international  level  and,  as  we  are  highly  affected  by  what 
happens abroad, Swedish banks and Sweden in general will also benefit from the fact that 
banks in other countries will become more resilient.  
Apart from the changes in levels, there are also stricter requirements regarding the quality of 
the  capital  held  by  the  banks.  As  equity  constitutes  the  difference  between  assets  and 
liabilities on the balance sheet, both the size and quality of the capital will be highly affected 
by how a bank’s assets and liabilities are valued. To ensure that the banks’ capital really can 
cover losses, they must already today make certain adjustments in their equity on the basis 
of what actually exists on the asset side. The principles governing how to do this will now be 
tightened  up.  For  example,  deductions  will  have  to  be  made  directly  from  the  Core  Tier  1 
capital, unlike today when either the total Tier 1 capital or the total capital base is adjusted.  
Nor  will  the  banks  be  able  to  include  assets  that  form  the  capital  base  in  other  financial 
institutions.  The  idea  behind  such  a  limitation  is  to  counteract  the  domino  effects  that  can 
arise if a bank goes bankrupt. Other important assets on the balance sheet that will require 
adjustment of the capital are goodwill and deferred tax assets.  
Another important change is that it will not be possible to include hybrid capital to the same 
extent as before. Innovative hybrid instruments with a so-called step up will, for example, be 
completely excluded from Tier 1 capital. The reason for this is that this relates to out-and-out 
rule  arbitrage.  Under  the  current  regulations,  it  is  not  permitted  to  include  dated  debt 
instruments in the capital base. To get round this, the banks have issued securities with a so-
called step up, where the interest rate rises if the security is not repurchased before a certain 
predetermined date. This has enabled the banks to signal to the markets that they will pay off 
their debts on a certain date even if formally there is no specific date on which the securities 
fall due.  
Basel  III  thus  entails  a  considerable  tightening  up  of  the  minimum  capital  requirements.  I 
think  this  is  excellent.  I  have  long  advocated  clearer  and  stricter  regulations.  As  equity  is 
expensive in relation to other sources of funding, tighter capital requirements will reduce the 
banks’ appetite for risk and at the same time increase their ability to manage losses. More 
and  better  capital  will  thus  not  only  soften  the  effects  of  future  crises  but  also  reduce  the 
likelihood of them occurring at all. A clear and uniform level for Core Tier 1 capital will also 
reduce the scope for arbitrary interpretations. This in turn will reduce the scope for creating a 
non-level playing field, which should benefit global competition.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Counter-cyclical capital buffer  
In addition to the new minimum requirements, Basel III comprises a counter-cyclical capital 
buffer of a maximum of 2.5 percentage points of Core Tier 1 capital.6 The buffer acts as a 
dynamic capital requirement, which means that it varies over the economic cycle. The idea is 
that the banks should build up capital in good times that they can use to deal with losses in 
bad times.  
According to the Basel Committee’s guidelines, the buffer should come into play when the 
ratio  between  aggregate  credit  provision  in  the  economy  and  the  development  of  GDP 
deviates from an average trend. The greater the deviation the greater the increase, and vice 
versa.  However,  this  is  not  something  that  will  happen  automatically.  The  decision  on 
whether the buffer should be activated or not will lie with the national authorities. As countries 
develop at different rates, the capital requirements will also vary from country to country. A 
bank that is active on several markets will therefore need to calculate its capital requirement 
on the basis of the geographical distribution of its exposures. Like the capital conservation 
buffer, the counter-cyclical capital buffer is linked to sanctions on dividends.  
The  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer  is  good  for  several  reasons.  First,  it  can  be  used  to 
counteract  the  procyclical  effects  that  a  risk-weighted  capital  requirement  automatically 
entails and that result in an unwanted high expansion of credit in upturns and cutbacks in 
downturns.  
Second, it can be used to limit the build-up of systemic risks. The reason for this is that the 
buffer is based on the risks in the economy as a whole rather than in each individual bank. In 
times of high credit growth, when systemic risks usually develop, the buffer can be activated, 
thereby increasing the capital requirement for all of the banks at the same time even if the 
actions  of  the  individual  banks  do  not  constitute  a  risk  in  themselves.  Higher  capital 
requirements increase the banks’ lending rates and thus dampen the overall growth of credit 
in the economy. Considering that we currently lack tools that can be used to counteract risks 
of a systemic nature, this type of capital requirement is thus a welcome feature.  
Convertible debt instruments  
A question that is under discussion but not directly related to Basel III is whether a new way 
for  banks  to  acquire  new  capital  should  be  introduced.  Traditionally,  banks  can,  like  other 
companies, acquire capital in two ways: by issuing bonds or by issuing shares. The choice of 
method often creates a conflict between the banks’ owners and the responsible supervisory 
authority. While the banks’ owners usually prefer the first alternative because it is cheaper7 
and  because  they  do  not  want  to  see  their  share  capital  watered  down,  the  supervisory 
authorities require the banks to have a certain level of share capital that can be used to deal 
with losses. As a result, the possibility to use so-called contingent convertibles, also known 
as coco bonds, is therefore now being discussed. These instruments have a mix of bond and 
share  characteristics  in  that  they  are  issued  as  a  debt  instruments  but  are  automatically 
converted to share capital when a bank experiences problems. It is still unclear what role this 
type of instrument will be able to play when the banks calculate their capital requirements. A 
number of questions remain to be answered – for example what type of event should trigger 
a conversion?  
                                                 
6   The  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer  may  consist  of  Core  Tier  1  capital  or  other  capital  than  can  completely 
absorb losses. The Basel Committee will specify what types of capital the banks can include at a later date. 
Issuing bond is a less costly alternative for acquiring capital than issuing shares for tax reasons. Interest rate 
payments for bonds are made pre-tax while share dividends are paid from post-tax profits. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
7  
6 
 The sum of the new capital regulations  
There are many new regulations and levels and it may be difficult to estimate what the banks’ 
total  capital  requirement  will  ultimately  amount  to.  It  we  limit  ourselves  to  looking  at  Core 
Tier 1 capital we can see that the new regulations mean that all banks will need to hold share 
capital and retained earnings amounting to at least 4.5 per cent of their risk-weighted assets. 
In  addition  there  is  the  capital  conservation  buffer  of  2.5  per  cent  and  the  counter-cyclical 
capital buffer of a maximum of 2.5 per cent. This means that in a situation where the counter-
cyclical capital buffer is fully activated the banks will need Core Tier 1 capital amounting to at 
least 9.5 per cent, and this applies to all banks.  
There are also discussions about whether additional capital requirements should be placed 
on those banks that are considered to be systemically important. At present, no decision has 
been made on which banks this would be, nor on the levels that could apply. It is not even 
certain  that  the  measures  directed  at  these  systemically-important  banks  would  focus  on 
higher Core Tier 1 capital requirements, although this is likely. Decisions on these matters 
are not expected until the summer. However, if the major Swedish banks are considered to 
be among the banks concerned they should make provisions for further increases. It is not 
unreasonable  to  assume  that  their  total  capital  requirement  could  end  up  somewhere 
between 9.5 and 12 per cent – at least. According to our own calculations practically all of 
the major Swedish banks currently have capital levels in this range.  
The minimum level for Core Tier 1 capital may of course be affected by the decision on the 
use of convertible debt instruments. At present, the discussion concerns whether this type of 
instrument could be used for the increase for systemically-important banks. However, this is 
still an open question. One method is to require, let us say, six per cent in coco bonds over 
and above the 12 per cent added up here. The total potentially available share capital would 
then be 18 per cent.  
In connection with this I would like to mention that the Basel Committee has already decided 
that this type of convertible instrument must be used for Tier 2 capital and that part of Tier 1 
capital that does not consist of Core Tier 1 capital. Under the new regulations, a bank will 
only  be  able  to  include  debt  instruments  that  can  be  converted  into  share  capital  if  the 
responsible  supervisory  authority  believes  that  the  bank  has  problems  that  threaten  its 
survival.8
 Leverage ratio  
One of the more discussed elements of Basel III is the introduction of a leverage ratio. The 
aim of this measure is to restrict the banks’ total indebtedness and to set a limit for how large 
a  part  of  the  balance  sheet  the  banks  may  fund  with  debts.  To  comply  with  the  new 
regulation, the banks must retain capital corresponding to at least three per cent of the value 
of their total exposures, or assets if you like.  
In  contrast  to  the  minimum  capital  requirement,  the  leverage  ratio  is  not  a  risk-weighted 
measure. This means that the banks should not take into account to whom or for what they 
are  lending  when  they  calculate  their  total  assets.  In  addition,  most  of  the  items  off  the 
balance sheet should be included at their full nominal value. One reason why this new type 
of measure has been developed is that a number of banks – not least the US investment 
banks and UBS in Switzerland – experienced major problems when the financial crisis began 
because of their high level of indebtedness.  
                                                 
8   For a debt instrument to be included as Tier 2 or Tier 1 capital the contract must clearly state that it can be 
converted into share capital if the responsible supervisory authority finds this necessary. This applies to debt 
instruments issued after 1 January 2013. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
However,  many  observers  believe  that  a  risk-neutral  measure  such  as  the  leverage  ratio 
constitutes an incentive for the banks to invest in assets that carry a higher risk and that this 
is  directly  counter  to  the  traditional  capital  adequacy  regulations.  In  Sweden,  the  criticism 
from the industry has been particularly sharp. The reason for this is that a large proportion 
(approximately 40 per cent) of the Swedish banks’ balance sheets consists of mortgages. As 
mortgages  are  considered  to  carry  a  low  risk  they  are  also  subject  to  low  capital 
requirements.  This  thus  means  that  banks  can  have  large  volumes  of  mortgages  and 
relatively little capital but still be able to report a high level of capital adequacy. When we now 
introduce a measure that does not take into account the banks’ risk profile, this will probably 
hit the Swedish banks harder than those in some other countries.  
It is probably the case that regulations that do not take risks into account can lead to a poorer 
pricing of risk and to greater risk taking. As banks are companies that aim to maximise their 
profits and high risk is generally related to high returns, there will always be a willingness to 
invest in high-risk assets. And taking high risks can, as we all know, contribute to financial 
crises that have severe effects on the economy.  
Given this it may seem paradoxical for the Basel Committee to recommend a leverage ratio 
that does not vary with risk. However, we should remember – and this is important – that the 
traditional capital requirement has not prevented banks from borrowing too heavily, and this 
was  one  of  the  central  problems  during  the  financial  crisis.  As  long  as  the  economy  ran 
smoothly the banks could use their debt-burdened balance sheets as levers and make large 
profits. However, as soon as the downturn began and the banks began to make loan losses 
they had hardly any capital that could be used to bear the losses. Instead, governments and 
taxpayers had to provide funds to rescue the indebted banks. Of course we do not want to 
experience such a sequence of events again. It is therefore positive that we are introducing a 
complementary  capital  requirement  that  ensures  that  the  banks  do  not  overburden 
themselves with debt. The idea behind the leverage ratio is to limit the growth of credit when 
the economy is going well. It therefore acts as a complement to the counter-cyclical capital 
buffer and helps to prevent an extreme expansion of the balance sheets. 
Another reason for introducing a leverage ratio is that most large banks use internal models 
to estimate the risks associated with their lending. If banks estimate these risks incorrectly, 
for  example  by  underestimating  them,  they  may  not  hold  enough  capital.  And  as  major 
financial crises do not, I am glad to say, occur so often and the banks’ data is often limited, 
there is actually a risk that they will underestimate the risks in their lending. A gross solvency 
requirement as a complement to the standard capital adequacy requirement thereby acts as 
an extra safety measure.  
In response to the criticism from the Swedish banks there is another factor that I would like to 
take  up.  In  Sweden,  the  banks  can  lend  money  to  households  with  very  little  risk.  This  is 
because the historical losses for mortgage lending in Sweden have been at very low levels. 
This in turn can be explained by a number of factors. One explanation is that in contrast to 
many other countries we do not have a speculative housing market on which households buy 
several houses or flats for investment purposes and thus take a high risk. Another is that we 
have a legal structure in which private individuals have to live with their debts until they are 
repaid. In general, people cannot get rid of their debts by filing for personal bankruptcy. A 
third reason is that we have a social insurance and benefits system that means that people 
who  become  unemployed,  for  example,  do  not  lose  their  entire  income.  The  likelihood  of 
borrowers not wanting or not being able to make the interest and amortization payments on 
their loans is therefore relatively small.  This means that banks can lend money at a lower 
cost than would otherwise be the case. They can thus boost the expansion of credit in the 
economy  without  taking  any  significant  risks  themselves.  This  is  something  that  we  have 
actually seen in recent years – lending to Swedish households has increased at a worryingly 
high rate. I believe that the introduction of a ceiling for how much the banks can lend without 
increasing their equity is a reasonable measure to prevent an excessive provision of credit.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
New standards for the banks’ liquidity management  
As I mentioned at the beginning, the financial crisis has also given us reasons to consider 
more direct and specific liquidity regulations. Consequently, the Basel Committee has drawn 
up entirely new standards for how banks should manage their liquidity. They have drawn up 
two  quantitative  measurements;  the  Liquidity  Coverage  Ratio  and  the  Net  Stable  Funding 
Ratio,  and  will  also  impose  considerably  stricter  requirements  on  the  banks  to  report  their 
liquidity risks.  
The Liquidity Coverage Ratio focuses on the banks’ liquidity buffers. The banks must hold 
liquidity  reserves  that  are  sufficiently  large  and  sufficiently  liquid  to  cope  with  a  30-day 
stressed cash outflow. The rules for what constitutes liquid assets are strict. At least 60 per 
cent of the reserves must consist of government securities, the rest can be made up of high-
quality, liquid mortgage and corporate bonds.  
The  second  measurement,  the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio,  is  a  structural  measurement 
focusing  on  the  banks’  funding  models.  The  aim  is  that  the  banks  must  reduce  the 
differences in maturities between their assets and liabilities and their dependence on short-
term market funding. To achieve this, the banks must match their funding and lending to a 
greater extent than they do today. Assets with short maturities can have short-term funding 
while  long-term  illiquid  assets,  such  as  mortgages,  will  need  more  long-term  and  stable 
funding. All funding with a remaining maturity of more than one year will be counted as stable 
funding.  
This is a sound and important feature of the new Basel regulations. And it will probably affect 
the Swedish banks’ business models. Currently, none of the four major Swedish banks meet 
the structural liquidity measurement requirements (Net Stable Funding Ratio). This is mainly 
because  they  largely  fund  their  lending  through  short-term  market  funding.  The  banks  will 
need to think again here. In addition, a number of the Swedish banks do not meet the short-
term measurement (Liquidity Coverage Ratio) either. These banks must, before the LCR is 
introduced, either strengthen their liquidity buffers, for example by buying government bonds, 
or reduce their short-term net outflow.  
A weakness of the new standards is, however, that they do not contain any specific rules for 
matching maturities per currency. This is something Swedish authorities should look at more 
closely.  Two  thirds  of  Swedish  banks’  market  funding  is  in  foreign  currency.  A  certain 
proportion of this is converted via the swap markets to SEK and then lent. As a result, the 
Swedish  banks  are  sensitive  to  disruptions  both  in  the  primary  markets  and  the  swap 
markets. This was a problem we saw during the crisis, when the Riksbank was forced to lend 
large amounts of foreign currency. Our outstanding US dollar loans peaked at USD 30 billion.  
Increased capital requirements for the trading book  
As I mentioned earlier, the current capital adequacy regulations have taken far too optimistic 
a view of market risk. To correct for this the banks must now complement their calculation 
methods to take into account potential losses even under stressed conditions. This means 
that the capital requirement for assets in the trading book will be increased.  
In addition, banks that trade in derivatives must use central counterparties to a greater extent 
than is the case today. The idea is to reduce the banks’ counterparty risks and thus reduce 
contagion  risks.  For  trading  where  central  clearing  is  not  possible  or  appropriate  a  more 
sophisticated method is being introduced to calculate capital requirements for counterparty 
risk.  By  and  large  these  changes  mean  that  the  banks  will  need  to  hold  more  capital  to 
protect themselves against changes in counterparty risks. This means, for example, that if a 
counterparty’s  CDS  premium  rises  then  the  bank  concerned  will  face  a  higher  capital 
requirement.  
This is of course a good thing. It was precisely in trading in financial instruments that a large 
part of the losses that affected the banks in the financial crisis arose. This was not actually a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
great problem in Sweden, but rather in the United States and some other parts of Europe. 
We  have  also  underestimated  the  strength  of  the  contagion  risks  that  arose  as  a 
consequence  of  the  connections  between  different  agents  in  the  financial  system.  If  the 
banks are to be equipped to deal with their losses themselves we should endeavour to draw 
up capital requirements that reflect the banks’ real risks.  
Reactions and effects  
As always, when stricter regulations are introduced, a certain amount of resistance can be 
expected. The most usual criticism of the new banking regulations is that they will come at a 
high cost, both in terms of actual expenses and in terms of efficiency. I am very aware that 
stricter regulations entail certain costs. But these costs are worth incurring if they mean we 
will get a new regulatory framework that does what it is designed to do. What we want is a 
safer financial system. Having seen the results of many financial crises internationally and 
two in Sweden, I can also note that the costs of a deep and wide-ranging banking crisis can 
be exceptionally high. Looking back, we can see that financial crises are usually drawn-out 
processes  that  are  followed  by  long  periods  of  high  unemployment  and  low  GDP  growth. 
Situations like this should be avoided, although of course not at any price. Quite simply, this 
is a matter of designing a set of rules and regulations that will counteract future economic 
crises  at  the  same  time  as  the  socio-economic  costs  for  these  rules  and  regulations  are 
limited.  
What will the new regulations cost?  
It is easy to get the impression that all of the new requirements I have reviewed will lead to 
drastically  increased  requirements  regarding  the  banks’  capital.  One  common  and  highly-
justified  question  is  therefore  how  the  new  regulations  will  affect  the  banks  and  their 
customers.  
In recent months, we have read in the headlines about how expensive the new rules will be, 
above  all  for  private  individuals  with  mortgages.  According  to  the  banks’  calculations, 
mortgage rates will go up by up to one percentage point. And yes, it is quite likely that the 
new  regulations  will  force  the  banks  to  adjust  their  business  models,  which  may  lead  to 
certain price increases. While it is too early to say exactly what these costs will amount to, 
the Riksbank judges that they will not be excessively high. Basel III is a gradual process that 
will  begin  to  apply  in  2013,  but  which  will  not  have  its  full  impact  until  1  January  2019. 
Furthermore, the market is already placing high requirements on the banks’ capital, and we 
can note that the Swedish banks are coping well – they are well-capitalised in terms of both 
level  and  quality.  So  there  should  be  no  question  of  any  extra  costs  for  acquiring  capital. 
However, the Swedish banks need to retain the capital they have at present and, therefore, 
should not pay any extra dividends.  
Neither does the introduction of the leverage ratio look like being any great problem if the 
banks maintain current capital levels. We have looked more closely at the four major banks 
(Nordea, Swedbank, Handelsbanken and SEB) and, at present, none of them falls below the 
minimum requirement of three per cent.  
However,  the  Swedish  banks  are  finding  it  difficult  to  comply  with  the  new  liquidity 
requirements.  The  greatest  challenge  will  probably  lie  in  complying  with  the  structural 
requirement. Here, the banks have two alternatives – either cutting back on the commitments 
that require stable funding (for example lending for housing purchases) or exchanging short-
term  funding  for  long-term  funding.  This  second  alternative  could  well  result  in  the  banks’ 
funding costs increasing, which should push lending rates up somewhat. As yet, we have no 
exact  figure  on  what  this  may  cost  in  terms  of  basis  points,  but  we  assess  that,  despite 
everything, these costs will be small.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
How all this will affect the banks’ customers is hard to say. In the final analysis, the question 
of how these costs will be divided among the banks’ owners and customers is a question of 
competition. But, as we are now introducing regulations to reduce the risk of bankruptcies, I 
think it would be reasonable to assume that the banks’ financiers will lower their expected 
return.  
Effects on the real economy  
So  what  do  we  believe  about  the  effects  on  the  real  economy?  Increased  interest  rate 
margins and reduced lending volumes will probably result in certain macroeconomic effects 
in  the  form  of  reduced  GDP.  How  great  these  effects  will  be  is  hard  to  say.  The  Basel 
Committee has appointed two groups with the task of more closely examining both the direct 
and the long-term macro effects of the new Basel regulations.9 The results of their work do 
not indicate any drastic costs. They estimate that, during the actual implementation phase, 
Sweden’s GDP level will be slightly lower (approximately 0.3 per cent) that what it would be 
without Basel III. But, over the longer term, the new banking regulations will instead lead to 
higher  GDP  and  prosperity  –  because  we  will  reduce  the  likelihood  of new  crises.  Making 
exact forecasts is always difficult. However, it is helpful to have an estimate of the levels we 
are  talking about.  And,  in  Sweden’s  case,  we can  note  that  the  costs  for  Basel  III  will  not 
even come close to the costs of a crisis. For society as a whole, this will be a highly profitable 
investment in increased security.  
Basel III is a step forward, but more may be needed  
Consequently,  the  Riksbank  welcomes  the  Basel  III  regulations.  Considering  the  severe 
financial  crisis  we  have  been  through  in  recent  years  and  the  shortcomings  we  have 
identified  in  the  current  regulations,  it  is  perhaps  not  so  difficult  to  understand  why.  If  the 
world’s  banks  had  had  larger  and  better  buffers,  both  of  capital  and  of  liquidity,  the  crisis 
would hardly have been as serious as it was.  
But  the  question  is  whether  the  new  regulations  are  sufficient.  Even  if  Basel  III  is  a  major 
step forward, we must not forget that it represents global minimum regulations that are the 
result  of  compromises  by  representatives  of  27  countries  in  which  the  structures  of  the 
financial  markets  differ  considerably.  In  addition,  these  regulations  will  not  reach  their  full 
effect until 2019.  
In my speech today, I have shed light on a number of risks that are specific to the Swedish 
economy, not least the Swedish banks’ dependence on funding from the international capital 
markets  and  the  households’  increased  borrowing.  Against  this  background,  I  believe  that 
there may be good reasons to consider whether we, the Swedish authorities, ought to adopt 
extra measures or proceed more quickly than planned in Basel III.  
There are a number of measures that I believe are worthy of further discussion. One is to 
bring  forward  the  introduction  of  the  new  liquidity  standards,  a  second  would  be  to  add 
                                                 
9   The Macroeconomic Assessment Group (MAG) has been assigned to estimate the effects on the interest rate 
margins, lending volume and GDP during the implementation of the new regulations both as regards capital 
and  liquidity.  The  MAG  report  is  called  “Assessing  the  macroeconomic  impact  of  the  transition  to  stronger 
capital and liquidity requirements”, and is available at www.bis.org. Using the Mug’s methods as a basis, the 
Riksbank has made its own analysis of the effects of Basel III. This was partially presented in the Riksbank’s 
Financial Stability Report, which was published in November 2010.  
Long-term  Economic  Impact  (LEI)  has  studied  the  long-term  effects  of  the  new  regulations.  LEI  takes  into 
account  both  the  benefits  and  the  costs  of  the  new  banking  regulations.  The  report  by  LEI  is  called  “An 
assessment of the long-term economic impact of stronger capital and liquidity requirements” and is available 
at  www.bis.org. The Riksbank has also made  its own  analysis here,  which  will  be published at some point 
during 2011. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
requirements for the banks to better match their foreign exchange lending with the equivalent 
amount  of  borrowing.  It  became  apparent  during  the  crisis that  the  banks’  dependency  on 
currencies other than the kronor was a problem that can be difficult to handle. If it becomes 
necessary  to  dampen  lending  to  households,  over  and  above  the  effect  of  the  Riksbank’s 
repo-rate increases, one could introduce reserve requirements for such lending, or increase 
the capital requirements, or increase the risk weighting for mortgages. Furthermore, I believe 
we should consider whether a leverage ratio of three per cent is enough to curb excessive 
indebtedness, and what attitude we should take towards convertible debt instruments as a 
supplement above and beyond the other capital requirements. All of these alternatives are 
worth considering. When I say this, you should also remember that many decision-makers 
are involved in the implementation process, both internationally and in Sweden. Furthermore, 
the  Riksbank  is  not  responsible  for  the  main  part  of  the  new  regulations  –  so  this  is  not 
something  we  can  decide  on.  On  the  other  hand,  we  can  and  should  participate  in  the 
debate.  
Regardless of our conclusions, it is important that we have an open and realistic discussion 
on the development of the Swedish economy and or possibilities to counteract potential risks 
before we are saddled with a new crisis. The discussions currently underway in the EU on 
how the costs of a crisis should be allocated show how difficult it can be to sort out problems 
after the fact – and this applies to an even greater extent as regards extensive cross-border 
banking operations. We should thus learn from this and discuss how we can avoid ending up 
in such a situation right from the very start.  
Finally, I would also like to add that there are a number of important areas that Basel III does 
not  deal  with.  These  include  how  we  should  handle  banks  that  encounter  problems,  what 
approach we should take to systemically-important participants and how we should solve the 
challenges  set  by  cross-border  banking.  These  are  areas  that  remain  to  be  regulated  and 
which will be keenly discussed in the future, both in Sweden and in the EU. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
