Mark Carney: Canada in a multi-polar world 
Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, presented to the Canadian 
Club of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario, 16 May 2011. 
 Introduction 
It is a pleasure to speak to this venerable institution. 
When the Canadian Club was founded in 1903, the world economy was being transformed. 
A  great  wave  of  globalization  was  under  way  with  commerce  expanding  and  distance 
shrinking. International trade and capital flows were growing at historically rapid paces and, 
just a year earlier, Marconi had started a communications revolution from the peak of Signal 
Hill. 
It was a time of tremendous opportunity for a young country with immense potential. 
Canada took advantage, posting the fastest growth in the world in the 20 years preceding the 
First  World  War.  Our  economy  evolved  rapidly  as  trends  that  would  extend  far  into  the 
century  began  to  crystallize.  New  industries,  notably  the  wheat  boom  on  the  Prairies  and 
steel in central Canada, emerged, supported by mass immigration and new technologies. 
Our principal markets began to shift from the historic Empire preferences towards the rapidly 
rising United States. By 1990, after almost a century of continental integration, the share of 
our exports to the United States would double. 
In  the  early  decades  of  the  20th  century,  the  new  economic  order  supported,  and 
occasionally  buffeted,  the  Canadian  economy.  The  United  States  went  through  the  boom-
bust-boom  cycles  typical  of  an  emerging  hegemon.  The  international  monetary  system 
strained to the breaking point under the weight of disruptive change in the economic order. A 
reflexively isolationist America was slow to replace the ebbing Pax Britannia, until depression 
and war gave birth to an uneasy multilateralism.1  
In the process, Canada learned some important lessons: 
Openness  is  better  than  protectionism.  Trade  brings  innovation,  growth  and  jobs. 
However,  it  also  brings  shocks,  which  demand  resilient  institutions  and  dynamic  policy 
responses. 
Economic  flexibility  is  essential.  Markets  change;  industries  rise  and  fall;  exciting  new 
products emerge and then become commoditized. In a rapidly shifting world, only sustained 
education, ingenuity and investment can maintain competitiveness. 
Sound macroeconomic policy is the cornerstone of prosperity. Fiscal profligacy erodes 
economic sovereignty; inflation hurts the most vulnerable while undermining confidence and 
investment; price stability is paramount. 
These lessons will remain valid in the years ahead. 
The new paradigm shift 
We  meet  today  in  the  midst  of  another  great  transformation  –  one  that  is  occurring  more 
rapidly than most recognise. 
                                                 
1   C. Kindleberger, The World in Depression 1929?1939 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  financial  crisis  has  accelerated  the  shift  in  the  world’s  economic  centre  of  gravity. 
Emerging-market  economies  now  account  for  almost  three-quarters  of  global  growth  –  up 
from just one-third at the turn of the millennium. 
Robust emerging market economies 
Recent  strength  in  emerging  economies  reflects  the  combination  of  spectacular  secular 
trends reinforced by powerful cyclical forces. 
Emerging  Asia  is  rapidly  urbanizing.  Since  1990,  the  number  of  people  living  in  cities  in 
China  and  India  has  risen  by  nearly  half  a  billion,  the  equivalent  of  housing  the  entire 
population  of  Canada  every  18  months.  This  process  can  be  expected  to  continue  for 
decades. 
In parallel, a massive new middle class is being formed, growing by 70 million people each 
year and set to double to 40 per cent of the global population by the end of this decade.2  
Accommodative monetary policies, capital inflows and credit booms are currently reinforcing 
these secular forces and driving strong – in some cases, unsustainably strong – domestic 
demand in major emerging markets. 
While  many  emerging  economies  have  begun  raising  interest  rates  and  applying  other 
restrictive  measures,  monetary  policies  remain  quite  stimulative.  Real  interest  rates  are 
negative in many cases, despite excess demand (Chart 1). In some large emerging-market 
economies, nominal exchange rate adjustment is being thwarted and real effective exchange 
rate appreciation is being driven by inflation – in Asia, exclusively so (Chart 2). 
These policies risk asset bubbles in emerging economies, more acute inflationary pressures 
globally and subpar global growth. 
Listless advanced economies 
The contrast between the emerging world and the advanced economies could not be starker. 
The major advanced economies, particularly the United States, were Canada’s future once. 
However,  in  the  years  ahead,  they  will  be  weighed  down  by  the  legacy  of  the  crisis. 
Repairing  the  balance  sheets  of  banks,  households  and  countries  will  take  some  time 
(Charts 3 and 4). 
None of this is surprising. History suggests that recessions involving financial crises tend to 
be  deeper  and  have  recoveries  that  take  twice  as  long.  In  the  decade  following  severe 
financial crises, growth rates are about one percentage point lower and unemployment rates 
five percentage points higher.3 The current U.S. recovery is proving no exception. 
In Europe, the recovery is being restrained by major competitiveness and fiscal challenges in 
peripheral  economies,  as  well  as  the  risks  of  contagion  from  under-capitalised  banks.  We 
support  the  current  efforts  of  our  European  partners  to  resolve  these  issues  through 
aggressive bank stress tests and, in conjunction with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
credible programs to support durable recoveries in the affected economies. 
In  Japan,  the  cost  of  the  physical  damage  of  the  earthquake,  tsunami  and  subsequent 
nuclear  crisis  could  reach  as  high  as  6  per  cent  of  GDP.  The  resulting  supply  chain 
disruptions will hit growth in Japan and other advanced economies, including Canada, this 
                                                 
2   McKinsey & Company, “The Great Rebalancing,” McKinsey Quarterly, June 2010. 
3   See  C.  M.  Reinhart  and  V.  R.  Reinhart,  “After  the  Fall,”  Macroeconomic  Challenges:  The  Decade  Ahead, 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  2010  Economic  Policy  Symposium.  Available  at: 
http://www.kansascityfed.org/publicat/sympos/2010/reinhart-paper.pdf 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
quarter.  Over  the  longer  term,  Japanese  growth  will  be  weighed  down  by  significant  fiscal 
and demographic pressures. 
The balance of these two major forces – weakness in advanced economies and strength in 
emerging economies – determines the global economic outlook. Last fall, the consensus was 
that  a  faltering  recovery  in  advanced  economies  was  a  greater  risk  than  overheating  in 
emerging markets. Today, it is the opposite. Such reversals can be expected to continue. 
Although  this  shift  to  a  multi-polar  world  is  fundamentally  positive,  it  is  also  disruptive. 
Labour,  capital  and  commodity  markets  are  changing  rapidly.  The  effective  global  labour 
supply quadrupled between 1980 and 2005 and may double again by 2050.4 Cross-border 
capital  flows  have  exploded,  growing  at  almost  seven  times  their  rate  when  this  club  was 
founded. Commodity markets are in the midst of a super cycle. 
Once again, it is a time of great opportunity for Canada, but navigating the cross-currents in 
the global economy will require boldness and skill. 
Allow me to expand on three consequences for Canada. 
Changing patterns of trade 
Patterns  of  trade  are  evolving  rapidly.  In  particular,  the  expanding  urban  middle  class  in 
emerging economies is having a major impact on a wide range of commodities. Whether it is 
travel,  housing  or  protein,  consumption  levels  in  major  emerging  markets  are  currently 
fractions  of  those  in  advanced  economies.5  With  convergence  still  a  long  way  off,  the 
demand  for  commodities  can  be  expected  to  remain  robust  for  some  time.  Based  on  the 
experiences  of  Japan  in  the  1960s  and  Korea  in  the  1980s,  emerging  Asia’s  energy  and 
metals intensities should gain momentum in coming years. 
Even though experience suggests that all booms are finite, this one could go on for some 
time. 
The Bank’s view is that a large, sustained increase in demand (most notably in China) is the 
primary driver of this boom. With more than three-quarters of commodities above their long-
term averages, the breadth and durability of the rally underscores this conclusion (Chart 5). 
This is not to say commodity prices will not continue to fluctuate, sometimes abruptly. Recent 
declines could reflect a re-rating of global growth prospects combined with some adjustments 
to positions of financial market participants. But these are fluctuations around high levels. 
The  reorientation  of  production  to  Asia  and  the  dramatic  increases  in  its  infrastructure 
spending  have  also  fuelled  an  export  boom  of  capital  goods,  which  is  supporting  the 
recoveries in major economies.6 This is one reason why U.S. production has led domestic 
demand.  These  exports  of  capital  goods  have  fed  the  hiring  and,  by  extension,  the 
consumption growth that has occurred.7 
Going  forward,  Canada’s  exposure  to  emerging  markets  will  be  increasingly  important.  At 
this  stage,  it  is largely derivative  (gaining  more  from  the  price  impact of  commodities  than 
                                                 
4   Adjusted for the percentage of the population in the traded-goods sector. See M. Carney, “The Implications of 
Globalization  for  the  Economy  and  Public  Policy,”  speech  delivered  to  the  British  Columbia  Chamber  of 
Commerce and the Business Council of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, 18 February 2008. 
5   See M. Carney, “The Paradigm Shifts: Global Imbalances, Policy, and Latin America,” speech delivered to the 
Inter-American Development Bank, Calgary, Alberta, 26 March 2011. 
6   During the financial crisis, U.S. machinery & equipment exports fell sharply relative to other export categories. 
The subsequent strength in growth of this category has largely been a recovery towards pre-crisis levels. It 
now sits at 54 per cent of total exports, slightly above its pre-recession share. 
7   Labour input growth in the goods sector is 28 per cent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
from broader export sales). Higher commodity prices raise profits in the primary sector, which 
in turn stimulates production and investment in that sector, as well as greater spending more 
broadly on domestically produced goods and services. 
However,  since  only  10  per  cent  of  Canada’s  exports  go  to  emerging  economies  and  our 
non-commodity  export  market  share  in  the  BRICS  has  been  almost  halved  over  the  past 
decade, activity in Canada does not benefit to the same extent as in past commodity booms 
driven by U.S. growth.8 The current situation is more akin to a supply shock for our dominant 
trading partner, with higher commodity prices acting as a net brake on growth. With oil prices 
up 50 per cent since last summer, the effect is material.9  
Increasing market share in emerging markets will require sustained efforts to develop trade, 
technical  and  academic  partnerships.  In  tandem,  Canadian  business  needs  to  improve  its 
competitiveness,  source  new  suppliers,  and  prepare  to  manage  in  a  more  volatile 
environment. 
Changing capital flows 
The second consequence of the shifting global landscape is dramatic changes in the scale, 
composition and direction of capital flows. These dynamics will have important implications 
for returns for Canadian investors, the cost of capital for our businesses, and the risks to our 
economy.  Given  the  expected  growth  differentials  between  emerging  and  advanced 
economies  and  the  substantially  underweight  positions  of  most  Canadian  investors,  the 
opportunities appear substantial. However, it will be a crowded field in the short term. 
Investors  from  advanced  economies  are  substantially  overweight  in  their  home  markets: 
advanced  economies  represent  half  of  current  global  GDP,  but  their  equity  market 
capitalization is nearly three-quarters of the global capital market. A reallocation of 5 per cent 
of  advanced-economy  portfolios  to  emerging  markets  translates  into  a  potential  flow  of 
$2 trillion, or 10 times portfolio equity flows to all emerging markets. 
Unlike Canada, which imported on average 8 per cent of GDP per year in the three decades 
before World War I, emerging markets are currently net capital exporters (Chart 6). In effect, 
there  is  a  massive  recycling  operation  under  way:  private  capital  flows  from  advanced  to 
emerging economies are being more than offset by official outflows in the opposite direction. 
While  emerging  economies  are  having  difficulties  absorbing  large  private  flows,  advanced 
economies have often misallocated surges in yield-insensitive gross claims. In Canada, as 
elsewhere,  large  capital  inflows  will  require  vigilance  from  public  authorities  and  private 
financial institutions. Financial history, particularly during times of large power shifts, is rife 
with examples of booms stoked by dumb money that turn good situations to bad. 
Moreover,  the  current  dynamics  could  have  important  effects  on  the  exchange  rates  of 
countries like Canada. With some countries managing their exchange rates and restricting 
capital  inflows,  pressure  for  U.S.-dollar  depreciation  is  re-directed  to  freely  floating 
currencies.  As  well,  the  stock-flow  problem  of  investors  looking  to  rebalance  portfolios 
towards  emerging  markets  could  lead  them  to  invest  in  proxies  such  as  Australia  and 
Canada.  Finally,  the  desire  of  major  reserve  holders  to  diversify  their  portfolios  provides 
additional  support.  With  financial  market  participants  trying  to  ride  these  trends,  volatility 
could become excessive. 
                                                 
8   BRICS refers to Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa. 
9   All else being equal, the IMF estimates that a 10 per cent increase in oil prices, reduces U.S. growth by about 
0.2 to 0.4 per cent. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The imperative of macro stability 
In this environment, domestic macro stability is paramount. 
Sustained fiscal adjustment is now required in most advanced economies. Debt-to-GDP in 
G-7 countries is now the highest since the Second World War. The Age of Austerity is not a 
slogan but a timetable. 
The  task  is  enormous  (Chart  7).  Stabilizing  debt  will  require  increases  in  the  primary 
balances of between 8 and 11 per cent of GDP for the United States, the United Kingdom 
and Spain. Moreover, these forecasts assume that nominal interest rates will be roughly the 
same level as nominal growth rates. However, if markets begin to lose patience, higher rates 
will ensue and the required adjustment will be even larger.10 
Canada is one of the few advanced economies on a path to avoid this outcome. However, 
despite  this  crucial  advantage,  we  cannot  fully  insulate  ourselves  from  the  spillovers  from 
others. Fiscal slippage by some major countries may increase interest rates for all. Moreover, 
experience suggests that when debt exceeds 90 per cent of GDP (as it will for most of our 
trading partners), growth slows, with predictable consequences for our exports.11 
In the extreme, if fiscal consolidation abroad is delayed too long, investors may even call into 
question  the  existence  of  a  risk-free  asset.  This  would  have  far-reaching  consequences, 
including  less-diversified  portfolios,  higher  risk  premia  across  asset  classes  and  greater 
asset market volatility.12 The resulting higher borrowing costs for individuals and firms would 
have broad-based implications for capital allocation and economic growth.13 
In the end, given these risks, all countries should follow the Toronto G-20 accord to halve 
their deficits by 2013 and stabilize their respective debt-to-GDP ratios by 2016. 
Implications for monetary policy in Canada 
In this volatile world, the best contribution that monetary policy can make is to keep inflation 
low, stable and predictable. The outlook for inflation in Canada is importantly influenced by 
current manifestations of some of the longer-term trends I have mentioned. 
Following the depths of the crisis, Canadian domestic demand grew very strongly, supported 
by  highly  stimulative  fiscal  and  monetary  policy.  Now,  aggregate  demand  is  rebalancing 
towards  business  investment  and  net  exports  and  away  from  government  and  household 
spending. However, the relative weakness in the U.S. economy, our under-representation in 
emerging  markets,  and  our  competitiveness  challenges  will  likely  weigh  on  export 
performance for some time. 
While  underlying  inflation  is  relatively  subdued,  the  Bank  expects  that  sharp  increases  in 
energy prices (when combined with ongoing changes in provincial indirect taxes) will keep 
total  CPI  inflation  above  3  per  cent in  the  short  term,  as  was  the  case  in  March, before  it 
returns to the 2 per cent target by the middle of 2012. Core inflation is expected to rise to 
2 per cent over the same period, as excess supply in the economy is slowly absorbed, labour 
compensation  growth  remains  modest,  productivity  recovers  and  inflation  expectations 
remain well anchored. 
                                                 
10   A 2 per cent increase in interest rates could require another 4 per cent of GDP fiscal adjustment for some 
countries. 
11   C. M. Reinhart and K. Rogoff, “Growth in a Time of Debt,” American Economic Review 100, No. 2 (May 2010): 
573–578. 
12   A. Damodaran, “Into the Abyss: What if nothing is risk free?” (2010). Available at: 
<http://pages.stern.nyu.edu/~adamodar/>. 
13   F. Black, “Capital market equilibrium with restricted borrowing,” Journal of Business 45, no. 3 (1972): 444–455. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Data  received  since  the  April  decision  have  generally  supported  the  Bank’s  near-term 
outlook. Recent inflation and employment have been modestly stronger; auto sales and retail 
purchases  have  been  a  touch  weaker.  Indicators  have  been  consistent  with  continued, 
strong business investment. 
The  possibility  of  greater  momentum  in  household  borrowing  and  spending  in  Canada 
represents  an  upside  risk  to  inflation  in  Canada.  The  persistent  strength  of  the  Canadian 
dollar  could  create  even  greater  headwinds  for  our  economy,  putting  additional  downward 
pressure on inflation in Canada. 
The Bank’s 1 per cent target for the overnight rate leaves considerable monetary stimulus in 
place, consistent with achieving the 2 percent inflation target in an environment of material 
excess  supply  in  Canada.  Any  further  reduction  in  monetary  stimulus  would  need  to  be 
carefully considered. 
Conclusion 
The lessons of the past century would serve us well in this one. 
As Barry Eichengreen observed, “Global shifts have almost always fanned economic conflict, 
created problems for economic management, and heightened diplomatic tensions.”14 
Challenges for economic management can be addressed by economic flexibility and sound 
macro  policy.  Canada’s  fiscal  strength  and  monetary  policy  credibility  represent  crucial 
advantages that must be preserved. 
Our commitment to openness should drive us not only to create new markets but also to help 
secure  the  new  economic  order.  That  is  why  we  are  investing  so  heavily  in  current  G-20 
efforts to develop a framework for open capital flows and reforms for more resilient financial 
systems.  That  is  why  we  are  working  to  help guide  the  multilateral  cooperation  and  policy 
coordination required to support the global recovery. That is why we are trying to convince 
others to follow the lessons we learned in the last century, so that we can all realise the great 
promise of this one. 
This  is  how  we  can  best  fulfill  Laurier’s  vision,  expressed  in  his  inaugural  address  to  this 
Club, when he called for a century “filled” by Canada.15 
                                                 
14   B.  Eichengreen,  “Global  Shifts,”  Paper  presented  at  the  Bank  of  Finland  200th  Anniversary  Conference, 
Monetary Policy Under Resource Mobility, held in Helsinki, Finland, 5?6 May 2011 
15   Laurier  said,  “Canada  has  been  modest  in  its  history,  although  its  history,  in  my  estimation,  is  only 
commencing. It is commencing in this century. The 19th century was the century of the United States. I think 
we  can  claim  that  it  is  Canada  that  shall  fill  the  20th  century.”  Canadian  Club  of  Ottawa,  Ottawa,  Ontario, 
18 January 1904. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
