Andreas Dombret: Global reforms and the market economy system 
Welcome address by Dr Andreas Dombret, Member of the Executive Board of the Deutsche 
Bundesbank, at the reception given by the Deutsche Bundesbank at the Annual Congress of 
the Verein für Socialpolitik, Frankfurt am Main, 6 September 2011. 
 Welcome 
1. 
Ladies and gentlemen, members of the Verein für Socialpolitik, 
On  behalf  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  I  would  like  to  warmly  welcome  you  to  this 
reception. I am especially delighted to accept the role of host at the Bundesbank’s reception 
once again this year. 
The  Bundesbank  is  a  true  friend  and  supporter  of  the  Verein  für  Socialpolitik  –  and  not 
without a certain degree of self-interest. The Bundesbank considers science and research to 
be fields of great importance, since the work of central banks is today – more than ever – 
research and knowledge-based. Time and again, research work has been the starting point 
for  central  bank  policy  decisions.  Conversely,  problems  we  are  currently  witnessing  in  the 
central banks’ various areas of operation stimulate new research projects. Moreover, central 
banks  offer  an  attractive  research  environment.  I  am  therefore  convinced  that  a  close 
exchange with research institutions and universities benefits all concerned.  
The Bundesbank maintains contacts and works together with a wide range of institutions and 
academics  at  the  Goethe  University.  One  such  example  is  the  Institute  for  Monetary  and 
Financial Stability; it is financed by the Monetary Stability Foundation, which in turn is run by 
the Bundesbank. But cooperation also takes place on a less formal level, for instance with 
the Center for Financial Studies and the Graduate School here in Frankfurt, to name but two 
examples. 
Lessons from the crisis – comments on the G20 agenda 
2. 
The  topic  of  this  year’s  congress  is  “The  order  of  the  world  economy:  Lessons  from  the 
crisis”, and the scope of the programme demonstrates the range of the related questions and 
answers. 
What are the right lessons to be learned from the crisis? This question was the subject of 
debate even before the first escalation of the crisis, namely the collapse of Lehman Brothers 
in  September  2008.  Initially,  it  was  thought  by  more  than  just  a  few  that  technical 
improvements in financial market regulation – notably concerning the securitisation market – 
would be a sufficient response to the crisis.  
However, when the most severe global economic crisis in decades took hold in the autumn 
of 2008, two points became obvious. First, reforms must be more broadly based in order to 
make  the  world  economy  and  the  global  financial  system  more  robust  and  crisis-resistant, 
thereby  reducing  the  scale  and  the  frequency  of  future  crises.  And  second,  intelligent  and 
consistent  reforms  of  the  economic  framework  can  only  be  achieved  through  global 
cooperation. 
Despite  –  or  perhaps  precisely  because  of  –  the  need  for  reforms,  there  is  a  not 
inconsiderable risk that policymakers will make decisions which are difficult to reconcile with 
principles of a market economy. Those who are already sceptical about the market economy 
system and about globalisation, and who believe the current crisis to be the result of market 
failure rather than political failure, may even welcome this. In my opinion, however, measures 
that  boil  down  to  protectionism,  continuous  direct  market  intervention  or  more  extensive 
macroeconomic  fine-tuning  are  the  wrong  answers  to  the  crisis.  Instead,  the  regulatory 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
framework needs to be adjusted in such a way that the focus is again put more squarely on 
market-economy principles such as individual responsibility and private liability. The current 
sovereign debt crisis and its background serve as a strong reminder both of the limits and 
pitfalls of supranational economic policy cooperation and of the disciplinary effect of market 
signals, incomplete though that effect may have been prior to the crisis. 
At institutional level, considerable progress has been made since the outbreak of the crisis. 
For example, the G20 has assumed the role of predominant international forum for financial 
policy. The Financial Stability Forum was expanded to become the Financial Stability Board, 
with a significantly widened range of tasks and members, and is a key driver of the reform of 
financial market regulation. Within the European Union, too, institutional consequences were 
taken  in  the  wake  of  the  crisis.  A  European  System  of  Financial  Supervisors  was  set  up, 
comprising supervisory authorities for banking, insurance and securities markets, to achieve 
closer cooperation in European financial supervision, as well as the European Systemic Risk 
Board,  or  ESRB  for  short.  The  ESRB  represents  the  first  time  that  macroprudential 
surveillance  has  been established at  European  level.  The  central  banks  of  Europe  have  a 
vital part to play here because of the expertise they possess. 
It is at the global level that, in some cases, widely diverging ideas on the role of economic 
policy  collide.  Occasionally  we  experience  joint  commitment  to  the  principles  of  free  and 
open markets, only to find that effectively implementing reforms is a good deal more difficult. 
The G20 agenda clearly demonstrates that. It features a framework for strong, sustainable 
and  balanced  economic  growth,  more  stringent  regulation  of  the  international  financial 
system and the reform of the international monetary system including the role of the IMF.  
The  objective  of  the  framework  –  strong,  sustainable  and  balanced  economic  growth  –  is 
surely undisputed. In addition, a process was launched on the basis of which G20 economies 
can assess each other’s macroeconomic policies. Through this Mutual Assessment Process 
(or MAP), member states report on the implementation of their respective political agenda in 
terms of their shared goal. Beneficial though a peer review of this kind may be, it must not 
become a back door for macroeconomic fine-tuning. 
That  may  already  be  reflected  in  the  selection  and  design  of  the  indicators  used  for  the 
assessment.  For  instance,  in  the  first  stage  of  the  “assessment  of  external  sustainability” 
within  the  MAP,  a  specified  set  of  indicators  is  observed  which  are  intended  to  identify 
macroeconomic  imbalances.  This  procedure  would  appear,  initially,  to  be  an  appropriate 
means of filtering for more precise analysis in the second stage. For instance, no one would 
deny  that  persistent  current  account  imbalances  pose  a  problem.  But  it  is  not  clear  why 
current account surpluses should be dealt with in the same way as deficits – symmetry of 
statistics does not imply symmetry of causes and risks. 
In  this  context,  the  economic  policy  implications  are  also  the  subject  of  contentious  debate. 
Besides the outright rejection of pronounced positive or negative current-account balances, the 
Bundesbank takes a dim view, in particular, of endeavours to reduce such balances by direct 
political  intervention.  Current  account  positions  are  not  to  be  condemned  per  se,  especially 
when – as in the case of Germany – they result from market processes and make sense given 
the  demographic  changes  that  are  underway.  More  important  and  lasting  effects  would  be 
achieved  by  eliminating  barriers  to  an  endogenous  adjustment  of  current  account  balances, 
such as pegging exchange rates at levels which are difficult to justify in terms of fundamentals. 
But focussing on mere balances and thresholds tends to deflect attention from such topics. 
Considerable progress has already been made in financial market regulation. And given that 
weaknesses in regulation were one of the main reasons for the financial crisis, this was, in 
my opinion, a matter of priority. Of course, mention must be made of the reform of the capital 
rules – also known as Basel III – which will lead to a quantitative and qualitative improvement 
of banks’ capital and, as a result, increase their loss absorbency capacity. The more losses 
the banks’ investors can and must bear themselves, the lower the danger that the taxpayer 
will again have to come to the rescue. At the same time, the phenomenon of systemically 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
important financial institutions shows that Basel III cannot be the final step. Supplementary 
rules for dealing with the “too big to fail” problem must follow and are at the top of the reform 
agenda,  along  with  the  even  more  complex  monitoring  and,  where  necessary,  regulatory 
treatment of the shadow banking system.  
One major milestone was certainly the decision taken by the Group of Governors and Heads 
of Supervision on 25 June of this year. The oversight body of the Basel Committee agreed 
on  key  procedures  for  dealing  with  global  systemically  important  financial  institutions.  In 
future, these banks will be subject to additional capital surcharges ranging between 1 and 2½ 
percentage points depending on their degree of systemic importance. This will better enable 
companies to price the economic cost of – or any further increase in – systemic importance 
into  their  calculations.  In  my  view,  disincentives  such  as  these  are  generally  preferable  to 
“hard” structural interventions such as explicit size limits. 
A third topic on the G20 agenda that I would like to touch upon is the discussion on reforming 
the  international  monetary  system.  This  is  a  very  multifaceted  topic  ranging  from  the 
treatment of capital flows, the appropriate level of foreign reserves and the strengthening of 
IMF  surveillance  to  the  future  role  of  the  International  Monetary  Fund.  The  last-mentioned 
point, for example, concerns whether considerably more funds should be placed at the IMF’s 
disposal and global financial safety nets created under the direction of the IMF. In this way, 
financial aid could be granted more easily and under more lenient conditions than in the past.  
Like many other IMF members, the Bundesbank is critical of these endeavours. There is no 
disputing the major role played by the IMF in, for example, providing analytical insight into 
the  crisis  and  managing  adjustment  programmes.  However,  global  financial  safety  nets 
without  adequate  conditionality  would  weaken  rather 
financial 
responsibility of the individual countries. Particularly in light of the sovereign debt crisis, we 
consider  this  strategy  unsuitable  as  a  means  of  making  the  international  monetary  and 
financial system more resilient. Moreover, central banks’ monetary policy autonomy would be 
substantially restricted if the IMF were to become a “world central bank” or the global lender 
of last resort – which is what almost unlimited liquidity provision would in fact mean: for the 
IMF,  unlike  central  banks,  cannot  itself  create  liquidity.  Consequently,  the  national  central 
banks of countries whose currencies are part of the basket of special drawing rights would be 
required to provide liquidity, whatever the amount.  
than  strengthen 
the 
Conclusion 
3. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The financial and debt crisis is, unfortunately, far from over. This was made abundantly clear 
again  this  summer.  I  have  deliberately  disregarded  current  actions  to  cope  with  the  crisis, 
focussing instead on lessons from the crisis and casting a sceptical eye on some aspects of 
the global reform agenda. Let it be understood that the Bundesbank certainly does not reject 
this agenda, since it addresses the areas that need to be addressed; moreover, reforms are 
crucial to establishing more solid foundations for the global economy. 
However,  it  is  important  to  avoid  measures  which  hamper  or  prevent  market-economy 
processes without recognisably reinforcing stability. Blind faith in the market lost its appeal, 
at the latest, with the onset of the crisis. Yet this does not mean that statism and government 
control are the right answers to the crisis. The cost of attempts to achieve politically desirable 
market results and structures is likely to be high – indeed, too high. The prime objective of 
the global reforms ought to be to identify weaknesses in the existing regulatory framework 
and  to  adjust  the  framework  accordingly.  In  this  admittedly  often  lengthy  and  arduous 
process,  the  Bundesbank  sees  itself  in  the  role  of  committed  advocate  and  constructive 
admonisher. 
Thank you very much for your attention. I wish you an enjoyable evening at the Deutsche 
Bundesbank’s reception here at the Goethe University in Frankfurt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
