Christian Noyer: Evolution of the regulation in Europe and in the United 
States – convergence or divergence? 
Keynote address by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of 
the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  to  the  Paris-Europlace 
Financial Forum, New York, 18 April 2011. 
 Regarding achievements in financial regulation: What has been completed so far? 
First, at the G20 level, the reform on OTC derivatives; 
Second, the Basel Committee work for banks (Basel 3); 
And third, the accounting reforms by the IASB and the FASB. 
One of the most visible regulatory changes is the reform to address weakness 
Strengthening financial regulation has been high on the agenda of the G20 since Pittsburgh 
in October 2008. Much has already been achieved both at the international level especially 
through  the  Basel  Committee  for  Banking  Supervision  but  also  on  national  level  with  the 
Dodd-Frank  Act  in  the  US  and  the  pending  regulation  for  market  infrastructures  in  the 
European Union.  
It is fair to say that the evolution of the regulation in Europe and in the United States has not 
always followed the same path in the past. At a time when our regulations are completely 
revisited and when many restructurations are taking place in the finance industry, rigorous 
consistency  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic  is  clearly  needed  if  we  want  to  avoid  regulatory 
arbitrages  and  uneven  level  playing  field  which  would  be  the  seeds  for  inefficiencies  and 
future disappointments. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  briefly  discuss  the  achievements  on  reforms  of  financial 
regulation.  Then  I  will  highlight  some  existing  discrepancies  between  European  and  US 
regulatory frameworks that should be addressed. 
I. 
Three main issues warrant specific attention: 
– 
– 
– 
1.1 
in OTC derivatives markets  
Although  they  were  not  at  the  origin  of  the  crisis,  they  certainly  and  conspicuously 
aggravated systemic stresses in a weakened global financial system. 
The forthcoming European Market Infrastructure Regulation – commonly called “EMIR” – as 
well as the Dodd Frank Act is both of paramount importance in order to fulfill the Pittsburgh’s 
commitments  made  by  G-20  leaders.  I  see  as  particularly  important  the  increase  in 
transparency, the prevention of systemic risk, the promotion of financial stability. 
In  order  to  meet  these  objectives,  both  regulations  do  introduce  mandatory  reporting  of 
derivative  transactions  to  trade  repositories  as  well  as  mandatory  clearing  for  eligible 
standardized transactions. 
Both regulations do take into account the fact that a mandatory clearing obligation may also 
increase  the  systemic  importance  of  clearing  houses.  Indeed,  both  regulations  introduce 
more stringent organizational, managerial and prudential requirements in order to ensure that 
those clearing houses are safe and sound and comply at all times with those requirements. 
The fact that both regulations are overall consistent and support the same objectives 
is of crucial importance and it is a first achievement for financial stability. 
Nevertheless, it is only a first step, and implementation measures have still to be elaborated 
by European and American competent authorities and, as recalled by a popular saying: as 
usual “the devil is in the details”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Therefore, it is of the uttermost importance to further encourage cooperation and exchange 
of information between the European and American competent authorities. I will come back 
on this issue later on. 
1.2 
Concerning  the  recent  evolutions  of  the  banking  regulation,  let  me  first  point 
out that, to me, the Basel 3 package constitutes a very significant advance that will in the 
long run strengthen the prudential framework for banks. The main message I would like to 
emphasize today is that Basel 3 is a balanced reform, in the sense that it is both ambitious 
and cautious. 
The scope of risks captured by the Basel framework has been enhanced very significantly. 
Banks’ capacity to absorb losses has been magnified by more than three times if, beyond the 
higher  level,  you  account  for  the  improvements  in  the  quality  of  capital.  Some  incentives 
towards excessive risk-taking have been corrected, through higher capital requirements for 
riskier  activities,  notably  those  related  to  re-securitization,  and  also  through  new  rules  for 
compensation policies. A leverage ratio will be introduced that will act as a backstop, and not 
a substitute, to risk-weighted regulation.  
Besides,  I  believe  that,  with  Basel  3,  some  important  work  of  harmonization  has  already 
been done. For instance, we now have a far more stringent and more harmonized definition 
of  regulatory  capital.  The  need  for  common  and  internationally  harmonized  capital  and 
liquidity requirements has been broadly recognized and will be made operational in the near 
term. 
Basel  3  represents  therefore  an  ambitious  goal.  At  the  same  time,  it  has  been  set  in  a 
cautious  way  in  order  not  to  impact  the  financing  of  the  economy  and  the  global  growth. 
Those latter points are the reasons for the rather long phasing in, that has been put in place 
by  the  Basel  Committee.  This  phasing  in  period  should  also  enable  countries  that  did  not 
move to Basel 2 – namely the US –, to implement Basel 3 at the same pace than European 
banks.  
As a matter of fact, I consider it essential that implementation of this new framework both 
in Europe and in the US be concomitant – and exhaustive and I am far from being the 
only one. As a matter of fact, experience shows that if a reform is not implemented globally, 
weaknesses remain. The American administration is very positive and determined about it, 
so I trust that can be done. Failure to implement Basel 3 in a globally consistent way would 
lead to a competitive race to the bottom and may thus plant the seeds for another crisis. 
1.3 
since the crisis is the accounting framework. 
Following the impetus of the G20 and the Financial Stability Board, there is a current trend in 
accounting reform for reducing the scope for mark-to-market and for moving from an incurred 
loss model to a forward looking model of provisioning. In particular, both the IFRS and the 
US GAAP will include an amortized cost category for financial assets such as loans. In my 
view, these types of changes in the accounting rules constitute the first, and to my mind the 
most powerful line of defense to limit the procyclicality brought forward by the crisis. 
I also want to point that even we if are witnessing some significant progress between the two 
sets of accounting standards, I am convinced that further convergence is needed. 
II. 
Indeed,  when  it  comes  to  the  sources  of  differences  and  discrepancies 
between US and European regulation frameworks, I’d like to bring to your attention the 
following issues: 
– 
Last but not least, another area in which significant progress has been made 
Regarding  OTC  derivatives,  further  consistency  at  technical  and  implementation 
level is key in order to avoid regulatory arbitrage; 
The convergence between IFRS and US GAAP is particularly needed to allow for a 
level-playing  field  implementation  of  some  regulatory  requirements,  such  as  a 
leverage ratio, over different jurisdictions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 2 
 Regarding the OTC derivatives reform, there is a great degree of parallelism in the 
2.1 
EU and US approaches, but issues arise as the details are worked out. 
First of all, regulators have been mandated to make important determinations, such as which 
derivatives  may  still  be  traded  over  the  counter  or  which  participants  could  be  granted 
exemptions in clearing obligations. It is obviously essential that our regulatory efforts result in 
similar solutions so as to avoid creating arbitrage opportunities. 
Second, the scope of possible mutual recognition regimes for trade repositories and clearing 
houses should be carefully assessed in order to obtain a fair reciprocal treatment. The basic 
principle  is  fairly  simple:  a  third  country  trade  repository  or  clearing  house  could  service 
participants  or  markets  of  other  countries  provided  that  the  legal  and  supervisory 
arrangements  are  deemed  equivalent  and  that  international  cooperation  arrangements  are 
established. But equivalence is not really easy to assess and one could understand a more 
conservative approach based on a systematic registration. Indeed, under such a regime, a 
third country trade repository or clearing house servicing participants or markets of another 
country would have to be registered by the competent authorities of that country and, once 
registered, would have to be subject to regulations and to on-site inspections, in addition to 
the domestic ones. 
While,  in  order  to  decrease  the  risk  of  burdensome  and  inefficient  regulatory  overlap,  the 
position  held  in  the  European  EMIR  regulation  proposal  is  to  support  mutual  recognition 
regimes,  registration  regimes  do  remain  implemented  in  other  major  jurisdictions;  in 
particular, in the US as foreseen in the Dodd Frank Act that applies to activities outside the 
US that have a “direct and significant connection with activities in, or effect on, commerce of 
the United States.” In practice this may mean that non-US entities would become subject to 
the requirement of the DFA, unless an exemption is granted. In my view, the US regulation 
and  the  subsequent  registration  to  US  authorities  should  not  lead  European  entities  to  be 
subject to a redundant or a double regulation. 
The  issue  of  access  to  the  information  stored  in  trade  repositories  is  also  particularly 
sensitive.  One  can  easily  understand  that  if  the  national  supervisory  bodies  keep  both  full 
access  to  the  locally  registered  TR  and  full  control  of  the  access  granted  to  foreign 
supervisors, we will rapidly conclude that we need one TR per asset class and per country, 
which  will  clearly  be  sub-optimal  from  a  supervisory  point  of  view,  since  we  need  a 
consolidation  of  the  risks,  and  from  an  industrial  point  of  view  with  an  increased  cost  for 
everybody.  
Hence,  it  is  crucial  to  continue  our  common  discussions  with  the  American  authorities  in 
order  to  limit  redundancies  and  inconsistencies,  of  information  decrease  the  risks  of 
regulatory  arbitrage  or  overlaps,  whilst  our  common  objective  remains  the  safety  and 
soundness  of  financial  market  infrastructures.  Constructive  dialogue  between  rule  making 
agencies is essential. 
2.2 
In the field of regulatory and accounting standards, I would like to point out that 
convergence  is  highly  needed  in  order  to  allow  users  of  financial  reporting,  especially 
regulators, analysts, and market participants to draw relevant comparisons between banks. 
– 
Firstly,  let  me  say  briefly  that  the  largest  European  banks  have  strengthened 
their robustness during the last two years and are, at least, as robust as their 
US peers1: 
• 
The  top  European  Banks  have  seen  their  revenues  increase  by  8.6%  on 
average from 2009 to 2010 (up 2.5% for the main US banks over the same 
                                                 
1  The  following  figures  are  based  on  calculations  made  with  a  sample  of  17  large  European  and  American 
banks: JP Morgan, Wells Fargo, Bank of America, Citigroup, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, HSBC, RBS, 
Barclays, Santander, BBVA, BNPP, SG, Groupe Crédit Agricole, UBS, Crédit Suisse, Deutsche Bank.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 period). All banks have benefited from a decline in their costs of risk (–43% for 
US banks and –30% for European banks, from 2009 to 2010). But in absolute 
terms,  the  cost  of  risks  amounts  to  EUR  63  bn  for  the  top  4  US  banks,  as 
opposed to only EUR 58 bn for the 11 largest European banks. 
Solvency  ratios  have  significantly  improved  in  Europe,  banks  have  retained 
earnings  and  increased  capital  through  various  ways  (new  equity  issues, 
dividends paid in new shares); 
 •  With  Tier  1  ratios  comprised  between  10%  and  almost  18%  for  the  main 
European banks, they are equivalent to the range of 11%–16% of American 
banks. 
Regarding  now  the  core  Tier  1  ratios,  which  is  the  measure  displayed  by 
banks  for  the  markets,  they  are  also  pretty  equivalent.  Again,  with  ratios 
ranging between 8.5% and 15.3%, the main European banks are as solid as 
US banks (with ratios between 8.4% and 13.3%). 
   Secondly,  the  differences  in  the  leverage  ratios  levels  mainly  result  from 
accounting discrepancies that can lead to particularly misleading comparisons: 
• 
If we observe the leverage multiples, it is true that the figures displayed by 
US banks (between 10% and 14%) are lower than those of most of European 
banks. For the latter, the range is much wider (between 15% and 25%). 
But  we  all  know  that  the  measurement  of  the  leverage  ratios  is  significantly 
impacted  by  different  accounting  treatments,  the  main  differences  between 
IFRS and US GAAP arising from the netting of derivatives and repos. 
The example of Deutsche Bank is a case in point to illustrate this impact. At 
the end of 2010, the institution presented total assets of EUR 1,900 bn. But, 
according  to  the  bank,  on  an  adjusted  basis,  which  reflected  netting  of 
derivatives  and  certain  other  balance  sheet  items,  total  assets  were  EUR 
1,200  bn.  In  addition,  according  to  some  analysts,  the  grossing-up  of 
derivatives assets alone would create a rise in total assets comprised between 
42% and of 129% for the largest US banks. 
The  discrepancies  in  the  offsetting  of  transactions  have  been  outlined  by  the  Financial 
Stability Board. As a result, the two leading accounting Boards have swiftly reacted in putting 
this topic on their convergence agenda. I welcome this joint project and wish that the two 
Boards,  after  the  consultation  period  with  their  respective  constituents,  will  be  able  to 
publish a common standard that will facilitate the implementation of a global leverage ratio. 
2.3 
More generally, the differences in accounting standards between IFRS and US 
GAAPs have been a matter of concern from the beginning of the crisis.  
Since  April  2009,  the  G20  has  continuously  asked  the  two  Boards  to  converge  towards  a 
single  set  of  high  quality  global  accounting  standards  and  to  complete  their  convergence 
project by 2011 with the aim of remedying the major weaknesses identified during the crisis. 
The standard setting Boards have made progress, but standards have still to be finalised 
and this is not an easy path.  
– 
Regarding  the  impairment  of  financial  assets,  the  two  boards  have  eventually 
agreed on a joint project based on a forward looking model that should allow for the 
building  up  of  provisions  at  an  earlier  stage  of  the  life  of  the  portfolio.  It  is  of  the 
outmost importance to have a converged standard to avoid any accounting arbitrage 
across the Ocean and to facilitate international comparisons between global banks. 
A  balanced  standard  should  be  able  to  dampen  the  effects  of  an  economic  down 
turn.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Concerning  the  classification  of  instruments,  the  importance  given  to  the 
business model of the banks has led to recognize an amortized cost category for a 
broader range of instruments, and to reconsider the extensive use of fair value in the 
IFRS standards. Nevertheless, convergence between the IASB and the FASB is 
far  from  being  achieved.  Even  if  the  US  standard  setter  has  recently  set  an 
amortised cost category, the latter would have a narrower scope than in IFRS and 
the overall architecture of the classification model is not yet finalised.  
The SEC is expected to give its decision on the adoption of IFRS by the end of this 
year.  Definitely,  the  easiest  path  to  fill  in  the  gap  between  the  IFRS  and  the  US 
GAAPs would be the adoption of IFRS by the US. 
 Let me conclude. 
– 
The various G20 statements set clear directions and deadlines. Looking ahead, our 
challenge is now to specify the rules and implement them. The main challenge for 
regulators  now  lies  in  finalizing  the  rules  and  incentives  that  will  be  conducive  to 
reaching  these  targets.  Thanks  to  the  agreement  reached  by  G20  leaders, 
ambitious  regulatory  reforms  and  markets  initiatives  are  now  under  way.  I 
recognize that the regulation of global finance is a considerable challenge: we have 
to  preserve  innovation  while  setting  the  limits  on  the  capacity  of  instruments, 
markets or models to weaken the whole system. 
Our  goal  now  is  to  ensure  consistency  across  countries  of  the  detailed 
regulations  while  keeping  the  momentum  of  the  reform.  Indeed,  OTC 
derivatives  are  a  global  market,  large  banks  are  not  local  players  and  accounting 
standards  should  be  a  common  language.  Any  discrepancies  in  the  regulatory 
frameworks  would  be  easily  arbitraged,  creating  loopholes  in  the  system.  In  that 
perspective, we clearly need to strengthen our coordination. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
ANNEXES :  
Niveaux des ratios de solvabilité et de levier des principales banques 
européennes et américaines 
1. 
 Ratios Tier 1 des principales banques européennes 
Ratios Tier 1 des principales banques 
américaines 
Source : Rapports financiers des banques 
 Ratios core Tier 1 des principales banques européennes 
Ratios common Tier 1 des principales 
banques américaines 
Source : Rapports financiers des banques 
* Pour BNPP : common Tier 1 ratio 
** Pour BBVA : core capital ratio 
 
Si le Tier 1 est défini par la réglementation, le ratio de fonds propre « core » ne l’est pas.  
Selon les pays et même selon les banques, on parle de core Tier 1 ou de common Tier 1 ou 
encore de core capital ratio. Ces termes ne recouvrent pas toujours la même définition des 
fonds  propres  car  il  ne  s’agit  pas  d’une  mesure  réglementaire  mais  d’un  indicateur 
davantage destiné au marché, sur lequel les banques disposent de plus de liberté pour son 
calcul et sa communication. 
A  noter  que  même  le  core  Tier  1  et  le  common  Tier  1  ne  sont  pas  toujours  définis  de  la 
même manière par les banques. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Levier des principales banques européennes 
Levier des principales banques 
américaines 
Source : Rapports financiers des banques (calculs Banque de France - SEMASFI) 
  2. 
Impact de la non compensation (netting) des opérations sur les dérivés sur le 
total bilan et les leviers des banques US 
 
Augmentation du total bilan si non 
compensation des opérations 
sur dérivés (hors repos) 
Impact du netting sur les ratios de levier des 
banques 
Source : Risk.net (d’après Credit Suisse et Fitch) 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
