Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Aachener Zeitung on the occasion of 
the awarding of the 2011 International Charlemagne Prize of Aachen  
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  on  the 
occasion of the awarding of the 2011 International Charlemagne Prize of Aachen, conducted 
by  Ms  Birgit  Marschall, Mr  Bernd  Mathieu  and Mr  Peter  Pappert  of  the  Aachener  Zeitung, 
and published on 27 May 2011. 
 Question: Mr President, people in Europe are worried about the debt crisis in the euro 
area. What is your take on the current situation?  
Trichet: We are experiencing a dramatic global financial crisis, which is also impacting on the 
euro  area.  This  is  the  deepest  recession  since  the  Second  World  War.  All  the  advanced 
economies – the United States, Japan and Europe – must draw lessons from it. The outlook 
for the monetary union is favourable: the euro and prices are stable. The average inflation 
rate in the euro countries over the last 12 years has been just under 2%, and in Germany it 
has been as low as 1.5%; this is a better result than was achieved during the 50 years of the 
Deutsche Mark.  
Question: So where does the problem lie? 
Trichet:  The  real  problem  in  the  euro  area  is  that  the  economic  union  –  the  “E”  in  
EMU –between the euro countries has not been properly implemented. There is a need for 
much improvement on that score. The most important lesson from the crisis is that the euro 
countries must coordinate their economic and financial policies better – and do so urgently. 
Question: We are a long way from there, look at Greece.  
Trichet:  In  recent  years  the  EU  governments  have  ignored  the  rules  of  the  Stability  and 
Growth  Pact.  Unfortunately  the  large  countries  –  i.e.  France,  Germany  and  Italy  –  tried  to 
weaken  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  or  even  rescind  it  in  2004  and  2005,  when  they 
themselves were not complying with it. I expressed grave concerns at the time, because the 
letter of the Pact was weakened and the spirit of the Stability Pact was being violated. The 
weakening  of  the  Pact  had  devastating  consequences.  We  urgently  require  effective  and 
reliable governance that conforms to common economic goals. 
Question: The Heads of State or Government recently agreed on tougher rules for the 
Stability Pact. Is this enough? 
Trichet: No. We are asking the Heads of Government, the European Commission and the 
European Parliament to go further and to be far more rigorous. We need automatic sanctions 
for excessive deficits. The entire process – from the discovery of looming budget difficulties 
to  the  actual  imposition  of  penalties  –  should  be  automatic.  We  saw  in  the  past  all  the 
dangers of the complacency of governments. 
Question: Is it conceivable that a euro country might leave the single currency? 
Trichet: No, that is entirely unrealistic. There’s not even any provision for it in the EU Treaty. 
The euro area is a community that shares the same destiny: each member is dependent on 
the others. 
Question:  Why  is  the  ECB  taking  such  a  tough  stance  against  a  rescheduling  of 
Greece’s debt? 
Trichet:  The  adjustment  and  reform  programme  agreed  by  the  EU  and  the  International 
Monetary  Fund  with  Greece  does  not  envisage  restructuring.  Greece  must  implement  the 
programme fully and rigorously; this is very important to correct the errors of the past and 
pave the way for sustainable job creation. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the 
to  oversee 
fiscal  and  economic  adjustment.  Where  necessary, 
Question:  Many  Greeks  are  not  accepting  this  reform  programme  and  taking  to  the 
streets. 
Trichet:  It  is  never  easy  when  a  country  has  to  put  right  many  years  of  economic  and 
financial  mismanagement.  Greece  has  lived  beyond  its  means  for  years  while  continually 
raising public-sector pay. It is absolutely essential to reform the country so that it can stand 
on  its  own  two  feet  once  again.  It  is  in  the  Greeks’  own  best  interests  that  growth  is 
generated and jobs are created again in future.  
Question:  In  Germany,  there  is  growing  discontent  among  politicians  and  taxpayers 
about the billions upon billions of assistance. Does that worry you? 
Trichet:  When  we  decided  to  have  a  single  market  with  a  single  currency,  we  created  a 
strong  interdependence.  If  a  member  gets  into  difficulties  –  despite  the  surveillance  which 
was supposed to be exercised by the other governments – it is the responsibility of all other 
countries 
they 
can support the adjustment,  as  the  IMF  does, with  non-concessional  loans under  strict 
conditionality.  
Question:  Many  people  on  the  streets  think  otherwise.  They’ve  been  saying  things 
like: “If we give Greece even more money, then we don’t have it here at home – for tax 
cuts, for example.” What do you say to the German people? 
Trichet: I think it is certainly right to say that very strong conditionality is of the essence, and 
that the loans complementing IMF financing must be non-concessional. On the other hand, it 
would be very paradoxical for Europeans to appear less united in times of difficulty than other 
continents.  I  have  no  wish  to  moralise.  However,  in  other  parts  of  the  world  –  Asia,  for 
example  –  there  were  no  discussions  during  the  Asian  crisis.  Provided  there  is  strong 
conditionality, all over the world friends can help each other. But I would also like to say to 
the  Germans:  you  yourselves  have  every  interest  in  getting  Greece  to  adjust  its  economy 
and for it to be a stable partner in Europe and in the euro area. 
Question: Is such scepticism with regard to financial assistance “typically German”? 
Trichet: No, you also find it in other countries. 
Question: What are the main reasons for the rising inflation in the euro area? 
Trichet: The prices of oil and raw materials have risen worldwide. This is also pushing up the 
consumer  price  index  in  the  euro  area.  Our  responsibility  is  to  prevent  price-setters  and 
social partners from increasing other prices and wages in the medium term. We are there to 
prevent these second-round effects. Over the medium term prices increases will go back to 
our definition of price stability: below 2%, close to 2%. 
Question: When Chancellor Kohl paved for the way for the euro – not single-handedly, 
but  with  real  determination  –  he  saw  it  above  all  as  a  political,  not  an  economic, 
decision. Was this a key conceptual defect of the common currency? 
Trichet: That is a very direct question. The fundamental idea of having European unity has 
always been to guarantee peace, prosperity and stability on our continent. From the outset 
this has included the idea of a common market. Europeans’ efforts to join closely together 
and  create  a  single  currency  have  deep  roots  in  European  politics.  Chancellor  Kohl, 
Chancellor Helmut Schmidt before him, and, with them, many other political leaders across 
Europe, pressed ahead with the project, knowing that it would combine peace and prosperity. 
Monetary Union is a resounding success. The scepticism about its capacity to maintain price 
stability  has  not  been  borne  out  at  all.  The  problem  is  that  not  everyone  has  learnt  their 
lessons from the global financial crisis. We have to re-affirm the visions of Helmut Schmidt 
and Valéry Giscard d’Estaing and of Helmut Kohl and François Mitterrand.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Question:  The  promise  of  taking  the  decisive  step  towards  political  union  with  the 
euro has not been kept. Will the promise ever be fulfilled? 
Trichet: To fulfil this promise, cooperation between the 27 EU countries, and even more so 
between the 17 euro countries, must be improved significantly. That much is obvious. Better 
coordination of fiscal and competition policy over time automatically creates greater political 
cooperation. At present each of us has his or her own opinion on the long-term outlook for 
political union in Europe. As a European citizen, I am convinced that we should head further 
down the path of significantly closer political union. However, this is not one of the European 
Central Bank’s responsibilities. Jean Monnet once commented that he was unsure what the 
European  political  institutional  framework  would  look  like  in  the  future,  but  was  sure  that 
today’s improvements would lay the foundations for the European institutional framework of 
tomorrow. 
Question:  Do we need a two-speed Europe in order to ensure that the tempo is not 
dictated by those moving forward more slowly? 
Trichet:  The  European  Treaties  make  no  such  provision.  We  have  to  insist  on  Member 
States  moving  forward  together.  However,  it  is  also  quite  clear  that  if  you  share  a  single 
currency, you must make much more of a joint effort and cooperate much more effectively on 
economic policy.  
Question: What are Europe’s basic values? 
Trichet: Europeans are deeply attached to democracy. They are deeply committed to human 
rights  and  the  market  economy.  This  is  fundamental.  Europeans  also  have  their  own 
particular way of giving the market economy a social face. This was apparent not least during 
the crisis. It seems to me that the social market economy, which the Germans are so proud 
of, was also embraced by the other countries a long time ago. As I see it, the most important 
thing is: we have a shared cultural identity which is developing from shared roots.  
Question: How is this idea of Europe being conveyed to younger people? 
Trichet:  Peace,  prosperity  and  stability  can  never  –  never  –  be  taken  for  granted.  Every 
country,  community  and  individual must  stand up  for  it  time  and  again.  As  Europeans,  we 
have more political and geostrategic reasons to forge close ties today than we did right after 
the Second World War. Back then, the United States of America was the sole major single 
market. Today we have India, China, Brazil and other emerging countries with a bright future 
in front of them. That’s good, and that’s exactly what we were aiming for 60 years ago when 
we created the World Bank. For us Europeans it also means uniting even more so as to take 
into account the existence of these new economic giants. What I would say to young people 
is: take a look at the many good reasons that we have for uniting Europe; together we can 
respond far more effectively to tomorrow’s challenges.  
Question: Your term of office as ECB President ends in October. What has been your 
most significant or most cherished experience in the course of these eight years? 
Trichet:  As  president  of  such  an  organisation,  you  are  constantly  facing  new  challenges. 
From  the  start  there  was  a  tremendous  team  spirit  throughout  the  ECB,  even  in  the  most 
difficult situations. It is gratifying to note that we do not function simply as an institution, but 
as true Europeans who are deeply attached to the historic construction that is the European 
Union. 
Question: What significance does the Charlemagne Prize have? 
Trichet:  Everyone  at  the  ECB  is  moved  and  impressed  that  we  –  especially  in  today’s 
challenging  circumstances  –  are  being  awarded  this  prize.  I  know  all  about  the  prize  and 
have  attended  in  the  past.  It  is  a  very  moving  and  impressive  celebration.  We  were  just 
talking about Europe’s roots. In Aachen, we are at the very roots of Europe. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Question: How well do you know Aachen? 
Trichet: I have been to Aachen several times. I am familiar with the big historic buildings, and 
of course with Charlemagne. At the age of ten I won a prize in a school competition: a medal, 
struck with a portrait of Charlemagne. A German emperor, a French emperor – it makes no 
difference. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
