Daniel Mminele: Global economic and financial market developments – 
implications for South Africa 
Address by Mr Daniel Mminele, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
Bank’s Financial Markets Department’s Annual Cocktail Function, Pretoria, 7 April 2011. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Good evening, ladies and gentlemen, and a sincere welcome to you all to the fifth annual 
cocktail function of the Financial Markets Department. 
As you are aware, the Financial Markets Department hosts this function both to convey its 
appreciation for the co-operation it receives from counterparties in its market operations and 
to give an update on its operations to market participants. Tonight’s function also provides an 
opportunity for us to bid farewell to our long-time colleague and friend, Dr Roelf du Plooy, 
who officially retires from the service of the Bank at the end of this month. I know that many 
of you have already met and interacted with Ms Zanele Mavuso Mbatha in her new capacity, 
but I should also like to use this opportunity to introduce her formally to market participants 
as the new head of the Financial Markets Department. She took up the role in January 2011, 
and has been working with Roelf du Plooy to facilitate a smooth transition and succession. 
Before I give you an update on the market operations of the Financial Markets Department, 
allow  me  briefly  to  touch  on  the  global  economic  and  financial  markets  backdrop  and  its 
implications for South Africa and our operations.  
Global economic and financial market developments 
2.  
Global  economic  developments  continue  to  be  characterised  by  high  levels  of  uncertainty. 
While  the  global  economic  recovery  appears  to  be  on  track,  it  remains  uneven  with  the 
advanced  economies  growing  slower  than  emerging-market  economies.  Sovereign  debt 
challenges  and  high  levels  of  unemployment  still  present  risks  to  growth  in  advanced 
economies, and many emerging-market economies have to grapple with risks of overheating 
economies and rising inflationary pressures. More recently, downside risks to growth have 
increased on the back of recent developments in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA), 
which  have  led  to  a  further  increase  in  the  oil  price,  to  more  than  double  the  levels  that 
prevailed about a year ago. Food prices have increased substantially in many countries and 
have added to the pressures being observed. It is generally anticipated that the effects of the 
earthquake in Japan on the global economy will be of a short-term nature, but until the full 
extent  of  the  damage  and  implications  of  the  nuclear  disaster  are  known,  risks  and 
uncertainty remain. 
Global  financial  markets  have  been  reflecting  these  levels  of  uncertainty  and  have  been 
experiencing  increased  levels  of  volatility,  with  the  VIX  index  spiking  to  30  index  points  in 
mid-March.  Efforts  to  try  and  find  lasting  solutions  to  the  European  sovereign  debt  crisis, 
currency  interventions  in  the  wake  of  the  Japanese  disaster,  sovereign  rating  downgrades 
and bank stress tests are all impacting on developments in financial markets. As they say, 
the only certainty in financial markets is uncertainty.  
The recent global and financial market developments are presenting challenges for monetary 
policy makers around the world, who have to ensure that they maintain credibility and protect 
macroeconomic stability by managing inflation risks, while at the same time avoiding undue 
damage  to  growth  prospects  by  possibly  acting  too  hastily  to  remove  accommodative 
policies.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Implications for South Africa 
3. 
As  a  relatively  small  and  open  economy  with  sophisticated  financial  markets,  South  Africa 
will not escape the impact of global economic and financial market developments. A third of 
South Africa’s exports of manufactured products are destined for Europe. The country sells 
commodities  to  Asia  and  has  been  witnessing  increased  exports  to  that  region.  Japan  is 
South Africa’s fourth largest trading partner, with platinum and other semi-processed metals 
being the major exports. South Africa is a significant importer of oil.  
At the conclusion of the most recent Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) meeting on 24 April 
2011, we highlighted these international developments and indicated that, based on short-
term economic indicators, the domestic growth momentum would likely be maintained. We 
lifted  our  forecast  for  economic  growth  from  3,4  to  3,7  per  cent  for  2011.  Consumption 
expenditure  –  particularly  by  households  –  is  holding  up  well,  credit  extension  figures 
released last week show a better take-up of credit by businesses, implying that the recovery 
in investment spending will pick up and that subdued growth in gross fixed capital formation 
will improve. The improved reading on the most recent Purchasing Managers Index to a level 
of 57,2, with very encouraging readings for the business activity and new order components, 
appears  to  confirm  the  favourable  outlook  for  the  manufacturing  sector.  Unfortunately,  the 
employment  subindex  confirmed  the  serious  challenges  the  country  is  facing  with  job 
creation. 
The MPC also highlighted the Bank’s view that the risks to the inflation outlook are on the 
upside, with food and administered prices – particularly oil prices – being among the biggest 
risks.  While  we  expect  to  remain  inside  the  target  range  until  the  end  of  2012,  our  most 
recent  forecast,  showing  CPI  averaging  5,7  per  cent  for  2012,  indicates  that  the  room  to 
manoeuvre is becoming less. We all witnessed another significant increase in petrol prices 
earlier this week, and while South Africa’s food price inflation is coming off a low base as a 
result  of  previous  bumper  maize  crops  and  a  favourable  exchange  rate,  Producer  Price 
Inflation (PPI) numbers show rising trends for both agricultural and manufactured food prices. 
This situation will require careful monitoring going forward. 
The MPC is committed to achieving the inflation target within the parameters of its mandate. 
However,  given  that  inflationary  pressures  are  currently  seen  to  be  mainly  of  a  cost–push 
nature and not demand-driven, any future policy action and its timing will be based on the 
MPC’s assessment of any second-round impacts.  
During the global financial markets crisis – and even now with the current risks that could 
threaten  markets  and  financial  stability  –  the  South  African  financial  markets  continue  to 
function  effectively.  We  have,  however,  experienced  capital  and  foreign-exchange  market 
volatility in line with international developments.  
When we met here about a year ago, sentiment in the domestic and international financial 
markets  improved  amid  a  plethora  of  positive  global  economic  indicators  that  pointed  to  a 
sustainable  global  economic  recovery.  The  JSE  All-Share  Index  traded  at  a  level  of  over 
29 000 points while the VIX Index declined to well below 20 index points in March 2010. The 
strong upward momentum in the domestic equity market continued until mid-February 2010, 
when  the  All-Share  Index  reached  near-record  levels.  However,  since  then,  gains  in  the 
domestic equity market  have been limited, although on a  year-to-date basis, the All-Share 
Index has increased by about 2,4 per cent. The domestic market continues to be impacted 
by negative developments in the euro zone and the MENA region, as well as global inflation 
concerns and monetary policy tightening by some emerging-market economies. In addition, 
the All-Share Index has been affected by industrial action, volatile exchange rate movements 
and sharp losses in the platinum index, following the shutdown of auto production in Japan. 
On  the  domestic  bond  market  front,  government  bond  yields  were  on  a  declining  trend  in 
March last year, supported by subdued inflation, reductions in the repo rate, the appreciation 
in the rand and improved public finances. In 2011, however, yields on domestic government 
bonds increased significantly amid increased volatility. From slightly below 7,0 per cent, the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
yield on the R157 (2016) bond increased to almost 8,0 per cent in March 2011, due largely to 
a  sell-off  by  non-residents,  increased  supply  and  expectations  of  higher  interest  rates  in 
response to rising inflationary pressures. 
After recording strong bond inflows for most of 2010, non-resident demand for South African 
bonds started to wane in October 2010. During the fourth quarter of 2010, non-residents sold 
R22 billion worth of bonds. The sell-off was attributed to a global reallocation of emerging-
market  portfolio  investment  towards  equities,  given  the  favourable  economic  backdrop  for 
this asset class and increasing policy rates in some emerging-market economies. Domestic 
factors that contributed to the sell-off in domestic bonds were related to perceptions that the 
interest rate cycle had bottomed out and to profit-taking. Nonetheless, in 2010 non-residents 
bought R53,2 billion worth of bonds; three times the amount purchased in 2009, representing 
a shift from previous trends when portfolio inflows tended to be dominated by equity inflows. 
The  strong  appetite  for  domestic  bonds  continued  to  diminish  in  2011.  Non-residents  sold 
R8,3 billion worth of bonds in the year to 6 April 2011, although we have seen significant net 
purchases  in  the  last  few  days.  Despite  net  sales  by  non-residents,  and  the  continued 
purchases of foreign exchange by the Bank, the rand has remained firm but volatile, and in 
the  process  appreciated  to  R6,6848  on  6 April  2011.  For  2010  as  a  whole,  the  rand 
appreciated  by  about  12  per  cent  against  the  US  dollar  and  by  around  10  per  cent  on  a 
trade-weighted basis. Total turnover in the domestic foreign-exchange market increased to a 
record high of almost US$20 billion in January 2011, mainly due to an increase in hedging 
activities by non-residents.  
Strong  capital  inflows  into  emerging  market  economies  (including  South  Africa)  witnessed 
during  2010  have  presented  policy-makers  with  some  challenges,  such  as  appreciating 
exchange  rates  (which  raised  concerns  regarding  the  competitiveness  of  export  markets) 
and increased sterilisation costs. In the light of these considerations, some emerging-market 
economies  made  noticeable  shifts  towards  curbing  capital  inflows  and,  hence,  currency 
appreciation.  Measures  considered  and  implemented  include  limits  being  placed  on 
government bond investment by foreigners; taxes imposed on the purchase of fixed-income 
securities  and  stocks  by  foreign  investors;  and  the  pre-announcement  of  currency  market 
intervention  programmes  in  order  to  build  foreign-exchange  reserve  balances  and  to  limit 
currency  appreciation. Other  countries  imposed  reserve  requirements  on  foreign-exchange 
swaps and forward trades conducted by non-residents, and on non-resident accounts with 
domestic banks. South Africa has carefully studied these measures, and our view is that the 
efficacy of most of them, in terms of what they were intended to achieve, has been rather 
doubtful and that such means would not be appropriate for South Africa at this stage. Any 
potential consideration of any such measures would need to be informed by our own country-
specific circumstances, which include the fact that our savings/investment imbalance makes 
us dependent on portfolio flows to finance our current-account deficit.  
Financial market operations  
3. 
The market operations conducted by the Financial Markets Department are associated with 
two of the key functions of the Bank, that is, (i) the implementation of monetary policy and 
(ii) the management of the official gold and foreign-exchange reserves. My remarks in this 
section will therefore cover open-market operations, reserves management and also touch 
on market development initiatives. 
Open-market operations 
3.1 
As you are aware, the successful conduct of the Bank’s open-market operations is essential 
for the effective implementation of monetary policy. A number of refinements to the monetary 
policy  implementation  framework,  and  measures  aimed  at  streamlining  the  daily  monetary 
policy  operations  were  identified  and  have  been  implemented  since  August  2010.  The 
changes comprised the following: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
     The  Bank  discontinued  the  practice  of  providing  estimated  ranges  of  the  weekly 
liquidity requirement and began to announce, at 9 o’clock on every business day, 
the actual liquidity requirement of the previous day, while announcing on a weekly 
basis only the average estimated weekly liquidity requirement 
As from 1 March 2011, there was no longer any need to accept Category 2 assets 
(bonds  issued  by  Eskom,  Transnet,  Trans-Caledon  Authority,  the  Development 
Bank  of  South  Africa  and  the  South  African  National  Roads  Agency)  as  eligible 
collateral for the Bank’s refinancing operations 
The  South  African  Multiple  Option  Settlement  (SAMOS)  penalty  facility  was 
abolished  after  a  new  automated  end-of-day  square-off  process  had  been 
introduced to replace the previous system of manual auctions 
The spread between rates on the standing facilities and the repo rate was widened 
from 50 to 100 basis points below and above the rep rate 
The  Bank  started  using  longer-term  foreign-exchange  swaps  with  maturities  up  to 
12 months to manage money-market liquidity more efficiently. 
The changes were intended to streamline the Bank’s daily activities in the money market and 
to enhance the participation in the SARB debenture and longer-term reverse repo auctions. 
The success of the changes made to the open-market operations resulted in an increased 
take-up of SARB debentures and reverse repos, and led to an increase in the level of the 
money-market shortage. The shortage was, on average, above R15,0 billion, with a high of 
R22  billion  on  7  March  2011,  compared  with  an  average  of  R10,0  billion  for  the  period 
August 2009 to August 2010. The phasing out of Category 2 assets as eligible collateral in 
the Bank’s refinancing operations also had no adverse impact on the yields of bonds issued 
by the state-owned enterprises concerned.  
It is also important to note that more banks are now participating in the Bank’s weekly repo. 
The number has increased from four banks to five and, more recently, to six, with a seventh 
institution also occasionally taking up a portion of the amount on offer in the weekly repo. 
The broader participation by banks in the main weekly refinancing operations is encouraging, 
and will further enhance the implementation of monetary policy.  
The  Bank  started  using  longer-term  foreign-exchange  swaps  with  maturities  of  up  to 
12 months as an instrument to manage money-market liquidity and to facilitate accelerated 
foreign-exchange purchases. The consequence of using foreign-exchange swaps is that the 
Bank  now  reflects  an  overbought  forward  position,  currently  amounting  to  approximately 
US$4,0  billion.  The  bulk  of  the  forward  position  represents  swaps  related  to  foreign-
exchange  purchases  and  the  Bank’s  ongoing  objective  of  foreign-exchange  reserves 
accumulation. 
Reserves management, including accumulation 
3.2 
Strong  capital  inflows  into  South  Africa  in  2010  provided  the  Bank  with  an  opportunity  to 
increase  the  level  of  foreign-exchange  reserves.  Gross  reserves  have  increased  by 
approximately US$9,6 billion since January 2010 to US$49,3 billion in March 2011 (with an 
increase  of  about  US$5,5  billion  recorded  in  the  first  quarter  of  2011).  The  international 
liquidity position or net reserves increased by US$5,7 billion to US$44,7 billion over the same 
period.  During  the  2010  calendar  year,  the  Bank  purchased  US$7,4  billion  for  foreign-
exchange reserves accumulation, while approximately US$3,8 billion was purchased during 
the  first  three  months  of  2011.  Going  forward,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  work  closely  with 
National  Treasury  to  continue  building  reserves.  The  Bank’s  policy  remains  that  of 
accumulating reserves and not of defending or achieving a particular level for the exchange 
rate. The exchange rate remains market-determined, and any speculation that the Bank may 
currently have a preference for a stronger currency or may have even been selling foreign-
exchange reserves is misplaced.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The Bank continues to manage the country’s official foreign-exchange reserves in a prudent 
manner,  and  has  continued  its  successful  partnership  with  its  external  private  and  official-
sector fund managers. 
Market development initiatives 
3.3 
The Financial Markets Liaison Group (FMLG) is a joint initiative between the Bank and key 
participants in the financial markets. The objective of this consultative forum is to promote the 
efficiency,  integrity  and  stability  of  South  Africa’s  financial  markets,  and  to  discuss 
international  market  and  structural  developments  that  could  affect  domestic  financial 
markets.  The  FMLG,  which  emerged  from  the  Money  Market  Liaison  Group,  has  recently 
been reconstituted and held its first meeting in November 2010.  
The  November  2010  meeting  was  preceded  by  several  meetings  of  the  sub-committees 
comprising the FMLG, namely the Money Market, Foreign Exchange and Fixed Income and 
Derivatives subcommittees, and progress on a wide range of projects was reported. These 
projects include, among others, investigating the maturities of SARB debentures and longer-
term reverse repos; the pricing of floating rate notes in the secondary market; the impact of 
algorithmic  trading  on  the  foreign-exchange  market;  the  monitoring  of  the  over-the-counter 
(OTC)  market  in  foreign-exchange  derivatives;  and  the  revision  of  reference  rates  in  the 
money  market.  A  working  group  was  also  established  to  review  credit  value  adjustments 
(CVAs) and credit support annexures (CSAs), which might impact the efficiency and liquidity 
in the interbank derivative market.  
Concluding remarks 
4.  
Let  me  conclude  by  thanking  you  for  your  co-operation  during  the  past  financial  year.  We 
may find that when we gather here next year, the financial and economic landscape may be 
vastly  different  to  what  it  is  today.  No  doubt  the  future  holds  surprises  and  interesting 
challenges in store for us, but I trust that the spirit of co-operation and co-ordination that we 
have  developed  in  our  financial  markets  over  the  years  will  allow  us  to  rise  to  these 
challenges. 
In conclusion, I should also like to thank my own colleagues, the management and staff of 
the  Financial  Markets  Department,  for  their  hard  work  and  dedication  to  the  task  at  hand, 
both for the Bank and in the interest of our financial markets. Thank you also to the staff of 
the  South  African  Reserve  Bank’s  Conference  Centre  for,  once  again,  arranging  this 
function.  
Last,  but  not  least,  I  indicated  that  we  are  saying  “goodbye”  to  Dr  Roelf  du  Plooy  who  is 
going on retirement. On behalf of all of us, I should like to wish Roelf a happy and healthy 
retirement. 
Roelf retires after many year of service at the Bank, having first joined the Bank in 1974. He 
has been head of the FMD since 2007, having occupied a number of other positions in the 
Bank. Roelf has been instrumental in the implementation of the repo-based accommodation 
system in the Bank. He was active in the development of the domestic fixed-income market 
at  the  time  when  the  Bank  was  the  market  maker  in  government  bonds  and  options  on 
government  bonds.  He  has  also  contributed  significantly  to  the  MPC,  as  one  of  the 
presenters since its inception. He has assisted in regional development initiatives and was 
an active member of various other external and internal committees.  
We thank Roelf for his good leadership and wise counsel over the years. and wish him well 
for the future.  
Thank you and enjoy the evening. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
