Mark Carney: Opening Statement for Appearance before the Standing 
Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce 
Opening Statement by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Standing 
Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, Ontario, 22 June 2011. 
 Good  afternoon,  Mr.  Chairman  and  committee  members.  Tiff  and  I  are  pleased  to  appear 
today to discuss the Bank of Canada’s analyses of the economic outlook and the stability of 
the financial system. We look forward to your questions and the discussion that follows. 
The  Bank’s  most  recent  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  economy  was  presented  in  its 
April  Monetary  Policy  Report  (MPR).  On  31  May,  the  Bank  issued  its  latest  policy  rate 
announcement. These provide the basis for my comments today. Please bear in mind that 
the Bank’s next full economic analysis will be published in the upcoming MPR, which will be 
released on 20 July 2011. 
I will also take a few moments this afternoon to outline the highlights of the Bank’s Financial 
System  Review  (FSR),  which  was  released 
this  morning.  The  FSR  reviews 
developments in the financial system and identifies potential vulnerabilities. 
Beginning with the economic outlook: 
 
 
just 
The global recovery is proceeding broadly as we had expected in April.  
The U.S. economy continues to grow at a modest pace, limited by the consolidation 
of household balance sheets.  
Growth in Europe is maintaining momentum, although the risks related to peripheral 
economies  have  clearly  increased.  The  disasters  that  struck  Japan  in  March  are 
severely affecting its economic activity and are also causing temporary supply chain 
disruptions in advanced economies, including Canada.  
Although commodity prices have declined recently, they are expected to remain at 
elevated  levels,  supported  by  tight  global  supply  and  very  strong  demand  from 
emerging markets.  
These  high  prices,  combined  with  persistent  excess  demand  conditions  in  major 
emerging-market  economies,  are  contributing 
inflationary 
pressures.  
Despite the challenges that weigh on the global outlook, financial conditions remain 
very stimulative.  
In the short term, economic growth in Canada is expected to slow to modest rates, 
due to a number of temporary factors. These include the supply chain disruptions 
that will dampen automotive production, as well as the drag from adjusting to higher 
energy prices on consumer spending in Canada and the United States.  
Overall,  a  broad  rebalancing  of  demand  in  Canada  is  underway  as  the  economic 
expansion  progresses.  Business 
is  now  growing  strongly,  and 
contributions to growth from both household consumption and government spending 
are diminishing. As I will discuss in a moment, in this context, the Bank anticipates a 
slowing  in  both  the  rate  of  household  credit  growth  and  the  upward  trajectory  of 
household debt-to-income ratios.  
The recovery in net exports is expected to be modest given the relative weakness in 
the U.S. economy, Canada’s underrepresentation in fast-growing emerging markets, 
to  broader  global 
investment 
       BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
   While underlying inflation is relatively subdued, the Bank expects that high energy 
prices  and  changes  in  provincial  indirect  taxes  will  keep  total  CPI  inflation  above 
3 per cent in the short term.  
Total CPI inflation is expected to converge with core inflation at 2 per cent by the 
middle  of  2012,  as  excess  supply  in  the  economy  is  gradually  absorbed,  labour 
compensation growth stays modest, productivity recovers and inflation expectations 
remain well-anchored. 
The  Bank  expects  a  re-acceleration  of  growth  in  the  second  half  of  the  year, 
consistent with a renewed narrowing of the output gap. We will update the projection 
in the July MPR. 
Allow me to turn now to the Bank’s monitoring of developments in the financial system. 
 
Although  the  Canadian  financial  system  is  currently  on  a  sound  footing,  the  Bank 
judges that, largely because of external factors, risks to its stability remain elevated 
and  have  edged  higher  since  December.  Of  the  five  risks  identified  in  the  FSR,  I 
would like to concentrate on three:  
– 
remain  strained 
First,  sovereign  balance  sheets 
in  many  advanced 
economies. Fiscal strains in the euro-area periphery have continued to build 
despite  continued  efforts  by  the  affected  countries  and  assistance  from  the 
International Monetary Fund and the European Commission. Whether or not a 
sovereign credit event occurs, these strains could trigger a sharp repricing of 
credit  risk  for  other  governments  with  high  debt  burdens,  as  well  as  a  more 
generalized retrenchment from risk-taking in global markets, including markets 
in Canada.  
Second, a long period of low interest rates globally may  fuel excessive risk-
taking.  The  search  for  yield  could  cause  risk  to  be  underpriced  or  lead 
investors  to  take  on  exposures  that  they  may  not  be  able  to  manage  if 
conditions  become  less  benign.  Our  institutions  should  not  be  lulled  into  a 
false sense of security by current low rates.  
Lastly,  the  high  level  of  household  indebtedness  has  increased  financial 
vulnerabilities  in  Canada.  Canadians  are  now  as  indebted  (relative  to  their 
income)  as  the  Americans  and  the  British.  The  Bank  estimates  that  the 
proportion  of  Canadian  households  that  would  be  highly  vulnerable  to  an 
adverse economic shock has risen to its highest level in nine years, despite 
improving  economic  conditions  and  the  ongoing  low  level  of  interest  rates. 
This partly reflects the fact that the increase in aggregate household debt over 
the past decade has been driven by households with the highest debt levels. 
There are some offsets. Debt is largely fixed rate and household net worth is 
at  an  all-time  high.  However,  borrowers  should  remember  that  a  fixed-rate 
mortgage  will  reprice  a  number  of  times  over  the  life  of  the  mortgage  and, 
while asset prices can rise and fall, debt endures. 
     2 
 The elevated levels of household debt require continued vigilance. Since 2008, the 
federal  government  has  taken  a  series  of  prudent  and  timely  measures  to  tighten 
mortgage insurance requirements. These will reduce the possibility that prices are 
further  driven  up  simply  through  higher  leverage  and,  more  broadly,  support  the 
long-term stability of the Canadian housing market. 
While  these  measures  will  help  moderate  the  pace  of  debt  accumulation  by 
households, it will take some time for their full effect to be felt. Canadian authorities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Despite  the  challenging  international  environment  and  increasing  strains  on 
household  balance  sheets,  the  Canadian  financial  system  remains  healthy.  For 
example,  asset  quality  at  Canada’s  major  banks  has  improved  further  in  recent 
months.  Moreover,  the  aggregate  financial  position  of  the  domestic  non-financial 
corporate sector is solid, with corporate leverage remaining at low levels.  
Finally,  I  would  like  to  note  that  on  Monday,  the  Bank,  along  with  the  Minister  of 
Finance  and  the  Commissioner  of  the  RCMP,  unveiled  a  new  generation  of  bank 
notes.  
These  new  notes  are  at  the  frontier  of  bank  note  technology.  They  are  secure, 
durable and green. They will set a benchmark worldwide and will help maintain the 
confidence Canadians already have in their currency.  
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
