Bojan Markovic: FX volatility and market stability 
Speech by Mr Bojan Markovic, Vice Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the Annual 
ACI Conference, Zlatibor, 17 September 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
A year ago, I was standing here in front of the very much the same audience, expounding on 
the benefits of exchange rate flexibility. I argued that exchange rate flexibility is a necessary 
backbone  of  stable  and  low  inflation,  and  as  such  it  must  stay  with  us  in  the  foreseeable 
future. I reasoned that movements in the exchange rate absorb shocks that otherwise would 
have gone to inflation or output and applauded the role the flexible exchange rate played in 
sheltering our economy from the impacts of the crisis.  
At the same time, however, I called for a greater use of hedging instruments and sheltering 
the financially less literate sectors of our society from unwarranted exchange rate exposure. 
The way forward, I argued, is not through limiting exchange rate volatility, but rather through 
expanding on the use of dinar based and hedging instruments. Accordingly, monetary policy 
based on a flexible exchange rate has become a cornerstone of our efforts to increase the 
use of dinars in the economy.  
A  year  on,  some  of  the  effects  of  exchange  rate  volatility  are  already  visible.  The  daily 
exchange rate has certainly become more volatile. According to some measures1, the daily 
volatility increased threefold in the past year, although it still remains lower compared to, for 
instance, volatility in similar countries with flexible exchange rate, such as Poland, Hungary 
or Romania. And we expect that to remain the case in the period ahead. 
Chart 1.  
NBS interventions and short-term FX volatility 
NBS interventions (rhs)
30-days moving average (lhs)
EGARCH (lhs)
(EUR m)
st. dev.
0.008
0.007
0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001
0.000
jun
jul
avg
sep
oct
nov
dec
2010
jan
feb
mar
apr
may
jun
jul
2011
                                                 
1  Charts 1 and 2 report 30-days moving average and EGARCH measures of daily volatility. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 120
100
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
 1
is 
in 
line  with 
the  experience  some  other  countries, 
The increase in exchange rate volatility was taking place against a declining presence of the 
National Bank of Serbia (NBS)in the FX market. With more than 100meuros volume a day, 
continuous  quoting  and  low  spreads,  the  market  has  recently  been  able  to  absorb  larger 
orders  from  both  sides  of  the  market  than  before,  within  only  moderate  exchange  rate 
movements,  and  without  an  excessive  central  bank’s  assistance.  Indeed,  the  interbank 
market  volumes  and  the  central  bank’s  presence  have  been  inversely  correlated,  and  this 
behavior 
the 
Czech Republic, had at this stage of market development in transition.  
In  Serbia,  the  daily  FX  volatility  increased  at  the  beginning  of  the  year,  following  the 
discontinuation of NBS interventions in the final months of 2010. After calming down during 
the first months of 2011, the volatility started rising once more in May this year – again after 
the NBS stopped intervening.  
While the stronger NBS interventions would successfully calm the markets, they would also 
delay market development by stifling genuine market making of private banks. Some of our 
evidence  points  out  that  the  short-term  exchange  rate  volatility  increases  gross  trading 
volumes  in  the  interbank  market  and  thus  strengthens  the  arbitraging  behavior  of  market 
participants.  
for  example 
Short-term FX volatility and spot trading volumes in the interbank market 
Chart 2.  
Interbank market spot gross trading volume (rhs)
30-days moving average (lhs)
EGARCH (lhs)
(EUR m)
st. dev.
0.008
0.007
0.006
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001
0.000
jun
jul
avg
sep
oct
nov
dec
2010
jan
feb
mar
apr
may
jun
jul
2011
Our recent experience thus gives a fairly straightforward answer to a notorious chicken-and-
egg problem. Less central bank presence in the market increases short-term exchange rate 
volatility,  which  in  turn  strengthens  market  making  and  volumes,  making  the  market  more 
resilient to shocks and thus decreasing the need for NBS interventions.  
In addition to supporting market making, higher short-term volatility should also help market 
development by discouraging short-term speculative behavior. Arguably, a 1% daily volatility 
in the exchange rate presents a problem for an investor seeking an immediate profit from its 
FX position, but is less of an issue for a longer-term investor in Treasury securities. In this 
manner, the higher short-term volatility may have also strengthened the stability of financial 
system in Serbia.  
In the NBS, we are also looking into the effects higher exchange rate flexibility has on the 
degree  of  financial  dinarisation.  The  NBS  has  started  publishing  a  quarterly  report  on  the 
progress in its dinarisation efforts. While there are some encouraging developments already, 
the process is a long-term phenomenon and overall trends are not yet clearly visible in the 
2 
 400
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
 data.  Nevertheless,  we  can  observe  that  the  bank  credit  market  is  becoming  increasingly 
dinarised.  An  increase  in  the  level  of  dinarisation  can  partially  be  related  to  the  increased 
monthly volatility of the exchange rate. Portfolio models of financial intermediation2 suggest 
that the combination of inflation targeting and increased exchange rate volatility should foster 
the  use  of  the  local  currency  and  discourage  the  use  of  the  foreign  currency.  Preliminary 
econometric analysis of the Serbian data for the past three-years suggests that indeed there 
exists  a  relatively  fast  link  between  higher  exchange  rate  volatility  and  a  higher  degree  of 
dinarisation.  In  particular,  higher  monthly  exchange  rate  volatility  appears  to  increase  the 
loan dinarisation with a delay of around two months.  
Also,  increased  exchange  rate  flexibility  might  be  contributing  to  the somewhat  weakening 
link between domestic prices and the exchange rate. A recent NBS analysis suggests that 
the pass-through of the exchange rate to prices has declined over the past several years, 
since the Lehman Brothers episode.  
In  summarizing  my  short  speech:  plain  data,  the  experience  of  other  countries,  as  well  as 
more sophisticated analysis suggest that somewhat greater short-term FX volatility has been 
beneficial for market development. Indirectly, it has allowed for lower National Bank of Serbia 
presence  in  the  market  and  contributed  to  making  the  market  more  resilient  by  attracting 
longer-term and discouraging short-term hot inflows. We have also observed that dinarisation 
might  be  reacting  positively  to  somewhat  higher  exchange  rate  flexibility  and  so  does  an 
increased use of hedging instruments. 
That said, although in the long run our goal remains full flexibility of the exchange rate, until 
the  FX  market  in  Serbia  becomes  deep  enough  and  fully  efficient,  the  National  Bank  of 
Serbia  stands  ready  to  react  with  its  large  stock  of  FX  reserves  and  ensure  normal 
functioning of the market, should it be needed. But we shall carefully measure our actions so 
to avoid endangering the now dynamic process of structural market development in Serbia. 
On that note I thank you for your attention, and wish you a successful annual meeting. 
                                                 
2  For  example,  A.  Ize  and  E.  Levy-Yeyati  (2003),  Financial  Dollarization,  Journal  of  International  Economics, 
Vol. 59, pp. 323–347. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
