Timothy Lane: The changing face of risk in the global financial system  
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  Lane,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  Canadian 
Pension & Benefits Institute, Vancouver, British Columbia, 19 May 2011. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon. 
I would like to talk to you today about risk. 
I  know  that  risk  is  ever-present  in  your  work,  as  you  fulfill  your  commitments  to  the 
beneficiaries and sponsors of your pension plans. Important risks surround the investment 
performance  of  those  plans,  as  well  as  the  value  of  pension  liabilities.  All  of  you  are,  no 
doubt, acutely aware of these risks, which have become  much more  pronounced over the 
past few years. 
At the Bank of Canada, we also focus on risk as part of our commitment to Canadians. Our 
mandate demands that we take an economy-wide perspective on risk. In setting monetary 
policy to achieve our 2 per cent target for inflation, we assess the risks to the real economy 
and inflation. In our work promoting a stable financial system, we assess the various risks to 
financial stability, both in Canada and globally. It is on these risks to financial stability that I 
would like to focus my remarks today. 
The  global  financial  crisis  was  a  watershed.  During  the  crisis,  many  financial  system  risks 
materialized and new risks emerged. I will talk briefly about the pre-crisis setting – the Great 
Moderation  –  when  risks  were  perceived  to  be  diminishing.  I  will  then  discuss  how  this 
complacency  was  shattered,  the  risks  that  materialized  and  the  actions  being  taken  to 
address  those  risks.  Finally,  I  will  talk  about  new  risks  that  have  emerged  in  the  global 
financial environment, which stem from the “two-speed” recovery of the global economy. 
I would like to use this discussion today to illustrate two main points. First, the sources of risk 
are  evolving,  and  continuous  effort  is  needed  to  identify  and  track  risks  as  they  evolve. 
Second, risk can come from unexpected sources. That means we must strive to ensure that 
the Canadian and the global financial systems are resilient enough to withstand the impact of 
unexpected events. At the Bank of Canada, we are working on both of these fronts. 
The great moderation 
Let me begin by talking about the “Great Moderation.” For much of the past quarter-century, 
conventional wisdom held that the global economy was becoming increasingly stable. In the 
advanced countries, inflation had been tamed, recessions were milder than in the past and 
financial stability seemed assured. Ironically, that view was reinforced by the bursting of the 
dot-com bubble in 2001, which may have shaken the financial markets and given a number 
of you some sleepless nights but was seen as a test of the resilience of the global financial 
system.  The  Great  Moderation  was  believed  to  be,  at  least  in  part,  the  product  of  sound 
economic policies and a sophisticated financial system that could transform and reallocate 
risks efficiently. 
Emerging-market  economies  had  quite  a  different  experience  during  that  period.  Mexico, 
Korea, Indonesia, Thailand, Russia, Brazil and Argentina all suffered devastating crises that 
arose  from  a  combination  of  financial  system  weaknesses,  unsustainable  public  debt  and 
external imbalances. 
Then,  during  the  last  decade,  the  emerging-market  economies,  too,  became  progressively 
more  stable.  In  most  cases,  they  persevered  in  setting  their  public  finances  in  order,  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
cleaning up their financial systems and in undertaking bold reforms to unfetter their dynamic 
economies. They  made  use  of  a  benign  global  environment  to  reduce  their  external  debts 
and build up international reserves. 
There  were  still  concerns  about  vulnerabilities  –  notably  the  global  current  account 
imbalances – but the risks were widely underestimated. 
The 2008 crisis 
When the global crisis did occur, it started in an unexpected place: not on the periphery, but 
at the very core of the global economy, in the world’s most sophisticated financial system. As 
stresses  began  to  appear  in  the  U.S.  subprime-mortgage  market,  many  knowledgeable 
people thought that those stresses would be easily contained, since the problem loans were 
relatively small and securitized so that the risk could be borne by well-informed, diversified 
and  adequately  financed  investors.  In  the  autumn  of  2008,  however,  as  we  all  know,  this 
turned  into  a  global  cataclysm,  which  spread  through  the  world  economy  and  financial 
system. Liquidity dried up as institutions became afraid to lend to one another. Their balance 
sheets deteriorated as they held fire sales of assets, and investors worldwide fled from risky 
assets. 
With the resulting credit crunches and massive loss of wealth, the financial stresses triggered 
the “Great Recession” – the most severe since the Second World War. In this recession, no 
country  escaped  unscathed.  However,  the  emerging-market  economies  were  slower  to  be 
drawn into recession and quicker to recover than the advanced economies. 
The  global  economy  is  now  in  a  two-speed  recovery.  Emerging-market  countries  have 
resumed robust growth. But in many of the advanced economies, notably the United States 
and  Europe,  economic  growth  has  been  sluggish,  as  households,  firms  and  financial 
institutions continue to repair the damage to their balance sheets. As I will discuss later, this 
two-speed recovery creates a new configuration of risk in the global financial system. 
Here in Canada, the financial system proved more robust than in other advanced economies, 
although  problems  with  asset-backed  commercial  paper  could  have  had  very  serious 
ramifications had it not been for timely official intervention. The Bank of Canada had to inject 
substantial  amounts  of  liquidity  into  the  system  to  keep  core  funding  markets  functioning. 
Nonetheless,  Canada  suffered  a  severe  recession,  mainly  because  of  the  collapse  in  our 
exports. 
The recovery is now well under way, both in Canada and globally. Indeed, in Canada, we are 
already  in  an  expansion,  as  we  have  surpassed  pre-crisis  levels  of  economic  activity  and 
employment. But we must still ask how the crisis happened, and what must be done to avoid 
a recurrence. 
What happened in the crisis? 
Perhaps the biggest surprise of the crisis was the fact that defaults of subprime mortgages in 
the  United  States  –  a  small  segment  of  that  country’s  housing  market  –  could  cause  the 
global  financial  system  to  unravel.  As  events  unfolded  in  the  autumn  of  2008,  we  were 
reminded  that  the  global  financial  system  is  bound  together  by  an  extensive  web  of 
interconnections.  These  interconnections  among  financial  institutions  and  markets  can 
spread trouble to unexpected places and cause small shocks to have outsized effects. 
The financial crisis highlighted three main weaknesses in the way that the system handled 
risk. 
 
First,  many  financial  institutions  were  excessively  leveraged,  had  inadequate 
cushions of capital to absorb losses and insufficient liquidity to function in stressed 
market conditions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  Second,  the  complex  and  opaque  web  of  securitized  lending  and  derivatives 
markets,  which  were  believed  to  help  the  economy  better  manage  and  distribute 
risk, instead turned out to transmit and amplify that risk.  
Third,  financial  institutions  that  were  “too  big  to  fail”  had  diminished  incentives  to 
manage risk and, ultimately, shifted those risks to taxpayers.  
These vulnerabilities were permitted to build up – or were even fostered – by the perception 
of  diminishing  risks  in  the  Great  Moderation.  Financing  patterns  that  appeared  well-
constructed  in  the  context  of  ever-diminishing  risk  turned  out  to  be  imprudent  once  the 
system came under stress. Regulation fell well behind financial innovation. 
The global response 
The  global  financial  reforms  launched  by  G-20  leaders  are  designed  to  address  the  three 
weaknesses  I  have  just  discussed.  First,  to  reduce  the  incidence  and  severity  of  financial 
crises,  financial  institutions  will  be  required  to  have  more  ample  cushions  of  capital  and 
liquidity.  Second,  steps  will  be  taken  to  reduce  the  risk  that  financial  markets  become 
channels of contagion. And third, mechanisms to deal with the too-big-to-fail problem will be 
made more robust. I will briefly discuss each of these elements. 
The centrepiece of the agenda for global financial reform is the new Basel III rules on capital 
and  liquidity.  These  rules  substantially  increase  the  loss-bearing  capital  that  financial 
institutions  must  hold,  combined  with  required  liquidity  ratios  and  a  limit  on  leverage.  In 
addition, a countercyclical buffer will be established so that capital is built up in good times, 
which can subsequently be available to absorb losses.1  
On  financial  markets,  a  key  step  is  to  strengthen  market  infrastructure  to  reduce  systemic 
risk.  The  G-20  leaders  agreed  to  require  clearing  and  settlement  of  over-the-counter 
derivatives through central counterparties, and to increase transparency in those markets – 
which proved to be a channel of financial contagion during the crisis. A central counterparty 
is also being established in Canada for clearing repurchase agreements (repos), a key form 
of short-term financing. 
A  related  issue  is  market-based  financing,  including  securitized  lending.  Work  has  begun 
under the auspices of the Financial Stability Board to define the sector, to develop the data 
and methodology to systematically monitor it, and to develop policy options.2  
To address the too-big-to-fail problem of systemically important financial institutions, work is 
under  way  to  ensure  that  they  are  appropriately  supervised  and  adequately  capitalized  to 
absorb losses, and to establish a framework for resolution in the event that they do fail. 
So this, in a nutshell, is what is being done to address the weaknesses underlying the 2008 
crisis,  with  a  view  to  creating  a  more  resilient  global  financial  system.  I  will  now  go  on  to 
discuss a new pattern of risks that has emerged since the recession. 
Risks in a two-speed global recovery 
As  I  have  already  mentioned,  the  current  global  recovery  is  operating  at  two  speeds,  with 
robust  growth  in  emerging-market  economies  and  anaemic  growth  in  the  advanced 
                                                 
1   The  Bank  of  Canada’s  research  report  on  the  costs  and  benefits  of  the  new  rules  can  be  found  at 
<http://www.bankofcanada.ca/2010/08/secondary-page/strengthening-international-capital-and-liquidity-
standards-a-macroeconomic-impact-assessment-for-canada-2/>. 
2   See  “Shadow  Banking:  Scoping  the  Issues–A  Background  Note  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board,”  Financial 
Stability Board, 12 April 2011 <http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_110412a.pdf>. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
economies.  This  two-speed  recovery,  accompanied  by  a  widening  of  global  economic 
imbalances, is at the centre of a new configuration of risks to global financial stability. These 
risks comprise sovereign risks, financial fragility, the search for yield, and related stresses in 
emerging-market economies and foreign exchange markets. 
Twice  a  year,  the  Bank  of  Canada  publishes  its  Financial  System  Review  (FSR),  which 
examines developments in the financial system with a view to identifying potential risks to its 
overall  soundness.  This  publication  also  highlights  the  efforts  of  the  Bank,  and  other 
domestic and international regulatory authorities, to mitigate those risks. The pattern of risks I 
am going to discuss was examined in our December 2010 issue. We are continuing to track 
them and will provide an updated assessment in June. 
Sovereign risks have become increasingly prominent in a number of advanced economies. 
Many countries entered the crisis with weak fiscal positions and then were further weakened 
by  the  effect  of  low  growth  on  tax  revenues  and  the  costs  of  economic  stimulus  and  the 
bailouts of financial institutions. These problems are most acute in the peripheral countries of 
Europe  –  notably  Greece,  Ireland  and  Portugal.  But  many  advanced  economies  still  have 
precarious public finances and will need to persevere to address these problems. 
Canada’s fiscal position, in contrast, is stronger than that of most other advanced economies. 
Moreover, the domestic financial sector has limited direct exposure to the sovereign debt of 
peripheral  euro-area  countries.  Nevertheless,  there  are  a  number  of  potential  channels 
through which the Canadian financial system could be adversely affected by sovereign debt 
problems elsewhere, such as higher funding costs and a decline in asset-price valuations. 
The low growth of many advanced economies has led to lingering  financial fragility. The 
outlook for banks in Europe – and, to a lesser extent, the United States – continues to be 
clouded. Although many banks around the world made substantial progress in repairing their 
balance  sheets,  some  remain  unusually  strained.  They  are  also  exposed  to  vulnerable 
economic sectors, notably residential and commercial property markets. In some cases, their 
funding positions are fragile, subject to fragile investor confidence. 
With the weak growth of the major advanced economies, interest rates in a number of those 
economies are at extraordinarily low levels and are expected to remain so for an extended 
period. While stimulative monetary policy is needed to support the global economic recovery, 
this “low-for-long” scenario creates risk for the global financial system, and for the pension 
industry in particular. 
As  you  know,  institutional  investors  such  as  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds  are 
often expected – or in some cases even required by contract or mandate – to deliver a target 
rate  of  return.  In  many  cases,  these  targets  are  now  unrealistic  and  can  be  met  only  by 
taking on more risk than is prudent. Changes in accounting rules, which use low, risk-free 
interest rates to discount liabilities while valuing assets at current market prices, increase the 
pressure to achieve these high returns on a continuous basis. 
This is a particular instance of the “search for yield” that often accompanies a long period of 
very low interest rates. It may be associated with excessive credit creation and undue risk-
taking as investors seek higher returns, leading to the underpricing of risk and unsustainable 
increases in asset prices. A number of other developments – the record issuance of high-
yield debt securities in the United States, the rebound of capital flows into emerging-market 
economies and the popularity of commodity exchange-traded funds in recent quarters – are 
consistent with this pattern. 
The  influence  of  sustained  low  interest  rates  in  major  advanced  economies  on  risk-taking 
behaviour is a powerful dynamic that bears watching. 
Global imbalances are linked to the three risks I have just described and also pose some 
additional  risks  to  the  global  financial  system.  The  counterpart  of  these  imbalances  is  that 
surplus countries in many cases are resisting upward pressure on their currencies and this is 
resulting  in  domestic  inflationary  pressures.  As  the  authorities  try  to  bottle  up  these 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
inflationary  pressures,  that  puts  further  stress  on  their  financial  systems.  There  is  also  the 
risk that the needed exchange rate adjustment, when it does come, will be disorderly. 
Resolving  global  imbalances  requires  that  the  United  States  and  other  deficit  countries 
boost  domestic  savings  in  a  timely  and  sustained  manner.  At  the  same  time,  surplus 
economies –  particularly  the  emerging  economies  of  Asia  –  need  to  undertake structural 
reforms to bolster internal sources of growth in order to reduce their reliance on external 
demand. Greater exchange rate flexibility is also an essential part of the solution.3  
These are some of the main risks to financial stability that we see emerging in the two-speed 
global recovery. Let me now talk briefly about how the Bank of Canada is working to sharpen 
its analysis of risks. 
Strengthening risk assessment 
At  the  Bank  of  Canada,  we  are  developing  new  risk-assessment  tools  and  models  that 
capture the diverse sources of risk and help us understand how they propagate through the 
financial system. While the Bank is making important progress in this area, we are not alone. 
The International Monetary Fund and the Financial Stability Board, as well as central banks 
and academics, are also making significant efforts in this area. 
Improvements  in  risk-assessment  frameworks  will  focus  on  detecting  vulnerabilities  in  the 
financial system. The Bank of Canada is thus developing a more rigorous empirical analytic 
framework  to  complement  our  current  analysis  and  market  intelligence.  It  may  be  that  a 
single model of the financial system is neither practical nor realistic. Given the complexity of 
the financial system, a suite of models combining a number of analytical tools, approaches 
and indicators could provide the best avenue for success. 
While we are working to identify key risks, recent events have reminded us that we have to 
expect the unexpected. The earthquake and tsunami in Japan are examples of the kind of 
shocks that nobody had foreseen. Another example is the – no less seismic – political unrest 
of the Middle East. 
Clearly we can’t anticipate every shock. That’s why it so important to ensure that the financial 
system  is  more  robust,  so  that  it  can  withstand  the  shocks  that  will  occur.  Resilience, 
therefore, is the main goal of the G-20 reform agenda. 
Conclusion 
Allow me to conclude. Risk is ever-present, but its nature and sources change over time. 
Complacency is itself a source of risk – and indeed, the Great Moderation sowed the seeds 
of its own destruction as vulnerabilities were allowed to build up. 
This calls for vigilance in assessing the shifting nature of risk. The Bank of Canada continues 
to  evaluate  risks,  sharing  its  assessment  with  other  public  institutions,  international 
counterparts and the private sector. 
But we must also expect the unexpected. The only defence against the unexpected is the 
development of a more resilient financial system – and the current set of financial reforms will 
do just that. 
Thank you. 
                                                 
3   All are key goals of the G-20 Framework for Strong, Sustainable and Balanced Growth. Canada co-chairs the 
committee monitoring the implementation of policies under this framework. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
