Vítor Constâncio: The macroeconomic and the financial landscape in the 
aftermath of the 2007 crisis – new challenges and perspectives 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the High 
Level Policy Seminar, European University Institute, Florence, 7 June 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Thank you very much for the invitation to join you today at the European University Institute 
for this high level policy seminar. It is an apposite time to take stock of the lessons of the 
recent  crisis;  the  actions  that  have  been  taken  in  response;  and  the  measures  that  are 
needed for the future. 
I  believe  that  the  recent  financial  and  economic  crisis  has  revealed  some  fundamental 
lessons  about  the  functioning  of  the  euro  area  –  lessons  which  policymakers  have  been 
obliged to learn and act upon to build tomorrow’s European structure. 
We  learned  that  preventing  future  crises  requires  action  across  a  range  of  policy  areas 
encompassing fiscal, economic and financial policies. 
On the other hand, we learned that these policy areas are interconnected – fiscal imbalances 
can undermine the financial sector; financial sector imbalances can weigh on the credibility of 
the sovereign; both can spillover into the real sector, and vice versa. 
Responding  to  these  lessons  requires  a  holistic  encompassing  concept  of  economic 
governance. This implies a high degree of institutional coherence and co-ordination which is 
not easy to achieve – even unitary states like the U.S. have struggled to put in place such a 
comprehensive approach. 
In  the  euro  area,  it  requires  establishing  a  comprehensive  set  of  rules  and  institutions  to 
guide economic policies towards mutually beneficial outcomes. In the absence of a central 
political  authority,  such  rules  and  institutions  are  essential  to  overcome  collective  action 
problems  and  prevent  free  riding  –  to  maximise  the  common  good  as  opposed  to  private 
utility. 
The key to effective rules and institutions is as follows: their scope must be commensurate 
with the scope and degree of economic and financial integration in the euro area. Otherwise, 
authority lags behind integration and crises cannot be efficiently forestalled. 
In  general,  policymakers  have  recognised 
to  economic 
governance are needed after the crisis. But my main contention today is that the reforms put 
forward  in  response,  whilst  very  important,  do  not  yet  meet  sufficiently  the  criterion  for 
effectiveness.  
If we truly recognise the lessons of the crisis for the euro area, economic governance must 
be more ambitious. 
Let me begin by recalling these lessons and their implications for economic governance. 
fundamental  changes 
that 
Lessons from the crisis 
By now we know all the lessons from the crisis and I apologise for reminding you of some of 
these but I need to do it for the sake of my later arguments. The crisis revealed five important 
lessons. 
The  first  lesson  was  that  the  euro  area  lacked  an  institutional  framework  to  identify  and 
correct macroeconomic imbalances. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
For  countries  that  share  a  single  currency  and  cannot  devalue,  maintaining  nominal  price 
and  cost  growth  in  line  with  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  is  essential.  From  1999  onwards, 
however, developments have not followed this path. 
Some euro area countries experienced strong nominal divergence caused by unit labour cost 
increases  and  excessive  credit  growth,  leading  to  declining  competitiveness.  At  the  same 
time, large current account imbalances reflected a build-up of public and private sector debt, 
creating external vulnerabilities that were exposed when the crisis broke. 
Establishing a permanent framework for surveillance of such imbalances is essential for the 
future. 
The second lesson was that the implementation of the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) did 
not contribute to fiscal polices consistent with membership of a single currency. 
In  an  economic  and  monetary  union,  fiscal  policies  have  to  be  consistent  with  rates  of 
sustainable growth and price stability. Instead, despite the “good times” between 1999 and 
2008, fiscal policies were largely pro-cyclical: few countries maintained a budgetary position 
in structural balance and many ran deficits. Peer pressure to correct imbalances was largely 
absent. 
In some cases, this indiscipline precipitated serious fiscal challenges when recession began 
in  late  2008.  In  others,  fiscal  policy  reinforced  nominal  divergence  and  macroeconomic 
imbalances. 
A more effective SGP is therefore required for all euro area countries. 
The  third  lesson  was  the  absence  of  appropriate  frameworks  for  policy  co-ordination  in 
areas essential for competitiveness and sustainable growth. 
For  example,  a  number  of  euro  area  countries  internalised  the  fallacy  that  temporarily 
elevated national productivity and inflation rates warranted persistent wages increases out of 
line with the euro area as a whole.  
This may apply if inflation differentials are driven by healthy catching-up effects, but in many 
cases  they  were  largely  the  outcome  of  inappropriate  macroeconomic  policies  and  debt-
financed booms in domestic demand. Wage developments were therefore not sustainable. 
Much  greater  policy  co-ordination  is  now  needed  to  reinforce  the  euro  area  dimension  in 
national economic policymaking – in particular that a medium-term inflation rate of below, but 
close to, 2% over the medium term is the appropriate benchmark at the national level.  
The fourth lesson was that financial supervision in the Europe was lagging behind financial 
integration. 
Monetary union led to a structural increase in financial interlinkages within the euro area, in 
particular via the growth of systemically relevant large cross-border banking groups. Yet, the 
regime for financial supervision remained fragmented. 
National  supervisors  that  were  supposed  to  supervise  cross-border  banks  had  no 
mechanism  to  resolve  conflicts.  The  EU  level  financial  services  committees  had  only 
advisory powers and the ability to issue non-binding guidelines and recommendations. 
The  result  was  that  a  large  build-up  of  systemic  risk  in  the  financial  sector  went  largely 
unnoticed – risk which in many cases was ultimately transferred to the balance sheet of the 
sovereign. 
A supervision regime commensurate with the reality of financial integration in the euro area is 
therefore an urgent need. 
The final lesson was that sovereign debt challenges in individual euro area countries – no 
matter their size – can undermine the stability of the euro area as a whole. To the surprise of 
some, “sudden stops” episodes occurred in the euro area, as if the single currency was not a 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
common  currency  of  all  members.  Since  member  countries  do  not  control  their  currency, 
they are vulnerable to liquidity episodes and multiple equilibria. Creditors’ assessment can 
change e.g. by effect of contagion, even when fundamentals would not justify it.  
The high degree of financial integration within EMU means that, if left unchecked, contagion 
in  the  banking  sector  can  spread  rapidly  via  cross-border  holdings  of  sovereign  debt.  For 
sovereigns  themselves,  sudden  shifts  in  market  re-pricing  of  risk  can  lead  to  unexpected 
liquidity challenges. 
These dynamics underscore the importance of strengthening the mechanisms that prevent 
such  risks  –  the  SGP,  surveillance  of  broader  macroeconomic  imbalances,  and  stronger 
financial supervision. 
However,  the  liquidity  dry-outs  and  the  contagion  risks  also  call  for  stronger  backstop 
mechanisms, to provide significant, albeit temporary, liquidity assistance.  
For the same reason, a permanent crisis management framework is appropriate for the euro 
area.  
First responses 
These lessons show us that the crisis was an interlinked phenomenon involving the public 
sector,  real  sector  and  financial  sector.  Consequently,  a  comprehensive  response  to  the 
crisis needs to address all these sectors and the ways in which they are interconnected. 
So far, there has been important progress in all 5 areas I identified.  
There is strong momentum behind reinforcing economic governance to prevent and correct 
fiscal and broader macroeconomic imbalances. 
The  package  of  legislative  reforms  now  undergoing  final  discussion,  introduces  a  new 
surveillance framework for macroeconomic imbalances, with an alert mechanism based on a 
scoreboard  of  key  indicators.  An  enforcement  mechanism  allows  the  Council  to  fine  euro 
area  countries  in  case  of  repeated  non-compliance  with  recommendations.  This  closes  an 
important lacuna in the economic governance framework. 
The new legislative package also reinforces the SGP to focus more on fiscal sustainability 
and reducing government debt levels. 
Member States with a government debt exceeding the 60% of GDP will have to observe a 
debt-reduction  rule  or  face  an  excessive  deficit  procedure  –  backed  by  more  effective 
financial  sanctions  and  new  political  and  reputational  measures.  Commitments  would  be 
more solidly anchored at the national level through new minimum requirements for national 
budgetary frameworks.  
Important steps have also been taken towards improving policy co-ordination. 
The “European semester” was introduced on 1 January this year to encourage better ex ante 
co-ordination  of  economic  policies.  From  now  on,  national  programmes  for  fiscal  and 
economic policies will be submitted and assessed at the same time. This should create more 
consistency  between  policy  recommendations  and  improve  timing  with  national  budgetary 
cycles. 
Euro area leaders have decided to deepen further policy co-ordination by creating the “Euro 
Plus  Pact”.  The  Pact  aims  to  address  deep  challenges  related  to  competitiveness  and 
productivity in the euro area. Hence, it rightly focuses on key indicators of competitiveness 
divergences such as unit labour costs, and key structural rigidities related to wage setting, 
competition and the labour market. The ECB very much welcomes this increased focus on 
the euro area. 
Major reforms have already taken place in the field of financial supervision. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Following  the  recommendations  of  the  de  Larosière  Group,  the  European  System  of 
Financial  Supervisors  (ESFS)  was  established  to  reinforce  the  European  framework  for 
micro- and macro-prudential supervision. 
It comprises the three new European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) for banking, insurance 
and  securities  markets;  and  the  European  System  Risk  Board  (ESRB),  which  will monitor, 
identify  and  prioritise  systemic  risks  to  financial  stability.  This  framework  will  play  an 
important  role  in  managing  the  interdependencies  of  a  closely  integrated  single  European 
financial market. 
In  addition,  efforts  are  underway  to  establish  an  EU  framework  for  cross-border  crisis 
management in the banking sector.  
Finally, euro area leaders have agreed to establish a permanent crisis management facility, 
the European Stability Mechanism (ESM). 
The ESM builds on the ad hoc stability facilities established in 2010 to arrest contagion and 
thereby preserve overall financial stability in the euro area. By providing bridge funding, it will 
create breathing space for euro area countries in financial difficulties to implement a deep 
adjustment  programme,  correct  imbalances  and  regain  market  access.  In  spite  of  some 
shortcomings  stemming  from  the  rigidity  of  its  instruments,  the  creation  of  the  ESM  is  of 
enormous importance. 
The way ahead 
These measures – although at varying stages of development – represent an important step 
forward towards remedying the problems of economic governance in the euro area. 
Whilst necessary and important, they will have to be further reinforced, recognising that what 
may be sufficient for the 27 Member States is not enough for the euro area. The reform of 
governance  of  the  euro  area  should  not  be  hampered  by  the  need  to  decide  anything 
according to the least common denominator among the 27 members of the EU. The decision 
of  17  countries  to  share  a  common  currency  has  far  reaching  consequences  and 
requirements that should be fully recognised.  
The  euro  area  is  a  highly  integrated  economic  and  financial  area  which  needs  to  be 
managed through common decisions. However, aside from monetary policy, it lacks powerful 
decision-making  institutions.  This  means  that  rule-based  frameworks  must  act  a  substitute 
for centralised authority. 
For fiscal and economic issues, a unitary state would have a Finance Ministry which both 
defines and vetoes fiscal and broader economic policies. EMU must achieve the same effect 
through  its  economic  governance  framework.  The  recognition  of  this  requirement  was 
certainly  behind  the  recent  proposal  presented  by  President  Trichet  for  the  creation  of  a 
European Finance Ministry. 
We  know  from  the  crisis,  and  from  learning-by-doing,  that  soft  rules  will  not  achieve  the 
desired outcome. They allow for multiple equilibria – some of which are sub-optimal for all 
parties.  
Strengthening the rules governing fiscal and broader macroeconomic policies is essential to 
guarantee equilibria that are mutually beneficial. 
The legislative package on economic governance I described above is now being negotiated 
between  the  Commission,  the  Council  and  the  European  Parliament,  with  the  goal  of 
strengthening the rules for surveillance of fiscal and broader macroeconomic policies. In the 
ECB’s view, the Council position is insufficient and needs improvement in a number of areas. 
Greater automaticity is needed in preventing and correcting national economic policies that 
stray  from  a  sustainable  path.  Political  discretion  should  be  limited  when  unsustainable 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
policies put the stability of the euro area as a whole at risk. Credible economic governance 
needs to be consistent and predictable. It also needs to be backed by timely, tough sanctions 
to encourage compliance. 
More  ambitious  policy  requirements  would  better  match  the  current  reality  of  the  euro 
area. It makes sense for macroeconomic surveillance to have a clear focus on the euro area 
countries  with  the  greatest  vulnerabilities.  Fiscal  surveillance  should  avail  of  ambitious 
benchmarks when establishing an excessive deficit and setting the adjustment path towards 
a country’s medium-term budgetary objective.  
Much  closer  alignment  is  needed  between  commitments at the EU  and national levels. 
The perception that “Europe” imposes policies on countries, when they have been agreed by 
their  own  politicians,  is  not  helpful.  National  authorities  need  to  take  ownership  of  their 
European commitments. 
This means anchoring EU rules in their national legislation and making them mandatory and 
being  held  to  account  by  domestic  parliaments.  Major  improvements  are  also  needed 
regarding the production and quality of fiscal statistics. 
Anticipating the final result of the negotiations, the ECB is encouraged that the amendments 
proposed  by  the  European  Parliament  go  in  the  direction  of  significantly  strengthening 
economic  governance.  We  welcome  the  ambition  the  European  Parliament  has  shown 
towards greater automaticity, the broader and timelier use of sanctions, and reducing room 
for halting or suspending procedures against those Member States breaking the rules. 
I hope that the negotiations will allow the texts to be significantly improved along these lines.  
For  financial  supervision  issues,  the  aim  of  the  euro  area  should  be  to  construct  a 
supervisory  framework  that  reflects  the  single  market  in  financial  services.  This  would 
eventually imply a single financial supervisor enforcing a single rule book across all relevant 
financial institutions. 
We  should  not  be  surprised  if  this  takes  time  to  achieve  in  Europe.  It  remains  a  complex 
issue even in unitary states. The United States, for example, has seven different supervisory 
authorities and nationwide interstate branching has only been allowed since 1997. 
In the medium-term, the establishment of the European System of Financial Supervision is 
appropriate for the EU27. However, I believe that a special regime for financial supervision is 
warranted for the euro area. 
Euro  area  financial  institutions  require  a  different  quality  of  supervision  as  they  lack  an 
exchange  rate  to  “bottle  up”  cross-border  capital  flows,  thus  heightening  the  potential  for 
systemic risk. Another aspect that sets the euro area as a special case stems of course from 
the existence of a central bank providing the liquidity and acting as lender of the last resort to 
the banking sectors of all countries belonging to the area. The need for a more significant 
European  perspective  in  banking  supervising  should  be  evident  when  we  reflect  on  the 
instrumental  role  of  European  banks  from  all  countries  in  the  creation  of  negative 
macroeconomic  imbalances.  Criticism  made  by  some  commentators  that  the  ECB  could 
have  done  something  to  control  the  credit  boom  in  some  member  countries  is  totally 
unfounded  as  the  ECB  was  not  given  legal  competences  in  that  area  and  banking 
supervision has been kept prominently as a national competence. This should be changed in 
the future as the banking crisis in a Member State can in the end affect the whole area. It can 
affect  in  particular  the  liquidity  provision  and  the  transmission  mechanism  of  the  single 
monetary policy. 
One approach to better reflect the euro area dimension in financial supervision would be to 
grant the European Banking Authority more binding powers over national supervisors in euro 
area countries, so as to ensure a more convergent rule book and supervisory practices. It is 
worth  remembering  that  in  12  of  the  17  members  of  the  euro  area,  the  respective  central 
banks  have  responsibilities  in  banking  supervision.  After  the  crisis,  the  trend  in  several 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
countries has been to change the system of banking supervision by giving that responsibility 
to  the  respective  central  banks.  Regarding  macro-prudential  policies,  the  Eurosystem  (the 
ECB  plus  the  National  Central  Banks)  was  already  given  a  special  role  in  supporting  the 
mission  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board.  All  this  points  to  a  possible  future 
development  in  the  direction  of  giving  a  more  significant  role  to  the  Eurosystem  in  the 
supervision of banks, in particular of large cross-border banking groups. 
Developments  of  this  kind  would  provide  more  effective  tools  to  address  financial  sector 
imbalances that are particularly dangerous within the euro area – and thus prevent negative 
feedback loops emerging between the financial sector and the sovereign. 
In this way, strengthening the euro area dimension of financial supervision would support the 
overall functioning of the economic governance framework. 
A truly European system of financial supervision would also require a European resolution 
fund with a mechanism for burden sharing between Member States. Whilst this is not viable 
in the near term, within the euro area there is some interesting progress in this direction via 
the stability support facilities that have been created in the context of EU/IMF programmes 
for some euro area countries. 
The use of stability facilities to provide loans for banking sector recapitalisation reflects the 
recognition that crisis management for sovereigns and for financial institutions is increasingly 
intertwined.  Perhaps  over  time  this  will  provide  the  foundation  for  a  more  integrated 
European system of public and financial sector crisis management. 
Essentially, strengthening the rules governing fiscal, economic and financial policies is about 
defining what should be avoided in EMU, for the good of all its members. 
However, the euro area also faces urgent questions about what can, or should be done. 
In a unitary state, the party of government would set this agenda. In the euro area, it is the 
role  of  policy  co-ordination.  Co-ordination  is  essential  to  provide  the  euro  area  with 
leadership and ensure that all countries progress on the same trajectory. 
At  present,  the  major  challenge  requiring  greater  coordination  is  ensuring  sustainable  and 
balanced  growth  across  the  euro  area.  Projections  of  the  euro  area’s  growth  prospects 
remain  weak,  depressed  by  the  fiscal  burden  of  age-related  expenditure,  slow  productivity 
growth, and ongoing debt sustainability challenges. 
In  this  context,  a  comprehensive  programme  of  growth-enhancing  structural  reforms  is 
essential  to  elevate  growth  potential.  This  means  that  euro  area  countries  must  fully 
implement the Europe 2020 strategy, supported by intensive monitoring and follow-up. The 
key to the success of the Euro Plus Pact is also implementation. 
As  it  is  inter-governmental  and  relies  on  voluntary  commitments,  there  is  much  scope  to 
selectively implement certain reforms. This was the flaw of the Lisbon Agenda and it should 
not be repeated. 
Political ownership by the Heads of State or Government is therefore critical to ensure that all 
euro area countries set ambitious commitments and rigorously apply them. 
Over time, Member States could demonstrate their commitment to deep structural reform by 
incorporating  the  key  elements  of  the  Euro  Plus  Pact  into  the  legislative  framework  on 
economic governance, and therefore giving them binding legal force. 
Strengthening policy co-ordination creates solidarity and substitutes for the fact that the EU is 
a political community without a nation. 
On  the  one  hand,  it  makes  the  collective  responsible  to  the  individual.  Intrusive  mutual 
surveillance ensures that each country realises its growth potential. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
On  the  other  hand,  it  makes  the  individual  responsible  to  the  collective.  Implementing 
necessary reforms reinforces overall stability and shows commitment to the euro area as a 
whole. 
Conclusion 
A famous resident of the city of Florence, Niccolò Machiavelli, wrote these well-known words 
in the Prince, Chapter VI: 
“It must be considered that there is nothing more difficult to carry out, nor more 
doubtful of success, nor more dangerous to handle than to initiate a new order of 
things.” 
Nevertheless,  having  understood  the  lessons  of  the  crisis,  it  would  be  irresponsible  for 
policies makers not to try. 
Strengthening  economic  governance  is  essential  to  create  sustainable  growth  and  job 
creation in the future, whilst preserving the national diversity that makes Europe unique. 
It  is  fundamental  to  the  success  of  a  union  with  a  centralised  monetary  policy  and 
decentralised economic policies, which is not a political union. 
It  is  important  to  see  the  challenges  currently  facing  Europe  in  this  broader  context  –  and 
take the actions that are commensurate with it. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
