Deepak Mohanty: Lessons for monetary policy from the global financial 
crisis – an emerging market perspective 
Paper presented by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the Central Banks Conference of the Bank of Israel, Jerusalem, 1 April 2011. 
 The assistance by Jaya Mohanty, Rajeev Jain and Binod B. Bhoi is acknowledged.  
The  global  financial  crisis  has  challenged  the  conventional  views  on  the  role  of  monetary 
policy. Post-crisis, the weight of arguments tilts towards acceptance of financial stability as 
an objective of central bank or monetary policy. However, the key challenge is to evolve a 
consistent framework for implementation. While interest rate can continue as the dominant 
instrument for implementing monetary policy, supplementing it with other quantity or macro-
prudential instruments even in normal times will not only enhance the flexibility of monetary 
policy  to  attain  multiple  objectives  but  could  also  obviate  the  risk  of  hitting  the  zero  lower 
bound. 
Introduction 
I. 
I thank the Bank of Israel for this opportunity to present my views before this distinguished 
gathering.  The  past  three  years  have  been  unprecedented  in  the  history  of  the  world 
economy. The crisis though not unique in terms of its nature has certainly been more global 
and  intense  in  terms  of  its  impact.  The  expanse  of  the  crisis  has  tested  all  the  limits  of 
conventional and unconventional policy options available to policymakers around the world. 
In  fact,  the  speed  and  intensity  with  which  the  US  subprime  crisis  turned  into  a  global 
financial crisis and then into a global economic crisis has led to a whole new debate on the 
dominant tenets in macroeconomics. 
The  crisis  has  certainly  questioned  the  efficacy  of  the  existing  institutional  framework  and 
available policy instruments at the national as well as international levels in ensuring global 
financial  stability.  It  has  raised  skepticism  about  the  functioning  of  financial  markets  and 
institutions,  in  particular  their  capacity  to  price,  allocate  and  manage  risk  efficiently.  It 
exposed weaknesses in both private sector risk management and inadequacies in the public 
sector’s  oversight  of  the  financial  system.  The  lessons,  though  are  still  being  distilled,  are 
relevant not only to advanced economies but also to emerging market economies (EMEs). 
Against  this  backdrop,  I  will  reflect  on  the  following  set  of  questions.  How  was  the  recent 
crisis  different  from  the  past  crises  in  terms  of  its  cause  and  impact?  What  were  the 
differences  in  the  nature  of  policy  response  in  the  advanced  economies  and  EMEs?  How 
was India impacted and what were its policy responses? I will conclude by highlighting six 
key lessons from the crisis which have implications for the conduct of monetary policy. 
Genesis of the crisis 
II. 
It has now become clear that the crisis was not an outcome of any single cause rather the 
result  of  the  complex  interaction  between  a  host  of  macroeconomic  and  microeconomic 
factors. From a macroeconomic perspective, the crisis has been viewed as being caused by 
the persistence of global imbalances, excessively accommodative monetary policy pursued 
in major advanced economies and lack of recognition of asset prices in policy formulation. 
The microeconomic causes highlighted in the literature are the excessive credit growth and 
associated  leverages,  the  lowering  of  credit  standards,  rapid  financial  innovations  without 
adequate regulation, inadequate corporate governance, inappropriate incentive structure in 
the financial sector and overall lax oversight of the financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Global imbalances 
It is argued that while the subprime problem was the trigger, the root cause of the crisis lies 
in the persistence of the global imbalances (BIS, 2009). Large current account deficits in the 
advanced countries, especially the US, mirrored by large current account surpluses in EMEs, 
especially  China,  implied  that  excess  saving  flowed  uphill  from  developing  countries  to 
developed countries (Chart 1). This “saving glut” (Bernanke, 2005) was considered as one of 
the  factors  leading  to  the  crisis.  The  causation,  however,  is  not  very  clear:  whether  it  is 
excess  saving  in  China  or  excess  consumption  in  the  US  that  contributed  to  the  crisis 
(Mohanty, 2010). 
 At the same time, it is argued that large accumulation of reserves by the EMEs, led by China, 
as self insurance against sudden reversal of capital flows, caused misalignment of exchange 
rates. This prevented the global imbalances from adjusting in an orderly manner – with the 
burden  of  adjustment  falling  disproportionately  on  countries  with  flexible  exchange  rates. 
While there is merit in this argument, it is not clear whether movement in exchange rates by 
itself could have prevented global imbalances without an adjustment in aggregate demand – 
lower consumption in the US and higher consumption in China. 
Monetary policy 
In  a  number  of  advanced  countries,  policy  rates  remained  very  low  (i.e.,  below  what  is 
considered as neutral rates) for a sustained period which resulted in mispricing of risks and 
hence contributed to the crisis (Chart 2). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Notwithstanding  the  arguments  on  both  the  sides,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  monetary 
policies in advanced countries do have spillover effect on EMEs. For instance, persistence of 
low  interest  rates  in  advanced  economies,  by  increasing  the  interest  rate  differential  could 
push  excessive  capital  flows  to  EMEs  in  search  of  higher  returns,  thus  exposing  these 
economies  to  the  risk  of  reversal  unrelated  to  their  fundamentals.  Excessive  inflows  could 
accentuate asset prices and put upward pressure on exchange rate. Given the fact that most 
of EMEs are linked with advanced economies more than ever before, they could not remain 
insulated from the impact of crisis originating elsewhere. 
Excess leverage 
Apart  from  perpetuating  global  imbalances,  it  is  argued  that  the  easy  monetary  policy 
pursued in advanced economies encouraged excessive leveraging on the part of investors 
as  well  as  banks  and  financial  institutions.  The  sharp  rise  in  the  leverage  of  financial 
institutions in the first decade of this century has been particularly striking (Chart 3). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  3
Search for yields 
The low interest rates coupled with excess market liquidity led to the search for yields, which 
in turn promoted rapid financial innovations in terms of complex derivatives and structured 
finance  products.  Consequently,  the  financial  system  got  enlarged  with  the  growth  in  off-
balance sheet activities, and the shadow banking remained beyond the purview of regulation. 
During  the  golden  years,  financial  economists  believed  that  free-market  economies  could 
never  go  astray  which  is  belied  by  the  crisis  (Krugman,  2009).  The  financial  system, 
however,  remained  vulnerable  to  the  risks  of  reversal  in  easy  monetary  policy  on  the  one 
hand and disorderly unwinding of global imbalances on the other. It is argued that the “great 
moderation”  carried  the  seeds  of  its  own  destruction.  This  stability  bred  complacency, 
excessive  risk  taking  and,  ultimately,  instability  (Minsky,  2008).  Furthermore,  multilateral 
institutions like the IMF which were charged with the responsibility of surveillance, failed in 
diagnosing  the  vulnerabilities  both  at  the  global  level  and  at  the  level  of  systemically 
important advanced economies (Reddy, 2009). 
III. 
Impact and policy response 
Advanced economies 
The crisis manifested itself first in the form of tightening of liquidity in inter-bank markets in 
advanced economies as banks became reluctant to lend to each other because of the fear of 
counterparty  risks.  This  led  to  abnormal  level  of  spreads,  shortening  of  maturities,  and 
contraction  of  some  market  segments.  As  a  result,  banks  and  other  financial  institutions 
experienced erosion in their access to funding and capital. The tightening of credit conditions 
coupled with extreme risk aversion and deleveraging by banks and financial institutions led to 
a sharp slowdown in private sector credit growth. 
Equity prices also plunged in the face of heightened uncertainties. The falling equity prices 
coupled with the deteriorating macroeconomic conditions affected profitability of banks and 
financial institutions. Consequently, the liquidity problem transformed into a solvency problem 
leading to large scale bank failures in the US and other advanced economies in Europe. The 
attendant wealth loss on account of collapsing asset prices further aggravated the problem in 
the real sector. The real GDP growth in advanced economies decelerated from 2.7 per cent 
in 2007 to 0.2 per cent in 2008 and subsequently turned negative (–3.4 per cent) in 2009. 
Transmission to EMEs 
Initially, it was widely hypothesized that EMEs would remain insulated from global financial 
meltdown  on  the  back  of  the  buffer  in  terms  of  substantial  foreign  exchange  reserves, 
improved  policy  frameworks  and  generally  robust  banking  sector  and  corporate  balance 
sheets.  However,  as  the  crisis  intensified  further  with  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in 
September 2008 and resulted in heightened risk aversion and global deleveraging, the EMEs 
were affected. 
Policy response 
The international transmission of liquidity shocks was fast and unprecedented. While falling 
asset  prices  and  uncertainty  about  valuation  of  the  traded  instruments  affected  market 
liquidity, failure of leading global financial institutions and the deleveraging process tightened 
the market for funding liquidity. Given the growing risk of illiquidity cascading into solvency 
problems, 
response,  both  nationally  and 
internationally.  Monetary  authorities  in  the  advanced  economies  were  the  first  to  resort  to 
aggressive  monetary  easing  first  by  reducing  policy  rates  and  then  by  using  their  balance 
sheets in unconventional ways to augment liquidity. With the financial crisis spreading to the 
real  sector  and  raising  concerns  of  economic  recession,  credit  and  quantitative  easing 
acquired policy priority in most central banks. 
the  crisis  evoked  unprecedented  policy 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Central banks in advanced countries expanded the pool of securities as well as the number 
of  counter-parties  eligible  for  their  central  banking  operations  as  well  as  extended  the 
maturity  of  those  liquidity  providing  operations.  Implementation  of  such  unconventional 
measures  led  to  sharp  expansion  in  the  size  and  composition  of  their  balance  sheets 
(Chart 4). 
The large scale economic downturn accompanying the financial crisis also led to activation of 
counter-cyclical fiscal policy of unprecedented magnitude. The fiscal measures focused on 
improving the balance sheet of the financial and corporate sectors as reflected in large scale 
bailouts in the US and other advanced economies. Reflecting such fiscal stimulus measures, 
advanced economies witnessed significant deterioration in their fiscal position as reflected in 
high public debt to GDP ratios (Chart 5). 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
The contagion from the global financial crisis also warranted swift monetary and fiscal policy 
responses  in  EMEs  with  a  view  to  ensuring  orderly  functioning  of  markets,  preserving 
financial stability, and moderating its adverse effects on growth. They relied first on liquidity 
augmenting measures – forex liquidity followed by domestic liquidity – and used instruments 
such  as  currency  swaps  and  cash  reserve  ratio  before  activating  policy  rates  cuts,  albeit, 
from a much higher level. In the process, their policy responses became more synchronised 
with global efforts. 
Most emerging market central banks conducted outright sales of foreign exchange reserves 
to  help  meet  the  local  market’s  demand  for  foreign  currency  funding  and  to  relieve  the 
pressure  on  the  exchange  rate.  Central  banks  in  countries  like  Brazil,  Korea,  Mexico  and 
Singapore  had  dollar  swap  arrangements  with  the  Federal  Reserve.  However,  it  may  be 
noted  that  although  EMEs  undertook  several  liquidity-easing  and  foreign  exchange 
measures, their use of credit easing and quantitative easing was more limited (Table 1). 
While  both  developed  economies  and  EMEs  resorted  to  conventional  and  unconventional 
monetary  measures,  there  were  certain  differences  in  terms  of  their  timing,  types  and 
magnitudes. First, while in the advanced economies the switchover was from conventional 
monetary tools to unconventional measures due to policy rates approaching zero, in many 
EMEs, unconventional foreign exchange easing and domestic liquidity augmenting measures 
preceded  the  conventional  measures  of  policy  rate  cuts.  Second,  while  central  banks  in 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
EMEs  relied  mostly  on  direct  instruments  such  as  reserve  requirements  to  ease  domestic 
liquidity,  central  banks  in  advanced  countries  resorted  to  various  liquidity  providing 
operations through relaxation of counterparties, collaterals and maturity. Third, central banks 
in advanced countries extensively used credit and quantitative easing measures which led to 
large expansion of their balance sheets. Fourth, while in advanced economies fiscal support 
aimed at rescuing the financial sector from the crisis situation, in EMEs they were generally 
meant to address the deficiency in aggregate demand.  
Indian experience 
Until the emergence of the global crisis, the Indian economy was passing through a phase of 
high growth driven by domestic demand – growing domestic investment financed mostly by 
domestic  savings  and  sustained  consumption  demand.  Inflation  was  also  low  and  stable. 
Sequential  financial  sector  reforms,  rule-based  fiscal  policy  and  forward  looking  monetary 
policy together contributed to the improved macroeconomic performance. 
India, initially remained somewhat insulated to the global developments, but eventually was 
impacted  significantly  through  all  the  channels  –  financial,  real  and  more  importantly,  the 
confidence  channel  (Subbarao,  2009).  This  could  be  attributed  to  the  global  nature  of  the 
current crisis on the one hand and accelerated trade and financial integration of the Indian 
economy with the world since the 1990s on the other. Consequently, there has been a shift 
in  the  degree  of  synchronisation  of  the  Indian  trade  and  business  cycles  with  the  global 
cycles, which along with increased financial integration in the recent period indicate that India 
cannot remain immune to global trends. Global economic developments now have a greater 
influence on the domestic economy (Mohanty, 2009). 
The  impact  was  first  visible  on  India’s  financial  markets.  Equity,  money,  forex  and  credit 
markets came under pressure from a number of directions. Subsequently, under the impact 
of  external  demand  shocks,  the  Indian  economy  witnessed  a  moderation  in  growth, 
especially during the second half of 2008–09 and registered 6.8 per cent for the full year, in 
comparison with the robust growth performance in the preceding five years: 8.9 per cent per 
annum (Table 2). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
In order to limit the adverse impact of the contagion on the Indian financial markets and the 
broader  economy,  the  Reserve  Bank,  like  most  other  central  banks,  took  a  number  of 
conventional  and  unconventional  measures.  These  included  augmenting  domestic  and 
foreign exchange liquidity and a sharp reduction in the policy rates. The Reserve Bank used 
multiple instruments such as the liquidity adjustment facility (LAF), open market operations 
(OMO),  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR)  and  securities  under  the  market  stabilization  scheme 
(MSS)1 to augment the liquidity in the system. In a span of seven months between October 
2008 and April 2009, there was unprecedented policy activism. For example: (i) the repo rate 
was reduced by 425 basis points to 4.75 per cent, (ii) the reverse repo rate was reduced by 
275 basis points to 3.25 per cent, (iii) the CRR was reduced by a cumulative 400 basis points 
to 5.0 per cent, and (iv) reduction in statutory liquidity ratio (SLR) by 1 percentage point of 
banks’  net  demand  and  time  liabilities  (NDTL)  to  24  per  cent;  (v)  other  liquidity  provisions 
included special refinance facility for all scheduled commercial banks to the extent 1 per cent 
of their NDTL, term repo facility under LAF to enable banks to ease the liquidity stress faced 
by  mutual  funds,  NBFCs  and  housing  finance  companies  and  buyback  of  MSS  securities. 
The  cumulative  amount  of  primary  liquidity  potentially  made  available  through  all  these 
measures  to  the  financial  system  was  over  Rs.  5.6  trillion  (or  over  10  per  cent  of  GDP). 
These  measures  were  effective  in  ensuring  speedy  restoration  of  orderly  conditions  in  the 
financial  markets  over  a  short  time  span.  Despite  these  measures,  however,  the  balance 
sheet  of  the  Reserve  Bank  did  not  expand  much,  unlike  in  other  advanced  economies 
(Chart 4), as these operations were conducted mainly with banks as the counterparties and 
government securities as collaterals. 
By  synchronising  the  liquidity  management  operations  with  those  of  exchange  rate 
management  and  non-disruptive  internal  debt  management  operations,  the  Reserve  Bank 
ensured that appropriate liquidity was maintained in the system, consistent with the objective 
of price and financial stability. These measures were supported by fiscal stimulus packages 
during  2008–09  in  the  form  of  tax  cuts,  investment  in  infrastructure  and  increased 
expenditure  on  government  consumption.  This  raised  the  fiscal  deficit  of  the  Central 
Government  by  about  3.5  per  cent  of  GDP  to  6.0  per  cent  in  2008–09  (Table  2).  It  is, 
however, important to note that the entire fiscal stimulus in India was aimed at addressing 
the deficiency in aggregate demand rather than extending support to the financial sector as 
in  the  advanced  countries.  The  expansionary  fiscal  stance  continued  during  2009–10  to 
support aggregate demand. 
Subsequently,  with  further  consolidation  of  growth  and  inflation  emerging  as  a  major 
concern, India began its exit from accommodative monetary policy pursued during the crisis 
beginning October 2009. To begin with all special liquidity measures were withdrawn which 
was followed by hikes in policy rates – LAF repo and reverse repo rates have been raised by 
200  basis  points  and  250  basis  points,  respectively.  The  CRR  has  also  been  raised  by 
100 basis  points  to  6.0  per  cent  now.  The  process  of  fiscal  consolidation  resumed  in  
2010–11 is expected to be further strengthened in 2011–12. Thus, while the magnitude of 
the  crisis  was  global  in  nature,  the  policy  responses  in  India  were  adapted  to  domestic 
growth outlook, inflation conditions and financial stability considerations. 
Key differences in policy response: India vis-à-vis the advanced countries 
There were, however, some key differences between the actions taken by the Reserve Bank 
of India and the central banks in many advanced countries: 
                                                 
1   Market Stabilisation Scheme (MSS) securities are short-term government papers earlier issued for sterilisation 
purpose and remained impounded with the RBI. Redemption and buyback of these securities during the crisis 
injected rupee liquidity. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
      In the process of liquidity injection, the counter-parties were banks unlike non-banks 
in  case  of  advanced  economies.  Even  liquidity  measures  for  mutual  funds,  non-
banking financial companies (NBFCs) and housing finance companies were largely 
channeled through the banks.  
There was no compromise on collateral standards for injecting liquidity. Unlike the 
mortgage securities and commercial papers in the advanced economies, the range 
of collaterals was not expanded beyond government securities.  
Despite  large  liquidity  injection,  the  Reserve  Bank’s  balance  sheet  did  not  show 
unusual increase because of release of earlier sterilised liquidity. 
Availability and flexible use of multiple instruments facilitated better sequencing of 
monetary and liquidity measures. 
The use of pro-cyclical provisioning norms and counter-cyclical regulations ahead of 
the global crisis helped safeguard financial stability. 
Fiscal stimulus was geared to address deficiency in aggregate demand rather than 
supporting the financial sector as was the case in advanced economies. 
Lessons from the crisis 
IV. 
The  crisis  showed  that  irrespective  of  the  degree  of  globalisation  of  a  country  and  the 
soundness of its domestic policies, it cannot remain isolated due to the inter-linkages in the 
global  economy.  The  crisis  has  tested  the  mettle  of  central  banks.  In  the  process,  they 
reinvented  themselves  towards  the  unconventional  and  unprecedented  role  –  shifting  from 
the role as lender of last resort to lender of first resort. While it might yet be early to draw 
precise lessons, I will highlight six broad lessons reflecting on the ongoing debate, especially 
from an EME perspective.  
Lesson 1.  Monetary policy has limits: constrained by zero bound 
The dominant view during the pre-crisis period that one objective and one instrument as the 
best  monetary  policy  framework  has  come  under  question  during  the  crisis.  Despite  the 
success of this framework in achieving price stability, the crisis falsified the dominant view 
that price stability could simultaneously ensure financial stability. It can be observed from the 
sequencing  of  monetary  policy  responses  in  advanced  countries  that  as  policy  rates 
gradually  approached  record  lows  or  even  near  zero,  central  banks  had  to  resort  to 
unconventional  measures  such  as  credit  and  quantitative  easing,  which  posed  significant 
challenges to policy communication. 
New Keynesian models generally agree that monetary policy can be effective even at zero 
lower bound, if policy can take the form of credible commitments to future interest rate paths. 
However, the risk is that such commitments could undermine central banks’ credibility if not 
communicated  effectively.  As  solutions  to  zero  bound  constraint,  other  prescriptions 
(i) raising inflation targets by central banks (Blanchard et al., 2010) and (ii) making negative 
nominal  interest  rates  a  possibility  (Mankiw,  2010)  have  been  questioned  on  various 
grounds.  While  such  measures  may  have  a  stimulating  impact  on  the  economy,  they  may 
come at the risk of undermining public confidence in the central bank’s willingness to resist 
further upward shifts in inflation. 
Various alternative measures were undertaken in view of the constraint of zero lower bound. 
For  instance,  the  US  Fed  expanded  its  balance  sheet  on  the  liability  side  through 
remuneration of reserves to pursue an expansionary monetary policy. However, this in itself 
did not constitute an expansionary policy stance due to lack of associated incentive to spend. 
The  balance  sheet  expansion  on  the  asset  side  through  direct  purchases  of  private 
securities,  although  considered  to  be  more  effective,  had  repercussions  in  terms  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
profits/loss  with  attendant  fiscal  implications.  IMF  (2010)  points  out  that  in  case  of  severe 
crisis,  increases  in  risk  aversion  may  well  override  the  stimulus  to  consumption  and 
investment from low real interest rates. 
The  monetary  policy  frameworks  in  EMEs,  mostly  based  on  multiple  indicators  (e.g.,  in 
China,  India  and  Russia)  and  multiple  instruments  were  found  to  be  more  effective  in 
responding  to  the  crisis  situation  without  being  confronted  with  the  zero  lower  bound. 
Liquidity  management  operations  being  an  integral  part  of  execution  of  monetary  policy  in 
EMEs,  sequencing  of  policy  measures  in  a  combination  of  rate  and  quantity  instruments 
proved to be more effective. 
While  interest  rate  continues  to  be  the  dominant  instrument  for  implementing  monetary 
policy,  supplementing  it  by  other  quantity  or  macro-prudential  instruments  even  in  normal 
times will not only enhance the flexibility of monetary policy to attain multiple objectives but 
also could obviate the risk of hitting the zero lower bound. Concurrent deployment of multiple 
instruments also enhances the transmission of monetary policy which is impaired as policy 
rate moves close to the zero lower bound. 
Lesson 2.  Asset prices and monetary policy: leaning against the wind 
During  the  pre-crisis  period,  central  banks’  monetary  policy  gained  more  credibility  for 
achieving great moderation characterized by high growth and low inflation. With the adoption 
of inflation targeting increasing number of central banks had focused primarily on maintaining 
price stability. However, it needs to be recognized that globalization was another major factor 
contributing to the great moderation. Countries such as China and India with their abundant 
labour  provided  low  cost  substitutes  and  thereby  helped  contain  both  inflation  and  wage 
pressures  in  the  advanced  economies.  Consequently,  with  explicit  focus  on  price  stability, 
central banks were able to anchor inflationary expectations and gain credibility. 
On  the  back  of  robust  growth,  there  was  “benign  neglect”  of  credit  market  excesses  and 
asset price booms. The pre-crisis view largely favoured that asset markets were efficient at 
distributing  and  pricing  risk.  Even  though  there  could  be  some  temporary  bouts  in  asset 
prices due to “exuberance” on the part of investors, there was little that monetary policy could 
do  about  them  (Bean  et  al.,  2010).  Moreover,  many  central  banks  had  limited  or  no 
supervisory role and therefore ignored or failed to assess the systemic risk arising from credit 
and building up of asset price bubbles, partly fuelled by a low interest rate environment. 
Post-crisis, it is increasingly recognised that the policy of benign neglect of asset price build-
up did not succeed: price stability by itself cannot deliver financial stability. Accordingly, it is 
felt that the mandate of monetary policy should encompass macro-financial stability and not 
just price stability. The view that monetary policy frameworks should allow policymakers to 
lean  against  the  buildup  of  financial  imbalances,  even  if  near-term  inflation  expectations 
remain  anchored,  appears  to  be  gaining  ground.  The  balance  of  views  within  the  central 
banking  community  has  been  shifting  in  this  direction  (Carney,  2009;  Shirakawa,  2009; 
Trichet, 2009; Cagliarini et al, 2010; Woodford, 2010 and Fischer, 2011). 
It  is  argued  that  central  banks  must  improve  the  underlying  analytical  framework  of  their 
monetary  policy  taking  due  cognisance  of  asset  price  movements,  monetary  and  credit 
developments and the build-up of financial imbalances in order to identify potential risks and 
ensure  more  informed  decision  making.  Given  the  likely  synergy  between  macroprudential 
supervision  and  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  the  perception  has  gained  importance  that 
central  banks,  entrusted  with  regulatory  and  supervisory  functions, in  addition  to monetary 
policy functions, are better equipped to foster financial stability goals. In fact, many central 
banks  have  recently  been  assigned  with  new  responsibilities  for  microprudential  and 
macroprudential supervision – such as the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Lesson 3.  Financial stability objective: instrumentality not clear? 
Post-crisis  there  is  emerging  consensus  that  financial  stability  should  be  an  objective  of 
central  banks  but  opinion  remains  divided  as  to  what  extent  it  can  be  considered  as  an 
additional  objective  of  monetary  policy.  It  is  argued  that  the  monetary  policy  horizon  for 
achieving  the  inflation  target  could  be  lengthened  to  facilitate  taking  financial  stability 
concerns into account. IMF (2010) noted that in adopting such an approach, central banks 
need to guard against the persistent deviations of inflation which may otherwise dilute policy 
accountability and create uncertainty about the long-term commitment to price stability. The 
question is: should financial stability objectives be considered explicitly in the central bank’s 
reaction  function?  Svensson  (2009)  argues  that  it  should  be  treated  as  a  constraint  to 
monetary  policy  rather  than  as  a  separate  target.  The  rationale  being  that  under  normal 
circumstances financial stability does not impose any constraints on monetary policy, except 
in  crisis  when  it  undermines  the  effectiveness  of  transmission  mechanism.  Broader 
mandates for central banks will need to be made explicit and conditional on the priority of the 
core mandates (Gokarn, 2010). 
Many  EMEs  had  financial  stability  as  an  additional  objective  of  their  monetary  policy 
framework and therefore used multiple instruments, including quantitative tools such as the 
cash  reserve  ratio  to  moderate  the  pace  of  domestic  credit  growth  as  well  as  monetary 
impact of large capital flows (e.g., China, India and Russia). Macro-prudential measures in 
the  form  of  loan  loss  provisioning  requirements  were  used  to  target  certain  sectors  in  a 
number  of  EMEs  (Moreno,  2011).  Apart  from  raising  provisioning  requirements  (on  banks’ 
exposure to systemically important nonbank financial institutions), risk weights (for housing 
loans, consumer credit and commercial real estate) were also used to check unbridled credit 
growth  in  specific  sectors.  Several  countries  used  credit  ceilings  (such  as  Indonesia)  and 
window guidance (involving consultations between the authorities and the banks in China) to 
curtail lending, while Korea used aggregate credit ceiling to target credit to small and medium 
enterprises.  
Even  while  the  weight  of  arguments  tilts  towards  acceptance  of  financial  stability  as  an 
objective of central bank or monetary policy, there is little agreement about what should be 
the framework and how it should be implemented: First, even if central banks closely monitor 
developments in asset markets, how to calibrate the policy response remains an open-ended 
issue?  Second,  do  central  banks  have  a  sufficient  number  of  instruments  to  conduct  both 
monetary and prudential policy to fulfill a dual mandate of price and financial stability? If both 
monetary  policy  and  prudential  policies  are  conducted  by  the  central  bank,  dedicated 
governance  arrangements  are  needed  to  ensure  monetary  policy  independence  (IMF, 
2010).Third, how to coordinate macro-prudential tools with other supervisory and regulatory 
agencies?  This  issue  becomes  all  the  more  important  when  regulatory  and  supervisory 
functions of financial system do not fall under central banks’ purview. Fourth, there are also 
risks  that  macro-prudential  tools  may  under  certain  conditions  act  as  substitutes  to  policy 
interest  rates  and  thereby  could  undermine  the  effectiveness  of  monetary  transmission 
mechanism. 
Lesson 4.  Financial stability: a shared responsibility?  
There  is  no  denying  that  financial  stability,  by  its  nature,  lacks  precise  specification  and 
measurement  unlike  price  stability.  Even  though  greater  role  for  central  banks  has  been 
widely  recognized  for  ensuring  financial  stability,  unlike  price  stability,  a  formal  institutional 
framework  for  better  coordination  with  other  regulatory  agencies  is  yet  to  evolve.  Caruana 
(2011)  highlighted  that  determining  the  manner  of  interaction  and  ensuring  central  bank 
autonomy needed to achieve price stability, will not be easy. 
Nonetheless, a number of countries, viz., the UK, the US and Euro area are gearing towards 
a new set of arrangements for better coordination between financial regulatory agencies. In 
particular, central  banks  are  being  assigned  with  an  enhanced  role  for  financial  stability  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
view of their informational advantage with respect to the dynamics of the financial system. 
For  instance,  in  the  UK  a  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC)  has  been  set  up  under  the 
Chairmanship  of  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England  to  promote  financial  stability  objective. 
Within the Bank of England, a Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) has been constituted to 
deal with issues related to macro-prudential regulation for reducing risks across the financial 
system. In this context, it may be noted that in many EMEs, including India, the responsibility 
for  executing  monetary  policy  and  supervising  the  financial  system  rested  with  the  central 
banks. This sort of arrangement proved to be more effective during the crisis, especially by 
enabling central banks to undertake macro-prudential measures.  
In the recent years, the Reserve Bank conducted macro-prudential regulation being both the 
monetary authority and the regulator of banks and non-bank financial institutions. However, 
there are different regulators for the capital market, insurance and pension fund. In order to 
facilitate  coordination  amongst  the  various  regulators  of  the  financial  system,  recently  a 
Financial  Stability  and  Development  Council  (FSDC)  has  been  set  up  with  the  Finance 
Minister as Chairman. While coordination mechanisms within the financial sector have been 
strengthened,  it  is  yet  early  to  assess  their  efficacy  which  will  be  tested  by  future 
developments.  
Lesson 5.  Need for development of local bond market 
In the context of stability of the external sector, a key initiative could be to develop the local 
currency  bond  market.  Experience  shows  that  capital  flows  to  emerging  and  developing 
countries take a sudden hit even if they are not the source of crisis. This can pose a number 
of  challenges  for  policy  makers  in  EMEs.  First,  financing  of  growth  can  be  an  issue  with 
significant dependence on external resources. Second, domestic currencies tend to fall with 
reversal  of  capital  flows.  Third,  bank-intermediation  is  also  adversely  affected  as  was 
observed during the recent crisis. Under such circumstances, countries with well functioning 
and liquid local bond markets cope better with shocks and the risks stemming from frozen 
credit  markets.  Since  EMEs  do  not  have  reserve  currency  status,  they  need  to  keep 
adequate buffers of foreign exchange reserves to insure against sudden reversals in investor 
sentiment. 
In  India,  the  Reserve  Bank  and  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI)  have 
taken a number of steps to develop the market microstructure of the corporate bond market. 
Limits on foreign investment in local currency bonds have been progressively liberalised. It is 
expected  that  further  reforms  in  insurance  and  pension  segments  of  the  financial  sector 
alongside  fiscal  consolidation  will  spur  demand  for  corporate  bonds.  As  India  has  a  huge 
need  for  infrastructure  development,  the  expansion  of  corporate  bond  market  becomes 
important.  
Lesson 6.  Exchange rate policy and global imbalances 
It is argued that the coexistence of complementary growth models may have contributed to 
the  crisis.  While  many  EMEs  followed  export-oriented  growth  models,  major  advanced 
economies  followed  debt  fueled  growth  models  which  were  not  bound  by  external  current 
account constraints. This ultimately led to building up of global imbalances between current 
account deficits and surpluses as well as between savings and investment. The causation, 
however, is not very clear: whether it is excess savings in EMEs or excess consumption in 
the advanced countries that contributed to the crisis. Moreover, it is also not clear whether 
movement  in  exchange  rates  by  itself  could  have  prevented  global  imbalances  without  an 
adjustment in aggregate demand – lower consumption in the advanced countries and higher 
consumption  in  EMEs.  On  balance,  there  is  broad  agreement  that  greater  flexibility  in 
exchange rate could help moderate global imbalance. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Conclusion 
V. 
The  recent  experience  showed  that  conventional  policy  framework  may  not  always  be 
sufficient  to  deal  with  crisis.  Therefore,  central  banks  have  to  be  flexible  enough  and 
innovative  in  their  policy  approach  to  respond  promptly  to  the  build-up  of  sectoral 
imbalances. 
The dominant view during the pre-crisis period that one objective and one instrument as the 
best  monetary  policy  framework  has  come  under  question  during  the  crisis.  Experience  in 
EMEs  including  India  suggests  that  multiple  indicators  along  with  multiple  instruments  can 
work well not only during normal times but also during crisis. While interest rate can continue 
as  the  dominant  instrument  for  implementing  monetary  policy,  supplementing  it  with  other 
quantity  or  macro-prudential  instruments  even  in  normal  times  will  not  only  enhance  the 
flexibility  of  monetary  policy  to  attain  multiple  objectives  but  also  could  obviate  the  risk  of 
hitting the zero lower bound. 
Post-crisis,  there  is  emerging  consensus  that  financial  stability  should  be  an  objective  of 
central  banks  but  opinion  remains  divided  as  to  what  extent  it  can  be  considered  as  an 
additional  objective  of  monetary  policy.  Even  while  the  weight  of  arguments  tilts  towards 
acceptance of financial stability as an objective of central bank or monetary policy, the key 
challenge is to evolve a consistent framework for implementation. 
(2010), 
“Rethinking 
References 
Bank for International Settlements (2009), 79th Annual Report, June. 
Bean, Charles, Matthias Paustian, Adrian Penalver and Tim Taylor (2010), “Monetary Policy 
after  the  Fall”,  Paper  presented  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Annual 
Conference Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 27.  
Bernanke,  Ben  S.  (2005),  “The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit”, 
Remarks at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia. 
Blanchard,  Olivier;  Giovanni  Dell’Ariccia  and  Paolo  Mauro 
Macroeconomic Policy”, IMF Staff Position Note No.10/03, February 12. 
Cagliarini A., Kent C. and Stevens G. (2010), “Fifty years of Monetary Policy: What have we 
Learned?”, Reserve Bank of Australia’s 50th Anniversary Symposium, Sydney, February 9. 
Carney  M.  (2009),  “Some  Considerations  on  Using  Monetary  Policy  to  Stabilize  Economic 
Activity”,  Remarks  at  the  symposium  on  Financial  stability  and  macroeconomic  policy 
sponsored  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City,  Jackson  Hole,  Wyoming, 
August 22. 
Caruana,  Jaime  (2011),  “The  Role  of  Central  Banks  after  the  Crisis”,  Speech  at  the 
Observatory of the European Central Bank, January 19. 
Fischer,  Stanley  (2011),  “Central  Bank  Lessons  from  the  Global  Crisis”,  3rd  P.R. 
Brahamananda Memorial Lecture at Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, February 11.  
Gokarn,  Subir  (2010),  “Monetary  Policy  Considerations  after  the  Crisis:  Practitioners’ 
Perspectives”,  Plenary  Lecture  at 
Inclusive 
Development”  organized  by  the  Ministry  of  Finance,  Government  of  India  and  National 
Institute of Public Finance and Policy at New Delhi on December 1. 
International Monetary Fund (2010), “Central Banking Lessons from the Crisis”, available at 
http://www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2010/052710.pdf.  
Ishi,  Kotaro,  Mark  Stone  and  Etienne  B.  Yehoue  (2009),  “Unconventional  Central  Bank 
Measures for Emerging Economies”, IMF Working Paper WP/09/226, October. 
the  Conference  “Economic  Policies 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
Krugman,  Paul  (2009),  “How  Did  Economists  Get  It  So  Wrong?”,  The  New  York  Times, 
September 2. 
Mankiw, N. Gregory (2009), “It May Be Time for the Fed to Go Negative”, New York Times, 
April 18. 
Minsky, Hyman P. (2008), Stabilizing an Unstable Economy, McGraw-Hill Publications.  
Mohanty, Deepak (2009), “Global Financial Crisis and Monetary Policy Response in India”, 
RBI Bulletin, December.  
----------- (2010), “The Global Financial Crisis: Genesis, Impact and Lessons”, RBI Bulletin, 
February.  
Moreno, R.  (2011), “Policymaking from a  Macroprudential Perspective in Emerging Market 
Economies”, BIS Working Papers No. 336. 
Reddy, Y.V. (2009), “Epilogue” in India and the Global Financial Crisis: Managing Money and 
Finance, Orient Blackswan, New Delhi.  
Reinhart, Carmen M., and Kenneth S. Rogoff. (2009), This Time is Different: Eight Centuries 
of Financial Folly, Princeton University Press. 
Shirakawa,  M.  (2009),  “Some  Thoughts  on  Incentives  at  Micro-  and  Macro-level  for  Crisis 
Prevention”,  Remarks  at 
“Financial  and 
Macroeconomic Resilience – Revisited”, Basel, June 26. 
Subbarao, D. (2009), “Impact of the Global Financial Crisis on India: Collateral Damage and 
Response”,  Speech  delivered  at  the  Symposium  on  “The  Global  Economic  Crisis  and 
Challenges  for  the  Asian  Economy  in  a  Changing  World”  organized  by  the  Institute  for 
International Monetary Affairs, Tokyo, February 18. 
Svensson, Lars E O (2009), “Flexible Inflation Targeting – Lessons from the Financial Crisis”, 
Speech at the Workshop “Towards a New Framework for Monetary Policy? Lessons from the 
Crisis”, Organised by the Netherlands Bank, Amsterdam, September 21.  
Trichet, J. C. (2009), “Credible Alertness Revisited”, Speech delivered at the Symposium on 
Financial  Stability  and  Macroeconomic  Policy,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City, 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 22.  
Woodford,  M  (2010),  “Financial  Intermediation  and  Macroeconomic  Analysis”,  Journal  of 
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 24 (4), Fall.  
the  Eighth  BIS  Annual  Conference  on 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
