Yves Mersch: Financial crisis and the challenge of supervision 
Welcome address by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at the 
ESE (European Supervisor Education Initiative) Conference 2011: “Financial crisis and the 
challenge of supervision”, Luxembourg, 28 September 2011. 
 framework  should  better  position  authorities 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure and an honor to host the 2011 European Supervisor Education Initiative 
conference on Financial Crises and the Challenge of Supervision here in Luxembourg. I am 
pleased  to  note  that  so  many  participants  from  the  supervisory  and  central  banking 
community  are  attending.  I  am  convinced,  that  stimulating  input  by  the  distinguished 
discussants will be beneficial to all participants. The Banque centrale du Luxembourg, given 
its mandate of prudential liquidity supervision and its role in macro-prudential policies, has 
joined the European Supervisor Education Initiative in 2010. 
Against the background of renewed vulnerabilities and turbulences in markets, the subject of 
the conference is indeed very timely. Liquidity risk, together with sovereign and funding risk 
constitute  for  the  time  being  the  main  threats  to  the  EU-banking  system.  The  recent 
intensification of tensions in the sovereign debt market has led to contagion risk of systemic 
nature. 
From a supervisory perspective, let me redraw that the past financial crisis have evidenced 
the fact that micro-prudential supervisory instruments and tools alone, if used in an isolated 
way, may no longer be sufficient to address the challenges posed by financial instability. 
The need has been highlighted to restructure regulation and supervision and to go beyond a 
purely micro-prudential approach in this regard. Focussing on the development of a macro-
prudential 
reducing 
to  contribute 
pro-cyclicality and improving the financial sector’s resilience to adverse shocks.  
In  response  to  the  regulatory  challenges,  the  European  System  of  Financial  Supervision 
(ESFS) has been established, under which the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) has 
been made responsible for the macro-prudential oversight of the financial system as a whole. 
The  work  of  the  ESRB,  which  is  founded  on  close  cooperation  between  central  banks, 
national  supervisory  authorities,  the  European  Supervisory  Authorities  (ESAs)  and  policy 
makers, will contribute to the mitigation of systemic risk within the financial system.  
However, despite the significant progress in institutional architecture at the European level, 
crucial  areas  within  global  and  national  financial  systems  remain  fragile  and  vulnerable  to 
unexpected shocks. All countries face a varying degree of challenges. In Luxembourg we still 
have significant gaps, particularly with respect to institutional reforms and the adjustment of 
our  model  of  supervision.  In  this  regard,  I  am  aware  that  there  is  no  perfect  supervisory 
model,  nevertheless,  we  must  try  to  profit  from  the  recent  experiences  of  other  neighbour 
countries in order to mitigate systemic vulnerabilities and enhance financial stability. As you 
know,  different  countries;  U.K.,  Belgium,  France  and  recently  Switzerland,  have  adjusted 
their model to be more integrated.  
So it would appear self-evident that central banks, given their role as lenders of last resort 
and their responsibilities in monetary policy and liquidity management, should play a key role 
in  safeguarding  financial  stability.  However,  the  lender  of  last  resort  might  be  the  most 
important backstop during periods of financial turbulences, nevertheless this should not be a 
“free  lunch”.  In  order  to  fulfill  their  responsibilities  effectively,  central  banks  should  be 
equipped with a clear and independent macro-prudential mandate and toolbox to assess and 
mitigate  macro-prudential  risks  at  the  systemic  level.  This  proposal  is  coherent  with  the 
to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
I  welcome 
the  business  cycle.  Thus, 
recommendations  of  the  de  Larosière  report  which  attributed  an  umbrella  role  to  central 
banks in the supervisory framework. 
In this regard, it must be assured that national macro-prudential authorities have the flexibility 
to  adjust  regulatory  requirements  over 
the 
Commission’s  proposal  regarding  CRD  IV  in  particular,  the  countercyclical  capital  buffer. 
However,  the  macro-prudential  regime  must  find  a  balance  between  preserving  national 
flexibility  –  as  the  business  cycle  varies  between  European  countries  –  and  maintaining  a 
level playing field so as not to distort competition within the Single Market.  
As  I  mentioned,  aside  from  the  institutional  arrangements,  many  challenges  remain  to  be 
resolved. The G-20 and the European Commission have taken some initiatives in addressing 
the regulatory deficiencies highlighted by the crisis. These include Basel III, OTC derivatives, 
the shadow banking system, high frequency trading, central counterparties (CCPs) and crisis 
resolution  mechanisms,  etc...  Such  proposals  remain  at  an  early  stage  and  still  face  the 
challenges of jurisdictional realities.  
Let me now focus on some specific issues that may arise under the new regulatory regime. 
With respect to liquidity, two new instruments have been proposed i.e. the Liquidity Coverage 
Ratio  (LCR)  and  the  Net  Stable  Funding  Ratio  (NSFR).  These  quantities  are  intended  to 
improve  financial  institutions’  liquidity  risk  profiles  and  the  resulting  increase  in  resilience 
should help to mitigate funding and market liquidity risk. In combination with a more robust 
and efficient supervisory landscape, the new liquidity standards should also help to bolster 
internal  liquidity  risk  management  practices.  This  issue  remains  crucial  as  the  recent 
sovereign  debt  turbulences  have  increased  the  level  of  liquidity  pressure  experienced  by 
banks. At the same time, tensions in foreign currency funding for financial institutions have 
become  acute  and  it  seems  to  be  important  that  these  concerns  be  addressed  within  the 
context of the new regulation. 
Going forward at the national level, the BCL has seen the need to incorporate these ratios 
into its current risk-based liquidity surveillance framework which relies on a combination of 
qualitative and quantitative elements. In addition, regular on-site visits and continuous off-site 
monitoring  are  currently  combined  with  a  five  day  forward-looking  liquidity  reporting  by 
banks.  
The BCL also sees the need to conduct surveys and studies in order to assess the liquidity 
situation of financial institutions. Indeed, with regard to the new liquidity ratios, an empirical 
analysis was performed in Luxembourg. The results revealed that a one-size fits all approach 
to  liquidity  supervision  might  not  be  appropriate  given  the  diversity  of  banks’  business 
models.  Thus  I  wonder  if  it  would  more  useful  to  complement  the  focus  on  financial 
institutions  by  taking  into  account  their  activities.  Therefore,  a  maximum  harmonized 
rulebook, disallowing flexibility on a national level, does not strike the right balance between 
efficient  liquidity  surveillance  and  increased  resilience  of  banks.  The  issue  of  the 
maintenance  of  liquidity  buffers  at  national  level  for  host  entities  of  cross-border  banking 
groups shall deserve particular attention in this regard. 
It is profoundly in the interest of all actors that these new requirements be implemented in a 
consistent  and  timely  manner.  During  the  transitional  period  however,  further  analysis  is 
required  in  order  to  ensure  an  appropriate  calibration.  Unintended  consequences  due  to 
restricting the ability of banks to manage their short and long-term liquidity or to undertake 
the  maturity  transformation  process  which  represent  the  core  of  financial  intermediary 
activities need to be weighed against the intended benefits.  
Furthermore,  care  should  also  be  taken  to  avoid  incentivising  banks  to  shift  some  of  their 
activities to the non-regulated banking system; the so-called “parallel” or ”shadow” banking 
sector.  Currently,  only  preliminary  information  on  the  level  of  interconnectedness  between 
regulated and non-regulated entities is available to supervisors. Additional work is needed in 
this  regard,  in  order  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  financial  regulation  across  markets  and 
jurisdictions. Looking forward potential new risks stemming from micro-structural issues such 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
as  UCITS  exchange-traded  funds  and  high  frequency  trading,  which  I  mentioned  before, 
need to be properly addressed. 
Regarding the access of credit institutions to central bank funding, their eligibility should be 
based  on  their  financial  soundness,  as  assessed  through  their  solvency  and  liquidity 
robustness. It is therefore of crucial importance for central banks to have access to relevant 
and  detailed  micro-prudential  information  and  assessments  on  their  monetary  policy 
counterparts. Moreover, this assessment cannot be dissociated from prudential information 
on the banking group to which the respective counterpart belongs. This calls for an enhanced 
participation by central banks and their involvement both in the EU College of Supervisors 
and cross border stability groups. 
Before  I  conclude,  I  think  it  would  be  appropriate  to  point  out  that  the  increased  level  of 
interconnectedness  of  financial  systems  and  banking  groups  highlights  the  need  for 
improved cross-border cooperation and crisis management.  
Finally, let me mention human capital requirements as another key area which often goes, 
unmentioned  yet  is  important  for  improving  the  quality  and  efficacy  of  supervision.  By 
combining the competencies and skills of supervisors and central banks, the ESE initiative 
certainly  contributes  to  enhancing  the  convergence  of  practices.  Under  this  welcome 
initiative,  the  efforts  of  the  Banque  centrale  du  Luxembourg  will  continue  to  enhance  the 
approach adopted by the ESE initiative.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, I wish you a pleasant stay in Luxembourg, and an interesting and 
successful  conference.  I  am  sure  the  presentations  as  well  as  the  panel  discussions  will 
include interesting and fresh ideas and insights from which all participants can benefit in their 
ongoing tasks, be it at local or cross-border level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
