Masaaki Shirakawa: Great East Japan Earthquake – resilience of society 
and determination to rebuild 
Remarks  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the  Council  on 
Foreign Relations, New York, 14 April 2011. 
 Introduction 
I. 
I  am  privileged  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  before  the  Council  on  Foreign  Relations 
today.  Before  beginning  my  speech,  I  would  like  to  extend  my  heartfelt  gratitude  to  the 
government and people of the United States for the support and encouragement concerning 
the tragic Great East Japan Earthquake. The situation in the areas close to the earthquake 
epicenter,  particularly  coastal  areas  that  were  hit  hard  by  the  tsunami,  is  disastrous.  The 
disaster  claimed  about  13  thousand  lives  and  more  than  15  thousand  people  are  still 
missing.  Residents  of  areas  near  the  Fukushima  Daiichi  nuclear  power  plant  have  been 
directed  to evacuate,  and  are  forced  to  spend  restless days  and  nights  in  shelters.  In  this 
way, Japan has faced a trying time since the earthquake struck. At the same time, however, 
Japanese society has shown resilience. The work of rebuilding has started to get under way, 
gradually  but  steadily.  In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  talk  about  the  situation  in  Japan  in  the 
month after the earthquake and the work being done to rebuild Japan’s economy. 
Experience in the month after the earthquake 
II. 
A good place to start is what happened in the financial markets, the area I am familiar with. The 
earthquake struck at 2:46 p.m. on Friday, March 11. At the time, I was being briefed by staff in 
preparation  for  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  scheduled  to  be  held  at  the  beginning  of  the 
following  week.  Even  in  Tokyo,  about  250  miles  away  from  the  earthquake  epicenter,  the 
shaking from the earthquake was the strongest that I had ever experienced and continued for 
more than two minutes. The earthquake’s magnitude at the epicenter was 9.0, which makes it 
the largest on record in Japan, and the energy released was enormous (Chart 1). Based on 
previously formulated emergency procedure, the Bank of Japan immediately set up a disaster 
management team with me as head. This task was completed 14 minutes after the earthquake 
struck. The most important thing for a central bank during a crisis is to ensure the stability of 
settlement systems and financial markets. The Bank of Japan Financial Network System, or 
BOJ-NET – Japan’s core settlement system for funds and government securities – has been 
operating  without  any  problems  the  entire  time  since  the  earthquake  struck.  The  Bank  of 
Japan’s Fukushima branch, which is about 40 miles away from the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear 
plant, has been conducting its business as usual, and has been providing cash, including on 
the weekend immediately after the earthquake. Financial market stability has been maintained. 
I would also note that trading on the Tokyo Stock Exchange has been perfectly normal. 
Looking  beyond  the  world  of  settlement  systems  and  financial  markets,  the  people  in  the 
disaster  areas  have  been  calm  and  composed  and  full  of  a  spirit  of  mutual  cooperation, 
despite  such  a  difficult  living  environment.  In  Tokyo,  although  electricity  shortages  are 
causing  some  inconvenience,  people  have  accepted  these  new  realities  and  adapted 
immediately. One of the visible changes is that people are increasingly deciding themselves 
to cancel parties or other events, as a mark of respect to the victims of the disaster and out 
of  consideration  for  the  feelings  of  the  people  affected.  Another  change  is  a  substantial 
decline in visitors from overseas. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Effects on Japan’s economy 
III. 
Next, let me turn to the effects on Japan’s economy of the disastrous events – namely, the 
earthquake,  tsunami,  and  nuclear  accident.  Something  that  has  not  been  recognized  so 
much is that Japan’s economy in 2010 performed best among the G-7 economies in terms of 
both  growth  rate  and  unemployment  rate  (Chart  2).  The  disaster  occurred  at  a  time  when 
Japan’s economy was gradually returning to a recovery path, albeit a moderate one. In the 
short  run,  it  is  inevitable  that  the  earthquake  will  significantly  affect  production  and  other 
economic activity through its damage to supply capacity. The four prefectures most affected 
by the earthquake and tsunami in total account for about 6 percent of Japan’s GDP (Chart 3). 
In  the  case  of  the  Kobe  Earthquake,  which  occurred  in  January  1995,  real  GDP  did  not 
decline,  even  in  the  quarter  when  the  earthquake  occurred.  In  contrast,  the  March  11 
earthquake will have a greater impact on production for the following reasons. 
First,  this  was  not  just  an  earthquake  that  was  huge  in  magnitude  and  geographically 
widespread. It also triggered tsunami, which, together with the earthquake, caused a nuclear 
accident. 
Second,  hard-to-replace  parts  and  material  produced  in  factories  in  the  disaster  areas  are 
integral  to  supply  chains.  A  typical  example  is  electronic  parts,  the  shortage  of  which  has 
been  having  a  severe  impact  on  automobile  production  even  in  non-affected  areas.  The 
effects  might  go  beyond  the  domestic  sphere.  The  economies  of  Japan,  China  and  the 
United  States  have  become  interdependent,  in  that  Japan  produces  the  parts,  China 
assembles them, and the United States develops the finished consumer products. Therefore, 
the impact on supply chains could spread internationally (Chart 4). 
Third,  Japan’s  power  generating  facilities  have  been  significantly  impaired.  The  problems 
associated with nuclear power generation have been a subject of intense scrutiny due to the 
accident  at  the  Fukushima  Daiichi  nuclear  power  plant,  but  it  is  worth  noting  that  the 
earthquake also caused serious damage to thermal power plants (Charts 5 and 6). Measures 
are  currently  being  taken  to  curtail  demand  through  various  efforts  such  as  asking 
businesses and households to conserve electricity, and at the same time, steps are being 
taken to restore generating capacity. The power shortages will be temporarily eased due to 
seasonal  factors,  but  electricity  could  run  short  again  in  Tokyo  Electric  Power  Company’s 
service  area  when  demand  peaks  in  the  summer.  For  historical  reasons,  Japan  has  two 
frequency  domains  and  there  is  little  room  for  surplus  electricity  to  be  delivered  across 
domains. 
The impact of such supply constraints will be serious in the short term. But at the same time, 
we should remember that the impact of the disaster can be mitigated by human wisdom and 
determination.  Let  me  give  you  two  examples  of  how  the  impact  is  being  and  will  be 
mitigated. 
First, top priority is now being placed on fixing the production and supply bottleneck of parts 
and materials, with the cooperation of the firms using them. At the same time, we are now 
seeing  signs  that  alternate  production  has  started  in  domestic  factories  located  in  places 
other than the affected areas. And on the electricity front, efforts are being made to devise 
effective measures for curtailing energy use during the high-demand period in summer when 
electricity could run short. 
Second, as time passes, demand will also emerge for restoring damaged capital stock such 
as  roads,  factories,  and  houses.  While  it  is  difficult  to  accurately  forecast  the  amount  and 
time path of rebuilding demand at present, the amount of damage to capital stock due to the 
earthquake and tsunami will be about 3 to 5 percent of nominal GDP and 1 to 2 percent of 
total capital stock, according to government estimates (Chart 7). 
Taking these factors into account, most private economists believe that Japan’s GDP growth 
rate will turn positive again from the third quarter of 2011 onward. Moreover, from a longer-
term perspective, new demand is expected to emerge. For example, the recent experience of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
disruption  to  supply  chains  has  made  us  aware  of  a  concentration  of  risks  in  particular 
regions  or  with  respect  to  particular  firms.  This  new  awareness,  through  a  rethinking  of 
business strategies, could generate new investment in, for example, computer centers and 
distribution depots. The accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear plant has triggered active 
global  discussion  on  nuclear  power  policy,  which  will  highlight  the  importance  of  energy 
conservation and environmental technologies. And as Japanese firms have an edge in those 
areas, such as high-end batteries, there will be great room for them to make contributions. 
Tasks ahead for Japan’s economic rebuilding 
IV. 
Various  challenges  lie  ahead  on  the  road  to  overcoming  the  adverse  effects  of  the 
earthquake and rebuilding Japan’s economy. 
The first challenge is ensuring the necessary financing for rebuilding. In this regard, Japan 
has continued to have a current account surplus. In other words, Japan has had an excess of 
savings over investment for a protracted period, which means that, from a macroeconomic 
perspective, this financing will not be difficult (Chart 8). Japan’s capacity for foreign currency 
funding is extremely strong, given that the country is the biggest creditor nation in the world, 
with  net  external  assets  of  2.9  trillion  U.S.  dollars,  or  57  percent  of  nominal  GDP.  Private 
financial  institutions  are  fully  able  to  meet  an  increase  in  financing  demand  for  rebuilding. 
Rumors  have  circulated  that  Japanese  insurance  companies  would  sell  foreign  currency 
assets due to an increase in payments of insurance claims relating to the earthquake and 
subsequent events. These companies have ample short-term liquid assets, so they do not 
need  to  sell  their  foreign  currency  assets  in  order  to  make  the  payments.  Meanwhile, 
Japanese government bonds have been issued quite smoothly and long-term interest rates 
have  remained  stable  at  low  levels  compared  with  other  countries.  As  long  as  Japan 
continues to work tirelessly toward rebuilding, it is unlikely financing problems will arise. 
The second challenge is raising Japan’s potential growth rate. Since 2000, Japan has had 
one of the highest GDP growth rates per worker among G-7 countries, although slightly lower 
than  the  United  States  (Chart  9).  However,  the  decline  in  the  working-age  population  in 
Japan is proceeding at a pace that has no precedent in modern economic history (Chart 10). 
As a result, Japan’s economic growth has been on a downtrend. Raising the potential growth 
rate  was  the  biggest  challenge  for  Japan’s  economy  even  before  the  earthquake,  but  the 
efforts to do so by raising both the labor participation rate and productivity have now become 
all the more important. As Japan seeks to rebuild its economy, efforts to raise the potential 
growth rate have become even more important. These are certainly not easy challenges, but 
we have to take them on with great determination. 
The Bank of Japan’s response 
V. 
Finally, let me briefly touch on the Bank of Japan’s response after the earthquake struck. As 
was the case in the financial markets immediately after the failure of Lehman Brothers, when 
people’s lives and safety are at risk, they sometimes tend to become excessively risk averse, 
which makes things worse. Incidentally, while foreign nationals residing in Tokyo increasingly 
left Japan for fear of radiation risk, it has tended to be overlooked that the radiation levels in 
Tokyo  are  roughly  the  same  as  in  other  major  cities  around  the  world,  such  as  Paris  and 
Berlin, or they were exposed to more radiation on the airplane than they would have been 
exposed to in Tokyo. In the money markets, financial institutions’ precautionary demand for 
liquidity surged. Rumors have spread among the foreign financial community that the Tokyo 
financial  markets  would  close  due  to  fears  of  radiation  risk.  The  Bank  of  Japan  has  been 
asked  whether  there  was  any  truth  to  the  rumors  that  the  Bank  of  Japan  was  planning  to 
retreat to a backup site in the western part of Japan. Of course, these rumors were and are 
groundless. As I said, the financial infrastructures are fully functional and there is no reason 
for us to relocate from Tokyo. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In such times, the first priority is ensuring calm among market participants, and in this regard 
the  Bank  of  Japan has provided  ample  liquidity  on  an  unprecedented  scale  day after  day. 
The  very  next  business  day  after  the  earthquake,  we  decided  to  significantly  increase  the 
amount  of  its  asset  purchases,  mainly  of  risk  assets,  with  a  view  to  preventing  any 
deterioration  in  business  sentiment  or  excessive  increase  in  risk  aversion  from  adversely 
affecting economic activity. As a result of these measures, financial markets, which became 
somewhat  jittery  in  the  period  immediately  after  the  earthquake  occurred,  have  regained 
stability.  Needless  to  say,  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  mission  is  to  ensure  price  and  financial 
system stability, thereby contributing to the sustainable growth of Japan’s economy. We will 
continue to take appropriate measures as the central bank in order to achieve this mission. 
Concluding remarks 
VI. 
As I mentioned earlier, nothing is more heartening in a crisis than the encouragement and 
support  of  friends  overseas.  I  would  like  to  conclude  by  thanking  you  once  again  for  your 
friendship.  With  the  resilience  of  Japanese  society  and  the  determination  to  rebuild,  I  am 
absolutely  convinced  that  Japan’s  economy  will  overcome  this  trying  time,  successfully 
rebuild and become even better placed with greater growth potential. With that, I would like 
to conclude my remarks. Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 
 
 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5
 6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 