Jean-Claude Trichet: ECB press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
and  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of 
the  European  Central  Bank,  Helsinki, 
5 May 2011. 
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  Vice-President  and  I  are  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  our 
press  conference  here  in  Helsinki.  I  would  like  to  thank  Governor  Liikanen  for  his  kind 
hospitality  and  express  our  special  gratitude  to  his  staff  for  the  excellent  organisation  of 
today’s meeting of the Governing Council. We will now report on the outcome of the meeting, 
which was also attended by Commissioner Rehn.  
Based  on  its  regular  economic  and  monetary  analyses,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to 
keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged following the 25-basis point increase on 7 April 
2011. The information that has become available since then confirms our assessment that an 
adjustment of the very accommodative monetary policy stance was warranted. We continue 
to see upward pressure on overall inflation, mainly owing to energy and commodity prices. 
While the monetary analysis indicates that the underlying pace of monetary expansion is still 
moderate, monetary liquidity remains ample and may facilitate the accommodation of price 
pressures. Furthermore, recent economic data confirm the positive underlying momentum of 
economic activity in the euro area, with uncertainty continuing to be elevated. All in all, it is 
essential  that  recent  price  developments  do  not  give  rise  to  broad-based  inflationary 
pressures. Inflation expectations in the euro area must remain firmly anchored in line with our 
aim  of  maintaining  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  Such 
anchoring  is  a  prerequisite  for  monetary  policy  to  make  an  ongoing  contribution  towards 
supporting economic growth and job creation in the euro area. With interest rates across the 
entire maturity spectrum remaining low and the monetary policy stance still accommodative, 
we will continue to monitor very closely all developments with respect to upside risks to price 
stability. Maintaining price stability over the medium term is our guiding principle, which we 
apply when assessing new information, forming our judgements and deciding on any further 
adjustment of the accommodative stance of monetary policy. 
As  stated  on  previous  occasions,  the  provision  of  liquidity  and  the  allotment  modes  for 
refinancing  operations  will  also  be  adjusted  when  appropriate,  taking  into  account  the  fact 
that all the non-standard measures taken during the period of acute financial market tensions 
are, by construction, temporary in nature.  
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Following the 0.3% quarter-on-quarter increase in euro area real GDP in the fourth quarter of 
2010,  recent  statistical  releases  and  survey-based  indicators  point  towards  a  continued 
positive underlying momentum of economic activity in the euro area during the first quarter of 
2011 and at the beginning of the second quarter. Looking ahead, euro area exports should 
be supported by the ongoing expansion in the world economy. At the same time, taking into 
account  the  high  level  of  business  confidence  in  the  euro  area,  private  sector  domestic 
demand  should  contribute 
the 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  and  the  measures  adopted  to  improve  the 
functioning of the financial system. However, activity is expected to continue to be dampened 
somewhat by the process of balance sheet adjustment in various sectors. 
In  the  Governing  Council’s  assessment,  the  risks  to  this  economic  outlook  remain  broadly 
balanced  in  an  environment  of  elevated  uncertainty.  On  the  one  hand,  global  trade  may 
continue  to  grow  more  rapidly  than  expected,  thereby  supporting  euro  area  exports. 
Moreover,  strong  business  confidence  could  provide  more  support  to  domestic  economic 
activity in the euro area than currently expected. On the other hand, downside risks relate to 
to  economic  growth,  benefiting 
increasingly 
from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  ongoing  tensions  in  some  segments  of  the  financial  markets  that  may  potentially  spill 
over to the euro area real economy. Downside risks also relate to further increases in energy 
prices,  particularly  in  view  of  ongoing  geopolitical  tensions  in  North  Africa  and  the  Middle 
East,  and  to  protectionist  pressures  and  the  possibility  of  a  disorderly  correction  of  global 
imbalances. Finally, there are still potential risks stemming from the economic impact on the 
euro area and elsewhere of the natural and nuclear disasters in Japan. 
With  regard  to  price  developments,  euro  area  annual  HICP  inflation  was  2.8%  in  April 
according  to  Eurostat’s  flash  estimate,  after  2.7%  in  March.  The  increase  in  inflation  rates 
during the first four months of 2011 largely reflects higher commodity prices. Looking ahead, 
inflation rates are likely to stay clearly above 2% over the coming months. Upward pressure 
on  inflation,  mainly  from  energy  and  commodity  prices,  is  also  discernible  in  the  earlier 
stages of the production process. It is of paramount importance that the rise in HICP inflation 
does not translate into second-round effects in price and wage-setting behaviour and lead to 
broad-based inflationary pressures. Inflation expectations must remain firmly anchored in line 
with the Governing Council’s aim of maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over 
the medium term.  
Risks to the medium-term outlook for price developments remain on the upside. They relate, 
in particular, to higher than assumed increases in energy prices, not least on account of the 
ongoing  political  tensions  in  North  Africa  and  the  Middle  East.  More  generally,  strong 
economic growth in emerging markets, supported by ample liquidity at the global level, may 
further  fuel  commodity  price  rises.  Moreover,  increases  in  indirect  taxes  and  administered 
prices may be greater than currently assumed, owing to the need for fiscal consolidation in 
the  coming  years.  Finally,  risks  also  relate  to  stronger  than  expected  domestic  price 
pressures in the context of the ongoing recovery in activity. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, the annual growth rate of M3 increased to 2.3% in March 
2011,  from  2.1%  in  February.  Looking  through  the  recent  volatility  in  broad  money  growth 
caused  by  special  factors,  M3  growth  has  continued  to  edge  up  over  recent  months.  The 
annual  growth  rate  of  loans  to  the  private  sector  remained  broadly  unchanged  at  2.5%  in 
March,  after  2.6%  in  February.  Overall,  the  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion  is 
gradually  picking  up,  but  it  remains  moderate.  At  the  same  time,  monetary  liquidity 
accumulated prior to the period of financial market tensions remains ample and may facilitate 
the accommodation of price pressures in the euro area.  
Looking at M3 components, the annual growth rate of M1 remained broadly unchanged in 
March, while that of other short-term deposits increased. The development partly reflects the 
gradual  increase  in  the  remuneration  of  these  deposits  over  recent  months.  At  the  same 
time, the steep yield curve implies a dampening impact on overall M3 growth, as it reduces 
the attractiveness of monetary assets compared with more highly remunerated longer-term 
instruments outside M3. 
On the counterpart side, there has been a further slight strengthening in the growth of loans 
to  non-financial  corporations,  which  rose  to  0.8%  in  March,  after  0.6%  in  February.  The 
growth of loans to households was 3.4% in March, compared with 3.0% in February. Looking 
through short-term volatility, the latest data confirm a continued gradual strengthening in the 
annual growth of lending to the non-financial private sector. 
The overall size of bank balance sheets has remained broadly unchanged over the past few 
months,  notwithstanding  some  volatility.  It  is  important  that  banks  continue  to  expand  the 
provision of credit to the private sector in an environment of increasing demand. To address 
this  challenge,  where  necessary,  it  is  essential  for  banks  to  retain  earnings,  to  turn  to  the 
market  to  strengthen  further  their  capital  bases  or  to  take  full  advantage  of  government 
support measures for recapitalisation. In particular, banks that currently have limited access 
to market financing urgently need to increase their capital and their efficiency. 
To sum up, based on its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council 
decided to keep the key ECB interest rates unchanged following the 25-basis point increase 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
on  7  April  2011.  The  information  that  has  become  available  since  then  confirms  our 
assessment  that  an  adjustment  of  the  very  accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  was 
warranted. We continue to see upward pressure on overall inflation, mainly owing to energy 
and commodity prices. A cross-check with the signals coming from our monetary analysis 
indicates that, while the underlying pace of monetary expansion is still moderate, monetary 
liquidity  remains  ample  and  may  facilitate  the  accommodation  of  price  pressures. 
Furthermore, recent economic data confirm the positive underlying momentum of economic 
activity in the euro area, with uncertainty continuing to be elevated. All in all, it is essential 
that  recent  price  developments  do  not  give  rise  to  broad-based  inflationary  pressures. 
Inflation expectations in the euro area must remain firmly  anchored in line with our aim of 
maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Such anchoring is 
a  prerequisite  for  monetary  policy  to  make  an  ongoing  contribution  towards  supporting 
economic  growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro  area.  With  interest  rates  across  the  entire 
maturity spectrum remaining low and the monetary policy stance still accommodative, we will 
continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all  developments  with  respect  to  upside  risks  to  price 
stability. Maintaining price stability over the medium term is our guiding principle, which we 
apply when assessing new information, forming our judgments and deciding on any further 
adjustment of the accommodative stance of monetary policy. 
Turning  to  fiscal  policies,  current  information  points  to  uneven  developments  in  countries’ 
adherence  to  the  agreed  fiscal  consolidation  plans.  There  is  a  risk  that,  in  some  countries, 
fiscal balances may fall behind the targets agreed by the ECOFIN Council for the necessary 
and timely correction of excessive deficits. It is essential that all governments meet the fiscal 
balance  targets  for  2011  that  they  have  announced.  Where  necessary,  additional  corrective 
measures  must  be  implemented  swiftly  to  ensure  progress  in  achieving  fiscal  sustainability. 
The implementation of credible policies is crucial in view of ongoing financial market pressures.  
At the same time, it is of the utmost importance that substantial and far-reaching structural 
reforms be implemented urgently in the euro area in order to strengthen its growth potential, 
competitiveness  and  flexibility.  In  particular,  countries  which  have  high  fiscal  and  external 
deficits  or  which  are  suffering  from  a  loss  of  competitiveness  should  embark  on 
comprehensive  economic  reforms.  In  the  case  of  product  markets,  policies  that  enhance 
competition and innovation should, in particular, be further pursued to speed up restructuring 
and  to  bring  about  improvements  in  productivity.  Regarding  the  labour  market,  the  priority 
must  be  to  enhance  wage  flexibility  and  incentives  to  work,  and  to  remove  labour  market 
rigidities. 
The  Governing  Council,  in  line  with  the  ECB’s  opinion  of  17  February  2011  on  the  six 
legislative  proposals  on  economic  governance,  urges  the  ECOFIN  Council,  the  European 
Parliament  and  the  European  Commission  to  agree,  in  the  context  of  their  “trialogue”,  on 
more stringent requirements, more automaticity in the procedures and a clearer focus on the 
most vulnerable countries with losses in competitiveness. 
Finally, the Governing Council welcomes the economic and financial adjustment programme 
which was agreed by the Portuguese government following the successful conclusion of the 
negotiations with the European Commission, in liaison with the ECB, and the International 
Monetary Fund. 
The programme contains the necessary elements to bring about a sustainable stabilisation of 
the  Portuguese  economy.  It  addresses  in  a  decisive  manner  the  economic  and  financial 
causes  underlying  current  market  concerns  and  will  thereby  contribute  to  restoring 
confidence and safeguarding financial stability in the euro area. 
The  Governing  Council  welcomes  the  commitment  of  the  Portuguese  public  authorities  to 
take  all  the  necessary  measures  to  achieve  the  objectives  of  the  programme.  It  considers 
very important the broad political support for the adjustment programme, which enhances the 
overall credibility of the programme. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
