Mark Carney: Housing in Canada 
Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Vancouver Board of 
Trade, Vancouver, British Columbia, 15 June 2011. 
 Introduction 
It is a pleasure to be back in Vancouver, a place often rated as the world’s most liveable city. 
Less  frequently  is  it  viewed  as  the  most  affordable.  In  the  past  three  years,  the  average 
Vancouver  house  price  is  up  about  30  per  cent,  making  this  city  an  extreme  example  of 
general developments in Canadian housing. 
In my remarks, I will discuss the Canadian residential real estate market, consider some of 
the lessons from recent international experience and, finally, draw the policy implications. 
Importance to Canadians 
The single biggest investment most Canadian households will ever make is in their home. 
Housing  represents  almost  40  per  cent  of  the  average  family’s  total  assets,  roughly 
equivalent to their investments in the stock market, insurance and pension plans combined. 
In recent years, housing has proved a very good investment indeed. The value of residential 
real  estate  holdings  in Canada  has  climbed  more  than  250  per  cent  in  the  past  20  years, 
vastly  outpacing 
income  over 
that period (Chart 1). 
However, Canada is arguably no better off because of it. That’s because while homeowners 
may feel wealthier because of this rise in prices, housing is not net national wealth. Some 
Canadians  are  long  housing;  others  are  short.  Housing  developments  can  have  important 
implications for equality both across and between generations. Though some people in this 
room  may  have  been  enriched,  their  children  and  neighbours  may  have  been  relatively 
impoverished. 
in  consumer  prices  and  disposable 
increases 
Importance to the Bank of Canada 
Housing  not  only  meets  a  fundamental  human  need,  it  also  has  a  wider  economic 
significance. The Bank of Canada cares about the housing market because it can affect both 
price and financial stability. Let me address these in turn. 
Price stability 
The objective of Canadian monetary policy is low, stable and predictable inflation, defined as 
a  2  per  cent  annual  rate  of  increase  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI).  Housing  can 
influence inflation in three principal ways. 
First, it is a major element of the CPI, accounting for more than a fifth of the basket of goods 
and services that makes up the index. The prominence of housing in the Bank’s target index 
provides an important advantage in that it ensures that the most important asset price in the 
economy is directly relevant to monetary policy. 
Second, the real estate sector makes a significant, if volatile, call on resources and labour in 
our  economy,  thereby  influencing  wages  and  price  pressures  more  generally.  While 
residential investment has accounted for only 6 per cent of GDP on average over the past 
30 years, activity in the sector has been four times more volatile than the overall economy 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
over that period. Thus developments in housing substantially affect the business cycle and 
by extension inflation. 
Third,  while  changes  in  housing  values  may  not  lead  to  changes  in  net  wealth,  they  do 
influence  consumption  by  affecting  households’  access 
this 
“financial-accelerator”  effect,  homeowners  can  borrow  more  against  increases  in  home 
equity  to  finance  home  renovations,  the  purchase  of  a  second  house,  or  other  goods  and 
services.  Such  expenditures  can  accelerate  the  increase  in  house  prices,  reinforcing  the 
growth  in  collateral  values  and  access to  borrowing,  leading  to  a  further  rise  in household 
spending. Of course, this financial accelerator can also work in reverse: a decrease in house 
prices tends to reduce household borrowing capacity, and amplify the decline in spending.1, 2  
to  credit.  Through 
Financial stability 
A home purchase triggers the biggest liability most families will ever take on. The value of 
housing-related debt in Canada has nearly tripled over the past decade to $1.3 trillion. This 
debt is also the single largest exposure for Canadian financial institutions, with real estate 
loans  making  up  more  than  40  per  cent  of  the  assets  of  Canadian  banks,  up  from  about 
30 per cent a decade ago (Chart 2). 
This unprecedented exposure exists in the context of a Canadian mortgage market that is 
subject  to  more  stringent  checks  and  balances  than  in  the  United  States.  For  instance, 
almost all Canadian mortgages are full recourse, mortgage interest is not tax-deductible, and 
high-ratio lending standards are generally prudent. These factors help instil responsibility and 
discipline on both homeowners and lenders. 
Nonetheless, the central position of housing assets and liabilities on the balance sheets of 
both households and financial institutions means that any housing excesses could generate 
important vulnerabilities in the financial system. 
Housing market developments in Canada and abroad 
A review of the recent history is instructive. 
A benign global macroeconomic environment and rapid financial innovation contributed to a 
global housing market boom through much of the past decade. In some countries, it went too 
far.  Most  prominently,  in  the  United  States,  a  substantial  deterioration  in  underwriting 
standards turned boom to bubble and, ultimately, to bust. U.S. housing starts are now down 
three-quarters  from  their  peak  and  prices  have  fallen  by  one-third.  There  have  been  over 
nine million foreclosures initiated since the cycle turned, and almost one in four mortgages is 
now in a negative equity position. 
While  some  details  differ,  most  notably  in  the  scale  of  defaults,  recent  trends  have  been 
similar  in  the  United  Kingdom,  Spain  and  Ireland,  where  housing  markets  remain  acutely 
challenged. 
                                                 
1  This finding is also consistent with reduced-form evidence of a correlation between consumer spending and 
housing wealth. See L. Pichette, “Are Wealth Effects Important for Canada?” Bank of Canada Review (Spring 
2004): 29–35. 
2  Research conducted  at the  Bank of Canada and elsewhere suggests that the financial-accelerator  effect is 
economically significant. See M. Iacoviello, “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints and Monetary Policy in the 
Business  Cycle”  The  American  Economic  Review  95,  No.  3  (2005):  739–64.  See  also:  M.B.  Roi  and 
R. Mendes,  “House  Prices,  Residential  Mortgage  Credit  and  Monetary  Policy,”  Bank  of  Canada,  December 
2004;  and  J.  Campbell  and  J.  F.  Cocco,  “How  Do  House  Prices  Affect  Consumption?  Evidence  from 
Micro Data,” (Harvard Institute of Economic Research Working Papers No. 2045, 2004 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Elsewhere,  however,  the  global  financial  crisis  proved  to  be  only  a  brief  setback,  with  the 
growth of house prices resuming, or even exceeding, its former pace.3  
Canada falls into this latter group. Nationally, our house prices have risen 31 per cent from 
their trough in early 2009, to stand 13 per cent above their pre-crisis peak (Chart 3).4 Here in 
Vancouver, the recovery has been even stronger, with prices up 55 per cent from their trough 
to a level 29 per cent above the prior peak. The rebound in housing market transactions and 
new construction, both locally and nationally, has been similarly robust. 
The  performance  of  Canadian  housing  during  the  recent  cycle  has  been  unusual.  For 
example, it took nearly 12 years for real residential investment to regain its level on the eve 
of the 1990s recession; this time it took only a year and a half (Chart 4). This rapid recovery 
importantly reflects the evolution of monetary policy during the recent recession. In response 
to  the  sharp,  synchronous  global  recession,  the  Bank  lowered  its  policy  rate  rapidly  to  its 
lowest possible level, doubled our balance sheet, and provided exceptional guidance on the 
likely path of our target rate. 
With the initial rapid narrowing of the output gap, the return of employment to a level above 
its pre-crisis peak, the highly effective transmission of monetary policy in Canada, and the 
sustained momentum in household borrowing, the need for such emergency policies passed 
(Chart 5). As a consequence, the conditional commitment was removed, our balance sheet 
was  normalized,  and  rates  were  successively  tightened  until  they  reached  1  per  cent  last 
autumn, where they have remained. 
These policies provided considerable stimulus to the Canadian economy during a period of 
very weak global economic conditions and major downside risks. The housing market, highly 
sensitive  to  interest  rates,  responded.  The  rapid  bounce-back  in  housing  activity  was  also 
supported  by  federal  government  initiatives,  notably  the  Insured  Mortgage  Purchase  Plan 
and the Home Renovation Tax Credit. As a result, the recovery in the housing market played 
an important role in ensuring that the recession in Canada, while sharp, was also short. 
With  this  renewed  vigour  building  on  the  decade-long  boom  that  preceded  the  crisis,  the 
average level of house prices nationally now stands at nearly four-and-a-half times average 
household disposable income. This compares with an average ratio of three-and-a-half over 
the  past  quarter-century  (Chart  6).  Simple  house  price-to-rent  comparisons  also  suggest 
elevated valuations (Chart 7). While neither of these metrics reflect the impact of low interest 
rates, even after adjusting for these effects, valuations look very firm. For example, the ratio 
between the all-in monthly costs of owning a home and renting a home, as measured in the 
CPI, is close to its highest level since these series were first kept in 1949 (Chart 8). 
Financial vulnerabilities have increased as a result. Canadians are now as indebted (relative 
to  their  income)  as  the  Americans  and  the  British  (Chart  9).  The  Bank  estimates  that  the 
proportion of Canadian households that would be highly vulnerable to an adverse economic 
shock has risen to its highest level in nine years, despite improving economic conditions and 
the  ongoing  low  level  of  interest  rates.5  This  partly  reflects  the  fact  that  the  increase  in 
aggregate  household  debt  over  the  past  decade  has  been  driven  by  households  with  the 
highest debt levels (Chart 10). 
There are some offsets. Debt is largely fixed rate and household net worth is at an all-time 
high. However, borrowers should remember that a fixed-rate mortgage will reprice a number 
of times over the life of the mortgage and, while asset prices can rise and fall, debt endures. 
                                                 
3  This  has  been  the  pattern  in  many  emerging-market  economies,  notably  China,  as  well  as  in  a  number  of 
advanced economies that were not directly implicated in the crisis, such as Australia, Sweden and Israel. 
4  According to the Canadian Real Estate Association’s Multiple Listing Service. 
5  The  Bank  defines  highly  vulnerable  indebted  households  as  those  with  a  debt-service  ratio  greater  than  or 
equal to 40 per cent. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The fact that the “official” personal savings rate in Canada has remained consistently positive 
is of limited comfort.6 The personal savings rate has fallen to historically low levels, despite 
the  fact  that  the  baby-boom  generation  is  entering  its  highest  saving  years.7  Adjusting  for 
housing expenditures, Canadian households have now collectively run a net financial deficit 
for 40 consecutive quarters, in effect, demanding funds from the rest of the economy, rather 
than  providing  them,  as  had  been  the  case  through  the  1960s,  1970s,  1980s  and  1990s 
(Chart 11). 
How concerned should we be? To answer requires a deeper examination of the fundamental 
forces of supply and demand in the Canadian housing market. 
The forces of supply and demand 
Canada’s housing supply is relatively flexible, compared with other countries (Chart 12), and 
it appears to have grown at rates broadly consistent with underlying demand forces, the most 
important of which is the rate of household formation (Chart 13).8  
Some excesses may exist in certain areas and market segments. In particular, the elevated 
level  of  “multiples”  inventories  (Chart 14),  the  ample  pipeline  of  developments  under  way, 
and heavy investor demand (much of it foreign) reinforces the possibility of an overshoot in 
the condo market in some major cities. 
Moreover, looking at the amount being spent on Canadian housing, rather than simply the 
number  of  houses  being  built,  suggests  that  overall  activity  has  been  quite  robust. 
Residential  investment  as  a  whole  (including  new  home  construction,  renovations  and 
ownership  transfer  costs)  has  consistently  exceeded  its  long-term  average  share  of  the 
overall economic activity for more than seven years. Residential investment is now at levels 
that have previously proved to be peaks in Canada and, on a relative basis, in the United 
States (Chart 15). This partly reflects the generally strong performance of Canada’s labour 
market  over  the  past  decade,  which  has  driven  solid  gains  in  employment  and  income. 
However, it  also reflects historically favourable borrowing conditions, and potentially overly 
optimistic assumptions about future developments. 
Lower interest rates reduce the cost of financing the purchase or construction of houses and 
increase the value of collateral, enabling more borrowing than would otherwise be possible. 
While monetary policy rates influence mortgage rates across the yield curve, mortgage rates 
are ultimately set in the market, where a broad set of domestic and global forces play a role. 
Among  these  forces,  the  so-called  “global  savings  glut”  has  been  particularly  important  in 
underpinning the trend decline in long-term borrowing rates over the past decade. Flows of 
excess  savings  from  emerging  markets  into  the  U.S.  Treasury  market  have  restrained  the 
long-term  U.S.  interest  rates  that  provide  the  benchmark  for  yield  curves  globally.  Rough 
calculations  suggest  that  the  lower  real  rates  from  this  phenomenon  could  justify  a 
substantial  proportion  of  the  increase  in  house  valuations  across  mature  markets.9  The 
                                                 
6  The “official” savings rate refers to the personal savings rate as calculated in the Canadian System of National 
Accounts. 
7  The  calculation  of  the  personal  savings  rate  does  not  incorporate  spending  on  housing  such  as  ownership 
transfer costs and renovations, which are considered investments, even though it could be argued that they 
are more akin to consumption. However, regardless of whether such spending is classified as investment or 
consumption, it is often financed with borrowed funds. 
8  A. Caldera Sánchez and Å. Johansson, “The Price Responsiveness of Housing Supply in OECD Countries”, 
OECD Economics Department Working Papers, forthcoming, 2011. 
9  S.  Nickell,  “Household  Debt,  House  Prices  and  Consumption  Growth,”  speech  delivered  at  Bloomberg  in 
London on Tuesday, 14 September 2004. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
eventual rebalancing of the global economy from deficit countries, like the United States, to 
surplus countries, like China, should dampen this effect.  
As  in  many  other  countries,  cheap  credit  has  been  used  to  bid  up  the  price  of  Canadian 
houses,  a  non-tradable  good,  rather  than  invest  in  expanding  the  productive  capacity  and 
export competitiveness of our businesses. For example, over the past decade, housing debt 
grew by more than 150 per cent, while business borrowing rose by only 40 per cent. As a 
result,  the  stock  of  housing-related  debt  went  from  less  than  business  debt  to  almost 
two-thirds more. 
Domestic  demand  factors  are  not  the  only  forces  at  work.  Some  Asian  wealth  is  being 
invested in selected international housing markets as those investors seek out diversification 
and  hard  assets.  This  has  become  a  familiar  phenomenon  in  this  city.  Partly  as  a 
consequence, the average selling price of a home in Vancouver is now nearly 11 times the 
average  Vancouver  family’s  household  income,  a  multiple  similar  to  those  seen  in  Hong 
Kong  and  Sydney  –  cities  that  have  also  become  part  of  a  more  globalized  real  estate 
market. Such valuations are extreme in both Canada and globally (Chart 16). 
Given such developments, one cannot totally discount the possibility that some pockets of 
the Canadian housing market are taking on characteristics of financial asset markets, where 
expectations  can  dominate  underlying  forces  of  supply  and  demand.  The  risk  is  that 
expectations become extrapolative, prompting the classic market emotions of greed and fear 
– greed among speculators and investors – and fear among households that getting a foot 
on the property ladder is a now-or-never proposition. 
Policy implications 
The  Bank  manages  policy  for  the  economy  as  a  whole,  rather  than  any  specific  region  or 
sector.  In  this  context,  what  does  the  Bank  of  Canada  expect  for  housing?  In  a  word: 
moderation. 
In  the  Bank’s  view,  Canadian  housing  market  developments  in  recent  years  have  largely 
reflected  the  evolution  of  supply  and  demand.  While  supply  of  new  homes  should  remain 
relatively flexible, many of the supportive demand forces are now increasingly played out. 
For  example,  while  measures  of  housing  affordability  remain  favourable,  this  is  largely 
because interest rates are unusually low. Rates will not remain at their current levels forever. 
The  impact  of  eventual  increases  is  likely  to  be  greater  than  in  previous  cycles,  given  the 
higher stock of debt owed by Canadian households. At a 4 per cent real mortgage interest 
rate  –  equivalent  to  the  average  rate  since  1995  –  affordability  falls  to  its  worst  level  in 
16 years (Chart 17).10 As I have observed, some markets are already severely unaffordable 
even at current rates. 
Since 2008, the federal government has taken a series of prudent and timely measures to 
tighten  mortgage  insurance  requirements  in  order  to  support  the  long-term  stability  of  the 
Canadian housing market. These will reduce the possibility that prices are further driven up 
simply through higher leverage. 
The  Bank  has  been  expecting  moderation  in  the  housing  sector  as  part  of  a  broader 
rebalancing of demand in Canada as the expansion progresses. Overall economic growth is 
expected  to  rely  less  on  household  and  government  spending,  and  more  on  business 
investment and net exports. Household expenditures are expected to converge toward their 
historic share of overall demand in Canada (Chart 18), with expenditures growing more in 
                                                 
10  The affordability index represents the proportion of the average personal disposable income per worker that 
goes toward mortgage payments, based on current house prices and mortgage rates. A decline in the ratio 
indicates an improvement in affordability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
line with household income. In this context, the Bank anticipates a slowing in both the rate of 
household credit growth and the upward trajectory of household debt-to-income ratios. 
There  are  conflicting  signals  regarding  the  extent  to  which  this  moderation  is  proceeding 
(Chart 19). While growth in consumer spending slowed markedly in the first quarter, housing 
investment  re-accelerated,  as  did  household  borrowing,  with  mortgage  credit  growing  at  a 
double-digit annual rate (Chart 20). It is likely that some of this resurgence in borrowing is 
transitory,  reflecting  the  lagged  effects  of  the  surge  in  existing  home  sales  in  the  fourth 
quarter of last year, as well as recent changes in mortgage insurance regulations that may 
have  resulted  in  some  activity  being  pulled  forward  into  the  first  quarter.  Mortgage  credit 
growth slowed in April, reinforcing the view that the particularly strong increase in borrowing 
in  the  first  quarter  was  temporary.  Nonetheless,  at  a  5  per  cent  annual  rate,  growth  in 
mortgage credit in April was slower but not slow, particularly given the sustained above-trend 
increases of recent years. 
As  the  Bank  emphasized  in  its  recent  rate  announcement,  the  possibility  of  greater 
momentum  in  household  borrowing  and  spending  in  Canada  represents  an  upside  risk  to 
inflation. 
Conclusion 
In conclusion, historically low policy rates, even if appropriate to achieve the inflation target, 
create their own risks. 
Canadian  authorities  will  need  to  remain  as  vigilant  as  they  have  been  in  the  past  to  the 
possibility of financial imbalances developing in an environment of still-low interest rates and 
relative price stability. We continue to co-operate closely and monitor the financial situation of 
the household sector. 
In the short term, economic growth in Canada is expected to slow to modest rates, due to a 
number  of  temporary  factors.  These  include  supply  chain  disruptions  that  will  dampen 
automotive  production  and  the  drag  from  adjusting  to  higher  energy  prices  on  consumer 
spending in Canada and the United States. Overall, the Bank expects a re-acceleration of 
growth in the second half of the year, consistent with a renewed narrowing of the output gap. 
While  global  uncertainties  persist,  to  the  extent  that  the  Canadian  economic  expansion 
continues  and  the  current  material  excess  supply  in  the  economy  is  gradually  absorbed, 
some  of  the  considerable  monetary  policy  stimulus  currently  in  place  will  be  eventually 
withdrawn,  consistent  with  achieving  the  2  per  cent  inflation  target.  Such  reduction  would 
need to be carefully considered. 
With  monetary  policy  continuing  to  be  set  to  achieve  the  inflation  target,  our  institutions 
should not be lulled into a false sense of security by current low rates. Similarly, households 
will  need  to  be  prudent  in  their  borrowing,  recognising  that  over  the  life  of  a  mortgage, 
interest rates will often be much higher. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  7
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  15
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
