Thomas M Hoenig: Recent developments in US agriculture and its role in 
the US economy 
Statement by Mr Thomas M Hoenig, President of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 
before  the  Senate  Committee  on  Agriculture,  Nutrition  and  Forestry,  Washington  DC, 
17 February 2011. 
 Thank  you,  Madam  Chair.  I  appreciate  the  opportunity  to  discuss  recent  developments  in 
U.S. agriculture and its role in the U.S. economy. Agriculture remains a vital industry in the 
expansive region that the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City serves and, accordingly, our 
Bank  has  a  long  tradition  of  focusing  significant  attention  on  industry  developments.  Our 
observations  on  agriculture,  in  turn,  have  given  us  useful  insight  into  the  U.S.  and  global 
economies more broadly. In my remarks this morning, I’ll describe recent developments in 
the nation’s farm economy and discuss some risks that have my attention.  
Recent developments in U.S. agriculture  
Agriculture  –  broadly  defined  as  farm  production  and  output  from  related  industries  – 
accounts  for  almost  one-sixth  of  U.S.  jobs  and  economic  activity.  While  the  farm  share  of 
economic output has declined as other parts of our economy have grown, increased activity 
in  broader  agricultural  industries  –  manufacturing,  transportation,  distribution  and  food 
retailing – has opened new job opportunities in both rural and metro communities.  
A robust agricultural sector cushioned the rural economy in our and other regions across the 
nation  during  the  recent  recession,  and  the  industry’s  strength  is  supporting  further 
improvement in the rural economy today. In 2010, strong demand and tight supplies for most 
farm commodities contributed to a sharp rebound in farm profits, which then supported sales 
in  farm  equipment  and  other  farm-based  industries.  Strong  profits  from  agriculture  also 
girded  important  elements  of  our  rural  financial  system.  Commercial  banks  with  large 
agricultural loan portfolios posted stronger returns than their peers over the past three years. 
While  more  than  300  commercial  banks  failed  during  this  time,  only  22  were  agricultural 
banks.  
Agriculture is also benefitting directly from the rebounding economic strength of China and 
other emerging market economies, where rapid income growth is driving up food demand. 
The  United  States  remains  a  net  exporter  of  agricultural  products,  shipping  more  than 
40 percent of its wheat, cotton, soybeans and rice crops to foreign countries in 2010. United 
States crop and meat exports are expected to rise to record highs in 2011. Looking out a little 
further,  economists  expect  global  growth  to  exceed  4  percent  well  into  2012,  with  the 
developing and  emerging  market  economies  remaining  in the  lead.  Rapid  income gains in 
the developing world promise further increases in demand for higher-protein diets.  
Developing risks in agriculture  
Despite  prospects  of  sustained  farm  income  growth,  U.S.  producers  must  remain  alert  as 
they  face  challenges  related  to  their  very  success  and  tied  to  recent  developments  in 
financial  markets.  Surging  commodity  prices  and  low  interest  rates  have  translated  into 
increasing  farmland  values,  which  have  eclipsed  their  1980s  peaks.  In  our  Bank’s  fourth 
quarter  2010  Survey  of  Agricultural  Credit  Conditions,  for  example,  cropland  values  in 
Nebraska  and  Kansas  were  nearly  20  percent  above  year-ago  levels  and  more  than 
75 percent higher than five years ago.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
This run-up in farmland values has occurred, however, amid financial markets characterized 
by  high  levels  of  liquidity  and  unusually  low  interest  rates.  History  has  taught  us  that  it  is 
nearly impossible to determine how much  of the farmland boom may  be an unsustainable 
bubble  driven  by  financial  markets  and  how  much  results  from  fundamental  changes  in 
demand and supply conditions. Therefore, it will surprise no one when I say we are watching 
the  market  closely,  just  as  we  are  watching  for  imbalances  emerging  elsewhere  in  the 
economy.  
Of particular interest to me is how agriculture might adjust when financial markets return to 
more-normal  interest  rate  conditions.  Rising  interest  rates  often  coincide  with  falling  farm 
revenues  and  higher  capitalization  rates,  a  depressing  combination  for  farmland  values. 
Moreover,  even  if  crop  prices  remain  high  but  capitalization  rates  return  to  their  historic 
average, farmland values could fall by as much as a third, which most certainly would erode 
the financial health of the farm sector.  
Fortunately,  the  industry  entered  this  period  with  a  relatively  strong  balance  sheet.  Farm 
leverage ratios are at historic lows, and agricultural banks are well capitalized. In addition, 
farm operators and banks have strengthened their risk-management practices, using basic 
hedging  strategies  and  derivative  markets  to  manage  price  and  balance  sheet  risk,  which 
contributed to smaller increases in problem assets at agricultural banks than at their peers. 
Nevertheless, I follow the basic lesson that bad loans are made in good times, and I remain 
watchful.  
In closing, I’ll briefly highlight a symposium the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City hosted 
last summer to consider agriculture’s response to the extraordinary shifts occurring in market 
conditions.  There  was  a  marked  and,  in  my  view,  a  very  healthy  consensus  that  the 
industry’s  success  will lie  not  in its  ability  to  follow  a  single  path,  but in  its  ability to  adapt 
quickly to shifting economic landscapes and  conditions. Still, my nagging concern remains 
that current distortions in financial markets are increasing the risk that imbalances in asset 
markets  will  catch  agriculture  –  and  the  U.S.  economy  more  generally  –  by  surprise  once 
again.  
Thank you Madam Chair.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Thomas Hoenig, Esther George, Diane Raley, Alan Barkema, Kevin Moore  
Memorandum 
January 14, 2011  
To: 
From:  Jason Henderson and Brian Briggeman  
Subject: Farmland Values and Interest Rate Risk  
Higher crop prices and lower interest rates have fueled a surge in farmland values, raising 
concerns about a bubble in the agricultural real estate market. Since June, grain prices have 
doubled, and futures markets suggest that prices could remain elevated through 2014. Still, 
historically low interest rates and capitalization rates are needed to justify current farmland 
values.  
Over  the  past  year,  farmland  values  have  posted  double-digit  gains,  with  additional  gains 
expected in 2011 (Map 1). By the beginning of 2010, U.S. farmland values had risen more 
than 15 percent above 2005 levels, lifting the total value of U.S. farmland to almost $2 trillion 
(Chart 1).  While farmers own the  majority of  U.S. farmland, non-farm investors are buying 
more  land.  According  to  a  2010  Iowa  State  University  report,  investors  accounted  for  a 
quarter of Iowa farmland sales.  
Low interest rates, which have depressed capitalization rates, contributed to the recent spike 
in farmland values. Capitalization rates on U.S. farmland have fluctuated over time, falling in 
periods  of  negative  real  interest  rates  –  1970s  and  2000s  –  and  rising  during  periods  of 
higher real interest rates – 1980s. According to USDA data, Nebraska’s capitalization rate on 
cropland  was  5.1  percent  at  the  beginning  of  2010,  well  below  its  historical  average  of 
7.5 percent (Chart 2). Despite regional variation, capitalization rates on farmland values have 
fallen to record lows across the nation, with rates below 5 percent in most states (Map 2). 
Oklahoma and Texas have lower capitalization rates due to mineral rights inflating farmland 
values.  
Given low capitalization rates, farmland values face significant interest rate risk. For example, 
irrigated  cropland  in  eastern  Nebraska  is  valued  at  $5,000  per  acre.  A  historically  low 
capitalization rate of 5 percent is needed to rationalize this land value at current corn prices 
and yields (Table 1). If interest rates would rise and lift capitalization rates to their historical 
average of 7.5 percent, the capitalized value of irrigated farmland in eastern Nebraska could 
fall by a third to $3,300 per acre (Chart 3). If capitalization rates would rise to 10 percent as 
they  did  during  the  1980s  farm  crisis,  land  values  could  drop  by  half.  Additional  analysis 
suggests that other regions face similar interest rate risks.  
Rising  interest  rates  could  also  cut  farmland  values  by  reducing  farm  revenues.  Higher 
interest  rates  tend  to  raise  exchange  rates,  which  limits  agricultural  exports,  in  turn 
depressing commodity prices and farm revenues. In 1981, the spike in real interest rates led 
to higher exchange rates and contributed to lower agricultural exports. With falling exports, 
commodity prices and farm revenues dropped, which pushed farmland values to their 1985 
lows.  If  a  similar  event  occurred  today,  farmland  values  could  fall.  For  example,  if 
capitalization rates return to their historical average and corn prices drop to $4 per bushel, 
their 2009 average, irrigated land values in eastern Nebraska could fall almost 50 percent to 
$2,700 per acre (Chart 4). Other regions face similar risks. In sum, rising interest rates could 
trigger a sharp decline in farmland values. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
