Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with The Times 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  in  The 
Times, conducted by Mr Sam Fleming on 13 June 2011 and published on 16 June 2011. 
 The  Times:  There  are  two  camps:  one  that  emphases  the  benefits  of  the  euro  and 
another group that says look at what happened in Greece, Portugal and Ireland – this 
shows that the project is fundamentally flawed. Why are you in the first camp?  
Jean-Claude  Trichet:  All  advanced  economies  are  still  going  through  the  aftermath  of  the 
worst crisis in 60 years. It could even have been the worst crisis since World War I, if central 
bank and governments had not taken tough and bold decisions. Had public authorities not 
acted, we would not have avoided a major depression. I am absolutely convinced of that.  
What  we  are  reflecting upon  in  Europe  is  not  that  different  from  the  important  discussions 
and reflections that are taking place in the US or Japan. Were we on a sustainable long term 
path  on  the  previous  business  model?  It  seems  to  me  that  no  big  advanced  economy  – 
including the UK – can avoid to embark on a strategic reflection after this global crisis. It is 
not  at  all  surprising  that  we  in  the  euro  area,  as  one  of  the  big  advanced  economies,  are 
reflecting  on  our  business  model,  on  our  governance  and  measures  to  reinforce  our 
resilience.  
What  is  very  important  is  that  a  bird’s  eye  view  of  the  euro  area  gives  elements  that  are 
rather  encouraging  and  which  are  often  not  perceived:  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  is  less 
indebted and far less in deficit on a yearly basis than the US and Japan. Our current account 
is balanced, and our growth has been rather encouraging since the recovery started in the 
third quarter of 2009. As regards growth and job creation, compared with the US we have 
more or less the same growth per capita and we created more jobs since 1999. 
But  this  is  no  time  for  complacency  in  any  respect.  The  big  issue  to  be  addressed  is  to 
strengthen our surveillance of economic policies by member states. These economic policies 
are very important in a single currency area – fiscal policy on one hand and macroeconomic 
policies,  including  indicators  of  imbalances  and  competitiveness,  on  the  other  hand. 
“Economic Union” has to be improved considerably. That being said, as regards “Monetary 
Union”, twelve years after the launch of the single currency, I can say that the euro is there, it 
is  credible  and  it  maintained  price  stability  even  better  than  was  expected  by  almost  all 
observers. Annual average inflation over the past 12 years has been less than 2%, close to 
2%. This is better than in the euro area countries over the last 50 years. As a stable currency 
the euro is undoubtedly a success.  
But if you are in Greece, Portugal, Ireland or even to an extent in Spain you will look 
and  say  it  is  a  success  if  you  are  in  Germany  or  in  Northern  Europe  but  if  you  are 
dealing  with  the  changed  public  services,  or  the  unemployment  levels,  the  euro 
doesn’t feel like a success.  
You have to judge the euro area as a whole. I fully agree we have to improve the interaction 
between  national  economic  policies  in  a  number  of  domains  and  the  surveillance  by  the 
centre; that is clear. It’s absolutely clear that a country like Greece, for example, had a long 
period of growth that was largely artificial, boosted by unsustainable fiscal expansion. In such 
a  case,  the  correction  after  such  a  period  is  necessary  to  bring  the  economy  back  on  a 
sustainable path. It is clear that in any large economy, and also in a single currency area, it is 
extremely important to prevent divergences of this dimension driven by distortions. We have 
to be aware such issues are inherent for virtually all vast continental economies.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
A lot of central banks are emphasising the fragility of the recovery, yet at the same 
time  the  ECB  is  tightening  policy.  Why  is  there  this  different  position  between,  for 
example, the Fed and Bank of England on one side and the ECB on the other?  
It is not for me to comment on other monetary policies. What I would say is that in our case it 
is very important that we continue to anchor very solidly inflation expectations. We consider 
that  such  anchoring  has  been  a  very  important  element  in  the  way  we  went  through  the 
crisis; we avoided not only the materialisation of inflation risks in normal times but, in these 
exceptionally  difficult  times  since  the  intensification  of  the  crisis  in  2008,  also  the 
materialisation of deflationary risks.  
We  had  some  words  from  Barack  Obama  last  week  about  the  importance  that  this 
crisis  is  well-handled,  saying  if  it  is  not  well  handled  it  could  have  serious 
consequences for the US economy. Would you share that view?  
I have no particular comment on what the President of the United States said. What I would 
say is that it was very important to take the appropriate and bold decisions to cope with the 
private  sector  crisis,  to  draw  all  the  lessons  from  this  financial  crisis  as  far  as  financial 
regulation is concerned, and to be fully aware of the challenges that the addressing of the 
financial crisis had for public signatures. We were not at ease with the idea that in the heat of 
the  crisis,  all  countries  were  called  to  spend  as  much  as  possible,  embark  on  deficits  as 
much as possible. I believe that the tensions we are observing in Europe today are part of a 
much  more  global  phenomenon,  namely  the  pressure  on  the  sovereign  signatures  in  the 
advanced economies. The current tensions on some euro area sovereigns are therefore not 
only a euro area issue, but also have a European aspect and a global aspect. In comparison 
with  most  emerging  economies,  most  advanced  economies  have  to  cope  with  a  real 
challenge as regards their fiscal policies.  
The  projections  now  suggest  that  Greek  obligations  to  the  official  sector  could  in  a 
couple outweigh Greek obligations to the private sector. That underlies why those in 
Germany  say  we  should  have  private  sector  involvement.  Do  you  not  accept  their 
logic?  
The position of the Governing Council, which is public, is that we are not taking any decision 
in this domain. It is first of all for the executive branches to see what they want to do. We are 
telling them that to embark in a compulsory way of dealing with this issue is not advisable. 
We are telling them that doing anything that would create a credit event or selective default 
or  default  is  not  advisable.  In  any  case  it  is  their  decision,  and  then  we  will  take  all  the 
appropriate  decisions  ourselves  as  far  as  the  Eurosystem  is  concerned,  in  line  with  our 
statutory  obligations.  But  again,  we  are  saying  very  clearly  that  they  should  avoid 
compulsion, credit event, or selective default or default. Our position is clear.  
Do you think a compromise is possible on this?  
No other comment.  
There was a story a few weeks ago that some in Greece were considering a withdrawal 
from the euro. Has anyone in an official position ever raised with you that possibility?  
No.  
And likewise Ireland and Portugal?  
Correct.  
What would you say would be the consequences of such a thing?  
It is not a working assumption that anybody considers.  
You  have  bailout  fatigue  in  Germany  and  austerity  fatigue  in  Greece.  Do  you  worry 
about the strain this situation is putting on the compact between democratic leaders 
and their populations?  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We are living in democracies and we have to fully respect their functioning. It calls more than 
ever to communicate as clearly as possible to our people all the elements on the situation 
and  the  economic  and  financial  diagnosis.  It  is  true  for  all  countries,  including  those  in  an 
adjustment programme and those contributing to the financing of these programmes.  
The  Aachen  speech  talked  of  a  common  European  finance  ministry:  it  seemed  this 
would  be  an  EU27  idea.  Do  you  worry  that  the  likes  of  Britain  would  see  this  as  a 
threat to their sovereignty?  
I mentioned explicitly it would be in a long-term perspective, which calls for changes of the 
Treaty and which is based on the assumption that, at a certain moment in history, Europeans 
would decide to create a new kind of confederation of sovereign nations. I said very clearly 
this  is  not  for  today.  We  know  today  what  we  have  to  do.  It  would  be  for  the  day  after 
tomorrow. For that, we will depend entirely on the people of Europe and on its will.  
Perhaps this is a day after tomorrow question also; do you see it as Britain’s destiny 
to join the euro one day even if it seems unlikely today? 
I always said the UK was much welcome in the euro area and that it depended entirely on 
the  will  of  the  UK  government  and  people.  It  is  as  simple  as  that.  That  being  said,  even 
without the UK we are 331m people, the same order of magnitude as the US. Again, the UK 
is welcome and it depends entirely on the UK to decide. In any case, I am sure that the UK is 
a European country at the heart of Europe, by all means.  
Does the Latin American debt crisis offer any lessons for this one?  
What is striking to see is that virtually all countries and economies that had large problems in 
the  past  decades  drew  the  lessons  from  their  problems  and  became  much  more  resilient 
than the advanced economies in the occasion of the last crisis of 2007–08.  
For advanced economies now, financial sector reform is so important not only to make this 
sector much more resilient, but we also have to take into account that it is extremely unlikely 
that our democracies would put for a second time 27% of GDP of taxpayers risk on the table. 
It is very likely that the decision-making processes in our democracies would not allow us to 
avoid another great depression if we had exactly the same kind of challenge.  
You  were  the  author  of  the  3pc  limit  in  the  Maastricht  Criteria  and,  when  you  were 
confirmed  by  the  European  Parliament,  even  then  you  were  emphasising  over  and 
over  again  the  importance  of  getting  the  fiscal  side  right.  No  one  listened.  Why  will 
they listen this time?  
They are paying a high price after a practice of benign neglect. We were preaching in the 
desert for a long period of time. If I have a message today, it would be to all governments, 
not only in the euro area, but particularly in the euro area, that they have to take fiscal policy 
very, very seriously. Not only fiscal policy but also the monitoring of competitive indicators, 
the monitoring of unit labour costs.  
The other big lesson that emerges from reading about your earlier experiences before 
joining  the  ECB  was  your  role  in  the  franc  fort.  How  important  was  the  benefit  that 
France  evidently  received  from  that  policy  in  influencing  the  way  you  have 
approached your job in the ECB?  
I  was  in  France  the  fervent  advocate  of  what  I  called  with  a  number  of  colleagues 
“competitive disinflation”: it was to say that with inflation and successive depreciation of the 
currency or devaluation countries don’t have a winning strategy but a losing strategy. That 
was the main message of “competitive disinflation”.  
I  have  heard  it  said  that  what  Europe  faces  as  a  whole  now  is  a  crisis  of 
competitiveness,  vis-à-vis  China  for  instance.  What  Germany  succeeded  in  doing 
much of the West hasn’t, and China provides a huge wake-up call for the West.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
You  have  a  formidable  challenge  which  is  coming  from  all  emerging  markets.  The  crisis 
reveals a lot of weaknesses in the advanced economies and we all have to accept that and 
reflect on that. All advanced economies, the US, the euro area, the UK, or the single market 
of the EU-27, clearly we have a major new challenge, which is to adjust to an important role 
of China, India, Latin America and all the emerging countries in our global economy.  
The  fact  we  have  to  review  our  business  model  is  obvious.  A  lot  of  further  attention  is 
warranted  to  the  appropriate  flexibility  of  our  economies.  Structural  reforms  are  absolutely 
necessary.  Education,  science  and  research  &  development  are  key  success  factors.  The 
progressive  diminishing  of  PhDs  in  science  and  technology  in  the  many  advanced 
economies is not a good sign.  
The  growth  and  catching-up  of  the  emerging  world  is  exactly  what  we  wanted  after  World 
War Two. It calls for us to adapt permanently, perhaps more rapidly than we would like.  
One  of  the  impacts  of  the  rise  of  emerging  economies  is  the  strain  it  puts  on 
resources.  This  is  also  going  to  put  a  lot  of  strain  on  central  bankers:  how  should 
central  bankers  respond  via  monetary  policy  to  what  could  be  a  secular  long-term 
increase in the price of raw materials?  
Globalisation  is  a  Janus  with  a  double  face.  You  have  on  the  one  hand  this  formidable 
challenge of volatile oil and commodities prices. On the other hand you have the formidable 
disinflationary trend of manufacturing goods, which are produced at lower prices. We have to 
deal with these simultaneous trends that are very complex and are accelerating changes of 
relative prices. It is a formidable challenge for all central banks of the world, not only in the 
advanced economies of course. That is something that I trust central banks can do in the 
medium  term  if  they  are  vigilant,  if  they  are  attentive.  In  the  very  long  run,  I  tend  to  be 
optimistic. I was trained as a scientist at the beginning. I trust that we will find technological 
ways  to  get  rid  of  this  incredible  dependency  on  fossil  energy  or  on  the  large  number  of 
minerals  and  commodities.  It  is  an  absolute  must  for  our  world,  our  environment  and  our 
civilisation. I therefore trust that we will deliver.  
What are your plans after you retire after the ECB?  
I have no plan. I will see after the end of my mandate. At the present moment I still have 
close to five months ahead of me and quite a lot of challenges obviously. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
