Deepak Mohanty: Changing inflation dynamics in India 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Motilal Nehru National Institute of Technology (MNNIT), Allahabad, 13 August 2011. 
 The assistance provided by Abhiman Das, Sanjib Bordoloi and Manjusha Senapati is acknowledged. 
I  thank  the  Motilal  Nehru  National  Institute  of  Technology  (MNNIT)  for  giving  me  this 
opportunity to address this distinguished gathering. I propose to speak on inflation which is a 
matter of concern to all of us. What is inflation? Simply put, inflation is the sustained increase 
in  the  overall  price  level.  Relative  change  in  prices  of  goods  and  services  is  a  desirable 
attribute of market economy as it reflects productivity changes as well as demand and supply 
conditions. However, when this process transforms into an acceleration of the overall price 
level, we need to worry as inflation imposes many socio-economic costs. 
The  headline  wholesale  price  index  (WPI)  inflation  averaged  9.6  per  cent  in  2010–11  as 
compared  with  5.3  per  cent  per  annum  in  the  previous  decade.  Similarly,  the  average 
consumer  price  inflation,  measured  by  the  consumer  price  index  for  industrial  workers  
(CPI-IW), was even higher at 10.5 per cent in 2010–11 as compared with 5.9 per cent per 
annum  in  the  previous  decade.  Moreover,  this  elevated  level  of  inflation  also  persisted 
through the first quarter of 2011–12. In response to inflationary pressures, the Reserve Bank 
has  raised  the  policy  repo  rate  11  times  bringing  it  up  from  a  low  of  4.75  per  cent  in 
March 2010  to  8.00  per  cent  by  July  2011.  It  is  expected  that  inflation  should  come  down 
towards the later part of this year. 
Why has inflation been so high and persisted for so long? This is the theme of my talk today. 
In my presentation, I propose to address the following questions: Is India an outlier among 
major countries in terms of recent inflation performance? Has the inflation process changed? 
What  are  the  causal  factors  –  global  and  domestic  as  well  as  supply  and  demand?  I  will 
conclude with some thoughts on managing the inflation dynamics on the way forward. 
Is India an outlier in the inflation performance among major countries? 
It is important to appreciate the global backdrop in which we are experiencing a resurgence 
of inflation now. In the last decade, inflation was low, both in advanced countries as well as in 
emerging  and  developing  economies  till  the  global  financial  crisis  unfolded.  Consequently, 
global  economy  got  into  a  recession  and  global  output  declined  by  0.5  per  cent  in  2009. 
However, global output growth rebounded to 5.0 per cent in 2010. 
As the global economy recovered from the worst effect of the global financial crisis, inflation 
picked  up  in  emerging  and  developing  economies.  This  was  because  the  global  recovery 
was largely driven by emerging market economies (EMEs) what was termed as a two-speed 
recovery  –  a  faster  growth  in  EMEs  accompanied  by  a  slower  growth  in  advanced 
economies.  As  output  gaps  closed,  there  was  increasing  inflationary  pressure  in  EMEs, 
particularly  in  Asia.  According  to  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  consumer  price 
inflation in developing Asia almost doubled from 3.1 per cent in 2009 to 6.0 per cent in 2010 
and is projected to be around the same level in 2011. Latest data suggest that inflation in 
rapidly growing BRICS1 remains elevated (Table 1). 
 
                                                 
1  Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 Global factors 
With  recovery,  global  commodity  prices  rebounded  given  the  higher  level  of  commodity 
intensity of growth in EMEs. There was also an element of financialisation of commodities 
given the global excess liquidity2. Crop loss due to adverse weather conditions in many parts 
in  the  world  coupled  with  increased  diversion  of  foodgrains  towards  biofuel  exerted  added 
pressure  on  global  food  prices.  Thus,  global  commodity  prices  including  food  prices  rose 
sharply. For example, the IMF Commodities Index rose by 24 per cent in 2010 on top of an 
increase of 43 per cent in 2009. It further rose by 20 per cent in December 2010–April 2011, 
before  moderating  by  about  2  per  cent  during  June–July  2011.  Notwithstanding  some 
softening  in  the  last  few  months,  it  is  important  to  recognize  that  the  current  level  of 
commodity prices is almost double of that two and half years ago (Table 2).  
 The increase in commodity prices has affected different countries differently depending on 
whether  they  are  net  importers  or  exporters  of  commodities.  India  being  a  net  importer  of 
commodities, the adverse impact on domestic inflation has been stronger. Inflation increased 
in  developing  and  emerging  economies  with  a  combination  of  closing  of  output  gaps  and 
sharp increase in commodity prices. In this regard, India is not an exception. But the level of 
inflation in India has been high compared to those in many EMEs. This suggests that apart 
                                                 
2  While  there  is  disagreement  over  the  role  of  financial  investment  in  commodity  markets,  financial  flows  to 
commodity funds typically increase with higher commodity prices further accentuating price pressures. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
from  global  factors,  domestic  factors  have  had  a  significant  influence  on  the  inflation 
trajectory in India. 
Has the inflation process changed? 
In India, we have  multiple price indices – 6 consumer price indices and a wholesale price 
index (WPI). While the Reserve Bank examines all the price indices both at aggregate and 
disaggregated  levels,  changes  in  the  WPI  is  taken  as  the  headline  inflation  for  policy 
articulation. Within the WPI, non-food manufactured products inflation is considered the core 
inflation3. 
Going by any measure of inflation, India comes out as a moderate inflation country, though 
occasionally inflation crossed the double digit mark. The historical average long-term inflation 
rate was around 7.5 per cent. But significantly, there was substantial moderation in inflation 
in the 2000s. The annual average inflation rate was around 5.5 per cent irrespective of the 
inflation  indices  taken,  whether  WPI  or  CPI.  This  raises  the  question:  did  the  inflation 
dynamics  change  in  the  2000s?  Monthly  WPI  inflation  data  suggest  that  there  was  a 
structural  break4  around  the  mid-2000s  with  the  inflation  rate  during  the  latter  half  being 
higher (Chart 1). 
Average WPI inflation increased from 5.2 per cent in the first half of 2000s to 5.5 per cent in 
the second half. This was largely contributed by primary food inflation. In fact, the core non-
food manufactured products inflation moderated from 4.2 per cent to 3.9 per cent. What did 
cause  the  structural  break  in  the  mid-2000s?  A  disaggregated  assessment  suggests  that 
protein items largely contributed to this change in trend (Table 3). 
                                                  
3  Core  inflation  is  generally  estimated  by  excluding  volatile  food  and  fuel  components  from  the  headline 
inflation, though there are various statistical methods of estimation of core inflation. Analytically, core inflation 
is considered as an indicator of demand conditions. 
4  Estimated by Bai-Perron test. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Not only did the average food prices rise during the second half of 2000s but they were more 
volatile (Table 4). 
  Structural food inflation 
Food prices being subject to supply shocks tend to be volatile. For example, the performance 
of  monsoon  has  a  significant  bearing  on  the  trend  of  domestic  foodgrain  prices. Spikes  in 
food  prices  normally  subside  as  they  are  transitory.  However,  empirical  analysis  suggests 
that inflation in protein items has become persistent.5 This suggests that protein inflation has 
assumed  a  structural  character  and  is  partly  driven  by  demand  factors.  Within  the  protein 
group, persistence was lower for pulses as well as “egg, meat and fish”, but it was markedly 
higher for milk. Thus, the persistence of protein inflation has changed the inflation dynamics 
in  the  latter  half  of  the  2000s.  Increase  in  demand  for  protein  appears  to  be  an  inevitable 
consequence of rising affluence (Gokarn, 2010).6 This process was further accentuated by 
renewed  global  food  price  shock  during  2010–11.  Among  the  processed  food  items,  the 
persistence of inflation for edible oils was high (Table 5). 
                                                 
5  Persistence is estimated as the sum of autoregressive coefficients of the inflation series of the relevant items; 
a coefficient of over 0.5 is considered to be an indication of persistence. 
“The Price of Protein”, Inaugural Address at the Special Conference in honour of Dr. Kirit Parikh at IGIDR, 
Mumbai, October 26, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
6 
4 
  International price pass-through 
While the persistence of inflation on protein items has increased, it still has a relatively smaller 
share in overall WPI inflation. What matters more for the overall inflation trajectory is the non-
food manufactured products inflation which has a higher weight of 55.0 per cent in the WPI. It 
averaged  4.0  per  cent  in  the  2000s  with  a  moderation  in  the  second  half  (Table  3). 
Subsequently, there has been a sharp increase in 2010–11 and 2011–12 so far. The non-food 
manufactured products inflation shows a major structural break towards the middle of 2009–10 
around  the  time  the  global  commodity  prices  rebounded  (Chart  2).  This  has  also  raised  the 
question: is the non-food manufactured products inflation an imported inflation?  
Further, analysis suggests that industrial raw material7 prices also showed a structural break 
in early 2009 and the average price increase has been high and volatile (Chart 3). Moreover, 
the  pass-through  from  non-food  international  commodity  prices  to  domestic  raw  material 
                                                  
7 
Includes non-food articles, metallic minerals, other minerals, coal, aviation turbine fuel, high speed diesel oil, 
naphtha, bitumen, furnace oil, lubricant, electricity for  industry, cotton  yarn and paper pulp  with  a  weight of 
16.2 in WPI. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
prices has increased particularly in the recent years reflecting growing interconnectedness of 
domestic and global commodity markets (Chart 4). 
  This trend is also corroborated by corporate finance data which show that the share of raw 
material costs as a percentage of both expenditure and sales has been rising (Chart 5). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Demand factors 
Price pressures can emanate from the supply side but it will be difficult to sustain it without 
rising demand. In this context, important information on recent trend in expenditure pattern 
and  wages  is  available  from  the  66th  round  of  NSSO  consumption  survey  and  Labour 
Bureau. The average annual monthly per capita expenditure has increased at a faster pace 
in the second half of 2000s as compared with the first half, both in nominal and real terms 
(Table 6). 
 While the share of per-capita expenditure in food has gone down, as could be expected from 
rise in income levels, both in rural and urban centers, the dietary pattern has shifted in favour 
of protein items whose share has gone up markedly in the second half of 2000s (Chart 6). 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The sharp increase in rural consumption of protein seems to have been sustained by increase 
in wage rates of the unskilled rural labourers both in nominal and real terms (Chart 7). 
 In the formal sector, company finance data suggest that the wage bill has risen at a faster 
rate since the middle of 2009–10 (Chart 8). 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As  per  the  NSSO  surveys  (61st  round  and  66th  round),  nominal  wage  rates  of  skilled 
workers in both rural and urban areas increased much faster in the second half of the 2000s 
than  in  the  first  half.  While  the  real  wage  rates  declined  in  the  first  half,  it  increased 
significantly in the second half of 2000s (Charts 9 & 10). 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
There  has  also  been  added  stimulus  from  the  crisis  driven  fiscal  expansion  as  the  fiscal 
consolidation process was reversed in 2008–09 and continued through 2009–10 (Chart 11). 
 These evidences taken together suggest that sustained rise in real wages both in the formal 
and informal sectors in the recent years contributed to increase in demand. 
Conclusions 
The recent surge in inflation has become more generalised. Food inflation, prone to supply 
shocks, is also assuming a structural character given the change in the dietary habits and 
high  demand,  in  absence  of  adequate  supply  response.  Sharp  increase  in  non-food 
manufactured  product  inflation  suggests  that  producers  are  able  to  pass  on  the  cost 
increases, given higher demand. While the persistence in non-food manufactured products 
inflation is high, the persistence of food inflation has increased making the overall inflation 
rate sticky. The current inflation process, therefore, is an amalgam of both supply constraints 
and demand pressures. 
Prolonged  high  inflation  even  if  originating  from  supply  side  would  give  rise  to  increased 
inflation  expectations  and  cause  general  prices 
inflation 
expectations make long-term financial planning more complex with potential adverse effects 
on investment and growth. Moreover, high inflation is the most regressive form of taxation, 
particularly  on  the  poor.  It  is,  therefore,  important  to  contain  inflation  and  keep  inflation 
expectations  anchored  so  that  consumers  do  not  mark  up  their  long-run  inflation 
expectations by reacting to a short period of higher-than-expected inflation. 
Keeping  in  view  the  costs  of  inflation  and  the  fact  that  high  inflation  is  inimical  to  sustained 
growth, the medium-term objective of the Reserve Bank is to bring down inflation to 3.0 per cent 
consistent with India’s broader integration with the global economy. In this direction, monetary 
policy aims to contain perceptions of inflation in the range of 4.0 – 4.5 per cent with a particular 
focus on the behaviour of the non-food manufacturing component, which is considered as core 
inflation given its high degree of persistence. Going forward, both global and domestic factors will 
shape  the  inflation  outlook.  With  increasing  global  integration,  global  commodity  prices  are 
having  an  increasingly  significant  influence  on  domestic  prices.  It  is  expected  that  global 
commodity  prices  will  peak  in  2011  which  should  provide  some  relief  to  domestic  inflation 
scenario. 
to  rise.  Poorly  anchored 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The Reserve Bank signaled the reversal from its crisis driven expansionary monetary policy 
stance  in  October  2009.  Since  then,  the  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR)  has  been  raised  by 
100 basis points. The policy repo rate has been raised by a cumulative 325 basis points. As 
the liquidity in the system transited from surplus to deficit, the effective tightening has been of 
the order of 475 basis points. Thus, the cumulative monetary policy action would have the 
desired impact on inflation. 
While inflation is expected to moderate towards the later part of the year reflecting monetary 
tightening  and  likely  softening  of  global  commodity  prices,  fiscal  policy  needs  to  be 
supportive in containing aggregate demand. In addition, there is an urgent need to address 
the  issue  of  structural  supply  constraints,  particularly  in  agriculture,  so  that  these  do  not 
become binding constraints in the long-run hampering the task of inflation management. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
