Njuguna Ndung’u: The future of financial service delivery in Kenya 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the opening 
of the 3rd AFRACA Central Banks’ Forum, Kenya, 9 May 2011. 
 The Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance, Honourable Uhuru Kenyatta; 
The AFRACA Chairman and Deputy Governor, Central Bank of Congo; 
The Secretary General, AFRACA; 
Governors of Central Banks here present; 
Representatives of Banks, Microfinance Institutions and other Financial Institutions; 
Distinguished Guests and Participants; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am delighted to be with all of you here in Mombasa to make some brief remarks at this very 
auspicious  3rd  AFRACA  Central  Banks  Forum.  I  am  here  to  welcome  the  Deputy  Prime 
Minister and Minister for Finance to officially open this forum, but before doing that, I wish to 
make a few remarks. On behalf of the Central Bank of Kenya which is co-hosting this Forum 
with  AFRACA,  let  me  extend  a  very  warm  welcome  to  all  delegates  to  Kenya  and  in 
particular to Mombasa, a spectacular tourist town. It is my sincere hope that you will enjoy 
your stay in Kenya and will also find time during the Forum or after to sample Kenya’s tourist 
attractions. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  AFRACA  organizes  this  bi-annual  Central  Banks  Forum  as  an 
avenue  for  AFRACA  member  central  banks  and  other  regulatory  bodies  to  share 
experiences on workable solutions towards enhanced agricultural and rural financing as well 
as  to  challenge  each  other  on  possible  policy  solutions  to  increase  agricultural  and  rural 
financing. In this regard, the Forum serves to further AFRACA’s vision of “achieving a rural 
Africa  where  people  have  access  to  sustainable  financial  services  for  economic 
development”.  
The  theme  of  this  Forum;  “Financial  Services  for  Food  Security:  Leveraging  on 
Innovation” is quite timely and anchors well with the emerging trend whereby most of the 
agricultural land is being urbanized as well as the drastic climatic changes arising from global 
warming, which are posing a serious threat to food security for the future generations. Time 
to  generate  solutions  to  curtail  this  trend  is  now.  But  from  our  end,  we  focus  on  financial 
support investment to increase productivity in the sector. 
Although  Kenya’s  two  financial  access  surveys  conducted  in  2006  and  2009  have  shown 
general improvements in financial access with access to formal finance improving from 19 to 
23  percent;  to  semi-formal  improving  from  8  to  18  percent;  informal  declining  from  35  to 
27 percent and the excluded falling from 38 to 33 percent, access to finance for rural areas is 
still  low,  with  64  percent  of  the  rural  populace  not  accessing  formal  financial  services  and 
21 percent  being  excluded  from  any  form  of  financial  services.  This  is  a  huge  drag  to 
development  that  is  driven  by  financial  access.  We  know  from  established  wisdom  that 
poverty is very rural based in countries we come from. Access to finance allows the poor to 
escape poverty by building their assets through savings and credit. 
At  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  we  remain  committed  to  promoting  innovations  that  will 
enhance financial access and inclusion for the people of Kenya. These reforms we believe 
will  inevitably  enhance  access  to  finance  in  rural  areas.  My  colleagues  will  be  alluding  to 
these reforms in the course of this conference. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The size of credit to the agricultural sector in Kenya by the banking 
sector has risen over the last five years from USD335 million (Ksh.28.1 billion) in December 
2007  to  USD620  million  (Ksh.52.7  billion)  as  at  February  2011.  This  growth  is  explained 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
partly by the outcomes of the initiatives enumerated above. The level is expected to increase 
once the reform initiatives take root.  
To conclude my remarks, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me take this opportunity to reiterate 
the commitment of Central Bank of Kenya to contribute to the fulfillment of AFRACA’s vision. 
It  is  my  hope  that  this  conference  shall  provide  participants  with  key  lessons  on  how  to 
achieve a rural Africa where people have access to sustainable financial services for 
economic development.  I  also  reiterate  that  it  is  only  through  the  concerted  efforts  of  all 
players, governments, development agencies, donors, regulators and service providers that 
we will be able to deliver on this vision. 
With  those  few  remarks,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  it  is  now  my  honour  and  pleasure  to 
welcome the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance, Hon. Uhuru Kenyatta to deliver 
his keynote address and to officially open the 3rd AFRACA Central Banks Forum. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
