Lars Nyberg: Is it dangerous to borrow dollars? 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Svenska 
Handelsbanken, Stockholm, 17 May 2011. 
 The lessons of the financial crisis are many. The world’s banks – and a number of institutions 
that were not banks – had far too little and far too low-quality capital. They also had too little 
liquidity. The conviction that the markets would always be at hand with more or less unlimited 
liquidity turned out to be wrong. Across the world, central banks were forced to intervene and 
to provide the funding that the banks were unable to obtain elsewhere. 
Now  the  new  regulations  known  as  Basel  III  are  almost  in place,  even  if  it  will  take  a  few 
years to introduce them. The banks will need to hold both more and better capital and their 
buffers for managing liquidity shortfalls will need to increase. Of course, nobody is claiming 
that  this  will  save  us  from  all  future  financial  crises,  but  it  can  reasonably  be  expected  to 
strengthen the resilience of the financial system to shocks. The most apparent shortcomings 
brought to light during the crisis can be said to have been remedied. 
Even so, there is naturally still much work to be done. One issue that must be addressed is 
how to take care of banks that nevertheless become insolvent and must be wound down, as 
this  is  an  area  where  the  crisis  revealed  major  shortcomings  in  a  number  of  countries’ 
legislation.  And,  as  the  banks  have  grown  larger  and  have  increasingly  expanded  their 
operations  over  national  boundaries  over  the  last  decade,  each  nation  cannot  solve  such 
problems  alone.  The  question  of  how  to  manage  crisis  banks  is  currently  the  subject  of 
intensive  discussion  across  the  world,  and  new  regulations  of  some  form  must  also  arise 
from this discussion. 
Today, I plan to address another lesson from the financial crisis, a lesson that has not yet led 
to  any  consequences  in  the  form  of  regulatory  changes,  but  which  nevertheless  must  be 
dealt with in the long term. It applies to Sweden, but also to many other countries, particularly 
in Europe. It relates to the banks’ dependence on funding in foreign currencies, primarily US 
dollars. What kind of risks are the Swedish banks taking when they borrow in dollars – and 
who bears the cost? As usual, I would like to point out that the thoughts I present are my own 
and are not necessarily shared by my colleagues on the Riksbank’s Executive Board. 
The dollar crisis… 
As we all know, when Lehman Brothers collapsed in September 2008, the immediate effect 
was a liquidity crisis that affected the entire world to varying degrees. Banks and investment 
banks that had based their business on being able to rapidly obtain large volumes of short-
term  borrowing,  for  example  by  issuing  securities  with  short  maturities,  discovered  that 
investors in these securities suddenly just vanished. 
In Europe, including Sweden, many banks had borrowed dollars on the US market, where 
large volumes could be obtained at competitive rates. The US market for short-term funding 
had been highly liquid. However, when the crisis erupted, the flow of dollars quickly dried up. 
As is always the case when liquidity disappears from a market, this was due to uncertainty. 
Who wants to lend money to a bank when they are not certain they will get it back again? In 
this  case,  the  basis  of  this  uncertainty  was  that  European  banks  had  purchased  large 
amounts of US mortgage securities, often packaged in various structured products, that were 
difficult  to  value  and  therefore  also  difficult  to  sell  on  the  market.  Where  were  these 
securities, often designated as “toxic assets”? Uncertainty also affected banks that had not 
bought  any  US  mortgage  securities,  such  as  the  Swedish  banks.  Because  how  could 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
anybody be sure that these banks had not lent money to other banks whose balance sheets 
were full of structured products? 
The problem was exacerbated by the fact that a significant portion of the flow of dollars to 
Europe  had  come  from  US  MMFs  –  money  market  funds.  These  are  comparable  to 
Swedish money market funds, in which firms and private individuals can purchase shares, 
and where the fund invests in short-term debt securities. However, the use of such funds 
is  more  widespread  in  the  United  States  and  the  total  volume  amounted  to  over 
USD 3 trillion in 2008 – quite a lot of money, in other words. One trillion is equal to one 
thousand billion or one million millions.  
In the United States, as in Sweden, money market funds avoid almost all investments that 
may involve credit risk. Taking credit risks is quite simply not their business concept. Like all 
funds, they administer their clients’ money for a fee, and clients who are investing their liquid 
funds over the short term do not wish to be exposed to any credit risk. Put simply, it could be 
said that these funds are intended to function like a normal savings account in a bank, albeit 
with  slightly  better  interest.  So,  by  providing  this  “bank  account”  style  of  saving,  the  funds 
essentially function like normal banks, even though they are not banks. When we say that, 
before the crisis, there existed an extensive shadow banking system that was not as strictly 
regulated as the “real” banks were, it is partly these funds to which we are referring.  
Accordingly,  money  market  funds  do  not  like  credit  risk.  So  when  the  funds  (and  their 
customers) started to suspect that some European banks had large holes in their balance 
sheets,  they  pulled  out  of  the  market.  This  was  not  a  matter  of  pricing,  it  was  a  matter  of 
credibility. Many US funds were also impacted by significant redemptions, partly because the 
customers  needed  the  liquidity,  but  also  because  the  customers  became  uncertain  of  the 
risks existing in the funds’ investments. 
In Sweden, the banks had no significant holdings of bad US mortgage securities, but they 
were  still  affected  by  the  same  difficulties  as  other  European  banks  in  borrowing  dollars. 
Initially, of course, the market did not know that the Swedish banks had not purchased any 
“toxic assets” and had not lent significant amounts of money to any banks that had. But more 
important was the uncertainty that arose as a result of the Swedish banks’ extensive lending 
in  the  Baltic  countries.  Only  two  of  the  banks  actually  had  significant  business  in  these 
countries, but, as banks lend money to each other, it was not easy for the rest of the world to 
know where the risks actually were. Consequently, all Swedish banks encountered difficulties 
in borrowing on the market. 
…and how it was solved 
However, the inability of the European banks to borrow dollars as before turned out to be not 
only  a  European  problem  but,  in  fact,  also  a  US  one.  When  the  flow  of  capital  from  the 
private market in the United States suddenly decreased, the European banks found it difficult 
to repay what they had borrowed from their US counterparts. But the US banks were already 
facing  difficulties  with  their  liquidity  –  because  they  were  also  dependent  upon  short-term 
borrowing from the money market funds. They needed every dollar they could get back from 
their  European  counterparts.  So  the  European  dollar  problem  bounced  back  to  the  United 
States. 
In this situation, the US central bank (the Federal Reserve) decided to supply the European 
Central  Bank  (the  ECB)  and  a  number  of  other  European  central  banks,  including  the 
Riksbank, with dollar loans. While this had already been carried out on a smaller scale since 
2007,  it  escalated  steeply  in  conjunction  with  the  Lehman  collapse.  This  lending  was 
conducted via what are known as currency swaps, in which (put simply) the Federal Reserve 
lent  dollars  against  collateral  in  euros  or  other  local  currency.  In  this  way,  the  ECB,  the 
Riksbank and other central banks could provide their domestic banks with loans, not only in 
their own currency, but also in dollars. The flow of dollars from the private market was thus 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
500
400
Figure 1. Federal Reserve’s lending to 
other central banks 
USD Billions 
600
replaced by a flow of dollars from the Federal Reserve (see Figure 1). This saved a number 
of European banks which otherwise would have gotten into trouble, but what was probably 
more important from a US point of view was that it also saved a number of US banks.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  way  that  this  drama  played  out  in  Sweden  can  clearly  be  followed  by  examining  the 
Riksbank’s lending activities (Figure 2). During the entire crisis, the Riksbank provided the 
banks  with  liquidity  in  Swedish  kronor  at  fixed  interest  rates  and,  eventually,  at  variable 
interest  rates  via  auctions1.  However,  the  largest  demand  from  the  banks’  side  was  not  in 
kronor but in dollars (the yellow area in the figure). This lending took place during the whole 
period from October 2008 to November 2009. The amount lent by the Riksbank peaked at 
USD 30 billion. 
Sources: Federal Reserve and the Riksbank 
100
200
300
 0
 And this is exactly where the problem lies. Every central bank can create liquidity in its own 
currency. The Riksbank can thus supply the Swedish financial system with all of the Swedish 
kronor it will ever need. But we can’t create dollars – only the US central bank can. So when 
                                                 
1   The  extensive  fixed-interest  rate  lending  implemented  during  the  later  part  of  the  crisis  (the  blue  area  in 
Figure 2)  was  largely  motivated  by  monetary  policy  objectives.  By  this  point,  the  Riksbank  had  already 
lowered the repo rate as far as was deemed possible (to a quarter of a percentage point), but deemed that 
further monetary policy stimulation was necessary. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the Riksbank is to lend dollars, we first have to obtain them. In principle, this can be done in 
two ways. The first option is to borrow them. For natural reasons, it is easiest and quickest to 
borrow  from  the  central  bank  that  actually  produces  dollars,  namely  the  Federal  Reserve. 
And,  naturally,  this  presumes  the  Federal  Reserve’s  cooperation  via  a  swap,  for  example. 
The  second  option  is  to  use  the  foreign  currency  reserve.  This  is  somewhat  more 
complicated and takes more time. This is because the Riksbank’s foreign currency reserve is 
normally invested in interest-bearing securities, for example US government bonds. These 
must first be sold or borrowed against, and then the payment received must be deposited in 
a  suitable  bank  account,  preferably  the  Federal  Reserve  itself,  before  they  can  become 
available for lending to Swedish banks. During the crisis, the Riksbank used both methods. 
We borrowed from the Federal Reserve and used our foreign currency reserve. 
Looking back, we can say that the liquidity problems were solved quite well. The Riksbank was 
able to satisfy the Swedish banks’ demand for dollars when they were needed. However, at the 
same time, our experiences from dollar lending have brought into focus a number of issues to 
which we have reason to devote further consideration. What would happen if the Riksbank had 
been  unable  to  borrow  dollars  from  the  Federal  Reserve  as  easily  as  we  could  during  the 
crisis? How large a foreign currency reserve do we need to have to ensure that the Swedish 
banks will not face a shortage of liquidity in a crisis situation? And who is to pay the costs of 
this  preparedness?  Having  a  large  foreign  currency  reserve  costs  money.  At  present,  these 
costs  are  carried  by  the  Riksbank,  meaning  that,  in  the  end,  it  is  the  taxpayers  who  pay. 
However, with a certain amount of justification, we can ask whether this is actually reasonable. 
Because when the costs for risk-taking are not carried by the party taking the risk, this usually 
leads to these risks becoming excessive, from a macroeconomic perspective. Would the banks 
borrow fewer dollars if they had to carry the cost themselves? 
The banks’ currency borrowing 
How  dependent  are  the  major  Swedish  banks  on  borrowing  in  foreign  currency?  From  a 
historical perspective, it is fair to say that the dependence has been limited. However, during 
the  last  decade  or  so,  the  situation  has  changed  dramatically  (Figure  3).  In  1998,  the 
Swedish  banks  borrowed 
just  over 
SEK 200 billion (not including borrowing by subsidiary banks). Today, this figure is closer to 
SEK 1 500 billion. The banks’ rapid expansion, not least outside Sweden, has largely been 
funded  by  borrowing  on  the  international  financial  markets.  During  the  previous  financial 
crisis  at  the  start  of  the  1990s,  the  Swedish  banks  still  essentially  operated  on  a  national 
level. This is not the case today. 
in  an  amount  equivalent 
foreign  currency 
to 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Over time, the major Swedish banks have also become increasingly dependent on borrowing 
on the capital markets. Today, they only receive slightly less than half of their funding from 
normal deposits. The other half is comprised of what is usually called “purchased money”, 
which  is  to  say  money  borrowed  on  the  market  (Figure  4).  And  almost  two-thirds  of  that 
money comes from overseas. 
The fact that the major Swedish banks do not base their funding on traditional bank deposits 
(which  are  usually  considered  to  be  very  stable)  but  on  market  borrowing  (which  is  much 
more  volatile)  is  itself  worth  noting.  On  this  point,  Sweden  clearly  differs  from  the  pattern 
seen  in  many  other  countries  (Figure  5).  However,  this  is  essentially  a  reflection  of  the 
structure of household saving in Sweden.  
  We  Swedes  do  not  deposit  our  money  in  the  bank,  we  invest  in  funds.  Private  fund 
investment  is  thus  far  more  widespread  in  Sweden  than  it  is  in  most  other  European 
countries. So our savings do not arrive at the bank directly as normal deposits, but take an 
indirect route via the funds and insurance companies that manage our savings, not least the 
AP  funds.  This  is  because  they  invest  a  portion  of  the  money  they  manage  in  the  banks’ 
various borrowing instruments. This provides us with at least a good part of the explanation 
as to why our banks borrow more on the capital market and less from households than banks 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
in many other countries do. But it does not explain why borrowing takes place abroad – and 
this is exactly the problem that I wish to address here. 
Have the banks become too large? 
Let me first make a small digression. As the Swedish banks have grown so rapidly in recent 
decades,  mostly  by  expanding  overseas,  it  would  not  be  out  of  place  to  ask  whether  they 
have become too large for Sweden. Is there, perhaps, a limit for how large a banking system 
can  be  in  relation  to  the  total  production  capacity  and  fiscal  capacity  of  one  country?  The 
risks for society may, quite simply, become too high. Experiences from Iceland and Ireland 
during the last crisis undeniably suggest this. 
And the Swedish banks are certainly large. The combined balance sheet totals of the major 
banks are equivalent to slightly more than four times GDP (Figure 6, left-hand diagram). This 
multiple  is  among  the  highest  in  Europe,  in  the  same  order  of  magnitude  as  the  United 
Kingdom  and  the  Netherlands  (prior  to  the  crisis,  Iceland  was  in  ninth  place).  However,  I 
think that we should perhaps be cautious in assessing the risks in a banking system merely 
on the basis of the size of its balance sheets. For example, imagine that Nordea moved its 
head office from Stockholm to Helsinki, suddenly becoming a Finnish bank. This would take 
Sweden below the European average (Figure 6, right-hand diagram). Would the level of risk 
in the Swedish banking system then have decreased considerably? I don’t think so. The risks 
in  a  large  banking  system  have  many  other  dimensions  than  just  balance  sheet  total  in 
relation to GDP. Large banking systems can be associated with low risks and small banking 
systems can be associated with high risks. 
One important dimension of the risk is determined by the ability of the countries in which the 
banks are active to cooperate in a crisis, and the subsequent division of burdens. This issue 
deserves a lecture all of its own, so I will spend no more time on it today. Another dimension 
is that of funding, particularly how much funding is borrowed outside the countries in which 
the banks operate. And this is the aspect to which I would now like to return.  
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
What matters are how the banks borrow and how they use this money 
Of course, not all borrowing in foreign currency is a cause for concern – on the contrary. In 
many  cases,  it  forms  a  natural  part  of  traditional  banking  operations.  And  neither  is  it 
particularly remarkable to borrow in one currency and then exchange this for another on the 
market. But one of our experiences from the crisis is that it does make a difference both how 
you borrow and how you use this money. Let me start with how borrowing is conducted. 
Put simply, it could be said that the Swedish banks borrow over the short term in dollars and 
over the long term in euros (see Figure 7). The market for short-term borrowing is very large 
in the United States and, both before and after the crisis, the Swedish banks have been able 
to obtain significant volumes of funding on this market at favourable conditions. This market 
deals in maturities of less than one year, but the overwhelming portion of trading deals with 
securities with maturities of three months or less. Money market funds continue to be major 
investors. More long-term borrowing is largely  conducted in euros through the issuance of 
covered bonds. Pension funds and insurance companies are the main investors here.2 
 Obviously,  the  risks  of  a  bank  entering  into  an  acute  liquidity  crisis  become  smaller  as 
borrowing becomes more long-term. Consequently, the new regulations in Basel III require a 
greater  proportion  of  long-term  borrowing  than  most  banks  have  opted  for  so  far. 
Unfortunately, before the crisis, it was highly advantageous to borrow dollars over the short 
term, and this was also exactly what the European banks did, including the Swedish ones. 
Borrowing for longer maturities was much more expensive. And as the new Basel regulations 
have not entered into force yet, there still exist significant incentives for the banks to borrow 
dollars  over  the  short  term.  This  applies  to  the  Swedish  banks  in  particular,  who  are  also 
regarded  favourably  by  the  US  market  due  to  their  strong  balance  sheets,  particularly  in 
comparison with a number of their European competitors. 
                                                 
2  
In  recent  months,  a  couple  of  Swedish  banks  have  actually  succeeded  in  issuing  covered  bonds  with 
maturities of 3–5 years in the United States. It would naturally be desirable to gain access to the market for 
longer maturities in US dollars, but I feel that the journey there would be both long and rough. The level of 
mistrust  among  US  investors  towards  new  instruments  with  collateral  in  property  in  small,  distant  countries 
should not be underestimated. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
So,  in  terms  of  risks  for  an  acute  liquidity  crisis,  it  is  important  how  the  banks  borrow,  in 
particular which proportion of the borrowing is short-term. And this brings the problem back 
to  just  how to  get  hold of  dollars. However,  the  problem  is  also  related  to  that  of  how  the 
borrowed dollars are used. In principle, there are three options. One way is to purchase US 
government  bonds  to  use  as  a  liquidity  reserve.  Borrowing  for  this  purpose  (and  this  has 
been significant for a couple of banks, at least) does not form a problem. Government bonds 
can  always  be  sold  on  the  market  when  the  loans  fall  due,  as  they  are  highly  liquid  and 
remained so throughout the entire crisis. 
Another way of using the borrowed money is to exchange it immediately into Swedish kronor, 
but at the same time to enter into a forward contract where these kronor are exchanged back 
to dollars on the same date as the loan falls due. This entire process – borrowing in dollars, 
the immediate exchange into kronor and the exchange of these back again into dollars when 
the  transaction  falls  due  –  is  generally  combined  into  a  single  transaction  known  as  a 
currency swap. For the banks, this is a quite simple way of “creating” kronor, which, under 
certain circumstances, can be cheaper than borrowing on the Swedish market. The important 
point here is that, as long as the bank exchanges dollars into Swedish kronor at the same 
time as it agrees to exchange them back again when the transaction matures, no liquidity risk 
in dollars will arise. The bank knows, of course, that it can repay the dollar loan when it falls 
due.3 
A third way for the bank to use the dollars it has borrowed is to lend them to its customers. A 
growing number of the Swedish banks’ corporate customers operate internationally and have 
cash  flows  in  US  dollars.  As  part  of  their  liquidity  management,  these  companies  may 
occasionally need to borrow dollars for short durations. And the bank wishes to satisfy this 
need.  For  example,  Swedish  banks  undertake  significant  lending  in  dollars  to  shipping 
companies. Dollars are also lent in countries in which lending is strongly dollar-based, such 
as Russia. This type of lending has obvious liquidity risks. If the customer is unable to repay 
its dollar loan when this falls due, the bank may have difficulties in paying its counterparty. 
During the crisis, this is exactly what happened in several parts of the world. Major export 
companies were not paid by their customers as planned – as the customers could not borrow 
from their banks as usual – and so they wanted to extend or increase their loans from their 
own  banks.  However,  the  banks  could  not  extend  the  loans  from  their  US  counterparties, 
possibly because the money market funds were no longer willing to buy their securities. And 
so a liquidity crisis arose.4 
Now,  unfortunately,  we  do  not  know  exactly  how  large  a  proportion  of  their  borrowing  in 
dollars the Swedish banks use for each of these three purposes – investing in liquid dollar 
assets,  exchanging  into  Swedish  kronor,  and  lending  directly  to  customers.  However,  the 
proportion  of  currency  swaps  probably  lies  somewhere  around  half  of  the  total  dollar 
borrowing,  occasionally  perhaps  even  higher.  It  can  differ  quite  widely  between  different 
banks, and variations over time can also be significant. Here we need better data than are 
currently  available.  But  let  us  assume  that  the  total  dollar  borrowing  in  the  form  of  issued 
securities for the four major banks is around SEK 900 billion, and that half of this amount is 
used for lending to companies. This would put the lending potentially linked with a liquidity 
risk in the magnitude of SEK 450 billion. 
                                                 
3   Naturally, a counterparty risk may exist, should the bank on the other end of the currency swap have problems 
in accepting kronor against dollars according to contract. However, in this situation, it would not have its loan 
repaid either. 
4   The Swedish banks also borrowed large amounts of euros which were then lent to companies and households 
in  the  Baltic  countries.  Of  course,  in  retrospect,  this  was  not  particularly  well  thought-out,  and  led  to  major 
problems for the banks involved. However, this does not have a great deal to do with the liquidity problems in 
US dollars and my thoughts on this subject will thus have to wait for a later occasion. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
So, to summarise: not all borrowing in foreign currency is linked to a direct liquidity risk. This 
primarily  affects  short-term  borrowing,  which  largely  takes  place  in  US  dollars.  And  not  all 
dollar borrowing gives rise to a liquidity risk, but primarily that used for lending to customers. 
A rough estimate suggests a volume of around SEK 450 billion in the four major banks, but 
the level of uncertainty is high. 
Two questions 
It is apparent that the banks faced problems in their dollar funding during the crisis. Why else 
would  they  have  borrowed  as  much  as  USD  30  billion  via  the  Riksbank?  However,  one 
question that is always asked in this connection is why the banks necessarily had to borrow 
dollars. Couldn’t they instead have borrowed in kronor and then exchanged this into dollars 
on the foreign exchange market? This would have removed the problem of the shortage of 
dollars.  There  is  no  lack  of  kronor,  as  the  Riksbank  can  create  these  in  the  quantities 
needed. 
For  ordinary  people  like  us  and  for most  companies,  the  foreign  exchange  market  worked 
faultlessly during the entire crisis. If you had kronor, you could exchange them for dollars. It 
was  the  Swedish  banks  that  provided  this  service  –  they  were  the  counterparties  in  these 
transactions.  But  when  the  banks  themselves  wanted  to  carry  out  exchanges,  they  had  to 
find international investors who were willing to buy Swedish kronor for dollars, at least for a 
time (they could always agree to exchange back again after a period, but then they would 
have  de  facto  borrowed  dollars).  Unfortunately,  during  the  toughest  parts  of  the  crisis, 
everybody  wanted  dollars  and  almost  nobody  was  interested  in  owning  kronor.  The  krona 
also fell steeply against the dollar, by over 30 per cent from the peak in 2008 to the lowest 
point  in  2009.  Exchanging  kronor  borrowed  from  the  Riksbank  to  dollars  in  the  volumes 
required  would  have  been  an  impossibility  for  the  banks.  And,  if  they  had  tried,  the  krona 
would have dropped even more in value.5 
Another question that constantly comes up is why the Riksbank doesn’t, quite simply, reach 
an  agreement  with  the  Federal  Reserve  so  that  they  can  always  supply  us  with  dollars 
should we need them. It worked perfectly during the crisis, so why not trust in a solution like 
this? This would also remove the problem of the shortage of dollars. 
Now, no doubt the Federal Reserve is happy to help solve problems that it is clearly in its 
own  interest  to  solve.  And  doubtless  this  was  the  situation  during  the  crisis,  when  the 
shortage of dollars in Europe threatened to rebound on the US market. But, should only one 
or a few Swedish banks be facing problems, the situation would be different. How would the 
Federal Reserve explain to the US public that, from the kindness of its heart, it was helping a 
little  country  in  Europe  whose  banks  have  no  noticeable  influence  whatsoever  on  the  US 
financial system? I don’t think we should have any illusions about this matter, regardless of 
how strong our current cooperation is with the Federal Reserve. When there is a crisis, we 
must be prepared to deal with matters ourselves. This is my absolute conviction after almost 
thirteen years at the Riksbank.  
So what is the solution? 
If a bank in a crisis situation does not have any dollars of its own or is unable to obtain any 
on the market, and if the Riksbank does not have any to lend, naturally an uncomfortable 
situation will arise for that bank. It will be unable to fulfil its commitments (that is, pay what it 
                                                 
5   Banks are unwilling to take large currency risks, among other reasons because this requires large amounts of 
capital. So, to the extent that they purchase currency on the market, it is assumed that they will be able to 
mitigate currency risk by lending to customers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
has promised to pay others), which normally results in liquidation. This is hardly a risk that a 
well-managed bank wishes to take. Naturally, it could turn to the Ministry of Finance or the 
Swedish National Debt Office and apply for assistance under the Swedish Support to Credit 
Institutions Act. But even this would probably cost quite a lot in terms of money and prestige 
(for example, it is easy to imagine the management being replaced), so, in general, this is 
probably not an alternative that a bank would wish to consider. 
Naturally, one way of reducing the risk would be, quite simply, to decrease lending in dollars 
and thus also the need for borrowing in dollars. In such a case, customers would have to be 
referred to other banks. Of course, at least major customers generally also have contact with 
US banks, which never encounter acute liquidity shortages, as they can turn directly to the 
Federal Reserve in the event of a crisis. So they have access to a lender of last resort which 
can create dollars. This is exactly what the Swedish banks lack. 
Now, naturally it hurts for a bank to refer good customers to a competitor, but if you don’t 
have any dollars, then you don’t have any dollars. It’s all a question of what risks the bank is 
willing to take. 
Another way of minimising the risk is for the Riksbank to maintain a foreign currency reserve 
that the banks can have access to in a crisis, as it does at present. The Riksbank has several 
reasons  for  maintaining  a  reserve  in  foreign  currency,  but  one  important  argument  for  its 
current size is precisely the need to be ready to lend to the banks6. The Riksbank’s foreign 
exchange reserve is currently equivalent to about SEK 300 billion. It is, of course, difficult to 
say  exactly  how  large  the  foreign  exchange  reserve  would  have  to  be  to  assist  the  banks 
with  liquidity  in  a  crisis  situation.  The  amount  could  be  either  larger  or  smaller,  but  let’s 
assume that two-thirds of the reserve, that is SEK 200 billion, is available for this purpose. 
What  does  it  cost  to  maintain  a  foreign  currency  reserve  like  this?  And  who  should 
reasonably pay this “insurance premium”?  
Let us examine the cost first. One way of looking at the matter is that Sweden, as a nation, 
has borrowed SEK 200 billion more than we otherwise would have needed, and the cost for 
this, quite simply, is the average interest rate on the government debt. But this would be to 
disregard the fact that the Riksbank can actually invest the money we have borrowed via the 
Swedish National Debt Office in interest-bearing assets, let alone that choices are limited as 
the assets must have extremely good liquidity, that is to say that cash must be available at 
very short notice. If we assume that the difference between the deposit rate and the lending 
rate is about forty basis points, the annual cost for borrowing SEK 200 billion would thus be 
about SEK 800 million. Is this a lot or a little? This can be discussed, but, last year, the four 
major banks had a combined balance sheet total of SEK 11 300 billion and pre-tax profits of 
SEK 70 billion.  
Let us now examine the question of who is to pay for this “insurance”. So far, the Riksbank 
has done this, meaning that the taxpayers have had to foot the bill. The Riksbank pays its 
profit into the public treasury each year, and the smaller this profit is, the less the Riksbank 
contributes towards covering the state’s expenditure. But should the taxpayers really pay for 
the risk incurred by the banks when they borrow dollars? This is not the only thing that could 
be considered unfair. It also leads to risks becoming too high. As I mentioned earlier: when 
the costs for risk-taking are not carried by the party taking the risk, this usually leads to these 
risks  becoming  excessive  from  a  macroeconomic  perspective.  The  banks  will  borrow  and 
lend more dollars that they would if they had to pay for the costs of managing the liquidity risk 
themselves.  This  cost  is  essentially  an  insurance  premium,  in  which  the  banks  are  the 
                                                 
6   There are at least two other reasons for the Riksbank to maintain a currency reserve. One is to be able to fulfil 
Sweden’s commitments towards international bodies such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the 
other is to be able to undertake interventions on the foreign exchange market when needed to influence the 
value of the Swedish krona.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
insured party and in which the general public has so far paid the premium. When the banks’ 
foreign  currency  borrowing  was  not  particularly  great,  this  was  not  a  significant  problem. 
However, the growth in borrowing and our experiences from the crisis give us reason to think 
again. Today, it seems reasonable for the banks to carry the cost of the Riksbank’s foreign 
currency reserve, in as much as it is needed to meet their liquidity requirements in the event 
of a crisis. 
If they were to carry the cost of maintaining a liquidity buffer in the Riksbank, it is likely that 
the banks would find it profitable to cut back on the riskier areas of their dollar lending. In this 
case, the Riksbank would also reduce its foreign currency reserve, as the need for a buffer 
would have decreased. However, the banks should pay a charge to cover the costs of the 
remaining buffer. The extent to which the banks could imagine reducing the riskier areas of 
their foreign currency lending, the size of any charge, and how this could be repaid remain to 
be  discussed  by  the  Riksbank  and  the  banks.  The  rough  calculation  I  made  earlier  could 
form  a  starting  point,  but  I  make  no  claims  for  it  to  be  any  more  than  that.  However,  it  is 
essential that this question receives an answer. The present situation is unacceptable in the 
long run. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
