Kiyohiko G Nishimura: Population ageing, macroeconomic crisis and 
policy challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Kiyohiko  G  Nishimura,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
75th Anniversary Conference of Keynes’ General Theory, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
20 June 2011. 
 in 
thrilled 
to  participate 
this  conference  commemorating 
Introduction: macroeconomic crisis and long-run fundamentals 
1.  
I  am  honored  and 
the 
75th anniversary  of  the  publication  of  Keynes’  General  Theory.  In  particular,  being  an 
academic-turned-central  banker,  the  opportunity  to  participate  in  this  panel  on  policy 
responses  to  macroeconomic  crisis,  is  a  great  privilege.  The  task  before  me,  as  a  central 
banker, is to describe the responses of central banks to the macroeconomic crisis of 2008, 
especially  their  “unconventional  policies”.  In  addition,  I  hope  to  add  some  color  to  our 
discussion  on  the  consequences  of  the  financial  crisis  by  drawing  on  the  Japanese 
experience, which suggests a long and winding road in the post-crisis period. 
Having  set  the  parameters  of  my  presentation,  I  would  like  to  start  my  presentation  by 
expressing my uneasiness over the smugness that I sense among commentators on macro 
theory and policy. Very often, I hear that the worldwide asset market bubbles and resulting 
macroeconomic  crisis  of  2008  was  due  to  financial  excess,  and  therefore  macroeconomic 
fundamentals have not changed, either before the crisis, or since. Financial excesses in the 
bubble  years  accumulate  on  the  balance  sheets  of  those  who  leverage  heavily,  and  the 
prevalence of such problems may become a drag on economic recovery for some time, but 
eventually time will heal the wounds and everything will be back to normal. In other words, 
the issue at stake is maintaining financial stability, and all that is required of economic theory 
and policy is to supplement their theoretical and policy toolkits by adding measures to check 
financial excess before it builds up and to control systemic damage when bubbles burst. 
Lord Keynes, who laid the foundations of macro theory and policy three-quarters of a century 
ago would most certainly have challenged such a view, if he were attending this conference. 
In fact, just one year after the publication of the General Theory, in a speech whose theme 
still resonates today, he has alluded to the issue at the root of my uneasiness1. So let me 
stand on his shoulders and explain. 
There is a remarkable correlation between asset market bubbles that cause macroeconomic 
crisis and demographical changes. In Figures 1.1 and 1.2, I show Japan, the United States, 
Spain  and  Ireland  as  examples  of  countries  affected  by  the  financial  crisis2.  In  these 
countries,  the  formation  of  bubbles  in  asset  markets  seems  to  coincide  with  a  growing 
inverse  dependency  ratio,  which  is  the  ratio  of  the  working  population  to  the  non-working 
(dependent)  population.  Meanwhile,  busts  in  asset  markets  seem  to  happen  when  the 
inverse dependency ratio declines noticeably. 
Moreover,  there  also  seems  to  exist  a  relation  between  asset  market  bubbles  and 
demographical changes at the international level, which, borrowing from Lord Keynes, could 
be described as the demographic consequences of globalization. In the past decades, once 
                                                 
1   Keynes,  J.  M.,  “Some  Economic  Consequences  of  Declining  Population,”  Eugenics  Review,  Vol.19,  April 
1937, pp.13–17. 
I  presented  this  correlation  elsewhere  some  time  ago  (see  Nishimura,  K.  G.,  “This  Time  May  Truly  Be 
Different: Balance Sheet Adjustment under Population Ageing,” a speech presented at the 2011 AEA Annual 
Meeting, Denver, January 7, 2011). Appendix updates and expands the figures, showing this correlation using 
newly available data on world population prospects. 
2  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
non-market  economies  such  as  Russia  and  China  were  folded  into  the  global  market 
economy. As a consequence, the working population of the “market-economy world,” which 
once consisted largely of the so-called industrialized economies, has expanded dramatically, 
since the aggregate working population of China and others is much larger than that of the 
industrialized economies. Against this background, we witnessed a truly global asset market 
boom,  synchronously  involving  many  regions,  and  which  culminated  in  the  crisis  of  2008. 
Real property prices across a wide area of the globe surged nearly threefold within a decade.  
The significant point for us here is that the bubble we have experienced coincided closely 
with the turning point in demographic trends. Such demographic perspective casts serious 
doubts  on  the  view  that  little  has  changed  in  the  fundamental  character  of  the  global 
economy  even  after  the  crisis  of  2008.  It  will  form  the  core  of  my  argument  in  this 
presentation. The perspective directs us to recognize the fact that we are in the midst of a 
balance sheet adjustment process after the worldwide financial bubble burst, at a time when 
the population is ageing. This is not the balance sheet adjustment of the past, which took 
place when the population was young and growing. This is a balance sheet adjustment when 
the  demography  is  rapidly  tilting  toward  the  old.  With  the  change  (though  gradual)  in 
demography,  which  is  one  of  the  long-run  macroeconomic  fundamentals,  between  the 
pre-crisis  and  the  post-crisis  era,  macroeconomic  policy  challenges  are  also  likely  to  have 
changed accordingly. 
In  Section  2,  I  consider  the  acute  impact  of  demography  on  asset  prices.  Assets  such  as 
residential  property  and  company  shares  are  stores  of  value  enabling  the  transfer  of 
purchasing  power  from  one  period  to  the  next,  as  well  as  productive  resources  creating 
goods and services. I concentrate on the former characteristic of assets, namely, their role as 
stores  of  value.  A  simple,  rather  mechanical  overlapping  generation  model  suggests  a 
correlation between residential property prices and the inverse dependency ratio, which is in 
fact  found  in  many  of  the  countries  suffering  financial  crisis.  When  applied  to  the  market-
economy world as a whole, this simple model also suggests that globalization of the scale we 
have  experienced  over  the  past  decades  is  likely  to  produce  unprecedented  increases  in 
asset prices. Moreover, the example also suggests that the go-go age of asset booms has 
passed, and ageing populations imply that the rate of return on assets will be substantially 
smaller  in  the  post-globalization  era  than  in  the  globalization  era.  In  fact,  it  will  be  even 
smaller than in the pre-globalization era. 
In Section 3, I begin by examining the process of balance sheet adjustment after the bursting 
of  a  bubble  and  when  the  population  is  ageing,  juxtaposing  Japan  in  the  1990s  and  the 
United  States  in  the  2000s.  Then,  I  summarize  the  consequences  of  severe,  prolonged 
balance  sheet  adjustment  under  population  ageing.  I  identify  the  multi-faceted  challenges 
central banks may face as a consequence of carrying out balance sheet adjustments under 
population ageing. There I explain unconventional policies to tackle these problems, taking 
the Bank of Japan’s efforts as an example. In the final section, I will give some thoughts on 
the  population  issue  in  the  tradition  of  Cambridge,  especially  with  respect  to  technological 
innovation. 
2.  
Background of financial crisis: population ageing and globalization 
Population growth and longevity after 1955 
Let me first examine the changing characteristics of population dynamics. Table 2.1 shows 
population  growth  estimates  for  selected  countries  in  selected  years,  based  on  the  most 
recent United Nations population figures. As an illustration, I take the United States, United 
Kingdom, Germany, France, Italy and Japan to comprise the Developed area of the market-
economy world. I take China and Russia to represent the former communist countries that 
have become incorporated into the market-economy world. In this table, they represent the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Emerging area of the market-economy world. Table 2.2 depicts population longevity for the 
same countries. 
These  tables  illustrate  three  facts.  First,  looking  at  each  country’s  population  growth  and 
longevity,  we  see  simultaneous  declining  population  growth  and  increasing  longevity.  This 
implies that many countries face a sizable increase in working-age population up to a certain 
point in time, when the population then begins to age rapidly, with no exception, at least for 
the countries in this table.  
Second, if you compare the size of the Emerging population with that of the Developed, the 
huge impact of globalization is immediately apparent. In 2005, the Emerging area was more 
than twice as populous as the Developed. This table illustrates a big jump in the  “market-
economy  world  population”  when  the  Emerging  is  incorporated  into  the  market-economy 
world. As is apparent, it is the China factor that drives these dynamics. 
Third, however, the incorporation of the Emerging area through globalization does not help 
halt the population ageing of the market-economy world. Population growth in the Emerging 
area is actually expected to be lower than that in the Developed area. 
Conceptual framework: simple overlapping-generation model with pure store of value 
Although  ageing  populations  may  have  a  sizable  effect  on  the  economy,  current 
sophisticated mainstream models are not particularly suited to examining the impact of the 
brute  force  of  demographic  factors,  globalization  and  ageing,  on  asset  prices  as  stores  of 
value.3  To  tackle  demographic  factors  squarely,  I  take  the  other  extreme  of  simplicity. 
Specifically, I use a skeleton form of an overlapping generation model, in which there is only 
one type of asset of no intrinsic value, and this serves as a pure store of value.  
As  in  familiar  overlapping  generation  models  in  introductory  economic  theory,  I  assume 
people live in two periods, and that there are the Young and the Old at any point in time. The 
Young produce one unit of non-storable consumption goods, which are the sole goods in this 
world. There is only one type of asset, called Pure-Store-of-Value (PSV) assets. They yield 
nothing and thus have no intrinsic value, but they are the only stores of value in this world. 
That is, PSV assets are the only means to save, or to transfer purchasing power from one 
period  to  the  next.  The  quantity  of  PSV  assets  is  fixed  and  constant  over  time.  People 
accumulate PSV assets in exchange for the consumption goods they produce when they are 
young, and trade them for consumption goods when they are old.  
To  make  the  analysis  even  more  transparent  and  mechanical,  I  make  the  extreme 
assumption that the Young are constrained not to consume but to save. Thus, unlike usual 
overlapping  generation  models,  there  is  no  utility  maximization  of  the  Young:  the  Young 
produce the consumption goods, trade them with the Old to get PSV assets, and save them 
for the next period. 
In this economy, there is only one market, in which the consumption goods produced by the 
Young are traded for PSV assets possessed by the Old. The supply of consumption goods is 
equal  to  the  number  of  young  people,  since  one  young  person  produces  one  unit  of  the 
consumption goods and, by assumption, she does not consume it. The supply of PSV assets 
                                                 
3   These sophisticated models (e.g., dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models), which are now the popular 
workhorses  of  macroeconomic  analysis,  typically  assume  life-long  utility-maximizing  representative  agents 
who live infinitely (or in more sophisticated settings, decease probabilistically with a constant proportion) and 
are endowed with ability to form true-model-consistent own macro econometric models in an economy with 
the rest of the world as exogenously given. Because of these settings, it is not easy to analyze the effects of 
the  unexpected  incorporation  into  the  market-economy  world  of  former  communist  countries  with  huge 
populations, and the subsequent rapid ageing of the market-world population, that is, the increase in the Old 
as a proportion of the population. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
possessed by old people is fixed by definition. Thus, the purchasing power of PSV assets, or 
the price of PSV assets in terms of the consumption goods is:  
Price of the PSV Asset = (Number of the Young) divided by (Quantity of the Assets) 
Since the quantity of PSV assets is fixed, the change in the number of the Young determines 
the change in the price of PSV assets. Consequently, the PSV asset price inflation rate is: 
PSV Asset Price Inflation Rate = (Ratio of the Young to the Old Population) – 1 
This  model  is  admittedly  simplistic:  specifically,  it  is  stripped  of  consumption  and  saving 
decisions (optimization), capital stocks (including human capital), and technological progress. 
More  realistic  models  may  bring  smoother  generational  consumption/  rate-of-return  paths 
through capital stock formation, and so on4. However, the demographic factors explained in 
this simple example are brute and forceful, and it seems unlikely that incorporation of inter-
temporal  optimization  and  other  adjustment  processes  would  completely  undermine  the 
basic results. 
Closed economy: inverse dependency ratio and “boom and bust” in property markets 
Let  me  now  apply  this  model  to  the  real  world.  Assets  such  as  residential  and  commercial 
property, equities and even art objects are essentially all “long-term stores of value,” that is, 
means of transferring purchasing power from the present to the immediate as well as distant 
future.  And  among  these  long-term  stores  of  value,  residential  property  is  usually  the  most 
popular in many countries for various reasons including preferential tax treatment. So if the 
model has a reasonable explanatory power, we expect movement in real residential property 
prices5 to coincide with that of the inverse dependency ratio (i.e., ratio of working-age (15–60) 
population to the rest), which corresponds to the ratio of the young working population to the 
old non-working dependent population in the simple OLG model, abstracting from child-age 
population.  
Figure 2.1 shows real land prices in Japan (national average, for all purposes) juxtaposed 
with  the  inverse  dependency  ratio  from  1955  to  date.  This  figure  shows,  firstly,  that  the 
relative abundance of young people coincided with sharply higher property prices. Secondly, 
in  contrast,  the  relative  abundance  of  old  people  seems  to  be  leading  to  lower  property 
prices. It should be noted here that declining property prices greatly aggravated the balance 
sheet  adjustments  of  Japanese  corporations,  as  will  be  explained  later.  The  US  case  is 
illustrated in Figure 2.2. In the United States also, an increasing inverse dependency ratio 
seems to have coincided with the property bubble. After the bubble burst of 2007, property 
prices  seem  to  have  followed  the  long  run  movement  of  the  inverse  dependency  ratio, 
although it would be premature to draw any conclusions from this at the moment. 
How  about  the  European  experience?  Figure  2.3  shows  the  situation  in  Ireland.  A  sharp 
ascent  in  property  prices  coincided  with  an  increase  in  the  inverse  dependency  ratio,  and 
then we see a free fall. This free fall suggests a painful adjustment is coming. Spain is shown 
in Figure 2.4. Again, a sharp increase in property prices coincided with an increase in the 
inverse dependency ratio, and then prices declined. Germany, having no bubble in 2008, is 
                                                 
4  
If the Young are not constrained to save, they then face inter-temporal optimization of consumption allocation. 
Introductory economic theory tells us that in such a case there may be multiple equilibria. However, the thrust 
of the following argument is generic and likely to be carried over to each of these multiple equilibria. 
5   More  precisely  speaking,  the  model  implies  that  generation-to-generation  real  asset  price  inflation  is 
determined by the inverse dependency ratio. This means that current generation-period real asset prices are 
higher  than  previous  if  the  inverse  dependency  ratio  is  increased  from  the  previous  generation-period. 
Typically, one generation-period is considered as 25 years or longer. Thus, in order for this relationship to hold 
within  this  long  generation-period,  we  expect  a  positive  correlation  between  real  property  prices  and  the 
slow-moving inverse dependency ratio. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
shown in Figure 2.5, where property price movement is depicted after 1995, when data are 
available. In contrast with Ireland and Spain, property prices in Germany had already begun 
to decline in 2010, coinciding with the population ageing that the country has experienced for 
some time. Recovery of property markets to the previous peak seems far away in an ageing 
society. 
Globalization: from exuberance to stagnation in global asset markets 
Let me now consider the effects on asset prices of globalization, in particular marketization6 
of  former  communist  countries  into  the  market-economy  world.  To  do  this,  we  apply  the 
simple  overlapping  generation  model  just  described,  as  if  the  market-economy  world  were 
one big economy. Thus, I ignore productivity differences between regions, immigration and 
emigration, uncertainty, and in particular, exchange rate adjustments. 
I illustrate the possible impact of globalization by using the numerical example of Table 2.3, 
which  is  based  on  the  United  Nations  population  estimates  of  Table  2.1.  To  make  the 
analysis as simple as possible, I take 25 years as a one-generation period postulated in the 
overlapping generation model described before. We will consider three periods: the Cold War 
(Period  1,  represented  by  1955),  pre-globalization  (Period  2,  by  1980),  and  globalization 
(Period  3,  by  2005).  Also,  to  simplify  the  analysis  but  to  add  a  realistic  flavor,  we  take 
population  numbers  of  respective  years  in  Table  2.1  as  those  of  the  young  population.7 
These two assumptions lead to the figures in Table 2.3. I also assume that the quantity of 
PSV assets is fixed at, say, 100 million in the market-economy world. 
Suppose that in the Cold War and pre-globalization periods (Periods 1 and 2), the market-
economy  world  consists  solely  of  the  Developed  area  of  six  industrialized  economies,  as 
shown in Table 2.1. Then, in Period 1, the market-economy-world Young population is the 
same as that of the Developed area, about 473 million. The Old population in the Cold War 
period is that of the Developed area, and as a whole they possess 100 million PSV assets. 
The  Young  population  trades  473  million  units  of  consumption  goods  for  100  million  PSV 
assets that the Old population possesses. Consequently, the price of PSV assets is about 
4.73  units  of  consumption  goods  in  Period  1.  A  similar  situation  holds  true  in  the 
pre-globalization period, where the price of PSV assets is about 5.90 units of consumption 
goods. Consequently, the asset price inflation rate in the pre-globalization period is 0.89% 
per annum. 
Then, consider globalization. The Emerging area (that is, Russia and China) is incorporated 
into the market-economy world in the globalization period (Period 3). I assume throughout a 
fixed exchange rate between the Developed area and the Emerging one. Thus, there is one 
free worldwide market of consumption goods traded for PSV assets. Like the Young in the 
Developed area, the Young in the Emerging area produce one unit of consumption goods, 
and  sell  it  to  the  Old  to  obtain  PSV  assets  for  their  retirement.  The  Old  only  exist  in  the 
Developed area in the worldwide consumption goods market, since the Old in the Emerging 
area have no PSV assets and cannot buy consumption goods in the worldwide market. The 
Old in the Emerging area are therefore ignored in the following analysis. (They are assumed 
to be outside of the market-economy world.) 
The Young population of the market-economy world is then the sum of that of the Developed 
and of the Emerging area, about 2.14 billion. The Young populations of both regions want to 
trade  their  consumption  goods  of  about  2.14  billion  units  for  100  million  of  PSV  assets. 
                                                 
6   Merriam-Webster’s Online Dictionary defines marketization as “the act or process of entering into, participating 
in, or introducing a free market economy.” 
7   This  simplifying  assumption  overstates  the  actual  young  population,  but  it  does  not  qualitatively  affect  the 
following analysis. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Consequently,  the  price  of  PSV  assets  is  about  21.4  units  of  consumption  goods  in  the 
globalization period (Period 3), a huge increase from 5.90 in the previous period. The price of 
PSV  assets  is  nearly  four  times  higher  in  the  globalization  period  (Period  3)  than  in  the 
pre-globalization period (Period 2), leading to asset price inflation of 5.28% per annum.  
The  number  of  young  people  in  the  market-economy  world,  who  are  saving  for  future 
retirement,  increases  substantially  in  the  period  of  globalization.  Thus,  we  have  a  global 
“savings  glut,”  which  leads  to  substantial  asset  price  inflation  globally.  In  the  example  of 
Table  2.3,  the  asset  price  inflation  rate  accelerated  substantially,  from  0.89%  to  5.28% 
annually for twenty-five years. 
What  will  happen  once  the  boom  is  over?  Let  me  extend  Table  2.3  to  include  the  post-
globalization period, in Table 2.4. Here the post-globalization period is represented by 2030, 
and all population figures are the United Nations population estimates given in Table 2.1. 
If we look at Period 4, the post-globalization period, we see that the market-economy world 
population  will  grow  by  only  0.28%  annually  from  2005  to  2030.  Under  my  simplified 
assumption,  the  young  population  in  the  market-economy  world  will  produce  about 
2.29 billion  units  of  consumption  goods,  while  there  will  be  100  million  PSV  assets.  This 
means  the  price  of  the  assets  will  be  about  22.9  units  of  consumption  goods  in  the  post-
globalization period, meaning that asset price inflation decelerates quite sharply. The asset 
price inflation of the post-globalization period is a mere 0.28%. In fact, the rate is lower even 
than the 0.89% of the pre-globalization period. 
Summing up 
So far, I have suggested that the brute force of compositional change in population might be 
in the background of asset market bubbles and their subsequent bust, especially those which 
caused the global macroeconomic crisis of 2008 and after. To close this section, I would like 
to draw two observations from this exercise. 
First, I am not suggesting this demographic factor is the cause of the crisis, but pointing out 
that  this  favorable  demographic  background  (increasing  inverse  dependency  ratio)  might 
have been fertile ground for the excessive optimism that led many economic agents to take a 
highly  leveraged  position  to  multiply  their  returns.  By  the  same  token,  the  eventual  sharp 
reversal of the ratio made resolution of accumulated financial excesses particularly difficult, 
resulting  in  the  prolonged,  severe  balance-sheet  adjustment  that  followed  the  crisis,  and 
which is still under way.  
Second, the aftermath of globalization is likely to imply a substantial slowdown in asset price 
inflation,  and  ultimately  in  the  rate  of  return  on  these  assets.  Moreover,  the  post-
globalization-period rate of return is noticeably lower even than that in the pre-globalization 
period, because of increased population ageing. 
3.  
Post-crisis world: multifaceted challenges and unconventional policy 
Severe and prolonged balance sheet adjustment under population ageing 
Let me now consider the post-crisis world. In order to determine the effect of balance sheet 
adjustments  after  the  bursting  of  a  bubble,  I  first  clarify  who  leveraged  during  the  bubble 
periods. In Japan, it was the corporate sector, especially small to medium-sized firms, which 
for the first time gained access to large banks after the so-called financial liberalization. The 
corporate  sector’s  loan-to-GDP  ratio  increased  by  29  percentage  points  in  the  ten  years 
before  the  bubble  burst  in  1991.  In  the  United  States,  it  was  the  household  sector  that 
leveraged,  especially  in  housing.  The  household  sector’s  housing  loans-to-disposable 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
income  ratio  jumped  by  39  percentage  points  in  the  ten  years  before  the  bubble  burst  in 
2007.8 
These  sectors  were  interest-sensitive  and  thus  constituted  the  “transmission  gears”  of  the 
ordinary monetary transmission mechanism in the periods before the bubbles burst. That is, 
these  leveraged  sectors  had  been  sensitive  to  policy  rate  reduction  in  business  cycles. 
However, after the bubbles burst, these leveraged sectors became insensitive to policy rate 
reduction, because of the acute balance sheet adjustments. Large legacy shortfalls must be 
compensated for by current profit or income, period by period, and this process is slow and 
painful. This leads at least to a breakdown in the ordinary monetary transmission mechanism 
of policy rate change. 
What  then  are  the  long-term  consequences  of  severe  and  prolonged  balance  sheet 
adjustment under population ageing? Three adverse consequences can be identified. 
Long-term consequence 1: declining mobility/flexibility 
First,  mobility  declines,  or  in  other  words,  the  economy  becomes  “inflexible”.  Since 
de-leveraging firms or households have to pay back all their debts before “moving” from their 
current  position,  they  are  often  stuck  with  an  “underwater”  property.  Population  ageing 
strengthens this tendency. In the case of Japan, de-leveraging took place in the corporate 
sector,  and  thus  firms  became  less  mobile  between  industries  and  regions.  In  the  United 
States,  the  household  sector  is  de-leveraging,  and  thus  household  mobility  has  been 
reduced. 
Figure 3.1 depicts declining entrepreneurial mobility in Japan. This figure shows the creation 
and  destruction  of  enterprises  between  pre-bubble  (1981–1986),  bubble  (1987–1991),  and 
post-bubble (1992–1996). It can be seen in this figure that the creation of new enterprises 
was sharply reduced after the bubble burst of 1991. In contrast, the increase in the rate of 
destruction was relatively mild. These two imply a “sticky industry structure,” a tendency to 
hang on to the past. 
Declining  mobility  is  found  in  the  household sector  in  the United  States.  Figure  3.2  shows 
changes in the householder mobility rate between 2005 and 2009. A sharp decline is found 
across all age groups. Since there is no such change in renters, this sharp decline suggests 
that the housing crash reduced householder mobility rates.9 
Long-term consequence 2: loss of non-tangible/human capital 
The second consequence of severe and prolonged balance sheet adjustment is the loss of 
non-tangible  or  human  capital.  De-leveraging  firms  and  households  suffering  long  under-
utilization or under-employment tend to lose their non-tangible or human capital. In Japan, 
this  has  been  observed  especially 
loss  of 
entrepreneurship,  loss  of  human  networks  in  skilled  manufacturing,  and  loss  of  access  to 
technological advances. In the United States, the long-term unemployed or underemployed 
risk losing their human capital. 
to  medium-sized  enterprises: 
in  small 
                                                 
8   See Figures 2.1 and 2.2 in: Nishimura, K. G., “This Time May Truly Be Different: Balance Sheet Adjustment 
under  Population  Ageing,”  a  speech  prepared  for  the  Panel  “The  Future  of  Monetary  Policy”  at  the  2011 
American Economic Association Annual Meeting, Denver, January 7, 2011. 
It has been debated recently whether the negative equity of some homeowners significantly influences their 
mobility  in  the  United  States.  (See,  for  example,  Schulhofer-Wohl,  S.,  “Negative  Equity  Does  Not  Reduce 
Homeowners’  Mobility,”  Working  Paper  682.  December  2010,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Minneapolis.) 
However,  the  results  based  on  past  data  are  not  yet  conclusive,  since  in  the  past,  negative  equity  was  a 
relatively rare, idiosyncratic phenomenon. New data including the period after 2008 are needed to answer this 
question. 
9  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Long-term consequence 3: problems in financial intermediation 
The  third  consequence  of  severe  and  prolonged  balance  sheet  adjustment  is  the 
deterioration in financial institutions’ efficient functioning as financial intermediaries. This was 
most acutely observed in Japan during the several years after the bubble burst: a pile-up of 
non-performing loans seemed to lead to a breakdown in the “market selection mechanism” 
around 1997. 
Figure 3.3 shows the result of a large-scale panel analysis of Japanese firms, in which the 
total factor productivity of exiting and surviving firms is compared. Survival of the fittest is a 
basic  premise  of  the  natural  selection  mechanism.  Thus,  if  the  market  mechanism  works 
well, the productivity of successful and surviving firms should be higher than that of failing 
and hence exiting firms, at least on the average.  
In this figure, the shaded areas show cases where the productivity of failing and thus exiting 
firms is higher than that of surviving firms, which is an anomaly. In fact, the shaded areas are 
rather exceptional most of the time. However, if we look at the period 1996–97, the period of 
the  financial  crisis,  we  see  many  shaded  areas indicating that  more  productive  firms  were 
exiting  in  many  industries.  This  strongly  suggests  a  breakdown  in  the  natural  selection 
mechanism. 
Post-crisis reality 
So, what will the post-crisis reality look like once the consequences of acute balance sheet 
adjustment under population ageing have taken effect? Some of the post-crisis reality can be 
seen in the Japanese situation in the 2000s.  
Decline in prospects for growth and investment returns 
(1) 
First, growth prospects decline. Average real GDP growth in Japan fell from 5% to 4 % in the 
70s and 80s, to around 1% in the 90s and 2000s. This implies the expected rate of return on 
investment in the 2000s is low, especially for those small to medium-sized firms that depend 
on domestic demand. In contrast, money (bank deposits) becomes relatively attractive as a 
store of value, given the price-stability pledge of the central bank. Ironically, this leads to an 
apparent  breakdown  of  the  historically-proven  quantity-theoretic  relationship  between  real 
activity  and  money  stock.10  Moreover,  not  only  is  the  policy  rate  very  low,  but  so  too  are 
longer risk-free rates, judged by historical standards. Conventional monetary policy through 
the overnight policy rate is not as effective as before, and this means the economy is more 
vulnerable to a downside shock. 
The change is not only macroeconomic but also microeconomic and structural. The demand 
structure  shifts  from  homogenous,  mass  markets  for  the  young,  to  more  segmented  and 
heterogeneous  markets  for  the  old.  Thus,  continued  focus  on  the  young  may  entail  ever-
declining demand and overcapacity, and could miss the opportunity of exploiting the potential 
demand  of  the  old.  Here  the  microeconomic  and  structural  failure  of  firms  and  banks  to 
accommodate new demand may have macroeconomic consequence as well. 
In  many  discussions  over  the  past  two  decades,  this  dramatic  decline  in  growth  and 
investment  prospects  has  often  be  attributed  to  the  supposedly  unique  nature  of  the 
Japanese economy, whatever that may be. However, if the demographic factors outlined in 
the  previous  section  do  indeed  shape  the  future,  then  declining  prospects  for  growth  and 
investment returns may have more global relevance. 
                                                 
10   The  quantity-theoretic  relationship  presupposes  that  non-interest-bearing  money  is  dominated  by  other 
positive rate-of-returns assets as a store of value. However, when price is stable and expected risk-adjusted 
return on investment is very low, the clear rate dominance of the other assets over money may no longer hold. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Coordination failure in the financial system 
(2)  
Second, there are signs of coordination failure. Banks’ lending is sluggish, partly because of 
their inadequate functioning as expert relationship bankers. Here a vicious circle seems to be 
working. To begin with, banks lack the expertise to assess investment in new fields, suffering 
as  they  are  from  problems  with  non-performing  loans  and  under-investment  in  their  loan 
officers’ human capital. Consequently banks do not lend. This means that new investments 
and new enterprises cannot get funding, and thus new markets falter. Then, banks miss the 
opportunities to accumulate new expertise, bringing them right back to the starting point of 
this vicious circle. 
Another  coordination  failure  is  found  in  capital  markets,  in  the  form  of  excessive  risk 
aversion.  Fearing  unknown  unknowns,  investors  shun  investing  in  riskier  securities.  Their 
market  then  becomes  thin  and  vulnerable  to  non-fundamental  shocks.  This  means  they 
themselves become prone to turning into unknown unknowns, thus the original fear is self-
fulfilling.  These  two  types  of  coordination  failure  in  financial  markets  result  in  an  apparent 
lack of “animal spirits”. 
Piling-up of public debt 
(3)  
Third, we see a piling-up of government debt. This is partly the result of the substitution of 
public debt for private debt in the process of balance sheet adjustment, and partly due to the 
substitution  of  public  demand  for  private  demand  during  this  period  of  declining  growth. 
According to the OECD’s Economic Outlook, Japan’s General Government Gross Financial 
Liability-to-GDP Ratio in 2010 was 198%, compared with 93% in the United States. However, 
it  should  also  be  noted  that,  because  of  low  long-term  rates,  the  Government  Net  Debt 
Interest Payments-to-GDP is 1.2% in Japan, compared with 1.7% in the United States.  
Three challenges and unconventional policy 
Let me now examine the challenges that central banks face in the post-crisis world. 
The first challenge is that of “cycle stabilization”: ensuring a return to sustainable growth with 
price stability, when the policy rate is near zero and longer-term risk-free rates are also very 
low compared with their historical average. 
The  second  challenge  is  to  enhance  the  growth  trend,  or  strengthen  the  foundations  for 
growth.  In  other  words,  the  challenge  is  to  raise  long-term  growth  prospects,  especially  in 
domestically-oriented  growth.  This  should  be  done  by  solving  the  coordination  failure  in 
banking and capital markets described above. 
The third challenge is to avoid causing problems in national debt management. We should 
design  and  execute  carefully  measures  to  cope  with  the  first  and  the  second  challenge, 
taking appropriate account of the current national debt situation as explained before, as well 
as general economic conditions. 
To 
introduced 
unconventional  policies,  which  differ  from  region  to  region  depending  on  the  particular 
problems they face. Here as an example, I will explain the Bank of Japan’s recent attempts 
at unconventional policies, namely, the Comprehensive Monetary Easing (CME) in October 
2010, and the Growth Foundation Strengthening Facility (GFSF) in June of the same year.  
To meet the challenge of cycle stabilization, the first part of the CME changed the guidance 
for  the  policy  rate  from  0.1%  to  the  range  between  0  and  0.1%,  making  clear  the  Bank’s 
Virtually  Zero-Interest  Rate  Policy  (VZIRP).  For  the  second  part  of  the  CME,  the  Bank 
clarified its policy duration commitment: the Bank will continue its VZIRP until it judges price 
stability  to  be  in  sight  on  the  basis  of  the  Policy  Board  members’  understanding  of  price 
stability.  With  Policy  Board  members’  announced  forecasts  for  two  years  ahead,  this  is 
similar to “forecast targeting” though not specific in numbers.  
first  and  second  challenges,  many  central  banks  have 
tackle 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
The third part of the CME is the Asset Purchase Program, which is also designed to meet the 
cycle stabilization challenge. The first half of the Asset Purchase Program aims to influence 
downward longer-term risk-free rates. That is, the outright purchase of JGBs with remaining 
maturity  of  1–2  years  and  T-bills  is  to  reduce  the  term-premiums  of  risk-free  rates.  The 
scheme to provide 3- and 6-month funds at the overnight rate already instituted was aimed at 
lowering rates longer than the overnight rate, and has been continued and included in this 
program.  These  are  unconventional,  but  can  be  considered  as  a  natural  extension  of 
conventional monetary policy through policy rate changes. 
However, the second half of the Asset Purchase Program is truly unconventional, in that the 
Bank  purchases  riskier  assets  than  it  bought  before:  BBB-rated  corporate  bonds,  and  
a-2  CPs.  It  also  purchases  ETFs  and  J-REITs  directly  from  the  market.  The  purchase  is 
designed to act as a catalyst to induce investment in riskier assets, and thus help solve the 
coordination failure I described earlier. In other words, it is aimed at breaking another vicious 
circle in capital markets, that caused by excessive risk aversion. 
When  there  is  grave  anxiety  about  the  future  of  the  economy,  as  when  there  is  so-called 
Knightian uncertainty, there is a tendency that aversion to risky assets such as stocks and 
real estate becomes “excessive” and demand for those assets declines, resulting in the risk 
premiums  of  those  assets  remaining  high.11  This  excessive  “flight  to  quality”  may  greatly 
impede economic activity.12 Meanwhile, there is the possibility that as Knightian uncertainty 
increases,  demand  concentrates  on  assets  whose  risks  are  considered  to  be  simple  and 
small,  thereby  lowering  the  risk  premiums  of  those  assets.  This  is  known  as  the  “flight  to 
simplicity,” which is different from the flight to quality. Whatever name it has, excessive flight 
to  simplicity  also  distorts  the  market.  In  these  cases,  there  is  a  possibility  that  the  central 
bank’s  purchase  of  risky  assets  will  lead  to  it  playing  the  role  of  “catalyst”  to  alleviate  the 
tendency to excessive flight to quality and to simplicity.  
To tackle the second, “trend-enhancement” challenge, or to strengthen growth potential, the 
Bank of Japan instituted its Growth Foundation Strengthening Facility (GFSF) in the form of 
preferential  fund-provisioning  to  support  financial  institutions’  own  initiatives  in  lending  and 
investing in new growth areas.  
It  should  be  made  clear  here  that  it  is  not  the  Bank  of  Japan  but  participating  financial 
institutions  that  determine  which  investment  projects  should  be  funded  using  this  GFSF. 
Thus,  the  GFSF  is  designed  to  be  a  catalyst  to  induce  banks  to  find  new  firms  or  new 
investment  projects  in  their  perceived  growth  areas.  In  this  way,  the  GFSF  is  targeted  at 
solving  the  coordination  failure  in  the  financial  system  mentioned  earlier,  by  breaking  the 
vicious circle of no lending resulting in no new markets and thus no demand for lending to 
start with.  
Recently the Bank of Japan expanded the GFSF to include the new function of promoting 
more  effective 
financial 
intermediation, and small companies in particular rely on banks for most of their funding. In 
the  high  growth  era,  Japanese  banks  responded  to  strong  demand  for  funds,  using  their 
“expert eye” to  monitor  closely the business performance of companies and examine their 
ability  to  meet  repayment  obligations.  However,  through  the  hard  process  of  disposing  of 
in  Japan  play  a  central  role 
lending  methods.  Banks 
in 
                                                 
11   Here, in order to facilitate understanding, I intentionally and informally use the term “excessive” risk aversion 
as representing “(Knightian)  uncertainty aversion” or  “ambiguity aversion” over and above conventional risk 
aversion. For a survey of this literature of Knightian uncertainty/ambiguity, see Gilboa, I., and M. Marinacci, 
“Ambiguity and the Bayesian Paradigm”, mimeo., April 12, 2011. 
12   For reference, please see (1) Nishimura, K.G., and H. Ozaki, “Search and Knightian Uncertainty”, Journal of 
Economic Theory, 119 (2004), 299–333.and (2) Nishimura, K.G., and H. Ozaki, “Irreversible Investment and 
Knightian Uncertainty,” Journal of Economic Theory, 136 (2007), 668–694. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
non-performing  loans  in  the  1990s,  banks  began  to  rely  more  heavily  on  credit  protection 
measures in the form of real estate collateral and personal guarantees.  
Unfortunately,  this  increased  reliance  on  real  estate  collateral  and  personal  guarantees 
weakened banks’ ability to monitor client firms. The value of real estate and personal assets 
pledged to banks as collateral bears no direct relation to changes in the client firm’s business 
cash flow. Thus, there is a risk that financial institutions may overlook changes in the cash 
flow of a borrower’s core business and suddenly be faced with its business failure. Moreover, 
too great an emphasis on protection by real estate or personal asset collateral makes loan 
officers  focus  on  loans  to  companies  with  a  long  business  history  and  abundant  assets, 
rather  than  providing  funds  for  new  companies  and  new  business  areas.  Taking  these 
problems into consideration, the Bank of Japan decided to use this GFSF facility to promote 
lending methods that do not rely on real estate collateral and personal guarantees. 
When  implementing  these  measures  to  cope  with  cycle  stability  and  trend-enhancing 
challenges,  it  is  very  important  to  take  appropriate  account  of  the  third  challenge,  that  of 
avoiding  causing  problems  in  national  debt  management.  Specifically,  it  is  crucial  to  avoid 
creating an impression of the “monetization” of government debt. Otherwise, the large scale 
purchase  of  JGBs  may  lead  to  a  substantial  and  lasting  ratcheting  up  of  long-term  rates, 
which would pose a serious problem for economic recovery and the financial position of the 
government. Taking this point into consideration, the Bank of Japan has already purchased 
about  22  trillion  yen  in  JGBs  annually,  beside  the  Asset  Purchase  Program.  By  the  same 
token,  we  should  be  very  careful  about  the  possibility  that  asset  purchases  may  lead  to 
capital losses, which could tarnish the credibility of the central bank. 
Concluding remarks: Keynes, population ageing and innovation 
4.  
Let me return to where I started this presentation. As I mentioned in the Introduction, it was 
Keynes who, in his Eugenics Review speech, placed population once again at center stage 
of  macroeconomic  policy  in  the  framework  of  his  General  Theory.  While  in  the Malthusian 
tradition,  growing  populations  and  inadequate  food  production  to  feed  them  are  the  major 
issue, Keynes was concerned with declining populations and inadequate capital investment 
for full employment. Life expectancy was not particularly long in the time of both Keynes and 
Malthus,  and  so  population  ageing  was  not  an  issue  at  all.  Moreover,  rapid  technological 
innovation has at least partially solved the problems they had faced for some time. 
The  problem  we  now  face  stems  from  population  change,  but  with  a  different  twist.  Here 
composition of population has changed, inducing a large swing in asset prices as a store of 
value. With this in the background, we have witnessed asset prices bubble and then collapse 
spectacularly  in  some  countries,  leaving  us  with  severe  balance-sheet  problems  and 
diminished expectations on investment returns. 
One  may  then  ask  the  question:  Can  our  problems  also  be  solved  by  technological 
innovation, as they were for Keynes and Malthus? If so, we need not be particularly worried 
about the present stagnation.  
I  do  not  have  an  answer,  but  I  would  like  to  make  three  remarks  about  the  possibilities 
presented by technological innovation. 
First, the ageing society might impose unique challenges on technological innovation. When 
the  population  is  growing  rapidly, as  it  was  in  the  past,  the  demands  of  the  young  always 
dominate  those  of  the  old.  Thus,  successful  technological  progress  has  a  tendency  to  be 
youth-oriented and quantity-oriented. In contrast, when the population is ageing rapidly, the 
demands of the old dominate the market. The characteristics of technology demanded by the 
old may differ substantially from those demanded by the young, and current youth-oriented 
technological progress may prove to be not as value creating as before. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Second,  if  the  ageing  world  implies  a  substantial  fall  in  asset  returns,  it  would  induce 
curtailment  of  new  investment,  leading  to  a  worsening  of  economic  conditions.  To  prevent 
investment shrinking further, we might need a new source of investment, which is not based 
on high private returns. It should be noted that there are many socially desirable projects that 
carry a low private rate of return, such as urban renewal projects, which might have been 
crowded  out  in  the  age  of  high  private  returns.  To  counter  possible  shortfalls  in  private 
investment, we might be obliged to adopt some form of public-private partnership to mobilize 
these innovation-based projects.13 
Third, in an ageing world, the financial needs of an older population are often very different 
from the risk and return profiles of existing assets. We would then need financial innovation, 
as  one  form  of  technological  innovation.  Specifically,  securitization  might  be  helpful  in 
tailoring  financial  products  to  the  particular  needs  of  an  older  population.  However,  recent 
experience  in  securitized  products  markets  has  shown  the  need  for  care  in  the  design  of 
such  securitization,  to  ensure  the  necessary  regulations  and  adequate  oversight  for 
prospective practitioners of these schemes.  
Now it is time for me to stop here. Thank you for your kind attention. 
                                                 
13   Some years ago, I proposed a scheme elsewhere for this purpose called Socially-Oriented Investment Trusts. 
See: Nishimura, K. G., and M. Saito, “On Alternatives to Aggregate Demand Policy to Revitalize the Japanese 
Economy”, Asian Economic Papers 2:2 (2003), 87–126. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  15
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  17
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  19
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 Financial crisis and inverse dependency ratio – an update 
Appendix: 
In a speech in January 2011,14 I presented some telling figures on the correlation of financial 
crisis,  or  so-called  bubbles,  and  the  inverse  dependency  ratio  in  Japan,  United  States, 
Greece, Portugal, Spain, Ireland and China. The figures were based on the 2008 revision of 
the  United  Nations  World  Population  Prospects.  Since  then,  the  United  Nations  has 
published its 2010 revision. This appendix updates these figures and expands on them by 
including more European and Asian countries. 
The  Japanese  inverse dependency  ratio  peaked  around  1990,  and it was  in  the very  next 
year, 1991, that the Japanese Bubble peaked. The peak of the US ratio was between 2005 
and  2010,  and  the  peak  of  the  US  Subprime  Bubble  was  2007  (Figure  A.1  [same  as 
Figure 1.1]). The economically troubled countries of the eurozone present a similar pattern to 
Japan  and  the  United  States.  The  ratios  for  Greece,  Portugal  and  Spain  have  almost  the 
same  time  profile,  and  all  of  them  peaked  around  2000–2005.  The  peak  of  the  Spanish 
property  boom  was  just  after  the  ratio’s  peak,  and  the  financial  problems  of  Greece  also 
started at the same time. A particularly interesting case is Ireland, which showed a sharp rise 
in the ratio until around 2005. The bursting of the country’s property market bubble was just a 
few years around the corner (Figure A.2). 
How  about  other  European  countries?  The  so-called  Core  Europe,  Germany,  France  and 
Italy, passed the peak 10+ years ago, and seemingly, did not have any particularly alarming 
property  bubbles  around  2010  (Figure  A.3).  However,  new  and  potential  members  of  the 
eurozone show similar patterns to Greece, Spain, Portugal, and Ireland (Figure A.4). Their 
ratios peaked around 2005–2010, and some have their own problems. 
In contrast to advanced countries, emerging Asia has shown remarkable resilience against 
the financial crisis of 2008. In fact, their inverse dependency ratio is still rising, as exemplified 
by China’s ratio (Figure A.5). The inverse dependency ratios of many other Asian countries 
have a quite similar time profile to that of China (Figure A.6). However, their ascent will be 
checked in a relatively short period, and the peak will be around 2010–15 in many of these 
countries. After that, the ratio will fall as rapidly as it is now rising. 
                                                 
14   See footnote 2. 
20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  21
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  23
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 