Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Asset price bubbles – how they build up and 
how to prevent them? 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  an  alumni  event  of  the  Faculty  of  Economics  at  University  of  Vienna, 
Vienna, 3 May 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak today at the University of Vienna, the alma mater from 
which  I  graduated  many  years  ago.  Many  things  that  we  have  learned  at  the  time  of  my 
studies were particularly useful in recent years. So I am happy to be back at the university 
and  to  provide  you  today  with  a  policy  maker’s  perspective  on  the  issue  of  asset  price 
bubbles,  a  topic  that  has  been  rarely  out  of  the  news  in  the  past  few  years.  Against  the 
background of the experience of the recent history, we now have the opportunity to reflect 
upon the tendency of economic systems to produce boom-bust cycles in asset prices. In my 
talk I want to focus on two main questions.  
 
Why do asset price bubbles arise and why are they so dangerous for the health and 
stability of the financial system? 
What can policy do about asset price bubbles? 
 
It is not very hard to find recent examples of asset price bubbles. Chart 1 shows the evolution 
of  real  home  prices  in  the  United  States  and  Ireland  since  1990.  Both  economies  show  a 
sharp increase in home prices between 1995 and 2005. In Ireland prices more than tripled; in 
the  US  they  rose  by  70%.  As  we  know  today,  these  price  appreciations  ultimately  proved 
unsustainable and in both countries, the housing market has fallen by a third since 2007. 
Such boom-bust cycles in housing prices are by no means only a feature of the recent past. 
The Scandinavian economies went through a housing bubble of their own in the 1985–1995 
period. As Chart 2 clearly shows, real estate prices rose and fell dramatically. In the cases 
illustrated  in  the  two  charts  the  housing  bubble  led  subsequently  to  a  financial  crisis 
accompanied by a deep recession. More generally, economic historians – such as Charles 
Kindleberger1 and others, have provided evidence that financial systems have a tendency to 
generate such financial boom-bust cycles, which sometimes take systemic dimensions that 
can cause or contribute to severe financial crises and recessions. 
But how can we define bubbles more accurately? One way to do so is as a deviation of the 
value  of  a  financial  asset  from  its  “correct”  or  “fundamental”  value.  Broadly  speaking,  the 
“fundamental” asset price is equal to the net present value of the cash flows which the owner 
of the asset is entitled to receive.  
Although it is easy to state in theory, this definition it is by no means easy to apply in practice 
for investors, regulators or central bankers. Forming forecasts of highly uncertain cash flows 
that stretch far into the future is a challenge, which not only requires substantial expertise but 
is also subject to the great uncertainty about the future values of factors influencing the asset 
price. For example, in 2005 – with the information available at that time – it was hard to make 
an unambiguously agreeable case that high US housing prices would not be confirmed by 
good fundamentals in the future. Although there were also warnings and some speculation 
on price drops. In the light of such complications, practitioners often resort to complementing 
fundamentals-based  asset  price  assessments  with  comparing  current  prices  with  historical 
                                                 
1 
“Manias, Crashes and Panics”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
averages.  If  current  prices  exceed  long-term  averages  by  a  sufficiently  large  margin,  a 
warning signal is recorded that a bubble might be present and further analysis is triggered 
about whether it risks causing a crisis. I will come back to this later in my presentation. 
There are many reasons why the financial system may not value assets correctly, leading to 
bubbles  and  imbalances.  Investors  have  a  tendency  to  look  for  information  from  the 
behaviour of other investors. So buying and selling “herds”2 can develop in financial markets 
on the basis of very little genuine news. Imperfections in credit markets3 can lead to boom 
bust cycles in money and credit quantities as well as asset prices. “Moral hazard” could bring 
about  excessive  risk  taking  by  financial  intermediaries  who  try  to  exploit  naïve  investors4, 
debt-holders  or  the  depositor  safety  net  provided  by  governments5.  Last  but  not  least,  the 
inherent human decision-making limitations6 mean that actual human beings often fail to take 
the rational choices usually assumed in the standard academic literature. 
Regardless of why asset price bubbles arise, there is little doubt that they pose potential risks 
for financial stability, especially when they involve bank-provided debt finance. In terms of the 
ECB’s framework for the analysis of systemic risk7, asset price bubbles can contribute to the 
build up of financial imbalances which can unwind suddenly and cause the collapse of the 
banking system, with serious consequences for the real economy.  
We  know  that  asset  price  bubbles  and  financial  crises  can  cause  severe  economic 
dislocation.  This  fact  naturally  leads  to  the  next  question  I  want  to  discuss.  What  can 
economic policy do about asset bubbles and financial imbalances? 
Here it is worth drawing a distinction between what economists call “ex ante” and “ex post” 
policies. These are the economic policy equivalents to “prevention” and “cure” in medicine. 
Once the financial system is gripped by the kind of fear and panic we saw after the collapse 
of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008,  “ex  post”  or  “cure”  policies  are  vital  in  order  to 
restore confidence and prevent full-scale meltdown. This is why our actual experience during 
2007–2009  was  dominated  by  “ex  post”  crisis  management  policies.  This  is  the  subject  I 
want to turn to next. 
Once the global financial crisis intensified in the autumn of 2008, the ECB did not hesitate to 
use the full array of policy instruments at its disposal. Interest rates were cut from 4.25% to 
1%  (Chart  3).  The  European  Central  Bank  doubled  its  lending  to  euro  area  financial 
institutions in a matter of weeks (Chart 4). National governments took weak banks into public 
ownership or recapitalised them in order to restore the market’s confidence. 
What we were trying to avoid was another Great Depression. The seminal analysis of Milton 
Friedman and Anna Schwartz8 taught us that the Federal Reserve’s failure to reduce interest 
rates and provide enough liquidity to the financial system was an important amplifying factor 
behind the economic collapse of 1929–1933. This time we made sure we avoided a similar 
scenario. 
Chart  5  compares  the  evolution  of  real  GDP  in  the  US  during  the  Great  Depression  and 
during the recent financial crisis. I focus on the US because of data availability for the Great 
Depression period.  
                                                 
2  Welch (1992), Bikhchandani, Hirshleifer and Welch (1992). 
3  Kocherlakota (2009), Farhi and Tirole (2009), Martin and Ventura (2011), Aoki and Nikolov (2010). 
4  Allen and Gorton (1993). 
5  Allen and Gale (2000). 
6  Some key contributions to this “Behavioural Finance” literature are in Thaler (1993) and Thaler (2005). 
7  See the December 2009 ECB Financial Stability Review and Trichet (2009). 
8  Friedman and Schwartz (1963). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Between 1929 and 1933, US real output fell by more than a quarter. In contrast, between 
2007 and 2009, US real GDP fell by around 5%. In the Euro area the recession was equally 
severe but, again, not comparable in scale to the events of 1929–1933. The Great Recession 
was painful but it was not a second Great Depression.  
While “ex post” policies are an important part of policy-makers’ toolkit, they are by no means 
a  “free  lunch”.  Dealing  with  the  recent  financial  crisis  carried  a  substantial  fiscal  cost9.  In 
particular, debt-to-GDP ratios have increased as a result of bank bail-outs as well as due to 
the  effect  of  the  economic  downturn  on  fiscal  revenues  and  social  expenditures.  For 
advanced  economies,  the  IMF  reports  a  median  increase  in  the  ratio  of  debt  to  GDP  of 
25 percentage points and a median direct bail-out cost of 6% of GDP. These fiscal strains 
are keenly felt throughout Europe at the current juncture. 
The  policy  conclusion  I  want  to  draw  from  these  facts  is:  Even  when  the  “ex  post”  policy 
response is successful at attenuating the immediate impact of a financial crisis on the real 
economy,  the  build  up  of  public  debt  carries  substantial  costs  of  its  own.  In  matters  of 
financial stability (just as in medicine), “prevention” is always better than “cure”.  
Let me now turn to discussing “ex ante” preventative policies. 
The crisis revealed that our “ex ante preventative” policy tools were insufficient to deal with 
the build up of systemic risk. Many of the post-crisis efforts by central banks, regulators and 
national governments have, therefore, focused on rectifying this deficiency. 
An  important  lesson  from  recent  crisis  was  that  policies  aimed  at  ensuring  the  stability  of 
individual institutions (which is what micro-prudential regulation does) were not sufficient to 
prevent the under-pricing of risk and excessive balance sheet growth. Even though individual 
banks looked healthier than ever in 2007, the system as a whole was more fragile than ever.  
This is why, in January 2011, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) was established 
and charged with ensuring the integrity of the EU’s financial system. The ESRB’s main tasks 
are threefold: to identify and prioritise systemic risks; to issue early warnings when significant 
systemic risks emerge; and to issue policy recommendations for remedial action in response 
to the risks it identifies.  
In  addition,  today’s  globalised  financial  market  implies  that  the  efforts  aimed  at  crisis 
prevention must have a global dimension. This is why agreeing the new Basel III capital and 
liquidity standards have been another important milestone in the efforts of the international 
central banking community to reduce systemic risk.  
The Basel III standards have focused on increasing the resilience of the financial system to 
shocks in several important ways:  
 
 
Higher capital and liquidity buffers  
Increasing the quality of bank capital by focusing on loss absorbing liabilities such 
as common equity 
Increasing the reliance of banks on “bail-in debt” – debt instruments which convert 
into  common  equity  when  individual  or  system-wide  solvency  deteriorate  beyond 
pre-specified levels. 
 In addition, macro-prudential regulators throughout the world are acquiring new policy tools 
aimed  at  “leaning  against  the  wind”  of  financial  imbalances  and  asset  price  bubbles.  The 
most important examples of such tools are the counter-cyclical capital and liquidity buffers. 
                                                 
9  Laeven and Valencia (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
These are new policy instruments and we still need to understand fully how and when we 
should deploy them. But one thing should be clear. Policy-makers throughout the world are 
determined to do all they can in order to avoid a repeat of the events of 2007–2009. 
The  active  use  of  macro-prudential  policy  will  provide  a  new  array  of  “ex  ante”  policy 
instruments which can lean against asset price bubbles and reduce the pro-cyclicality of the 
financial system.  
Should  monetary  policy  also  be  used  to  “lean”  against  asset  price  bubbles  and  building 
imbalances?  
The  importance  of  monetary  policy  for  financial  bubbles  and  imbalances  has  been 
underscored by growing empirical evidence10 that holding interest rates too low for too long is 
likely to lead to declining lending standards and growing risk-taking in the banking system. 
This is associated with significantly higher defaults over time.  
Moreover,  we  have  seen  that  the  materialization  of  systemic  risk  and  financial  instabilities 
can  lead  to  deep  recessions  associated  with  great  economic  costs,  which  in  turn,  carries 
risks for medium term price stability. 
The  ECB  is  tasked  with  ensuring  price  stability  in  the  medium  term  for  the  citizens  of  the 
Euro  area.  It  is  unique  amongst  central  banks  in  having  a  two  pillar  approach  which 
combines both economic and monetary analysis in order to arrive at the appropriate interest 
rate setting.  
To the extent that financial imbalances are accompanied by excessive monetary and credit 
growth, the ECB’s focus on medium term definitions of price stability as well as its use of the 
monetary pillar already provides some “leaning against the wind”. Work at the ECB11 shows 
that  the  leaning  against  the  wind  attitude  embedded  in  the  ECB’s  monetary  analysis  has 
contributed to containing the build-up of financial imbalances prior to the financial crisis. As a 
result, it has prevented a more significant fall out in economic activity during the crisis and 
larger risks to price stability. Therefore, this analysis shows that a cautious leaning against 
excessive money and credit growth and building financial imbalances as part of the monetary 
pillar can bring benefits not only for financial stability but also for price stability. 
Let me sum up. 
The historical evidence clearly shows that asset price bubbles can build up over time and, if 
unchecked, start to pose significant risks to systemic stability. We have been reminded that 
the materialization of such risks can have great economic costs, not only due to low growth 
and losses of income, but also in terms of heavy burdens on public finances.  
So what can we learn for economic policy? 
First, we have to improve the general monitoring and analysis of asset price developments 
and potential financial imbalances. 
Second, we have to not only strengthen the micro prudential regulatory framework through 
better liquidity and capital provisions, but we also have to build up a strong macro prudential 
framework. The experiences since 2007 crisis have taught us that ensuring the stability of 
individual  banks  is  not  enough  for  the  stability  of  the  system  as  a  whole.  This  is  why  we 
established the ESRB in January 2011 and tasked it with identifying and prioritising systemic 
risks,  issuing  early  warnings  when  significant  systemic  risks  emerge  and  issuing  policy 
recommendations for remedial action. 
                                                 
10  Borio and Zhu (2008), Maddaloni and Peydro (2011), Jimenez, Saurina, Ongena and Peydro (2010), Adrian 
and Shin (2011), Jimenez, Saurina, Ongena and Peydro (2010). 
11  Fahr,  Motto,  Rostagno,  Smets  and  Tristani  (2010).  The  paper  uses  simulations  with  the  Christiano,  Motto, 
Rostagno (2009) model. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
And  third,  we  have  to  make  use  of  our  monetary  policy  framework  to  come  by  financial 
imbalances that go along with excessive growth in money and credit. Our monetary policy is 
focused on the medium term and grants a distinct role to the analysis of monetary and credit 
developments.  This  is  instrumental  that  the  ECB  is  not  only  ensuring  medium  term  price 
stability, but also contributes to the stability of the financial system. 
References 
Adrian,  T.  and  Shin,  H.  (2011),  “Financial  Intermediaries  in  Monetary  Economics”, 
Chapter 12 in The Handbook of Monetary Economics, Friedman, B. and Woodford, M. (eds.), 
Elsevier 
Allen,  F.  and  Gale,  D.  (2000),  “Bubbles  and  Crises”,  Economic  Journal,  vol.  110(460), 
pp. 236–55, January 
Allen, F. and Gorton, G. (1993), “Churning Bubbles”, Review of Economic Studies, vol. 60(4), 
pp. 813–36, October 
Aoki, K. and Nikolov, K. (2010), “Bubbles, Banks and Financial Stability”, University of Tokyo 
and ECB Mimeo 
Borio,  C.  and  Zhu,  H.  (2008),  “Capital  Regulation,  Risk  Taking  and  Monetary  Policy: 
A Missing Link in the Transmission Mechanism”, BIS Working Paper No. 268 
Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D. and Welch, I. (1992), “A Theory of Fads, Fashions, Customs 
and Cultural Change as Informational Cascades”, Journal of Political Economy 100, 992–1024 
Christiano,  L.,  Motto,  R.  and  Rostagno,  M.  (2009),  “Financial  Factors  in  Economic 
Fluctuations”, ECB Working Paper No. 1192 
ECB  Financial  Stability  Review,  December  2009,  Special  Feature  on  “The  Concept  of 
Systemic Risk”. 
Fahr,  Motto,  Rostagno,  Smets  and  Tristani  (2010),  “Lessons  for  Monetary  Policy  Strategy 
from the Recent Past”, ECB Mimeo. 
Farhi, E. and Tirole, J. (2009), “Bubbly Liquidity”, IDEI Working Paper No. 577 
Friedman, M. and Schwartz, A. (1963), A Monetary History of the United States: 1867–1960, 
Princeton University Press 
Jimenez, G., Saurina, J., Ongena, S. and Peydro, J. (2010), “Credit Supply – Identifying Balance 
Sheet Channels using Loan Applications and Granted Loans”, ECB Working Paper No. 1179 
Kindleberger, C. (1978), Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crisis, Wiley 
Kocherlakota,  N.  (2009),  “Bursting  Bubbles,  Consequences  and  Cures”,  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis Mimeo 
Laeven, L. and Valencia, F. (2010), “Resolution of Banking Crises: the Good, the Bad and 
the Ugly”, IMF Working Paper 10/146 
Maddaloni,  A.  and  Peydro,  J.  (2011),  “Bank  Risk-Taking,  Supervision  and  Low  Interest 
Rates: Evidence from Euro Area and US Lending Standards”, Review of Financial Studies, 
Forthcoming 
Martin, A. and Ventura, J. (2011), “A Theoretical Note on Bubbles and the Current Crisis”, 
IMF Economic Review, 59 (1), pp 6–40 
Rogoff, K. and Reinhart, C. (2009), This Time It’s Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, 
Princeton University Press 
Thaler, R. (ed.) (1993), Advances in Behavioural Finance, Princeton University Press 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Thaler, R. (ed.) (2005), Advances in Behavioural Finance Vol. II, Princeton University Press 
Trichet, J.-C. (2009), “Systemic Risk”, Clare Distinguished Lecture in Economics and Public 
Policy, Clare College, Cambridge University 
Welch, I. (1992), “Sequential Sales, Learning and Cascades”, Journal of Finance 47, pp. 695–732 
Charts 
Chart 1 
The US and Irish Housing Bubble 
Chart 2 
The Scandinavian Housing Bubble 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 3 
ECB Repo Rate 
Euro-system Assets: Credit to Euro Area Financial Institutions 
Chart 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
US real GDP in the Great Depression and the Great Recession 
Chart 5 
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
