José Manuel González-Páramo: The European Union and the lessons 
from the crisis – the way forward 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the RBC Capital Markets’ Central Bank Conference “Impacts and 
Implications of Integrated Global Markets”, Madrid, 12 May 2011. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
I. 
It is a privilege for me to participate in this conference dedicated to the very important topic of 
the  “impacts  and  implications  of  integrated  global  markets”.  As  we  are  all  aware,  from  the 
very start of the current crisis, economic and financial distress has been transmitted around 
the world through a variety of channels that, together, have formed an unusually rapid and 
pervasive cross-border transmission mechanism.  
The high degree of integration in today’s global financial markets is generally seen as one of 
the  factors  that  have  contributed  to  the  amplification  and  spread  of  the  current  crisis. 
However, the fact that integrated financial markets can contribute to the destabilisation of our 
economies  is  not  intuitive.  Economists  usually  believe  that  more  integrated  and  innovative 
financial  markets  are  conducive  to  sustained  economic  growth  and  reinforce  economies’ 
capacity to withstand shocks. The experience of the last four years shows though that, under 
certain conditions, financial integration and some types of innovation can increase the scope 
for  contagion  across  institutions,  markets  and  borders  and  contribute  to  the  emergence  of 
systemic risks.  
This is one of the many lessons that we have learnt from the crisis, but certainly not the only 
one. There are also important lessons regarding the economic governance of the euro area, 
the sustainability of public finances, the regulatory reforms of the financial sector, etc. to be 
learned. In my address today, I would like to share with you some reflections on what we 
need to do in order to draw such lessons and what, in my view, represents the way forward 
for the European Monetary Union. 
The state we are in 
II. 
The  idea  that  highly  integrated  financial  markets  are  always  conducive  to  macroeconomic 
and financial stability is not the only economic notion that has been challenged by the crisis. 
The  current  crisis  was  preceded  by  the  “Great  Moderation”,  a  period  of  reduced 
macroeconomic  and  financial  volatility  and  improved  economic  performance  that  began  in 
the mid-1980s. During this period, the progression of economic history as a succession of 
cyclical booms and busts seemed to have come to an end in many advanced economies. 
Some  economists  even  referred  to  specific  countries  as  “Goldilocks”  economies,  with  this 
term meaning their supposed ability to grow on a sustained basis at a rate that was neither 
too high to generate inflation nor to low to cause unemployment.  
The  trust  in  the  ability  of  our  financial  markets  and  economies  to  smoothly  overcome  any 
disturbances  came  to  an  end  in  the  summer  of  2007,  when  the  financial  “turmoil”  began. 
After the collapse of Lehman Brothers in October 2008, the turmoil mutated into a full-blown 
financial “crisis” and many market segments seized up. The “Great Moderation” gave way to 
the “Great Recession”, characterised by a massive fall in industrial output and trade.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Policy interventions were made by central banks and other public authorities to restore and 
secure the orderly functioning of markets and economies. I like to think of the interventions 
by  public  authorities  as  “lines  of  defence”  against  the  crisis.  They  proved  successful  in 
guaranteeing  those  authorities’  ability  to  continue  delivering  macroeconomic  and  financial 
stability against the crisis.  
Let me recall briefly the three main lines of defence: central banks increased their provision 
of  liquidity  and  financial  intermediation  services;  monetary  and  fiscal  authorities  adjusted 
their policies in order to mitigate the macroeconomic impact of the crisis; and governments 
implemented a variety of measures in support of the financial sector.  
The government measures adopted in response to the economic crisis – both those related 
to fiscal policy and those in support of the banking sector – did not come cheap. This is true 
not only in the euro area, but – more generally – in all advanced economies. Together with 
the impact on government budgets of the massive economic contraction recorded during the 
crisis, they led to a significant deterioration in the public finances of a number of economies 
in the euro area.  
The deterioration was particularly significant in countries in which: (1) pre-crisis growth had 
been of an unsustainable and unbalanced nature – typically as a result of an over-reliance on 
the  expansion  of  private  credit  and  the  contributions  of  housing-related  sectors  (notably 
construction  and  housing  finance)  –  and  (2)  in  which  governments  had  failed  to  take 
advantage  of  favourable  developments  in  the  years  of  booming  growth  in  order  to 
consolidate their public finances.  
Over time,  concerns about the size of government deficits and soaring debt-to-GDP ratios  
–  combined  with  uncertainty  about  the  ability  of  governments  to  design  and  implement 
consolidation plans in the context of reduced potential growth and massive implicit liabilities 
towards  the  financial  sector  –  developed  into  uncertainty  about  the  sustainability  of 
government  debt.  Although  the  initial  problems  primarily  concerned  the  Greek  government 
debt  market,  contagion  and  spillover  effects  meant  that  the  crisis  quickly  spread  to  the 
sovereign  debt  of  other  so-called  “peripheral”  countries  and  other  market  segments.  In 
particular,  financial  markets  turned  their  attention  to  the  solvency  of  some  “peripheral” 
economies  that  were  perceived  to  have  been  hit  particularly  hard  by  the  crisis  because  of 
long-standing structural and institutional weaknesses. 
The  deterioration  of  public  finances  in  some  euro  area  member  States  has  impacted 
negatively on investors’ confidence in government bonds issued by these countries, and thus 
led to further turbulences in the financial markets. This is also reflected in the sharp increase 
in the yields on the government bonds issued by those countries. This additional distortion 
has  given  rise  to  further  instability  in  the  financial  system,  both  directly  and  through  its 
interplay with the weaknesses of the public sector. 
Given  the  central  role  played  by  sovereign  debt  in  financial  markets,  its  dysfunctional 
behaviour threatened both financial stability and the transmission of monetary policy. In this 
context,  the  Eurosystem  launched  its  Securities  Markets  Programme  (SMP),  which  entails 
the outright purchase of debt instruments to address the malfunctioning of securities markets 
and  to  ensure  the  proper  transmission  of  monetary  policy  impulses  to  the  wider  economy 
and, ultimately, the general price level.  
In addition, in order to mitigate the impact of the sovereign debt crisis on the banking sector’s 
ability  to  refinance  its  activities,  the  ECB  temporarily  reversed  the  phasing-out  of  its  non-
standard  measures.  It  also  took  collateral-related  measures  to  support  access  to  central 
bank  liquidity  by  banks  located  in  the  countries  that  were  committed  to  implementing 
economic and financial adjustment programmes negotiated with the European Commission, 
in liaison with the ECB, and the IMF.  
There is no denying that the financial crisis has put the euro and the economy of the euro 
area to the test. During the crisis the euro area public authorities have proven their capacity 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and  willingness  to  take  the  necessary  emergency  steps  to  maintain  financial  stability. 
However, the crisis has clearly shown the need to undertake a number of reforms in order to 
address some institutional and structural weaknesses in our economies. This is essential in 
order to map out the way forward for the European Monetary Union, which I will now briefly 
sketch.  
The way forward 
III. 
The way forward for the euro area and the EU requires a number of initiatives in key areas in 
order  to  guarantee  the  public  authorities’ ability  to  continue  delivering  macroeconomic  and 
financial  stability.  In  my  view,  the  building  blocks  of  any  comprehensive  plan  of  reform  for 
Europe are the following: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
implementing fiscal consolidation and securing the sustainability of public finances; 
promoting sustainable growth and job creation; 
enhancing the crisis management framework; 
improving economic governance; 
strengthening the financial sector. 
Let me briefly elaborate on these points. 
III.(a) 
Implementing fiscal consolidation and securing the sustainability of public 
finances 
The financial and economic crisis has led to a very considerable deterioration in the fiscal 
positions of euro area countries, in terms of both large budget deficits and rising government 
debt. However, the economic recession amplified imbalances in fiscal policies that had built 
up  gradually  long  before  the  crisis,  reflecting  the  failure  by  many  countries  to  implement 
sound fiscal policies during past periods of strong economic growth. On the institutional side, 
the EU’s fiscal framework, which is embedded in the Stability and Growth Pact (and that had 
been watered down in 2005), proved to be too weak to enforce fiscal discipline and was not 
implemented with sufficient rigour.  
As mentioned earlier, reflecting large fiscal imbalances and a loss of confidence on the part 
of investors, government bond spreads increased dramatically for some euro area countries 
and  became  very  volatile  in  2010.  The  willingness  of  investors  to  support  governments’ 
financing needs declined, with the result that the governments of three euro area countries 
have  since  then  required  financial  support  by  means  of  joint  EU/IMF  programmes.  These 
programmes  are  subject  to  strict  conditions  on  fiscal  adjustment  in  order  to  restore  public 
finances to health.  
However,  the  need  to  pursue  more  ambitious  consolidation  targets  is  more  general.  It  is 
striking to see that there are currently only two euro area countries that are not subject to an 
excessive  deficit  procedure.  Fiscal  consolidation  is  essential  to  ensuring  an  environment 
conducive to output growth and price stability. 
Looking  ahead,  implementing  fiscal  consolidation  and  securing  the  sustainability  of  public 
finances are among the major challenges faced by policy-makers. The consolidation of public 
finances requires a comprehensive policy comprising: (i) the timely correction of excessive 
deficits;  (ii)  the  reduction  of  government  debt  to  more  sustainable  levels;  and  (iii)  the 
reorganisation  of  banks  in  order  to  limit  strong  links  between  the  balance  sheets  of 
governments  and  financial  sectors,  which  typically  result  in  the  socialisation  of  banks’ 
liabilities  in  times  of  crisis.  These  measures  need  to  be  complemented  by  pension  and 
healthcare reforms to alleviate the fiscal burden arising from population ageing.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Moreover,  fiscal  governance  in  the  euro  area  needs  to  be  reinforced  by  means  of  the 
strengthening  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  This  means  establishing  stricter  and  more 
binding  rules  for  fiscal  policy,  backed  up  by  stronger  sanctions  or  mechanisms  to  ensure 
compliance with the rules. At the same time, the effectiveness of budgetary institutions needs 
to be improved at the national level. In this context, effective rules on expenditure should be 
regarded  as  a  means  of  promoting  fiscal  discipline  and  limiting  fiscal  vulnerabilities  in  the 
event of adverse economic shocks occurring in the future.  
III.(b)  Promoting sustainable growth and job creation 
Euro  area  countries  also  need  to  increase  their  efforts  to strengthen  their  growth  potential 
and  their  ability  to  create  jobs  in  a  sustainable  manner.  European  countries  have  made 
reasonable  progress  over  the  past  ten  years  in  the  area  of  employment.  Indeed,  over 
14 million jobs were created in the euro zone since the introduction of the euro, far more than 
in the previous ten years (around 8 million). The employment increase in the euro area since 
1999 was even significantly larger than in the United States (7.6 million).  
This  is  an  important  achievement,  but  it  remains  insufficient,  especially  against  the 
background of the massive employment destruction observed in some euro area countries 
during the crisis. Unemployment rates have reached unacceptably high double-digit rates in 
some countries and segments of the population (i.e. the young workers), that, as a result, 
carry  extremely  large  economic  and  social  costs.  This  is  socially  unfair  and  economically 
inefficient.  
European  countries  must  made  more  efforts  to  resolutely  pursue  –  and  with  far  greater 
urgency  than  in  the  past  –  the  necessary  structural  reforms  in  product  markets,  labour 
markets, pension systems and so on. In this respect, a key contribution to the strengthening 
of the euro area’s long-term economic prospects will come from the thorough implementation 
of the Europe 2020 strategy, with its focus on key areas such as: (i) education, research and 
innovation; (ii) resource efficiency; and (iii) high levels of employment and social cohesion.  
III.(c)  Enhancing the crisis management framework 
In  response  to  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  the  euro  area  has  recently  armed  itself  with  an 
important tool to safeguard area-wide financial stability. At the European Council meeting of 
24 and 25 March 2011 the Heads of State or Government of the EU agreed to establish a 
permanent European Stability Mechanism (ESM) based on the existing temporary European 
Financial Stability Facility (which will remain in place until June 2013).  
The ESM will grant financial assistance to countries in distress in the form of credit, with the 
assistance  provided  under  strict  conditionality  and  on  the  basis  of  a  strict  analysis  
–  conducted  by  the  European  Commission  and  the  IMF,  in  liaison  with  the  ECB  –  of  the 
sustainability of the relevant country’s debts. The establishment of the ESM represents an 
important addition to the institutional fabric of EMU.  
However, the existence of a mechanism to provide financial assistance to countries facing 
temporary  distress  should  not  be  seen  as  a  source  of  moral  hazard.  Such  risks  are 
prevented both by the strict conditions under which any assistance would be provided and by 
the fact that the mechanism will be activated only if deemed indispensable in order to counter 
threats to the financial stability of the euro area as a whole. In addition, the establishment of 
this  permanent  stabilisation  mechanism  will  be  accompanied  by  the  strengthening  of  the 
framework for economic governance in the euro area, particularly as regards the framework 
for  the  multilateral  vigilance  of  national  policies  in  the  areas  of  public  finances  and 
competitiveness.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Improving economic governance 
III.(d) 
It is fair to say that the experience of the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU) over its first 
twelve  years  has  been  a  historic  success.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  also  fair  to  say  that  the 
credit  should  go,  to  a  very  large  extent,  to  the  achievements  of  the  monetary  pillar  of 
Monetary  Union  (the  “M”  in  EMU)  rather  than  of  its  economic  pillar  (EMU’s  “E”).  Yet, 
monetary policy alone cannot deliver all the benefits of EMU. The economic pillar must also 
play  its  part.  Unfortunately,  this  has  not  always  been  the  case  so  far.  Indeed,  national 
governments  have  not  been  sufficiently  committed  to  fulfilling  their  obligation  to  guarantee 
macroeconomic stability and fiscal sustainability in the long term.  
Therefore, a key lesson learnt from the crisis is that in order to fully reap the benefits of EMU, 
it is essential to strengthen the rules that govern macroeconomic policies in the euro area so 
as to ensure their alignment with (1) sound economic principles (such as fiscal discipline and 
a commitment to a market-based economic system) that foster macroeconomic and financial 
stability, and (2) with the needs of the single currency.  
Some  concrete  legal  initiatives  in  these  areas  have  been  proposed  by  the  European 
Commission, on the basis of the final report of the task force chaired by the President of the 
EU  Council  Herman  Van  Rompuy.  In  a  nutshell,  the  European  Commission  recommends 
strengthening  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact,  which  represents  the  framework  of  rules  and 
procedures  preventing  countries  from  accumulating  excessive  public  debts  and  deficits.  In 
addition, 
the  establishment  of  a  broader 
macroeconomic framework for the monitoring of economic policies, which – if not sufficiently 
sound  –  can  give  rise  to  imbalances  such  as  a  loss  of  competitiveness,  current  account 
imbalances and excessive private indebtedness.  
In  addition  to  these  EU-wide  proposals  at  the  legislative  level,  a  separate  pact  (the  “Euro 
Plus  Pact”)  has  been  drawn  up  by  the  euro  area  countries and  several  other  EU  Member 
States in order to further strengthen the economic foundations of EMU.  
The ECB is of the opinion that, in both areas, the current reform efforts are not sufficiently 
extensive. While the proposals tabled by the European Commission go some way towards 
improving  macroeconomic  and  fiscal  surveillance  in  the  euro  area,  they  fall  short  of  the 
quantum leap forward that is needed in order to guarantee the smooth functioning of EMU.  
The  legislative  acts  implementing  the  reform  of  economic  governance  are  now  being 
discussed in the context of the “trialogue” discussions taking place between the European 
Parliament, the European Commission and the Hungarian Presidency of the EU Council. The 
purpose of these discussions is to produce a common set of proposals that accommodates 
the amendments requested by the various authorities involved in the legislative process. The 
ECB  has  called  on  these  authorities  to  produce  a  strong  and  clear  set  of  rules,  including 
automaticity in the triggering of procedures and sanctions, in line with the ten key elements 
for the reform of economic governance published on its website.1 
the  European  Commission  proposes 
III.(e)  Strengthening the financial sector 
The  financial  crisis  has  also  revealed  a  number  of  deficiencies  and  vulnerabilities  in  the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  in  our  economies.  The  massive  economic  and 
financial impact of the crisis has clearly indicated that addressing such deficiencies through 
far-reaching reforms is essential in order to prevent similar crises in the future.  
There is a relatively broad consensus as regards the nature of the reforms required. Indeed, 
following the deterioration of the crisis in the wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the 
                                                 
1   See 
of 
Elements 
Key 
(http://www.ecb.int/ecb/legal/pdf/key_elements_opinion_con_2011_13.pdf). 
the 
ECB 
Opinion 
on 
Economic 
Governance 
Reform 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
G20 rapidly identified some of the key areas for reforms and entrusted the task of drawing up 
concrete  proposals  to  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  and  the  Financial 
Stability Board.  
Some  progress  has  already  been  made  in  the  area  of  financial  market  regulation,  most 
notably as regards the “Basel III” capital accord. This calls for strong increases in the capital 
requirements of financial institutions and also introduces leverage requirements, as well as 
leverage ratios.  
In  Europe,  important  steps  have  been  taken  with  a  view  to  addressing  the  long-standing 
friction  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the  international  dimension  of  the  operations  of 
commercial banks and financial institutions, and, on the other hand, the national boundaries 
that constrain regulatory and supervisory measures. The Heads of State or Government of 
the EU have agreed on a new structure for financial supervision in the European Union – the 
European  System  of  Financial  Supervision  –  with  a  view  to  improving  coordination  and 
cooperation.  
 
As  regards  micro-prudential  supervision, 
three  newly  established  European 
Supervisory  Authorities  for  banks,  insurance  companies  and  financial  markets 
became  operational  at  the  beginning  of  2011.  These  are  designed  to  enhance 
coordination between micro prudential supervisors and to ensure the application of 
EU wide standards in the area of technical supervision.  
In  addition,  a  new  authority  –  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  –  has 
been established with a mandate to conduct macro prudential supervision within the 
EU. 
 Much has been achieved in the reform of financial market regulation and supervision since 
the onset of the financial crisis. But there are still many areas that require the attention of 
policy-makers – such as stricter regulation of all systemically relevant financial institutions, 
greater transparency as regards the “shadow” banking sector, better regulation of investment 
funds and credit rating agencies, and improvements to corporate governance models in the 
banking sector. These are just some of the key areas in which greater efforts are needed in 
order to strengthen the foundations of our economies. 
Concluding remarks 
IV. 
I have described the way forward for the euro area economy. Of course, I have only looked 
at what will happen if we take the high road out of the crisis. I haven’t even considered some 
of  the  “shortcuts”  that,  according  to  some  commentators  and  economists,  are  supposedly 
available to countries unwilling to bear the costs of structural and fiscal reforms. In particular, 
it is often argued that Greece would be better off rescheduling or renegotiating some of its 
sovereign debt, rather than continuing to implement the adjustment programme negotiated 
with the international authorities as part of the financial assistance provided by the European 
Commission and the IMF.  
The  argument  is  typically  presented  as  follows:  “Greece’s  key  problem  is  not  a  temporary 
lack of access to liquidity, but rather a solvency crisis. The country is too weak to bear the 
economic and social costs of implementing the institutional and economic reforms foreseen 
by the adjustment package. The country may, therefore, be better off announcing some form 
of  renegotiation  or  restructuring  of  its  debts  with  private  creditors.  Of  course,  such  a  step 
should  not  be  taken  lightly,  since  it  may  be  tantamount  to  a  sovereign  default,  and  the 
economic  literature  suggests  that  the  costs  of  defaults  can  be  both  multiple  (reputational 
loss, exclusion from financial markets, trade sanctions, and so on) and substantial. However, 
some  empirical  studies  focusing  on  emerging  economies  have  fortunately  found  that  the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
impact that an inevitable – rather than a strategic – default has on the defaulting country’s 
economy is typically smaller and less persistent than is commonly believed.2”  
Let me stress that I am rather surprised to see the flippancy with which some commentators 
recommend  that  the  government  of  an  advanced  economy  should  infringe  its  legal  and 
contractual  obligations,  as  though  breaching  the  trust  of  investors  and  citizens  were  the 
simplest and least costly solution to the deeply-rooted structural problems in Greece. 
Far  from  being  a  convenient  means  of  minimising  economic  losses  and  dissipating 
uncertainty, a  default  would  have  extreme  adverse  consequences,  many  of  an  irreversible 
nature, for the Greek economy – particularly for its banking sector and for the welfare of its 
citizens. Those basing their arguments on past experiences in emerging economies fail to 
take  into  consideration  the  many  differences  in  the  case  at  hand:  Greece  is  an  advanced 
economy  sharing  a  single  currency  with  16  other  democracies  which  has  signed  up  to  a 
common  set  of  rules,  institutions  and  overriding  objectives,  notably  macroeconomic  and 
financial  stability,  together  with  the  other  countries  of  the  European  Union.  Greece’s  euro 
membership  rules  out  debt-devaluation  spirals  and  ensures  price  stability  in  the  medium 
term.  Its  economy  is  highly  integrated  –  via  a  number  of  channels,  such  as  trade  and 
financial flows – with other advanced economies both in Europe and around the world that 
can  potentially  act  as  contagion  mechanisms.  Greater  economic  integration  has  been 
accompanied  by  an  increasing  degree  of  institutional  cooperation.  At  the  same  time,  the 
country’s economy is affected by a number of structural weaknesses and rigidities that have 
resulted in the persistent accumulation of public and private sector imbalances.  
The  thorough  implementation  of  the  comprehensive  programme  of  structural  reforms  and 
fiscal consolidation negotiated with the international authorities is the only way forward which 
is fully consistent with the long-term interests of the people of Greece. To paraphrase the title 
of  a  study  by  IMF  staff,3  the  debate  on  debt  restructuring  in  a  euro  area  country  is 
unnecessary, undesirable and unhelpful.  
I would also add that this discussion represents a dangerous and unwelcome distraction from 
more  important  debates  on  issues  such  as  how  to  enhance  the  euro  area’s  economic 
governance, make our economies more dynamic, ensure the sustainability of public finances 
and  strengthen  the  banking  sector,  which  deserve  our  full attention  and  to  which we  must 
devote our energies.  
                                                
 
2   A recent study covering more than 200 cases of debt restructuring since 1970 finds that the impact of defaults 
on  the  ability  of  defaulting  countries  to  access  credit  subsequently  is  larger  and  more  protracted  that 
previously believed. See Cruces, J. and Trebesch, C., “Sovereign defaults: The price of haircuts”, unpublished 
mimeo, 2010. 
3   Cottarelli, C., Forni, L., Gottschalk, J. and Mauro, P., “Default in Today’s Advanced Economies: Unnecessary, 
Undesirable, and Unlikely”, IMF Staff Position Notes, No 10/12, IMF, Washington, DC, 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
