Carlos da Silva Costa: The origins of the crisis and future prospects  
Address  by  Mr  Carlos  da  Silva  Costa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Portugal,  at  the  Centro 
Português de Estudos, London, 16 June 2011. 
 Introduction 
Good Evening Ladies and Gentlemen. It is a real pleasure to be here. 
Four  years  after  the  beginning  of  the  largest  financial  crisis  since  the  Great  Depression 
global  financial  stability  has  yet  to  be  secured  and  many  policy  challenges  remain  to  be 
addressed. 
Indeed: 
 
 
 
 
Global recovery is not proceeding at a balanced pace; 
Large global imbalances persist; 
Widespread public debt sustainability concerns have emerged; 
And  links  between  weak  balance  sheets  of  both  governments  and  the  banking 
sector have led to renewed tensions in financial markets, particularly affecting the 
euro area.  
Against this background, my intention today is to review the origins of the crisis and discuss 
future prospects. 
What has happened? 
1. 
The great moderation and regulatory failure 
The causes of the global financial crisis are now well understood. 
The mid-1990s marked the start of a decade of sustained macroeconomic growth and low 
inflation – a period which has become known as “the Great Moderation”. Globalisation has 
favored  benign  macroeconomic  conditions,  creating  the  illusion  of  a  new  paradigm  in  the 
economy. Low consumer inflation eased the pressure on central banks – most notably the 
US Fed – to tighten monetary policy and rein in credit growth. 
Rather  than  translating  into  consumer  price  inflation,  credit  expansion,  deriving  from  the 
ample liquidity and low interest rates, has led to fast rising asset prices. In particular, very low 
US  interest  rates  have  promoted  the  rapid  expansion  of  consumer  and  mortgage  credit, 
fuelling a widespread housing bubble. 
Regulatory  and  supervisory  failures  have  amplified  these  developments.  Indeed,  relevant 
factors  to  explain  the  magnitude  of  the  financial  bubble  and  the  subsequent  disruptions 
include: 
 
 
 
Wide-ranging financial de-regulation; 
Pro-cyclical elements in regulatory frameworks; 
Insufficient  attention  devoted  to  financial  interconnectedness  and  macro-systemic 
and liquidity risks; 
And, last but not least, lack of market transparency.  
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The transition to the self-regulation paradigm and the move from the “originate-to-hold” to the 
“originate-to-distribute” business model have created perverse incentives: emphasis was put 
on expanding lending, rather than on the borrower’s ability to pay. 
Accumulation  of  imbalances  in  the  US  economy  has  mirrored  the  build-up  of  large  global 
imbalances. Indeed, current account surpluses in emerging countries, most notably China, 
were  invested  in  US  securities  and  other  low-risk  assets  further  amplifying  liquidity  and 
depressing  yields.  This  has  encouraged  investors  elsewhere  to  search  for  higher  yields  in 
riskier assets, resulting in severe underpricing of risk. 
The EMU accession impact 
In Europe, specific developments were also at play, the most significant one being the plans 
to set up an Economic and Monetary Union. As from the mid-1990s, the prospect of EMU 
fostered  the  rapid  convergence  of  interest  rates  to  the  levels  prevailing  in  Germany  (the 
anchor country in the then Exchange Rate Mechanism). 
Prospective  EMU  members  –  especially  those  with  worse  track-records  in  terms  of 
macroeconomic  stability  –  initially  benefited  from  a  virtuous  cycle  between  nominal 
convergence and the prospect of EMU participation. 
In  these  so-called  “converging”  countries,  policy  efforts  towards  fiscal  consolidation  and 
lower inflation have increased the likelihood of EMU participation (as these countries became 
closer  to  fulfilling  the  Maastricht  criteria);  in  turn,  a  higher  probability  of  joining  EMU  has 
facilitated exchange rate stability, the convergence of interest rates to the lowest levels in the 
EU  (declining  risk  premia)  and  the  improvement  of  the  budget  balance  (lower  interest 
payments on public debt). 
The magnitudes involved were impressive: long-term interest rates in Portugal declined from 
over 12 per cent in April 1995 to around 4 per cent in December 1998, just before the country 
adopted the euro. During the same period, the 10-year interest rate differential against the 
D-mark narrowed from over 5 p.p. to about 0.3 p.p. Interest expenditure more than halved, 
dropping from 5.6% of GDP in 1995 to 2.4% in 2005. Similar developments occurred in other 
converging countries like Italy, Ireland, Spain and, with some lag, also Greece. 
As could be expected, this very substantial easing of liquidity constraints – arising both from 
the interest rate decline and access to a huge wholesale market for funding – led to booming 
private sector credit and lower savings. Households’ consumption of durables and housing 
investment  soared  and  corporate  leverage  increased  significantly.  Large  current  account 
deficits  emerged  in  the  converging  countries  as  a  counterpart  to  the  boom  in  private 
spending. 
The public sector has also benefited from lower interest rates and easier access to credit. In 
addition, booming private expenditure has pushed up tax revenue. All else equal, this should 
have meant substantially improved overall and primary balances, as well as declining debt 
levels. 
Prudent fiscal management should have recommended that the boom in private spending be 
partly  offset,  even  if  only  by  letting  automatic  stabilisers  play  their  role.  However,  while 
private  sector  dynamics  were  very  similar  within  the  group  of  converging  countries,  the 
behavior of the public sector was markedly different. 
As this “new world” of low interest rates and abundant financing seemed to offer a free lunch 
to  the  converging  countries,  several  imbalances  started  to  build-up.  Such  imbalances  took 
different shapes: 
 
In countries such as Portugal or Greece, fiscal imbalances became a major problem 
– even if the size of the problem was, and actually is, substantially different. In both 
countries,  savings  arising  from  lower  interest  rates  and  boom-related  windfall 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
revenues  were  used  to  finance  expansionary  expenditure  policies.  When  interest 
rate  convergence  was  completed  and  the  initial  impact  of  EMU  on  growth 
disappeared, the underlying unsustainable fiscal policies soon became apparent. 
Also, structural bottlenecks arising from lack of competition and an excessive weight 
of  the  public  sector  in  the  economy,  contributed  to  an  overexpansion  of  the  non-
tradables sector, hampering competitiveness and aggravating external imbalances. 
In  countries  such  as  Spain  or  Ireland,  fiscal  policies  were  more  prudent.  Still, 
imbalances built-up, mainly taking the form of a real estate bubble. 
In  Ireland,  an  oversized  financial  sector  developed  in  tandem  with  the  real  estate 
bubble (a similar phenomenon also occurred in non-euro area countries, the most 
prominent case being Iceland).  
   As the financial crisis emerged in mid-2007, and then developed into global recession, the 
response  of  policy  authorities  around  the  world  was  the  massive  provision  of  liquidity  by 
central banks coupled with huge fiscal expansion and the assumption or guarantee of banks’ 
debts  by  governments.  The  aim  was  to  mitigate  the  impact  of  the  crisis  on  output  and 
employment  and  to  prevent  a  fully-fledged  crisis  that  could  resemble  that  of  1929.  The 
consequence was of course a strong deterioration in the balance sheet of the public sector in 
general. 
The  resulting  sustainability  concerns,  especially  for  those  countries  where  the  room  for 
maneuver was more limited, have brought us to the third stage of the crisis, where we now 
are  –  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  which  has  so  far  mainly  affected  the  euro  area  peripheral 
economies. 
How to explain what has happened? 
2. 
With the benefit of hindsight, how can we explain the developments of the past 15 years? 
How  was  it  possible  that  such  high  current  account  deficits  persisted  in  a  number  of  euro 
area  countries  without  financial  markets  questioning  these  countries’  ability  to  repay  their 
increasing debts? 
Well, first and foremost, it cannot be ignored that, as a regime change, EMU had a major 
impact on the formation of expectations, the transmission channels as well as the equilibrium 
values of key economic variables. This made it extremely difficult to assess developments in 
real  time,  causing  very  reasonable  and  competent  people  to  disagree  about  the  best 
explanation, and therefore to advocate different policy responses. 
For  a  number  of  years,  the  dominant  view  in  academic  and  policy  circles,  as  well  as  in 
financial markets, was what we might call the “benign view”. 
Many  respectable  economists  and  policy-makers  claimed  that  current  account  imbalances 
were  the  expected  result  of  deeper  integration  among  countries  with  different  levels  of 
economic development. In a monetary union, a current account deficit reflecting the financial 
balance  of  the  private  sector  would  be  no cause  for  concern.  Credit  risk  monitoring  would 
ensure  adequate  risk-pricing,  and  there  would  be  no  aggregate  (and  thus  policy-relevant) 
macroeconomic imbalance. 
This view found support in the predictions of standard macroeconomic frameworks. In a neo-
classical  growth  model,  an  interest  rate  fall  caused  by  a  drop  in  the  home  country’s 
idiosyncratic  risk  premium  leads  to  higher  consumption  (through  the  wealth  and  inter-
temporal substitution effects) and stimulates investment (reflecting a permanently lower user 
cost of capital). The initial disturbance also causes an increase in the relative price of non-
traded  goods  (an  appreciation  of  the  real  exchange  rate)  and  an  increase  in  real  wages. 
Excess  demand  is  then  progressively  eliminated  on  account  of  both  improved  supply 
conditions  (reflecting  the  initial  higher  investment)  and  lower  expenditure  on  consumer 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
durables and housing investment (as the latter has adjusted to new equilibrium levels). The 
implied adjustment process is slow and efficient. 
As  it  turned  out,  higher  potential  growth  did  not  materialise  as  the  investment  boom  was 
largely concentrated in non-productive investment (construction) and/or was soon reversed. 
Indeed,  an  alternative  explanation  of  the  converging  countries’  adjustment  to  EMU  can  be 
obtained from a standard intertemporal macroeconomic model without a production sector. 
Such  a  model  illustrates  the  crucial  importance  of  the  intertemporal  substitution  effects  in 
consumption  that  dominated  EMU’s  early  years.  In  this  model  too,  the  implied  adjustment 
process, which will eventually be triggered by the accumulation of foreign debt, is slow and 
benign. 
The  assumptions  underlying  the  benign  approach  turned  out  to  be  highly  unrealistic  and 
misleading  from  a  policy  perspective.  Indeed,  the  conceptual  frameworks  described  above 
abstract from the key realities of life such as complex expectations formation mechanisms, 
the possibility of default, the absence of frictions in product and labour markets or imprudent 
fiscal behaviour. 
With  the  benefit  of  hindsight,  it  is  clear  that  a  more  “prudent  view”  was  warranted. 
Overoptimistic  expectations  about  future  growth  prospects  and  short-sightedness,  weak 
domestic  institutions  and  real  and  financial  frictions  should  have  made  a  strong  case  for 
policy intervention aimed at mitigating the boom-bust pattern of monetary integration. 
The  buffers  that  would  have  resulted  from  lower  public  debt  and  stronger  capital  in  the 
banking  sector  would  have  put  the  converging  economies  on  a  much  sounder  position  to 
face the financial storm. Also, a more ambitious and consistent approach to structural reform 
would have left these economies better equipped to face the challenges of globalisation and 
ageing. Shall we infer from this view that only domestic policy and institutional failures are to 
be blamed for the current state of affairs in Europe? 
The  answer  is  clearly  negative.  While  it  is  true  that  inadequate  –  and  in  many  instances 
irresponsible – domestic policies go a long way in explaining where we are, one must also 
acknowledge  that  an  incomplete  EMU  architecture  is  also  key  to  explaining  the  current 
situation. 
The EMU model of economic governance rests on four key principles: 
 
Euro  area  members’  fiscal  sovereignty  –  in  contrast  with  monetary  unification, 
Member States maintain responsibility for fiscal policy, subject to common rules and 
procedures at EU level; 
No  default  –  the  possibility  of  orderly  sovereign  debt  restructuring  has  not  been 
considered; 
No bail-out – no crisis management mechanism has been established; 
No-exit – the possibility of one member abandoning the euro is not envisaged.  
 
 
The Maastricht Treaty drafters were perfectly aware that we could not rely on market forces 
alone  to  ensure  discipline  and  the  correction  of  imbalances.  Numerous  historical  episodes 
have shown that financial markets tend to be too slow and weak in penalising profligacy in 
normal times, and can suddenly turn disruptive and cause overshooting during crisis. 
In order to contain moral hazard and prevent disruptions, the Stability and Growth Pact was 
agreed as a complement to the Maastricht architecture. The Pact sets budgetary rules and 
procedures to reinforce fiscal discipline at the national level. It was intended to avoid gross 
fiscal policy errors, through peer monitoring and peer pressure, as well as through the threat 
of sanctions. 
However,  implementation  of  the  Pact  was  rather  weak  in  EMU’s  early  years.  Tensions 
emerged already in the early 2000s, and in November 2003, when action should have been 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
taken against both France and Germany, the ECOFIN Council decided not to act, overruling 
the European Commission. This unwillingness to apply the rules was a “mortal sin”: a clear 
message  was  sent  to  the  other  euro  area  members  that  the  Pact  was  not  there  to  “bite”. 
More  generally,  I  would  say  that  weak  economic  governance  in  the  euro  area  had  three 
major consequences: 
 
First,  inadequate  domestic  fiscal  policies  were  tolerated,  leading  to  unsustainable 
fiscal positions in some countries and tensions in the conduct of the single monetary 
policy; 
Second,  insufficient  attention  was  devoted  to  losses  of  competitiveness  and  the 
accumulation of current account imbalances within the euro area; 
Third,  and  probably  most  important,  the  correlation  between  the  ability  of  the 
financial sector and of the sovereign states to obtain financing was largely ignored. 
On the one hand, the market for funding was highly integrated within the euro area 
(i.e., the money market and the sovereign debt market); on the other hand, banking 
ownership and lending continued to be essentially domestic-based. The fact that the 
banking system and the sovereign states shared the same frontier meant that their 
ability to borrow depended on the same set of fundamentals. This inter-dependence 
turned out to be a major source of macro-systemic risk in the euro area.  
  The  sovereign  debt  crisis  has  brought  to  the  forefront  the  failures  in  EMU  economic 
governance,  and  has  exposed  the  particular  vulnerability  of  euro  area  Member  States  to 
changes in markets’ sovereign risk perception. 
Indeed,  when  a  country  has  its  own  free-floating  currency,  a  loss  in  market  confidence 
translates  into  a  bond  sell-off,  which  in  turn  leads  to  higher  yields  and  exchange  rate 
depreciation,  leaving  (all  else  equal)  money  supply,  and  the  supply  of credit  to  the  private 
sector  broadly  unaffected.  Also,  the  national  central  bank  acts  as  a  lender  of  last  resort. 
Therefore, investors cannot precipitate a liquidity crisis that could force the country to enter 
into default. 
In contrast, for a country belonging to monetary union, a loss of confidence and the resulting 
bond sell-off imply not only higher yields, but a shortage of liquidity, which can easily turn into 
solvency problems. 
Crisis  management  by  the  EU  has  not  been  particularly  effective  in  restoring  market 
confidence. While swift and resolute action has been taken towards strengthening the EU’s 
financial architecture, the EU has clearly been running “behind the curve” in dealing with the 
sovereign  debt  crisis.  As  a  result,  the  ECB  has  been  confronted  with  the  inevitability  of 
playing a compensating role, testing the limits of its mandate. 
What do we need to do? 
3. 
As  mentioned,  the  root  causes  of  the  current  crisis,  both  the  global  financial  crisis  and  its 
ramifications in the euro area, are now well understood. 
The issue to consider now is what to do. Measures have to be taken both at the national and 
at the EU level. To be successful, national and EU measures need to be consistent, both as 
regards their design and their timing. 
At the national level, it is clear that utmost priority must be placed in restoring public debt 
sustainability,  increasing  domestic  savings  and  enhancing  potential  growth  in  the  crisis-hit 
countries.  These  are  necessary  conditions  to  stabilise  external  debt  and  put  it  on  a 
downward  path.  These  objectives  are  at  the  core  of  the  recently  approved  financial 
assistance programme to Portugal. 
At  the  EU  level,  a  new  economic  governance  model  is  needed  to  deliver  fiscal  discipline, 
prevent sustained losses in competitiveness and promote financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
For this purpose, in October 2010, the European Council endorsed the proposals put forward 
by a special Task-Force on economic governance led by President van Rompuy. The new 
economic governance model will comprise: 
 
A reformed Stability and Growth Pact, aimed at enhancing the surveillance of fiscal 
policies  and  applying  enforcement  measures  more  consistently  and  at  an  earlier 
stage; 
New provisions aimed at strengthening national fiscal frameworks; and 
A new surveillance mechanism of macroeconomic imbalances.  
 
 
The  legislative  package  that  will  establish  the  new  economic  governance  model  is  being 
negotiated between the Council and the European Parliament, and agreement is expected 
before end-June. 
The so-called Euro Pact +, agreed in March by the euro area Member States, and joined by 
6  other  EU  countries,  aims  at  strengthening  policy  coordination  even  further.  The  Pact 
focuses  on  those  areas  falling  under  national  competence  which  are  key  to  increasing 
competitiveness and avoiding potentially disruptive imbalances. 
It remains to be seen whether the new surveillance framework that will soon be adopted will 
prove sufficient to ensure a smooth functioning of the euro area. The ECB has highlighted 
the importance of ensuring greater automaticity in the surveillance and sanctions procedures 
and of increasing the political and reputational costs for non-compliance. 
The strengthened economic and budgetary surveillance procedures will be complemented by 
an  enhanced 
the 
recommendations of the de Larosière Group, the European System of Financial Supervisors 
was established, comprising (i) new European Supervisory Authorities (the so-called ESAs) 
for  banking,  insurance  and  securities  markets  and  (ii)  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board 
(ESRB) to address macro-prudential matters. 
In  addition,  an  EU  framework  for  cross-border  crisis  management  in  the  banking  sector  is 
being  considered  and,  a  European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM)  –  a  permanent  facility  to 
provide financial assistance to euro area Member States subject to strict conditionality – is 
expected to become operational at the beginning of 2013. The EMS will have an effective 
lending capacity of €500 billion, to be reviewed on a regular basis. 
The ESM concrete design is now being negotiated, even if its broad features have already 
been agreed and announced by the European Council. A number of question marks remain, 
in particular as regards the extent of private sector involvement, whether the ESM is to act 
more  as  a  preventive  or  a  rescue  tool,  and  also  how,  and  to  which  extent,  intervention  in 
primary  debt  markets  may  take  place.  Key  challenge  is  how  to  prevent  temporary  liquidity 
problems from becoming solvency problems while at the same time minimising moral hazard 
which is always implicit in any ex-ante rescue mechanism. 
Other institutional innovations have been proposed, among which the possible creation of 
euro-bonds. So far, this proposal has not been enthusiastically received by many Member 
States. However, the European Parliament, the European Commission and a few Member 
States have shown some interest and I believe that the debate on this issue is far from over. 
regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework  at  EU 
level.  Following 
Conclusion 
To conclude, these are undoubtedly challenging times for us all. The crisis has shown the 
need  for  enhanced  international  cooperation,  better  governance,  strengthened  market 
supervision and increased transparency. This is relevant not only for governments, but also 
for central banks and supervisory authorities. 
As rightly pointed out in the de Larosière report,  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
“… The world’s monetary authorities and its regulatory and supervisory financial authorities 
can  and  must  do  much  better  in  the  future  to  reduce  the  chances  of  events  like  these 
happening again.” 
Thank You. 
London, 16 June 2011 
References 
Barbosa, António Pinto et al., (1998), O Impacto do Euro na Economia Portuguesa, Lisboa, 
Publicações D. Quixote. 
Blanchard,  Olivier  and  Francesco  Giavazzi  (2002),  “Current  Account  Deficits  in  the  Euro 
Area:  the  End  of  the  Feldstein-Horiokka  Puzzle”,  Brookings  Papers  on  Economic  Activity, 
2:147:209. 
De Larosière et al (2009), Report by the High-Level Group on Financial Supervision in the 
EU, http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/finances/docs/de_larosiere_report_en.pdf 
European  Central  Bank,  “Opinion  of  the  European  Central  Bank  of  16  February  2011  on 
economic governance reform in the European Union” (CON/2011/13), Official Journal of the 
European Union, 25/5/2011, 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/ecb/legal/pdf/c_15020110520en00010041.pdf 
European Council Conclusions – 24/25 March 2011, 
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/120296.pdf 
Fagan, Gabriel and Vítor Gaspar (2008), “Adjusting to the euro”, Chapter 4 of Bulding the 
financial  foundations  of  the  euro  –  Experiences  and  challenges,  Jonung,  Lars,  Walkner, 
Christoph and Max Watson (eds), Routledge, 2008 (also available as ECB Working Paper 
N.716, January 2007). 
Von Rompuy et al (2010), Strengthening Economic Governance in the EU – Report of the 
Task-Force to the European Council, 21 October 2010,  
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/117236.pdf 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
