Masaaki Shirakawa: Money, government securities and a central bank 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  the 
2011 Spring Meeting of The Japan Society of Monetary Economics, Tokyo, 28 May 2011. 
 Introduction 
I.  
I am honored to be invited today to the Japan Society of Monetary Economics. It is of great 
significance  to  have  discussions  among  academics,  practitioners  and  policymakers  in  any 
academic field, and it is certainly true in the field of monetary economics. As I have worked at 
a central bank for a long time, and also placed myself in a university for a while, I sincerely 
hope  to  deepen  intellectual  interaction  among  academics,  practitioners  and  policymakers. 
Today, from a viewpoint of a policymaker and a practitioner, I will offer my thoughts with the 
title of “Money, Government Securities and A Central Bank.” 
Since the 2000s, the global credit bubble and the ensuing financial crisis have marked the 
most striking events in the global finance. The course of the events during the bubble and the 
ensuing  crisis  periods  shed  new  light  on  the  interdependency  of  the  confidence  in  the 
government, the financial system and the central bank. During the bubble period preceding 
the crisis, implicit government guarantee by the Government-Sponsored Enterprises (GSEs) 
such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac was one of the causes of the residential bubble in the 
United States. During the crisis period after the failure of Lehman Brothers, decisive actions 
backed by the confidence in the government  were required in order to end the crisis. The 
U.S.  and  European  governments  were  forced  to  make  large-scale  capital  injections  and 
guarantees to financial institutions to restore confidence in private financial institutions and 
the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  The  governments  also  employed  aggressive  fiscal 
policies  as  decisive  macroeconomic  measures  to  escape  from  sharp  and  deep  economic 
contractions.  
Even after the crisis, confidence in the government has remained an important issue. Since 
the  mid-2009,  the  world  economy  has  gradually  recovered,  thus  preventing  a  deep 
depression, through a different path from the 1930s. However, confidence in sovereign debts 
has  been  eroded  due  to  the  deterioration  in  fiscal  balance.  At  present,  Greece  and  other 
European peripheral countries were hit most severely by the deterioration in fiscal balances 
and  resulting  sovereign  debt  problems.  Those  countries  faced  an  adverse  feedback  loop 
among the sovereign risks, the financial system and the real economy. Although Japan has 
not  confronted  such  a  rise  in  yields  on  government  securities,  the  deterioration  in  fiscal 
balance is also severe.  
The  issue  of  confidence  in  a  government  has  been  relevant  to  a  central  bank.  After  the 
failure  of  Lehman  Brothers,  central  banks  in  advanced  countries,  including  Japan,  took 
unconventional policy measures. Those measures were not pure monetary policies defined 
as liquidity provisioning. They included, more or less, quasi-fiscal policy elements. Debates 
are  still  going  on  regarding  to  what  extent  a  central  bank  should  pursue  such  monetary 
policy,  namely,  the  relationship  between  a  central  bank  and  the  government,  or  the 
relationship between monetary and fiscal policy.  
Looking  back  on  those series  of  events,  I  hope  you  understand  why  I  choose  the topic  of 
money, government securities and a central bank. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
II.  
Interdependency of Confidence 
Money and government securities 
I will start by talking about two financial assets, money and government securities (Slide 1). 
Money  plays  an  important  role  as  a  means  of  payment,  a  unit  of  account  and  a  store  of 
value. The primary form of money is central bank money which consists of banknotes issued 
by a central bank and deposits in central bank current accounts. In Japan, the balance of 
central bank money is 122 trillion yen in March 2011. In addition, bank deposits, which are 
easily convertible to central bank money, also function as money. The outstanding balance of 
bank deposits is 1,024 trillion yen.  
The  outstanding  balance  of  Japanese  government  securities  is  865  trillion  yen.  A 
government  uses  the  securities  as  a  means  of  funding;  a  central  bank  uses  them  as  the 
instrument of monetary control; and investors including private financial institutions use them 
as  one  of  the  primary  financial  assets  for  investment.  Since  government  securities  are,  in 
many  cases,  regarded  as  risk-free  assets  whose  credit  risks  are  negligible,  yields  on 
government  securities  are  often  used  as  benchmark  rates  for  pricing  various  financial 
instruments. 
Both of money and government securities are merely pieces of paper which represent the 
liability of issuers, i.e., a central bank, private banks and a government. The debtor of central 
bank money is a central bank, the debtors of bank deposits are private banks, and the debtor 
of  government  securities  is  a  government.  Although  those  financial  assets  do  not  have 
intrinsic  value  as  materials  in  themselves,  they  are  regarded  as  valuable  assets  and  fulfill 
their functions. That is ultimately because holders of money or government securities have 
confidence in the issuers of those debts. 
The  importance  of  confidence  is  not  a  new  topic;  most  textbooks  on  monetary  economics 
emphasize  its  importance.  Governments,  central  banks  and  private  banks  make  their  best 
efforts to maintain the confidence. Governments make their efforts to maintain the medium- 
to long-term fiscal balances. Central banks maintain the stability in prices and the financial 
systems through the conduct of monetary policy, through actions as the lender of last resort, 
through financial supervision, and others. Private banks maintain their capital base, manage 
various risks, and provide credit intermediation and payment services.  
My  point  here  today  is  the  interdependency  of  confidence.  Confidence  in  each  issuer  is 
supported not only by the issuer’s own efforts but also by the fact that confidence in other 
issuers is maintained and that members in society understand the importance of confidence 
in each other. Now, I will elaborate on the interdependency of confidence. 
Determination by the government to underpin confidence in private financial 
institutions 
First,  confidence  in  bank  deposits  of  private  banks,  or  in  debts  of  financial  institutions,  is 
significantly affected by confidence in governments as well. The global financial crisis after 
the failure of Lehman Brothers demonstrated that. After the failure, financial institutions lost 
confidence  in  each  other’s  creditworthiness,  and  the  interbank  money  markets  almost 
stopped working. Under the circumstances, central banks acted as the lender of last resort 
and  aggressively  provided  funds  in  order  to  deal  with  the  liquidity  shortage  of  financial 
institutions.  Although  the  provision  of  liquidity  by  central  banks  was  extremely  important 
during the crisis after the failure of Lehman Brothers, it alone was not enough to restore the 
stability of the financial system. That was because the adverse feedback loop between the 
financial system and the real economy eroded capital positions of financial institutions and 
thereby  confidence  in  their  solvency  significantly.  As  the  central  issue  shifted  from  the 
liquidity  shortage  problem  to  the  capital  shortage  problem,  governments  were  required  to 
inject  public  capital  and  to  guarantee  senior  debts  of  the  financial  institutions  in  order  to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
restore confidence in private financial institutions. The amount of public capital injected by 
the  governments  of  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  Germany  and  France  during  the 
recent global financial crisis reached an equivalent of 84 trillion yen.1 The experience above 
suggests that the stability of money and the financial system also depends on confidence in 
governments. 
Support by the public to underpin confidence in a government 
Second, having talked about the importance of confidence in a government, I would like to 
emphasize  that  confidence  in  a  government  is, in  the  end, underpinned  by  support  by  the 
public.  After  the  global  financial  crisis,  fiscal  conditions  in  many  countries  deteriorated 
seriously  as  a  result  of  decreases  in  fiscal  revenues  associated  with  the  downturns  in 
economic  conditions,  aggressive  fiscal  policy  and  capital  injections  to  financial  institutions. 
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) reported that fiscal deficits of advanced economies in 
G20 countries were 1.7 percent of GDP in 2007. The deficit rose to 9.4 percent in 2009 and 
are projected to be as high as 8.0 percent in 2011 (Slide 2). The report notes that about an 
half of the increase in outstanding public debts in G20 advanced economies is due to the 
decrease in fiscal revenues, while nearly 20 percent of the increase is due to fiscal stimulus 
measures and the authorities’ support to financial institutions.2 
When  fiscal  conditions  deteriorate,  confidence  in  a  government’s  ability  to  repay  its  debts 
declines.  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  confidence  in  private  financial  institutions  is  affected  by 
confidence  in  a  government  as  well.  Therefore,  when  confidence  in  a  government  is 
undermined, confidence in private financial institutions is affected through various channels. 
The channels include a decline in the value of government securities they hold, erosion of 
their  ability  of  funding  due  to  the  depreciation  of  values  of  collateral  among  others.  Real 
economic activity suffers from rises in funding rates and difficulties in obtaining liquidity. As a 
result, tax revenue declines and confidence in a government’s ability to repay their debts is 
weakened.  In  other  words,  an  adverse  feedback  loop  emerges  among  sovereign  risk,  the 
financial system and real economic activities. Although the cause of sovereign debt problems 
in European peripheral countries varies from country to country, the common nature of the 
problem is such adverse feedback loop.  
When  private  financial  institutions  faced  the  financial  crisis,  governments  succeeded  in 
stabilizing the economy and the financial system by injecting public capital and conducting 
countercyclical  fiscal  policy.  A  prerequisite  for  such  success  is  that  a  government  is 
perceived  to  secure  future  revenue  to  cover  the  current  expenditure.  If  a  government  is 
perceived as lacking sufficient future revenue to cover increased expenditure due to public 
capital injection or expansionary fiscal policy, the effect of the policy measures may lessen, 
or even worse, could be adverse. The key to success of various aggressive policy measures 
in  an  emergency  is  confidence  in  the  government’s  ability  to  maintain  the  sustainability  of 
medium- to long-term fiscal balance. Various aggressive policies by a government in a crisis 
become  effective  only  when  a  government  has  a  “stock”  of  confidence  in  it.  And  the 
substance of the stock is, in the end, support by the public to maintain the sustainability of 
fiscal balance. A government is not able to pursue fiscal policy at will regardless of support 
by the public in such a way as to wave a magic wand. 
                                                 
1   The  figure  is  the  total  amount  of  public  capital  injections  until  March  2010  in  the  United  States,  United 
Kingdom, Germany and France. For details, see Bank of Japan, “Financial System Report” (March 2010). 
2   See IMF, “Fiscal Monitor” (May 2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Determination by the government and support by the public to underpin confidence in 
a central bank 
Third, I would like to emphasize that confidence in a central bank is not maintained solely by 
the efforts of a central bank. Support and understanding by the government and the public 
about  the  importance  of  confidence  in  a  central  bank  are  also  essential.  Since  the  recent 
global  financial  crisis,  central  banks  around  the  world  have  conducted  unconventional 
monetary  policies  on  a  large  scale.3  There  is  no  universally-accepted  definition  of 
“unconventional monetary policy,” as “convention” varies from country to country. In the case 
of  the  Bank  of  England,  unconventional  monetary  policy  means  a  large-scale  purchase  of 
long-term government bonds under the Asset Purchase Programme. By contrast, the Bank 
of Japan has been conducting the purchase of long-term government bonds for nearly fifty 
years. In that respect, purchasing long-term government bonds is one of the “conventional 
monetary  policy”  measures.  An  unconventional  monetary  policy  measure  for  the  Bank  of 
Japan  after  the  Lehman  shock  is  the  purchase  of  corporate  bonds,  commercial  papers 
(CPs), exchange-traded funds (ETFs), real estate investment trusts (REITs), etc. In the case 
of the Fed, the typical unconventional monetary policy measure is the purchase of CPs and 
mortgage-backed securities.  
As I mentioned above, central banks acted decisively to maintain the stability of the financial 
system in the wake of the recent financial crisis. In such a situation, confidence in a central 
bank is a prerequisite for a central bank to take those decisive actions. I will explain this point 
by  taking  the  expansion  of  a  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  as  an  example.  When  financial 
systems  become  unstable,  demand  for  liquidity  increases.  Opportunity  costs  of  holding 
central bank money could be negligible because of extremely low short-term interest rates. 
Under such condition, an increase in central bank money does not necessarily lead to a price 
hike.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  even  though  balances  in  central  bank  current  accounts  and  the 
monetary base increased markedly in Japan and the United States in recent years, inflation 
rates in both countries did not rise (Slide 3). However, it is crucial for a central bank to have 
the capacity to take necessary action promptly when an increase in interest rates is required 
due to changes in economic conditions. If market participants and the public perceive that 
the central bank is unable to take prompt action “for some reasons” when needed, rampant 
inflation may follow because the amount of money is extremely large.  
“Some  reasons”  include  these.  One  would  oppose  an  increase  in  interest  rates  on  the 
grounds  of  concern  about  capital  losses  of  government  securities  held  by  private  financial 
institutions  or  concern  about  an  increase  in  interest  payments  on  government  securities. 
Although those arguments do exist at any time, the arguments tend to be heated more when 
the  outstanding  balance  of  government  securities  is  larger  and  the  period  of  low  interest 
rates continues longer.  
Confidence in a central bank is formed in a complicated manner, and each country designs 
institutional arrangements deliberately and each central bank acts carefully when conducting 
their policies in order to maintain the confidence. I will come back to this point in more detail 
later. 
Issues related to fiscal balance 
III.  
Having  talked  about  the  interdependency  of  confidence,  let  me  discuss  the  importance  of 
confidence in light of Japan’s current fiscal condition.  
                                                 
3   As  for  unconventional  monetary  policies  taken  by  central  banks  after  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers,  see 
Monetary Affairs Department, Bank of Japan, “Major Central Banks’ Policy Operations in the Current Financial 
Crisis,” (July 2009, in Japanese). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Japan’s  current  fiscal  condition  is  very  severe  (Slide  4).  The  outstanding  amount  of  gross 
financial  liabilities  of  the  government  is  as  high  as  198  percent  of  GDP.  As  the  Japanese 
government,  unlike  other  major  countries’  governments,  has  a  large  amount  of  financial 
assets, some observers argue that net liabilities rather than gross liabilities may be a more 
adequate  indicator  for  true  indebtedness  of  the  Japanese  government.  In  terms  of  net 
financial  liabilities  of  the  government,  Japan  is  still  ranked  as  the  worst  among  developed 
countries with its ratio of 114 percent, higher than that of Italy, which is 103 percent. In any 
event, so far Japan has experienced no currency crisis or financial crises triggered by the 
deterioration in fiscal balances that occurred in some other countries.  
Though  the  necessity  of  the  sustainability  of  fiscal  balance  is  generally  well  recognized  in 
Japan, arguments which raise the alarm on risks associated with the deterioration in fiscal 
balance  are  sometimes  regarded  as  crying  wolf.  That  is  because  Japanese  government 
securities  have  been  issued  smoothly  for  years  and  yields  on  long-term  Japanese 
Government Bonds (JGBs) have been stable at low levels in spite of the deteriorated fiscal 
balance.  
No  country  can  perpetuate  fiscal  deficit.  Confidence  in  a  government’s  ability  to  repay  its 
debts can change in a non-linear fashion. The European sovereign debt problem that started 
in Greece is a case in point. In the fall of 2009, widening spreads of government securities of 
the  European  peripheral  countries  against  Germany  became  evident  (Slide  5).  In  October 
2009, spreads were below 2 percent, but suddenly widened dramatically and now remains at 
high levels currently such as 13.4 percent for Greece, 8.0 percent for Ireland and 6.6 percent 
for Portugal. Though macroeconomic conditions have not changed drastically since the fall of 
2009 in those countries, market participants’ perception has changed substantially. 
Yields on JGBs have been stable at a low level of 1.15 percent on average in fiscal 2010 
(Slide  6).  One  of  the  most  frequent  questions  I  have  got  at  international  meetings  is  why 
yields  on  JGBs  have  been  stable  at  low  levels  despite  the  very  severe  fiscal  condition. 
According to the economic theory, a quick answer is the expectations for a low growth rate 
and  a  low  inflation  rate.  If  we  compare  the  past  10-years’  average  nominal  growth  rates, 
which are the sum of Japan’s real GDP growth and inflation rate, with 10-year JGB yields, we 
will witness both have followed similar paths generally albeit with a small deviation (Slide 6). 
The low and stable JGB yields are explicable if many investors expect what prevailed in the 
past  10  years  will  continue  into  the  next  10  years.  However,  the  low  growth  and  inflation 
rates  are  not  sufficient  to  explain  low  yields  on  JGBs.  Long-term  interest  rates  are 
determined not only by the expected growth rate and the expected inflation rate, but also by 
the risk premium that compensates for their uncertainties. Thus, to fully explain the low yields 
on JGBs, we have to discuss why the risk premium is low. In that regard, I have to point to 
the following two.  
First, market participants believe that Japan ultimately has a will and an ability to work on 
fiscal consolidation despite a severe fiscal condition. Second, confidence is maintained in the 
Bank  of  Japan’s  conduct  of  monetary  policy  focused  on  achieving  sustainable  economic 
growth with price stability. To put it differently, if confidence in those two points were to be 
undermined, the rise in risk premium would raise the yield on JGBs. That clearly underscores 
the  responsibilities  of  the  government  and  the  parliament  that  formulate  fiscal  policy  and 
those  of  the  central  bank  that  conducts  monetary  policy.  As  I  mentioned  earlier  that 
confidence in one entity is underpinned by confidence in other entities, it is crucial for all the 
entities to recognize the importance of confidence in other entities. Ultimately, confidence in 
money  and  government  securities  is  underpinned  by  the  determination  of  people  who 
recognize the importance of confidence. And, such support by the public is able to exist only 
with a comprehensive account by the government and the central bank, and with people’s 
understanding of the situation based on the account.  
The  future  is  always  full  of  uncertainties,  and  I  see  that  there  are  two  tendencies  on  how 
market participants and the public form expectations for a long-term future. First, they may 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
tend to think that what has continued over a long period will stay as it is. In the context of the 
current Japanese economy, they may think that yields on long-term government bonds will 
continue to be stable at a low level in the future as the yields were for a long time. Second, 
once a change begins to occur with a trigger, this change reminds them of big events in the 
past and they may think that drastic changes will occur. Market participants and the public 
may drastically change their expectations triggered by an increase in fiscal deficit or an event 
which make market participants and the public think that the independence of the Bank of 
Japan is not respected. Then, they may expect that rampant inflation will occur in the end. 
Having mentioned those two contradictory tendencies, I have to add that it is quite difficult to 
predict  when  the  former  tendency  will  be  replaced  by  the  latter.  What  is  certain  is  that 
expectations  change  in  a  non-linear  fashion.  That  is  why  the  principles  of  the  authorities’ 
behavior have to be clear.  
It is vital for the fiscal authorities to work on the sustainability of fiscal balance in the midium- 
to  long-run.  The  deterioration  in  fiscal  balance  lowers  the  increase  in  the  expected  future 
income by households, especially for the working-age population, and thus reduces current 
household expenditure. To make things worse, if confidence in fiscal sustainability is eroded, 
an adverse feedback loop among fiscal balance, the financial system and the real economy 
may exert a negative impact on economic activity, as shown in the sovereign debt problem in 
the European peripheral countries. 
IV.  
Role of a central bank and government securities 
Use of government securities in the money market operations 
Principles of a central bank’s behavior must be clear as well as those of the fiscal authorities. 
Let  me  now  discuss  the  principles  of  a  central  bank’s  behavior  in  association  with 
government securities.  
First, let me show you some facts on the relationship between the Bank of Japan and the 
JGB market. The Bank of Japan uses JGBs to conduct money market operations (Slide 7). 
During a one-year period up to April this year, central bank money increased by 20.7 trillion 
yen  on  the  liability  side  of  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  balance  sheet.  Correspondingly,  JGBs 
increased by 8.2 trillion yen on the asset side as a result of the outright purchases of JGBs. 
To deal with short-term fluctuations in financial institutions’ demand for reserves, the Bank 
conducts  funds-supplying  operations  against pooled  collateral.  The  operations  are  that  the 
Bank  extends  loans  to  financial  institutions  against  pooled  collateral  which  they  submitted 
beforehand.  During  a  one-year  period  up  to  April  this  year,  those loans  increased  by  20.1 
trillion yen and JGBs account for 80 percent of the collateral. It is an example of how JGBs 
play an important role in the Bank’s money market operations.4 Apparently, the Bank is the 
most proactive among the central banks of major countries in using government securities in 
the money market operations.  
This  way,  the  Bank  of  Japan  uses  JGBs  on  a  large  scale  in  conducting  money  market 
operations. In that context, I would like to stress that the goal of the central bank’s outright 
purchases  of  JGBs  is  to  satisfy  demand  for  secular  growth  in  currency  and  to  conduct 
monetary  policy,  but  not  to  finance  government  debt  or  to  stabilize  yields  of  long-term 
government  bonds.  If  market  participants  were  to  regard  the  central  bank’s  outright 
purchases of JGBs as a means of government financing or of stabilization of long-term JGB 
yields, the resultant hike in risk premium would raise yields on long-term government bonds. 
If the rise in the yields on long-term government bonds reflects improvements in economic 
                                                 
4   For the details of the Bank’s use of JGBs in the conduct of money market operations, see Financial Markets 
Department, Bank of Japan, “Money Market Operations in Fiscal 2010.” (May 2011). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
conditions, the rise in the yields is natural and desirable. However, if the rise in the yields on 
long-term government bonds reflects the rise in risk premium, it exerts a negative impact on 
the real economy and the financial strength of financial institutions.  
The  Bank  has  made  the  principle  on  the  outright  purchases  of  JGBs  very  clear.  This 
principle, called “banknote principle,” has been working to prevent uncertainties of the Bank’s 
actions  from  raising  a  risk  premium  and  thus  from  exerting  a  negative  impact  on  the 
economy  and  finance. More  specifically,  the  Bank  keeps  the  total  amount  of  its  holding  of 
government bonds below the outstanding amount of banknotes in circulation.  
Some  criticize  the  Bank  for  establishing  such  a  principle.  However,  if  a  central  bank  that 
holds  such  a  large  amount  of  government  bonds  were  to  purchase  government  bonds 
without  making  its  fundamental  principle  of  the  purchases  clear,  increased  uncertainties 
would create a risk premium and lead to a rise in yields on long-term government bonds. In 
addition to the ceiling of the total holding of government bonds, the Bank also makes public 
the  amount  of  purchases  in  specific  maturity  segments  as  well  as  the  frequency  of  the 
purchases in advance (Slide 8).  
In  2009,  the  Bank  increased  the  amount  of  Bank’s  outright  purchases  of  JGBs  to 
1.8 trillion yen per month, that is, 21.6 trillion yen per year. Since then, the Bank has been 
keeping the ceiling. The average duration of the JGBs purchased by the Bank was about 
4 years in 2010. If the Bank purchases JGBs at the current pace, it will lead the Bank to 
hold  82  trillion  yen  of  JGBs,  the amount calculated  by  multiplying the  amount purchased 
per year by an average duration. The current outstanding amount of banknotes is around 
81 trillion yen.  At  present,  the  outstanding  amount  of  JGBs  held  by  the  Bank  is 
60 trillion yen and less than that of banknotes. However, if the Bank continues to purchase 
JGBs  at  this  pace,  the  outstanding  amount  of  JGBs  will  reach  that  of  banknotes.  The 
outstanding amount of banknotes in the future cannot be predicted with certainty because it 
depends on the income, the interest rate and the degree of stability of the financial system 
in the future. The Bank thinks it desirable for economic and financial stability that the Bank 
continues  to  purchase  JGBs  at  a  stable  pace,  based  upon  the  best  possible  forecast  of 
those economic developments.  
Underwriting of government securities by the Bank of Japan 
Now,  I  will  talk  about  the  idea  of  the  underwriting  of  government  securities  by  the  Bank, 
which is occasionally advocated as a way for funding new government spending.  
In  many  countries,  laws  do  not  allow  the  central  bank  to  directly  underwrite  government 
securities. In Europe, the underwriting is prohibited by law explicitly. In many other countries 
around the world, including emerging economies, it is not allowed, either. In Japan, Article 5 
of Public Finance Act prohibits the Bank from underwriting government securities. 
The  principle  on  prohibiting  the  central  bank  from  underwriting  government  securities  has 
been derived from historical lessons. History shows that once the underwriting by the central 
bank  was  introduced,  it  often  led  to  an  excess  issuance  of  money  and  hence  rampant 
inflation, even if it seemed to be under control at an initial phase. The excess issuance of 
money and resultant inflation destroy people’s lives and the national economy. 
Based  upon  this  conventional  wisdom,  the  introduction  of  the  Bank’s  underwriting  of 
government  securities  would  damage  confidence  in  money.  The  damage  would  lead  to 
higher long-term interest rates and instability in the financial market. Then, the government 
might not be able to issue its debts in the primary market. 
The current condition in the auction of Japanese government securities remains stable even 
after the recent Great East Japan Earthquake. Still, taking account of the deteriorated fiscal 
condition in Japan, it is of utmost importance to maintain the current stable condition in the 
primary government securities market. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Confidence in money and the well-developed government securities markets are parts of the 
social infrastructure for the Japanese economy. Now, it is even more important to maintain 
confidence in money and government securities on both international and domestic grounds, 
given  the  severe  fiscal  condition  and  damage  of  the  recent  earthquake  on  the  Japanese 
economy. 
Let  me  add  a  few  words  about  the  Bank’s  bitter  experience  in  oft-quoted  underwriting  of 
government bonds in the early 1930s when the veteran Finance Minister Korekiyo Takahashi 
initiated it. Though some commentators refer to this episode at times in their favor, they do 
not necessarily recognize a big difference between financial and economic conditions at that 
time and those at present (Slide 9). 
First, conditions in the financial market were tight on the eve of the Bank’s underwriting of 
government bonds in the early 1930s. The overnight call rate was 6.6 percent in December 
1931,  compared  with  the  current  level  of  0.07  percent.  The  long-term  interest  rate  was 
5.9 percent in December 1931, compared with the current level of 1.14 percent. 
Second, fiscal conditions were much better in the early 1930s than in 2011. The outstanding 
amount of government securities was 47.6 percent of GNP at the end of December 1931, 
compared with 181.9 percent of GDP at the end of March 2011. 
Third, the Bank’s underwriting of government bonds in the early 1930s was associated with 
tighter  capital  controls  in  the  early  1930s.  By  contrast,  the  financial  market  and  other 
economic  activities  are  much  more  globalized  now.  Under  those  circumstances,  the 
misconduct  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  which  leads  to  a  deterioration  in  confidence  in 
money, would affect long-term interest rates immediately. 
Fourth, the relative size of a domestic financial market was smaller in the early 1930s than 
today, and the government securities markets were less developed. In the 1920s and in the 
early  1930s,  the  government  issued  its  securities  mainly  through  a  syndicate  of  private 
financial institutions or through the Deposit Bureau of the Ministry of Finance. A large part of 
the  fund  of  the  Deposit  Bureau  came  from  postal  savings.  Under  such  condition,  the 
government lacked effective measures to issue a large amount of its securities promptly and 
smoothly.  
During the first several years of Mr. Takahashi in office, the Bank was able to sell most of the 
underwritten government bonds in the secondary market promptly. The amount of the Bank’s 
holding of government securities did not grow significantly, hence the monetary base did not, 
either. 
By contrast, we now have well-developed primary government securities markets. Even after 
the recent earthquake, the government is able to issue its securities in the market smoothly, 
and the bid-to-cover ratios in the primary markets remain unchanged. 
Although some commentators mention a sharp depreciation of the Japanese exchange rate 
in  the  early  1930s,  the  exchange  rate  regime  at  that  time  was  quite  different.  After  the 
departure from the gold standard at the end of 1931, the yen depreciated from an overvalued 
level  under  the  gold  standard.  By  contrast,  Japan  is  on  the  flexible  exchange  rate  system 
today. 
As many of you know, Mr. Takahashi was assassinated in 1936 by militarists when he was 
trying to stop ever-growing demand for military spending, and the course of events led to the 
eventual rampant inflation. I would argue that the introduction of the scheme of the Bank’s 
underwriting of government securities itself paved the way for eventual ballooning of fiscal 
spending,  precisely  because  the  scheme  lacked  the  checking  process  through  the  market 
mechanism.  
We often use the words of “entrance” and “exit” to discuss the conduct of monetary policy 
nowadays. In that terminology, we should interpret that the “entrance” of the introduction of 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the Bank’s underwriting of government bonds in the early 1930s led to the “exit” of the failure 
in containing growing demand for fiscal expenditure. 
In retrospect, we should note that the Bank’s underwriting of government bonds started as a 
“temporary measure.”5 Though Mr. Takahashi stated that he issued government bonds by a 
means of the Bank’s underwriting just temporarily in his address at a Diet session,6 history 
told us that it was not temporary. 
Today,  central  banks  are  not  allowed  to  underwrite  government  securities  in  emerging 
economies  as  well  as  developed  countries.  Underwriting  government  securities  by  central 
banks  may  eventually  lead  to  an  excess  issuance  of  money  and  rampant  inflation, 
devastating people’s lives and economic activity, even though it may appear no problem at 
the beginning. Humans are prone to temptations, but at the same time, humans are aware of 
that and take a preventive measure by prohibiting central banks’ underwriting of government 
securities. 
We are not able to improve fiscal balance simply by creating inflation (Slide 10). Inflation may 
cause an increase in tax revenue, but as the data for the last twenty years in Japan shows, 
changes in fiscal revenue show no significant correlation with inflation. Rather, fiscal revenue 
increased  as  the  economy  grew  in  real  terms.  Expenditures  such  as  social  security  and 
public  works  increase  with  inflation.  Interest  payments  on  the  government  debts  also 
increase with inflation, since long-term interest rates also go up, reflecting inflation. 
In the interest of time, I do not get into more detail on fiscal issues. What is clear is that we 
need to review the overall structure of revenues and expenditures in order to improve fiscal 
balance. Also, higher economic growth is needed to improve fiscal balance. Here, we have to 
bear in mind that it is growth in real terms rather than in nominal terms that matters. It should 
be noted that the view that higher nominal growth is needed for the improvement in the fiscal 
balance is misleading. That view gives a false impression that economic growth in real terms 
and inflation would exert the same impact on fiscal balance. The truth is that inflation per se 
does not improve fiscal balance. The crucial element for improving fiscal balance is steady 
efforts  toward  higher  economic  growth  in  real  terms.  When  higher  economic  growth  is 
achieved, prices may rise as a result. 
Concluding remarks 
V.  
Now, it is time to conclude my speech. Let me first emphasize that money and the financial 
systems  are  essential  for  sustained  economic  growth,  and  that  confidence  in  them  is  the 
most important foundation for money and the financial system to perform their roles. 
The starting point is obviously the efforts to maintain the confidence by the government, the 
central bank and private financial institutions, respectively. The government has to maintain 
fiscal balance in the medium- to long-run. The central bank has to maintain stability in prices 
and the financial system through the conduct of monetary policy and the lender-of-last-resort 
function. Private financial institutions have to provide payment and settlement services and 
the credit intermediation function properly. 
Those individual efforts are important, but they alone are not sufficient to achieve stability in 
money  and  the  financial  system.  Confidence  in  private  financial  institutions  depends  on 
confidence in the government as well. To maintain confidence in the government, achieving 
the medium- to long-term fiscal balance is an important precondition. Support by the public is 
also  essential  in  achieving  the  fiscal  balance.  Confidence  in  government  securities  is 
                                                 
5   Fukai, Eigo, Reflections on Seventy Years, 1941 (in Japanese). 
6   “The Address on the Government Debt Policy in Fiscal 1933 Budget,” January 21, 1933, Plenary Meeting, the 
64th Diet, Ministry of Finance, Financial History of the Showa Era, vol.6 (1954, in Japanese). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
underpinned  by  confidence  in  the  central  bank.  Confidence  in  the  central  bank  may  be 
enhanced if the government and people respect the central bank’s judgments, and it may be 
eroded  if  not.  In  other  words,  confidence  in  money  and  the  financial  system  are 
interdependent on each other. 
Confidence  is  something  like  the  air;  nobody  doubts  about  its  existence  at  normal  times. 
Confidence may wane in a discontinuous manner unless we make utmost efforts to maintain 
it. Once confidence is lost, the impact on the economy is enormous. Confidence is fragile. 
I  have  started  this  talk  by  mentioning  the  importance  of  dialogues  among  academics, 
practitioners  and  policymakers.  Let  me  conclude  by  sincerely  hoping  that  we,  members  of 
the Japan Society of Monetary Economics and the Bank of Japan, can cooperate further to 
promote understanding in society about the importance of maintaining confidence in money 
and the financial system. 
Thank you. 
 
 
 
 
 10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
 12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  13
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  14 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15
