Alan Bollard: The role of banks in the economy  improving the 
performance of the New Zealand banking system after the global 
financial crisis 
Speech by Dr Alan Bollard, Governor of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, to the New Zealand 
Shareholders Association Annual Meeting, Tauranga, 6 August 2011. 
This  speech  was  written  by  Dr  Alan  Bollard,  Chris  Hunt  and  Bernard  Hodgetts,  with  thanks  to  Don  Abel,  
Toby Fiennes, Michael Reddell and Grant Spencer for useful comments. 
 Introduction 
1 
The New Zealand financial system has been significantly tested in recent years by the effects 
of the global financial crisis, volatile global commodity prices, the end of a domestic housing 
boom, and the resulting slowdown in domestic economic activity between 2007 and 2009. 
Over  the  past  year,  even  with  the  economic  recovery  underway,  the  financial  system  has 
faced further challenges from the series of earthquakes in the Canterbury region and from 
ongoing fragility in the global financial markets due to sovereign debt concerns. 
Unlike the case in many countries, New Zealand’s banking system has remained relatively 
resilient  over  this  period.  Banks  dominate  the  New  Zealand  financial  system  to  an  extent 
seen  in  few  other  economies,  accounting  for  around  80  percent  of  the  total  assets  of  the 
financial  system.  Moreover,  four  banks  –  the  Australian-owned  subsidiaries  and  their 
branches domiciled in New Zealand – account for nearly 90 percent of the banking sector, or 
just over 70 percent of the financial system as a whole. It is these institutions that provide the 
lion’s share of financial services and products to the New Zealand economy, and therefore 
are of key systemic importance.  
What  explains  the  New  Zealand  banking  system  experience  relative  to  other  jurisdictions 
where banks failed, or required government recapitalisation? Briefly, our banks stuck to their 
knitting over the boom, engaging in very profitable lending to households and the rural sector in 
the main, without recourse to the sort of exotic financial innovation witnessed elsewhere. As 
prudential supervisor of the banks we certainly witnessed some decline in lending standards 
over  this  time,  and  what  we  considered  misplaced  exuberance  around  lending  to  some 
sectors, particularly later in the cycle. However, New Zealand’s conservative application of the 
regulatory  capital  regime  (under  both  the  original  Basel  I  and  the  new  Basel  II  frameworks) 
helped to promote sound risk management and the banks appear to have steered clear of the 
dubious lending practices evident in parts of the non-bank sector.  
Nevertheless,  one  point  needs  to  be  made  clearly.  When  the  crisis  did  hit,  the  banks  did 
require  public  sector  support.  The  Government  implemented  both  retail  and  wholesale 
funding guarantees to preserve confidence in the banking system, while the Reserve Bank 
expanded its liquidity facilities in order to ensure that banks remained liquid and well-funded. 
The financial crisis revealed a major limitation in the banks’ business model that lay behind 
the rapid expansion in credit during the lead-up to the financial crisis – a tendency to fuel 
much of that lending primarily through short-term wholesale funding from offshore. However, 
unlike banks in the Northern Hemisphere, the banks’ own capital buffers proved sufficient to 
absorb  the  rise  in  non-performing  loans  and  accompanying  decline  in  profitability  that 
followed from the economic slowdown.  
Banks play an important role in supporting economic growth and it is worth reflecting on the 
lessons  that  have  been  learnt  from  the  global  financial  crisis  and  the  experience  of  the 
New Zealand  financial  system  over  recent  years.  Under  the  Reserve  Bank  Act,  the 
Reserve Bank  has  a  legislative  mandate  to  promote  the  “soundness  and  efficiency”  of  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
financial  system.  In  thinking  about  ways  to  make  the  financial  system  safer  and  more 
resilient, consistent with the aims of global regulatory reforms, we need to take both these 
dimensions  of  financial  system  performance  into  account.  More  stringent  regulations  may 
well make the financial system safer but possibly at the expense of the efficiency and cost at 
which it provides services to businesses and consumers. 
What role do banks play in the economy? 
2 
Any modern financial system contributes to economic development and the improvement in 
living  standards  by  providing  various  services  to  the  rest  of  the  economy.  These  include 
clearing and settlement systems to facilitate trade, channelling financial resources between 
savers and borrowers, and various products to deal with risk and uncertainty. 
In principle, these various functions can be provided by banks or other financial institutions or 
directly through capital markets. Banks and other financial intermediaries exist because they 
are an efficient response to the fact that information is costly. Banks specialise in assessing 
the credit worthiness of borrowers and providing an ongoing monitoring function to ensure 
borrowers  meet  their  obligations.  They  are  rewarded  for  these  services  by  the  spread 
between the rates they offer to the accumulated pool of savers, and the rates they offer to 
potential borrowers. This process is known as “maturity transformation” and is at the heart of 
modern  banking.  Banks  offer  a  repository  for  savings,  and  then  transform  them  into  long-
lived (illiquid) assets – housing loans and lending to businesses. In addition, banks play a 
role  in  providing  payment  and  settlement  services  which  are  necessary  for  households, 
business and other financial institutions to settle day-to-day transactions. 
As  a  country  becomes  more  developed,  one  typically  sees  the  capital  markets  playing  a 
greater  role  in  supplying  financial  products  and  services  relative  to  that  supplied  by  the 
banks. In many advanced economies, for example, raising business debt through securities 
rivals or exceeds that provided though the banking system. Unusually, New Zealand has a 
large  banking  sector,  while  the  role  played  by  the  capital  markets  and  non-bank  financial 
institutions is small.  
Table 1 compares New Zealand to five other economies whose banking systems also tend to 
dominate  their  financial  systems,  using  data  immediately  prior  to  the  financial  crisis  as 
compiled by the IMF.1 Table 2 compares the New Zealand and Australian financial systems. 
The following points emerge: 
 
Relative  to  the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  the  New  Zealand  banking  system  is 
large  in  common  with  the  other  countries  included  in  the  table.  New  Zealand’s 
banking system is larger than Australia on this metric. 
In  relation  to  the  size  of  the  economy  however,  the  New  Zealand  and  Australian 
banking  systems  are  of  roughly  equal  size,  and  much  smaller  than  the  other 
countries identified by the IMF. 
New  Zealand’s  financial  system  is  much  smaller  than  in  the  other  economies 
included in Table 1. On the eve of the crisis Iceland’s financial system was 4 times 
as  large  as  New  Zealand’s.  New  Zealand’s  financial  system  is  also  smaller  than 
Australia’s  largely  reflecting  Australia’s  compulsory  superannuation  and  the  large 
funds management business. 
The New Zealand banking system is not as internationally active as the countries in 
the IMF sample as measured by gross foreign assets and liabilities. However, our 
banking system’s negative net foreign asset position in 2007 was similar to Ireland’s, 
                                                    
1 
IMF (2010), “Cross-cutting themes in economies with large banking systems”, Policy Paper, 16 April. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 but smaller than Iceland’s. (The rest of the world’s net claims on the New Zealand 
banking sector is also reflected in figure 1 below). 
New Zealand has a relatively highly concentrated banking system, even compared 
with  those  countries  with  large  banking  systems.  The  big  four  Australian-owned 
banks  command  a  larger  role  in  the  New  Zealand  financial  system,  compared  to 
their parents in Australia. 
Table 1:  
Bank-dominated financial systems before the crisis – a comparison 
 Iceland 
Ireland  Switzerland  Hong 
Kong  Singapore 
New 
Zealand 
Financial sector size and growth 
Financial sector assets  
(% of GDP, 2007) 
Financial sector assets  
(% of GDP, 2001) 
1071 
1129 
218 
711 
873 
706 
Financial sector structure 
72 
79 
76 
34 
66 
67 
Banking sector 
69 
48 
876 
894 
121 
468 
367 
574 
491 
618 
–124 
–44 
41 
664 
518 
451 
223 
228 
Bank assets (% of total 
financial assets)* 
Banking sector 
concentration* (share of 
the largest 3 banks) 
Bank loans  
(% of total bank assets)* 
Bank assets  
(% of GDP, 2007) 
Bank assets  
(% of GDP, 2001) 
Bank foreign assets  
(% of GDP, 2007) 
Bank foreign liabilities  
(% of GDP, 2007) 
Bank net foreign assets 
(% of GDP, 2007) 
(*)  average 2003–2007 
Source: IMF, RBNZ. 
931 
574 
71 
55 
25 
641 
474 
386 
230 
156 
876 
836 
91 
31 
26 
789 
784 
447 
442 
242 
212 
75 
68 
78 
184 
152 
8 
62 
5 
–54 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Table 2 
Financial system structure – comparison with Australia 
(as at December 2010) 
New Zealand 
Australia 
Domestically owned 
as a percent of GDP 
Foreign branches 
Locally incorporated 
 
Total financial system assets 
 
Number of banks 
 
 
 
Total bank assets 
 
 
Big-4 banks’ assets 
 
 
Stock market capitalisation (2009) 
 
as a percent of GDP 
as a percent of total financial system assets 
as a percent of GDP 
as a percent of total bank assets 
as a percent of total financial system assets 
$474 bn 
244% 
20 
10 
10 
3 
$380 bn 
80% 
195% 
 89% 
71% 
 25% 
AU$4.6 tr 
340% 
54 
33 
21 
12 
AU$2.7 tr 
58% 
197% 
 77% 
43% 
 180% 
Sources: RBNZ, APRA, RBA, World Bank. 
The  dominant  role  of  banks  within  the  New  Zealand  economy  can  also  be  examined  by 
looking  at  financial  claims  between  the  different  sectors  of  the  economy  –  financial 
corporates, non-financial corporates, households, government and the rest of the world. As 
can be seen from figure 1, banks dominate the flows between the financial sector and the 
rest of the economy. 
Figure 1 
Financial claims between registered banks and other sectors,  
December 2009 (percent of GDP) 
 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
New  Zealand  has  a  very  “plain  vanilla”  banking  system  with  a  large  proportion  of  assets 
being loans to households and businesses. Relatively few of its assets are held in the form of 
trading securities. New Zealand’s banks largely fund themselves “on balance sheet” rather 
than through the securitisation channel common in some other countries. The banks have 
little  in  the  way  of  funds  under  management,  nor  do  we  allow  them  to  conduct  much 
insurance business. Reflecting New Zealand’s history of current account deficits, the banking 
system  has  a  reliance  on  foreign  wholesale  markets,  particularly  the  short-term  funding 
markets. 
Given these trends and our relatively underdeveloped capital markets, the question can be 
asked  whether  the  structure  of  our  financial  system  is  optimal  for  the  economic  growth 
outcomes we would like to achieve. The answer is by no means clear. The failure of any one 
of our larger banks could have serious repercussions for the rest of the economy. Moreover, 
there may be efficiency concerns if the banks are perceived by their customers and investors 
to  be  “too-big-to-fail”  and  hence  gain  a  competitive  advantage  over  other  banks  and  other 
non-bank financial institutions or financial markets.  
New Zealand firms could well benefit from greater capital market development to help them 
grow and reach the scale necessary to compete on the world stage – a point made by the 
Capital  Markets  Taskforce  and  more  recently  the  Savings  Working  Group.  Larger  capital 
markets  might  help  to  stimulate  greater  competition  in  the  financial  system  by  providing  a 
substitute  for  bank  funding  of  both  small  and  large  businesses.  However,  it  is  not  clear 
whether our underdeveloped capital markets are more a symptom of low national savings or 
a direct cause of relatively low growth outcomes over the past two decades. Finally it may 
well be that because of the large number of small businesses in New Zealand, relationship 
lending through a bank-based system is actually an optimal arrangement.  
Banks and financial (in)stability – making the system safer 
3 
Transforming  short  term  deposits  into  longer  term  lending  –  one  of  the  most  important 
functions  that  banks  perform  for  the  rest  of  the  economy  –  is  also  what  makes  financial 
systems  prone  to  fragility.  This  process  exposes  banks  to  illiquidity  or  possibly  insolvency 
given the possibility of bank runs from depositors and creditors, or deterioration in lending 
quality. Banks’ own practices and financial regulation have an important bearing in reducing 
or amplifying this risk. For example, banks have choices around how much debt they use to 
fund their lending (leverage), while the quality of that lending is influenced by a number of 
governance-related factors. These include the control that creditors and shareholders exert 
over  bank  managers,  as  well  as  the  internal  risk  management  systems  of  the  bank. 
Regulations also set boundaries on what banks are able to do. 
Given  the  interconnections  between  a  bank  and  the  rest  of  the  economy,  the  effects  of  a 
bank in stress or failure can potentially spill over to the wider financial and economic system 
when financial savings cannot be accessed, the credit intermediation process is disrupted or 
the transactional role via the payments and settlement systems is undermined. The extent of 
such contagion will depend on the “systemic importance” of the bank, which will be roughly 
related to its size, the nature of its exposures, interlinkages with other banks and so forth. 
Governments  are  naturally  reluctant  to  see  such  important  institutions  fail  since  economic 
crises  that  are  accompanied  by  major  banking  crises  are  typically  far  worse  than  usual 
business cycle slowdowns. However, as we have seen from the experience of Ireland and 
Iceland,  supporting  stressed  banks  can  create  major  fiscal  problems,  particularly  if  the 
banking system is very large relative to the size of the economy. A banking crisis can evolve 
into a sovereign debt crisis, which itself can have cross-border contagion effects. 
As mentioned at the outset, the New Zealand banking sector did not experience the sorts of 
problems that affected the US or European banking systems. Despite a tightening in lending 
conditions and standards, which had a significant effect on some businesses, our banking 
system was largely able to maintain the confidence of depositors and creditors. However, it 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
did  still  require  a  backstop  of  government  support.  In  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis  we  are 
aligning our prudential initiatives with global efforts focussed on redesigning the regulatory 
safety  net.  This  improvement  in  the  soundness  of  our  banking  system  centres  on  the 
implementation  of  stronger  microprudential  standards; 
the  development  of  a  new 
macroprudential framework; and improved failure resolution management. 
Microprudential standards 
(i) 
Microprudential  settings  in  New  Zealand  were  largely  appropriate  heading  into  the  crisis. 
Both before and after the implementation of Basel II, our capital requirements ensured locally 
incorporated  banks  held  high  quality  (Tier  1)  capital  that  excluded  hybrid  debt/equity 
instruments in order to absorb potential losses. The larger banks that were accredited to use 
their own internal models to calculate capital requirements under the Basel II guidelines were 
also strongly encouraged to use risk parameters that “looked through” the boom-bust cycle. 
Basel II largely appears to have served us quite well, although the banks’ initial modelling of 
capital requirements for both housing and rural lending was not sufficiently conservative, a 
point highlighted by the sharp fall in farm prices and earnings in 2008–09. In response, the 
Reserve Bank has initiated a number of adjustments, most recently a tightening in the area 
of capital requirements for farm lending. 
Over  the  course  of  the  crisis  the  Reserve  Bank  introduced  a  Prudential  Liquidity  policy  to 
ensure that bank lending is largely funded by stable (retail and long-term wholesale) funding 
and  to  ensure  that  banks  have  sufficient  liquid  assets  to  withstand  short-term  market 
disruptions. Banks are now also able to issue covered bonds to help diversify and lengthen 
their  wholesale  funding.  Banks  should  now  have  more  robust  liquidity  structures,  reducing 
their need to call on emergency liquidity facilities with the Reserve Bank during periods of 
funding market volatility. 
The  Reserve  Bank  will  be  reviewing  its  capital  adequacy  framework  in  view  of  guidelines 
from the Basel Committee now widely known as “Basel III”. In addition there may be minor 
developments  to  our  liquidity  policy.  We  are  broadly  supportive  of  Basel  III,  but  will 
implement it in a manner that is appropriate for our financial system. We don’t believe our 
banking system requires the sort of radical overhaul that is being discussed as necessary in 
some other countries, given the relative resilience of our banks over the course of the crisis.  
The Reserve Bank’s supervisory approach for banks has also changed, with a shift from a 
high reliance on market disclosures, to one that uses more private reporting. This will enable 
the  Reserve  Bank  to  utilise  more  detailed  and timely  information  from  internal  reports  that 
banks themselves use to manage risk. 
Macroprudential framework 
(ii) 
Microprudential policies are typically aimed at building the resilience of individual institutions, 
while  a  macroprudential  approach  focuses  on  system-wide  risks  and  vulnerabilities  and  a 
range of instruments or tools that might be used to build greater financial system resilience to 
the risks associated with the extremes of the credit cycle. Examples include countercyclical 
capital  requirements,  liquidity  ratios  or  caps  on  loan-to-value  ratios  for  housing  lending. 
Some of these tools may also have the ability to directly dampen the credit cycle. 
We have been considering a number of potential instruments for these purposes including 
credit-based  measures  and  capital  and  liquidity  buffers.  Our  examination  of  the  costs  and 
benefits  of  these  tools  suggests  we  should  keep  our  expectations  modest  in  terms  of  the 
effectiveness  of  any  one  tool  particularly  as  instruments  to  help  control  the  flow  of  credit. 
However, we have concluded that our Core Funding Ratio – part of the Prudential Liquidity 
policy – could help to dampen periods of excessive credit growth in some circumstances by 
making the marginal cost of funding more expensive than it would be were it not in place. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  existing  resolution 
tools  did  not  address 
Failure resolution management 
(iii) 
One important lesson from the crisis was that few countries had an adequate framework for 
resolving  the  failure  of  a  systemically  important  bank  or  financial  institution  in  an  orderly 
fashion.  Moreover, 
the  cross-border 
complications that occur with globally active banks. Improving the resolution framework is an 
important component of efforts to address the systemic risks posed by the largest and most 
interconnected of the international banks. 
New  Zealand’s  largest  banks  are  not  of  global  systemic  importance  and  nor  are  their 
Australian parents. However, distress in any one of our larger banks in New Zealand could 
have a potentially large negative effect on the New Zealand economy and could expose the 
government to large fiscal risks in the event of a bailout. The recently announced Open Bank 
Resolution (OBR) policy is a failure resolution option that aims to preserve the continuity of 
banking services to retail customers and businesses, while placing the cost of a bank failure 
primarily on the bank’s shareholders and creditors rather than the taxpayer. Under OBR, the 
creditors of a distressed bank, including its depositors, would face a “haircut” of their funds 
based  on  initial  estimates  of  the  shortfall  in  the  bank’s  capital  position.  Access  to  their 
remaining  funds  would  be  supported  via  a  government  guarantee.  This  would  allow  the 
affected  bank  to  remain  open  for  business  while  the  longer-term  options  were  worked 
through. 
We believe OBR would help address the “too-big-to-fail” problem posed by our largest banks. 
Currently we are not contemplating additional loss absorbency or capital surcharges for the 
largest New Zealand banks, measures that are currently being planned for the largest 30 or 
so global banks. 
Making the financial system more efficient – the role of banks 
4 
The  banks’  role  as  financial  intermediaries  has  a  major  bearing  on  how  efficiently  the 
economy allocates its resources between competing uses. In considering efficiency, we are 
interested  in  whether  lending  activity  helps  resources  flow  to  their  “best  use”  or  whether 
some sectors get too little or too much credit relative to what is needed for the economy to 
perform at its best. We are also interested in whether lending and other financial activities 
are provided in a cost effective manner from the point of view of consumers and the degree 
to which the banks improve and innovate their financial products and services over time. 
All  else  equal,  a  well-managed  bank  acting  prudently  and  operating  in  a  reasonably 
competitive  market  will  be  making  credit  available  at  an  appropriate  price  to  creditworthy 
borrowers.  However,  in  concentrated  banking  systems  dominated  by  a  handful  of  large 
banks,  competition  may  be  lacking.  Households  and  firms  may  end  up  paying  more  to 
access credit (and other bank services) than in a more competitive system.  
Financial  sector  efficiency  can  also  be  compromised  by  boom-bust  cycles,  which  is  why 
there  has  been  a  resurgence  of  interest  in  how  we  might  avoid  or  reduce  these.  During 
booms,  lending  standards  may  fall  significantly  and  lenders  may  underprice  risk,  with  too 
much  credit  being  allocated  to  any  one  sector  (such  as  the  rural  sector  or  property 
development).  In  turn,  when  the  boom  turns  to  bust,  the  over-allocation  of  credit  may  be 
revealed when physical and human resources become underemployed. 
International evidence suggests what might be more important for competition and efficiency 
is  how  “contestable”  the  banking  system  (or  individual  banking  product  markets)  is,  rather 
than simply how many banks operate (i.e. market structure). Contestability is influenced by 
both the actions of incumbent banks, and by various formal and informal barriers to entry and 
exit.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Cross country comparisons undertaken by the OECD suggest formal regulatory barriers to 
entry  and  exit  to  the  New  Zealand  financial  system  are  low  by  international  standards.2. 
While banks seeking registration must meet minimum qualitative and quantitative criteria so 
that their entry to the market is consistent with the soundness and efficiency objective, the 
Reserve  Bank  does  not  impose  quotas  of  any  kind  nor  do  we  restrict  foreign  ownership. 
However, the costs associated with establishing a new retail branch network in New Zealand 
appear  to  be  high  given  the  small  scale  of  the  market.  Notwithstanding  the  success  of 
Kiwibank in the retail market, the fact remains that it is difficult for new players to enter the 
New Zealand market and assume a competitive position other than through direct acquisition 
of an existing bank or by specialising in a narrow market segment. 
In terms of  informal barriers to entry, one such barrier may come about from the  practical 
difficulties  customers  face  switching  between  banks.  Shifting  one’s  banking  activities  from 
bank  A  to  bank  B  is  usually  a  more  involved  process  than  shifting  between  cellphone 
providers or electricity companies. The customer inertia that this creates makes it difficult for 
new  entrants  to  gain  critical  mass  even  if  they  price  their  offerings  keenly.  Encouragingly, 
some  of  these  barriers  may  have  eased  recently  through  technical  innovations  at  the 
payment  systems  level  orchestrated  by  Payments  New  Zealand  (PNZ).  More  switching 
implies greater incentives for banks to compete and innovate. 
Figure 2 
Post tax return on equity – OECD comparison 
(average 2002–2007) 
Source:  OECD,  Australian  Prudential  Regulatory  Authority, 
RBNZ calculations. 
                                                  
2  OECD (2006), Competition and regulation in retail banking, Policy Roundtables. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Although some of the smaller banks have succeeded in “nipping at the heels” of the larger 
banks  and  stimulating  competition  in  some  markets,  overtaking  the  market  share  of  the 
larger banks has proven a very tall order. It is likely that the “franchise” or brand value of the 
large New Zealand banks is an important factor that gives established banks an advantage. 
Customers do appear to place considerable weight on the “brand” of the financial institutions 
with  which  they  bank  and  the  larger  banks  have  considerable  investment  built-up  in  their 
brands, both tangible and intangible.  
What does all this imply about the efficiency of the New Zealand banking system? Efficiency 
is very difficult to measure in absolute terms, but two commonly used indicators include the 
return  on  equity  and  operating  costs  as  a  share  of  income.  Profitability  is  a  gauge  of  the 
economic rents that banks are able to earn, while operating costs tell us something about the 
efficiency with which services are delivered.  
In the decade preceding the global financial crisis, the New Zealand banking system’s return 
on equity (RoE) appears to have been among the highest of the OECD group of countries 
coming second in a sample of 22 countries for the period 2002 to 2007. Rates of return in 
New  Zealand  were  ahead  of  those  in  Australian  banks,  which  were  third  highest  in  the 
comparison.  Operating  costs  were  second  lowest  in  the  sample  while  loan  loss  provisions 
were also towards the lower end.  
While  we  are  acutely  aware  of  the  accounting  issues  that  can  make  these  comparisons 
misleading, taking the comparison at face value would suggest the New Zealand banks (and 
their  Australian  parents)  were  among  the  world’s  most  cost-efficient,  and  also  among  the 
most profitable. This was at least partly due to their relatively strong asset quality. From a 
financial stability perspective, the relative strength of the Australasian banks could be seen 
as a desirable feature. A leaner banking system would have had fewer financial buffers to 
draw  on  and  therefore  would  be  potentially  more  exposed  to  the  sorts  of  risks  that  arose 
following the global financial crisis. 
However, the question can be asked why the banks’ rates of return were not at levels that on 
average  were  more  typical  of  other  countries.  The  result  could  be  seen  as  evidence  that 
competition and contestability in the banking sector were lacking enabling the banks to earn 
higher profits than would otherwise be the case. However, alternative explanations are also 
plausible. 
One  relevant  factor  is  that  the  sample  period  covers  a  major  domestic  credit  boom.  A 
comparison over a longer period would be likely to reveal rates of return more in line with the 
banks’  international  counterparts.  There  have  certainly  been  periods  when  New  Zealand 
bank  profits  have  been  weaker  most  notably  in  the  early  1990s  following  the  commercial 
property downturn. 
Another potential explanation relates to the higher cost of capital facing New Zealand. Risk-
free  interest  rates  have  been  consistently  higher  in  New  Zealand  than  in  most  other 
countries,  and  this  could  account  for  part  of  the  higher  observed  rate  of  return  in  New 
Zealand. Moreover, the degree of support that the major New Zealand banks receive from 
their Australian parents allows them to maintain lower capital levels than would otherwise be 
the  case  to  maintain  their  credit  ratings.  Nevertheless,  the  capital  ratios  of  New  Zealand 
subsidiary  banks  are  similar  to  those  of  the  Australian  parents,  and  it  remains  an  open 
question why the Australasian banking system as a whole has been relatively profitable. 
Some  work  we  have  done  comparing  the  margins  that  banks  charge  on  some  financial 
products  like  residential  mortgages  suggest  that  the  New  Zealand  banks  have  not  earned 
interest margins that are particularly high relative to other countries. This would support the 
view that strong profitability was due to low operating costs rather than undue market power 
being  exercised  over  customers.  However,  a  comparison  across  the  full  range  of  financial 
products is difficult due to a lack of comprehensive data and other country differences.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Clearly,  operating  conditions  for  the  banks  have  changed  profoundly  since  the  financial 
crisis. It is still too early to be definitive about how this will affect financial performance over 
the years ahead. In terms of bank shareholders, regulatory changes designed to create safer 
banks might be expected to lower required rates of return over time. However, a host of other 
structural changes will also have a bearing on returns. In the past three years, bank balance 
sheets  have  shown  little  growth,  with  households  and  businesses  choosing  to  curtail  debt 
and  save  more.  If  this  trend  endures,  banks  will  have  less  opportunity  to  generate  higher 
profits  through  balance  sheet  expansion.  A  combination  of  higher  risk  aversion,  global 
regulatory changes and sovereign debt issues have led to a rise in the cost of debt funding 
for banks although where these costs are likely to settle in the longer run is uncertain. The 
higher funding costs have encouraged some large corporates to raise funds directly in the 
capital  markets  in  lieu  of  the  banks  and  it  will  be  interesting  to  see  whether  this  trend 
continues.  The  banks’  ability  to  recover  higher  funding  costs  from  customers  will  depend 
partly on the strength of loan demand as well as competitive pressures from other parts of 
the financial sector.  
All things considered, it seems unlikely that the rates of return in banking enjoyed over the 
past decade can be sustained in the future. 
Conclusion 
5 
The global financial crisis has focussed policymaker’s attention on making their banking and 
financial systems safer and more resilient to shocks. While New Zealand’s bank-dominated 
financial system stood up well during the crisis and does not require the extensive overhaul 
required in some countries, we have continued to develop our prudential policies with the aim 
of  improving  the  resilience  of  individual  institutions  and  the  financial  system  as  a  whole. 
Ensuring that core banking services can continue if any one of our large banks comes under 
duress, and that the cost of bank failure falls squarely on the shoulders of shareholders and 
creditors, is another plank in our regulatory reform agenda. Notwithstanding the importance 
of financial system resilience, we also need to understand more about the efficiency of the 
financial system when assessing its performance and contribution to the economy.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
