Charles Bean: The economic outlook  
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
to the Northern Ireland Chamber of Commerce, Belfast, 19 May 2011. 
 Good afternoon! It is a great pleasure to be back again in Belfast. I am particularly pleased to 
be  addressing  you  in  this  historic  venue,  whose  grandeur  bears  witness  to  Belfast’s  long 
history as a key hub for international trade. That is symbolised in the stained glass windows 
on the ground floor, which show Neptune, the god of the sea, flanked by images representing 
the  industries  synonymous  with  Victorian  Belfast:  Navigation;  Spinning;  Weaving;  and 
Engineering. The local economy has changed considerably since those days. And change 
will be a theme that runs through my talk today.  
It is now 18 months since the economy began to recover from the worst fall in output in the 
post-war period. Since its trough in 2009 Q3, estimated GDP has risen 2½%, leaving it some 
4% below its peak prior to the financial crisis. But towards the end of last year the pace of 
recovery appears to have slackened. Excluding the effects of the snow, which the ONS say 
reduced output by about ½ percentage point in the fourth quarter, activity was reported to 
have been broadly flat across the final quarter of last year and the first quarter of this one; 
see  Chart  1.  There  is  some  doubt  about  this,  not  least  because  the  official  series  for 
construction output has been highly volatile over the past year and looks surprisingly weak in 
the light of the commentary of the trade associations. But even if we leave out the volatile 
construction and extraction sectors by focussing just on manufacturing and services, we are 
still  left  with  a  picture  of  flattish  underlying  activity  through  the  end  of  last  year  and  only 
modest quarterly growth of just ½% at the beginning of 2011.  
It may be that later editions of the data may clarify some of this uncertainty, but some1 other 
indicators, such as measures of consumer and business confidence and the reports from our 
Agents  around  the  country,  also  point  to  a  slackening  in  the  underlying  rate  of  expansion 
around the turn of the year. The crucial question is whether this just represents a temporary 
“soft patch” of the sort often seen during the early stages of economic recoveries, or whether 
it is instead the harbinger of a prolonged period of slow growth. To answer this, we need to 
look at the forces driving the various elements of demand.  
For some while even before the financial crisis broke in August 2007, the MPC had drawn 
attention to the need for the composition of demand in the economy to rebalance away from 
private  and  public  consumption  towards  investment  and  net  exports.  And  associated  with 
such a re-balancing, one would expect to see some shift in the structure of production away 
from  sectors  focussed  on  serving  domestic  needs  towards  those  producing  internationally 
tradable  goods  and  services.  The  re-balancing  should  be  facilitated  by  the  depreciation  of 
sterling – down around a quarter since the middle of 2007 – but is still at an early stage.  
Household spending stagnated over 2010 and remains around 4% below its pre-recession 
level (Chart 2). The sluggishness of consumer spending should hardly be a surprise. Real 
post-tax  labour  incomes  have  been  squeezed  by  a  mix  of  low  pay  growth  and  elevated 
inflation  on  the  back  of  higher  VAT,  energy  and  import  prices.  In  addition,  heightened 
uncertainty probably led some households to increase their savings or pare back their debts. 
The most recent survey of retailers by the British Retail Consortium suggested that the fine 
Easter weather and the royal nuptials may have brought a welcome fillip to the High Street, 
but  with  the  squeeze  on  real  pay  likely  to  continue  through  this  year,  it  seems  likely  that 
consumer spending will remain subdued through this year at least. Public spending will also 
                                                 
1   Though not all: recent employment data, for instance, have been surprisingly robust. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
provide little impetus to overall activity, given the necessary fiscal consolidation that is now 
under way. That, of course, is a particular issue here in Northern Ireland.  
So,  the  prospect  for  overall  growth  depends  heavily  on  business  spending  and  external 
demand. In contrast to the stagnant consumer, business spending on inventory accumulation 
and  fixed  capital  together  contributed  2½  percentage  points  to  GDP  growth  last  year.  The 
contribution from stockbuilding cannot be expected to persist and indeed has already waned 
somewhat. As far as capital spending goes, on the one hand, there seems little rationale for 
businesses  to  expand  capacity  while  activity  is  weak  and  there  is  still  a  margin  of  spare 
capacity. On the other hand, business investment is still about 20% lower than its pre-crisis 
peak (Chart 3). Some of that shortfall reflects replacement investment postponed during the 
recession, which is likely to be re-instated at some juncture. Moreover, even though overall 
demand  may  remain  depressed,  the  rebalancing  in  activity  towards  the  internationally 
tradable  sectors  of  the  economy  will  probably  necessitate  some  expansion  in  capacity  in 
those  sectors,  while  achieving  cost  savings  and  efficiency  gains  also  often  requires 
investment.  Finally,  many  large  companies  are  presently  cash-rich  and  can  access  the 
capital  markets.  So  a  shortage  of  finance  should  not  prevent  them  increasing  their 
investment spend, though some smaller businesses relying on bank credit may have more 
trouble. But, overall, it seems reasonable to expect further recovery in business investment.  
Given  the  past  substantial  depreciation  of  sterling  and  the  associated  improvement  in  the 
competitive  position  of  UK  suppliers,  the  performance  of  net  exports  has  so  far  been 
somewhat  disappointing.  That  is  less  to  do  with  exports,  which  grew  by  more  than  5%  in 
2010,  reflecting  both  strong  global  growth  and  improved  competitiveness.  Rather  the  let 
down has been on the import side, where there has been less substitution of domestically 
supplied goods and services for imports than past experience would have led one to expect. 
It  is  possible  that  increased  specialisation  means  that  demand  is  less  responsive  to  price 
than it used to be. Alternatively, heightened uncertainty and the absence of UK suppliers for 
some  sorts  of  goods  and  services may  mean  that  it  takes longer  for  import  penetration  to 
respond to the enhanced profit opportunities. In any case, the MPC still expects net exports 
to  contribute  substantially  to  the  overall  growth  in  demand  over  the  next  few  years  as  the 
necessary rebalancing gradually takes place. The most recent trade figures indicate that net 
exports  of  goods  boosted  GDP  by  around  1¼  percentage  points  in  the  first  quarter2,  and 
suggest that we may at last be starting to see a more significant contribution to growth.  
Chart 4 shows the MPC’s current assessment of the outlook for four-quarter GDP growth, as 
published last week in the Bank’s latest Inflation Report and assuming that Bank Rate follows 
the gently rising path implied by market interest rates. The single most likely path lies within 
the deepest green band. The near-term path is somewhat choppy, reflecting the impact of 
factors such as the extra bank holiday associated with the royal wedding. But the underlying 
picture is one of growth gradually picking up to around its historical average rate, reflecting 
continued recovery in investment and a higher contribution from net exports and, on the back 
of that, some modest strengthening in consumer spending as we go through next year.  
One should not, though, put too much weight on any single path, as the coloured fan in Chart 
4, which covers nine out of ten of the possibilities as we see them, is pretty wide. That serves 
to  emphasise  the  high  degree  of  uncertainty  at  the  current  juncture.  Those  uncertainties 
include not only the spending of households and businesses here in the United Kingdom, but 
also the evolution of demand abroad. In particular, while the euro area overall has exhibited 
decent growth in recent quarters, the countries of the periphery are struggling with a mixture 
of  fiscal,  banking  and  competitiveness  problems.  There  is  a  risk  that  this  could  lead  to 
                                                 
2  
Imports of aircraft were temporarily high in 2010 Q4 reflecting the forthcoming change in VAT treatment, but 
the data were still encouraging even after allowing for the resulting distortion to import growth in 2011 Q1. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
renewed  banking  sector  turbulence  and  a  hit  to  confidence  more  generally,  with  adverse 
consequences for us.  
Even though our central projection has growth returning to around its historical average rate, 
that would still leave the level of activity well below a continuation of its pre-crisis trajectory 
(Chart 5). That makes it unlike normal downturns, in which the economy usually experiences 
a period of above-average output growth during the recovery period, thus making up much of 
the lost ground.  
The tendency for economies to suffer substantial persistent losses relative to a continuation 
of their pre-crisis trajectory is a common feature of downturns after banking crises. That is 
illustrated in Chart 6, which shows the spread of outcomes for the shortfall of output relative 
to  a  continuation  of  its  pre-crisis  trajectory  across  88  past  banking  crises  in  different 
countries3; the blue swathe covers the central 50% of cases, while the grey swathes take in 
the central 80% of cases. There is a considerable diversity of experience, but the average 
outcome – given by the purple line in the middle of the swathe – shows a persistent output 
shortfall of about 10%, even seven years after start of the crisis. In other words, the typical 
banking crisis results in a substantial persistent depression in activity relative to what might 
otherwise  have  taken  place.  The  red  line  shows  the  central  path  for  the  level  of  output, 
relative to a continuation of its pre-crisis trend, from our most recent projections (the dash 
denotes the forecast period up to and including 2013). As you can see, that path lies quite 
close to the average experience from this sample of past banking crises.  
There are a number of  reasons why output losses after banking crises have tended to be 
much  more  persistent  than  after  normal  economic  downturns.  First,  banks  and  highly-
indebted households and businesses need to get their balance sheets back in order, typically 
resulting in a period of low credit growth and high savings. 
Second, the injection of public funds into stricken banking systems, coupled with a loss of tax 
revenues in the downturn, results in a deteriorating fiscal position, which subsequently needs 
correction.  Third,  such  crises  often  also  result  in  some  long-lasting  impairment  of  the 
economy’s supply capacity.  
We can see the first two mechanisms at work in the UK economy. But it is not so easy to see 
what  is  happening  to  the  economy’s  supply  capacity  and  therefore  also  to  the  available 
margin  of  spare  capacity,  which  is  an  important  determinant  of  domestic  inflationary 
pressures.  Certainly  there  is  some  spare  capacity  in  the  labour  market,  where  the 
unemployment rate is around 3 percentage points above its pre-crisis level. But the margin of 
spare capacity within firms is less clear.  
In recessions, employers normally hang on to essential or hard-to-replace employees. As a 
consequence, the growth in output per hour worked typically slows, while unused capacity is 
simultaneously created. Productivity then accelerates sharply in the recovery phase, as that 
labour  is  brought  back  into  use  and  the  margin  of  unused  capacity  diminishes.  But  while 
productivity growth slowed sharply in both services and manufacturing during the downturn, 
only  the  latter  has  subsequently  picked  up  (Chart  7).  Moreover,  since  the  trough, 
employment and total hours worked have risen by around 1½%, not much less than the 2½% 
rise in output. This suggests underlying productivity growth, and with it the rate of growth of 
the  economy’s  supply  capacity,  may  have  fallen  back  during  the  recession.  And  that  is 
corroborated by business surveys, which suggest that manufacturers are, on average, back 
to pre-crisis utilisation rates, while the margin of spare capacity has also closed significantly 
in services firms (see Chart 8).  
It is, though, unclear why underlying productivity growth should have been quite so weak. To 
be sure, the collapse in business investment has resulted in a somewhat lower rate of growth 
                                                 
3   Taken from the IMF’s World Economic Outlook, October 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
of  the  capital  stock,  but  estimates  suggest  that  can  only  account  for  a  modest  slowing  in 
underlying productivity growth. And while some businesses will certainly have been forced to 
reduce the scale of their operations or close because of lack of access to credit, corporate 
bankruptcies  have  remained  at  relatively  low  levels.  Overall,  there  are  few  objective 
indicators to suggest a major hit to capacity growth from the crisis and subsequent recession. 
It  is  possible  that  the  true  fall  in  output  during  the  recession  has  been  overstated  in  the 
official  statistics4,  but  the  extent  of  the  mismeasurement  would  have  to  be  very  large  to 
reconcile all the facts. It is all somewhat puzzling!  
Even if the margin of spare capacity in businesses is no longer all that great, the elevated 
level of unemployment should have put downward pressure on inflation. And, indeed, wage 
growth has been, and remains, subdued (Chart 9). But other factors have conspired to push 
inflation well above the MPC’s 2% target.  
First, the substantial depreciation of sterling, though helpful to the necessary re-balancing of 
the UK economy, also simultaneously raised import prices. We initially underestimated how 
strong  this  impact  would  be,  but  we  now  think  that  the  rise  in  import  prices  as  a  result  of 
depreciation has added somewhere between 4¼% and 6½% to the level of consumer prices. 
Second, commodity prices – especially oil prices (Chart 10) – have been on something of a 
roller-coaster, rising sharply on the back of strong growth in the emerging economies up to 
mid-2008, then falling back sharply as global activity collapsed at the end of 2008. They have 
subsequently rebounded, reflecting both the recovery, especially in the emerging economies, 
and  temporary  adverse  supply  factors  (bad  weather  affecting  agricultural  commodities; 
unrest in the Middle East and North Africa affecting oil). Finally, the increase in the standard 
rate of VAT has also boosted inflation.  
The blue swathe in Chart 11 shows our estimate of the combined contribution of these three 
factors, for a range of plausible assumptions, together with the actual inflation rate (the red 
line). The green swathe is the implied contribution from all other influences on inflation. It is 
worth noting that the current elevated inflation rate of 4.5% can be largely accounted for by 
the effects of energy and import prices and VAT: energy prices and VAT are probably each 
contributing around one percentage point to current inflation, and non-energy import prices 
around double that.  
The  twelve-month  inflation  rate  is  likely  to  remain  elevated  through  the  remainder  of  this 
year, and indeed may rise further in the second half of the year, as utility prices are likely to 
rise sharply to reflect higher oil and wholesale gas prices. But inflation should fall back as we 
go into 2012 and factors such as the rise in VAT drop out of the calculation. But the pace and 
extent to which inflation will drop back will depend on a number of factors. First, there may be 
further  significant  movements  in  commodity  prices  and  in  import  prices  more  generally. 
Second, there may be some resistance to the past erosion in living standards, resulting in a 
period of faster pay growth. Third, although pay growth has been subdued, the low rate of 
growth of productivity has nevertheless resulted in a squeeze in profit margins and there may 
be  some  attempt  to  restore  these  as  the  economy  strengthens.  Finally,  if  the  period  of 
elevated inflation leads business and households to expect higher inflation in the future, then 
it may also lead them to set higher pay and prices.  
Chart  12  shows  our  current  assessment  of  the  inflation  outlook,  also  assuming  that  Bank 
Rate rises in line with market yields, and with the most likely path lying inside the deepest red 
band. This shows inflation moving towards the target through next year, though, as I have 
already  indicated,  there  is  considerable  uncertainty  about  the  speed  at  which  that  will 
                                                 
4   For instance, the value added by the financial sector is conceptually very difficult to define and measure. The 
ONS  are  therefore  forced  to  employ  a  variety  of  proxy  indicators,  such  as  balance  sheet  information.  It  is 
possible that these proxies overstated both the true contribution of the financial sector to GDP growth before 
the crisis and its subsequent fall. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
happen. But we judge the chances of inflation being above or below the target by the end of 
the forecast period to be roughly equal.  
In  concluding,  there  are  two  general  points  that  I  want  to  make  regarding  the  current 
conjuncture. The first is that the next few  years are likely to continue to be rather difficult, 
especially for households and consumer-facing businesses. The economy is still adjusting to 
three substantial shocks, all of which conspire to reduce UK living standards. There is the 
loss  in  output  associated  with  the  banking  crisis,  the  consequences  of  which  households 
have hitherto been partially sheltered from by the expansion in the budget deficit. There is 
the rise in commodity prices relative to the global price of finished goods and services, which 
means  that  we  have  to  pay  more  for  the  raw  materials  that  we  need.  And  there  is  the 
substantial depreciation of sterling, which is a counterpart to the necessary re-balancing of 
the economy, but which also implies that we have to pay more for our imported goods and 
services.  
The  second,  and  related,  point  is  that  while  monetary  policy  cannot  ultimately  insulate  us 
from the associated hit to our living standards, it can affect the adjustment path. In particular, 
the MPC’s chosen approach has been to accept a temporary period of above-target inflation, 
rather  than  seeking  to  hold  inflation  as  close  to  the  2%  target  as  possible  at  all  times. 
Achieving  the  latter  would  have  required  a  markedly  higher  level  of  Bank  Rate  and  with  it 
most probably a somewhat higher level for sterling. That would have moderated some of the 
external inflationary impulses facing us, but would also have depressed activity and pay even 
more  and  retarded  the  requisite  re-balancing  of  the  economy.  The  Committee’s  approach 
has, I believe, been consistent with its mandate from the Chancellor of the Exchequer, which 
recognises “that the actual inflation rate will on occasions depart from its target as a result of 
shocks and disturbances” and that “attempts to keep inflation at the inflation target in these 
circumstances may cause undesirable volatility in output.”  
It is almost 100 years to the day since the ill-fated Titanic was launched from Queen’s Island, 
just  across  the  channel.  It  may  be  tempting  to  see  a  parallel  between  the  hubris  and 
excessive  risk-taking  that  resulted  in  its  tragic  encounter  with  an  iceberg  on  its  maiden 
voyage,  and  the  hubris  and  excessive  risk-taking  that  led  up  to  the  Great  North  Atlantic 
Financial  Crisis  of  2008.  But  a  more  optimistic  parallel  is  provided  by  rebirth  of  the  old 
Harland  and  Wolff  shipyard  as  the  Titanic  Quarter,  the  biggest  regeneration  project  in 
Northern Ireland’s history and the largest waterfront redevelopment in Europe. That serves 
as  a  reminder  of  the  ever  changing  nature  of  the  fabric  of  the  economy,  as  old  industries 
make  way  for  new.  And  it  also  serves  as  a  suitable  metaphor  for  the  UK  economy  more 
generally,  as  it  begins  to  re-balance  in  the  wake  of  the  deepest  downturn  in  the  post-war 
period.  
Thank you! 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  7
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 