Miroslav Singer: The Czech Republic outside EMU – a success story 
born from painful lessons. A Czech view on resolving the euro crisis 
Speech by Mr Miroslav Singer, Governor of the Czech National Bank, as part of the OMFIF 
(Official Monetary and Financial Institutions Forum) Golden Series on World Money, Reform 
Club, London, 28 June 2011. 
 A horrible end is better than endless horror.  
Lieber  ein  Ende  mit  Schrecken  als  ein  Schrecken  ohne  Ende.  Ferdinand  Von  Schill  
(1776–1808) 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As we all know, the eurozone is facing serious problems at the present time. It is my opinion 
that there are important lessons to be learned from the collapse of the Bretton Woods system 
in  the  early  1970s.  The  Czech  policy  authorities  learned  these  lessons  –  often  the  
hard way – first of all after the split of Czechoslovakia 1993, and again during the financial 
and currency crisis that hit the Czech Republic later in the same decade. In my speech today 
I  will  recall  these  lessons  and  examine  how  they  can  be  applied  in  order  to  minimise  the 
costs of resolving the eurozone debt crisis. 
Before  going  any  further,  however,  I’d  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  four  basic  –  and 
surprising, perhaps even shocking – facts about the Czech Republic. First of all, it may come 
as  a  shock  to  some  of  you  to  learn  that  the  Czech  Republic  is  not  an  Eastern  European 
country. In fact, its capital, Prague, lies more than 90 miles west of Vienna. In the words of a 
famous Londoner – the actor Michael Caine – “Not a lot of people know that”.  
What  is  more,  the  Czech  economy  is  further  west  than  you  might  think  not  just 
geographically, but also economically. This brings me to shocking fact number two. Despite 
tepid real growth averaging 3%, the Czech economy has grown by 10% on average in recent 
years  thanks  to  appreciation  of  its  exchange  rate.  Therefore,  the  Czech  economy  has 
multiplied in size more than 4.5 times since 1993 in nominal terms in euros. Consequently, it 
could have bought on average more than 7% p.a. of the core European countries’ real GDP 
over the last 18 years. 
And  now  for  shocking  fact  number  three.  Despite,  or  maybe  thanks  to,  our  first-hand 
experience  with  financial  crisis  (bad  loans  exceeded  40%  of  GDP  in  the  late  1990s),  no 
bailout  has  been  needed  and  no  taxpayers’  money  has  been  used  to  save  any  Czech 
financial firm in the latest turmoil. 
Finally, and a good deal less shockingly I’m pleased to say, the Czech National Bank has 
been  not  only  the  central  bank,  but  also  the  integrated  supervisor  of  the  Czech  financial 
industry  since  2006.  This  set-up  gives  us  many  advantages  in  terms  of  dealing  with  the 
financial  crisis  and  maintaining  financial  stability  at  national  level,  and  it  hopefully  also 
enhances our understanding of the current events in the eurozone. 
I’d now like to remind you of some important events which, I feel, provide us with important 
lessons and guidance for dealing with the current crisis. The first of these was the collapse of 
the Bretton Woods system at the beginning of the 1970s. The key lesson from this event was 
the so-called Impossible Trinity, namely that it is impossible to have a fixed exchange rate, 
free capital flows and independent monetary policy all at the same time.  
Cracks  started  to  appear  in  the  Bretton  Woods  system  in  the  1960s  as  a  result  of 
globalisation of the financial system and enormous growth in cross-border capital flows. This 
process was accelerated by the expansive fiscal policy of the USA, which fostered monetary 
expansion, a loss of competitiveness of US producers and growth in the US trade deficit. As 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
in  both  new  currency  markets.  Despite 
soon as the rising demand for dollars exchangeable for gold encountered the limited stock of 
US  gold  reserves,  the  credibility  of  the  US  dollar  foundered.  This  loss  of  credibility 
undermined the very foundations on which the global monetary system was built. The fall of 
the  Bretton  Woods  system  teaches  us  that  a  fixed  exchange  rate  requires  a  consistent 
macroeconomic framework and corresponding coordination of all aspects of monetary policy. 
Various adjustments to this set-up might reduce some partial imbalances, but if the cause of 
the problem is not tackled head on, the effects of such adjustments will be short-lived and it 
will only be a matter of time before the whole system comes crashing down.  
Now  let’s  move  forward  in  time  some  20  years,  to  the  split  of  the  Czechoslovak  currency 
following  the  dissolution  of  Czechoslovakia  in  1993.  For  many  years,  fiscal  transfers  had 
masked  the  significantly  inferior  performance  of  Slovak  economy  relative  to  its  Czech 
neighbour to the west. This performance gap was further widened by the closing-off of the 
Slovak armament industry from the federal centre at the beginning of the 1990s. After the 
country  split  in  two,  the  stated  goal  of  keeping  a  common  currency  came  under  market 
pressures as Czech and Slovak entities transferred their deposits to Czech banks and capital 
flowed out of both countries. As a result, this goal was abandoned in less than two months 
and an independent Czech crown – or koruna – was introduced. I should add that the CNB 
had its plan B and had been running preparations for the currency split since the second half 
of 1992. Consequently, after it had decided to act, it was able to act fast. 
So,  what  lessons  can  we  learn  from  this  event?  The  lack  of  political  will  to  preserve  the 
federal  Czechoslovak  state  had  quickly  recognisable  consequences  for  the  common 
currency.  As  a  result,  the  costs  of  the  event  were  relatively  low  and  order  was  quickly 
restored 
in  decision-makers’ 
communication,  the  situation  had  been  easy  to  read  by  markets,  citizens  and  economic 
agents in general.  
A few years later, the Czech economy was hit by a severe currency and financial crisis. Until 
1996,  the  Czech  Republic  maintained  a  fixed  exchange  rate  regime  and  generally 
stabilisation-oriented (restrictive) macroeconomic policies. However, entry to the OECD and 
related capital flow liberalisation created an Impossible Triangle. This led to twin deficits and 
attempts to “half-free” the exchange rate regime similar to those made in the Bretton Woods 
case. Additional factors such as data errors and an insufficiently credible first reform package 
only  exacerbated  the  problems.  Serious  worries  of  the  Czech  National  Bank  about  its 
credibility and reputation contributed to its mistakes. A change of government made acts of 
government less predictable. 
The defence of the exchange rate was ended by the central bank without the knowledge of 
the government. This caused a wide rift to open up between these two authorities. A general 
lack  of  coordination  of  macroeconomic  policies,  and  possibly  too  restrictive  monetary 
policies,  culminated  in a  severe  financial crisis.  The  outcome  was  a  very  costly  event  that 
could, with the benefit of hindsight, be judged as avoidable to a significant extent. General 
U-turns made by policy authorities contributed to these high costs. Even for the majority of 
market  players,  many  of  the  decisions  taken  at  the  time  were  difficult to  predict,  read  and 
adjust  to.  The  chief  conclusion  from  these  two  Czech-made  episodes  of  turmoil  is  that 
predictable  actions  produce  lower-cost  outcomes  than  unpredictable  ones.  This  time  the 
CNB  had  no  plan  B,  so  after  the  fixed  regime  was  abandoned,  it  took  several  months  to 
prepare  the  first  coherent  monetary  policy  framework  after  the  end  of  the  fixed  exchange 
regime. 
All of which brings me to the current parlous situation of the eurozone. Let me start with a 
few observations. The eurozone’s mechanisms have supported economic divergence rather 
than  convergence.  The  rules  are  not  only  wrong,  they  are  manifestly  and  idly  ignored 
regardless  of  their  quality.  To  see  this,  consider  for  example  that  the  eurozone’s  debt 
exceeds the Maastricht debt criterion by one-half, and its deficit exceeds the deficit criterion 
by  a  factor  of  almost  two.  Only  three  eurozone  countries  –  Finland,  Luxembourg  and  
the  U-turn 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Estonia – fulfil the Maastricht criteria. The belief that eurozone membership has disciplining 
consequences after joining has been proved unsubstantiated. 
As in the case of the Czech crisis of the 1990s, political and economic policy authorities have 
made numerous U-turns at state and EU level during the crisis. There have been volte-face, 
for  example,  on  bank  bailouts  and  the  necessity  for  them,  on  the  need  to  relax  monetary 
policy in Europe, on the state of the EU financial sector, on the no-state-bailout clause, and 
on the sufficiency of the current Greek package. 
In addition, several false myths have been propagated, for example on the consequences of 
Greek bankruptcy for the German and French banking sectors and on the need for the ECB 
and  central  banks  to  have  positive  equity.  In  fact,  numerous  central  banks  have  negative 
equity  yet  have  no  problems  operating  if  they  are  credible  enough.  The  real  capital  of  a 
central bank is its credibility and reputation, not a figure on its balance-sheet. Credibility and 
reputation  are  virtues  that  thrive  on  consistent  and  credible  policies  and  communication. 
Another myth is that the eurozone cannot survive a Greek default. Why not? Is it insolvent? 
Are  there  significant  trade  dimensions  between  Greece  and  the  eurozone?  According  to 
available  DTCC  data  –  which  is  incomplete  but  very  probably  covers  the  majority  of 
cross-border transactions – even CDS that are now so often mentioned should not present a 
systemic  problem  for  the  European  financial  system.  Note  that  CDS  on  Greek  debt  are 
higher  than  a  year  ago,  but  the  euro  is  stronger  than  at  the  peak  of  last  summer’s  Greek 
crisis. The markets do not appear to think that Greece is that fundamental to the survival of 
the eurozone. Finally, it is implied that if we solve the debt problem, Greece and Portugal are 
saved. They are not. Competitiveness is the real issue for these countries. No economy can 
survive and thrive unless it is competitive. 
The upshot of the recent U-turns is that the markets are completely confused and do not see 
any predictable outcome to adjust to. They see no will to allow Greece to leave the eurozone 
and  depreciate,  but  they  also  see  no  willingness  to  support  the  country  sufficiently.  The 
solution to the crisis has already been made unavoidably costly due to past incredible and 
unclear communication. 
There  are  two  possibly  costly  but  credible  ways  to  restore  competitiveness.  The  first  is  a 
solution within the framework of the eurozone. This would involve restructuring the debt and 
imposing  and  rigorously  enforcing  fiscal  discipline.  But  the  structural  reforms  are  hardly 
enough to restore competitiveness within a short enough period of time in such a scenario. In 
addition,  tens  of  billions  of  euros  in  aid  would  have  to  flow  from  the  strong  eurozone 
economies  to  the  weak  ones  to  restore  competitiveness.  Such  generous  aid  would  very 
probably  have  to  be  conditional  on  the  distribution  of  the  aid  not  being  managed  by  the 
Greek authorities. The ECB would provide liquidity support – and assurances of such support 
– to the Greek banking sector. I believe that given the relatively small size of Greece – and 
even, if need be, of Greece and Portugal – both those actions are within the realm of the 
politically feasible. 
The  second  way  out  of  the  crisis  is  the  “classic”  IMF  prescription,  that  is  to  say,  fiscal 
discipline, debt restructuring and currency devaluation. Note that to  make such a scenario 
easier some aid is also very desirable at least in the form of support for the drachma from the 
ECB and/or European authorities (among others) to avoid an overshooting after the exit from 
the eurozone. 
Note that we are currently seeing a rather disorderly effort along the lines of the first scenario 
of keeping the current eurozone together. In the same spirit we could see an orderly exit from 
the  eurozone,  if  there  is  the  political  will.  In  short,  to  minimise  the  costs,  either  scenario 
needs  to  be  carried  out  in  an  orderly  way,  while  disorderly  implementation  results  in 
dramatically  increased  costs  in  both  cases.  Therefore,  instead  of  the  current  muddling 
through,  one  of  these  two  ways  should  be  chosen  and  clearly  communicated  to  markets, 
voters  and  others.  Otherwise,  we  risk  a  further  loss  of  credibility  for  everyone  involved  in 
Europe and very likely for the IMF as well. Further continuation of the current uncertainty will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
continue to cause significant economic costs for the EU and Europe in particular. At present, 
the risk of an event pushing Greece (and/or others?) into unexpected default is shooting up. 
That would surely be the most costly outcome, at least in the short term. We need to avoid a 
repeat of the 1997 Russian default, where Russia received a programme of aid, everyone 
expected it to work, but the needs turned out to be much bigger two months later. 
There is also a very rapidly increasing risk of citizens running on Greek banks as well as a 
rocketing risk of some other EU/eurozone country’s voters producing an outcome that will, in 
addition to other more likely and more profound consequences, further complicate finding a 
solution to the technical issues, i.e. how to structure the debt restructuring. 
To  conclude,  this  is  a  crisis  whose  causes  lie  in  eurozone  institutions,  which  we  were 
assured were created – together with the eurozone itself – to prevent crises. Without further 
close involvement of eurozone institutions, including the ECB and eurozone member states, 
it will most probably result in a disorderly meltdown of at least some European economies. 
On  many  levels,  including  the  level  of  European  institutions,  the  crisis  was  caused  by 
incoherent  and/or  insincere  communication,  which  increased  the  uncertainty  of  market 
participants in the broad sense. Our country’s history tells us that a generally predicted loss 
of a currency fix has much lower costs (including political ones) than an unexpected one. If 
eurozone  countries  and  EU  institutions  opt  for  “safe”  Greek  membership  in  the  eurozone, 
they  must  present  a  solution  that  is  broad,  generous  and  general  enough  to  convince  the 
markets of its credibility. This solution had better come fast, though, as muddling through has 
significant  economic  costs  and  increases  the  risks  dramatically.  In  the  meantime,  the 
authorities should at least avoid communication that increases the risk of a run on banks and 
of angering the voters of fiscally sounder eurozone states. Last but not the least, a plan B 
would be highly desirable. 
Let me end by stressing that any disorderly outcome clearly goes against all the interests of 
the Czech Republic and its economy. There is now no possibility of a happy (i.e. relatively 
costless)  end.  But  we  should  end  the  uncertainty.  After  all,  muddling  through  the  current 
crisis  is  clearly  occupying  European  decision-makers  to  an  extent  that  is  preventing  them 
from solving the issues important for the core and crucial parts of the eurozone and EU – for 
example,  how  to  change  this  part  of  the  world,  which  is  currently  sliding  down  the  global 
relative benchmarks quite fast, in a way that will enable Europe to regain its past ability to 
compete globally. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
