Tiff Macklem: Canada’s competitive imperative – investing in productivity gains 
Remarks  by  Mr  Tiff  Macklem,  Senior  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  a 
Productivity Summit Series Luncheon, Edmonton, Alberta, 1 February 2011. 
 Introduction 
I  am  honoured  to  be  here  to  launch  Productivity  Alberta’s  luncheon  series.  In  addition  to 
offering  opportunities  like  today’s  to  network,  learn,  and  discuss,  Productivity  Alberta  is 
providing  leadership  and  vision  –  together  with  practical  tools  and  resources  –  to  support 
business and industry in enhancing their competitiveness.  
Canada’s advantages were very apparent through the financial crisis. They sheltered us from 
the worst of the storm and put Canada at the front of the pack coming out of the recession. 
Indeed,  Canada’s  international  brand  for  sound  economic  and  financial  management  has 
rarely been stronger. This is an opportunity to capitalize on, but only if our relative success 
does not blind us to our own vulnerabilities.  
As the title of my remarks suggests, today I want to talk to you about the erosion of Canada’s 
international competitiveness in recent years, how this is affecting the Canadian economy, 
and  the  competitive  imperative  for  businesses  in  Canada  to  sustain  a  durable  rebound  in 
investment  spending  and  translate  this  into  productivity  gains.  With  household  balance 
sheets stretched and fiscal stimulus set to wind down, the Canadian economy must regain its 
competitive edge to sustain a lasting expansion.  
Of course, this is easier said than done. Business decisions to invest and innovate inevitably 
entail  risk.  And  we  continue  to  face  elevated  global  risks.  In  this  environment,  it  may  be 
tempting to conclude that the best business strategy is to delay investing until risks recede. 
This appears misguided. 
Our  competitors  are  not  waiting.  They  are  raising  their  game.  So  while  investment  is  not 
without risk, failure to invest will almost certainly doom  Canadian business to a continuing 
loss of competitiveness and a shrinking share of global markets.  
This need not be our fate. Indeed, after a very sharp decline through the recession and a 
delayed recovery, business investment in Canada is finally rebounding strongly. But it is still 
15 per cent below its pre-recession level. There is much lost ground to make up.  
Moreover, while individual firms can point to many investments that have produced tangible 
productivity gains, at the aggregate level, the productivity dividend of the investments made 
over  the  past  decade  has  been  alarmingly  low.  This  has  to  change.  We  need  more 
investment that enhances productivity and improves our international competitiveness so that 
Canadian businesses can seize the opportunities that arise as the global economic recovery 
proceeds and markets expand. 
Canada’s  productivity  underperformance  is  an  enduring  and  much-studied  feature  of  our 
economic  landscape.  And  truth  be  told,  puzzles  remain.  Nevertheless,  the  concerted 
research  effort  over  the  past  two  decades  points  to  several  clear  conclusions  as  to  what 
makes some firms more productive than others. I will come back to these lessons.  
But first let me review the outlook for the global and Canadian economies, and explore the 
evidence, the causes and the consequences of Canada’s declining competitiveness.  
The global and Canadian outlooks 
Two weeks ago the Bank of Canada published its updated economic outlook.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The good news is that the global economic recovery has gained momentum. Global markets 
are expanding, and prices of the commodities Canada exports have increased.  
Private  domestic  demand  in  the  United  States  has  picked  up  and  will  be  reinforced  by 
recently announced monetary and fiscal stimulus. Growth in Europe has also been slightly 
stronger than anticipated, although ongoing challenges associated with sovereign and bank 
balance  sheets  will  limit  the  pace  of  the  European  recovery.  Continued  strong  growth  in 
emerging markets is supporting commodity prices, which have increased significantly since 
last  autumn  (Chart  1  and  Chart  2).  With  some  emerging-market  economies  overheating, 
authorities  there  have  begun  implementing  more  restrictive  policies  with  the  goal  of 
containing rising inflationary pressures.  
The recovery in Canada is proceeding broadly as anticipated, with a period of more modest 
growth  following  the  strong  recovery  experienced  in  late  2009  and  early  2010  (Chart  3). 
Going forward, demand in Canada is projected to rely less on government and household 
spending  and  more  on  investment  and  net  exports  (Table  1).  This  rotation  of  demand  is 
essential to sustaining a durable expansion.  
Through 2009–10, government spending contributed one percentage point or more to growth 
each  year,  dampening  the  recession  and  spurring  recovery.  But  with  fiscal  stimulus  set  to 
unwind  as  governments  begin  the  return  to  fiscal  balance,  the  contribution  of  government 
spending to growth is expected to turn negative.  
Household spending, supported by extraordinary monetary and fiscal stimulus, has provided 
the  most  important  source  of  growth  since  the  start  of  the  recovery  in  the  third  quarter  of 
2009, increasing at an average annual rate of 4.3 per cent. With disposable income growing 
by 2.3 per cent over the same period, the ratio of household debt to disposable income has 
risen  to  a  record  high  of  148  per  cent,  surpassing  the  comparable  ratio  for  U.S.  citizens 
(Chart 4). 
With household balance sheets becoming increasingly stretched and consumption unlikely to 
be bolstered by further gains in house prices, household spending is expected to moderate in 
line  with  income  growth.  But  even  with  this  moderation,  the  savings  rate  is  projected  to 
remain near historic lows, household debt near historic highs, and the share of the economy 
accounted for by household spending well above its historical average (Chart 5 and Chart 6). 
Prudent consumers should do no more and could well decide to do less. 
This leaves business investment and net exports to pick up the slack.  
The prospects for investment are very favourable, reflecting both propitious conditions and 
business imperatives. The financial positions of Canadian firms are strong. Borrowing costs 
for  Canadian  businesses  are  exceptionally  low,  access  to  financing  has  continued  to 
improve,  and  the  Canadian  dollar  has  appreciated  making  imported  machinery  and 
equipment less expensive in Canadian dollars. Moreover, given the historically large drop in 
investment  through  the  recession  –  almost  25  per  cent  –  and  the  delayed  recovery,  firms 
have  much  depreciated  capital  to  replace.  This  is  reinforced  by  the  imperative  to  improve 
productivity amid heightened pressures to become more competitive. 
Surveys of business intentions, such as the Bank of Canada’s Business Outlook Survey and 
the Conference Board’s survey, confirm that firms plan to invest heavily in the year ahead for 
a variety of purposes, but increasingly to seize new opportunities and improve productivity 
(Chart  7).  Reflecting  all  these  factors,  the  Bank  is  expecting  a  historically  strong  and 
sustained rebound in investment, with investment growing at more than 9 per cent this year 
and next (Chart 8). 
What about net exports? With the United States – our major trading partner – experiencing 
its worst recession since the Great Depression, our exports were particularly hard hit, falling 
more  than  16  per  cent  (Chart  9).  And  with  a  moderate  US  recovery  through  2010,  an 
appreciating  Canadian  dollar,  and  relatively  strong  domestic  demand  supporting  imports, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Canada’s  trade  balance  turned  sharply  negative,  subtracting  2.3  percentage  points  from 
growth in 2010. 
Looking forward, the Bank expects an improvement in net exports over the next two years as 
external  demand  continues  to  recover  and  domestic  demand  moderates  from  its  previous 
rapid  pace.  Nevertheless,  competitiveness  challenges  are  likely  to  mean  that  Canada  will 
benefit less from improved global demand than in past recoveries. Consistent with the strong 
rebound in investment, this projection assumes a recovery in trend labour productivity growth 
from 0.6 per cent in 2010 to 1.1 per cent in 2012. At best this will stop the slide in our relative 
productivity  performance.  Making  up  lost  ground  will  require  superior  performance  by 
Canadian business. 
A key risk to the outlook is that even this modest assumed improvement in productivity could 
fail to materialize. Particularly if combined with persistent strength in the Canadian dollar, this 
would  jeopardize  the  recovery  in  net  exports.  Moreover,  renewed  tensions  in  foreign 
exchange markets could put additional upward pressure on freely floating currencies. 
Canada’s deteriorating competitiveness 
Canada’s  current  account  balance  has  declined  substantially  in  recent  years,  reaching  a 
deficit  of  4.3  per  cent  in  the  third  quarter  of  last  year  –  the  largest  deficit  in  20  years 
(Chart 10). This sharp deterioration reflects a large decline in Canada’s merchandise trade 
balance, owing to both strong imports and weak exports. Part of this shift is likely cyclical, 
reflecting  the  fact  that  domestic  demand  has  been  much  stronger  in  Canada  than  in  the 
United States in recent years. This suggests that we should see some cyclical recovery in 
the trade balance as growth in household spending in Canada moderates while it picks up 
south of the border. 
But another more structural and more worrisome explanation also appears to be at play – 
increased  import  penetration  into  Canada  and  a  loss  of  market  share  among  Canadian 
exporters abroad. Canadian exporters’ have lost considerable market share in their largest 
market.  From  2000  to  2010,  China  increased  its  share  of  U.S.  imports  from  8  per  cent  to 
19 per cent, surpassing Canada as the largest exporter to the United States (Chart 11). Over 
the same period, Canada’s share of U.S. imports fell from 20 per cent to 14 per cent, with 
about  two-thirds  of  this  decline  occurring  since  2005.  Moreover,  while  the  large  rise  in 
China’s share is also affecting other countries, a number of countries, notably Mexico, have 
fared relatively better than Canada. 
Over  the  same  period,  Canada’s  competitiveness  has  declined,  with  a  sharp  rise  in  the 
labour cost of producing a unit of output in Canada compared with other countries, adjusted 
for  exchange  rate  movements.  The  Organisation 
for  Economic  Co-operation  and 
Development (OECD) calculates that the Canadian real exchange rate in terms of unit labour 
costs  has  appreciated  about  17  per  cent  since  the  beginning  of  2005.  The  bilateral 
Canada-U.S. measure shows a 31 per cent increase in relative Canadian unit labour costs 
over the period. 
Relative unit labour costs can be broken down into three components: the nominal exchange 
rate, relative hourly compensation and relative productivity (Chart 12). Since the beginning of 
2005, the appreciation of the Canadian dollar explains about two-thirds of the increase in unit 
labour  costs  in  Canada vis-à-vis  the  United  States.  Wage  growth  in  the  two  countries  has 
been  broadly  similar  over  the  period,  leaving  productivity  underperformance  to  account  for 
the remaining deterioration in this measure of competitiveness: labour productivity in Canada 
has  grown  at  an  average  annual  rate  of  just  0.5  per  cent  since  the  first  quarter  of  2005, 
compared with 2.1 per cent in the United States. 
After  a  long  period  of  productivity  underperformance  starting  in  the  1970s,  productivity 
growth in Canada accelerated in the second half of the 1990s, keeping pace with a roughly 
coincident pickup in U.S. productivity growth (Chart 13). But since 2001, productivity growth 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
in Canada has slowed to historically low rates. It has languished well below U.S. rates, and 
has been at the low end compared with our competitors in the U.S. market. This is showing 
up in our international rankings across a range of competiveness measures. For example, 
the World Economic Forum, while rating Canada’s banking system the soundest in the world 
three years in a row, dropped Canada’s ranking in world competitiveness from 7th in 2000 to 
10th in 2010. 
Enough measurement. What do we need to do to restore Canada’s sagging competitiveness? 
Restoring competitiveness 
The  public  sector  plays  an  important  role  in  creating  conditions  to  support  productivity 
growth, and it is important to recognize that successive governments in Canada have done 
many of the right things. Canadian businesses benefit from a sound policy environment with 
low and stable inflation, sustainable fiscal policy, and well-regulated financial institutions. A 
series  of  important  trade  agreements  have  improved  access  to  key  markets,  and  tariff 
reductions have lowered the cost of intermediate inputs. In addition, a number of measures 
have  substantially  improved  Canada’s  tax  competitiveness  for  new  investment,  making  it 
among the most attractive in the industrialized world.  
But  while  the  public  sector  can  sow  the  seeds  of  productivity  gains,  it  is  up  to  the  private 
sector to reap the harvest. And it is time for business to step up and  deliver. That means 
getting  on  with  the  job  of  investing,  innovating,  developing  new  markets,  and  finding  new, 
more efficient ways of organizing and executing production.  
Needless to say, there are many different business strategies to achieve success. But the 
results  of  research  over  the  past  two  decades  are  increasingly  suggesting  a  number  of 
specific  directions  for  businesses  in  search  of  improved  productivity.  In  particular,  while 
productivity  puzzles  remain,  what  has  come  into  clearer  focus  is  that  the  more  productive 
firms tend to: 
 
invest  more  in  machinery  and  equipment  (M&E),  particularly  in  information  and 
communications technology (ICT), 
invest more in research and development (R&D) and innovation,  
employ more workers with higher educational attainment,  
and compete in foreign markets. 
 
 
 
Looking  at  how  Canadian  businesses  stack  up  along  these  dimensions,  there  is  room  for 
improvement. 
Canadian businesses on average invest less in M&E and ICT than their U.S. counterparts. 
Between 1987 and 2009 Canadian investment per worker in M&E and ICT averaged 77 per 
cent  and  59  per  cent,  respectively,  of  that  invested  in  the  United  States.  By  2009,  on 
average, Canadian workers had only about half as much M&E and ICT capital stock to work 
with as their U.S. counterparts. 
Canada has a well-educated workforce that compares favourably when it comes to primary 
and post-secondary education, but Canadian firms lag in the employment of PhDs and other 
post-graduates,  especially  in  the  sciences,  engineering,  and  business.  There  are  both 
demand  and  supply  elements  to  improving  along  this  dimension,  but  business  has  an 
important role to play by placing greater value on advanced education.  
In  business  sector  spending  on  R&D,  Canada  ranks  a  disappointing  17th  among  OECD 
countries,  and  when  it comes  to  innovation,  the  World  Economic  Forum  rates  us  19th,  far 
behind the United States, Germany and Japan. Admittedly this may exaggerate the R&D gap 
as Canadian firms also import a significant share of R&D from foreign countries and by some 
other  measures  the  gap  looks  smaller:  for  example,  the  World  Economic  Forum  ranked 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Canada 7th for university-industry collaboration in R&D. Our biggest trading partner ranked 
first. 
On openness and competition, we are a trading nation and have been very fortunate to be 
right  beside  the  biggest  market  in  the  world.  But  as  growth  shifts  to  emerging  markets, 
finding new markets in Asia and Latin America will be critical. Emerging-market economies 
now represent one-half of all import growth and about two-thirds of global economic growth. 
Let me conclude. 
Conclusion 
Canada’s poor productivity performance is not a new story. And there are certain facts we 
cannot avoid. Our workforce is aging and our labour force growth is declining. We have to 
compete  against  more  countries  in  a  globalized  marketplace,  and  we  are  facing  greater 
direct  competition  as  emerging-market  economies  move  up  the  value  chain.  These  forces 
put a premium on raising our productivity growth.  
But our productivity performance has been particularly weak in recent years. And this now 
risks holding back the recovery if competitiveness challenges restrain net export growth. As 
stretched  households  in  Canada  pull  back  and  government  stimulus  unwinds,  business 
investment and net exports must play bigger roles in driving growth. If we needed another 
more immediate reason to invest in productivity gains and improve our competitiveness, this 
is it. 
At the Bank of Canada we don’t forecast the value of the Canadian dollar, but counting on a 
much weaker dollar to regain business competitiveness looks like a risky business model. A 
cheap  currency  is  not  a  business  strategy.  Business  needs  to  get  on  with  investing  and 
turning  these  investments  into  lower  unit  labour  costs  and  improved  competitiveness.  The 
first part – more investment – is at least under way, and the latest productivity numbers offer 
a glimmer that we could begin moving in the right direction on competitiveness. 
Businesses in Canada can let things happen, make them happen, or see what happened. 
Let’s make them happen. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Appendix 
Canada’s competitive imperative: investing in 
productivity gains 
Chart 1 
Emerging-market economies drive global growth  
Chart 2 
Global commodity prices have risen 
  6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 3  
Real GDP growth in Canada 
Canada’s household debt-to-income ratio on the rise  
Chart 4 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Table 1 
Contributions to average annual real GDP growth  
(percentage points) 
Chart 5 
Personal savings rate in Canada projected to  
remain near historic lows 
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 6 
The contribution of household expenditures to GDP is  
expected to fall but remain well above its historical average 
 Chart 7 
Firms intend to invest 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
Business fixed investment is expected to rebound strongly  
Chart 8 
Chart 9 
Canadian exports fell sharply in the recession  
  10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Canada’s current account balance has declined sharply 
Chart 10 
Chart 11 
Canada is losing share of the U.S. import market  
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  12 
 Chart 12 
A strong Canadian dollar and poor productivity explain  
Canada’s weak competitiveness 
Labour productivity growth: Canada and the United States  
Chart 13  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
