Richard W Fisher: Containing (or restraining) systemic risk – the need to 
not fail on “too big to fail” 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas, before the Market News International Seminar, New York, 6 June 
2011. 
The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
 that 
I  am  somewhat  “dismal” 
those  who  do  will  correctly  deduce 
Thank you for that kind introduction. This discerning audience no doubt noted that despite 
being  overeducated,  I  am  not  a  formally  trained  economist.  I  do  not  have  a  Ph.D.  in 
economics; 
in 
comprehending  the  arcana  of  “the  Dismal  Science.”  After  my  undergraduate  education  in 
economics and my studies at Oxford, I took a different path. I earned an MBA and then went 
to Wall Street and into funds management before cashing out and taking to public service. 
My perspective on monetary policy and regulation is shaped less by theory and more by my 
experience as a market operator.  
I confess that in matters of monetary policy and regulation, I am often in the minority. This 
does  not  make  me  the  least  bit  uncomfortable.  The  majority  opinion  is  not  always  right; 
indeed, my experience as an investor has biased me to conclude that more often than not, 
the  consensus  view  is  the  wrong  view,  even  among  the  most  erudite.  Exhibit  A  of  the 
fallibility  of  consensus  thinking  is  the  herd  mentality  among  supposedly  sophisticated 
financiers as well as theoretical economists who believe in efficient-markets theory and other 
nonsense themes that led us into the recent financial crisis. I happen to believe that Margaret 
Thatcher, the former British prime minister, was right when she said, “You cannot lead from 
the crowd.”1 There is a role for contrarians, not just in the investment arena, but also at the 
highest  level  of  policymaking;  at  a  minimum,  it  is  important  to  question  and  challenge 
consensus views, even when they are formed by the most credentialed individuals. 
For  example,  some  of  you  may  recall  the  public  letter  written  by  364  eminent  economists 
predicting disastrous consequences that would result from Thatcher’s policy initiatives. That 
letter was published in the Times of London on March 30, 1981.2 The British economy began 
a  recovery  almost  immediately  afterward,  in  1982;  by  1983,  inflation  and  mortgage  rates 
were at their lowest levels in over a decade, while economic growth accelerated. The failure 
of  the  consensus  view  led  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer  Geoffrey  Howe  to  define  an 
economist as “a man who knows 364 ways of making love, but doesn’t know any women.”3  
To  be  sure,  economic  theories  and  econometric  models  are  of  great  utility  for  providing  a 
framework  for  policymaking;  we  cannot  make  policy  without  them.  But  they  are  imperfect 
substitutes  for  common  sense.  The  late  New  York  intellectual  Irving  Kristol  is  reported  to 
have said: “Don’t fall for fantastical notions that have nothing to do with the way people really 
are.”4  My  experience  of  having  worked  in  real  time  in  the  financial  markets  leads  me  to  a 
different perspective on financial operators and markets than that of most of my colleagues 
                                                 
1  See www.number10.gov.uk/history-and-tour/prime-ministers-in-history/margaret-thatcher. 
2  See “Were 364 Economists All Wrong?” Institute of Economic Affairs,  
  www.iea.org.uk/sites/default/files/publications/files/upldbook310pdf.pdf. 
3  See “Were 364 Economists All Wrong?” BBC Newsnight report by Stephanie Flanders,  
 
4  See “Three Cheers for Irving,” by David Brooks, New York Times, Sept. 22, 2009. 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/programmes/newsnight/4803858.stm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
at  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC).  This  not  only  affects  my  views  on  the 
implementation of monetary policy, but also shapes my perspective on regulation. 
Monetary policy and regulation are intricately linked. When conducting its monetary policy, 
the Fed is governed by a dual mandate: creating the monetary conditions to foster maximum 
employment  growth  while  constraining  inflation  and  its  alter  ego,  deflation.  These  goals 
cannot  be  realized  without  financial  stability  that  results  from  effective  regulation.  As  the 
FOMC now sets its sights on concluding the accommodative monetary policy it fashioned to 
stave  off  financial  collapse  and  deflation,  our  supervision  and  regulation  team  is  wrestling 
with  developing  the  appropriate  policy  for  dealing  with  the  lingering  effects  of  the  financial 
crisis, and, most importantly, erecting a new regulatory framework to substantially reduce the 
chances  of  financial  crises.  Or  at  least  make  them  more  manageable,  should  one  occur 
again. (In all candor, it would be more historically accurate to say “when one occurs again,” 
because  crises  and  panics  have  occurred  repeatedly  throughout  history,  including  three 
times just in my own career: the mid-1970s, the late 1980s and just recently). 
The Federal Reserve’s efforts to revamp the regulatory framework are being led by Governor 
Tarullo, who is providing focused, important leadership on this critical matter.5 The revamping 
is  largely  shaped  by  the  Dodd–Frank  Wall  Street  Reform  and  Consumer  Protection  Act 
(“Dodd–Frank”),  which  became  law  last  summer.  The  act  establishes  a  new  regulatory 
infrastructure  for  promoting  financial  stability.  Among  its  most  prominent  macroprudential 
features  is  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council,  an  interagency  body  charged  with 
detecting and deterring threats to the financial system. The act also establishes an Office of 
Financial Research, a mechanism for the orderly winding down of failing financial firms, and 
new  responsibilities  for  the  Federal  Reserve  in  overseeing  certain  nonbank  financial 
companies  and  certain  payment,  clearing  and  settlement  utilities.  The  Federal  Reserve 
Board  is  also  directed  to  develop  enhanced  prudential  standards  for  large  banking 
organizations and systemically important nonbank financial firms. 
Dodd–Frank itself mostly provides only high-level direction, leaving an extraordinary number 
of details and critical decisionmaking to regulatory discretion. As a result, the ultimate nature 
and future of reform rest in the hands of regulators. As many of you are aware, the various 
regulatory agencies are presently seeking public comments on a range of issues involving 
implementation of Dodd–Frank. 
Most  regulatory  reform  initiatives  applied  since  the  Banking  Act  of  1864  have  missed  the 
mark. They looked good on paper and appeared to solve the problems of the day but later 
proved  not  up  to  the  task.  This  is  especially  true  with  efforts  to  solve  the  “too  big  to  fail” 
problem, in which an unwillingness to follow through on prior policy commitments to actually 
close  down  large  failures  and  impose  losses  on  their  uninsured  creditors  has  led  to  what 
economists  call  “time  inconsistency”  in  policy.  Let’s  hope  this  time  will  be  different,  that 
regulators will make their commitments credible and consistent with future rather than past 
needs.6 
Having come from the financial industry, I take a keen interest in these issues, and I hold 
some strong opinions as to how we should proceed. I believe there are leverage points for 
effective  reform.  There  are  areas  where,  if  regulators  act  decisively,  they  might  have 
profound  positive  effects  and  avoid  time  inconsistency.  Conversely,  there  are  other  areas 
where regulatory action would at best generate small benefits and, in the worst case, might 
actually be counterproductive. 
                                                 
5  See  “Regulating  Systemically  Important  Financial  Firms,”  address  by  Governor  Daniel  K.  Tarullo  at  the 
Peterson Institute for International Economics, June 3, 2011. 
6  See “Financial Reforms or Financial Dementia,” keynote address by Richard W. Fisher to the Southwestern 
Graduate School of Banking, June 3, 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The key to successful reform will be to identify the leverage points that exist and do our best 
to ensure regulators are up to the task in those areas while not burdening other aspects of 
the  financial  system  with  heavy  intervention  that  might  trigger  the  law  of  unintended 
consequences.  
Eye on target 
Let us be clear about the goals of reform. With so much energy being expended on the what, 
the  when  and  the  how  of  implementing  Dodd–Frank,  the  first  risk  we  run  is  forgetting  the 
why—the reasons for the act, its primary goals. 
For this, we need only turn to the law itself, the preamble, which spells out the key objectives 
as follows: “To promote the financial stability of the United States by improving accountability 
and  transparency  in  the  financial  system,  to  end  “too  big  to  fail,”  to  protect  the  American 
taxpayer by ending bailouts, to protect consumers from abusive financial services practices 
and for other purposes.”7 On the subject of too big to fail, the legislation is quite blunt. The 
Conference Report summary of the legislation’s key provisions, provided in plain English by 
the Senate Banking Committee, states that it seeks to end “the possibility that taxpayers will 
be asked to write a check to bail out financial firms that threaten the economy by: creating a 
safe  way  to  liquidate  failed  financial  firms;  imposing  tough  new  capital  and  leverage 
requirements  that  make  it  undesirable  to  get  too  big;  updating  the  Fed’s  authority  to  allow 
system-wide  support  but  no  longer  prop  up  individual  firms;  and  establishing  rigorous 
standards and supervision to protect the economy and American consumers, investors and 
businesses.”8 
While  there  is  much  to  criticize  about  Dodd–Frank,  I  cotton  to  those  blunt  statements  on 
ending  too  big  to  fail.  For,  if  after  the  myriad  rules  and  regulations  are  written  and 
implemented we have not eradicated too big to fail from our financial infrastructure, reform 
will have failed yet again. 
I have spoken to this topic on several occasions.9 If you pull up a copy of the Sept. 28, 2009, 
Wall  Street  Journal,  you  will  find  an  article  I  wrote  with  my  colleague  Harvey  Rosenblum 
about the interference too big to fail poses for the effective conduct of monetary policy. In 
looking  at  regulatory  reform  and  implementing  Dodd–Frank,  I  think  a  key  point  worth 
repeating  is  that  the  distinction  between  “commercial  banks”  and  “the  shadow  banking 
system” is a false one. The two became intertwined beginning with the bypassing of Glass–
Steagall  strictures  by  Sandy  Weill  and  Citicorp  and  the  deregulatory  initiative  of  Gramm–
Leach–Bliley. The fact is that the largest commercial banks played a major role in many of 
the more problematic phenomena of the recent credit boom and ensuing crisis, including the 
spread of what I have previously referred to as financial STDs, or securitization transmitted 
diseases.  
In the aftermath of the Panic, these viruses linger. Last week, the New York Times printed an 
interesting  article  by  Joe  Nocera,  who  drew  upon  the  observations  of  a  highly  regarded 
regional  banker  from  Buffalo,  Robert  Wilmers  of  M&T  Bank.10  Wilmers  claimed  that  of  the 
                                                 
7  See the Dodd–Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act, http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/cgi-
http://banking.senate.gov/public/_files/FinancialReformSummaryAsFiled.pdf. 
bin/getdoc.cgi?dbname=111_cong_bills&docid=f:h4173enr.txt.pdf. 
8  See “Restoring American Financial Stability,” a summary of the bill, 
 
9  See “Paradise Lost: Addressing ‘Too Big to Fail,’” speech by Richard W. Fisher at the Cato Institute’s 27th 
Annual  Monetary  Conference,  Nov.  19,  2009,  and  “Minsky  Moments  and  Financial  Regulatory  Reform,” 
speech by Richard W. Fisher before the 19th Hyman P. Minsky Conference, April 14, 2010. Also see note 5 
and “The Blob That Ate Monetary Policy,” by Richard W. Fisher and Harvey Rosenblum, Wall Street Journal, 
Sept. 28, 2009. 
10  See “The Good Banker,” by Joe Nocera, The New York Times, May 30, 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
$75 billion made by the six largest bank-holding companies last year, $56 billion derived from 
trading  revenues.  Nocera  noted  that  “in  2007,  the  chief  executives  of  the  Too  Big  to  Fail 
Banks  made,  on  average,  $26  million  …  more  than  double  the  compensation  of  the  top 
nonbank Fortune 500 executives.” A recent survey conducted for the Wall Street Journal of 
CEO compensation at 350 public companies shows that financial services compensation has 
been  tempered;  the  rate  of  increase  in  compensation  for  2010  was  just  1  percent.11  The 
Journal attributed this to higher levels of scrutiny of financial firms as well as pressure from 
shareholders and regulators. Even so, some financial-sector CEOs enjoyed robust increases 
in their total compensation, including a 74 percent increase and a 51 percent increase at two 
of the five largest U.S. banking organizations. Interestingly, the trading revenue of these two 
firms accounted for almost half of the $56 billion in total trading revenue mentioned by Mr. 
Wilmers.  These  recent  numbers  buttress  Nocera’s  reasonable  conclusion  that  bank  CEOs 
“were being compensated in no small part on their trading profits – which gave them every 
incentive to keep taking those excessive risks.” 
I am sympathetic to these concerns. I have no problem with risk takers being rewarded with 
large compensation packages. I put my own and my partners’ capital at risk for the 20 years I 
operated in the markets and profited handsomely. But I never was provided with capital that 
was  safeguarded  by  government  guarantees.  There  is  no  logic  to  having  the  public 
underwrite  through  deposit  insurance  or  subsidize  through  protective  regulation  the  risk-
taking ventures of large financial institutions and their executives. There is a substantial case 
to be made for separating the “public utility” – or traditional core function of banking – from 
the risk-taking function. 
To be sure, financial problems are not limited to large institutions and their complex, opaque 
and conflicted operations. Regional and community institutions that have, for the most part, 
stuck to the public utility function have faced their own difficulties, especially in the context of 
construction lending. But while over 300 banks failed during the crisis, another 7,000 did not. 
Community and regional banks that are not too big to fail appear to have succumbed less to 
the  herdlike  mentality  and  promiscuous  financial  behavior  that  affected  their  megabank 
peers. 
Moreover, when smaller banks got into deep trouble, regulators generally took them over and 
resolved  them.  In  the  treatment  of  big  banks,  regulators,  for  the  most  part,  tiptoed  around 
them.  Failing  big  banks  were  allowed  to  lumber  on,  with  government  support,  despite  the 
extensive  damage  they  wrought.  Big  banks  that  gambled  and  generated  unsustainable 
losses received a huge public benefit: too-big-to-fail support. 
Postcrisis, the large institutions are even larger: The top 10 now account for 64 percent of 
assets, up from 58 percent before the crisis and substantially higher than the 25 percent they 
accounted for in 1990. In effect, more prudent and better-managed banks have been denied 
the market share that would have been theirs if mismanaged big banks had been allowed to 
go out of business. This strikes me as counter to the very essence of competition that is the 
hallmark of American capitalism: Prudently managed banks are being victimized by publicly 
subsidized competition from less-prudent institutions. 
A student of existentialism is tempted to recall Nietzsche’s lament that, “He who is punished 
is never he who performed the deed.”12 An acerbic devotee of H.L. Mencken might be given 
to recite his dictum that while “injustice is relatively easy to bear; what stings is justice.”13 I do 
not doubt for a New York minute that the savvy big players who “performed the deed” did so 
                                                 
11  See “Oil and Gas CEO Pay Beats Other Industries,” by Dana Mattioli, Wall Street Journal, May 12, 2011. Also 
see http://graphicsweb.wsj.com/php/CEOPAY11.html. 
12  See Daybreak: Thoughts on the Prejudices of Morality, by Friedrich Nietzsche, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge 
University Press, 1997. 
13  See Prejudices: Third Series, by H.L. Mencken, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1922. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
with confidence they would be protected by the authorities who might find “justice” difficult to 
impose. In solving the crisis at hand during the Panic, it appears that the most imprudent of 
lenders and investors were protected from the consequences of their decisions; the sinners 
were rescued and the virtuous penalized. In crafting regulations in response to Dodd–Frank, 
we need to restore market discipline in banking and let the market mete out its own brand of 
justice for excessive risk-taking rather than prolong the injustice of too big to fail.  
It is not difficult to see where this dynamic, if uncorrected, will lead – to more pronounced 
financial  cycles  and  recurring  crises.  I  would  argue  that  the  failure  to  reform  the  banking 
system  in  Japan  was  one  of  the  principal  reasons  for  that  country’s  “Lost  Decade(s).”  We 
must not let that pathology take hold here. 
Making matters worse 
If we do not keep this ultimate goal of reform firmly in mind, our rule making not only might 
fail  to  promote  the  original  objectives  of  reform,  but  could  actually  work  against  them. 
Ironically, with Dodd–Frank, such a perverse outcome is a distinct possibility. 
The Dodd–Frank law entails the writing of more than 200 proposals and rules covering a host 
of issues – risk-based capital requirements, ability-to-pay requirements for home mortgages, 
protections for consumers sending remittances to foreign countries and so on. The Congress 
decided the need for these rules to be written, drawing on the input of many, including some 
very  thoughtful  economists.  Here,  I  think  it  wise  to  draw  upon  the  insight  of  the  classical 
liberal  Frédéric  Bastiat  in  his  take  on  unintended  consequences.  Bastiat  opined,  “There  is 
only one difference between a bad economist and a good one: the bad economist confines 
himself to the visible effect; the good economist takes into account both the effect that can be 
seen and those effects that must be foreseen.”14 The same might be said of regulators. As 
regulators  grapple  with  implementation  of  the  voluminous  Dodd–Frank  reform  act,  the 
unforeseen  must  be  taken  into  account.  The  law  of  unintended  consequences  is  always 
lurking in the shadows. To get regulatory reform right, we have a lot of “foreseeing” to do. 
One can envision, for example, that the potential cumulative impact of the many regulations 
demanded by Dodd–Frank will be to artificially raise the cost structure of the non-too-big-to-
fail depository institutions. Imposition of the new requirements and restrictions risks creating 
new economies of scale in banking generated by the costs of regulatory compliance, many of 
which could be fixed costs not fully proportional to bank size. 
To the extent that a large scale becomes necessary to absorb the regulatory cost associated 
with reform, Dodd–Frank could intensify the tendency toward bank consolidation, resulting in 
a more concentrated industry, with the largest institutions predominating even more than in 
the past. Such an outcome would appear to me contrary to the stated spirit and goal of the 
act.  A  more  consolidated  industry  would  only  magnify  the  challenge  of  dealing  with 
systemically  important  institutions  and  offsetting  their  historically  elevated  too-big-to-fail 
status.  
My  concerns  over  regulation-induced  economies  of  scale  and  the  implications  for  industry 
consolidation  apply  to  all  the  size  classes  of  banks,  given  the  extensive  list  of  new  or 
enhanced requirements created by Dodd–Frank and their associated compliance costs. As it 
affects  community  banking,  my  concerns  are  tempered  somewhat,  though  not  completely 
alleviated, by the small-bank exceptions that have been granted to several of the new law’s 
more costly requirements. 
                                                 
14  See  “That  Which  is  Seen,  and  That  Which  Is  Not  Seen,”  in  Essays  on  Political  Economy,  by  M.  Frédéric 
Bastiat, London: Provost & Co., 1872. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Unfortunately, the same cannot yet be said for the case of regional banks. The act indicates 
that  all  banking  organizations  with  more  than  $50  billion  in  assets  should  be  subject  to 
enhanced  supervision.  Some  of  the  related  regulatory  proposals  have  already  been 
distributed for comment. Still other proposals for new, stricter “enhanced supervision” rules 
for these banks will be unveiled soon. 
Yet, few really believe a $50 billion bank poses a systemic threat to our $17 trillion banking 
system. Nor is a $50 billion bank qualitatively similar along risk dimensions to the very largest 
ones that exceed $2 trillion in size. The top 10 banking organizations have a cutoff point of 
$300  billion.  I  posit  that  this  group  should  constitute  the  primary  target  for  enhanced 
supervision.  Interestingly,  despite  its  large  share  of  industry  assets,  this  group  holds  only 
about 20 percent of the small-business loans on bank books. Clearly, these institutions are 
engaged  in substantial activities  outside  the  traditional  banking  role.  It is  within  these  very 
largest banks, and perhaps a few slightly smaller yet highly complex or interconnected ones, 
that systemic risk is concentrated.  
If the enhanced-supervision requirements are not highly graduated and imposed primarily on 
the  very  largest  banks,  it  is  not  difficult  to  imagine  how  the  costs  associated  with  such 
supervision  could  lead  mid-tier  banks  that  exceed  the  $50  billion  threshold  –  yet  fall  well 
short of megabank status – to seek merger partners in order to achieve sufficient scale by 
which  to  help  cover  the  cost  of  regulation.  This  would  compound  the  problem  rather  than 
alleviate it.  
With  regard  to  enhanced  standards  for  such  important  factors  as  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements,  leverage  limits  and  risk  management,  Dodd–Frank  instructs  regulators  to 
differentiate among these banks. Enhanced supervision can be implemented on a graduated 
scale, based on the extent of assets beyond $50 billion and possibly other factors. Let us do 
that fully, then, applying these measures along a highly graduated scale, with only minimal 
added mandates directed at mid-tier banking organizations. 
However,  when  it  comes  to  the  top  10  or  so,  I  would  apply  Dodd–Frank  extensively  and 
vigorously.  I  would  apply  all  the  elements  of  heightened  supervision  –  from  enhanced 
standards for capital and liquidity requirements, leverage limits and risk management to the 
additional  measures  of  living  wills  and  credit-exposure  reports,  concentration  limits,  extra 
public disclosures and short-term debt limits – with full force. 
To this we would add robust annual stress tests conducted by the Federal Reserve, along 
with the additional tools and procedures of macroprudential supervision, including in-depth 
horizontal reviews across large companies.  
Conclusion 
I trust regulators will rise to the challenges posed by the financial crisis and too big to fail, 
leaving  a  legacy  of  success  and  providing  a  practicable  infrastructure  for  next-generation 
supervision and regulation. 
I quoted Bastiat’s criterion for a good economist as one who accounts for “effects that must 
be foreseen.” Economists did not do a good job of foreseeing the financial crisis. Neither did 
regulators.  Moreover,  previous  measures  directed  at  containing  too  big  to  fail  proved 
ineffective, with no one too surprised that when crisis came, many large-bank counterparties 
were protected under implicit guarantees. Let’s hope that going forward, regulators can do 
better, avoiding both unintended consequences and time inconsistencies. For if they don’t, 
and they are unable to solve the too-big-to-fail issue in a timely manner, we will ultimately 
have  to  take  more  draconian  measures  and  simply  break  up  the  largest  banking 
organizations to eliminate the threat they pose to financial stability and economic growth.  
That is my contrarian view, and I’m sticking with it. 
Thank you.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
