Njuguna Ndung’u: Islamic finance – a paradigm shift in Africa 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 3rd Gulf 
African Bank Annual East & Central Africa Islamic Finance Conference, Nairobi, 28 March 
2011. 
 the  opportunity 
to  discuss  emerging 
Mr. Suleiman Shahbal, Chairman, Gulf African Bank Ltd;  
Mr. Najmul Hassan, Chief Executive Officer, Gulf African Bank Ltd;  
Board Members of Gulf African Bank Ltd here present;  
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
I am delighted and honoured to have been invited to preside over the opening ceremony of 
this  important  conference.  At  the  onset,  let  me  extend  a  warm  welcome  to  all  participants 
attending  the  3rd  Gulf  African  Bank  Annual  East  and  Central  Africa  Islamic  Finance 
Conference, with the theme: “Islamic Finance: A Paradigm Shift in Africa” 
Allow me to compliment Gulf African Bank for organising this Islamic Finance Conference. 
Indeed, this landmark conference brings together financial experts, central bankers, financial 
regulators,  lawyers,  financial  institutions  and  Islamic  banking  consumers  from  Kenya  and 
beyond.  To  all  international  participants,  let  me  extend  a  particularly  hearty  welcome, 
“Karibuni Kenya”.  
This  conference  gives  participants 
industry 
developments as well as reflect on the gains and challenges since the last Islamic Finance 
Conference held in May last year.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: Sharia compliant banking is viewed by many as the fastest growing 
segment  of  the  banking  sector  in  the  world.  In  Africa,  Islamic  banking  is  a  fast  growing 
financial sector attracting all customers even of different religious orientation.  
The  uptake  of  Islamic  banking  is  projected  to  grow  exponentially  in  sub-Saharan  Africa. 
Kenya  is  among  other  African  countries,  that  are  taking  up  the  lead  in  Sharia  compliant 
banking services.  
Today,  Sharia  compliant  banking  services  in  Kenya  have  made  huge  strides  since  its 
introduction in 2007. The banking sector boasts of two exclusively Sharia compliant banks. 
As at the financial year ended December 31, 2010 the two banks collectively commanded a 
market share of 0.9% of the banking sector with gross assets of Ksh.16.54bn, net loans and 
advances  of  Ksh.9.23bn  and  deposits  of  Ksh.13.76bn.  The  two  banks  had  58,101  deposit 
accounts and 2,609 loan accounts as at the end of December 2010 – in less than 4 years of 
operation.  
In addition, several conventional banks now offer Sharia compliant products as part of their 
product  range  through  specifically  created  Islamic  banking  divisions  or  windows.  Other 
conventional banks have also expressed interest in providing Sharia compliant products to 
an increasing customer base.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Among  the  challenges  facing  Kenya’s  ambition  to  be  a  hub  of 
Sharia compliant investment products to compliment the Islamic banking in the country are 
lack of; Shariah compliant investment vehicles, an enabling legal and regulatory framework 
and awareness by majority of the populace that hinder the uptake of these investments. For 
the country to fully embrace Islamic Finance, there is need to extend beyond the offering of 
Sharia compliant products by introducing such investment vehicles like unit trusts, corporate 
bonds  (sukuks)  and  insurance  (takaful)  products  and  Sharia  compliant  treasury  bills  and 
bonds (government Sukuk).  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
It is encouraging to note the ongoing efforts by the Government and other players especially 
the Capital Markets Authority and Insurance Regulatory Authority to come up with a range of 
shariah compliant financial products. Already there are positive signals of these efforts with 
the introduction of Shariah compliant investments and Insurance Products.  
It  is  in  this  spirit  that  the  Kenyan  government  through  the  Finance  Act  2010,  amended 
Section 45 of the Central Bank of Kenya Act, to allow the Central Bank as the Government’s 
fiscal  agent  to  recognize  the  payment  of  a  “return”  rather  than  “interest”  on  government 
securities. This amendment opens up the spectrum of Sharia compliant investments in the 
country.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: The future of Islamic finance in Kenya and in the region remains 
bright. On its part, the Government of Kenya will continue to pursue policies that create an 
enabling environment that will eventually culminate in Kenya establishing itself as a regional 
financial  hub  as  envisaged  in  Vision  2030.  In  addition,  the  Central  Bank  will  continue  to 
partner with the sector to promote financial inclusion by supporting innovation in the Sharia 
compliant banking sector.  
With these few remarks, let me wish all participants to this conference, fruitful deliberations 
over  the  next  two  days  and  declare  the  3rd  Gulf  African  Bank  Annual  East  and  Central 
African Islamic Conference officially opened.  
Thank You. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
