Mervyn King: Do we need an international monetary system? 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  at  the  2011  Economic 
Summit,  Stanford  Institute  for  Economic  Policy  Research  (SIEPR),  Stanford,  California, 
11 March 2011. 
 I am indebted to Charlie Bean, Martin Brooke, Oliver Bush, Ed Dew, Katie Farrant, Andrew Hauser, Jenny Scott, 
Misa Tanaka and Iain de Weymarn who have worked closely with me in preparing this speech, and to Michelle 
Wright and Rumman Khan for their excellent assistance in preparing the empirical and historical research. 
No country, however large or small, is an economic island. Trade has always been the key to 
faster economic growth and higher living standards. Some of the most successful examples 
of economic development have followed the path of export-led growth, and some of the most 
unsuccessful have not. South Korea, for example, exports the same amount of manufactures 
in a day as Egypt exports in a month, and its GDP per head is now five times higher. And 
trade is not restricted to goods. The days when trade was measured by weight or volume of 
cargo through our ports have, by and large, gone. Services account for around a fifth of world 
trade, a proportion that is growing. 
The expansion of trade in services is related to the rise of technologies that make it easier to 
transmit  services  around  the  world.  Within  a  few  miles  of  this  conference  room  are 
companies  like  Apple,  Facebook  and  Google  that  have  transformed  the  way  in  which 
services can be provided worldwide. And even the older services have become tradable – 
over  the  course  of  a  century  the  All  England  Lawn  Tennis  Club  Championships  at 
Wimbledon  have  grown  from  a  small  local  tournament  to  the  world’s  premier  tennis  event 
driven by a global television audience of around 400 million people in 187 countries (as many 
as are members of the IMF). 
But  international  trade  requires  a  monetary  system  to  flourish  –  the  rise  of  the  successful 
Asian economies would never have occurred if they had been restricted to barter. If flexible 
exchange  rates  were  allowed  to  determine  the  relative  values  of  different  currencies  in 
competitive markets, why should there be any need for “rules of the game” or an international 
currency? Indeed, is the phrase “international monetary system” an oxymoron? That leads to 
the question I want to discuss today: what is meant by the international monetary system and 
do we need one? 
Over the years, views on the need for “rules of the game” governing international payments 
have  ebbed  and  flowed.  So  it  is  not  surprising  that  France  has  chosen  the  international 
monetary system as a theme of its presidency of the G20 this year. 
Why not leave these issues to market forces? What are the externalities in the international 
monetary system which mean that one country’s actions distort the choices open to others? 
The  main  externalities  in  today’s  international  monetary  system  are  most  visible  in  the 
interaction  between  the  advanced  and  emerging  economies.  The  rising  importance  of  the 
emerging economies has perhaps been the most important development since the Bretton 
Woods  framework  of  fixed  exchange  rates  was  abandoned  in  the  early  1970s.  China  and 
India alone have brought 2 ½ billion people into the world trading system, with many more in 
other countries such as Brazil and Russia. And over the next five years, emerging economies 
are expected to account for almost three quarters of total growth in world output. 
Trade has promoted development in China and other emerging markets, and has benefited 
the  rest  of  the  world  as  the  costs  of  a  range  of  traded  goods  and  services,  particularly 
manufactured  goods,  have  been  driven  down.  But  the  emergence  of  the  accompanying 
imbalances in current accounts had huge effects on the global pattern of spending. Between 
1998 and 2006, annual output in high-saving economies expanded by around $10 trillion – 
$1trillion  more  than  the  growth  in  domestic  demand  in  the  same  economies.  The  rise  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
output relative to demand in the high-saving countries was only possible because there were 
matching  capital  flows.  Capital  flowed  “uphill”  from  many  of  the  emerging  markets  to 
advanced  deficit  economies,  not  an  obvious  sign  of  capital  moving  to  exploit  profitable 
investment  opportunities.  The  deficit  countries  –  predominately  the  US,  UK,  Australia  and 
countries  in  the  euro-area  periphery  –  were  borrowing  almost  $1trillion  dollars  more  each 
year  by  2006  than  they  had  been  in  1998.  This  created  unsustainable  paths  for  domestic 
demand, net debt and long-term real interest rates. 
Whether households or policymakers truly understood how unsustainable these paths were 
is hard to know. But the extent of the resulting financial fragility became all too apparent in 
late  2008.  Credit  supply  in  many  of  the  advanced  economies  froze,  confidence  collapsed 
around  the  world  and  private  demand  fell  sharply.  Output  was  cushioned  only  through  an 
unprecedented policy response around the world. That did bring an end to the sharp falls in 
output,  and  allowed  confidence  to  recover  somewhat.  And  in  many  countries,  particularly 
those that did not suffer directly from banking crises, output has bounced back. 
Yet  this  extraordinary  policy  response  has  simply  postponed  much  of  the  required 
adjustment  in  spending  patterns  around  the  world.  And  long-term  real  interest  rates  are 
unsustainably low. 
The challenges of sustainability are most evident in vulnerable euro-area periphery countries. 
Unable  to  sustain  domestic  spending  through  further  borrowing  they  are  now  struggling  to 
substitute  external  demand  for  domestic  spending.  They  face  a  major  challenge  to  raise 
output by enough to allow them to service existing debt and to bring unemployment down. 
This is particularly difficult within a currency union because, without a flexible exchange rate, 
it is not easy for them to lower domestic prices relative to those overseas. And even if that 
were  possible,  the  burden  of  debt,  denominated  in  nominal  terms,  would  rise  relative  to 
income. These countries, then, are heavily dependent on the pattern of spending elsewhere 
and would benefit greatly from an expansion in domestic demand in countries with stronger 
balance sheets. 
The main lesson from the experience of the imbalances is that national policy frameworks 
alone were unable to prevent domestic demand from growing at an unsustainable rate. Inter-
temporal  budget  constraints  do  not  exercise  the  same  discipline  as  constraints  that  are 
immediately  binding.  So  unsustainable  paths  of  spending  and  precarious  stock  positions 
developed. As a result, abrupt, and costly, adjustment at some point in the future was always 
likely. 
Markets can enforce inter-temporal  budget constraints only over a long-time horizon. As  a 
result,  countries  can  pursue  inconsistent  policies  for  long  periods,  and  a  range  of 
imperfections  in  the  financial  system  encourages  them  to  do  so.  An  example  of  those 
imperfections is that opportunities to insure against exchange rate fluctuations are limited – 
markets  are  incomplete.  Exchange  rates  can  move  in  surprising  and  unpredictable  ways. 
Over the past twenty years, the ratio of the highest to the lowest dollar-yen exchange rate 
was almost 2 to 1, and the same was true of the dollar-euro rate. The difficulty in insuring 
against  such  swings  means  that  this  volatility  can  induce  large  fluctuations  in  output  with 
unnecessary  costs  incurred  in  the  relocation  of  resources  and  employment.  Fixed,  or 
managed, exchange rate regimes may help to limit the real economic costs of “excessive” 
volatility  that  reflects  short-lived  shifts  in  market  sentiment,  but  if  they  impede  desirable 
adjustments of real exchange rates, they contribute to unsustainable patterns of spending. 
There  are  other  reasons  why  emerging  economies,  in  particular,  have  managed  their 
exchange rates. Perhaps the most important is that pushing down on the exchange rate is a 
means to pursue a strategy of export-led growth. Another motive, important in the wake of 
the Asian financial crisis, was to build up large precautionary balances of foreign exchange 
reserves as a way of insuring against sudden reversals in capital flows, especially of short-
term bank lending, that proved so damaging in the 1990s. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Such policies distorted saving and exchange rates, and created large capital flows unrelated 
to the distribution of profitable real investment opportunities. Given imperfections in financial 
markets in both borrowing and lending countries, such capital flows can lead to a degree of 
fragility, such that, when adjustment comes, there is a high probability that it will be abrupt. 
For example, the distortion from a “too important to fail” implicit subsidy to the funding costs 
of banks in the industrialised world led to excessive leverage in these countries. Creditors 
were prepared to lend at lower rates and on a greater scale than they would have without the 
implicit  subsidy.  In  other  countries,  financial  repression  artificially  raised  saving  rates  by 
making  borrowing  too  costly.  This  highlights  the  need  to  focus  reform  efforts  on  the 
international monetary and financial system (IMFS). 
There are, therefore, both “good” and “bad” imbalances. On the one hand, the advantage of 
globalisation is that it allows savings to flow to where the rate of return on new investment is 
highest. On the other hand, imbalances can be a symptom of distortions to the price signals 
in  the  economy,  leading  to  unsustainable  patterns  of  capital  flows  and  spending  that  are 
costly  to  correct.  Distinguishing  between  them  will  never  be  easy,  but  is  necessary  when 
setting  monetary,  fiscal  and  financial  policy.  But  we  should  assess  imbalances  in  terms  of 
whether  their  consequences  are  “good”  or  “bad”  –  that  is,  whether  they  are  creating  a 
distorting externality. 
So  how  should  we  reform  the  current  system  of  monetary  arrangements?  If  problems 
abound,  there  is  certainly  no  shortage  of  proposed  solutions.  Since  Bretton  Woods,  there 
have  been  regular  suggestions  for  changing  from  fixed  to  flexible  exchange  rates,  or  the 
other  way  round,  returning  to  the  gold  standard,  creating  a  new  international  currency, 
changing the composition of the currency basket comprising Special Drawing Rights (SDRs), 
abolishing  or  introducing  controls  on  capital  flows,  and  providing  new  ways  of  holding 
currency reserves. 
What  is  much  less  clear,  however,  is  the  problem  to  which  these  proposed  solutions  are 
thought  to  be  the  answer.  I  have  suggested  that  we  need  to  analyse  more  carefully  the 
imperfections,  or  frictional  costs,  which  make  a  regime  of  floating  exchange  rates  an 
insufficient answer in itself. The crucial frictional costs, it seems to me, are those associated 
with  a  sharp  fall  in  output  and  employment  following  an  abrupt  adjustment  in  the  current 
account, whether brought about by a sudden movement in exchange rates or the collapse of 
a financial system. They reflect distortions of the price signals for inter-temporal saving and 
financing decisions. Both the Asian and the recent financial crisis were vivid illustrations of 
how  large  those  costs  can  be.  Central  to  any  solution  is  a  problem  that  has  not  been 
resolved since the Bretton Woods conference in 1944, namely the asymmetric pressures on, 
and responsibilities of, deficit and surplus countries to adjust their spending patterns. 
In trying to deal with this central question, we should not get sidetracked by issues such as 
changing  the  composition  of  the  SDR  basket.  The  SDR  is  a  reserve  asset,  not  a  reserve 
currency, and as such has rather little to do with the emergence of unsustainable levels of 
spending and interest rates. 
Our  predecessors  were  well  aware  of  the  central  issue.  At  Bretton  Woods,  both  American 
and British officials presented proposals for schemes to impose more symmetric obligations 
on both surplus and deficit countries. For the United States, Harry Dexter White, an alumnus 
of Stanford, put forward the idea of a “scarce currency” clause for the Articles of the IMF. And 
his British counterpart, John Maynard Keynes, proposed an International Clearing Union with 
penalties on large surpluses or deficits (his suggestion of a new currency, the bancor, was 
included primarily because at the time national currencies were not convertible). His aim was 
to ensure symmetric obligations. As he wrote in 1941,  
“[T]he social strain of an adjustment downwards is much greater than that of an 
adjustment upwards. And besides this, the process of adjustment is compulsory 
for  the  debtor  and  voluntary  for  the  creditor.  If  the  creditor  does  not  choose  to 
make,  or  allow,  his  share  of  the  adjustment,  he  suffers  no  inconvenience.  For 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
whilst a country’s reserve cannot fall below zero, there is no ceiling which sets an 
upper  limit.  The  same  is  true  if  international  loans  are  to  be  the  means  of 
adjustment. The debtor must borrow; the creditor is under no such compulsion”. 
And ever since then, the absence of an effective symmetric framework of obligations on both 
debtor  and  creditor  countries  has  led  to  periodic  crises.  The  obstacle  to  the  creation  of  a 
binding framework is clear. Governments know whether they are debtors or creditors today. 
So a framework that has economic and indeed moral force when seen from behind the “veil 
of ignorance”, as suggested by John Rawls, is unlikely to appeal to governments. 
Should we conclude, therefore, that in the absence of a world government, the identification 
of “new rules of the game” is likely to be no more than a theoretical exercise? Certainly, the 
fate  of  Keynes’  proposal  for  an  International  Clearing  Union  is  not  encouraging.  But  the 
experience of the past twenty years shows that large imbalances mean that everyone suffers 
when there is a sharp adjustment. 
So there is scope, if not for formal international policy coordination, then for an international 
conversation  about  how  to  improve  a  system  that  is  fragile.  Central  banks  were  able  to 
ensure, for a while, that the paths of output were sustainable – consistent with low and stable 
inflation.  But  the  patterns  of  demand  were  far  from  sustainable.  And  when  the  sharp 
adjustment to demand eventually came, it inevitably had implications for the level of output. 
Reform of the IMFS, and of our domestic financial systems, is a necessary complement to 
the domestic price stability oriented policy frameworks of central banks. 
The immediate issue of how to move to a more sustainable position requires a resolution of 
different  countries’  economic  strategies  for  rebalancing.  There  can  be  only  one  path  for 
rebalancing – with rebalancing in the deficit economies, by definition, just a mirror of that in 
the surplus countries. But the path that would be chosen by high-saving economies differs 
from  that  which  the  more  indebted  industrialised  economies  would  prefer.  Their  need  to 
deleverage and reduce borrowing means that if another abrupt adjustment is to be avoided, 
they  cannot  risk  taking  too  long  to  rebalance  their  economies.  In  contrast,  many  of  the 
emerging economies continue to require rapid economic growth and abundant employment 
opportunities in their export industries to ensure adequate levels of employment for their vast 
populations. As a result, policymakers in countries like China quite simply see limits to the 
extent  and  speed  at  which  they  should  expand  the  share  of  domestic  demand  in  their 
economies. They do not want to rebalance their economies too quickly. Of course, ex post 
there must be consistency between these two strategies as demand in the world as a whole 
must “add up”.  
The current pattern of demand in the world economy is unsustainable. The political tension 
generated by the divergent preferences of surplus and deficit countries risks moves towards 
protectionism, as happened in the 1930s. So there must be scope, in the short term, for a 
“grand bargain” to adopt a set of policies that would support an agreed path of rebalancing 
and avert a move towards protectionism. 
Such a “grand bargain” should be the central objective of the G20’s Framework for Strong, 
Sustainable and Balanced Growth. It would require a shared analysis, seemingly absent at 
present, of the relative importance of the “good” and “bad” aspects of the imbalances. And it 
should  comprise  (i)  an  agreed  path  for  the  reduction  or  increase  of  net  exports  relative  to 
domestic demand; (ii) an agreed framework for allowing real exchange rates to support the 
path for unwinding the imbalances; (iii) a set of rules governing the circumstances in which 
countries would be able to limit short-term capital flows; (iv) macro-prudential policies to limit 
the build-up of imbalances and add to the instruments available to pursue financial stability; 
and  (v)  structural  policies,  including  fiscal  measures,  to  raise  national  savings  in  deficit 
countries  and  to  lower  savings  in  surplus  countries.  Some  combination  of  all  of  these 
elements will be necessary in order to chart a path back to sustainability. 
There  are  pitfalls  to  avoid.  Too  often  the  policy  response  to  a  sharp  adjustment  to  an 
unsustainable position starts and ends with the provision of liquidity. Rarely, however, is the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
problem  a  temporary  shortage  of  liquidity.  As  we  have  seen  since  2007,  and  on  many 
occasions before that, most players – whether financial institutions or countries – would like 
others to believe that greater provision of liquidity is the answer. Almost always the provision 
of liquidity works only when it is the bridge to a more fundamental solution. 
Once  rebalancing  has  been  achieved,  there  will  be  the  longer-term  question  of  how  we 
prevent  a  recurrence.  There  is  no  world  government  to  impose  “rules  of  the  game”  to 
internalise  the  externalities.  So  the  solution  can  be  found  only  in  cooperation  between 
nations. At present, the plethora of international meetings offers many chances to see the 
world, if not actually to save it. Ultimately, only the Bretton Woods institutions themselves – 
the  IMF  and  the  World  Bank  –  have  the  legitimacy  to  represent  all  of  their  187  member 
countries. But their governance is outdated. At the height of the crisis, the G20 and the G7 
provided strong leadership. But legitimacy and leadership should go together. One without 
the other does not offer a sustainable vehicle for international cooperation. So allowing the 
G20 to metamorphose into the governing body of the IMF makes a good deal of sense. Such 
an  evolution  would,  with  a  little  commitment  and  imagination,  create  a  single  effective 
framework for international economic cooperation. And in the long run a more powerful and 
legitimate international body might be able to use its clout to deal with the imperfections and 
frictions that I have discussed. It might even be the vehicle for a more rules-based framework 
for the IMFS, based on a judgement about the sustainability of the pattern of world demand. 
Although  that  seems  a  distant  prospect  today,  there  is  a  precedent  for  a  system  of 
internalising cross-border externalities: the WTO already plays a similar role in international 
trade.  So  far,  these  rules  have  stood  the  test  of  time.  Indeed,  it  is  now  more  likely  that 
protectionism  would result from high unemployment, which the rules  were not designed to 
prevent, than the pressures from producers which have been resisted. 
There is much to do. None of the underlying causes of the current crisis have been removed. 
The problem of “too important to fail” banks is still with us. And even more intractable is the 
challenge  of  how  to  reconcile  free  trade  with  a  stable  international  monetary  and  financial 
system. 
Today,  the  most  obvious  problem  at  the  global  level  is  that  the  imbalances  are  growing 
again.  And  continuing  high  debt  levels,  although  in  many  ways  a  natural  response  to  low 
long-term interest rates, leave indebted countries particularly vulnerable to a rapid reversal of 
high saving rates in surplus countries and a rise in long-term interest rates – surely inevitable 
in the long run – which would drive down asset prices. It is clear that these vulnerabilities 
affect us all. So recognising our common interest in moving to a more sustainable pattern of 
world demand is in our self-interest. 
The  global  community  showed  that  it  could  work  together  when  the  world  economy  was 
close to the abyss in 2008. The challenge now is to prove that we can also work together 
when we are no longer in an immediate crisis, but still facing deep-seated problems. Will we 
create a more stable IMFS? The next few years will provide the answer. And they will, as our 
Chinese friends say, be interesting. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
