Duvvuri Subbarao: Central bank governance issues – some RBI 
perspectives 
Comments by Mr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the meeting 
of  the  Central  Bank  Governance  Group,  Bank  for  International  Settlements,  Basel, 
9 May 2011. 
 1. 
Thank  you  for  this  opportunity  to  speak  on  some  central  bank  governance  issues 
from the perspective of the Reserve Bank of India (RBI). I will raise some specific issues. But 
before  getting  into  them,  I  want  to  make  two  broad  comments  about  the  mandate  of  the 
Reserve Bank and our systems of autonomy and accountability. That will give you the broad 
context for appreciating the specific issues that I will raise later. 
The  legal  mandate  for  our  other  key  functions  and  responsibilities  comes  from 
RBI’s mandate 
2. 
RBI has a mandate that is wider than is typical of central banks. The preamble to the 
RBI Act, 19341 describes its main functions as “...to regulate the issue of Bank Notes and 
keeping  of  reserves  with  a  view  to  securing  monetary  stability  in  India  and  generally  to 
operate  the  currency  and  credit  system  of  the  country  to  its  advantage.”  This  preamble 
indicates the two core functions of the Reserve Bank: (i) issue of currency; and (ii) monetary 
authority. The Act also entrusts other functions to the Reserve Bank such as regulation of 
non-bank financial institutions, management of foreign exchange reserves, management of 
sovereign debt – by statute in respect of central government and by agreement in respect of 
state governments – and regulation of forex, money and government securities markets and 
their derivatives. 
3. 
specific statutes: 
 
The Banking Regulation Act, 1949 together with the RBI Act, gives us the power to 
regulate and supervise commercial banks and cooperative banks. 
The Foreign Exchange  Management Act, 1999 empowers the RBI to regulate the 
foreign exchange market. 
The  Payment  &  Settlement  Systems  Act,  2007  mandates  RBI  to  regulate  and 
supervise the payment and settlement systems. 
4. 
All the statutes put together make the Reserve Bank a full service central bank. We 
are the issuer of currency and are the monetary authority. We regulate and supervise banks, 
non-bank financial companies and segments of the financial markets. We are the banker and 
debt  manager  to  the  Government.  We  are  the  gate  keepers  of  the  external  sector.  We 
regulate  and  supervise  the  payment  and  settlement  system.  Being  both  the  monetary 
authority and banking sector regulator gives us also the principal responsibility for financial 
stability. 
                                                   
1  The legislation to establish a central bank for India was passed in 1934 and the Reserve Bank of India came 
into being a year later in 1935. The Bank was set up on the basis of the recommendations of the Hilton Young 
Commission. Earlier in 1913, John Maynard Keynes who served as an officer of British Administration in India, 
had  proposed  a  “State  Bank”  to  be  set  up  in  India,  which  was  to  engage  in  both  central  banking  and 
commercial banking functions. Keynes proposed that the Bank be run by a Central Board consisting of the 
Governor, the Deputy Governor, a representative of Government and three or more non-voting assessors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Even as the Reserve Bank’s statutory  mandate is wide compared to that of other 
5. 
central banks, what really sets us apart is the key role the Reserve Bank has had in driving 
India’s development agenda. Several national level programmes such as those for the flow of 
credit to the agriculture sector and for small and medium industries were initially designed 
and implemented by the Reserve Bank. The apex national institutions for agriculture credit 
(NABARD), industrial finance (IDBI) are offshoots of what were once departments within the 
Reserve  Bank.  The  Reserve  Bank  has  been  at  the  forefront  in  nurturing  institutions  and 
developing financial markets in India – the money market, the foreign exchange market and 
the government securities market. Efforts in recent years have focussed on enhancing the 
depth, integrity, transparency and efficiency of these markets. 
6. 
The Reserve Bank pioneered the Lead Bank Scheme in 1969 whereby a designated 
bank in each district coordinates the flow of credit from all institutions in the district in support 
of the district credit plan. The Reserve Bank also issues directions and monitors the priority 
sector lending scheme, whereby all commercial banks are required to set apart a prescribed 
share of their total advances to priority sector. In recent times, the Reserve Bank has been 
leading the effort towards financial inclusion and financial literacy with the aim of eventually 
providing all households in the country meaningful access to the formal financial sector. 
Autonomy and accountability 
7. 
My second introductory comment is about autonomy and accountability. Neither the 
RBI  Act  nor  any  rules  lay  down  a  formal  accountability  mechanism.  In  the  absence  of  a 
specific formulation, the fallback is on the general principle underlying a democracy – which 
is to render accountability to the parliament through the Finance Minister. The Reserve Bank 
assists  the  Finance  Minister  in  answering  parliament  questions  that  pertain  to  its  domain. 
Besides,  the  Standing  Committee  on  Finance  of  Parliament  summons  the  Governor  for 
testimony on specific issues including legislations under consideration. 
8. 
As regards autonomy, the Reserve Bank has not been accorded autonomy under 
the statute. The RBI Act lays down that the Central Government may give directions to the 
Bank, from time to time, after consultation with the Governor, where considered necessary in 
public interest. 
9. 
To  an  untutored  observer,  the  above  arrangements  present  a  picture  of  a  central 
bank  with  limited  autonomy,  and  that  too  enjoyed  at  the  pleasure  of  the  Government, 
juxtaposed with relatively loose systems of accountability. 
10. 
The  reality,  however,  is  quite  different.  RBI  in  effect  functions  with  a  functionally 
autonomous mandate and there has been no instance so far of the Government exercising 
its reserve powers to issue a directive. This is all the more remarkable since the interaction 
between the Government and the Reserve Bank is closer and more frequent than is typical in 
other  countries,  and  this  draws  from  the  key  role  of  the  Reserve  Bank  in  financial  sector 
reforms and economic development. But this close relationship has not spilled over into the 
Government encroaching on the Reserve Bank’s autonomy in making monetary policy and 
regulatory policy. 
11. 
The systems of accountability too are not loose contrary to what the formal picture 
might  suggest.  Since  we  are  not  an  inflation  targeting  central  bank,  there  is  no  formal 
memorandum of understanding (MOU) or a “Results Agreement” between the Government 
and  the  Reserve  Bank.  Nevertheless,  we  render  accountability  for  our  performance  on 
inflation.  We  explain  the  rationale  for  our  monetary  policy  stance  quite  extensively. 
Importantly,  the  Governor  addresses  a  press  conference  following  each  policy  review  in 
order to disseminate the specifics of the policy and the expected outcomes, and to respond 
to  questions  from  the  media.  This  is  followed  by  structured  interviews  in  the  print  and 
electronic  media.  Our  latest  initiative  in  the  dissemination  process  is  a  post-policy 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
teleconference with researchers and analysts where the Governor and the Deputy Governors 
respond to questions from them. 
12. 
For most of the other important, non-monetary policy decisions, it has now become 
standard practice for the Reserve Bank to consult with stakeholders and call for feedback on 
the draft policy before a final decision is taken. 
13. 
One  of  the  determinants  of  rendering  accountability  is  the  quality  of  accounting 
standards and of financial reporting and disclosure. The RBI complies with best practices in 
accounting,  and  marks  to  market  its  holdings  of  domestic  and  foreign  currency  assets. 
However, only realised gains are recognised as income. Disclosures provided in the Annual 
Report of the RBI are fairly comprehensive and provide disaggregated analysis in respect of 
all major balance sheet heads including reserves and income and expenditure. 
14. 
The sum and substance of this is that RBI renders accountability not as a matter of 
compliance  with  a  specific  provision  of  law  but  as  a  matter  of  self-discipline  required  of  a 
responsible public institution, and this self-discipline has over time got enshrined into a code 
of conduct. 
15. 
systems of accountability, let me turn to some specific governance issues. 
After  these introductory  comments  on  the  mandate  of  the Reserve  Bank,  and  our 
Formulation of monetary policy 
16. 
Monetary policy decisions are made by the Governor. There is no formal committee 
structure like the FOMC of the Fed or the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) of the Bank of 
England. The Governor holds structured consultations with the four Deputy Governors and 
they constitute an informal MPC although a committee structure is not enjoined under the law 
or the rules. By its very nature there is no voting in this committee and the final call is that of 
the Governor.  
17. 
We do have a Technical Advisory Committee (TAC) on Monetary Policy that acts as 
a proxy policy committee, but it is advisory in nature. It comprises the Governor as chairman, 
the  Deputy  Governor  in  charge  of  monetary  policy  as  the  vice  chairman  and  other  three 
Deputy Governors as members. Besides, the committee has five external members, two of 
whom are experts from the Central Board of the Bank while the other three are drawn from a 
wider  pool.  The  external  members  are  nominated  by  the  Governor.  They  give  specific 
recommendations on policy options and these are minuted. We have recently started putting 
the minutes of the meeting in the public domain, including specific recommendations, without 
directly identifying members with their advice. 
Ahead of each quarterly monetary policy announcement, there is also an extensive 
18. 
financial  market 
process  of  structured  consultation  by 
representatives,  trade  bodies  and  industry  associations.  We  also  convene  a  meeting  of 
economists and analysts twice a year, ahead of the annual policy in April and the second 
quarter policy in October. 
19. 
Finally, close to the policy decision, an established practice for the Governor is to 
meet the Prime Minister and the Finance Minister informally, give them an assessment of the 
macroeconomic  situation  and  indicate  to  them  his  proposed  policy  stance.  This  is  only  a 
matter of courtesy, and the process has not impinged on the autonomy of the Reserve Bank 
in monetary policy making. The consultation with the Finance Minister, in particular, should 
be  seen  as  an  avenue  for  fiscal-monetary  coordination,  since  on  a  reciprocal  basis,  the 
Finance  Minister  too  takes  the  Governor  into  confidence  on  the  fiscal  stance  ahead  of 
presenting the budget to the Parliament. 
20. 
An issue that comes up often is that even as the current system is working, whether 
we might be better served by having a formal MPC with its majority advice becoming binding. 
My own view is that we should be moving towards an MPC system, but in a phased manner. 
the  Governor  with  banks, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
There  are  some  pre-conditions  to  be  met.  First,  the  central  bank  should  be  given 
legally-backed  formal  autonomy.  Second,  in  a  situation  where  inflation  dynamics  are  more 
often  dictated  by  supply  side  elements,  the  central  bank’s  ability  to  control  inflation  is 
restricted. An MPC mechanism in such a situation can weaken the coordination between the 
Government  and  the  Reserve  Bank.  However,  when  our  financial  markets  deepen  further, 
operating procedures improve and monetary transmission becomes more efficient, shifting to 
an MPC system becomes a realistic option. 
Inflation targeting 
21. 
 Inflation targeting, by its very nature, is an issue in central bank governance. The 
defining  features  of  an  inflation  targeting  central  bank  are  a  precise  mandate,  a  single 
instrument (the policy interest rate) in its armoury, a single minded devotion to achieving this 
target and a principal-agent relationship with the Government.  
22. 
The Reserve Bank is not an inflation targeting central bank. Nevertheless there is an 
influential  view  that  our  economy  will  be  better  served  if  the  Reserve  Bank  becomes  one. 
The  argument  is  that  inflation  hurts  much  more  in  a  country  like  India  with  hundreds  of 
millions  of  poor  people  and  that  the  Reserve  Bank  will  be  more  effective  in  combating 
inflation if it is not burdened with other objectives. 
23. 
This argument is contestable. Inflation targeting is neither feasible nor advisable in 
India, and for several reasons. First, in an emerging economy like ours, it is not practical for 
the central bank to focus exclusively on inflation oblivious of the larger development context. 
The Reserve Bank cannot escape from the difficult challenge of weighing the growth-inflation 
trade off in determining its monetary policy stance. 
24. 
Second, the drivers of inflation in India often emanate from the supply side which 
are normally beyond the pale of monetary policy. In particular, given the low income levels, 
food  items have  a  relatively  larger  weight  in  the  consumption  basket  in  India compared  to 
advanced economies and even many emerging market economies. We have three consumer 
price  indices  each  covering  different  segments  of  the  population  with  the  weight  for  food 
ranging  between  46–70  per  cent.  Monetary  Policy,  as  is  well  known,  is  an  ineffective 
instrument  for  reining  in  inflation  emanating  from  supply  pressures.  It  is  unrealistic,  under 
these  circumstances,  to  expect  the  Reserve  Bank  to  deliver  on  an  inflation  target  in  the 
short-term. 
An  alternative  that  is  put  forward  is  that  we  could  target  core  inflation  rather  than 
25. 
headline inflation. That is not a feasible solution either. An inflation index, with half the basket 
excluded from it, hardly reflects reality. Moreover, the exclusion of food from the core index 
can be justified if average food inflation is the same as the average non-food inflation. If food 
inflation is higher, as is typically the case in many low income countries including India, then 
we would be underestimating inflationary pressures on a systemic basis. That would mislead 
policy prescriptions.2 
26. 
Even if, for the sake of argument, we settle on inflation targeting, we have a problem 
about which inflation index to target. The headline inflation index is the wholesale price index 
(WPI), and that does not, by definition, reflect the consumer price situation. However, getting 
a single representative inflation rate for a large economy with 1.2 billion people, fragmented 
markets  and  diverse  geography  is  a  formidable  challenge.  The  recent  introduction  of 
CPI-Urban and CPI-Rural is welcome, but it still does not solve the problem of heterogeneity. 
                                                 
2 
In  our  case,  over  the  last  six  years  average  food  inflation  (8.7  per  cent)  has  been  more  than  double  of 
non-food inflation (4.0 per cent). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Finally,  a  necessary  condition  for  inflation  targeting  to  work  is  efficient  monetary 
27. 
transmission. In India, monetary transmission has been improving but is still a fair bit away 
from best practice. There are several factors inhibiting the transmission process such as an 
asymmetric relationship between depositors and banks, administered interest rates on postal 
savings that are not adjusted in line with prevailing interest rate trends and rigidities in the 
financial markets. All these factors dampen the efficacy of monetary signals and complicate 
the adoption of an inflation targeting regime in India. 
28. 
Importantly,  there  is  a  political  economy  argument  too  against  the  Reserve  Bank 
becoming an inflation targetter. The intellectual basis for central bank independence draws 
from Rogoff’s conservative central bank construct. The construct is based on the assumption 
that  governments  tend  to  favour  growth  and  employment  while  central  banks,  left  to 
themselves,  would  seek  to  lower  inflation.  Precise  inflation  targeting  formalizes  this 
arrangement  and  dilutes  the  scope  for  interference  in  each  other’s  domain.  Such 
independent policy pursuits by the Government and the central bank, it is contended, serve 
the best interests of the national economy. 
29. 
This  assumption  does  not  hold  in  the  case  of  India  because  societal  tolerance  in 
India  for  inflation  is  low.  Given  the  compulsions  of  democracy  and  the  large  population  of 
poor,  any  government  in  India  has  always  to  be,  and  indeed  has  been,  sensitive  to  price 
stability even if it means sacrificing output in the short-term. So, the argument of divergence 
of natural preferences as between the government and the central bank that underpins the 
inflation targeting framework does not hold in the case of India. Indeed both the Government 
and the Reserve Bank have to factor in the short-term growth-inflation trade off in their policy 
calculations. 
Macroprudential regulation and supervision 
30. 
One  of  the  important  lessons  of  the  crisis  is  that  a  collection  of  healthy  financial 
institutions does not necessary make for a healthy financial system, and consequently that 
microprudential  regulation  and  supervision  at  the  individual  institution  level  have  to  be 
complemented by macroprudential regulation at the systemic level to guard financial stability. 
There  are  several  debates  that  have  surfaced  centred  around  this  issue  including,  what 
should be the ambit of macroprudential policies, what are the instruments to be used, should 
macroprudential  concerns  be  part  of  the  monetary  policy  calculus,  which  institution  or 
institutions  should  be  given  the  responsibilities  for  macroprudential  supervision  and  what 
should  be  the  arrangements  for  coordination.  All  the  above  questions  raise  several 
governance issues with political economy dimensions. 
31. 
Consider  the  context.  As  part  of  the  post-crisis  reforms  of  regulatory  architecture, 
there is an increasing trend of entrusting macroprudential supervision to central banks as an 
additional  responsibility.  Where  central  banks  already  have  this  responsibility,  it  is  being 
more explicitly defined. 
All policy decisions, as much as they are based on analytical constructs, eventually 
32. 
formulating 
involve  making 
macroprudential  policies.  This  is  so  because  formalizing  the  analytical  framework  for 
macroprudential policies, demanding as it does defining the metrics for identifying systemic 
risk and identifying the appropriate instruments, is conceptually more challenging than is the 
case for other policies. 
33. 
Possibly because of this judgement dimension, among central banks that are new to 
macroprudential  regulation  and  supervision,  there  is  an  apprehension  that  performing  this 
task will make them vulnerable to political interference. There is also an unstated fear that 
once a culture of political interference into central bank business gets a foothold, it will rapidly 
“spillover” into all areas of central bank business, including monetary policy, and thus erode 
the much prized autonomy of the central bank. 
judgement  plays  a  bigger 
judgements.  But 
role 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
The  Indian  experience  does  not  bear  out  this  apprehension.  Macroprudential 
34. 
regulation and supervision have historically been a part of the Reserve Bank’s mandate. Yet 
there  have  been  no  instances  of  political  influence  on  the  macro  prudential  policies  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  acting  in  its  capacity  as  the  regulator.  In  fact,  the  Reserve  Bank  enjoys  as 
much autonomy over its regulatory decisions as it does on its monetary policy decisions, and 
the political system has not tried to influence the Reserve Bank’s stance. 
35. 
Indeed,  in  spite  of  India  being  a  vigorous  democracy  with  very  little  that  remains 
outside  the  political  domain,  the  political  system  has  respected  the  Reserve  Bank’s 
autonomy  over  its  domain.  This  is  a  testimony  of  the  credibility  and  reputation  that  the 
Reserve Bank has earned for its professional integrity. The political system has an incentive 
in keeping it that way. 
Debt management office 
36. 
The  RBI  Act  mandates  the  Reserve  Bank  to  be  the  debt  manager  of  the  Central 
Government.  The  Reserve  Bank  also  manages  the  debt  of  state  governments  by  mutual 
agreement as provided in law. There is now a proposal to shift this function out of the central 
bank, and this has generated a debate around several governance issues.  
37. 
To set the context for this debate, it should be noted that the Reserve Bank has an 
impressive track record in debt management. Even as the Government’s borrowing had gone 
up  both  in  absolute  and  proportional  terms,  it  has  managed  to  complete  the  borrowing 
programme  in  a  cost  efficient  manner.  With  the  average  maturity  of  government  debt  at 
around 10 years, India has one of the longest maturity profiles in the world, which proved to 
be a source of major strength and comfort during the crisis. 
38. 
It could be argued that public debt management in India has been effective because 
the Reserve Bank, which is the monetary authority, is also entrusted this task. Nevertheless, 
the  progress  on  fiscal  consolidation  by  the  Government  in  the  years  before  the  crisis 
suggested  that  there  could  be  operational  efficiencies  to  be  gained  by  shifting  debt 
management  to  a  separate  Debt  Management  Office  (DMO).  The  Government  has 
accordingly set up a middle office of the DMO and is proposing to move forward with a Public 
Debt Management Agency of India Bill. 
39. 
There  is  need  to  reconsider  the  content  and  pace  of  this  process  in  view  of  the 
revised circumstances post-crisis. The case for shifting debt management function out of the 
central bank is made on several arguments such as resolving conflict of interest, reducing 
the  cost  of  debt,  facilitating  debt  consolidation  and  increasing  transparency.  These 
advantages are overstated. 
40. 
The most potent of these arguments is the one relating to conflict of interest. The 
other arguments pertain to mechanics of debt management which can be said to be model 
neutral. Let me, therefore focus on the conflict of interest issue. 
41. 
The  primary  conflict  which  is  generally  associated  with  a  central  bank  managing 
sovereign  debt  pertains  to  the  one  between  its  inherent  responsibility  as  the  monetary 
authority,  and  its  obligations  as  a  debt  manager.  In  particular,  it  is  argued  that  the  central 
bank will be biased towards a low interest regime in order to reduce the costs of sovereign 
debt  even  if  it  compromises  its  anti-inflation  stance.  A  similar  conflict  may  also  distort  the 
open market operations of the central bank. 
42. 
The  above  arguments,  though  valid  in  some  countries,  fail  to  recognize  that  in 
countries  such  as  India,  given  the  large  size  of  the  government  borrowing  program, 
sovereign debt management is much more than merely an exercise in resource raising. The 
size and dynamics of government borrowing program has a much wider influence on interest 
rate  movements,  systemic  liquidity  and  even  credit  growth  through  the  crowding  out  of 
private sector credit demand. Management of public debt, therefore, has necessarily to be 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
seen as part of broader macroeconomic management framework involving various tradeoffs. 
Once this is recognised, the centrality of central banks in this regard becomes quite evident. 
Only  central  banks  have  the  requisite  market  pulse  and  instruments  to  aid  in  making 
contextual judgements which an independent debt agency, driven by narrow objectives, will 
not be able to do. 
43. 
Also,  it  is  not  that  these  conflicts  would  disappear  merely  by  shifting  debt 
management  out  of  the  central  bank.  In  fact  resolving  those  conflicts  could  become  much 
more  complicated  leading  to  inferior  outcomes.  This  is  because  even  after  the  separation, 
the central bank would continue to be expected to manage the market volatility and market 
expectations arising out of government borrowing. 
44. 
Admittedly, a few years back, the challenges of managing the above conflicts in the 
then prevailing context seemed to weigh in favour of separation of debt management from 
the  central  bank.  The  constraining  factor,  even  then,  was  the  high  fiscal  deficit.  The  fiscal 
position, which was improving in the years before the crisis, got off-track during the crisis. 
The  Government  is  making  attempts  to  get  back  on  to  a  path  of  fiscal  consolidation  post-
crisis.  The  difference  as  far  as  the  Reserve  Bank  is  concerned  is  that  the  Fiscal 
Responsibility  and  Budget  Management  (FRBM)  Act,  2003  in  place  which  prohibits  the 
Reserve  Bank’s  participation  in  the  primary  auction  for  Government  securities.  A  separate 
mechanism for conveying monetary stance in the form of repo and reverse repo rates under 
the Bank’s Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) has been put in place in 2000. Furthermore, in 
a situation of excess capital flows requiring forex intervention from the Reserve Bank and the 
consequent sterilisation through issuance of Government bonds by the RBI, the coordination 
of debt management with monetary operations needs to continue. This makes the case for 
separation much weaker in the revised circumstances. 
45. 
In  the  Indian  context,  there  is  the  added  complexity  of  managing  the  debt  of  the 
states. The sensitivity of the states to entrust debt management to an agency of the Central 
Government  also  needs  to  be  kept  in  view  given  the  political-economy  dimensions  of  our 
federal structure. This is all the more important since market borrowings have emerged as 
the  dominant  source  of  deficit  financing  at  the  sub-national  level.  Taken  together,  the 
borrowing  by  states  has  attained  a  critical  mass  vis-a-vis  the  absorptive  capacity  of  the 
market.  That  makes  it  imperative  to  harmonise  the  market  borrowing  programmes  of  the 
Centre and the States. Separation of the Centre’s debt management from the central bank 
will make such harmonisation difficult. 
46. 
Thus,  on  balance,  as  long  as  there  are  institutionalized  mechanisms  to  negotiate 
various tradeoffs in a given context within the overarching objective of achieving monetary 
and financial stability, separation of debt management from central bank seems to be a sub-
optimal  choice.  Even  internationally,  the  emerging  post-crisis  wisdom  recognizes  the 
interdependence between the functions of monetary policy, financial stability and sovereign 
debt management and the need for close association of the central bank with sovereign debt 
management. 
Responsibility for financial stability 
47. 
The Reserve Bank’s mandate for ensuring financial stability arises mainly from its 
mandated  functions  of  regulator  of  the  banking  system,  regulator  and  supervisor  of  the 
payment  and  settlement  systems,  regulator  of  the  money,  forex,  government  security  and 
credit  markets,  banker  to  the  banks,  as  also  the  lender-of-the  last  resort.  This  unique 
combination  of 
regulation  and  microprudential 
supervision,  together  with  an  implicit  mandate  for  systemic  oversight  has  allowed  the 
Reserve  Bank  to  exploit  the  synergies  across  various  dimensions.  The  micro-level 
information coming from supervision of individual institutions has been a valuable input for 
shaping  the  macro  perspective.  On  the  other  hand,  the  broad  understanding  from 
for  macroprudential 
responsibilities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
macroprudential regulation has been effective in instituting prudential safeguards at the micro 
institution level.  
48. 
Financial stability is explicitly entering the objective function of central banks post-
crisis.  In  the  Reserve  Bank  though,  we  had  all  along  pursued  financial  stability  as  an 
important objective. Indeed, one of the main reasons the impact of the crisis on India has 
been  blunted  is  because  the  Reserve  Bank  tightened  the  provisioning  norms  and  risk 
weights  for  sub-sectors  that  experienced  rapid  credit  growth  in  the  years  before  the  crisis 
such as real estate and consumer credit. 
49. 
In India, there are other market regulators besides the Reserve Bank such as the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India (SEBI), the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority (IRDA) and the Pension Funds Regulatory and Developmental Authority (PFRDA) 
who contribute to the building block for financial stability. Nevertheless the Reserve Bank has 
played an apex role by tradition and by the fact that it regulates banks in a financial system 
that is bank-dominated. The channels of interconnection between banks and other financial 
sector entities are within the regulatory perimeter of the Reserve Bank. 
50. 
Though  the  Indian  financial  system  weathered  the  global  financial  crisis  relatively 
unscathed, there was enhanced focus on the regulation of financial system in India too in the 
wake of the global financial crisis. While the post-crisis debate in most countries was on the 
reform of the regulatory architecture, and what responsibilities to entrust to the central bank, 
the focus in India was on coordination amongst regulators. With a view to establishing a body 
to institutionalise and strengthen the mechanism for maintaining financial stability, financial 
sector  development  and  inter-regulatory  coordination,  in  December  2010,  the  Government 
constituted  the  Financial  Stability  and  Development  Council  (FSDC)  to  be  chaired  by  the 
Finance  Minister.  The  FSDC  is  to  be  assisted  by  a  Sub-Committee  to  be  chaired  by  the 
Governor,  RBI.  This  Sub-Committee  has  replaced  the  erstwhile  High  Level  Coordination 
Committee on Financial Markets (HLCCFM) under the chairmanship of Governor, RBI. While 
constituting the FSDC, the Government held out a clear assurance that the setting up of the 
FSDC will not in any way erode the autonomy of the regulators. 
51. 
In  terms  of  governance  structure,  the  two-tier  framework  of  FSDC  and  the 
Sub-Committee presents an interesting case. The crisis has clearly demonstrated the need 
for  explicit  delineation  of  responsibilities  for  financial  stability  across  agencies  and  the 
protocol for coordination among such agencies. The crisis has at the same time brought forth 
the critical stake of the sovereign in ensuring financial stability – the spillover costs in a crisis 
have to be borne by the governments. In the Indian context, the proposed FSDC structure 
attempts to strike a balance between the sovereign’s objective of ensuring financial stability 
to reduce the probability of a crisis and the operative arrangements involving the central bank 
and the regulators. While the Sub-Committee under the Governor, RBI is expected to evolve 
as a more active, hands-on body for managing financial stability in normal times, the FSDC 
would have a broad oversight and will assume central role in crisis times. 
52. 
Since  the  Reserve  Bank  has  historically  been  a  macroprudential  regulator,  not  all 
the governance issues surrounding financial stability that have emerged post-crisis are new 
to us. Nevertheless, there are always unknown unknowns and the system should be able to 
respond to them. Now that the regulatory architecture of the FSDC is in place, it is important 
for the Government and the regulators in India to develop conventions and practices which 
will  serve  the  goal  of  preserving  financial  stability  without  eroding  the  autonomy  of  the 
regulators. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
