Austin Mwape: Improving financial transactions in Zambia 
Speech  by  Dr  Austin  Mwape,  Deputy  Governor-Operations  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the 
Official Launch of “Airtel Money”, Lusaka, 14 September 2011. 
 The Managing Director of Airtel – Mr Fayaz King  
The Former First Lady, Mrs. Maureen Mwanawasa  
Management and Staff of Airtel  
Chief Executive Officers and Representatives of various institutions present  
Distinguished invited guests  
Members of the press  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
Let me begin by thanking the management of Airtel for inviting me to this occasion, which 
marks  the  official  launch  of  “Airtel  Money”  and  may  I  also  thank  the  Managing  Director  of 
Airtel, Mr. Fayaz King, for inviting me to speak at this important occasion.  
As  has  already  been  stated,  Airtel  Money  will  provide  an  electronic  wallet  that  will  enable 
customers  to  make  different  types  of  commercial  transactions  conveniently,  quickly  and 
safely. Customers will be able to make person to person payments, make purchases and pay 
various utility bills using this product. Airtel Money will certainly contribute to improving the 
way in which we transact and will also provide an efficient tool that will give Airtel customers 
the ability to carry out financial transactions from the comfort of their own homes.  
As you may be aware, the Bank of Zambia in consultation with key stakeholders has put in 
place an enabling environment to promote the development of modern payment systems in 
Zambia. For example the National Payment Systems Act which was enacted in 2007 gives 
powers for the Bank of Zambia to regulate and oversee operations of payment systems to 
ensure  the  effectiveness,  efficiency  and  safety  of  payment  systems  so  as  to  promote  the 
stability and safety of the Zambian financial system.  
Further,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  through  the  National  Payment  Systems  Vision  and  Strategy 
2007–2011  and  the  Financial  Sector  Development  Plan,  has  undertaken  various  activities 
that are focused on improving access to financial services for both the banked and unbanked 
population.  You  may  recall  the  Topline  findings  by  Finscope  on  our  financial  sector 
development  systems  and  their  recommendation  to  expand  access  to  financial services  to 
the  unbanked  population  in  remote  areas.  The  launch  of  Airtel  Money  is  expected  to 
contribute positively to the financial inclusion agenda which in turn will have a positive impact 
on the economy at large.  
In addition, the Bank is in the process of putting in place Electronic Money Regulations that 
will ensure that e-money transactions are operated within safe, efficient and secure bounds.  
Distinguished guests, allow me to also comment on the recent B+ sovereign rating assigned 
to the country by world renowned rating agencies Standards and Poor and Fitch, as well as, 
the reclassification of Zambia as a middle income country by the World Bank. The rating and 
reclassification requires the central bank, the Zambian business community and Government 
to  continue  enhancing  the  financial  system  to  ensure  that  it  is  robust  and  reaches  the 
unbanked.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  product  that  is  being  launched  today,  demonstrates  the  way 
businesses are evolving to bring forth financial solutions that benefit customers. This service 
provides  an  important  avenue  for  harnessing  resources  for  financing  development  in  our 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
communities  as  Airtel  will  partner  with  various  stakeholders  in  different  sectors  of  the 
economy.  This  will  further  enhance  the  development  of  the  telecoms  sector  and  its 
contribution to our economy.  
Therefore,  I  wish  to  commend  Airtel  for  introducing  this  product  which  is  expected  to 
contribute towards bridging the gap in financial service provision by catering for customers in 
remote areas who have no access to banking services. The product is expected to extend 
the financial inclusion agenda in that it will be far reaching thereby impacting positively on the 
Zambian public.  
I am also informed that the product is expected to reduce the use of cash in the economy. As 
you may be aware, the Bank of Zambia has been working towards reducing the use of cash 
in the economy by encouraging the use of alternative electronic means of payment such as 
the product being launched today. It is initiatives and innovations like Airtel Money that will 
make it possible for the general public to have alternative methods of transacting other than 
cash and other transnational payment instruments.  
To  this  end,  I  wish  to  mention  that  the  Bank  of  Zambia  with  other  stakeholders  is  in  the 
process of putting in place a National Switch that will further enhance initiatives such as this 
one whose launch we are witnessing today.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  will  continue  to  support  any  efforts  and 
innovations by the private sector that extend the provision of financial services to the majority 
of  our  citizens.  I  look  forward  to  seeing  the  product  being  launched  today  live  up  to  the 
expectations of providing a safe, efficient, secure and reliable service to the Zambian people.  
I hope that all customers will enjoy using the Airtel Money service.  
With these few remarks, I wish to declare Airtel Money officially launched and wish it all the 
success.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
