Ewart S Williams: Economic Outlook 2011 
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, on 
the  occasion  of  a  panel  discussion  at  the  Trinidad  and  Tobago  Chamber  of  Industry  and 
Commerce, Port-of-Spain, 14 January 2011. 
 The Honourable Stephen Cadiz 
Members of the head table 
Distinguished ladies and gentlemen 
Salutations: 
 
 
 
First, thanks for the invitation. 
1. 
Before talking about the 2011 outlook, a brief word on 2010. Notwithstanding a slight 
pick-up  in  the  last  quarter,  for  the  year  as  a  whole  the  preliminary  data  shows  that  the 
economy was flat – no growth. This follows a decline of some 3 per cent in 2009. What this 
means is that while many economies recovered from the global recession of 2008–2009, the 
Caribbean, including Trinidad and Tobago was not so fortunate. 
2. 
The  energy  sector  continued  to  register  positive  growth  but  activity  in  the  non-
energy sector declined for the second consecutive year. For the period 2009–2010, activity 
in  the  non-energy  sector  declined  by  a  cumulative  10  per  cent.  Now,  the  non-energy 
sector accounts for 97 per cent of total employment. If these estimates are correct, therefore, 
it is more than likely that there is a significant increase in unemployment. 
3. 
The economy and the population cannot afford a third year of economic stagnation 
and  therefore,  in  my  brief  statement,  I  have  opted  not  to  present  a  passive  analytical 
outlook but to identify the many positive characteristics that we could exploit to ensure 
that we break the current economic malaise. 
4. It is now generally accepted that the global recovery in 2011 will be stronger than last 
year. This is good news for our energy sector which could expect an increase in demand and 
in  prices  for  oil  and  petro-chemicals,  in  particular.  The  outlook  with  respect  to  gas  is  less 
clear  –  although  gas  prices  faced  a  sudden  jump  recently.  Unfortunately,  the  short  term 
outlook 
fallen  below 
100,000 barrels per day. There is, however, scope for some growth in petro-chemical output 
following  the  addition  of  new  productive  capacity.  We  therefore  project  that  energy  sector 
value added would increase by 3.2 per cent in 2011, slightly more than last year. 
5. 
As noted above, a recovery in the non-energy sector is urgently needed; and while 
any  pick-up  in  regional  demand  will  help,  that  is  not  assured,  the  jolt  must  come  from 
domestic  demand.  In  my  view,  many  of  the  pre-conditions  for  resurgence  in  domestic 
demand already exist. We need to take advantage of these. 
6. 
The outturn for FY 2010 indicates that the fiscal impulse was far smaller than had 
been envisaged (for several reasons). The fiscal stance announced in the current year 
(FY11) is appropriately geared to supporting an economic recovery. The challenge is to 
accelerate the implementation of some of the approved infrastructural projects so as to give 
a  much-needed  boost  to  the  construction  sector.  Obviously,  a  meaningful  resumption  in 
construction activity would be facilitated by steps to clear outstanding arrears to contractors. 
It is important to stress that we are talking about a temporary fiscal stimulus for 
7. 
FY  2011,  the  plan  being  that  Government  also  devises  a  fiscal  framework  to  return  to 
budget balance as early as possible (in the interest of reducing public debt). 
for  continued  reduction  of  oil  production  which  has  now 
is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The table also shows that the Central Bank has maintained its level of intervention 
Monetary conditions are ideal for a long-awaited resumption of private demand. With 
8. 
significant unused productive capacity, considerable excess liquidity and with core inflation 
expected to remain subdued, the Bank sees further room for lowering the policy interest 
rate. In turn, we hope to see a much sharper reduction in bank lending rates. Last year, we 
saw an appreciable reduction in mortgage interest rates but less so in other lending rates. 
We think that current spreads could more than afford a sizable cut in bank lending rates. 
9. 
Few banks have taken steps to facilitate lending to small businesses. However, data 
on loan guarantees to small businesses, through the Business Development Company show 
a continued decline. For the medium term, it will be important for Government, the banks and 
the business sector to work to enhance small business development programmes. 
10. 
The  Central  Bank  is  able  to  give  the  assurance  that  foreign  exchange  availability 
would not be a bottleneck to production. As noted earlier, the prospect is for buoyant energy 
prices. In addition, we expect foreign reserves to be supplemented by inflows related to oil 
exploration  activities  and  by  proceeds  of  foreign  loans.  With  official  reserves  now 
equivalent to around 12 months import cover, the Bank is not targeting any additional 
increase in official reserves in 2011. 
11. 
A brief word on the foreign exchange market. This table shows that after a period of 
substantial build-up from 2004 to 2008, the Central Bank has not been accumulating foreign 
exchange  reserves.  For  2011,  the  target  is  for  a  slight  reduction  in  official  reserves.  This 
means that, excluding the HSF accumulation, the Bank intends to continue its programme of 
expanded foreign exchange sales to the market. 
12. 
into the foreign exchange market even in the face of a sharp decline in imports. 
It is still worth noting, however, that our small country cannot continue to afford 
13. 
the  level  of  foreign  exchange  leakage  (call  it  capital  flight,  if  you  like)  that  we  have  been 
financing in the past few years. Small countries like ours are not expected to be the source of 
net capital outflows (non-trade related) on a sustainable basis. 
The scenario that we are putting forward today is for real GDP growth of about 2 per 
14. 
cent in 2011, led by developments in the energy sector but with the expectation of positive 
growth  in  the  non-energy  sector  for  the  first  time  in  three  years.  Ordinarily,  after  a 
pronounced downturn, employment generation lags economic recovery. However, the nature 
of  the  expected  fiscal  stimulus  in  2011  would  imply  some  increase  in  employment  in  the 
construction sector which should, at least, contain the unemployment rate at about 7 percent.  
15. 
This scenario has several downside risks. First, there are the uncertainties related to 
the  expected  recovery  in  the  global  and  regional  economy.  You  may  recall  that  at  the 
beginning of last year, we also thought that the global economy was on the path of a strong 
recovery,  but  growth  slowed  in  the  second  and  third  quarter  only  to  pick  up  again  in  the 
fourth. In addition, however, there are the domestic factors which could continue to postpone 
resurgence in business activity. Two such factors are a delay in the resolution of the Clico 
crisis and a worsening of the industrial relations climate. 
16. 
A word on inflation. In principle, the expected normalization of domestic agricultural 
output  should  put  downward  pressure  on  food  prices.  There  is  now,  however,  heightened 
concern about a global oil and food price shock which could have a significant impact on 
domestic food prices (corn prices are 94 per cent higher than June 2010 lows: soya beans 
are up 50 per cent and wheat is up 80 percent). At this stage, the Bank sees a reduction 
in inflation to 7 – 8 per cent as being very feasible. 
In summary, my message is that a much needed resurgence in economic activity in 2011 will 
be  greatly  facilitated  by  a  social  compact  –  formal  or  implied,  in  which  the  various  parties 
recognize the urgency of their respective roles whereby for instance:  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
(i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
The  Government  succeeds  in  the  implementation  of  the  needed  fiscal  stimulus, 
including the reduction in arrears to contractors; 
The  Central  Bank  increases  its  intervention  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  as 
needed; 
The  business  sector  operates  with  the  needed  trust  and  confidence,  avoiding  the 
tendency to warehouse foreign exchange; 
The  banks  accept  the  need  for  a  larger  reduction  in  interest  rates  and  banking 
spreads; and 
Where  all  the  parties  contribute  to  easing  the  industrial  relations  climate  and 
generally helping to restore confidence. 
This is a tall order, but absolutely necessary. 
Achieving  medium  term  growth  and  stability  presents  even  greater  challenges,  but  the 
immediate reactivation in economic activity will boost confidence and provide the breathing 
space for this greater challenge. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
  4 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5
 6 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
