Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview in The Wall Street Journal 
Interview with Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, in The Wall 
Street  Journal,  conducted  by  Messrs  Brian  Blackstone  and  Marcus  Walker  on  19 January 
2011. 
 WSJ:  If  2008  and  2009  were  years  of  crisis,  and  2010  was  a  year  of  stabilization  and 
recovery. How do you see 2011? What should Davos participants be focused on this year? 
TRICHET: Since the start of the recovery, in the third quarter of 2009, the real economy has 
surprised up on the upside. This is encouraging. I see 2011 as a year of continuous hard 
work,  to  make  the  financial  sector  more  resilient  and  to  improve  the  soundness  of  fiscal 
policies.  The  crisis,  which  started  in  2007  and  intensified  in  September  2008  revealed  the 
fragility of the financial sector first and then the relative vulnerability of public finances in the 
advanced economies. 
WSJ: What worries you most? 
Trichet:  To  consider  that  because  we  managed  to  avoid  a  depression  and  are  now 
experiencing  the  recovery,  we  could  lose  momentum  in  the  reforms  that  are  still  urgently 
needed. That is the main danger.  
WSJ:  This  year  austerity  becomes  pan-European.  But  a  recent  United  Nations  report  said 
austerity risks a renewed economic downturn. Do you agree? 
TRICHET:  No,  we  do  not.  I  do  not  buy  the  very  simple  reasoning  that  would  suggest  that 
pursuing sounder fiscal policy would hamper growth. On the contrary, I think that appropriate 
fiscal  retrenchment  in  countries  that  need  it  is  part  of  growth  enhancement,  because 
sustainable  public  finances  makes  a  difference  in  terms  of  improving  confidence  of 
households,  enterprises,  investors  and  savers,  which  is  decisive  to  foster  growth  and  job 
creation.  
WSJ: Does the U.S. have it wrong? It is engaging in even more fiscal stimulus. 
TRICHET: It’s not for me to give a lecture to other advanced economies. We have our own 
responsibilities.  In  our  own  case  we  strongly  believe  that  fiscal  soundness  is  confidence-
enhancing and therefore part of a growth-enhancing strategy. 
WSJ: In your recent ECB press conference you made repeated references to the July 2008 
rate  hike  and  said  the  ECB  is  never  pre-committed  not  to  move  interest  rates.  Were  your 
remarks over-interpreted as hawkish? 
TRICHET: I have nothing to add to what I have said last Thursday (ECB press conference on 
13 January). You have to place my remarks in the context of the first 12 years of the euro, 
during which we delivered price stability in line with our definition: less than 2%, close to 2%. 
When you look at the yearly average since the setting up of the euro it is 1.97%, better than 
had been done in any such period of time in the previous 50 years. You don’t get this result 
by  chance.  We  are  profoundly  attached  to  our  mandate.  And  that  explains  the  solid  the 
anchoring of our inflation expectations, which we see as one of our major assets because it 
helps avoiding second round effects when we have oil price increases in particular. Clearly, 
in particular on the side of energy and commodity prices we have a number of developments 
that we will continue to monitor closely.  
WSJ: Tighter monetary policy would have the biggest impact on countries like Spain, Greece 
and Ireland where private debt is linked to Euribor. Can you understand why those peripheral 
countries are concerned about this hawkish shift? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
TRICHET:  I  also  said  in  my  last  press  conference  that  the  present  interest  rates  were 
appropriate. In any case all countries in the euro area have an immense stake in the solid 
anchoring of inflation expectations because medium and long-term interest rates incorporate 
future inflation expectations.  
WSJ: Inflation is being driven by energy and commodity prices and higher value-added taxes 
in some countries. Is the ECB’s focus on headline inflation misplaced? Does the Fed have it 
right by focusing more on core inflation? 
TRICHET:  In  the  U.S.  the  Fed  considers  that  core  inflation  is  a  good  predictor  for  future 
headline  inflation.  In  our  case  we  consider  that  core  inflation  is  not  necessarily  a  good 
predictor  for  future  headline  inflation.  That  being  said  all  central  banks,  in  periods like  this 
where you have inflationary threats that are coming from commodities, have to go through 
the hump and be very careful that there are no second-round effects. This is what we are 
doing.  
WSJ: When you hiked rates in 2008 there were signs of those second-round effects. Do you 
see evidence they are starting to take hold in Germany or elsewhere? 
TRICHET: At this stage, we do not see this. And everybody knows we would not let second-
round effects materialize. We will continue to deliver price stability.  
WSJ:  Could  the  ECB  raise  interest  rates  while  still  maintaining  nonstandard  measures 
including unlimited loans to banks? 
TRICHET: It is our doctrine since the beginning of the turbulence that interest rates on the 
one  hand  and  non-standard  measures  on  the  other  hand  are  decoupled.  We  design  the 
monetary policy stance; we decide interest rates to deliver price stability in the medium term. 
Non-standard measures are there to help restoring a better functioning of monetary policy 
transmission. We are disconnecting both measures. We can move interest rates on the one 
hand, and we can move non-standard measures on the other hand independently. 
WSJ:  Euro  member  states  are  working  on  comprehensive  measures  to  address  the  debt 
crisis. What elements should be in that package? 
TRICHET:  These  decisions  are  the  responsibility  of  governments.  We  have  in  particular  a 
very  strong  message,  which  is  that  we  need  a  “quantum  leap”  in  the  strengthening  of 
governance of economic and fiscal policies. 
WSJ:  When  you  spoke  of  a  quantum  leap  last  year,  you  referred  to  quasi-automatic 
sanctions on excessive deficits. Governments so far haven’t come along. What makes you 
optimistic that you can still get your point of view adopted by governments? 
TRICHET:  There  are  a  number  of  elements  that  are  important:  the  reinforcement  of 
sanctions;  the  reinforcement  of  the  independent  diagnosis  that  would  be  made  by 
Commission. It’s a set of quantum leaps, including the quasi-automaticity of the start of the 
corrective  procedures  and  of  the  sanctions,  which  in  our  view  is  extremely  important. 
Governance is now discussed by the European Council and the European Parliament. The 
Parliament  has  in  the  past  always  demonstrated  a  remarkable  capacity  to  capture  what  is 
essential for Europe. So, the involvement of the Parliament is very important. 
WSJ:  Last  year,  governments  made  a  watery  compromise  on  sanctions,  weaker  than  the 
European Commission’s proposals. Should governments rethink that compromise? 
TRICHET:  Even  the  initial  proposals  from  the  Commission  seemed  to  us  too  timid.  Our 
position has not changed.  
WSJ:  You  have  called  for  maximum  flexibility  for  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility. 
There is discussion whether EFSF should take over all or part of the bond buying program 
from the ECB. If that were to happen, would you be relieved? 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
TRICHET: As I said, they have to improve the stabilization fund in both quality and quantity. 
By quality I mean having a tool that is as flexible as possible. 
WSJ:  You  have  said  bond  purchases  are  meant  to  ensure  the  transmission  of  monetary 
policy. If EFSF buys bonds, wouldn’t that take a monetary function away from the ECB and 
give it to a fiscal authority? 
TRICHET:  As  all  our  non-standard  measures,  the  securities  purchase  is  indeed  meant  to 
help  restoring  a  better  transmission  mechanism  of  our  monetary  policy.  It  is  clear  that  if 
markets  are  functioning  better  more  generally  then  we  have  less  problems  in  the 
transmission  of  monetary  policy.  In  any  case,  the  main  tool  to  improve  the  situation  is  to 
restore the credibility of individual governments themselves. 
WSJ:  Should  countries  be  able  to  borrow  money  from  the  EFSF  for  bank  recapitalization 
without having to apply for a full bailout? 
TRICHET: These are the responsibilities of the governments. We are asking to demonstrate 
full responsibility for economic and financial stability through a quantum leap as regards the 
economic governance in the euro area, a quantum leap in conditionality and greater flexibility 
in their utilization of the mechanism. 
WSJ: You have said there is a sense of urgency to improve the EFSF. Governments appear 
to have put off any changes until March at the earliest. Do you think leaders are showing a 
sufficient sense of urgency? 
TRICHET: Since the beginning of the turbulence, I have said we needed to demonstrate – all 
of us, all authorities – a solid sense of direction, a sense of responsibility and the awareness 
of the necessity to be ahead of the curve and not behind the curve. I maintain that. 
WSJ: What do you think the risk is that this wrenching process will cause the breakup of the 
euro or its membership? 
TRICHET: Of course the euro is there and will be there in the future. I do not comment on 
what I consider absurd hypotheses. I am used to such questions from the very beginning of 
the euro. The paradox is that, years ago, the question was about Germany supposed to be at 
that time the “sick man of Europe”. I was responding that Germany was doing hard work that 
its economy was catching up on competitiveness. Now the same hard work has to be done 
by those that were growing rapidly over the past years but at the same time had lost their 
competitiveness. One has to accept that within a vast economy that has the size of the euro 
area, with 331 million people, there are economic differences. For instance when I look on 
both sides of the Atlantic I see that the differences between the fastest and slowest-growing 
U.S. states, it is more or less of the same order of magnitude as between countries in the 
euro area, for instance between Oklahoma and Nevada, 13 % differences in growth in 2009; 
between Slovakia and Ireland more than 9 % in growth in 2008.  
WSJ:  The  U.S.  copes  with  these  differences  through  labor  mobility  and  a  federal  budget. 
Does the euro zone ultimately need a big federal budget? 
TRICHET: The quantum leap we are asking for in surveillance of fiscal policy has to be the 
equivalent, in our own institutional framework, of what a federation could do. And we should 
not overestimate labor mobility in the U.S. and underestimate it in Europe. If I take the U.S. 
state  with  the  highest  unemployment  and  the  state  with  the  lowest,  I  am  not  that  far  from 
what we observe in the euro area, for instance in 2009 between 18% and Spain, 3,7 % in 
Netherlands, and between 13,6 % in Michigan, and 4,3 % in North Dakota, 4.3%.  
WSJ: Should senior bondholders of bank debt be forced to accept haircuts in the event of a 
bailout, as proposed by the European Commission? 
TRICHET: This is not a European concept. This is a global concept, which is discussed in 
particular  at  the  level  of  the  Financial  Stability  Board  and  of  the  Basel  Committee  It  is 
particularly  important  for  so-called  systemic  financial  institutions.  Very  careful  analysis  is 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
required  on  the  various  possible  options  –  additional  capital  buffers,  contingent  capital, 
bailing in financial instruments, etc. I would say for us it is still a work in progress. In any case 
I  don’t  imagine  we  could  have  a  different  solution  in  Europe  than  in  other  advanced 
economies.  
WSJ: What can be done to improve the euro zone’s growth potential? 
TRICHET: The growth potential of Europe and the euro area could be significantly higher if 
all  European  countries  had  implemented  the  structural  reforms  of  the  so-called  Lisbon 
Agenda. Now the Europeans are again committed to bold structural reforms. Two avenues 
seem particularly decisive amongst many others. I would insist on the full opening of a real 
single  market  in  services.  When  we  created  the  single  market  we  were  an  industrialized 
economy and services were not particularly dominant. Now we are an advanced economy 
and services are playing a dominant part, and we still have resistance to a real single market 
in services. This could give a boost to European growth potential. The second point is labor 
market reform where we need significantly more flexibility in a number of economies. 
WSJ: This is your last year as ECB president. How important is it that the choosing of your 
successor by governments be a smooth process? 
TRICHET: I have very hard work until the end of October and I expect to exert, with all my 
colleagues,  my  impressive,  inspiring  and  profound  responsibilities  until  the  last  day.  As 
regards my succession I have full confidence in the heads of state and government. It is their 
responsibility.  
WSJ: What has surprised you, both good and bad, over the last 12 years of the euro? What 
do you think the euro zone will look like in 2015? 
TRICHET: I will not say that I was myself surprised because I have been deeply involved in 
the negotiation of the  Maastricht Treaty and the setting up of the euro. But I guess that a 
number of external observers are very positively surprised to see that price stability with the 
euro has been, over 12 years, better than with the previous national currencies and that as 
many as 17 countries and 331 million peoples are in the euro area since the beginning of 
2011. But this is not time for complacency. As all of the advanced economies we have to 
draw – without any complacency – all the lessons from the present global crisis, in particular 
in terms of governance.  
WSJ: The Fed is doing more quantitative easing, while the ECB warns of inflation risks even 
though both regions are recovering in a broadly similar fashion. Are Fed and ECB policies 
diverging, and does it pose a risk to global financial stability? 
TRICHET: On both sides of the Atlantic we have each of us our responsibilities that are very 
important. We are placed in different economies, particularly in terms of the financing of the 
economy,  and  of  the  nature  of  the  shocks  we  have  to  cope  with.  But  we  are  united  in 
purpose: to deliver price stability in medium term and to solidly anchor inflation expectations. 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
