Ipumbu Shiimi: National Payment System Vision 2015 launch 
Speech by Mr Ipumbu Shiimi, Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the launch of the National 
Payment System Vision 2015, Windhoek, 5 April 2011. 
 Director of Ceremonies 
Mr. Ian Leyenaar, representing Mr. Erastus Hoveka the President of Bankers Association of 
Namibia, 
Dr. Gift Kavari Chairperson of the Payments Association of Namibia Members of the banking 
industry 
Members of the Media 
Distinguished Invited Guests, Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good Morning 
It is with great pleasure to welcome you all here today to witness the launch of the National 
Payment System (NPS) Vision 2015 for Namibia. Let me first use this opportunity to thank 
the banking industry for their respective contributions in the process of finalizing the Vision 
document. Without your input we would not have achieved this milestone. 
Much has been achieved since the development of the first NPS Vision and Strategy in the 
year 2000, and although I do not want to detail these achievements, there are a few major 
milestones which are worth highlighting: 
 
The  first  major  milestone  was  reached  on  10  June  2002,  when  the  Namibia 
Inter-bank  Settlement  System  (NISS)  was  implemented,  enabling  banks  to  settle 
their  obligations  with  each  other  immediately,  the  so-called  real  time  gross 
settlement system (RTGS). 
The second milestone was reached with the promulgation of the Payment System 
Management Act in December 2003. The Act provides the Bank with the mandate to 
oversee and monitor the payment system; 
The third major milestone was reached during 2004 – 2005 with the establishment 
of  the  Automated  Clearing  House,  Namclear,  which  localised  the  clearing  and 
processing of the Electronic Funds Transfer System (EFT) and Cheque Processing 
System; 
The Payment Association of Namibia (PAN) was established in 2005 to manage the 
affairs  of  its  members  in  relation  to  payment  instructions,  but  also  to  act  as  a 
medium of communication with the different stakeholders, namely the Bank, public 
bodies, the media and even the general public. 
Finally, perhaps one of the most important achievements in the NPS recently was 
the  establishment  of  Namibian  Card  Switch,  NAMSWITCH  in  November  2008, 
enabling the clearing and settlement of Namibian card transactions locally. 
    Director of Ceremonies 
The  payment  system  is  dynamic  and  new  demands  and  opportunities  arise  as  a  result  of 
market requirements and technological developments. Therefore, new challenges are facing 
the NPS, hence a new strategic direction is required. It is against this background that the 
Bank in collaboration with the banking industry has developed a new vision, strategies and 
objectives for the Namibian NPS. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Allow me to spend few minutes to highlight a few points about what is contained in the Vision 
document. The NPS Vision 2015 document provides a high-level strategic direction for the 
Namibian  payment  system  up  to  2015.  The  NPS  Vision  2015  contains  six  strategic  focus 
areas, I will highlight a few. 
Access and participation in the NPS 
The  first  objective  under  this  focus  area  is  to  increase  the  accessibility  of  the  payment 
system by providing for new types of participants, but at the same time maintaining the safety 
and efficiency of the payment system by adhering to sound internationally accepted payment 
system principles. 
Increased accessibility by new participants will facilitate wider usage of the payment system 
by the public and will further enhance access to financial services and payment system. 
The  second  objective,  close  to  many  people’s  hearts,  is  to  set  standards  for  fees  and 
charges in the interest of efficiency in the NPS. The payment system fees and charges have 
often been identified as one of the key supply side barriers to financial services. The recent 
amendments to the Payment System Management Act give the Bank of Namibia power to 
act  if  the  market  fails  to  ensure  that  fees  and  charges  are  transparent,  competitive  and 
commensurate with input costs. 
Over  the  next  few  years  ending  in  2015,  the  Bank  will  be  targeting  products,  fees  and 
charges  that  have  hindered  Namibia  from  moving  towards  a  more  financially  inclusive 
economy: These are: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
An implementation plan with a time table on how to address these issues has been agreed 
with banks recently and is in the process of being rolled out. 
cash deposit fees, 
the lack of a low cost basic bank account, 
penalty fees, 
dormant account fees, 
non-transparent pricing such as tiered pricing structures, and 
interchange fees 
Interoperability and standards in the NPS 
In order to ensure that the Namibian payment system remains safe and efficient we need to 
adopt international best practice. Namibia has in the past few years experienced a significant 
increase in card fraud. Therefore we need to strengthen our risk mitigation measures. In this 
regard, I am pleased to inform you that the banking industry has agreed on a roadmap for 
rolling out Europay, MasterCard and VISA (EMV) standards in Namibia. 
These standards will be fully complied with on the post machines side by 2012 and on the 
cards side by 2015. Once implemented, EMV compliance will go a long way to reducing card 
fraud in Namibia. 
NPS infrastructure and technology 
Namibia  can  be  proud  of  its  payment  system  infrastructure  established  over  the  last  10 
years.  However,  the  Namibian  banking  industry  has  once  again  a  unique  opportunity  to 
create a modern, streamlined and cost-efficient payments infrastructure that will position the 
banking industry and the Namibian economy well for the future. A future where commerce 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
will  require  real-time  payment  mechanisms  that  give  immediate  value  and  finality  to  the 
beneficiary. A world where various channels like e-payments, mobile phones and the Internet 
will  be  used  to  make  payments  and  conduct  business  fast,  efficiently  and  cost  effectively. 
This is a world where instruments that are prone to fraud such as cheques will play a small 
role, if any. 
Cross-border remittances 
Transfer of money across borders by people in the low segment of the market will enjoy our 
priority  during  the  implementation  of  this  vision  document.  It  is  important  for  the  banking 
industry to improve the remittance transfer infrastructure in Namibia with the view to achieve 
a low-cost and safe cross border remittance service to cater for unbanked community. 
Regional participation in CMA and SADC 
There  are  currently  discussions  about  integration  of  payment  systems  in  CMA  and  SADC 
countries  to  facilitate  cross-border  payments.  Namibia  is  committed  to  fully  participate  in 
these initiatives with the view to contribute to the successful implementation of efficient, safe 
and cost-effective regional payment systems. 
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  congratulate  the  banking  industry  for  the  effort,  and 
achievements of the past ten years, not only in the area of payment systems, but also in the 
manner in which we have worked together on daily basis. Much of what has been achieved 
in  the  development  of  our  NPS  over  the  past  ten  years  has  been  through  consultation, 
collaboration and co-operation between the members of PAN and the Bank. 
Going forward there are new and complex challenges facing the NPS. Therefore the Bank 
looks forward to the continued co-operation of PAN, the Banking Association of Namibia and 
other  stakeholders  as  we  tackle  the  challenges  that  lie  ahead  in  an  effort  to  implement  a 
world-class  payment  system,  which  will  meet  the  needs  of  the  domestic  economy  and 
comply with international best practices by 2015. 
I thank you for your kind attention. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
