Jean-Pierre Danthine: Swiss monetary policy in the public eye 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at the Money Market Event, Zurich, 24 March 2011. 
 I would like to thank Marlene Amstad and Gero Jung for their valuable support in drafting this speech. I also want 
to thank Rita Kobel Rohr for helpful comments. 
Introduction: the Great Recession vs the Great Depression 
The Great Recession is behind us. In the case of Switzerland, we may wonder if the term is 
justified. With a fall in output of 3.2% from the top of the cycle in 2008 to the trough in 2009, 
the recession was the most severe since the mid-1970s.1 However, measured on a quarterly 
basis, consumption, which is a more meaningful indicator of economic well-being, barely fell. 
In Switzerland, the Great Recession was a (relatively severe) recession.  
What was it, that transformed what many feared could have been a new Great Depression 
into the Great Recession? As historical data show, the downturn in global industrial output in 
the first ten to twelve months of the two crises was similar (Chart 1). Economic historians will 
be occupied with this question for a long time. Let me venture to say that the policy reactions 
of fiscal and monetary authorities will occupy a central position in the historians’ final answer. 
Charts 2 and 3 provide some illustrations of the difference in policy responses between 1929 
and  2008.  The  much  stronger  monetary  policy  reaction,  a  greater  willingness  to  run  fiscal 
deficits and incomparably larger amounts of support to the financial sector are the distinctive 
features  of the  present crisis.  Monetary  and  fiscal  policy  were  both  restrictive  in  the  Great 
Depression. The opposite is the case in the Great Recession; both have been and continue 
to  be  very  expansive.  Stabilisation  packages  to  help  the  banking  sector  have  been  very 
large,  while  they  were  non-existent  in  the  early  thirties.  It  will  be  hard  to  argue  that  these 
policy  responses  have  not  played  a  crucial  role  in  avoiding  a  repetition  of  the  Great 
Depression.  Of  course,  expansive  fiscal  policies,  support  measures  to  the  financial  sector 
and unconventional monetary policies do not come for free. This can be seen in the increase 
in public debt levels registered in many countries and in the size of, and the corresponding 
risks present in, many central banks’ balance sheets. 
What in turn are the reasons why, in Switzerland, the Great Recession took the form of a 
“relatively severe recession”? A number of factors, some of which were already hinted at in 
my  Money  Market speech last year, were surely at play: the sound condition of the Swiss 
economy when it entered into the crisis, the demand impulse provided by immigration, the 
absence  of  a  real  estate  bubble,  strong  private  savings  ahead  of  the  crisis,  and,  last  but 
certainly  not  least,  a  very  expansionary  monetary  policy  response  completed  with  a 
determined and calibrated support to one of our big banks. 
Today, I will focus on one of the most discussed elements of the monetary policy response, 
our interventions in the foreign exchange market. Before doing so, I would like to stress a key 
element of the Swiss financial market structure that has shown particular resilience and has 
helped  to  provide  appropriate  financial  conditions  throughout  the  crisis  in  the  Swiss 
economy:  the  Swiss  franc  repo  market.  The  good  performance  of  this  market  is  closely 
related  to  another  element  of  the  SNB’s  policy  that  has  drawn  public  attention,  and  even 
criticism – our collateral policy. 
                                                 
1   During the recession of 1974–1976, real output in Switzerland fell by more than 10%. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
An important feature of the Swiss money market: the SNB’s collateral policy 
I. 
A plausible and popular diagnosis for the recent financial crisis is that it started with a bank 
run. In contrast to a “traditional” bank run, such as those that occurred during the 1930s,2 the 
run in the current crisis took the form of a large and sudden increase in collateral haircuts in 
the US repo market.3 If one plausibly estimates the size of the US repo market at $10 trillion 
at  the  eve  of  the  crisis,  a  20%  increase  in  haircuts  led  to  a  withdrawal  of  funds  from  the 
banking  sector  equivalent  to  $2  trillion.4  Chart  4  provides  an  estimate  of  the  increase  in 
haircuts in the US market while Chart 5 displays the drop in overnight repo volume between 
March and December 2008.5 This run on the repo market had obvious implications for the 
ability of the banking sector to lend. The consequent dearth of liquidity in US dollars was felt 
throughout  the  world,  in  particular  in  Europe.  It  was  the  main  reason  for  the  swap 
agreements  initiated  by  the  Federal  Reserve  and  a  number  of  international  central  banks, 
including the SNB. The aim was to substitute central bank liquidity provision for the failing 
money  market  in  US  dollars,  and  was  directed,  particularly,  at  international  market 
participants. In contrast to this account of the early phase of the financial crisis in the US, 
Chart 6 reports the evolution of the exchanged volumes in the Swiss secured and unsecured 
money  markets.  The  contrast  between  the  last  two  charts  could  not  be  more  striking:  in 
Switzerland,  the  secured  interbank  market  progressively  took  over  from  the  collapsing 
unsecured market  to  achieve  record  volumes  of  activity  in  the  week  following  the  Lehman 
Brothers collapse. Clearly this market showed its resilience and fulfilled its function, which no 
doubt  helped  prevent  a  credit  crunch  materialising  in  Switzerland.  Note  that  later 
developments (starting in late autumn 2008) were strongly marked by the abundant liquidity 
situation  created  by  the  SNB  swap  agreements  with  other  central  banks  and  later  by  the 
interventions  in  foreign  exchange  markets.  As  a  result,  demand  for  short-term  liquidity  by 
market participants disappeared. Preliminary evidence strongly suggests that a key factor in 
the relative performance of the Swiss and US repo markets lies in the quality of the collateral 
backing  repo  transactions.6  In  the  US,  as  emphasised  in  a  BIS  study,  repo  markets  had 
doubled  in  size  since  2002,  with  gross  amounts  outstanding  at  year-end  2007  of  roughly 
USD  10  trillion.7  These  markets  ended  up  financing  up  to  one-half  the  total  assets  of  the 
major investment banks. This growth in volume was based on a widely broadened collateral 
basket,  including  corporate  bonds,  bonds  issued  by  agencies,  mortgage-backed  securities 
and  other  lower-rated  collateral.  In  March  2008,  following  the  Bear  Stearns  rescue, 
confidence waned and market participants immediately ceased accepting any collateral other 
than Treasury and agency securities. In Switzerland by contrast, the collateral accepted in 
99.8% of the transactions in the secured interbank market corresponds to the definition of the 
SNB  collateral  basket,  that  is,  to  the  collateral  accepted  by  the  SNB  in  its  own  repo 
operations.  The  SNB’s  collateral  policy  is  based  on  a  transparent,  essentially  rule-based 
approach. This means that when securities are excluded from the list of acceptable securities 
                                                 
2   See Diamond and Dybvig (1983). “Bank runs, deposit insurance, and liquidity”, Journal of Political Economy 
1983, vol. 91, no. 3, pp. 401–19. 
3   Typically, the total amount of the deposit will be some amount less than the value of the underlying asset, with 
the difference called a “haircut”. For more details, see Gorton and Metrick (2009) “Securitized Banking and the 
Run on Repo”, NBER Working Paper Series (NBER Working Paper No. 15223), August 2009. 
4   This could be a reasonable approximation. See Gorton (2009): “Slapped in the Face by the Invisible Hand: 
Banking and the Panic of 2007”, Prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta’s 2009 Financial Markets 
Conference, May 2009; and Gorton and Metrick (2009). 
5   Chart 4 illustrates the average repo haircut on structured debt. This is a good indication for an overall “haircut 
index”, as shown by Gorton and Metrick (2009). 
6   Another important difference is that the Swiss repo market is conducted on a highly efficient automated and 
centralised platform while US repo transactions are traded over the counter. 
7   Hördahl and King (2008). However, these numbers are estimates given that almost all of the repo transactions 
are conducted over the counter. See also IMF (2010), Global Financial Stability Report, October 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
there  is  no  new  information  but  only  the  application  of  the  existing  and  published  criteria. 
Compared to many other central banks, the definition of eligible collateral is unusually open 
in the sense that the SNB is rare among central banks in accepting securities denominated in 
foreign currencies and not only in its home currency, the Swiss franc. The quid-pro-quo of 
this  multi-currency  policy  is  that  securities  eligible  for  SNB  repo  transactions  must  satisfy 
stringent  quality  requirements:  these  requirements  concern  their  credit  ratings  and  liquidity 
properties.  This  policy  is  coherent  –  open  but  strict!  –  and  it  has  substantial  advantages. 
First, no initial margin or haircut is applied during standardised repo transactions, making the 
system  more  capital  efficient.8  Second,  it  allows  a  broad  range  of  financial  institutions  to 
participate, including many international banks. Third, it creates incentives for banks to hold 
high-quality, liquid assets in their balance sheets. Finally, as already suggested, this highly 
credible collateral policy has resulted in SNB eligible collateral becoming the standard for the 
secured  interbank  money  market  in  Swiss  francs.  This,  in  turn,  has  made  an  essential 
contribution  to  creating  a  robust  secured  interbank  market  and  thereby  keeping  interbank 
credit lines open at all times during the crisis. 
The SNB’s interventions in foreign exchange markets 
II. 
Let me now move on to my second main point, the interventions in foreign exchange markets 
carried out by the SNB during 2009 and 2010. The SNB acted on foreign exchange markets 
in this period for one reason and one reason only: the zero interest rate lower bound had 
been  reached  and  the  economic  situation  unequivocally  called  for  looser,  not  tighter, 
monetary  conditions.  The  goal  was  to  maintain  price  stability,  which  meant,  in  these 
circumstances, avoiding deflation. One should always have in mind that there are no clear 
recipes for avoiding a deflationary trend in such a situation. The most famous illustration of 
this statement is the US experience in the late 1920s and early 1930s. At the time the US 
policymakers  underestimated  the  consequences  of  a  bout  of  deflation  and  failed  to  take 
aggressive action. The consumer price index (and the GDP deflator) declined by 24% from 
August 1929 to March 1933, after having been virtually flat from 1921 to 1929. This decline 
was  accompanied  by  a  fall  in  real  GDP  of  almost  30  percent.9  A  more  recent  example  is 
Japan’s  “lost  decade”.  There  the  situation  was  not  underestimated  to  the  same  degree. 
However,  public  actions  culminating  in  a  doubling  of  Japanese  public  debt  proved  to  be 
insufficient  to  avoid  a  protracted  deflationary  episode.  Let  me  review  the  history  of  our 
interventions in more detail. 
At the beginning of 2009, the severe downturn in the global economy had translated into a 
very serious threat of deflation in Switzerland. For example, the inflation forecasts produced 
by the IMF showed inflation in Switzerland to be in negative territory for two years in a row. 
Price stability was evidently not assured. The substantial increase in the value of the Swiss 
franc  since  the  beginning  of  financial  crisis  represented  an  inappropriate  tightening  of 
monetary  conditions.  Yet,  it  was  imperative  that  monetary  conditions  be  kept  as  loose  as 
possible,  a  fortiori  to  avoid  a  further  monetary  tightening.  Given  that  the  interest  rate  was 
effectively at a zero level, the SNB decided to prevent any appreciation in the Swiss franc 
with  respect  to  the  euro  from  March  2009  on.  The  SNB  achieved  this  goal  by  repeatedly 
intervening  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  during  the  course  of  2009.  This  policy  was 
maintained until the monetary policy assessment (MPA) of December 2009.  
By the end of 2009, the economic situation was showing some signs of improvement and the 
threat of deflation was estimated to have diminished. As a consequence, the SNB decided 
that a certain appreciation in the Swiss franc could be allowed without price stability being 
compromised.  At  the  December  MPA,  the  SNB  therefore  announced  that  it  would  act 
                                                 
8   There are, however, twice daily margin calls in case of variations in the collateral market value. 
9   Source: IMF (2003), “Deflation: Determinants, Risks, and Policy Options”, April 2003. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
decisively  in  the  event  of  an  excessive  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc.  This  policy  was 
maintained throughout the first half of 2010. 
In  spring  2010,  the  news  on  the  state  of  the  Swiss  economy  turned  increasingly  positive 
although  the  forecast  remained  fraught  with  major  uncertainties.  It  was  not  clear,  for 
instance,  that  partial  unemployment  (short-time  work)  could  be  reabsorbed  without  a 
significant additional increase in the rate of unemployment. The recovery appeared to be on 
the way but was presumed to remain very fragile. At the same time, the sovereign debt crisis 
in  Europe  was  causing  major  tensions  in  financial  markets.  In  general,  markets  were 
commonly  afraid  that  the  euro  could  face  long  term  structural  problems,  the  flight  to  safe 
investments was universal and the pressures on the Swiss franc were substantial. The SNB 
considered  that,  at  that  time,  the  Swiss  economy  was  unlikely  to  have  gained  enough 
strength  to  be  able  to  withstand  a  further  violent  appreciation  of  the  franc.  Such  a 
development  would  have  placed  the  Swiss  economy  under  such  severe  strains  that  the 
threat of a deflationary trend would have again come to the fore. The SNB was not prepared 
to take this risk; it resisted an excessive appreciation of the franc and in so doing was led to 
acquire large quantities of foreign exchange. 
As is now well known, the EU authorities came up with a “shock and awe” package10 that, 
after  some  hesitations,  market  participants  accepted  as  providing  some  reassurance, 
although not a complete and final solution to the European periphery debt problem. By the 
end  of  May,  the  pressures  on  the  franc  started  to  subside.  Taking  stock  of  these 
developments  and  of  the  visible  strengthening  of  the  recovery  of  the  Swiss  and  global 
economies, the SNB considered in its June monetary assessment that the threat of deflation 
had  largely  disappeared.  A  further  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  was  no  longer  such  a 
threat to price stability and the economy as it had been previously. In the second half of the 
year the SNB thus refrained from carrying out further interventions on the foreign exchange 
market. 
One can summarise this historical episode as follows. From March 2009 to the end of the 
year the SNB decided, in view of providing the most appropriate monetary conditions to an 
economy  in  recession,  and  given  that  traditional  monetary  policy  had  hit  the  zero  lower 
bound,  that  it  would  prevent  any  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  against  the  euro.  It 
maintained  this  policy  stance  until  the  MPA  of  December  2009.  As  Chart  7  shows,  the 
nominal export weighted value of the Swiss franc which had appreciated by more than 10% 
since August 2007 was halted. In fact, over the March to December 2009 period, the Swiss 
franc  depreciated  by  a  little  over  2%  with  respect  to  the  euro  and  by  less  than  1%  on  an 
export-weighted  basis.  In  December  2009,  the  SNB  updated  its  view  of  the  economy  and 
decided  that  some  appreciation  of  the  franc  would  be  tolerable  but  that  an  excessive 
appreciation  needed  to  be  prevented.  It  maintained  this  policy  until  June  2010.  Over  the 
course of this period, while the franc gained almost 8% with respect to the euro it lost about 
10% against the dollar. Chart 7 shows that the export-weighted value of the franc increased 
by  approximately  2.5%  during  this  period.  After  June  2010,  the  SNB  refrained  from 
intervening. Until the end of the year the franc gained around 10% on the euro, 15% on the 
dollar and more than 10% on an export-weighted basis.  
What can we conclude from this? We can certainly not conclude that the SNB was not able 
to hold on its policy, or was “defeated by the markets”. On the contrary, the SNB did what it 
had announced it would do and thus provided the Swiss economy with monetary conditions 
that have contributed to a reasonably swift recovery from the crisis and an early return to pre-
crisis GDP levels, while, importantly, assuring price stability. Chart 8 shows the evolution of 
the Swiss GDP in comparison with a few other industrialized countries. The downturn has 
                                                 
10   See  press  release  by  the  Council  of  the  European  Union’s  Extraordinary  Council  meeting,  Economic  and 
Financial Affairs, Brussels, 9/10 May 2010. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
been less severe in Switzerland and Swiss output has been the first to reach its pre-crisis 
level. Overall, GDP rose by 2.6% in 2010, after having fallen by 1.9% in 2009. Chart 9 shows 
the evolution of inflation together with our most recent conditional forecast. The inflation rate 
recovered to 0.7% in 2010 after hitting a low of –0.5% in 2009. 
Why  are  the  SNB  interventions  often  perceived  as  unsuccessful?  For  outside  observers 
studying the performance of the Swiss economy going in and out of the crisis and looking at 
Charts  8  and  9,  this  must  be  a  puzzle.  All  the  more  so  when  they  realise  that  this 
performance was not the result of an amply expansionary fiscal policy; on the contrary, the 
Swiss  policy  mix,  a  very  expansionary  monetary  policy  combined  with  a  more  contained 
fiscal  policy,  was  appropriate  given  the  circumstances.  With  the  crisis  originating  almost 
entirely in foreign markets and hitting the export sector very strongly, a large domestic fiscal 
stimulus  would  have  missed  the  target.  The  results  of  this  appropriate  policy  mix,  which 
placed the burden of the response to the crisis on the shoulders of the SNB, can be seen in 
the  remarkable  accounts  of  the  Swiss  general  government:  public  surpluses  in  both  2009 
and 2010 (+0.8% and +0.2% relative to GDP, respectively) and a reduction of the debt level 
to less than 40% of GDP.11 
One  reason  for  the  misperception  is  probably  the  view,  propagated  by  the  academic 
literature  on  the  subject,  that  central  bank  interventions  in  foreign  exchange  markets  are 
geared  to  achieving  an  exchange  rate  target  and  that  they  are  generally  unsuccessful  at 
doing  so.  As  has  been  repeatedly  emphasised,  this  was  not  the  objective  for  the  SNB  in 
2009–2010.12  The  SNB’s  objective  was  to  provide  appropriate  monetary  conditions  to  the 
Swiss economy. A given exchange rate level in that context may be maintained for a limited 
time  period,  but  it  is  subject  to  review  as  macroeconomic  conditions  evolve.  And  as  the 
SNB’s  experience  in  2009  demonstrates  (illustrated  in  Chart  7),  influencing  the  exchange 
rate  level  temporarily  is  feasible  and  makes  sense  at  the  zero  lower  bound  when  the 
traditional monetary policy instrument is exhausted. 
Conclusion: how to judge whether interventions were successful? 
III. 
All actions by the SNB have to be considered in the light of its mandate. The primary goal is 
to ensure price stability, while taking due account of the overall economic situation. In this 
way  monetary  policy  contributes  to  creating  an  environment  that  fosters  prosperity  and 
economic  growth.  To  achieve  its  goal,  the  SNB  strives  to  provide  the  most  appropriate 
monetary  conditions,  not  to  achieve  an  exchange  rate  target.  The  primary  indicator  of  the 
success of interventions is the inflation chart. Conversely, the more significant gauge of the 
potential cost of interventions is not found in the central bank’s balance sheet. Our foreign 
exchange  interventions  will  be  revealed  to  have  been  costly  if  they  result  in  serious 
inflationary  pressures  two  to  three  years  from  now.  As  the  subsequent  speaker,  Dewet 
Moser, will explain in further detail, since June 2010 the SNB has been setting up and using 
instruments that allow us to adapt the conduct of monetary policy to the new excess liquidity 
situation. We are convinced that these instruments, reverse repos and SNB Bills of various 
maturities,  which  are  now  fully  operational,  constitute  an  efficient  toolset  for  the  times  to 
come. They place the SNB in a sound position to steer the Libor rate at the level required to 
maintain price stability. 
                                                 
11   The Swiss Confederation also had public surpluses both in 2009 and 2010 (+0.5% and +0.4% relative to GDP, 
respectively) and a debt level of around 20% relative to GDP. 
12   See,  for  example,  Hildebrand,  Philipp  (2010)  “Monetary  policy  challenges:  Swiss  exports  in  a  globalised 
world”, Brussels, November 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
  6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
