Agathe Côté: Financial risks and global reforms 
Remarks  by  Ms  Agathe  Côté,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Financial 
Markets  Association  of  Canada  in  association  with  Women  in  Capital  Markets,  Toronto, 
Ontario, 28 June 2011. 
 Introduction 
Good afternoon. I want to thank our hosts, the Financial Markets Association of Canada and 
Women in Capital Markets, for the invitation to speak to you today. I am very pleased to be 
here. 
Last week, the Bank released its Financial System Review (FSR), a semi-annual publication 
in which we summarize the main risks to the stability of the Canadian financial system, and 
the policy actions required to mitigate those risks. This issue of the FSR also includes three 
articles that focus on issues related to financial markets. 
Today,  I  am  going  to  devote  the  largest  part  of  my  presentation  to  one  of  those  articles, 
which  discusses  shadow  banking,  or  what  we  at  the  Bank  prefer  to  call  market-based 
financing  or  MBF.1  We  favour  this  term  because  it  highlights  the  fact  that  the  credit-
intermediation  activities  that  constitute  shadow  banking  –  such  as  securitization  or 
repurchase  agreements  –  are  conducted  primarily  via  markets.  If  properly  monitored  and 
regulated,  these  activities  can  bring  significant  economic  benefits  and  do  not  have  to  be 
“shadowy.” 
The agenda for global financial reform that was launched by the G-20 at its London Summit 
in 2009 has, to date, been primarily directed at the banks. Banks are the core of the global 
financial  system,  and  governments  and  central  banks  in  many  countries  had  to  intervene 
heavily  to  support  them  during  the  crisis.  But  the  financial  crisis  has  shown  that  MBF 
activities  can  also  be  an  important  source  of  systemic  risk.  Moreover,  with  the  standards 
applied  to  banks  set  to  increase  with  Basel  III,  the  incentives  for  activities  to  migrate  to 
shadow banking may increase. For these reasons, the international financial reform agenda, 
under the auspices of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), is now turning its attention to this 
area. 
In  my  remarks  today,  I  will  describe  the  key  characteristics  of  the  MBF  sector,  examine 
potential risks associated with it and discuss the policy options being considered to address 
these risks. I will conclude with comments on an important aspect of the reform agenda for 
this  sector,  which  is  the  move  to  strengthen  market  infrastructure  through  greater  use  of 
central clearing services for derivatives and repo transactions. 
First,  however,  I  want  to  start  with  a  brief  summary  of  our  assessment  of  the  key  risks  to 
Canada’s financial system. 
Risks to Canada’s financial system 
The process of financial sector repair is continuing and the economic recovery is proceeding 
at  a  steady  pace  in  most  advanced  economies.  As  expected,  however,  it  is  taking 
considerable  time  and  effort  to  resolve  the  underlying  economic  and  financial  imbalances. 
The path to a more resilient global financial system is further complicated by the two-speed 
                                                 
1   J. Chapman, S. Lavoie and L. Schembri, “Emerging from the Shadows: Market-Based Financing in Canada,” 
Bank of Canada Financial System Review (June 2011):29–38. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
recovery  in  economic  activity,  with  relatively  modest  growth  in  advanced  economies  and 
increasing signs of overheating in emerging-market economies. 
Despite  the  challenging  international  environment,  the  Canadian  financial  system  remains 
healthy. For example, asset quality at Canada’s major banks has improved further in recent 
months.  Moreover,  the  aggregate  financial  position  of  our non-financial  corporate sector  is 
solid. 
The main source of concern domestically continues to be the high level of debt carried by 
households,  with  the  aggregate  debt-to-income  ratio  of  Canadians  at  a  record  high.  This 
raises the risk that the impact of an adverse macroeconomic shock on the financial system 
could be exacerbated by a deterioration in the ability of households to service their debts. 
This risk remains elevated and is broadly unchanged since our previous FSR in December. 
Aside from our concern about household finances, the principal sources of risks to Canada’s 
financial stability come from the external environment. They are: 
 
large  current  account 
imbalances  cannot  persist 
First, sovereign balance sheets remain strained in many advanced economies. In 
the near term, the principal threat is that the acute fiscal strains in peripheral Europe 
could  trigger  a  generalized  retrenchment  from  risk-taking  in  global  markets, 
including markets in Canada.  
indefinitely. 
Second, 
Implementing the structural changes needed to resolve these imbalances will be a 
lengthy process and the risk of a disorderly adjustment involving sharp movements 
in asset prices remains high.  
Third, while the majority of banks have made substantial progress in strengthening 
their  balance  sheets,  some  foreign  banks  continue  to  struggle,  and  the  risk  that 
further  progress  may  be  delayed  by  the  protracted  recovery  in  advanced 
economies is still elevated. 
Lastly, a long period of low interest rates globally may fuel excessive risk-taking. 
The “search for yield” could cause risk to be underpriced or lead investors to take on 
exposures that they may not be able to manage if conditions become less benign. 
Since  December,  there  has  been  mounting  evidence  of  this  search-for-yield 
dynamic in the global financial system, although the risk that it could lead to financial 
instability in Canada remains moderate.  
   Key features of market-based financing 
The  market  behaviours  I  have  just  outlined  –  excessive  risk-taking  and  the  potential 
underpricing of risks – can, and often do, manifest themselves in the market-based financing 
or shadow banking sector. 
Let  me  describe  the  principal  characteristics  of  the  sector.  In  broad  terms,  MBF  refers  to 
credit-intermediation  activities  similar  to  those  performed  by  banks  because  they  involve 
maturity  or  liquidity  transformation,  possibly  with  some  degree  of  leverage.  But,  as  I 
mentioned at the outset, these activities are conducted primarily through markets rather than 
within  financial  institutions,  although  they  can  involve  banks  as  well  as  other  financial 
institutions, such as securities dealers, finance companies and hedge funds. 
The MBF sector is subject to a different regulatory framework and is typically not regulated or 
supervised to the same extent as the traditional banking system. But MBF serves useful and 
legitimate economic functions. It can contribute to the efficient funding and transfer of credit 
risk.  It  provides  competition  for  the  traditional  banking  sector  and  helps  diversify  credit 
sources.  In  fact,  the  rapid  expansion  of  MBF  in  the  pre-crisis  years  was  driven  largely  by 
competitive market forces, financial innovation, and the ongoing expansion and deepening of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
financial markets. So, if the associated risks are properly managed, MBF can be beneficial to 
the economy. 
In  aggregate,  the  MBF  sector  is  big.  MBF  activities  are  significant  in  several  advanced 
economies, and are comparable in size to traditional lending activities performed by banks. If 
we estimate total activity by liabilities outstanding, since 1999 the MBF sector in Canada has 
been  about  the  same  size  as  the  traditional  banking  sector.  In  comparison,  in  the  United 
States,  at  their  peak  before  the  crisis,  MBF  liabilities  were  roughly  twice  as  large  as 
traditional bank liabilities. They are currently about 25 per cent larger. 
Another key characteristic of the MBF sector is its diversity, both within and across countries. 
It involves a wide range of activities with different levels of benefits and risk. For example, we 
view  government-guaranteed,  mortgage-backed  securities  as  part  of  the  MBF  sector 
because  they  transform  illiquid  assets  into  more  liquid  securities,  in  part  through  market 
channels.  But  these  securities  clearly  lie  at  the  less-risky  end  of  the  range.  They  do  not 
embed  leverage,  and  credit  risk  is  eliminated  by  the  government  guarantees.  By  contrast, 
activities  at  the  riskier  end  of  the  continuum  would  include  highly  complex,  opaque  and 
leveraged  securities,  such  as  some  of  the  non-bank-sponsored,  asset-backed  commercial 
paper (ABCP) that existed in Canada prior to the crisis. 
The  size  and  composition  of  shadow  banking  also  vary  across  jurisdictions,  partly  in 
response  to  the  structure  and  regulation  of  the  banking  system.  In  Canada,  at  the  end  of 
2010,  the  most  prominent  MBF  activities  were  repurchase  agreements  (repos),  which 
accounted  for  over  half  of  total  MBF  liabilities.  This  was  followed  by  mortgage-backed 
securities,  at  about  one  quarter  of  the  total,  and  short-term  debt  instruments,  at  less  than 
10 per cent. In the United States, in comparison, government-sponsored enterprises, money 
market  mutual  funds  and  asset-backed  securities  represent  the  major  components  of  the 
overall MBF sector. 
Canada and the United States also differ in the role that regulated financial institutions play in 
MBF activities. In Canada, regulated financial institutions are dominant players. In addition, 
the  widespread  use  of  government,  or  government-guaranteed,  securities  as  collateral  to 
underpin these transactions (both repos and mortgage-backed securities) make the sector in 
Canada relatively less vulnerable. 
Key vulnerabilities in market-based financing 
Generally  speaking,  there  are  two  main  concerns  with  MBF  activities:  the  opportunity  for 
regulatory  arbitrage  and  the  possibility  of  systemic  risk.  The  first  one  is  straightforward: 
shadow banking activity can be used to circumvent and undermine banking regulations. This 
may become increasingly important given the new Basel III standards for bank capital and 
liquidity coming into force. 
The second concern reflects a number of vulnerabilities inherent in MBF, perhaps the most 
important of which is exposure to panics. Entities that rely on MBF are exposed to liquidity 
crises  that  resemble  a  classic  bank  run.  This  is  owing  to  their  funding  structure,  with  the 
important  difference  that  MBF  lenders  are  not  protected  by  deposit  insurance,  and  MBF 
borrowers typically do not have direct access to central bank liquidity. The 2007 crisis in the 
Canadian  market  for  non-bank-sponsored  ABCP  was  a  prime  example  of  how  a  liquidity 
crisis  can  unfold.  Short-term  instruments  were  used  to  fund  illiquid,  risky  and  long-term 
assets.  Those  instruments  also  embedded  significant  leverage.  When  signs  of  trouble 
emerged, investors shied away from ABCP. Maturing paper was not rolled over as investors 
became  more  aware  of,  and  concerned  with,  the  potential  risks,  especially  the  uncertainty 
surrounding the willingness and the capacity of the sponsors to provide a liquidity backstop. 
A second vulnerability is counterparty credit risk arising from the interconnected nature of the 
MBF sector. MBF investors are exposed to credit risk, both from their direct counterparties 
but also, more generally, from their counterparties’ counterparties, and so on. The network of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
obligations  that  arises  from  MBF  activities  thus  requires  an  investor  to  be  aware  of  the 
creditworthiness  of  its  direct  counterparty,  including  risks  that  could  arise  from  how  that 
counterparty is connected to the rest of the financial system. During a crisis, however, the 
difficulty  of  properly  assessing  one’s  exposure  to  this  complex  network  and  the  resulting 
uncertainty may cause or amplify a financial panic as risk aversion increases. 
A third vulnerability is related to the opacity of some of the securitized assets being used as 
collateral in secured borrowing. During the recent crisis, this type of collateral became more 
illiquid and difficult to evaluate. This opacity may also impede the transfer of credit risk. 
Finally, there is a vulnerability associated with the build-up of leverage that can take place in 
MBF activities, which can be exacerbated by the lower level of regulation. The build-up of 
leverage  embedded  in  very  complex  financial  products,  followed  by  forced  deleveraging, 
played a crucial role during the crisis. 
Reforming the shadow banking sector 
While we have a much better understanding of the MBF sector today than we did before the 
crisis, we still have much to learn. 
The  FSB  has  created  a  task  force  to  study  shadow  banking.2  It  is  currently  assembling 
information  and  developing  a  methodology  to  systematically  monitor  the  sector  and  to 
explore possible regulatory measures. 
Broadly speaking, there are four types of responses that policy-makers can consider: 
 
First,  indirectly  regulating  MBF  activities  by  regulating  the  banks’  involvement  in 
them; 
Second,  directly  regulating  entities that  are  active  in  MBF  and  that  pose  systemic 
risk concerns or create opportunities for regulatory arbitrage; 
Third,  focusing  on  instruments  and  activities  that  potentially  create  risk  in  the 
financial system, rather than on entities; and,  
Fourth,  enacting  a  range  of  macroprudential  measures,  such  as  those  that  would 
reduce procyclicality and strengthen market infrastructure. 
   Three  points  merit  emphasis.  First,  it  is  important  that  the  approach  to  reform  strikes  an 
effective  balance  between  the  benefits  of  market-based  financing  and  the  risks.  Second, 
given the important differences in the structure of market-based financing across countries, it 
is important to balance the need to take account of these differences against the need for 
international  consistency  to  address  common  risks  and  to  avoid  creating  cross-border 
arbitrage  opportunities.  Third,  the  approach  taken  should  put  a  premium  on  adaptability, 
since  changes  in  regulation  and  innovation  can  lead  to  rapid  expansion  and  mutation  of 
these activities. This also implies that the MBF sector necessitates continuous monitoring to 
identify emerging vulnerabilities. 
Strengthening market infrastructure 
A number of reforms are already under way both in Canada and globally to address shadow 
banking risks exposed by the crisis. Let me turn to one aspect I just alluded to, which is to 
strengthen  market  infrastructure.  One  of  the  key  lessons  of  the  crisis  was  the  excessive 
vulnerability  of  the  financial  system  to  individual  institutions,  where  weaknesses  in  one 
financial  institution  had  cascading  effects  on  others,  ultimately  posing  risks  to  the  entire 
                                                 
2  
“Shadow Banking: Scoping the Issues,” Financial Stability Board background note, 12 April 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
financial system. For example, the near-collapse of Bear Stearns threatened the viability of 
the tri-party repo market. As a result, central banks took extraordinary measures to support 
core  funding  markets.  Similarly,  the  failure  of  Lehman  revealed  the  vulnerabilities  and 
unforeseen exposures that had been propagated through the commercial paper markets and 
derivatives  markets,  among  others.  That  is  why  the  agenda  for  global  financial  reform  is 
aimed at strengthening both individual financial institutions and financial market resilience. 
And here, infrastructure plays a critical role. As I just noted, the Lehman crisis highlighted the 
systemic  importance  of  the  highly  complex,  multi-counterparty,  cross-border  derivatives 
markets.  As  a  result,  the  G-20  decided  that  all  standardized  over-the-counter  (OTC) 
derivatives  should  be  cleared  through  central  counterparties  (CCPs)  by  the  end  of  2012. 
CCPs can act as firewalls against the propagation of shocks across market participants. But 
in order to reap these benefits, CCPs have to be carefully designed and subject to robust 
regulation and supervision. 
The Bank of Canada is responsible for overseeing major clearing and settlement systems for 
the  purpose  of  controlling  systemic  risk.3  Two  key  infrastructure  initiatives  that  we  are 
involved in address systemic risk by enhancing the resiliency of the system. 
We are working with the industry to develop a domestic CCP for Canadian-dollar repos that 
will  underpin  the  resiliency  of  that  core  funding  market.  Again,  I  want  to  remind  you  that 
repos are half of market-based financing in Canada. It is our expectation that this system will 
be designated for oversight when it begins operating, likely later this year. 
And the Bank is working on how best to implement the G-20 commitment for OTC derivatives – 
a market in Canada of roughly $9 trillion notional, of which $6 trillion is interest-rate swaps. Its 
size and interconnectedness point to its systemic importance and the critical need for rigorous 
oversight. One way to build resiliency may be a domestic infrastructure for centrally clearing 
OTC Canadian-dollar denominated derivatives.4  
As  market  infrastructure  supporting  the  Canadian  financial  system  evolves,  the  Bank  will 
continue to exercise its oversight role. We must be able to fulfill our legislative responsibility 
for oversight of major clearing and settlement systems – not just at a moment in time, but 
over time. If all aspects of systemic clearing systems were within Canada – for example, the 
physical  location,  management,  and  risk  controls  –  clearly  it  would  be  easier  to  fulfill  that 
responsibility.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  those  systems  were  managed  in  foreign  jurisdictions, 
then the Bank would need to judge the extent to which it could rely on foreign authorities for 
principal oversight – a judgement that has not yet been required. And, if our ability to rely on 
foreign  jurisdictional  authorities  were  to  diminish  over  time,  we  would  also  need  to  ensure 
that we would have the ability to remedy the situation. We at the Bank must be able to fulfill 
our obligations to Canadians to ensure sound management of the risks associated with these 
systemically important clearing and settlement systems. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. Throughout the global financial crisis, Canada’s financial system showed 
its  strength  and  resilience.  Nonetheless,  an  important  lesson  from  the  non-bank  ABCP 
episode in particular and the global crisis more generally is that our financial system is not 
immune  to  vulnerabilities  in  market-based  financing.  The  sector  represents  roughly  half  of 
                                                 
3   The legislative authority is set out in the Payment Clearing and Settlement Act. Systems which are currently 
designated  as  having  the  potential  to  pose  systemic  risk  are:  CDSX,  which  is  the  system  that  clears  and 
settles  securities  transactions;  the  Large  Value  Transfer  System;  and  CLS  Bank,  a  global  system  for  the 
settlement of foreign exchange transactions. 
4   See  J.  Slive,  C.  Wilkins  and  J.  Witmer,  “Access  to  Central  Clearing  Services  for  Over-the-Counter 
Derivatives,” Bank of Canada Financial System Review (June 2011):39–45. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the financial system in several advanced economies. Since the crisis, it has not been subject 
to  the  same  degree  of  regulatory  reform  as  the  traditional  banking  system.  That  is  now 
changing. 
This  is  why  regulatory  authorities  in  Canada,  including  the  Bank  of  Canada,  are  actively 
involved,  both  at  the  FSB  table  and  here  in  Canada,  in  assessing  market-based  financing 
activities and helping to develop new financial regulations and market infrastructure, such as 
central clearing services, that will reinforce the safety and efficiency of our financial system. 
More broadly, with the international financial system still facing serious risks, it is crucial that 
we maintain the momentum of reform. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
