Stefan Ingves: Challenges for the design and conduct of 
macroprudential policy 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Bank of Korea–Bank 
for  International  Settlements  (BOK-BIS)  Conference  on  Macroprudential  Regulation  and 
Policy, Seoul, 18 January 2011. 
 The  last  three  years  have  been  a  challenging  time  for  central  bankers  and  policy-makers. 
And yet significant challenges lie ahead. The crisis exposed gaps in the existing regulatory 
frameworks  and  raised questions  about  previously  accepted  beliefs  and  practices.  We  are 
still trying to understand the key lessons from the crisis so we can determine the reforms to 
the  financial  systems,  regulatory  structures  and  policy  instruments  that  are  needed  to 
enhance financial stability in the future. But it is clear that a major element of these reforms 
will  be  the  development  and  implementation  of  effective  macroprudential  frameworks 
empowering  some  form  of  agency  to  identify  system-wide  risks  to  financial  stability,  and 
providing the instruments to prevent and mitigate those risks. 
Of  course,  while  the  reforms  are  being  developed  and  implemented,  we  must  rely  on  the 
existing framework and instruments to support the fragile recovery of the real economy and 
financial system. 
Sweden’s economy is recovering but vulnerabilities remain 
Strong Swedish recovery from the crisis 
As in many countries, GDP fell sharply in Sweden as a consequence of the financial crisis. 
But Sweden is now experiencing a relatively strong economic recovery (see Figure 1) and 
the Swedish banking sector appears resilient. 
Figure 1: Development of GDP in selected countries and regions 
 
Quarterly changes in per cent, annual rate, seasonally adjusted data. Sources: Bureau of 
Economic  Analysis,  Eurostat,  Statistics  Sweden  and  the  Riksbank  (Monetary  Policy 
update, 15 December 2010) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Swedish banks’ access to market funding, which was disrupted after the failure of Lehman 
Brothers,  has  recovered  sufficiently  to  enable  the  Riksbank  to  withdraw  the  extraordinary 
lending it provided during the crisis.1 In addition, the four largest Swedish banks, which have 
a combined market share of about 75%, are well capitalised. Indeed, the Riksbank estimates 
that, by the end of 2011, they will already have sufficient resources to meet the forthcoming 
Basel  III  capital  requirements,  including  the  capital  conservation  buffer  and  a  fullscale 
counter-cyclical capital buffer, without undertaking any exceptional capital raising exercises 
(see Figure 2).2 
Figure 2: Estimated common equity tier 1 capital ratios  
for the four largest Swedish banks 
 Sources: Bank reports and Riksbank calculations. (The Riksbank’s Financial stability report 2010:2) 
But potential vulnerabilities are building up in Sweden 
Despite  these  positive  developments,  there  are  still  vulnerabilities  in  the  Swedish  financial 
system. Recent surveys suggest that Swedish households remain capable of servicing their 
debts.3 At the same time, household credit losses in Sweden are traditionally low: even in 
1992, at the peak of the Swedish banking crisis, credit losses from households only made up 
6 per cent of total credit losses.4 But household indebtedness has continued to grow faster 
                                                 
1   During  the  crisis,  the  Riksbank  provided  extra  liquidity  to  the  Swedish  banking  sector  through  a  number  of 
long-term loans in SEK and USD. 
2   However, we expect that some banks will need to raise their liquidity buffers to meet the new Basel III liquidity 
rules. 
3   See  Finansinspektionen,  “The  Swedish  mortgage  market  and  bank  lending”,  February  2010,  and  Sveriges 
Riksbank, “Financial Stability Report 2009:2”. 
4   Finansinspektionen (2009), “Utvecklingen på bolånemarknaden 2008”, 2009:7. (Only available in Swedish.) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
than  income  (see  figure  3),  loan-to-value  ratios  have  increased,  and  a  large  proportion  of 
mortgages are variable-rate loans. These vulnerabilities could impair the financial system by 
increasing loan losses if the current economic recovery were to stall, or by impairing Swedish 
banks’ ability to finance mortgages if investors’ confidence in Swedish covered bonds were 
to fall. 
Figure 3: Swedish household debt and post-tax interest expenditure 
Per  cent  of  disposable  income.  Sources:  Statistics  Sweden  and  the  Riksbank.  (The  Riksbank’s  Financial 
stability report 2010:2) 
 loan-to-value 
It  is  too  early  to  establish  whether  recent  repo  rate  increases  and  the  introduction  of  a 
maximum  permitted 
residential  mortgages  by 
Finansinspektionen  (the  Swedish  Financial  Supervisory  Authority)  have  had  a  discernable 
effect on credit growth. In any case, house prices are continuing to grow (see figure 4). The 
Riksbank does not consider the present level of house prices and household debt to be an 
immediate  threat  to  financial  stability,  but  their  current  growth  rates  are  unsustainable,  so 
future problems cannot be ruled out. 
ratio  of  85% 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Figure 4: Real residential property prices in Sweden and other countries 
 Index 1995 q1 = 100. Source: Reuters Ecowin and Statistics Sweden. (The Riksbank’s Financial stability report 
2010:2) 
If  the  current  growth  rates  of  house  prices  and  household  debt  are  considered  to  be  a 
potential threat to future financial stability, it may be necessary to act soon, because it will 
take  time  for  any  measures  to  take  effect.  So  the  Riksbank  is  investigating  instruments 
(existing or potential) to prevent or mitigate this threat by smoothing the house price cycle, 
controlling household indebtedness or improving the resilience of banks. There are a range 
of  prohibitive  instruments  that  could  be  used  to  restrict  the  choices  of  households  and 
financial  institutions.  These  could  include,  for  example,  the  introduction  of  a  binding 
maximum loan-to-value ratio on household borrowing5 or a maximum debt-to-income ratio, 
or requiring mortgage interest payments to be fixed for a certain time period. There is also a 
range of taxation instruments that could act on the price of the activities of households and 
financial  institutions.  This  includes changes  to  financial  institutions’  capital  requirements  or 
changes to the reserve requirements (SEK or foreign currency that financial institutions are 
required to hold at the central bank). The choice between prohibition and taxation is not new 
to public choice economics. 
And vulnerabilities are building up internationally 
The build-up of problems is even more apparent when looking internationally; in particular at 
the  recent  difficulty  eurozone  countries  with  weak  public  finances  have  had  in  issuing 
government  bonds.6  Investors  are  increasingly  making  similar  assessments  with  regard  to 
                                                 
5   The  current  maximum  loan-to-value  ratio  constrains  the  amount  a  household  can  borrow  in  a  mortgage 
contract but places no limit on other forms of lending to that household. A binding maximum loan-to-value ratio 
on household borrowing could place a firmer limit on households’ total borrowing. 
6   One of the reasons that the Swedish economy is currently experiencing relatively strong economic growth is 
that  Sweden’s  public  finances  were  comparatively  strong  going  into  the  crisis.  Therefore,  Sweden  has 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
sovereign risk as the Riksbank is making for Swedish household debt. For example, debt-to-
GDP  ratios  give  a  similar  picture  for  countries’  ability  to  repay  debt  as  the  debt-to-income 
ratio shows for households. There are fairly well developed and commonly used techniques 
to  estimate  probabilities  of  default  (PD)  and  loss  given  default  (LGD)  on  banks’  loan 
portfolios, which are useful for the conduct of microprudential policy. These techniques are 
also useful for macroprudential policy, and should be used more extensively, as they can be 
used  to  estimate  PDs  and  LGDs  at  an  aggregated  level  for  entire  sectors  (eg  banks, 
households, corporates). I would expect that these same techniques could be used to assess 
sovereign debt but, to my knowledge, I believe it is not done. 
An  analogy  can  also  be  drawn  between  the  macroprudential  tools  the  Riksbank  is 
considering  for  household  debt  and  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  for  countries  in  the 
eurozone. The Stability and Growth Pact is designed to facilitate the stability of the Economic 
and Monetary Union (EMU) by placing upper limits on member countries’ national debt (60% 
of GDP) and annual deficit (3% of GDP). These are somewhat similar to maximum loan-to-
value  ratios  and  debt-to-income  ratios  for  households.  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  was 
reformed in 2005, making it more enforceable by relaxing the rules to reflect the difficulty of 
adhering  to  limits  throughout  the  economic  cycle  as  the  burden  on  public  debt  increases 
during a recession due to automatic stabilisers (such as increased social security payments). 
A number of measures were introduced in the eurozone during the crisis to protect the EMU, 
such as the creation of the European Financial Stability Facility. The debate about longer-
term reforms is currently ongoing. 
Calibrating  these  rules  and  national  macroprudential  instruments,  such  as  a  maximum 
household debt-to-income ratio, is difficult because we lack complete understanding of how 
risks  to  the  financial  system  develop  and  how  macroprudential  instruments  act  on  those 
risks.  As  a  result,  decisions  cannot  be  fully  guided  by  theory;  instead,  policy  makers  are 
required  to  make  genuine  policy  judgments.  This  may  be  more  difficult  to  achieve  for 
international tools that require agreement between multiple national policy makers. 
Macroprudential policy needs to be operational soon 
It is therefore clear that vulnerabilities are emerging as countries recover from the crisis and 
it is important that national authorities are soon able to implement macroprudential policies to 
address  those  risks.  Leading  the  development  of  formalised  macroprudential  policy 
arrangements are the European Systemic Risk Board, which will hold its inaugural meeting in 
just  two  days,  and  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council  in  the  US,  which  held  its  first 
meeting  in  October  2010.  But  many  other  countries  are  thinking  seriously  about  how  to 
implement and conduct macroprudential policy in their jurisdictions. 
Governance arrangements for macroprudential policy 
A vital aspect of the macroprudential policy framework will be the design of the governance 
arrangements. They will determine how the different elements of the framework are brought 
together and will influence how macroprudential policy interacts with other policy areas. 
Governance arrangements should be effective in three broad areas; they must ensure that 
the macroprudential decision-maker (the “macroprudential agency”) has: (i) a clear mandate; 
                                                                                                                                                      
managed  to  avoid  the  fiscal  consolidation  currently  seen  in  many  other  EU  countries.  One  reason  for 
Sweden’s robust public finances is that it had to implement a programme of fiscal consolidation in the mid-
1990s,  following  the  Swedish  banking  crisis.  Therefore,  Sweden  had  already  learnt  the  importance  of 
maintaining sustainable deficits and debt levels, and had already imposed many of the public reforms required 
to deal with structural problems that can inhibit economic recovery. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
(ii)  access  to  the  necessary  information  and  the  analytical  capability  to  set  policy;  and 
(iii) control over a sufficient set of tools to achieve its mandate. 
The need for a clear mandate 
Effective  governance  arrangements  must  ensure  that  the  macroprudential  agency  has  a 
clear  mandate.  That  is,  the  objectives  of  macroprudential  policy,  the  tools  available  to  the 
macroprudential  agency  and  the  interaction  of  macroprudential  policy  and  other  public 
policies must be clearly set out. This is necessary to ensure that: (a) there is no ambiguity 
about the macroprudential agency’s role; (b) expectations on the agency are in line with what 
it  can  achieve;  (c)  the  macroprudential  agency  can  be  held  accountable  for  its  actions  (or 
lack of action); and (d) any overlaps between policy areas or agencies can be better handled. 
It  may  be  desirable  to  set  out  the  macroprudential  mandate  (and  objectives)  explicitly 
because this could make it easier for the macroprudential agency to defend unpopular but 
necessary interventions. It would also allow policy objectives to be ranked, which would help 
manage policy trade-offs. However, when setting explicit mandates or objectives in law, care 
must  to  be  taken  to  avoid  inadvertently  constraining  policy  actions.  This  is  a  potential 
problem because we do not fully understand the variables that influence financial stability. 
Indeed, we currently lack a precise but comprehensive definition of financial stability. 
In  addition  to  giving  the  macroprudential  agency  a  clear  mandate,  there  should  be  a 
transparent decision-making process that avoids political and interest group pressure. This is 
necessary  to  ensure  that  the  macroprudential  agency  is  free  to  make  interventions  that 
impose short-term costs on financial institutions or the public in order to achieve long-term 
benefits through financial stability.7 While the macroprudential agency must be independent, 
it  must  also  be  accountable  for  its  actions  (or  lack  of  action).  A  clear  mandate  will  help 
achieve  accountability  and  make  assessment  of  the  macroprudential  agency  against  its 
objectives easier. 
Information and analytical capability 
Effective governance arrangements must also ensure that the macroprudential agency has 
access  to  the  information  and  analytical  capability  needed  to  quickly  identify  system-wide 
risks and to determine when and how instruments should be used in response to these risks. 
Information  on  exposures  between  institutions  and  on  exposures  commonly  held  by 
institutions is likely to be crucial for macroprudential supervision. Much of this information will 
need to be obtained from individual institutions and may overlap with the type of information 
collected for microprudential purposes. The collection and sharing of this information may be 
easier  if  the  microprudential  and  macroprudential  agencies  are  located  together.  An 
alternative  approach  would  be  to  give  a  separate  microprudential  agency  responsibility  for 
collecting the information necessary for the conduct of microprudential and macroprudential 
policy.  Memorandums  of  Understandings  or  information-sharing  protocols  would  then  be 
used to ensure the free sharing of information between agencies. 
The analytical skills and tools required for macroprudential policy are likely to draw on those 
used for macroeconomic analysis and, to a lesser degree, microprudential analysis. But the 
                                                 
7   This argument is developed by Martin Cihák in a speech “Price stability, financial stability and central bank 
independence”, 38th Economics Conference of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank, 2010. A number of case 
studies illustrating how inadequate independence arrangements for financial sector regulators and supervisors 
have contributed to the emergence and scale of financial crises are presented by Marc Quinton and Michael 
W. Taylor in “Regulatory and supervisory independence and financial stability” IMF Working Paper, WP/0246, 
2002. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
macroprudential agency will need to build new analytical techniques. Before the crisis, many 
central banks had already begun to develop the type of system analysis that will be required 
for macroprudential supervision (for example, in the assessment of interdependencies and 
systemic risks included in financial stability reports) – but the analytical techniques remain in 
their infancy. 
the 
for  effective  analysis, 
information  and  knowledge  necessary 
Control over a sufficient set of tools 
the 
As  well  as 
macroprudential  agency  must  have  access  to  suitable  instruments  in  order  to  achieve  its 
mandate.  Otherwise  there  will  be  unreasonable  expectations  of  what  the  macroprudential 
agency can achieve, as it may be unable to address the system-wide risks that it identifies. 
The macroprudential mandate is likely to be broad in scope, as system-wide risks can arise 
in  a  wide  range  of  ways  and  from  a  wide  range  of  sources.  Consequently,  the  range  of 
macroprudential instruments must be equally broad in scope. Discussions of macroprudential 
instruments usually emphasise the need for instruments that operate in two dimensions: the 
time  or  cyclical  dimension,  in  which  instruments  are  designed  to  counteract  financial 
multipliers/  accelerators  that  amplify  cycles;  and  the  cross-sectional  dimension,  in  which 
instruments  are  required  to  isolate  or  dampen  the  transmission  of  problems  across  the 
financial system. 
While it is important that the macroprudential agency has control over instruments to prevent 
and  mitigate  system-wide  risks,  it  is  not  essential  for  the  agency  to  implement  these 
instruments itself. The macroprudential toolkit is likely to include instruments used for other 
policy objectives and not implemented by the macroprudential agency (for example, capital 
requirements and insurance premiums). 
Overlap between policy areas 
The overlap between different policy areas is one of the major challenges to the design of 
effective governance arrangements. Responsibility for using instruments that can be used for 
multiple policy objectives is more complicated and policy-setting is more difficult as policy-
makers must consider the unintended impact of their instruments on other policy objectives 
and the unintended impact of other policy-makers’ instruments on their own policy objective. 
The  use  of  an  instrument  for  one  objective  may  conflict  with  or  amplify  the  effect  of 
instruments used to achieve a different policy objective. This is best illustrated by considering 
the relationship between macroprudential policy and monetary policy. 
Monetary policy instruments can affect financial stability 
Monetary policy instruments can have an effect on financial stability. Recently, it has been 
proposed that monetary policy can affect the build-up of risk in the financial system through 
the  “risk-taking  channel”,  an  independent  and  previously  unrecognised  part  of  the 
transmission mechanism.8 There are a number of ways in which (loose) monetary policy is 
said to encourage risk-taking. Low interest rates can encourage investors to substitute low-
yielding, safe assets for higher yielding, riskier assets – the “search for yield”. Investors (such 
as pension funds) may make this substitution in the hope of attaining returns that match their 
commitments. 
                                                 
8   The concept of a risk-taking channel was introduced by Claudio Borio and Haibin Zhu in “Capital regulation, 
risk-taking and monetary policy: a missing link in the transmission mechanism?” BIS Working Paper No.268, 
2008. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Alternatively,  investors  may  be  encouraged  to  take  greater  risks  if  they  perceive  that 
monetary  policy  is  being  used  asymmetrically  –  that  is,  that  the  policy  rate  is  reduced 
aggressively  in  the  event  of  a  sharp  fall  in  asset  prices  but  the  policy  rate  is  not  used  to 
address sharp increases in asset prices.  
Another,  more  indirect  channel,  is  formed  by  a  feedback  loop  that  amplifies  asset  price 
increases  and  causes  banks  to  increase  their  holdings  of  risky  assets.  It  is  argued  that 
financial  institutions  target  leverage  ratios  that  are  constant  (commercial  banks)  or  pro-
cyclical (investment banks). Therefore, an increase in the value of financial assets causes 
financial institutions to increase their balance sheets to maintain their target leverage ratios, 
which puts further upward pressure on asset prices. This also causes an increase in the level 
of risk in the financial system because the availability of safe investments is limited, so banks 
must move up the risk spectrum towards risky borrowers when they increase their balance 
sheets. 
Macroprudential policy instruments can affect price stability 
Macroprudential  policy  instruments  can  also  have  an  effect  on  price  stability.  This  can  be 
illustrated using a highly stylised view of the monetary policy transmission mechanism: 
 This equation describes how banks’ lending rates are a function of the central bank’s policy 
) is a function of the 
rate plus an interest rate margin or spread. The interest rate margin (
compensation  taken  by  banks  for  factors  such  as  administrative  costs,  capital  costs,  risk 
premiums and the banks’ profit margins. The failure of macroprudential policy can affect the 
transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  by  affecting  the  interest  rate  margin.  For 
example,  during  a  crisis,  the  relationship  between  the  policy  rate  and  market  rates  may 
diverge as market rates are increasingly governed by uncertainty over credit risk.  
But macroprudential policy can also affect the transmission mechanism outside of a crisis. 
This is because the bank lending rate is also a function of financial regulations (placed on 
banks  to  enhance  financial  stability  and  consumer  protection),  as  these  tend  to  increase 
banks’  costs  which,  to  a  certain  extent,  are  passed  on  to  customers  in  the  form  of  an 
increased interest rate margin. This concept can be illustrated in the stylised equation for the 
lending rate by adding a variable (
) which designates regulations affecting the interest rate 
margin: 
 This equation is, of course, a simplification, but it is useful for illustrative purposes. It shows 
how  some  static  macroprudential  instruments,  such  as  increased  capital  or  reserve 
requirements, will affect the interest rate margin in a “one-off shift” when they are introduced, 
which  will  affect  the  transmission  mechanism  during  the  period  of  adjustment.  However, 
there  are  also  likely  to  be  dynamic  macroprudential  instruments,  such  as  time-varying 
countercyclical capital buffers, aimed at ensuring that macroprudential policy can influence 
the availability and pricing of credit throughout the cycle. These time-varying instruments will 
affect the transmission mechanism on an ongoing basis as they change over time. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But the instruments are not perfect substitutes 
While  the  effects  of  monetary  and  macroprudential  instruments  may  overlap,  they  are  not 
perfect substitutes.9 As stated earlier, the macroprudential policy toolkit is likely to include a 
diverse  range  of  instruments  that  operate  in  different  ways  on  different  elements  of  the 
financial  system.  And  the  effect  of  these  instruments  on  policy  objectives  other  than 
macroprudential policy will also vary. For example, cross-sectional instruments are less likely 
to  conflict  with  monetary  policy  than  with  the  cyclical  dimension  of  macroprudential  policy. 
And instruments aimed at a narrow range of financial institutions or agents will be easier to 
focus on financial behaviour rather than macroeconomic factors.  
In  general,  it  is  desirable  to  use  instruments  with  a  narrower  focus  to  address  specific 
problems,  as  they  can  be  better  tailored  to  the  problem  and  will  have  fewer  unintended 
consequences on the real economy and on other policy objectives. However, there will be 
times when instruments with a broader scope will be desirable – for example, when there is a 
danger  that  developments  in  the  financial  system  will  enable  agents  to  circumvent  more 
narrowly focused instruments. 
The ability to circumvent instruments forms one of the challenges for macroprudential policy. 
The effectiveness of macroprudential policy could be strained when the build-up of risks (for 
example, an asset price bubble) in the financial system justifies significant policy intervention 
to  contain  the  risks  but  the  prevailing  macroeconomic  conditions  do  not  justify  a  similarly 
aggressive  monetary  policy.  While 
tighten  policy 
substantially to increase market interest rates (to dampen the asset price bubble), doing so 
will  increase  the  incentive  to  circumvent  the  intervention  (for  example  by  borrowing  from 
institutions  outside  the  scope  of  macroprudential  policy,  such  as  foreign  lenders).  This 
implies  that  the  effectiveness  of  time-varying  macroprudential  instruments  will  vary 
depending on the arbitrage opportunities available to borrowers and lenders in the economy. 
the  macroprudential  agency  may 
Macroprudential and monetary policy instruments must be coordinated 
The interaction between macroprudential policy and monetary policy instruments means that 
it will be necessary to coordinate their use. This is for three reasons. Firstly, there is a danger 
of  the  instruments  conflicting  if  they  are  implemented  in  an  uncoordinated  manner  by 
authorities  with  different  objectives.  This  has  been  shown  to  lead  to  a  “push-me,  pull-you” 
problem  in  which  monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy  instruments  are  used  more 
aggressively, in opposing directions, leading to a worse outcome than if the instruments had 
been coordinated.10 
Secondly,  in  most  cases,  monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy  instruments  should 
reinforce, not conflict with, each other. But it will still be necessary to monitor and understand 
the overlap between the instruments to ensure optimal policy. 
Thirdly, in some extreme situations, the use of instruments usually prescribed for monetary 
or  macroprudential  policy  will  be  insufficient  to  meet  their  respective  policy  objectives.  In 
such situations, monetary and macroprudential policy instruments will be required to work in 
tandem to meet the policy objectives. Close coordination will be needed to guide use of the 
tools in these circumstances, as the distinction between the objectives of the instruments will 
be blurred. 
                                                 
9   A recent paper, by Charlie Bean, Matthias Paustian, Adrian Penalver and Tim Taylor, “Monetary policy after 
the fall”, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Annual Conference, August 2010, shows that the monetary 
policy  instrument  and  macroprudential  instrument  (a  lump-sum  levy/subsidy  on  the  banking  sector)  are  not 
perfect substitutes in a sticky-price New Keynesian macroeconomic model with a banking sector. 
10   Charlie Bean et al, ibid. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
The  overlap  between  macroprudential  and  monetary  policy  is  one  rationale  for  giving  the 
central  bank  a  prominent  role  in  the  setting  of  macroprudential  policy.  In  addition,  many 
central banks already have some of the analytical skills that will be needed for conducting the 
policy. However, greater analytical capacity will need to be built up. 
Analytical tools must be developed to guide policy 
While we know that there is an overlap between macroprudential policy and monetary policy, 
we lack models that describe the relationship in much detail. It is a difficult task for a number 
of  reasons:  (a)  in  the  models  currently  used  by  central  banks,  financial  sectors  are  poorly 
modelled,  so  it  is  difficult  to  introduce  financial  instabilities;  (b)  developments  in  financial 
markets  are  sometimes  driven  by  psychology,  which  is  difficult  to  replicate  in  models  with 
rational agents; (c) the risk of a crisis cannot be modelled in the usual way, as it is more like 
an extra channel in the transmission mechanism; and (d) policymakers want models that can 
give them guidance on when to act, which is extremely challenging. 
One  approach  that  I  find  promising  was  recently  outlined  in  a  presentation  by  Michael 
Woodford.11 He described a version of a new Keynesian model with two possible states for 
credit spreads: normal and elevated (that is during a crisis). He argued that it is the degree of 
leverage  in  the  financial  system,  rather  than  the  level  of  asset  prices,  that  poses  a  risk  to 
financial stability. In a standard New Keynesian model, the optimal policy commitment will be 
to hold the output-gap-adjusted price level (the “optimal target criterion”) constant. However, 
Woodford showed that when the likelihood of a crisis increases when leverage increases, the 
optimal target criterion is altered to include a factor relating to the marginal increase in the 
expected loss from a crisis per unit increase in the level of leverage. Therefore, the central 
bank should balance its inflation and output stabilisation objectives against its concern about 
financial instability. An attractive feature of this model is that it shows that, in most cases, the 
central bank will set the optimal policy rate in the usual manner (that is, it can disregard the 
factor relating to the marginal risk of a crisis in the optimal target criterion) but, if required, the 
central bank can affect the probability of a crisis by keeping the policy rate higher. 
An alternative approach is to describe the connection between the Taylor rule for monetary 
policy and a form of Taylor rule that describes how regulations vary based on an assessment 
of, for example, credit growth.12 The different rules are connected through the stylised view 
of the monetary policy transmission mechanism presented earlier: 
 )  is  determined  by  the  well-known  Taylor  rule  for  monetary  policy.  The 
The  policy  rate  (
), which is itself determined by non-
interest rate margin (
time varying regulations ( ), the credit gap (measured as actual credit volume in relation to a 
level deemed sustainable over the long-term (
)), and the output gap (measured as the 
actual level of output in relation to a level deemed sustainable over the long-run, (
) is influenced by regulation (
 Together,  the  Taylor  rule  for  monetary  policy  and  the  rule  for  regulation  form,  through  the 
bank  lending  interest  rate  equation,  a  system  that  describes  the  relationship  between 
monetary  policy  and  macroprudential  policy.  I  should  emphasise  that  this  is  merely  an 
                                                  
11   Michael Woodford, “Inflation targeting and financial stability”, Czech National Bank seminar, September 2010. 
12   Stefan  Ingves,  “Monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  –  some  future  challenges”,  Swedish  Economics 
Association, May 2010. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
illustration  of  a  quite  loose  concept,  rather  than  a  description  of  a  concrete  proposal  or 
model. But it helpfully illustrates the type of work that must be carried out before any theory 
or model can be applied in practice. 
The Riksbank has used a simple version of this rule to illustrate the effect that countercyclical 
capital buffers could have had in Sweden between Q1 1997 and Q2 2009 (see Figure 5). 
Under  this  rule,  capital  adequacy  for  the  four  main  banks  in  Sweden  is  a  function  of  the 
banks’ long-run capital adequacy ratio, the credit gap and the output gap. 
Figure 5: Countercyclical capital buffer using capital adequacy rule 
Source: Riksbank 
Again, this exercise is purely illustrative, but the results are encouraging, as the rule would 
have raised the banks’ capital in the run-up to the recent crisis and lowered it after the crisis 
hit. And the results broadly match those from a similar exercise conducted by Claudio Borio, 
in which a measure of the credit-to-GDP was used to guide the size of countercyclical capital 
buffers in Sweden since 1980 (Figure 6).13 
                                                  
13   Claudio  Borio,  “Credit  in  monetary  and  (macro-)prudential  policy”,  Sveriges  Riksbank  workshop  on  housing 
markets, monetary policy and financial stability, November 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
Figure 6: Countercyclical buffers in Sweden using credit-to-GDP gap-rule 
 
Vertical shaded areas indicate the starting years of system-wide banking crises. The countercyclical buffer is 0 
when the value of the credit/GDP gap is below 2, and 2.5 when it is above 10%; for gaps between 2 and 10% the 
buffer is calculated as 2.5/8 times the value of the credit/GDP gap exceeding 2%. Source: BIS calculations. 
However, much more work is required, for example to allow the approach to include other 
regulations, to determine how best to calculate the sustainable level of credit in the long-run, 
and to overcome the econometric problems when estimating the rule.14 And it is a long way 
short of being something that can guide the practical use of macroprudential policies. 
Summary 
In  this  speech,  I  have  broadly  illustrated  some  of  the  thoughts  and  reflections  that 
macroprudential  (and  other)  policy-makers  will  need  to  consider  going  forward.  There  are 
many challenging issues: some of them are new (and particular to macroprudential policy) 
but many of them are not, such as the need to manage the overlap between policy areas. 
However,  we  can  already  see  system-wide  risks  again  building  in  financial  systems,  in 
Sweden and internationally – so it is important that we now face these challenges head on.  
The first challenge will be designing effective macroprudential frameworks to ensure that the 
appropriate  agencies  are  given  the  appropriate  mandates,  sufficient  capability,  and  policy 
instruments to deal with threats to financial stability. Governance arrangements will play an 
important role. They will help to clearly define the role of macroprudential policy, to ensure 
that it can be used effectively, and to manage the interaction with other policy areas. While 
there  are  likely  to  be  numerous  solutions  for  the  design  of  effective  governance 
arrangements, the issues and key concerns are fairly well defined and understood.  
                                                 
14   The  Riksbank  faced  several  econometric  problems  when  attempting  to  estimate  the  capital  adequacy  rule 
shown in Figure 4. For example, we used a short time series and faced an endogeneity problem (because 
bank lending is included on the left and right hand side of the rule). Therefore, in this exercise, we have simply 
selected  coefficients  that  achieve  what  we  believe  to  be  an  appropriate  level  of  sensitivity  between  capital 
adequacy regulation and the output gap and the bank lending gap. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Unfortunately, as I have discussed, it is clear that we do not have the same understanding of 
the more technical aspects of how macroprudential instruments should be used and of how 
they interact with other policy areas. I have highlighted a couple of high-level approaches to 
modelling the interaction of macroprudential policy and monetary policy, but these are not yet 
sufficiently developed to produce anything that is practically applicable. So there are likely to 
be a number of open questions / uncertainties when macroprudential policy becomes active. 
Fortunately that is nothing new for policy-makers.  
That said, this is an exciting and, I believe, potentially very fruitful area for research in the 
future. And it is encouraging to see prominent researchers becoming increasingly interested 
in  issues  related  to  financial  stability.  I  am  therefore  hopeful  that  there  will  be  mutually 
beneficial cooperation between academics and policy-makers in the future. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
