K C Chakrabarty: Introduction of International Financial Reporting 
Standards (IFRS) - issues and challenges 
Speech  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
inauguration  of  a  national  level  seminar  on  International  Financial  Reporting  Standards 
(IFRS), Mumbai, 11 February 2011. 
 Dr  Naresh  Chandra,  Principal,  Birla  College,  Former  Pro  Vice  Chancellor,  Mumbai 
University,  Dr  Shyam  Agrawal,  eminent  eye  surgeon,  Shri  M.  M.  Chitale,  veteran  CA  and 
Chairman  NACAS,  Shri  U.  Venkataraman,  CEO-Currency  Derivatives  Segment  &  Whole 
Time Director, MCX-SX, Principal of PDL College of Commerce and Economics and my dear 
student Dr N. N. Pandey, Prof D. M. Kadhi, Convenor, other distinguished guests, ladies and 
gentlemen. I am delighted to be present here amongst you all on the occasion of the National 
Level Seminar on IFRS. Needless to say, it is a very topical area which has been engaging 
the attention of the standard setters, government authorities and regulatory bodies for quite 
some time. I shall share with you a few of my thoughts on the issue. 
Reading financial statements 
Let me begin by talking about the most elementary and fundamental area of commerce and 
accountancy  which  is  “How  to  read  a  Financial  Statement”.  To  a  lay  man,  financial 
statements comprise the Balance Sheet and Profit and Loss Account. However, the numbers 
given in these alone do not give the correct picture to the reader unless one carefully goes 
through the notes to accounts, cash flow statements and qualifications, if any, in the Auditor’s 
Report  and  also  appreciates  the  accounting  policies  followed  by  the  enterprise.  In  some 
cases, ratio analysis, trend analysis and an industry peer comparison can be done to obtain 
a  better  perspective.  A  thorough  study  of  all  these  aspects  is  required  before  a  user  can 
make an informed decision. 
The  objective  of  financial  statements  is  to  provide  information  about  the  financial  position, 
performance and cash flows of an enterprise that is useful to a wide range of users in making 
economic  decisions.  Corporate 
the  notes  and  narratives 
surrounding them, are intended to enable investors to predict cash flows, determine returns 
generated  on  capital  invested,  assess  the  business  liquidity,  and  evaluate  management’s 
performance. Financial statements are prepared by drawing an artificial line of cut-off at the 
year end, even though the business continues as a going concern. In many transactions, one 
leg of a transaction may be completed, while the other, leg may still have to take place. For 
instance, questions arise on several issues such as to whether unsold goods at the end of 
the  accounting  period  can  be  valued  at  cost  or  realizable  value  and  the  applicable  cost 
formula, alternative method for evaluating depreciated/amortized value of fixed assets, how 
to  ascertain  the  value  of  a  number  of  assets/liabilities,  claims  and  counter-claims  and  the 
correct treatment of uncertainties involved in evaluating a particular transaction. Therefore, 
there  is  an  imperative  need  for  evolving  appropriate  accounting  policies  and  accounting 
standards to deal with these questions. 
financial  statements  with 
Importance of accounting standards 
Accounting as a “Language of Business” communicates the financial results and health of an 
enterprise to various interested parties by means of periodical financial statements. Like any 
other language accounting should have its grammar and these sets of rules are Accounting 
Standards.  The  objective  of  Accounting  Standards  is  three  fold.  Firstly,  they  help  to 
standardize  the  diverse  accounting  policies  and  eliminate  the  incomparability  of  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
statements within an entity and across entities. Secondly, they facilitate the presentation of 
high  quality,  transparent  and  comparable  information  in  financial  statements.  Thirdly,  they 
reduce  to  accounting  alternatives  and  thereby  eliminate  the  element  of  subjectivity  in 
financial statements. 
India  has  a  long  tradition  of  framing  accounting  standards  in  the  country.  The  Institute  of 
Chartered Accountants of India (ICAI) set up under an act of Parliament had constituted an 
Accounting Standards Board (ASB) in April 1977 and the ASB has been framing the Indian 
Accounting Standards for the last three decades. 
International financial reporting standards 
Globalization of financial markets has meant an increased focus on international standards in 
accounting and has intensified efforts towards a single set of high quality, globally acceptable 
set of accounting standards. Financial statements prepared in different countries according 
to different set of rules, mean numerous national sets of standards, each with its own set of 
interpretation about a similar transaction, making it difficult to compare, analyse and interpret 
financial statements across nations. 
A  financial  reporting  system  supported  by  strong  governance,  high  quality  standards,  and 
firm  regulatory  framework  is  the  key  to  economic  development.  Indeed,  sound  financial 
reporting standards underline the trust that investors place in financial reporting information 
and  thus  play  an  important  role in contributing to  the  economic  development  of  a country. 
Needless to mention, internationally accepted accounting standards play a major role in this 
entire process. 
It is in this context that the role of an independent, global standard-setting body such as the 
International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (IASB)  is  of  critical  importance.  The  principal 
objectives of the IASB are:  
a. 
to  develop  a  single  set  of  high  quality,  understandable,  enforceable  and  globally 
accepted  international  financial  reporting  standards  (IFRSs)  through  its  standard-
setting body, the IASB; 
to promote the use and rigorous application of those standards;  
to take account of the financial reporting needs of emerging economies and small 
and medium-sized entities (SMEs); and  
to  bring  about  convergence  of  national  accounting  standards  and  IFRSs  to  high 
quality solutions. 
b. 
c. 
d. 
Converging  to  global  accounting  standards  i.e.  IFRS  facilitates  comparability  between 
enterprises  operating  in  different  jurisdictions.  Thus,  global  accounting  standards  would 
remove  a  frictional  element  to  capital  flows  and  lead  to  wider  and  deeper  investment  in 
markets. Convergence with IFRS is also in the interest of the industry since compliance with 
them would be able to create greater confidence in the mind of investors and reduce the cost 
of raising foreign capital. It is also burdensome and costly for enterprises operating across 
several  countries  to  comply  with  a  multitude  of  national  accounting  standards  and  convert 
them to a single standard for group reporting purposes. Convergence would thus help reduce 
both the cost of capital and cost of compliance for industry. 
In pursuit of its objectives, the IASB works in close cooperation with stakeholders around the 
world,  including  investors,  national  standard-setters,  regulators,  auditors,  academics,  and 
others who have an interest in the development of high-quality global standards. Progress 
toward  this  goal  has  been  steady.  All  major  economies  have  established  time  lines  to 
converge with or adopt IFRSs in the near future and more than hundred countries require or 
permit the use of IFRSs. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Though Indian Accounting Standards are framed based on standards issued by the IASB, 
there  are  certain  differences  due  to  the  legal  and  regulatory  environment  prevailing  in  the 
country,  conceptual  issues  and  the  economic  environment.  In  2007  the  ICAI  decided  that 
India should converge towards IFRS in a definite time frame in the wake of developments 
taking  place  in  other  major  jurisdictions  which  had  set  up  time  schedules  for  migrating 
towards IFRS. 
Lessons from the financial crisis – review of standards for financial instruments 
One of the most destabilizing elements of the global financial crisis has been the pro-cyclical 
amplification  of  financial  shocks  through  the  banking  system,  financial  markets  and  the 
broader  economy.  The  tendency  of  the  market  participants  to  behave  in  a  pro-cyclical 
manner  has  been  amplified  through  a  variety  of  channels,  including  through  accounting 
standards  for  both  mark-to-market  assets  and  held-to-maturity  loans,  margining  practices 
and through the build up and release of leverage among the financial institutions, firms and 
consumers.  Failure  to  capture  major  on-and  off-balance  sheet  risks  as  well  as  derivative 
related exposures, was also a key destabilising factor. 
The provisions of IAS 39-Financial Instruments-Recognition and Measurement issued by the 
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), establishes the principles for recognizing 
and  measuring  financial  assets  and  financial  liabilities.  This  standard  is  of  particular 
importance to the banking sector and NBFCs which deal primarily in financial instruments. 
IAS  39  includes  provisions  about  classification  of  financial  instruments,  their  ongoing 
measurement (including when impairment is required) and derecognition. The provisions of 
IAS 39 are currently applicable globally in respect of financial instruments. 
Following the crisis, there was widespread criticism that the accounting standards, more so, 
fair  value  accounting  significantly  contributed  to  the  financial  crisis  or  at  the  very  least 
exacerbated the severity of the crisis, in view of its failure to deal with illiquid markets and 
distressed sales. 
The  G  20  Working  Group  on 
“Enhancing  Sound  Regulation  and  Strengthening 
Transparency” recommended that accounting standard setters should strengthen accounting 
recognition of loan loss provisions by considering alternative approaches for recognizing and 
measuring loan losses that incorporate a broader range of available credit information. The 
G 20 Working Group also recommended that the International Accounting Standards Board 
(IASB) should enhance its efforts to facilitate the global convergence towards a single set of 
high-quality  accounting  standards  by  sharing  the  experience  of  countries  that  have 
completed 
technical  assistance.  Another  significant 
recommendation  was  that  accounting  standard  setters  should  accelerate  efforts  to  reduce 
the complexity of accounting standards for financial instruments and enhance presentation 
standards  to  allow  the  users  of  financial  statements  to  better  assess  the  uncertainty 
surrounding the valuation of financial instruments. 
In April 2009, in response to the input received on its work responding to financial crisis, and 
following  the  conclusions  of  the  G  20  leaders  and  the  recommendations  of  international 
bodies such as the Financial Stability Board, the IASB announced an accelerated timetable 
for replacing the principal standard for recognition and measurement of financial instruments-
IAS  39.  IAS  39  is  sought  to  be  replaced  by  IFRS  9  in  three  phases.  The  first  phase  was 
completed  with  the  issue  of  the  portion  of  IFRS  9  which  deals  with  the  classification  and 
measurement of financial assets and financial liabilities. The second and third phases are in 
the  area  of  Hedge  Accounting  and  Impairment,  where  currently  work  is  underway.  It  is 
expected that IFRS 9 will replace IAS 39 in its entirety by June 2011. 
this  process  and  by  providing 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
IFRS Convergence – implementation in the Indian context and challenges 
In the backdrop of the developments after the global financial crisis, the Ministry of Corporate 
Affairs (MCA), GOI set up a high-powered Core Group under the chairmanship of Secretary 
(MCA)  to  study  the  impact  of  IFRSs  and  to  understand  the  preparedness  of  the  Indian 
companies  for  converging  with  IFRSs.  The  Road  map  towards  IFRS  convergence  for 
corporates  from  April  1,  2011  has  been  finalized  by  the  Ministry  of  Corporate  Affairs  in 
January, 2010. 
Convergence  also  entails  maintaining  consistency  with  legal  and  regulatory  requirements 
prevalent in the country. Towards this end, amendments need to be made to existing laws 
and regulations, notably the Companies Act, 1956 provisions and schedules that detail the 
requirements  of  financial  statements  need  to  be  harmonized  with  IFRS  requirements  and 
converged  Indian  Accounting  Standards  need to  be  notified  under  section  211  (3C)  of  the 
said  Act.  Additionally  there  are  also  issues  relating  to  taxation  under  an  IFRS  converged 
environment. 
There is also a need to improve awareness in general and build technical competence for the 
accounting and auditing profession on IFRS. The ICAI has already included a comparative 
study of Indian Accounting standards with international standards in its syllabus for CA Final 
Advanced Accountancy and is also offering courses and seminars for its members to update 
them  in  the  field.  The  RBI  too  has  been  holding  periodical  seminars  and  workshops  to 
educate its staff on IFRS provisions. 
Challenges for banks and non-banking financial companies 
 In respect of banks and NBFCs, in view of the special issues involved (finalisation of IFRS 9 
expected  in  the  middle  of  2011),  a  separate  road  map  was  prepared  in  March  2010  for 
convergence  with  IFRS  for  the  banking  industry  and  NBFCs.  The  convergence  process 
would be from period beginning April 1, 2013, with a phased approach for urban banks and 
NBFCs. This gives the banking system some time to adopt to the standards in a smooth and 
non-disruptive manner. 
It  has  to  be  noted,  however,  that  banks  will  be  significantly  affected  by  the  IAS 
39 replacement  project  and  a  number  of  other  accounting  developments  including  those 
relating  to  financial  instruments,  fair  value  measurement,  financial  statement  presentation 
and  consolidation.  Some  of  the  major  changes  pertain  to  certain  critical  areas  such  as 
classification and measurement of financial assets, classification and valuation of liabilities, 
impairment  provisions  and  fair  value  measurement.  One  area  of  concern  has  been  the 
drawback  of  the  incurred  loss  model  of  IAS  39  and  the  need  to  introduce  more  forward 
looking provisioning. 
The IFRS convergence process will involve significant challenges for the banking system in 
general.  Banks  would  need  to  upgrade  their  infrastructure,  including  IT  and  human 
resources,  to  face  the  complexities  and  challenges  of  IFRS.  Some  major  technical  issues 
arising for Indian banks during the convergence process would be differences between the 
IFRS  and  current  regulatory  guidelines  on  classification  and  measurement  of  financial 
assets, focus in the standard on the business model followed by banks and the challenges 
for  management  in  this  area,  application  of  fair  values  for  transactions  where  not  much 
guidance  is  available  in  India  in  terms  of  market  practices  or  benchmarks,  and  expected 
changes in impairment rules. 
Key non-accounting issues 
Let me now draw your attention towards certain key non-accounting issues which are equally 
crucial in the IFRS convergence process. The desired results will not come if non-accounting 
issues are not addressed along with the accounting issues. The first challenge is integrity of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
data  and  information.  Most  Scheduled  Commercial  Banks  in  India  have  either  already 
migrated or are in the process of migrating to Core Banking Solutions (CBS). In this context, 
data integrity and data validity would be of critical importance especially due to data intensive 
requirements  of  IFRS  converged  standards.  The  present  system  of  compilation  and 
submission  of  data  which  forms  the  backbone  of  preparation  of  financial  statements 
compromises on data quality. The scope of erroneous data entry of even malicious wrong 
reporting  cannot  be  ruled  out.  Lack  of  adequate  data  results  in  absence  of  information  on 
“returns”  at  activity  level  and  segmental  reporting  in  a  granular  manner.  Incorporating 
suitable  capability  in  CBS  for  enabling  automated  data  flow/generation  of  MIS  would  be  a 
facilitator  in  accurate  reporting  and  financial  statements  prepared  from  such  data  as  the 
basis would reflect a “true and fair” picture of the financial position of the entity. RBI has set 
up a group to work on this area. Preparatory work in this regard would enable us to counter a 
basic challenge in our effort towards IFRS convergence. 
Secondly, we come to the issue of “Ethical Standards” which are of critical importance in the 
field  of  accountancy  where  users  rely  heavily  on  the  statements  made  by  accounting 
professionals. Maintaining ethical standards and values is a key part of financial reporting. 
Without a strong code of ethics and adherence to those ethics, financial reporting would fail 
to inspire and ensure public and investor confidence in entities. Thus, along with high levels 
of  technical  competence,  accounting  professionals  also  need  to  have  unquestionable  and 
impeccable  professional  integrity.  Therefore,  professional  bodies  have  codes  of  ethics  for 
their members and disciplinary procedures for those who infringe upon these rules. However, 
one  of  the  causes  of  the  recent  financial  crisis  was  also  the  poor  adherence  to  ethics  by 
some accounting professionals who exploited “form over substance”, rather than “substance 
over form” to hide weaknesses in their financial position and misstate profits. 
Thirdly,  adaptability  and  compatibility  of  existing  IT  solutions  used  by  banks  to  the  new 
requirements imposed by IFRS convergence is also a major challenge. Software which has 
been  written  keeping  in  mind  Indian  GAAP  requirements  may  have  to  be  modified 
substantially  to  incorporate  features  of  IFRS  requirements.  Similarly,  compatibility  between 
software and hardware would have to be addressed to take care of the new requirement. 
RBI  has  always  believed  in  the  fact  that  accounting  standards  and  the  integrity  of  its 
implementation has a very important role to play in the financial system as reflected in the 
Report  of  the  Committee  on  Financial  Sector  Assessment,  wherein  the  importance  of  the 
convergence process of Indian accounting standards with IFRSs has been emphasized. RBI 
has  set  up  a  Working  Group  to  address  Implementation  Issues  in  IFRS  for  non-disruptive 
migration of the Indian banking system with members from ICAI, IBA and the regulatory and 
supervisory departments of RBI. 
Conclusion 
Training, education and skill development is one of the cornerstones of a successful IFRS 
implementation.  All  the  stakeholders  including  investors,  accountants,  auditors,  customers, 
software  and  hardware  vendors,  rating  agencies,  analysts,  audit  committees,  actuaries, 
valuation  experts  and  other  specialists  would  need  to  develop  and  understanding  of  IFRS 
provisions to varying degrees and what they need to do. Educational institutions need to play 
a pro-active role and students must also strive to develop a strong conceptual understanding 
of the new framework and academic institutions should include it in their curriculum. It is not 
only the accounting issues but how we address the non-accounting issues that will determine 
how successfully we make a transition to IFRS. It is in this backdrop, and considering the 
ongoing  changes  in  the  standards  both  globally  and  in  the  Indian  context  as  well  as  the 
amount  of  work  involved  in  the  convergence  process,  that  this  National  Seminar  on  IFRS 
assumes importance. I wish the deliberations in this Seminar all success. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
