Ravi Menon: Economic and financial developments in Singapore 
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore  (MAS),  at  the  MAS’  Annual  Report  2010/11  Press  Conference,  Singapore, 
21 July 2011. 
 Good morning. Welcome to MAS’ Annual Report press conference. 
I want to focus on four key themes with a forward looking orientation: first, prospects for GDP 
growth,  second,  the  outlook  for  inflation,  third,  MAS’  financial  accounts,  and  fourth, 
maintaining high standards of financial regulation. 
Let me begin with the economy. 
Singapore’s GDP growth forecast range remains at 5–7% for now, but uncertainties 
have clearly increased. 
As  you  know,  economic  growth  took  a  sharp  step-down  in  Q2  following  the  strong 
performance in Q1. First, disruption to regional supply chains in the aftermath of the Japan 
earthquake was much more severe than expected. Second, the rise in oil prices due to the 
unrest  in  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa  has  put  a  dampener  on  global  demand. 
Singapore’s trade-related sectors bore the brunt of impact. Both manufacturing output and 
re-exports saw sequential declines in Q2. In year-on-year terms, GDP growth averaged 4.7% 
in the first half of this year. 
Looking at the second half of this year, the prognosis for global economy has taken on a more 
cautious tone. There is more uncertainty in US and Europe compared to three months ago.  
But we expect growth in our external markets to continue, albeit at a slow and uneven pace. 
In  the  US,  weaknesses  in  housing  and  labour  markets  are  persistent.  Uncertainty  over 
employment prospects will cap the strength of consumer spending. But business sentiments 
(as measured by the purchasing managers’ index) and new orders for capital goods point to 
continued economic expansion, though at a slower pace. 
In  Europe,  the  core  economies  such  as  Germany  and  France  should  continue  to  perform 
well.  Industrial  output  and  business  investment  have  been  robust.  But  sovereign  debt 
concerns  in  peripheral  EU  economies  have  escalated.  They  cast  some  uncertainty  over 
Europe’s  near-term  growth  prospects.  In  Japan,  the  economy  has  been  hit  hard  by  the 
earthquake and tsunami. But there are signs that the worst has passed as production has 
begun  to  gradually  recover.  Emerging  Asia  remains  on  a  relatively  firm  footing.  Domestic 
demand continues to be resilient, supported by robust income growth and generally healthy 
household and corporate balance sheets. 
On  balance,  the  Singapore  economy  should  register  moderate  growth  for  the  rest  of  this 
year.  Some  industry-specific  factors  that  dragged  down  growth  in  electronics  and 
pharmaceuticals are expected to be transitory and the manufacturing sector should pick up 
from the soft patch we saw in Q2. The services industries, especially financial and tourism-
related activities, should remain firm due to strong regional demand. 
MTI and MAS are reviewing Singapore’s GDP growth forecast. For now, our sense is that the 
5–7% forecast range remains intact. But if the pick-up from the downturn in Q2 is weaker 
than currently expected, growth could come in at the lower half of the range.  
Beyond  current  uncertainties,  significant  risks  remain  in  the  global  economy  and  financial 
system  that  could  derail  growth.  In  Emerging  Asia,  there  are  upside  risks  to  inflation.  If 
central banks are forced to tighten monetary policy more, growth could be jeopardized. In the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
US,  there  are  concerns  about  fiscal  sustainability.  If  these  lead  to  volatility  in  the  financial 
markets  against  the  backdrop  of  a  still-weak  labour  market,  then  GDP  could  decelerate 
sharper than expected. 
But the chief global risk is the ongoing sovereign debt crisis in peripheral Europe. If there is 
contagion  and  banks  in  core  Europe  are  affected,  there could  be  a  severe  credit squeeze 
and pullback in economic activity. MAS is closely monitoring the developments in Europe. 
Let me now go on to recent developments on the inflation front. 
Headline inflation is now expected to be 4–5%, but forecast for core inflation is 
unchanged. 
I mentioned two months ago in a speech that headline CPI inflation had probably peaked. 
This remains technically correct but less clearly so in substance. Inflation has indeed eased 
from 5.5% in January to 4.5% in April and May. But inflation is expected to creep back up to 
slightly above 5% for the next couple of months before slowly trending down towards the end 
of the year. 
Therefore,  for  2011  as  a  whole,  we  are  revising  CPI  inflation  forecast  to  4–5%,  from  the 
current  3–4%.  This  upward  revision  and  renewed  volatility  reflect  two  factors.  First, 
accommodation costs. Over the past few months, CPI accommodation costs were boosted 
by an unexpected surge in the number of tenancy contract renewals at current higher rental 
rates. This resetting of old rental contracts could persist into the second half of this year. We 
therefore expect accommodation costs to impact CPI inflation more strongly than previously. 
Second, private transport costs. COE premiums have risen faster than expected, reflecting 
rising incomes and sharp cuts in COE quota to its lowest in more than a decade. 
This  uptick  in  headline  inflation  should  be  seen  in  perspective.  A  better  measure  of 
underlying  price  pressures  in  economy  is  MAS’  measure  of  core  inflation.  Core  inflation 
excludes  private  road  transport  and  accommodation  costs,  as  these  items  are  subject  to 
short-term  fluctuations.  These  items  also  do  not  affect  the  day-to-day  outlay  of  most 
Singaporean households. Core inflation is the measure MAS monitors most closely, among a 
range of indicators. 
Compared to headline inflation, core inflation was much lower at 2.2% in April and May. This 
reflects in part MAS’ pre-emptive tightening of monetary policy in April and October last year, 
which has helped to dampen some cost increases. A stronger Sing Dollar has helped, not 
just by filtering oil and food price increases, but also by providing a restraining effect on the 
economy. The strong exchange rate has capped upward pressure on prices. For the whole 
of 2011, the projection for MAS’ core inflation remains unchanged at 2–3%.  
This  is  not  to  suggest  we  are  entirely  satisfied  with  the  inflation  situation.  Core  inflation 
remains slightly above the historical average of 1.7%. Inflationary pressures in the economy, 
while  not  acute,  bear  very  close  watching.  First,  there  is  tightness  in  the  domestic  labour 
market. The unemployment rate has dipped below 2%. Second, domestic spending remains 
firm, supported by strong income growth and generally favourable sentiments. Third, global 
commodities prices remain elevated, reflecting short-term supply constraints. 
MAS will continue to keep a close watch on inflationary pressures and developments in our 
key export markets. At this juncture, the current monetary policy stance of appreciating the 
S$NEER  policy  band  set  in  April  this  year  remains  appropriate.  The  next  Monetary  Policy 
Statement is scheduled for October. 
I will now go on to MAS’ accounts. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
MAS made investment gains of S$12.3 billion but recorded overall loss of S$10.9 
billion due to a strong exchange rate. 
Excluding  exchange  rate  effects,  MAS  achieved  income  and  net  capital  gains  totaling 
S$12.3 billion during the financial year (FY) ended March 2011. Stronger global growth led to 
an upturn across many asset classes; MAS’ diversified investments posted valuation gains. 
With  the  recovery  in  asset  markets  over  the  past  two  years,  MAS’  portfolio,  excluding 
exchange rate effects, has more than recovered from effects of the global financial crisis.  
However, the strength of the Sing Dollar has had a bearing on the valuation of MAS’ foreign 
assets.  Over  the  FY,  the  Sing  Dollar  strengthened  considerably  against  most  currencies: 
10%  against  the  US  dollar  and  5.5%  against  the  Euro.  Including  exchange  rate effects,  in 
Sing Dollar terms, MAS recorded a net loss of S$10.9 billion. 
In short, we made good investment gains, but when measured in Sing Dollars, these gains 
were  more  than  offset  by  the  strength  of  the  currency.  If  we  had  reported  our  P/L  in  an 
international currency it would show a healthy profit. 
The effect of a strong Sing Dollar on our reserves should be seen in a broader context. 
First,  the  international  purchasing  power  of  our  reserves  is  unaffected  by  strength  of  Sing 
Dollar. MAS’ foreign reserves serve two primary purposes in times of crisis: they finance our 
imports from the rest of the world, and safeguard the value of our currency. On both fronts, it 
is foreign currency value of the reserves that matters.  
Second, the strength of the Sing Dollar has safeguarded our domestic purchasing power. It 
has  helped  to  moderate  the  increase  in  Singaporeans’  cost  of  living.  For  instance,  while 
global oil prices rose by 20% in FY2010, domestic prices of oil-related items increased by 
only 10%. Or take another example of food prices. During FY2010, the rate of increase in 
food prices in Singapore was about half of that in our major trading partners, which includes 
both advanced and emerging economies. 
Last, I will elaborate on our efforts to maintain high regulatory standards. 
MAS is well-placed to meet higher global standards emerging from international 
regulatory reforms following the crisis. 
Singapore’s regulatory regime already meets  or exceeds international norms, and this has 
enabled  us  to  weather  the  financial  crisis  relatively  well.  Following  the  crisis,  international 
regulatory standards are being raised. We are well-placed to meet them. 
Let  me  start  with  banking.  MAS  announced  last  month  we  will  require  Singapore-
incorporated banks to meet Basel III capital requirements earlier than the Basel Committee’s 
schedule, and at a higher standard. Market reaction to this announcement has been positive 
because Singapore-incorporated banks are well-capitalised and in a strong position to meet 
MAS’  revised  requirements.  These  requirements  will  help keep  our  banking  system  strong 
and safeguard our financial stability. 
Likewise for liquidity. Singapore was one of earliest jurisdictions to require banks to maintain 
minimum  liquidity  levels.  Over  the  years,  this  has  evolved  to  a  risk-based  liquidity  risk 
supervision framework. Singapore banks are therefore well positioned to meet the new Basel 
liquidity ratios. 
Effective regulation is not just about setting high standards. It is also about creating market 
conditions  that  enable  financial  institutions  to  meet  the  standards.  Take  for  instance  the 
higher liquidity requirements under Basel III. MAS has taken steps to increase the availability 
of  liquid  assets  in  the  market  and  collaborate  with  other  central  banks  to  expand  eligible 
collateral in the MAS Standing Facility. Let me elaborate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
We started issuing one-month MAS Bills in April this year. This has added about $6 billion of 
high quality liquid assets for financial institutions. We have seen good interest in the Bills. We 
are looking to issue more and in longer tenor, in the future.  
As for the MAS Standing Facility, we have, in the last two years, progressively expanded the 
range of eligible collateral. MAS has signed cross-border collateral arrangements with other 
central banks. Banks can now use as collateral, Euro and Sterling cash, as well as French, 
German and British government securities. We are now finalising similar arrangements with 
the US Federal Reserve, so that banks will be able to pledge US Treasury bills and notes to 
obtain  Singapore  dollar  liquidity  at  the  Standing  Facility.  These  initiatives  significantly 
enhance banks’ flexibility to tap on global sources of liquid assets. 
Let  me  now  touch  on  the  regulation  of  financial  markets.  A  key  focus  of  international 
regulatory  reforms  has  been  on  the  trading  of  OTC  derivative  contracts.  MAS  will  meet 
objectives set by G20 Leaders on regulation of OTC derivatives as well as recommendations 
by the Financial Stability Board (FSB). We are now reviewing our detailed policies and will 
conduct consultation by the end of this year on all aspects of FSB’s recommendations. MAS 
aims to meet FSB target to implement the recommendations by end 2012.  
There are four key thrusts in FSB’s recommendations on OTC derivatives trading. 
First,  standardise  derivative  contracts.  MAS  is  working  with  Singapore  Foreign  Exchange 
Markets  Committee  (SFEMC)  to  encourage  further  standardisation  of  derivative  products. 
The SFEMC will formulate a code of conduct for financial institutions operating in the OTC 
market.  
Second, mandate central clearing of all standardised contracts. Since 2006, the Singapore 
Exchange  has  operated  a  clearing  facility  for  OTC  derivatives.  It  started  with  derivatives 
contracts  for  commodities,  energy  and  freight;  and  introduced  interest  rate  swaps  in 
November 2010. It will clear FX forwards by the end of this year. Our policy consultation will 
provide further details on how mandatory clearing will be implemented.  
Third,  move 
International  discussions  on 
implementation  issues  are  still  ongoing.  MAS  is  actively  participating  in  these  discussions. 
We  will  use  the  findings  to  help  develop  our  own  regulatory  framework  for  organised 
platforms for trading. 
Fourth, report trades. We are assessing the need for a local repository and the appropriate 
regulatory regime. Our aim is a practical and efficient system that avoids duplication.  
On  the  insurance  front,  Singapore  was  among  the  first  in  Asia  to  introduce  a  risk-based 
capital  framework  back  in  2005.  Unlike  in  banking,  there  is  no  common  global  capital 
standard for insurance companies. The closest is the EU’s new standard known as Solvency 
II  which  is  expected  to  be  implemented  by  1  January  2013.  Many  non-EU  countries  are 
looking  to  modernise  their  own  capital  frameworks  along  similar  lines.  To  ensure  that  our 
risk-based  capital  framework  in  insurance  keeps  pace  with  these  developments,  MAS  will 
embark on a review of our framework. We expect to issue a consultation paper by the end of 
this year. 
In  the  post-crisis  landscape,  there  is  a  premium  placed  on  well-regulated  financial  centres 
that have strong economic fundamentals. Singapore is in a good position to benefit from this. 
We  have  high  prudential  standards  and  rigorous  supervision  that  give  market  players 
confidence. And we are at the crossroads of Asia, which is growing significantly faster than 
the Western economies.  
2010 was a good year for Singapore’s financial centre. The financial services sector grew by 
12%  last  year.  Several  specific  factors  in  Asia  underpin  the  demand  for  financial  services 
provided  by  Singapore:  increase  in  trade,  demand  for  infrastructure  investments,  rise  of 
Asian  corporates,  and  growth  of  individual  wealth.  As  a  well  regulated  and  diversified 
international  financial  centre,  Singapore  plays  a  natural  role  in  facilitating  trade  and 
to  platforms  where  appropriate. 
trading 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
investments in the region. High regulatory standards and a conducive business environment 
will continue to support stable growth in financial services.  
Conclusion 
Before I conclude, I want to highlight one more significant theme. This year marks MAS’ 40th 
anniversary. MAS is where it is today because of the outstanding contributions of its staff – both 
past and present. The economic and financial stability that Singapore has enjoyed is the result of 
tireless efforts of generations of MAS officers. They have helped to secure for Singaporeans a 
low  rate  of  inflation,  preserve  the  purchasing  power  of  our  official  foreign  reserves,  keep  our 
financial sector safe and sound amidst crisis and change, and grow Singapore as a vibrant and 
trusted financial centre. 
But MAS could not have done this alone. I would like to thank the financial services industry 
and all our partners for working alongside MAS to meet its objectives. We will continue to 
Sustain Stability and Serve Singapore in the years to come. 
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
