Njuguna Ndung’u: Launch of the Reconstituted Market Leaders Forum 
Talking  notes  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the 
Launch of the Reconstituted Market Leaders Forum, Nairobi, 6 July 2011. 
 Thank you all for finding time to attend this inaugural meeting of the reconstituted 
Distinguished Chief Executives;  
Directors; Members;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
1. 
Market Leaders Forum.  
2. 
As background information to our meeting today, I wish to mention that the Market 
Leaders Forum, popularly known as MLF, was formed in 2001 to promote and support the 
development of the Government Bonds Program. The membership of the Forum was drawn 
from  stakeholders  in  the  Government  Securities  Market  that  included  Commercial  Banks, 
Fund Managers, Stockbrokers, Investment Banks and Capital Markets Authority.  
3. 
The Forum meets monthly and is chaired by the Governor, Central Bank of Kenya. 
The  meetings  of  the  Forum  are  purely  consultative.  The  Bank  takes  into  account  the 
recommendations of the MLF in making decisions on bonds issuance, pricing and tenors and 
on  other  issues  relating  to  the  Financial  Markets,  and  more  specifically  Government 
Securities Market. But it is also a good meeting to discuss macroeconomic situation policy 
issues.  
Achievements  
4. 
Since  its  inception,  the  Forum  has  contributed  significantly  to  the  deepening  and 
development of the financial markets in Kenya. Through the cooperation and support of the 
Forum the financial market has realized great milestones including:  
i.  
Lengthening  of  Debt  Maturity  Profile:  The  initial  objective  of  the  MLF  was  to 
lengthen the maturity profile of securities in the domestic debt portfolio in order to 
minimize refinancing risks associated with short term debt and to also deepen the 
local  financial  markets.  This  has  successfully  been  achieved  with  the  ratio  of 
Treasury  bills  to  bonds  in  the  portfolio  currently  at  23:77  from  70:30  in  2001  and 
average maturity of all securities standing at 5 years 11 months up from 8 months in 
2001. The average maturity for bonds alone is 8 years so far. In 2008, CBK issued 
the  first  long-dated  paper  of  20-years  maturity.  This  was  followed  by  successful 
issuance of a 25-year bond in 2010 and a debut 30-year savings development bond 
in 2011.  
Secondary Market Infrastructure Development: In 2008, the CBK in partnership 
with the Nairobi Stock Exchange adopted the Automated Trading System (ATS) for 
Treasury bonds. The Adoption of ATS has improved efficiency and confidence in the 
Secondary bond market with the settlement cycle shortening to T+3. This initiative 
and  other  debt  market  developments  have  seen  the  secondary  market  activity 
improve with annual turnover increasing from Ksh.84.14 Bn ($1.05 Bn) in 2009 to 
Ksh.466.07 Bn ($5.83 Bn) in 2010. In 2008, the Horizontal Repurchase Agreement 
was introduced between commercial banks to improve liquidity in the market. The 
CBK together with the MLF has also moved to diversify bonds portfolio, mobilize a 
large mass of local and foreign investors to invest in government securities and thus 
deepening  the  bonds  market  in  Kenya.  As  a  result  of  these  successes,  the  bond 
market has attracted private issuers of fixed income securities like corporate bonds 
and thereby diversified the investment opportunities.  
ii.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
iii.  
iv.  
The establishment and implementation of the benchmark bonds program: In 
conjunction with MLF, CBK has spearheaded the establishment and implementation 
of  the  benchmark  bonds  program  in  2007.  CBK  adopted  the  introduction  of  a 
benchmark  bond  program  to  address  the  problem  of  bond  fragmentation  and 
thereby improve liquidity at the secondary market and firm up the yield curve.  
Infrastructure  Bonds  (IFBs)  Issuance:  A  total  of  four  infrastructure  bonds  have 
been issued since 2009. Proceeds from these bond issues were specifically meant 
for  financing  certain  infrastructural  projects.  These  projects  include  those  in  the 
Transport Sector – e.g. Construction of new roads and rehabilitation of old ones. 
Water sewerage and irrigation – e.g. Construction of water supply and sewerage 
systems,  water  reservoir  dams,  boreholes  and  irrigation  schemes  around  the 
country. Energy – e.g. Drilling of Electricity Generating Steam Wells (geothermal), 
upgrading  the  National  Grid  System  with  New  Transmission  Lines  and  expanding 
the Rural Electrification project. A debut IFB worth Ksh18.5 bn (USD231.25 mn) was 
successfully  issued  in  February  2009.  The  largest  successful  single  IB  of 
USD 395mn issued in August 2010. Three other IFBs of total value: USD 807.5mn 
issued so far. In 2011 the CBK, in cognizance of the tenets of Kenya’s Vision 2030 
of promoting savings among Kenyans, successfully issued a debut 30-year Savings 
Development Bond.  
Appreciation  
It is with sincere delight that I commend and highly thank the exiting members of the MLF for 
their  invaluable  contributions,  support  and  cooperation  without  which  the  aforementioned 
milestones would not have been realized. Thank you once more.  
The Forum will continue to be advisory through consultative engagements to advise 
Responsibilities  
5. 
the Bank on aspects of financial markets development including the following:  
i.  
ii. 
Implementation of the Government Borrowing Programme.  
Review performance of Government Securities in the Secondary Market and advice 
on issuance of Government Securities.  
Issues relating to trading of Government Securities in the secondary market.  
Development  of  efficient  financial  markets  through  dissemination  of  market 
information, marketing and investor education.  
Deepening  of  money  and  capital  markets  and  efficient  functioning  of  the  financial 
markets.  
Peer influence among stakeholders on policy reforms in their sectors.  
Promote development and harmonization of financial markets and practices in the 
region.  
Introduction of new financial markets products/developments for the consideration of 
the Bank.  
Initiate,  recommend  and  co-ordinate 
products/developments for consideration by the Bank.  
introduction  of  new 
financial  markets 
iii.  
iv.  
v.  
vi.  
vii.  
viii.  
ix.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Review of forum membership  
6. 
As  you  have  all  observed  over  the  last  decade  or  so,  the  financial  landscape  in 
Kenya  has  undergone  many  transformations.  The  sector  has  seen  the  entrance  of  new 
players  and  stakeholders.  For  example,  most  brokerage  firms  converted  into  investment 
banks with varying business focus.  
7. 
These  dynamic  developments  have  shown  the  need  to  include  other  emerging 
segments  of  the  financial  market  in  the  Forum.  Furthermore,  change  dynamics  in  the 
financial  market  sector  have  precipitated  high  representation  turnovers  in  the  MLF.  It 
therefore  became  necessary  to  re-constitute  the  Market  Leaders  Forum  to  reflect  the 
evolving financial landscape in Kenya and to enhance the relevance and effectiveness of the 
MLF in stimulating the government securities market in an expanding and dynamic financial 
market.  
8. 
umbrella organizations to the MLF membership.  
It is my hope and expectation that reconstitution of the Forum will re-energize the 
9. 
relevant financial sector development debate to effectively address emerging challenges in 
the financial markets and bring in new perspectives in the approach to financial sector growth 
in line with the Government policy to make Nairobi the Financial Hub for East and Central 
Africa.  
I congratulate all of you who have been nominated by your respective institutions or 
The Forum will meet monthly.  
Meetings  
10. 
I warmly welcome the new members of the Forum and look forward to working with them in 
the coming days. The Financial Markets Department will continue hosting monthly technical 
meetings to review progress and provide advice on an ongoing basis.  
Thank you all very much for your time and for listening. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
