Narayana Kocherlakota: Re-thinking leverage subsidies 
Speech  by  Mr  Narayana  Kocherlakota,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of 
Minneapolis, at the Tri-State Bankers Summit, Big Sky, Montana, 27 June 2011. 
 I thank Doug Clement, Ron Feldman, Dave Fettig, Terry Fitzgerald and Dick Todd for comments. 
Thank you very much for that kind introduction. I’ve been president of the Minneapolis Fed 
for  nearly  two  years  now.  I’m  often  asked  what  I  enjoy  about  my  job.  There  are  many 
possible answers, but one is certainly that it offers me a chance to visit Montana more than I 
would otherwise. This is definitely one of the most beautiful states in the Union.  
I’m also delighted to have this opportunity to talk to this group in particular. You are all very 
aware that our country has gone through a difficult financial crisis and that we are still only 
beginning to make our way back from its impact. There have been many changes in financial 
regulation  designed  to  reduce  the  risk  of  a  recurrence  of  such  a  traumatic  event.  My  goal 
today is to describe changes in the U.S. tax code that I believe will make such a crisis less 
likely to occur. And before going further, let me note that these remarks reflect my views, not 
necessarily those of others in the Federal Reserve System or on the Federal Open Market 
Committee.  
My starting point is the Dodd-Frank Act. It’s less than a year old, having been passed in July 
of  2010.  But,  even  in  that  short  time,  it  already  seems  clear  that  it  is  the  single  most 
important  piece  of  legislation  related  to  the  U.S.  financial  system  to  be  passed  in  at  least 
75 years – and arguably ever. Its first nine words describe the purpose of the 848 pages that 
follow as being “to promote the financial stability of the United States.” The Act envisions the 
Federal Reserve System as being integral to the fulfillment of this mission. In particular, the 
Fed  is  designated  the  supervisor  and  regulator  of  all  systemically  important  financial 
institutions – including those that are not banks.  
The Dodd-Frank Act makes significant headway toward the goal of promoting U.S. financial 
stability,  but  as  the  Act  itself  indicates,  there  is  more  to  be  done.1  And  given  the  Federal 
Reserve System’s part in this mission, I believe it is incumbent on Fed leaders to point out 
ways in which Congress could potentially act to make the financial system even more stable. 
It is with this in mind that I’d like to offer the following contributions.  
Of course, many Fed leaders have made these kinds of suggestions in the past, and I’m sure 
that they will do so in the future. In Minneapolis, my predecessor, Gary Stern, and my current 
head of supervision, Ron Feldman, did their part by writing a book in 2004 called Too Big to 
Fail. The book identified a host of incentives within the U.S. financial system that encouraged 
large  banks  to  take  on  risks  that  could  prove  destabilizing.  Their  book  has  proven  to  be 
distressingly prescient. I will follow in Stern and Feldman’s footsteps by focusing on ways in 
which  our  current  tax  system  provides  incentives  for  financial  institutions  to  make 
destabilizing choices.  
My focus today is on the use of debt as a form of financing – that is to say – on leverage. I 
will be making three points.  
• 
First,  the  sharp  and  largely  unanticipated  fall  in  U.S.  residential  land  prices  after 
2006 was the main cause of the financial crisis of 2007-09.  
                                                 
1  For example, section 1074 of the Act mandates that the secretary of the Treasury submit recommendations to 
Congress about possible changes to government-sponsored housing finance. Earlier this year, the secretary 
fulfilled that mandate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Second, household and financial institution leverage exacerbate the sensitivity of the 
financial system to declines in land prices and so reduce financial stability. 
Third,  the  U.S.  tax  system  promotes  leverage  on  the  part  of  households  and 
financial institutions. 
My conclusion is that Congress should modify the U.S. tax system to reduce the incentives 
for destabilizing activities by banks and households. 
As  I  have  already  indicated,  my  arguments  will  hinge  throughout  on  what  economists  call 
incentive  effects.  One  of  my  big  surprises  since  taking  this  job  is  that  there  is  a  lot  more 
scepticism among policymakers about the relevance of incentive effects than I would have 
thought. Basically, my point today about tax incentives is that if the tax system reduces the 
cost of one activity versus another, then people will do more of the first. I can restate this 
idea even more prosaically by saying that if apples fall in price relative to bananas, people 
will buy more apples, and fewer bananas, than previously. This proposition about choices is 
entirely  obvious  if  one  is  willing  to  assume  –  as  I  generally  do  –  that  people  behave  in  a 
purposive, goal-oriented way.  
But this assumption of purposive behavior is sometimes controversial. For that reason, it’s 
worth emphasizing that the power of incentives does not rely on this assumption. By way of 
illustration,  suppose  that,  in  my  apples  and  bananas  example,  people  simply  divide  their 
available money randomly between apples and bananas. Gary Becker, a Nobel laureate at 
the  University  of  Chicago,  showed  that,  even  with  this  seemingly  irrational  behavior, 
incentives still work their magic.2 Here’s why: Say you have $10. Now split that $10 into an 
amount  you  want  to  spend  on  apples  and  an  amount  you  want  to  spend  on  bananas. 
However you choose to split the $10, it will end up buying more apples and fewer bananas if 
the apple price falls relative to the banana price. Becker’s point is that incentives are shaped 
by scarcity – here, the scarcity of money to spend on apples and bananas – not rationality. 
His message underscores the enormous power of incentive effects – and why they need to 
be considered in any policy discussion. 
Let me now move on to talk about the behavior of land prices over the past 40 years. Right 
from the start, I’ll emphasize that I’m talking about land prices, not housing prices. A house is 
actually a bundle of two goods: a structure and the land underneath that structure. The price 
of the structure itself is largely dictated by the cost of materials and the cost of labor needed 
to build it. The prices of residential structures rose relatively little over the decade 1996-2006 
and have fallen relatively little since 2006. Hence, the evolution of the price of housing over 
the past 15 years is really driven by movements in the price of residential land. 
The data that I’ll use are maintained by the Lincoln Institute of Land Policy, together with the 
University of Wisconsin School of Business. They are constructed following a methodology 
originally  due  to  Morris  Davis  of  the  University  of  Wisconsin  and  Jonathan  Heathcote,  a 
researcher at the Minneapolis Fed.3 These data reveal that U.S. residential land prices grew 
at 2 percent per year from the fourth quarter of 1975 to the first quarter of 1996 in real terms 
(that is, corrected for inflation). At that point, the rate of growth accelerated sharply. Real land 
prices grew at 11 percent per year from the first quarter of 1996 to the first quarter of 2001. 
Monetary  policy  is  often  blamed  for  what’s  now  termed  a  nationwide  bubble  in  housing 
prices, so it’s worth noting that this original acceleration in prices took place during a period 
of  relatively  tight  monetary  policy.  It  also  began  before  the  passage  of  the  Gramm-Leach-
Bliley  Act,  which  officially  repealed  the  Glass-Steagall  Act’s  separation  of  commercial  and 
                                                 
2  See Becker (1962). 
3  See Davis and Heathcote (2007). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
investment  banking.4  Prices  did  accelerate  still  further  in  the  early  2000s,  growing  in  real 
terms at a rate of 17 percent per year from 2001 to 2006.  
By  early  2006,  the  price  of  U.S.  residential  land  had  risen  over  250  percent  in  a  decade. 
Firms and people around the world held a wide array of financial assets that were ultimately 
backed  by  U.S.  land  –  mortgage-backed  securities,  for  example,  or  any  asset  backed  by 
them – and these investors viewed the assets as being largely free of risk. They may have 
understood that a fall in the value of U.S. land would impose large losses on them. However, 
they put low odds on such a decline taking place. Rather, they seemed to believe that U.S. 
land prices would continue to rise at a steady clip as they had over the past decade.  
By the second half of 2007, that belief began to unravel in the face of incoming data. People 
were  starting  to  learn  the  hard  way  that  U.S.  land  was  a  risky  investment.  Now  the  only 
question was how risky. The uncertainty about the answer to this question planted the seeds 
for a global financial panic. 
What do I mean by the term financial panic? Financial panics are events that blur the line 
between liquidity and solvency. A firm is solvent if its revenues (in a discounted present value 
sense) exceed its expenditures. A firm is liquid if it is able to raise enough funds – either by 
borrowing  or  by  selling  assets  –  to  pay  its  current  costs.  In  a  well-functioning  financial 
market, solvent firms are typically liquid, because they are able to borrow against their future 
profits. In contrast, in a financial panic, lenders feel unable to assess the future profits and/or 
collateral of borrowers. Borrowing becomes highly constrained, and even highly solvent firms 
may become illiquid. 
During  the  mid-2000s,  many  forms  of  collateral  around  the  world  were  either  implicitly  or 
explicitly  backed  by  U.S.  residential  land.  As  I’ve  described,  beginning  in  mid-2007,  it 
became clear that this asset had more risk than financial markets had originally appreciated. 
It was not clear, though, how much additional risk was involved. As a result, financial markets 
became  increasingly  uncertain  about  how  to  evaluate  assets  backed  by  U.S.  land.  That 
uncertainty  translated  into  uncertainty  about  the  ultimate  solvency  of  institutions  holding 
those  assets  –  and  the  ultimate  solvency  of  any  of  those  institutions’  creditors  and  their 
creditors  and  so  on.  Spreads  in  credit  markets  between  Treasury  returns  and  other  bond 
returns began to widen – at first slightly and then alarmingly. The financial crisis of 2007-09 
was under way.  
Thus far, I’ve described how the fall in land prices that began in 2006 triggered the recent 
global  financial  crisis.  I  now  move  to  my  second  point:  Higher  amounts  of  household  and 
financial  institution  leverage  mean  that  the  financial  system  is  more  susceptible  to  these 
kinds of shocks.  
To understand my argument, it is best to consider an example. Suppose a household buys a 
house  worth  $200,000.  The  household  puts  down  $20,000  and  borrows  $180,000  from  a 
bank through a nonrecourse mortgage – meaning that in the event of default, the bank has 
access only to the collateral: the house itself. The bank is a big one – it has $2 trillion worth 
of assets, $1 trillion of those assets consisting of mortgages (either through direct ownership 
or  through  ownership  of  mortgage-backed  securities).  The  bank  has  $200  billion  worth  of 
outstanding equity – so its debt-to-equity ratio is 9-to-1. Here, I should be clear that my value 
references are all market-determined values. 
Now, suppose that land prices fall, and so houses around the United States fall suddenly and 
permanently in value by 30 percent. For the house in my example, that means its value has 
fallen  from  $200,000  down  to  $140,000.  The  household  is  now  significantly  underwater 
because it owes $180,000 on a house worth $140,000. If the household loses its sources of 
                                                 
4  My  dating  of  the  onset  of  the  acceleration  in  land  prices  (1996)  is  similar  to  Robert  Shiller’s  dating  of  the 
beginning of the housing bubble (1997). See Shiller (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
income – as might well be true if houses around the country are worth 30 percent less – then 
it will have no choice but to default on the loan (through a short sale or a foreclosure). Even if 
the household keeps its sources of income, it’s now in a position where so-called strategic 
default  on  a  nonrecourse  mortgage  is  financially  rewarding.  The  bottom  line  is  that  this 
mortgage once worth $180,000 is now worth much less, perhaps no more than $140,000. In 
other words, the 30 percent fall in the value of the underlying asset has led to as much as a 
22 percent fall in the value of the mortgage itself.  
This  has  severe  implications  for  the  bank,  of  course.  Recall  that  $1  trillion  of  the  bank’s 
assets took the form of these kinds of mortgages. Given the possible 22 percent drop on its 
mortgage values, the bank’s assets have fallen by as much as $220 billion, depending on the 
default choices of households. Its equity, originally worth $200 billion, will fall greatly in value – 
possibly to zero. It is a reasonable conjecture that it will not be able to raise new funds in 
debt or equity markets.  
These troubles for a $2 trillion institution will almost automatically pose a systemic risk to the 
U.S. financial system. But I don’t view size as essential to my story. I could have told exactly 
the same story if I had described 200 banks that each had $10 billion in assets and $5 billion 
of these kinds of mortgages.  
While size isn’t critical, there are three key variables that do matter in this little story. The first 
is household leverage. Remember that the house fell in value by $60,000. Suppose that the 
household  had  made  a  more  traditional  down  payment  of  20  percent  rather  than  the 
10 percent  figure  I  used  initially.  The  fall  in  home  value  would  still  leave  the  household 
underwater,  but  the  mortgage  value  would  have  fallen  by  only  $20,000,  not  $40,000.  The 
bank’s assets would have fallen by at most $120 billion. It would not have risked insolvency.  
The second relevant variable is bank asset concentration. In my example, the bank had half 
of its assets directly tied to U.S. residential land. If it had had only 30 percent of its assets in 
mortgages, then its losses could not have led to insolvency.  
Finally – and perhaps most obviously – bank leverage matters. The bank in my example had 
a  9-to-1  debt-to-equity  ratio.  Had  its  debt-to-equity  ratio  been  4-to-1  instead,  its  equity  of 
$400 billion would have outweighed its losses of $220 billion, and it would not have become 
insolvent. 
Thus, household leverage and financial institution leverage render the financial sector more 
sensitive to downward movements in the price of land. This kind of sensitivity decreases the 
stability  of  the  financial  system  and  so  increases  the  potential  for  the  kind  of  crisis  we 
endured in 2007-09.  
On  to  my  final  point:  The  U.S.  tax  system  encourages  household  leverage  and  bank 
leverage, even though both are potentially destabilizing. Let’s start with household leverage. 
Think about a family that wants to buy a $300,000 house. It has sufficient financial assets in 
stocks and bonds to cover half of the cost. Will it use these assets to fund half of the house 
price and take out a mortgage of $150,000? Or will it take a more levered position: Make a 
$60,000 down payment, and borrow the remaining $240,000?  
It’s not possible to answer this question with certainty for any given household. But we know 
that the tax system provides an extra incentive for any given household to take out the larger 
loan.  Under  the  current  tax  code,  the  household  can  deduct  from  its  gross  income  any 
interest  payments  it  makes  on  the  extra  $90,000  of  mortgage  debt.  This  means  that  the 
household’s  after-tax  interest  rate  on  its  mortgage  is  lower  than  it  would  otherwise  be, 
making mortgage financing more attractive. It is in this sense that the mortgage interest tax 
deduction undercuts financial stability. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
those  households 
that  make  over  $75,000.5  And–contrary 
In making this argument, I should note that only about one-third of U.S. tax returns itemize 
deductions and are therefore affected by the tax code’s leverage inducement. However, over 
60  percent  of  those  households  that  make  over  $50,000  do  itemize,  as  do  over  three-
quarters  of 
to  some 
misconceptions – the mortgages of these relatively upper-income households are certainly 
relevant as we think about the impact of the fall in land prices. According to a recent online 
survey, just over 20 percent of mortgage-holding adults with incomes over $50,000 – and a 
similar  fraction  of  those  with  incomes  over  $75,000–believe  that  they  are  “underwater”  on 
those  mortgages.6  This  fraction  is  pretty  much  the  same  as  the  percentage  for  all 
households.7 
Next, I turn to financial institution leverage. Consider a financial institution that needs to raise 
an extra million dollars. It can do so by issuing debt or attracting deposits that pay 1 percent 
interest.  Under  this  approach,  the  borrower  owes  $10,000  of  interest  to  its  creditors  next 
year.  Alternatively,  it  can  raise  the  million  dollars  by  issuing  the  same  amount  of  equity. 
Abstracting  from  risk  considerations,  the  equity  holders  will  expect  to  be  compensated  by 
receiving $10,000 of dividend payments every year.  
Which method of finance–debt or equity – will the financial institution choose? Taxes play a 
role in this decision. If it chooses the debt route, the bank can deduct its interest payments 
from its earnings before paying any corporate income taxes. If it chooses the equity route, 
then the financial institution must make its dividend payments from profits that are left after it 
pays  corporate  income  taxes.  Debt  repayments  are  cheaper.  In  this  way,  the  tax  code 
includes what is known as a corporate debt tax shield that encourages higher leverage for 
financial institutions. 
Through the previous discussion, I hope that I have convinced you of three main points. First, 
the financial system meltdown of 2007-09 was caused by the unexpectedly large decline in 
U.S.  residential  land  prices.  Second,  higher  amounts  of  household  and  financial  institution 
leverage  leave  the  financial  system  more  vulnerable  to  these  kinds  of  shocks.  Finally,  the 
U.S. tax system encourages leverage by providing incentives for households to take on more 
mortgage debt and financial institutions to finance through debt. 
What policy conclusions should we draw from these points? As an economist, I have a full 
appreciation  that  every  policy  choice  has  both  benefits  and  costs.  Policymakers  may  well 
disagree  about  how  to  weigh  those  benefits  and  costs.  However,  I  would  say  that  the 
experience of the past few years has demonstrated how challenging it is to safeguard the 
financial system against systemic risk and how costly it can be if we fail to do so. Given this 
fresh  experience,  and  my  earlier  remarks,  I  would  assess  the  costs  of  providing  tax 
incentives for leverage to be higher today than such an assessment in, say, 2006. 
With that in mind, I believe that my analysis suggests two changes in the tax code. The first 
change is to lower the fraction of mortgage interest that households can deduct from their 
taxable  incomes.  The  second  is  to  lower  the  fraction  of  their  interest  payments  that 
corporations8  are  allowed  to  deduct  from  their  taxable  incomes.  Of  course,  it  would  be 
appropriate  and  important  to  adjust  the  timing  of  these  changes  in  light  of  prevailing 
macroeconomic conditions.  
                                                 
5  See Internal Revenue Service (2010). 
6  See Harris Interactive Poll (2011). 
7  See CoreLogic (2011). 
8 
I have argued that financial institution leverage undercuts financial stability. However, in practice, I believe that 
it  would  be  administratively  challenging  to  have  different  tax  treatments  for  given  corporations  based  on 
whether they are “financial” or “nonfinancial.” Hence,  my suggested  policy proposal  applies to all corporate 
debt. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
I regard these two proposals for the tax code as being entirely natural ones to consider in 
light of the recent financial crisis. But I would also encourage policymakers in the tax arena to 
ask  broader  questions  about  the  mortgage  interest  and  corporate  interest  tax  deductions. 
What are the social benefits associated with these deductions? Can these social benefits be 
achieved using an approach that does not undercut the stability of the financial system? For 
example, suppose that a policymaker likes the mortgage interest deduction because he or 
she believes that it encourages home ownership. That policymaker could consider replacing 
the mortgage interest deduction with a tax credit that offsets part of a buyer’s down payment 
toward  a  home  purchase.  Such  a  tax  credit  would  encourage  home  ownership  without 
simultaneously providing more incentives for households to accumulate more debt. 
Similarly, a policymaker may like the corporate interest tax deduction because it stimulates 
business  investment.  That  policymaker  could  consider  replacing  the  corporate  interest  tax 
deduction with a lower corporate income tax rate. The lower corporate income tax rate would 
encourage business investment without simultaneously providing incentives for corporations 
to acquire leverage. 
Let  me  wrap  up.  In  a  speech  last  October,  Janet  Yellen,  the  vice  chair  of  the  Board  of 
Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  gave  a  speech  about  the  roots  of  the  recent 
financial crisis.9 As I have done today, she emphasized the critical role played by excessive 
household and financial institution leverage in generating the crisis. She described how the 
changes in supervision and regulation contained within the Dodd-Frank Act would put new 
and important brakes on these kinds of build-ups.  
I  agree  with  her  completely  about  these  benefits  of  the  new  supervisory  and  regulatory 
regime.  But  I  also  agree  with  her  statement  that  “systemic  risk  surveillance  will  demand 
Herculean efforts by the regulatory agencies.” In my view, this observation means that other 
elements of the policy environment need to be as supportive as possible of the regulatory 
agencies. It is for this reason that I believe that policymakers should be willing to reconsider 
the extent of leverage subsidies within the U.S. tax code.  
That brings me to the end of my prepared remarks. I would be happy to take your questions 
on what I have said, or on other any matters. Thanks for listening. 
References 
Becker,  Gary  S.  1962.  "Irrational  Behavior  and  Economic  Theory."  Journal  of  Political 
Economy 70 (1): 1-13. 
CoreLogic  Inc.  2011.  “New  CoreLogic  Data  Shows  Slight  Decrease  in  Negative  Equity.” 
News Release, June 7.  
Davis,  Morris  A.,  and  Jonathan  Heathcote.  2007.  “The  Price  and  Quantity  of  Residential 
Land in the United States.” Journal of Monetary Economics 54 (8): 2595-2620. 
Harris Interactive Poll. 2011. 
Internal  Revenue  Service.  2010.  Statistics  of  Income  Division.  Individual  Complete  Report 
(Publication 1304), Table 1.2. 
Shiller, Robert J. 2011. “The Sickness Beneath the Slump.” New York Times, June 11. 
Yellen, Janet L. 2010. “Macroprudential Supervision and Monetary Policy in the Post-crisis 
World.” Speech at the Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics. 
Denver, Colo., Oct. 11. 
                                                 
9  See Yellen (2010). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
