Carlos da Silva Costa: Overview of economic and financial challenges 
for Portugal 
Address by Mr Carlos da Silva Costa, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, at the centenary of 
Crédito Agrícola Mútuo, Lisbon, 25 May 2011. 
 The celebration of the centenary of Crédito Agrícola Mútuo (Mutual Agricultural Credit) is an 
appropriate timing:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
To highlight the relevance of banking activity in modern economies;  
To stress the crucial role of trust in the development of this activity; and 
To  make  a  brief  presentation  of  the  key  measures  included  in  the  adjustment 
programme in the field of financial stability – one of the three capstones underlying 
the adjustment programme and the new growth model of the Portuguese economy.  
1st – The relevance of banking activity in modern economies 
Credit  institutions  play  an  important  intermediation  role  between  savers  and  investors, 
centralising the resources of the former and channelling them to the funding of investment.  
This financial intermediation between savings and investment leads to:  
1. 
Maturity transformation – deposits with typically short maturities are transformed 
into longer-term credits; and 
Liquidity  transformation  –  deposits,  liquid,  are  transformed  into  credits,  more 
illiquid.  
2. 
Through financial intermediation, benefits may be reaped of a scale effect when mobilising 
savings:  multiple  low-value  individual  deposits  are  transformed  into  large  credit  amounts, 
allowing for the financing of large-scale investments.  
Finally,  savings  obtained  in  a  given  region  (or  country)  may  be  channelled  to  finance 
investments in other regions (or countries).  
Through this intermediation, the banking activity benefits from economies of scale, making it 
possible to ensure risk diversification and the implementation of procedures for effective risk 
management and control. This translates into a reduction of risk for a given remuneration, or, 
alternatively, a better remuneration of savings for the same level of risk appetite. 
Hence, the banking sector plays a key role in the efficient allocation of resources in a given 
economy,  as  well  as  in  the  provision  of  essential  services  for  making  payments,  thus 
decisively contributing to sustained economic growth.  
Banking  activity  can  be  said  to  be  the  “circulatory  system”  of  the  economy.  A  healthy  – 
productive and competitive – economy necessarily requires a dynamic and efficient banking 
sector. 
2nd – The crucial importance of trust and the role of regulation and supervision 
This crucial function of financial intermediation of the banking sector requires a relationship 
of  trust  between  banking  institutions  and  their  customers.  It  also  requires  that  the  general 
public and investors rely on the banking system as a whole. 
In  view  of  their  role  in  investment  funding  and  in  the  functioning  of  the  economy,  banking 
institutions are subject both to stringent regulation – intended to ensure their soundness and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the safety of the funds they are entrusted with – and supervision in terms of compliance with 
the  rules  governing  their  activity,  in  particular  as  regards  the  existence  of  appropriate  and 
prudent risk management. 
Contributing to this trust in financial activity are the establishment and implementation of:  
1. 
Rules  of  access  to  their  activity  based  on  demanding  principles  of  suitability  and 
professional qualifications; 
Effective and transparent corporate governance models and structures; 
Comprehensive  and  demanding  procedures 
supervision and regulation.  
for  micro  and  macro-prudential 
2. 
3. 
The  Rules  of  access  to  the  activity  and,  in  particular,  the  requirements  in  terms  of  the 
suitability  and  professional  qualifications  of  the  members  of  the  management  and 
auditing boards of the institutions and the integrity of shareholders are critical for the stability 
of  the  financial system,  as  they  determine  the quality  of  the  management  and  thereby  the 
trust of stakeholders as a whole.  
Furthermore,  corporate  governance  models  and  structures  must  be  effective  and 
transparent, and they must ensure a high level of control and accountability to the different 
stakeholders of the financial institution. An appropriate corporate governance model requires 
clear allocation of powers and responsibilities to the board and management, involving: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
The definition of strategies and objectives; 
Levels of risk tolerance; 
The structure of the organisation, management and control policies and procedures, 
and reporting lines; 
The protection of the legitimate interests of the stakeholders; 
The guarantee of compliance with applicable laws, regulations and rules. 
4. 
5. 
The quality of the corporate governance model must cover two key aspects of the institution:  
(i)  Internal governance:  a  management and  control structure is essential for the efficient, 
profitable and sustainable activity of the institutions. 
(ii) External governance: a balanced and transparent relationship must be ensured between 
the  institution  and  external  stakeholders  (including  shareholders,  investors,  State  and  the 
general public) 
Internal governance structures shall particularly ensure: 
1. 
An appropriate monitoring environment, which defines and values high standards of 
ethics,  integrity  and  skills,  and  establishes  the  institution’s  overall  risk  tolerance 
profile; 
A  sound  risk  management  system,  which  ensures  systematic,  timely  and  efficient 
management of internal and external risks (necessarily including procedures for risk 
identification, evaluation, treatment, monitoring and reporting);  
An  appropriate  internal  control  system,  integrating  independent  control  of  risk 
management procedures, audit and compliance;  
An  efficient  information  and  communication  system,  ensuring  that  information 
related to risk management and control is circulated across all institution levels, and 
that risk identification and control procedures are comprehensive, swift and efficient; 
An effective monitoring system, by which the management and supervisory bodies 
of  the  institution  may  appropriately  and  permanently  monitor  risks  and  control 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
failures. This system must be supported by an independent, disciplined and effective 
internal audit function, endowed with appropriate resources.  
Credit risk;  
Liquidity risk; 
Market risk;  
Operational risk;  
Reputational risk. 
In effect, reliable, qualified and competent managers, as well as governance models based 
on efficient monitoring systems are instrumental for the soundness of the financial system. 
They are a necessary condition for the sound and prudent management of the institutions, 
ensuring appropriate practices and procedures for managing risks incurred by the institutions 
in the course of their regular activity, especially:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
In  turn,  the  external  audit  function  (which  can  also  be  seen  as  one  of  the  components 
supporting  external  governance)  is  another  important  line  of  defence  of  financial  stability. 
Sound and independent auditing, in tandem with vigilance by market agents, is also of the 
essence for the trust of, and in, the markets.  
The need to control excessive risk taking, to ensure appropriate incentives, to safeguard the 
confidence of bank customers, and to maintain financial stability requires a demanding and 
permanently updated legal framework, i.e. a regulatory framework. 
Turning to regulation, the main challenges facing authorities are:  
 
On  the  one  hand,  to  obtain  a  timely  diagnostic  of  risks,  ensuring  the  quality, 
consistency, clarity and opportunity of the rules; and  
On  the  other  hand,  to  limit  the  regulatory  initiatives  to  merely  those  necessary  to 
carry  on 
thus  avoid 
unnecessarily  inhibiting  the  development  of  financial  activity  and  innovation  in  the 
sector. 
the  objectives  underlying  supervisory  activities,  and 
 In turn, the supervision of institutions must be intrusive, with a strong on-site component – 
thereby ensuring an active presence in the institutions under supervision. It must also rely on 
ITC-intensive use, in order to optimise distance regular monitoring procedures, and shall be 
based on risk.  
Its  purpose  is  thus  to  ensure  the  timely  detection  of  vulnerabilities  and  to  guarantee 
opportune and effective supervisory action, imposing corrective measures where necessary, 
and sanctioning non-compliances. 
In short, the purpose is to ensure that institutions and the respective managers actually meet 
their  responsibilities  for  the  safety  of  the  funds  entrusted  to  them,  and  report  to  the 
stakeholders on the performance of the respective institution. 
After this general overview, I will make a brief presentation of the key measures included in 
the adjustment programme in the field of financial stability. 
3rd – The role of financial stability in the adjustment of the Portuguese economy  
In Portugal, the banking system has been playing a fundamental role in meeting the growing 
financing needs of both the Portuguese economy and households, offsetting the – chronic – 
scarcity of domestic savings through recourse to external financing, chiefly after joining the 
Economic and Monetary Union. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
With the participation in the euro area, the country was able to reap the benefits of lower and 
less volatile interest rates and Portuguese banks gained access to a broader and exchange-
rate risk-free funding market.  
This environment has enabled credit to grow well above the level accommodated/ allowed by 
the deposit base, to the extent that external liquidity surpluses have been channelled through 
the banking system to meet internal financing needs. 
An  overall  context  of  ample  liquidity  has  led  to  the  perception  that  the  easing  of  financing 
constraints  would  indefinitely  be  maintained.  In  effect,  there  was  a  false  impression  that, 
within the framework of the Economic and Monetary Union, the capacity of banks to absorb 
resources,  and  therefore  their  access  to  the  capital  market,  would  only  depend  on  the 
respective solvency levels, reputation and risk-management ability.  
However, when a financial system corresponds roughly to the territory of a single sovereign 
state, the sovereign risk strongly binds risk perception by the financial system and therefore 
fundamentally constrains the financing capacity of the economy. 
As  the  international  financial  crisis  was  unfolding,  there  has  been,  since  late  2009,  a 
significant  differentiation  of  sovereign  risk  premium  in  a  number  of  euro  area  economies. 
This  situation  has  chiefly  affected  the  countries  where  substantial  and  unforeseen  rises  in 
deficits and public debt were combined with structural weaknesses, particularly in terms of 
external indebtedness and the trend growth of the economy.  
With regard to the Portuguese economy, imbalances result not only from the deterioration of 
the  fiscal  situation  or  from  structural  problems,  but  also  from  the  persistent  and  significant 
deterioration of the external position of the economy, in a context of high levels of public and 
private indebtedness and low economic growth. 
The  deterioration  of  expectations 
the 
sustainability  of  public  finances  in  Portugal  translated  into  a  strong  increase  in  the  risk 
premium of the sovereign debt, with negative repercussions on Portuguese banks’ access to 
and financing conditions in international wholesale debt markets.  
The external borrowing needs of the Portuguese economy have been almost exclusively met 
through the public sector and the banking system. As a consequence, the difficulties felt by 
these sectors in accessing international debt markets require stronger and faster adjustment 
between savings and investment of the Portuguese economy, across all institutional sectors. 
Indeed, the increasingly more difficult market funding conditions experienced by banks over 
the  course  of  the  current  year  require  strengthened  capitalisation  of  banks  and  the 
contraction  of  banking  activity,  which  in  turn  implies  an  acceleration  of  the  deleveraging 
process of the private sector. 
International investors’ rising fears about the sustainability of Portuguese public finances and 
the intertemporal dynamics of the external debt led to an inevitable request for international 
financial assistance that could not be postponed. 
The  interconnection  between  sovereign  risk  and  the  constraints  felt  by  banks  in  raising 
capital in international markets will condition prospects for the Portuguese banking system, 
given the existence of mutually reinforcing contagion mechanisms. 
The Economic and Financial Adjustment Programme, in addition to setting strict objectives 
for the sustainability of public finances and for structural reforms, includes measures to foster 
a gradual and orderly deleveraging of the banking sector. 
These measures include the provision of liquidity to the financial system, increased capital 
requirements for banks and the gradual deleveraging of the banking sector.  
Under  the  current  conditions  of  difficult  access  to  market  financing,  the  maintenance  of 
liquidity in the banking sector is crucial to avoid a strong and immediate contraction of credit 
to  the  Portuguese  economy.  The  adjustment  programme  explicitly  foresees  that  Banco  de 
financial  markets  regarding 
international 
in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Portugal,  in  cooperation  with  the  European  Central  Bank,  will  take  all  the  appropriate 
measures to maintain sufficient liquidity in the system. In addition, the amount of government 
guarantees  to  the  issuance  of  bank  bonds  will  be  increased  from  EUR  20  billion  to  EUR 
35 billion, encouraging banks to strengthen their collateral buffers. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  need  for  stronger  bank  balance  sheets  to  weather  the  adverse 
economic  conditions  that  will  prevail  in  the  period  ahead,  requires  a  new  increase  in 
institutions’  own  funds,  in  addition  to  that  announced  last  April.  Therefore,  the  Banco  de 
Portugal required banks to raise their core Tier 1 capital ratio to 9% by end-2011 and to 10% 
by end-2012. If needed, Banco de Portugal may require some banks, based on their specific 
risk profile to reach higher capital levels.  
By the end of June, banks are requested to present to Banco de Portugal their plans on how 
they intend to reach the new capital requirements through market solutions. The adjustment 
programme foresees a temporary State bank solvency support facility up to EUR 12 billion, 
which may be used if the market-based solutions fail. 
Unquestionably, immediate priority must be given to maintaining adequate liquidity conditions 
in  the  banking  system  and  to  strengthening  the  capitalisation  of  banks.  However,  in  the 
medium  term,  it  is  fundamental  to  ensure  that  the  domestic  savings  levels  will  make  the 
country  less  dependent  on  international  financial  markets,  bolstering  the  resilience  of  the 
national financial system and the overall financial stability conditions.  
To  this  end,  banks  are  requested  to  devise  by  end-June  medium-term  funding  plans 
consistent  with  this  objective.  The  plans  will  be  subject  to  regular  quarterly  reviews  and 
adjustments in the plans will be requested as needed to ensure their compatibility with the 
deleveraging objectives. At the same time, the programme foresees the strengthening of the 
supervisory  and  regulatory  framework  of  the  banking  sector,  including,  inter  alia:  the 
adjustment  of  the  legal  framework  governing  the  restructuring  and  resolution  of  credit 
institutions;  the  reinforcement  of  the  Deposit  Guarantee  Fund  (FGD)  and  of  the  Mutual 
Agricultural  Credit  Guarantee  Fund  (FGCAM);  and  the  introduction  of  amendments  in  the 
Insolvency Code to support effective rescue of viable firms. 
The coming years will be extremely demanding for the financial institutions but also for the 
Banco de Portugal as the regulatory and supervisory authority. However, I am confident that 
together  we  will  overcome  the  challenges  and  ensure  the  financial  stability  conditions 
required for the sounder growth model we all wish for Portugal. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
