Prasarn Trairatvorakul: The rise of Asia – finding the right balance for 
policy 
Address by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Japan Bank 
for  International  Cooperation  (JBIC)  seminar  on  “Outlook  for  the  Global  Economy  and 
Financial Markets 2011”, Bangkok, 8 February 2011. 
 Distinguished Speakers and Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my honor and pleasure to address today’s distinguished audience on the outlook of and 
the main challenges facing the global and Thai economies. Rather than giving you data and 
projections, which are readily available, I would like to take this opportunity to share with you 
my observations on the economic future of Asia and Thailand. While economic recovery in 
the West will likely be constrained by crisis legacies, the rapid bounce-back in Asia and its 
fast rising role in the world economy have made many believe that Asia is on the continued 
rise,  to  the  extent  that  Asia  is  entering  a  golden  age.  Nevertheless,  there  are  questions 
whether Asia can manage the risks associated with continued growth, particularly inflationary 
pressure and the impact of volatile capital flows. 
In line with this introduction, my presentation today will focus on four related topics. First I 
would like to pose a question whether Asia is truly approaching a golden age. Secondly, to 
sustain  the  rise  of  Asia,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the  need  for  Asian  economies  to  build 
capacities, as well as strengthen innovation and productivity. To follow, I will discuss the role 
of  policy  in  and  ensuring  that  growth  is  sustainable  and  not  prone  to  relapses,  especially 
ways to mitigate potential economic and financial imbalances. And finally, I will explain how 
the  Bank  of  Thailand  intends  to  find  the  right  balance  for  policy  to  foster  businesses  and 
investment during the rise of Asia. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Since the ancient Greek and Indian times, a golden age refers to a period of peace and unity, 
stability,  and  rising  wealth,  with  an  abundance  of  hope  and  opportunities.  Evidence  has 
pointed out that Asia has increasingly embraced these characteristics. 
In terms of peace and unity, we have witnessed increasing international cooperation to boost 
economic  welfare  and  safeguard  against  risks  in  the  region.  For  ASEAN,  this  has  been 
reflected by the increase in free trade and investment agreements both bilaterally and under 
the ASEAN Economic Community. In a broader group, the ASEAN+3 countries have been 
working closely to set up and improve a committed mechanism for regional crisis prevention 
and management. 
As for economic stability, I think that the robust recovery, low level of public debt, together 
with sufficient foreign reserves have demonstrated that Asian regional economies have the 
satisfactory capacity to cope with future shocks. 
In terms of increasing wealth, it is clear that the share of emerging Asia in world GDP has 
been increasing markedly with a status as a global production hub of manufactured goods. 
This  is  projected  to  rise  even  further.  While  this  share  was  around  8  percent  in  the  early 
1980s, it is expected to increase to 30 percent in the middle of this decade.  
Although the above evidence has indicated that Asia is on the rise, whether or not this rise 
will  be  sustained  will  depend  on  a  number  of  factors.  To  do  so,  Asia  needs  to  become  a 
global innovation hub, and rely significantly more on our own domestic and regional demand. 
Moreover,  we  also  need  to  assess  whether  prosperity  will  spread  to  all  of  the  regional 
economies. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Against this hopeful background, we need to reflect on the positioning of Thailand. As long-
term  business  partners  in  Thailand,  I  am  certain  that  Japanese  businesses  have  carefully 
assessed the prospects of Thai economy in comparison with our peers in the region. And, I 
think we share a common view that Thailand needs to climb up the value chain in order to 
benefit  from  the  expansion  of  the  regional  production  network.  This  is  a  very  important 
challenge as competitiveness from low labor costs will evaporate, and there is a risk of being 
marginalized in the increasingly competitive environment. 
Recognizing  that  Thailand  needs  to  come  up  with  concrete  plans  and  strategies  to  foster 
capacities and productivity, the Bank of Thailand has emphasized on various occasions that 
our economy needs to have a clear development strategy. In fact, several Asian countries 
have already announced goals ranging from becoming world leaders in science, technology 
or human resource development. 
However,  the  common  key  success  to  all  these  strategies  is  investment.  Increasing  and 
improving physical and human capital is vital for ensuring and fostering opportunities in the 
future period of growth. And foreign direct investment will continue to be a significant source 
of knowledge and technology transfers as well as productivity improvement.  
Yet  for  businesses  to  make  long-term  investment  commitments,  it  is  necessary  that 
economic  fundamentals  be  conducive.  This  is  where  policymakers  can  help  encourage 
investment expansion and, in the purview of the central bank, this means finding appropriate 
ways to mitigate risks to economic and financial stability. 
As all of us are aware, the main risk at present can arise from massive capital inflows from 
outside Asia and potential abrupt reversals as a result of the divergence in economic growth 
between the advanced economies and emerging Asia. 
While the growth outlook for Asia is positive, there are still significant risks to the recovery in 
the  US,  the  Euro  area,  and  Japan,  including  unemployment,  high  public  debt,  and  the 
housing  slump.  In  these  countries,  policies  continue  to  focus  on  shoring  up  their  recovery 
and strengthening their own momentum of growth, with monetary policy remaining loose.  
This is in stark contrast to Asia’s emerging markets, where the threat of inflation is real and 
present in the near term. Inflation is expected to rise, given rising costs and rising demand, 
allowing producers to pass on cost increases to consumers. In addition, rising demand from 
emerging  markets  can  potentially 
inflation 
expectations.  Therefore,  anchoring  inflation  expectations  and  ensuring  long-term  price 
stability is the policy priority in emerging Asia, and in Thailand.  
The policy divergence between advanced and emerging economies will make it difficult for 
both sides to arrive at any policy coordination which could lead to a win-win situation at a 
global level. Countries will likely pursue their self-interests in conducting policy, despite the 
externalities such policies may bring about. While it is unlikely that we will achieve a solution 
that would satisfy everyone, I would like to stress that we should aim to prevent ourselves 
from ending up in a lose-lose situation for all, such as a return to protectionism. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
As Asia is on the rise, another source of risk is that complacency can easily set in, both in the 
private sector’s risk taking behavior and in the way policy is conducted. You may recall that 
almost  15  years  ago,  Thailand  was  also  part  of  the  “Asian  Miracle”  and  was  on  track  to 
becoming the 5th “Asian tiger”, before unsustainable behavior led to the Asian economic and 
financial crisis. 
In  order  to  prevent  the  mistakes  of  the  past  and  guarantee  that  future  growth  in  Asia  is 
sustainable, both the private and public sectors must not be complacent. To ensure these 
costly  mistakes  are  not  repeated,  policies  must  be  firmly  grounded  on  safeguarding 
macroeconomic stability. 
further  push  up  commodity  prices  and 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
This leads me to my final point, which is, how the Bank of Thailand plans to deal with these 
potential  risks  on  both  the  external  and  internal  fronts.  For  external  risks,  recognizing  that 
sizeable capital inflows could be out of line with real developments, and that spillovers can 
persist  in  the  near  future,  we  need  to  closely  monitor  the  external  environment  to  capture 
these  risks.  It  is  also  important  to  improve  Thailand’s  capacity  to  cope  with  international 
capital flows by developing a systematic capital flows master plan, and promoting the use of 
financial  hedging  instruments  and  the  foreign  exchange  risk  management  capability  of  the 
private sector. The Bank of Thailand also stands ready to implement emergency measures of 
varying degrees to deal with volatile capital movements as appropriate. 
In addition, to prevent these inflows from causing economic and financial instability, the Bank 
of Thailand has prepared a toolkit of macro prudential measures to ensure the soundness of 
the macro economy and the financial sector. Measures to prevent overheating in particular 
segments of the property market are one example.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It would be uncommon for a central banker not to mention inflation and monetary policy in 
any speech. I would therefore like to emphasize that the Bank of Thailand’s monetary policy 
aims  to  achieve  domestic  price  stability  and  tighten  to  more  normal  levels  consistent  with 
Thailand’s macroeconomic fundamentals. Price stability helps foster a stable and predictable 
macroeconomic environment conducive to investment and growth. This is because it helps 
investors, businesses, and household to effectively make plans and manage their risks, as 
well as lower businesses’ cost of funds. 
To  end  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to  stress  that  while  there  remain  risks  and 
uncertainties  surrounding  the  overall  outlook  for  global  growth,  prospects  for  Asia  remain 
relatively bright. However, countries in Asia, and Thailand especially, need to put real efforts 
to foster capacity, innovation, and productivity. We must also prevent excessive risk taking 
and  lax  policy-making  from  becoming  the  norm.  This  requires  preempting  excessive  risk-
taking and conducting policy with prudence. 
I can assure you that the Bank of Thailand is committed to ensuring a stable macroeconomic 
environment  which  would  help  investors,  businesses,  and  households  in  planning  their 
economic activities and to operate  effectively.  However, policies can mitigate only parts of 
the spectrum of risks. The business sector must also be mindful and well-prepared to deal 
with new risks and challenges, going forward. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
