Lars Nyberg: The ESRB – reflections after 9 months of operation 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  Nyberg,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Norges  Bank 
(Central Bank of Norway), Oslo, 27 September 2011. 
 The  financial  crisis  that  started  in  2007–8  exposed  serious  weaknesses  in  the  regulatory 
system. Firstly, it turned out that the banks had too little capital and that the quality of that 
capital was not good enough. Furthermore, issues of liquidity had largely been neglected by 
regulators. All this has been addressed by the Basel III compromise, which is to be slowly 
implemented over the years to come – too slowly in the view of some countries, too quickly 
according to others. 
Secondly,  the  crisis  revealed  some  embarrassing  weaknesses  in  the  EU  framework  for 
financial  stability.  The  quality  of  supervision  varied  substantially  between  countries  and 
coordination within Europe was insufficient, to say the least. Perhaps even more importantly, 
the  concept  of  macro-prudential  supervision  (I  will  return  to  this  concept  in  a  while)  was 
largely unheard of. To address these issues, the Commission, in late 2008, set up a group 
(where I had the honour of being a member) led by Jacques de Larosière with the mandate 
of presenting a roadmap for strengthening the European supervisory framework. The group 
delivered  its  report  in  March  2009.  One  of  the  main  ideas  was  the  creation  of  a  new 
institution, which eventually came to be called the European Systemic Risk Board and which 
is my subject for today. 
Thirdly, the crisis made it apparent that the framework for the resolution of failing banks was 
grossly  inadequate.  Although  steps  have  been  taken  to  address  this  question  in  several 
countries,  a  lot  of  issues  remain  to  be  solved,  particularly  relating  to  cross-border  failures. 
But this is not for today’s discussion. 
The EU’s financial trilemma 
The  core  of  the  challenge  facing  the  EU  is  conceptually  quite  simple.  In  Europe,  we  have 
built  a  framework  based  on  the  logically  inconsistent  idea  of  having  one  single  market 
controlled by 27 sovereign nations. From a financial stability point of view, this is definitely no 
recipe for success. On the contrary, it is a source of coordination problems and conflicts of 
interest among the EU countries. 
This  challenge  has  been  described  by  Professor  Dirk  Schoenmaker  as  the  “financial 
trilemma  of  Europe”.  We  have  three  goals  –  financial  stability,  integration,  and  national 
sovereignty – but only two of these can be reached. 
Figure 1 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Until  the  financial  crisis,  the  combination  of  financial  integration  and  national  sovereignty 
seemed to work well in the EU (Figure 1). Financial crises were not considered to be likely 
and financial stability came far down on the political agenda. In connection with the financial 
crisis, however, policy makers have been forced to realise that increased financial stability 
has to come at the cost of either financial integration or national sovereignty. 
In principle, there are two options. 
 
Firstly,  there  is  the  federal  approach,  where  you  allow  for  a  full  delegation  of 
powers  to  the  EU  level,  including  regulation,  supervision  and  crisis  management 
(Figure 2). 
Secondly, you can abandon the idea of the internal market and return to a system 
with full national control of domestic financial systems (Figure 3). 
 Figure 2 
Figure 3 
   The de Laroisière group opted for a third way – the middle way – to reform the EU financial 
system. In terms of the financial trilemma, this means keeping financial integration and, at 
the  same  time,  trying  to  find  a  reasonable  compromise  between  financial  stability  and 
national sovereignty (Figure 4). Somewhat stronger cooperation, but still resting on national 
sovereignty. 
 Figure 4 
Financial stability 
 Financial 
integration 
National  
sovereignty 
 Given the present European crisis, you may well ask whether this is a possible compromise 
or whether it will be just another damp squib. Only time will tell. But within this concept, there 
is room to move towards stronger European cooperation.  
The EU’s new supervisory structure 
The de Laroisière proposal rested on two major institutional pillars. The first related to the 
previous “level 3” committees, which were to be strengthened, transformed into authorities, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and given as much power as possible without having to change the European Treaty. Out of 
this came the three European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs), namely the European Banking 
Authority  (EBA)  in  London,  the  European  Insurance  and  Occupational  Pensions  Authority 
(EIOPA)  in  Frankfurt  and  the  European  Securities  and  Markets  Authority  (ESMA)  in  Paris. 
We  discussed  whether  these  three  authorities  could  be  merged  into  one,  but  that  was 
considered  premature.  Suggesting  such  a  merger  might  have  delayed  the  whole  political 
process  (Figure  5).  Trying  to  move  the  three  to  the  same  city  was  considered  equally 
impossible. 
Figure 5 
The EU’s new supervisory structure 
   European 
Systemic 
Risk Board 
(ESRB) 
European 
Banking 
Authority 
(EBA) 
European 
Securities 
and Markets 
Authority 
(ESMA)
and 
Occupational 
European 
Insurance 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The second pillar was the European Systemic Risk Board, the ESRB. The main idea with the 
ESRB  was  to  look  beyond  the  supervision  of  individual  institutions  and  focus  on  the  risks 
relevant to the financial system as a whole. There was a widespread feeling that supervisors 
in many countries could not see the wood for the trees – and certainly not any woods in any 
other countries. So the new body should work with issues systemic to parts or to the whole of 
Europe. As time has passed, this task has become known as “macro-prudential supervision”. 
Pensions 
Authority 
(EIOPA) 
The institutional set-up of the ESRB 
Legally,  the  ESRB  is  an  independent  EU  body  located  in  Frankfurt  and  with  a  Secretariat 
provided by the European Central Bank. The President of the ECB is also the Chair of the 
ESRB.  The  ESRB  has  no  binding  powers. 
issue  warnings  and 
recommendations  to  national  authorities  and  to  EU  institutions.  These  warnings  and 
recommendations can be either public or private. The effectiveness of its recommendations 
will  depend  on  the  attitude  of  the  addressees  to  the  “comply  or  explain”  principle.  This 
principle  simply  says  that  either  you  do  as  recommended  or  you  explain  why  you  have 
chosen  not  to  comply.  To  work,  it  requires  respect  for  the  institution  issuing  the 
recommendations. 
Instead, 
it  can 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Figure 6 
The structure of the ESRB 
General Board
(65 members, 37 
voting members)
Steering
Committee
(14 members)
Advisory
Technical
Committee
(62 members)
Advisory
Scientific
Committee
(16 members)
 B
C
E
)
e
l
p
o
e
p
0
2
 t
u
o
b
a
(
t
a
i
r
a
t
e
r
c
e
S
The  ESRB  is  unique  in  that  it  brings  together  representatives  from  central  banks  and 
financial supervisory authorities from all 27 Member States, as well as representatives from 
the three European supervisory authorities and from the  European Commission. However, 
this also makes the General Board a large body consisting of 65 members – 37 voting and 
28 non-voting. Decisions are taken by simple majority, but a majority of two thirds is needed 
to  adopt  recommendations  or  to  make  a  warning  or  recommendation  public.  The  fact  that 
ESRB decide by voting rather than by consensus is important, since blocking minorities can 
be avoided. The majority of voting rights are held by the national central banks (27 voting 
rights) while the national financial supervisory authorities have one non-voting representative 
per Member State in the General Board. This gives the central banks a strong role. 
Figure 7 
Voting rights of the General Board 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Obviously,  this  requires  efficient  preparations  for  meetings.  A  Steering  Committee  with 
14 members  has  therefore  been  established  with  the  purpose  of  guiding  the  work  to  be 
presented to the General Board. The majority of the Steering Committee members represent 
the EU institutions and in addition there are four elected members from the national central 
banks. Two advisory committees have also been set up – the Advisory Technical Committee, 
chaired by Stefan Ingves of the Riksbank and the Advisory Scientific Committee chaired by 
Professor  Martin  Hellwig  of  the  Max  Planck  Institute.  The  Advisory  Technical  Committee 
(ATC)  mirrors  the  composition  of  the  General  Board  with  62  members.  The  Advisory 
Scientific Committee (ASC) is smaller, consisting of only 15 academics and the chair of the 
ATC. I have been a member of the ESRB and the ATC at its first meetings 
Box 1 
Steering Committee Members 
Vice-Chair 
  ESRB Chair (ECB President) and first  
  ECB Vice-President 
  Governors of 4 Central Banks 
  European Commission representative 
  Chairpersons of the three ESAs 
  President of the EFC 
  ATC Chair 
  ASC Chair 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The  ESRB  General  Board  held  its  inaugural  meeting  in  January  and  has  since  met 
three times. It will meet again in December. The meetings were prepared by the Secretariat, 
the  Steering  Committee  and  the  Advisory  Technical  Committee.  The  ATC  has  also  been 
supported by the work of several working and expert groups. 
The ESRB’s work so far 
I hardly need to point out that the ESRB started in a very difficult period when systemic risks 
in  Europe  seemed  to  be  greater  than  ever  and  when  political  and  economic  issues  were 
tightly  interconnected.  Obviously,  the  work  of  the  ESRB  has  largely  focused  on  the 
immediate challenges of the current situation. But work is also taking place on more long-
term structural challenges to the EU financial system.  
The vicious financial triangle 
At its June meeting, the ESRB concluded that the most serious threat to financial stability in 
the  EU  stems  from  the  interplay  between  the  vulnerabilities  of  public  finances  in  certain 
EU member states and the banking system, with potential contagion effects across the Union 
and beyond. At the last meeting on September 21, the ESRB stated that the risk to stability 
has increased considerably. 
I think we can all agree with this conclusion. Over the summer, the weakening prospects for 
economic growth have further added to the difficulties. We now face a dangerous interplay 
between  fragile  public  finances,  weak  banking  sectors  and  low  economic  activity  both  at 
global and EU levels – the vicious financial triangle. It was right of the ESRB to put this issue 
at the very top of its agenda, in spite of its highly political content. Anything else would have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
seriously  hurt  the  credibility  of  the  ESRB.  It  is  vital  that  the  politicians  now  stick  to  their 
previous commitments and do whatever else is needed to restore market confidence. 
To  limit  potential  adverse  spill-overs,  the  ESRB  has  also  discussed  how  to  improve  the 
resilience of the EU financial system. The ESRB has highlighted the importance of the stress 
tests  performed  by  the  EBA,  the  European  Banking  Supervisors  –  not  least  as  a  way  to 
improve  the  transparency  of  the  financial  system.  The  ESRB  has  therefore  called  on  the 
competent authorities in the EU and its Member States to contribute to clear and rigorous 
assessments of the banks involved. It has also called for national private or public back-stops 
to  be  put  in  place  to  deal  with  the  potential  need  for  bank  capital.  Last  week,  the  ESRB 
sharpened this message asking supervisors to coordinate efforts to strengthen bank capital. 
I  find  the  stress-testing  to  be  a  very  useful  exercise.  I  also  believe  that  the  disclosure  of 
relevant data is an important tool for building market confidence, reducing uncertainty and 
promoting  financial  stability.  However,  there  is  still  room  for  improvement.  No  doubt  the 
macro-scenario could have been more conservative and possible contagion between banks 
and countries could have been handled better. The ESRB will have an important role to play 
in the construction of future stress tests. 
Bank funding vulnerabilities 
In June, the ESRB also pointed out that bank funding vulnerabilities could pose a threat to 
financial stability. The ESRB noted at the September meeting the progressive drying-up of 
bank term funding markets, and that the availability of US dollar funding to EU banks also 
had decreased significantly. 
In Sweden, we have, for some time now, highlighted the risk of Swedish banks’ reliance on 
short-term funding in foreign currency. The Riksbank’s stress tests indicate that the Swedish 
banks have a good capacity to handle bigger loan losses, but that they take somewhat larger 
liquidity risks than many other European banks. 
Lending in foreign currency 
The  ESRB  has  also  looked  into  the  risk  stemming  from  lending  in  foreign  currencies  to 
unhedged  borrowers.  This  risk  has  been  highlighted  by  recent  fluctuations  of  some 
currencies and the potential impact on unhedged household’s capacity to repay loans taken 
out in foreign currency. In view of this, the ESRB has developed policy proposals targeting 
credit, liquidity and funding risks, as well as the risk of miss-pricing loans. In Hungary and 
Austria  problems  related  to  foreign  exchange  lending  have  become  acute  due  to  the 
appreciation of the Swiss franc. 
In  Sweden,  we  have  experience  from  excessive  foreign-currency  lending,  both  from 
excesses  in  Sweden  in  the  1990s  and,  more  recently,  from  the  Swedish  banks’  foreign 
currency lending in the Baltic States. 
Challenges 
– to define the concept of macro-prudential supervision 
The ESRB is still a new body and it will take some time before it has fully settled in to its 
work.  The  concept  of  macro-prudential  supervision  is  new  and  is  often  interpreted  very 
differently  by  different  people,  depending  on  their  background.  An  important  task  for  the 
ESRB will therefore be to make this concept more precise. What should a macro-prudential 
mandate look like? How should we define macro-prudential tools? What institutions should 
use  the  different  tools,  and  how  should  these  be  held  responsible  for  using  (or  not  using) 
them? These are important questions that are being discussed in many countries, not only in 
Europe. One important instrument that has been discussed widely in the Basel framework is 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  countercyclical  capital  buffer.  This  instrument  has  clear  cross-border  effects  and  we 
should, in the ESRB, be able to discuss the principles for setting these buffers.  
– to gain credibility 
As the ESRB does not have any binding powers, it needs to earn credibility if the principle of 
“comply or explain” is to work in practice. As I see it, this can be done in three ways. 
Firstly, the ESRB’s risk assessments and recommendations to act upon them need to be of 
high quality and to be presented in a timely manner.  
In doing this, the ESRB should take advantage of its unique composition of representatives 
from  the  EU  institutions,  as  well  as  national  central  banks  and  financial  supervisory 
authorities.  This  institutional  set-up  gives  the  ESRB  a  great  opportunity  to  gather  relevant 
information from all key players in the EU financial system. For this to function in practice it is 
necessary  that  all  actors  are  willing  to  share  relevant  information  so  that  the  ESRB  can 
perform  its  tasks  properly.  However,  sharing  information,  although  simple  in  theory,  often 
turns out to be difficult in practice. 
Secondly,  the  risk  assessments  and  recommendations  need  to  be  well-understood  and 
accepted.  
This will require efficient communication. The issuance of warnings and recommendations is 
one  way  to  communicate,  either  in  public  or  in  private.  So  far,  there  have  been  press 
conferences after the General Board’s meetings. Under the ESRB regulations, the ESRB is 
also required to publish an annual report. This report will be presented by the chair of the 
ESRB to the European Parliament and the Council in an annual hearing. 
But there is a clear need to further develop the ESRB communication. This is important, not 
only to legitimise the work of the ESRB but also to increase public awareness of systemic 
risk  and  macro-prudential  policy.  The  ESRB  could  make  a  substantial  contribution  to 
promoting discussions in this field, both nationally and at the international level.  
Thirdly, Member States must be willing to accept warnings and recommendations from the 
ESRB. 
This  may  perhaps  be  the  most  difficult  objective  to  achieve.  Accepting  warnings  and 
recommendations may be difficult to accept when there is a political cost. It is therefore vital 
that  the  ESRB  proves  its  independence  and  that  it  can  express  its  views  even  when 
politically inconvenient.  
The “comply or explain” principle is a powerful tool 
In my view, the ESRB has had a better start than might have been expected, given its size 
and composition. It has focused not only on identifying risks, but also on suggesting how to 
handle them. And the risks discussed have been the relevant ones, in spite of their political 
sensitivity.  Certainly,  a  lot  remains  to  be  done  before  the  ESRB  will  have  established  its 
working procedures. And it remains to be seen what it will be able to produce under normal 
conditions, out of the present crisis mode. But, properly managed, it should develop into a 
useful  institution,  forcing  countries  and  authorities  to  act  in  time  to  avoid  difficult  and 
dangerous situations. Comply or explain is a powerful tool, if respected. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
