Richard W Fisher: An economic overview – what’s next? Remembering 
Carol Reed, Aesop’s Fable, Kenneth Arrow and Thomas Dewey 
Remarks  by  Mr  Richard  W  Fisher,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas, before the Rotary Club of Dallas, Dallas, Texas, 13 July 2011. 
 The views expressed by the author do not necessarily reflect official positions of the Federal Reserve System. 
Thank you, Jim [Struble], for that kind introduction.  
It is always a pleasure to speak to Rotarians. Until I went to Washington in 1997 to serve as 
the  deputy  U.S.  trade  representative,  I  was  a  member  of  this  wonderful  downtown  club.  I 
especially  loved  the  patriotism  and  the  esprit  de  corps  that  characterize  every  meeting.  I 
have always considered Rotarians the Marine Corps of the civic community. Remember what 
Ronald Reagan said about the Marines? “Some people spend an entire lifetime wondering if 
they have made a difference. The Marines don’t have that problem.” Neither do Rotarians.  
Nor do they have a problem injecting a little humor to lighten the load of the day. When I was 
a member of this great club, Carol Reed used to read the “news” at the beginning of every 
meeting,  picking  subjects  not  ordinarily  reported  in  the  traditional  media.  One  of  her  most 
memorable reports was about a man who had fallen into a river in Egypt and had allegedly 
managed to fight off an attack by a 14-foot crocodile. The punch line, of course, was that if 
you didn’t believe a man could fend off a croc with his bare hands, then you yourself were in 
“de-Nile.” 
We are no longer in denial about our national economic plight. Our great country now finds 
itself  in  a  very  difficult  predicament.  It  is  true  that  the  situation  here  in  Texas  is  relatively 
better than that of the nation; Texas is an oasis in a national economic desert devoid of life-
giving job creation. We went into the Great Recession last and were one of the first to come 
out. As we have for the past 20 years, we continue to outpace the rest of the United States in 
employment  growth  by  a  significant  margin.  Since  the  Great  Recession  officially  ended  in 
June 2009, only North Dakota (a plucky state whose hearty population totals less than that of 
Collin or Denton counties) has seen faster job growth than Texas.1 As I speak, Texas has 
almost as many people employed as we did before the recession began. Our banks are in 
better shape than those in the rest of the country; we are benefiting from the blessings of 
nature, with copious amounts of oil and gas and abundant agricultural production; our fellow 
citizens have seen to it that our Legislature continues to hew to a tax, regulatory and legal 
environment  that  attracts  job-creating  investment  and  encourages  business  formation  and 
growth.  And  yet,  even  in  this  blessed  state,  there  are  too  many  unemployed  and 
underemployed, just as there are in the rest of America. We can do better. America must do 
better. 
The question is: How?  
To create employment, we must have economic growth.  
The simplest of econometric equations posits that the key components of economic growth 
are domestic consumption, plus foreign demand for U.S.-produced exports, plus investment 
by businesses, plus spending by government.  
I think it is pretty clear to everyone who lives on the planet that in order to grow our economy 
and put our people back to work, we must rely on our ability to curry to domestic and foreign 
                                                 
1  The  Great  Recession’s  end  date  was  established  by  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  which 
officially declares the beginning and end of recessions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
consumption  and  invest  here  at  home  to  produce  the  goods  and  services  to  sell  in  the 
marketplace. You’d have to be from Mars to believe that the federal and state governments 
will be the source of much direct spending stimulus to the economy. 
Presently, all eyes are focused on the budget negotiations in Washington as the debt-ceiling 
clock ticks on. Aesop’s classic fable comes to mind. Rather than work like ants to build and 
store for difficult times, our fiscal authorities – Congress after Congress, under Republican 
and  Democrat  leadership  alike,  and  with  presidents  of  both  parties  occupying  the  White 
House – have been proverbial grasshoppers. Except for a few interludes, they have partied 
along for decades using the people’s money as though life were an endless summer, storing 
nothing to draw upon for the blustery fall and the bleak winter that inevitably follow. Now a 
fiscal  reckoning  is  upon  us.  The  gig  is  up.  Congress  can  no  longer  carry  on  as  before, 
oblivious to the deleterious effect of spending our, and the successor generations’, money 
with unfunded abandon.  
Tongue  firmly  in  cheek,  Carol  Reed  might  have  reminded  us  that  there  are  alternative 
versions of this fable. In 1924, Somerset Maugham wrote a version about two brothers: one 
an  ant-like  hard  worker  and  the  other  a  grasshopper  wastrel.  In  the  end,  the  grasshopper 
marries a rich widow who dies and leaves him a fortune.2 Case closed! In Things Change, a 
film released by Columbia Pictures in 1988, the character played by Don Ameche recites a 
version  in  which  the  grasshopper,  fed  up  with  all  this  moralizing  about  the  virtues  of  hard 
work and saving for a rainy day, just up and eats the ant. 
I think we can safely assume that neither of these scenarios will occur. No one is going to 
bail out the government at the last minute. The ants that are the hard-working taxpayers are, 
if anything, poised to chew up and spit out improvident politicians should they fail to put an 
end to fiscal profligacy. The fiscal authorities have no choice but to come to terms with the 
need to bring about a better balance between taxes and spending and to not only bend the 
curve, but reverse the inexorable growth in federal debt accumulation. This is the stuff of the 
great  negotiations  taking  place  among  the  executive  branch  and  the  two  houses  of 
Congress.  
This  is  no  small  chore.  The  parties  involved  must  stop  the  hemorrhaging  without  inducing 
cardiac arrest; they must solve the long-run debt and deficit problem without, in the short run, 
pushing the economy back into recession, creating still more unemployment. And they must 
not  only  confront  their  addiction  to  debt  and  spending  beyond  their  means,  but  they  must 
reorganize the tax system, redirect the money they collect and rewrite the regulations they 
create so as to be competitive in a world that wants to beat us at our own game.  
This  is  an  essential  point.  It  will  not  be  enough  to  reach  a  deal  on  the  debt  ceiling  or  on 
partially reining in deficits. In the post-Cold War, post-Bamboo Curtain world, there are many 
governments  and  great  swathes  of  people  outside  the  United  States  that  want  to  attract 
investment and improve their lot. We are being challenged as the place to invest job-creating 
capital.  Our  fiscal  and  regulatory  authorities  do  not  operate  in  a  vacuum;  we  live  in  a 
globalized,  interconnected  world  where  money  is  free  to  go  to  wherever  it  earns  the  best 
return. In their solution to the debt crisis, our political leaders must develop an entirely new 
structure  of  incentives  for  private  businesses  and  investors  to  put  their  money  to  work 
creating jobs here at home. 
Only fiscal authorities have the power to affect this outcome. Monetary authorities, like me 
and my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee of the Federal Reserve (FOMC), 
have limited influence. We can fill the gas tank with attractively priced fuel – abundant and 
cheap money – needed to propel the economy forward. But we cannot trigger the impulse to 
step on the pedal and engage the transmission mechanism of job-creating investment by the 
                                                 
2  See Collected Short Stories, by William Somerset Maugham, New York: Penguin Books, 1972. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
private  sector.  This  is  the  province  of  those  who  write  our  laws  and  regulations  –  the 
Congress of the United States. 
I firmly believe that the Federal Reserve has already pressed the limits of monetary policy. 
So-called QE2, to my way of thinking, was of doubtful efficacy, which is why I did not support 
it to begin with. But even if you believe the costs of QE2 were worth its purported benefits, 
you would be hard pressed to now say that still more liquidity, or more fuel, is called for given 
the more than $1.5 trillion in excess bank reserves and the substantial liquid holdings above 
the normal working capital needs of corporate businesses. Even surveys of small businesses 
– most recently, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce’s survey of companies with less than $25 
million in sales and fewer than 500 employees – indicate that fewer than 10 percent of small 
enterprises  (which  employ  half  of  the  private  sector’s  workers)  are  having  problems 
accessing  credit.3  The  National  Federation  of  Independent  Business  specifically  noted  just 
yesterday  that  “91  percent  [of  those  surveyed  in  June]  reported  that  all  their  credit  needs 
were met or that they were not interested in borrowing.”4 
U.S.  banks  and  businesses  are  awash  in  liquidity.  Adding  more  is  not  the  answer  to  our 
problems. 
With  monetary  policy  having  reached  the  limits  of  accommodation,  and  the  federal 
government  at  sixes  and  sevens,  what  then  is  the  foreseeable  economic  outlook?  Are  we 
going to grow through the rest of the year and on into the next, or are we going to dip back 
into recession?  
Forecasting  economic  growth  is  not  a  precise  business.  Economics  is  an  art  form,  not  a 
science;  it  is  very  judgmental  and  subjective.  The  FOMC  is  composed  of  17  thoughtful, 
introspective  and  deliberate  men  and  women.  Five  of  the  members  serve  full  time  in 
Washington  as  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board,  appointed  by  presidents  of  the 
United States with the approval of Congress. The remaining 12, like me, are chosen by nine-
member,  nonpolitical  boards  of  directors  of  citizens  in  their  districts  and  charged  with 
conducting  the  business  of  the  Fed  in  the  field  based  on  our  business  acumen  and  with 
developing  policy  insights  based  upon  what  we  see,  hear  and  measure  on  Main  Street. 
Together, the 17 of us formulate policy with the best judgment we can collectively muster, 
free from political pressures or the passions of the moment, on what is in the best long-term 
interest of the country’s economy.  
We each gin up forecasts for the economy. All 17 FOMC participants’ expectations for the 
economy  through  2013  and  beyond  were  released  to  the  public  yesterday  and  widely 
reported  in  the  press  today.5  To  develop  those  forecasts,  we  employ  sophisticated 
econometric  models,  study  the  entrails  of  numerous  comprehensive  surveys  conducted  all 
across the nation – like the Dallas Fed’s Texas Manufacturing Outlook Survey and the Texas 
Retail Outlook Survey and their counterparts in other Federal Reserve districts – and draw 
upon  input  from  our  boards  of  directors,  numerous  advisory  boards  and  contacts  with 
businesses  and  stakeholders  nationwide  and  worldwide.  These  forecasts  are  helpful 
guideposts, but they must be kept in context.  
Kenneth  Arrow,  one  of  the  most  notable  Nobel  Laureates  in  economics,  has  his  own 
perspective on forecasting. During World War II, he served as a weather officer in the U.S. 
Army  Air  Corps  and  worked  with  a  team  charged  with  the  particularly  difficult  task  of 
producing  month-ahead  weather  forecasts.  As  Arrow  and  his  team  reviewed  these 
                                                 
3  See “Little Hiring Seen by Small Business,” by Siobhan Hughes, Wall Street Journal, July 11, 2011 
4  See  Small  Business  Economic  Trends  survey,  National  Federation  of 
www.nfib.com/research-foundation/surveys/small-business-economic-trends. 
Independent  Business, 
5  See the Federal Open Market Committee meeting calendar,  
  www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
predictions,  they  confirmed  statistically  what  you  and  I  might  just  as  easily  have  guessed: 
The  Corps’  weather  forecasts  were  no  more  useful  than  random  rolls  of  a  die. 
Understandably,  the  forecasters  asked  to  be  relieved  of  this  seemingly  futile  duty.  Arrow’s 
recollection  of  his  superiors’  response  was  priceless:  “The  commanding  general  is  well 
aware that the forecasts are no good. However, he needs them for planning purposes.”6 
Keep  Ken  Arrow  in  mind  when  you  hear  economists  tout  precise  forecasts  carried  out 
several  places  to  the  right  of  the  decimal  point.  You  may  need  economists’  forecasts  for 
planning purposes, but you should always take them with a grain of salt, even when the time 
horizon is a short one. I will direct you to an article in the Feb. 14 Wall Street Journal as 
evidence.  The  Journal  had  polled  51  leading  economists,  and  they  forecast  that  gross 
domestic product (GDP) would expand 3.6 percent in that very same first quarter.7 Growth 
came in at 1.9 percent.  
When  economists  forecast  we  will  have  growth  of,  say  3.6  percent,  remember  they  are 
saying .036. It is an elaborate conceit to think anybody can be that precise in an economy as 
large as that of the United States, operating as it does within the context of an even larger, 
very  dynamic,  global  economy.  This  is  true  for Fed  economists  as  well  as  academics  and 
those who sell their forecasts for a living. 
This  is  not  to  say  that  we  will  cease  and  desist  from  making  “point”  forecasts.  But  what 
matters most to me is the direction in which the numbers are headed and the general sense 
of momentum. At this juncture, I think it sufficient to say that, assuming the people we elect 
to  tax  us  and  spend  our  money  and  create  the  rules  and  regulations  that  govern  our 
economic behavior can at long last get their act together, confront their own denial of most 
rudimentary budgetary discipline, learn to shoot straight and remove the Damocles Sword of 
uncertainty  that  they  have  for  too  long  unwittingly  wielded  over  our  job-creating  private 
sector, there is plenty of potential for the economy to move forward at an accelerating clip. 
This is especially the case now that the Fed has reliquified the economy.  
I expect that economic activity will accelerate in the second half of this year, with real GDP 
likely  to  rise  at  an  average  annual  rate  of  between  3  and  4  percent.  Lest  you  get  carried 
away with excitement, I must note that some of the acceleration in activity will be a function 
of inventory adjustment, and much will stem from an unwinding of the disruption caused by 
the Japanese earthquake and tsunami as the Japanese make up for supply interruptions to 
the  auto  and  other  industries  faster  than  many  thought  possible.  Looking  beyond  2011,  I 
hope that growth above 3 percent can be sustained, again assuming the fiscal authorities get 
it right. 
As Jim has referenced, I may have called the bottom of the recession in the summer of 2009 
well  before  most  anybody  else  did,  but  I  made  the  point  in  that  Dallas  Morning  News 
interview that going forward, we were going to have a slow slog.8 I have said many times 
since  then  that,  in  light  of  the  fact  that  we  were  recovering  from  “post-traumatic  shock 
syndrome” stemming from the Panic of 2008 and 2009, economic recovery would proceed 
hesitantly, taking two steps forward and one step back until it finds its new legs. We took a 
step  backward  in  the  first  half;  I  expect  we  will  proceed  forward,  however  haltingly,  in  the 
second half and into 2012. 
                                                 
6  Eminent  Economists:  Their  Life  Philosophies,  ed.  Michael  Szenberg,  Cambridge,  England:  Cambridge 
University Press, 1992. 
“Consumer and Business Spending to Spur Expanding U.S. Economy,” by Phil Izzo and Justin Lahart, Wall 
Street Journal, Feb. 14, 2011. 
“Recession  Over,  Dallas  Fed  Chief  Says,  but  Jobs  Lag,”  by  Brendan  Case,  Dallas  Morning  News, 
Aug. 26, 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
7 
8 
4 
 The point is that I do not think we need be stuck in the low gear of the first half. Some of the 
temporary  influences  that  I  believe  retarded  growth  in  the  first  half  –  high  gasoline  and 
unprocessed-food  prices,  the  supply  disruptions  in  Japan,  etc.  –  are  passing  through  the 
system and are either being reversed or digested. To be sure, some businesses are being hit 
with  higher  input  costs  from  imported  goods  and  other  nonlabor  cost  increases.  Having 
become as lean as possible and having learned to preserve their margins by years of tight 
cost  management  and  by  maximizing  productivity,  they  don’t  have  much  fat  to  absorb  the 
cost  of  input  increases.  If  input  price  increases  continue  or  spread,  these  businesses  will 
naturally  attempt  to  pass  them  on  to  consumers,  who  are  wary  of  anything  else  that  will 
compress their living standards.  
I  see  a  bit  of  a  tug-of-war  developing  here.  The  issue  will  be  whether  businesses  can 
exercise  pricing  power  in  the  face  of  fallow  consumer  demand.  As  an  inflation  “hawk”  –  I 
prefer to think of myself and my 16 colleagues, hawks and doves alike, as wise owls – I am 
watching  this  very  carefully.  If  I  see  inflation  continuing  to  rise  and,  most  importantly, 
inflationary expectations beginning to spread, I will be the first out of the box to advocate the 
removal of the substantial monetary accommodation now in place. I cannot think of anything 
more  damaging  to  the  welfare  of  hard-working  Americans  who  have  jobs,  those  who  are 
unemployed and barely eking out a living, retirees who are earning minimum returns on their 
savings,  or  any  consumer  already  stretched  thin,  than  to  have  their  purchasing  power 
reduced by still higher inflation. 
Yet even though I am a central banker and am professionally disposed to being a worrywart, 
I am more optimistic about the economic outlook than the consensus. American businesses 
and workers have made very important improvements in their efficiency and competitiveness 
that will aid growth. If we can add to that a sound long-run budget deal, the recovery could 
gain even more strength. We are a resilient people. I know it is fashionable to think we have 
somehow  been  infected  with  an  economic  stasis  with  no way  out,  but  as  a  Texan  and  an 
American, I am culturally unable to accept that view. 
During the Q&A that followed a recent speech of mine abroad – in New York – a questioner 
cited the sickly economic pace of the first quarter and then recited the consensus view that 
very  weak  growth  will  likely  ensue  for  the  rest  of  the  year  and  beyond.  In  response,  I 
cautioned  that  forecasting  based  on  current  trends  can  be  very  misleading.  And  the 
consensus view – usually conveyed with confidence all the way out to three places to the 
right of the decimal point – is almost always wrong, even within short time periods.  
I asked my interlocutor to recall the presidential election of 1948. The consensus view called 
for a landslide victory by Gov. Dewey. Indeed, an early edition of the Chicago Daily Tribune 
on the very night of the election announced in the boldest of headlines that Dewey had won. 
Before  going  to  sleep,  an  overconfident  Dewey  is  reported  to  have  turned  to  his  wife  and 
said, “Just think about it: Tomorrow night, you are going to be sleeping with the president of 
the United States!” 
The  next  morning  at  breakfast,  Mrs.  Dewey  asked,  “Am  I  going  up  to  Washington  this 
evening or is Harry Truman coming to our house?” 
Carol Reed would love to have reported that story! 
Thank you, Rotarians. You are the embodiment of what makes this country great. Carry on 
with your good works. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
