Patrick Honohan: Ireland’s mortgage over-indebtedness against the 
background of macroeconomic and fiscal challenges 
Opening statement by Mr Patrick Honohan, Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the 
Joint Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform, Dublin, 2 September 2011. 
 Introduction  
Deputy  Governor  Matthew  Elderfield  and  I  thank  you  for  inviting  us  to  appear  before  the 
Committee today. 
In addition to some brief remarks about the overall macroeconomic situation, fiscal and other 
aspects of policy under the EU-IMF Programme, I would like to use the opportunity of this 
opening statement to outline our perspective on the problem of mortgage over-indebtedness. 
Economic developments and fiscal policy 
Aggregate  domestic  economic  demand  continues  to  be  affected  by  the  unwinding  of  the 
imbalances created in the past and the pressing need to continue with the correction of the 
country’s fiscal, banking and competitiveness problems. On the external side, the economy 
has performed well with positive growth in exports of goods and services. The point has now 
been reached where the positive impulse to output growth from the external side is broadly 
offsetting  and  even  beginning  to  outweigh  the  remaining  drag  on  growth  from  domestic 
developments. 
The  nature  of  the  recovery  will  be  moderate  and  growth  will  not  be  very  labour  intensive, 
however,  especially  in  the  initial  stages.  Employment  has  been  slow  to  stabilise  and 
unemployment has only declined due to an increase in outward migration. Nevertheless, the 
labour market situation is deteriorating at a much slower pace than previously and modest 
employment growth could emerge by the latter part of next year. Household incomes remain 
under  downward  pressure  and  the  savings  rate  has  risen,  keeping  domestic  consumption 
subdued. Increased savings partly reflect the desire of households to reduce their debt but 
are also prompted by high levels of uncertainty about the future. The latter, in turn, reflect the 
extent of the deterioration in the labour market, as well as concern about the precise impact 
of the planned fiscal adjustment on household finances. 
At  this  point,  it  would  be  beneficial  to  reduce  uncertainty  by  both  deciding  on  and 
announcing,  in  as  much  detail  as  possible,  the  complete  set  of  changes  required  to 
Government spending and taxation in order to bring the Government’s finances convincingly 
back onto a sound footing. There is no benefit to be gained by delay in this regard and the 
sooner  the  Government  can  make  more  detail  available  of  the  composition  of  the  full 
adjustment package, the better. The planned pace of the adjustment is the minimum that is 
required to ensure stability and it is vitally important the targeted reduction of the deficit as a 
proportion  of  GDP  is  achieved  on  or  even  before  schedule.  Progress  in  this  regard, 
combined  with  further  improvements  in  the  competitiveness  of  the  economy,  and  a 
restoration  of  a  functioning  banking  system,  are  the  cornerstones  to  recovery.  Recent 
developments in financial markets point to an increased recognition that Ireland is taking the 
right steps to achieve a return to sustainable growth and balanced public finances. The task 
now is to maintain the momentum behind all the necessary adjustments required to move the 
economy out of its current difficult situation. Progress on these fronts will help to increase the 
resilience  of  the  economy  to  change  in  the  external  environment  and  move  decisively 
towards a situation in which households can look forward to modest but steady increases in 
real incomes and living standards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
EU-IMF Programme 
Banking  as  well  as  fiscal  and  other  aspects  of  economic  policy  are,  of  course,  being 
conducted  in  the  context  of  the  policy  package  agreed  for  the  EU-IMF  Programme.  But  it 
would be a mistake to exaggerate the degree to which this package represents a different 
course  from  that  which  Irish  policymakers  would  otherwise  have  chosen.  Consistent 
Programme  compliance  by  Ireland,  as  has  been  confirmed  in  the  three  reviews  by  our 
External Partners – the EU Commission, the ECB and the IMF (in January, May and, most 
recently,  in  July)  –  is  thus  not  only  the  key  to  restoring  market  confidence  (and  ensuring 
release  of  Programme  funding),  but  signals  important  steps  towards  rebalancing  and 
strengthening the economy towards a recovery of activity and especially employment. 
Under  all  three  reviews  Ireland  has  been  deemed  to  be  on  track  in  relation  to  all  the 
quantitative macroeconomic targets and the structural benchmarks. In particular, the banking 
strategy is proceeding as scheduled. The financial sector reforms include the restructuring, 
recapitalisation,  and  the  deleveraging  of  the  banks.  All  of  the  structural  benchmarks  have 
been observed here too, with some achieved ahead of schedule. In fact, the third review and 
assessment, which took place in July, is being discussed at the IMF Executive Board and at 
the  European  Councils  today,  and  following  the  Board’s  and  Councils’  approval,  the  next 
tranche of funding will be issued. 
Mortgage arrears 
Of  course  the  vast  majority  of  Irish  borrowers  will  continue  to  meet  their  commitments  in 
servicing mortgage and other debt, albeit under more difficult circumstances. It is only on that 
basis that economic recovery – requiring, as it does, the progressive restoration of credit and 
finance generally – can be underpinned. Despite the generally lower interest rates that have 
been  prevailing,  given  what  has  happened  in  this  steep  recession,  in  particular  the  sharp 
increase  in  unemployment,  and  given  the  heavy  indebtedness  that  was  incurred  by  many 
households  in  previous  years,  there  has,  however,  been  an  exceptional  increase  in  the 
number of households who have missed payments on their mortgages. For some, this will 
reflect transitory factors and they will be able to resume servicing of their mortgage and other 
debt; for such cases the most commonly used restructuring and forbearance arrangements 
may be sufficient. 
But it is entirely foreseeable that some households whose circumstances have deteriorated 
will  not  be  able  to  recover  fully  and  that  the  banks  from  whom  they  have  received  the 
mortgage  loans  cannot  avoid  eventually  incurring  some  losses  on  these.  In  requiring 
additional capital for the banks – much of which has been injected by the Government – the 
Central Bank has ensured that the banks have sufficient financial strength to absorb losses 
of this type in cases where borrowers are genuinely in serious difficulty. This provides more 
capacity to address individual mortgage arrears cases. 
It is clear that many lenders have been slow to acknowledge the extent of this problem and 
to  put  in  place  sufficient  operational  infrastructure  to  deal  with  it.  Nevertheless  it  is  a  task 
from which the lenders should not be relieved. Neither the lender nor the borrower is well-
served  by  delay  in  recognising  the  existence  of  an  inability  to  service  debt.  Despite  its 
severity – indeed because of its severity – this problem can be adequately dealt with only on 
a case-by-case basis taking account of the borrower’s particular circumstances.  
Banks  must  put  the  framework  and  resources  in  place  to  examine  the  individual  cases  of 
distressed borrowers. The sooner they do this the better. 
There are, of course, already strong protections in place for consumers who are in mortgage 
arrears.  The  Central  Bank  Code  of  Conduct  on  Mortgage  Arrears  imposes  statutory 
requirements  on  banks  to  deal  expeditiously  and  fairly  with  distressed  mortgages  in  a 
manner  which  takes  account  of  the  overall  economic  conditions  of  the  household.  This 
framework  provides  protection  for  these  consumers  who  are  in  mortgage  arrears  in  their 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
dealings  with  their  banks,  including  stopping  the  clock  on  legal  action  by  the  banks,  no 
charges and the requirement that the bank must engage constructively to arrange alternative 
repayment arrangements with the borrower. 
It  is  very  important  to  stress  that  for  this  Code  to  work  well,  it  is  essential,  as  I  am  sure 
members of this committee will appreciate, that borrowers in distress approach their lenders 
as early as possible. When they do so they trigger the statutory protections. I want to strongly 
encourage distressed borrowers to approach their lenders quickly. 
We are vigorously policing this Code. I want to announce here today that we are about to 
undertake  a  major  thematic  review  of  banks’  compliance  with  the  Code  of  Conduct  on 
Mortgage  Arrears.  We  will  visit  the  banks  to  examine  very  closely  how  they  are  handling 
distressed  mortgage  holders  and  to  check  that  they  have  the  appropriate  framework  and 
adequate  resources  in place  to  look  after  their  distressed customers  properly  and  to  meet 
their statutory requirements under the Code. 
I  would  advise  bank  chief  executives  to  examine  very  carefully  their  compliance  with  the 
Code of Conduct on Mortgage Arrears and to ensure their processes and resources are up 
to the task. 
Banks need to work harder to bring a wider range of options for dealing with affordability to 
bear  on  this  problem  particularly  to  take  account  of  individual  cases  where  there  is  little 
prospect of servicing the original loan terms. On the one hand, the banks must husband their 
available capital in a prudent manner. On the other hand it may be possible to arrange that, 
even very stressed, owner-occupier borrowers who have to surrender ownership could stay 
in their house on a rental basis; and there could be intermediate shared equity type solutions. 
All of this would need to be on a case-by-case basis without imposing avoidable costs on the 
State, which has, after all, provided the necessary capital. Ideas along these lines are being 
considered by the banks, and would not require legislative or regulatory action. 
In  addition,  the  Central  Bank  has  been  working  actively  with  the  relevant  Government 
Departments with a view to making rapid progress on proposed amendments to Bankruptcy 
Law and the development of a carefully calibrated non-judicial debt settlement mechanism 
(building on the report of the Law Reform Commission). While entry into such a mechanism 
is far from painless – which should dispel any suggestion that borrowers could walk away 
from their situation (say, a buy-to-let investment) regardless of ability to pay, early clarity on 
its key elements will help reduce the anxiety of those who are struggling to manage over-
indebtedness. 
Society at large would not be well-served, to say the least, by strategic behaviour on the part 
of  any  persons  that  could  service  their  debts  but  conceive,  in  the  current  environment,  an 
opportunity  to  escape  from  their  obligations,  large  or  small.  It  is  important  to  ensure  that 
arrangements for dealing with distressed borrowers do not provide such incentives. Already 
the  State  has  assumed  too  great  a  burden  in  this  crisis  as  a  consequence  of  adopting  a 
broad-brush  or  blanket  approach  (as  with  the  initial  bank  guarantee).  As  my  colleague 
Matthew Elderfield has said, there is no silver bullet or one size fits all approach to resolving 
the  arrears  problem.  A  targeted,  case-by-case,  approach  must  be  the  hallmark  of  current 
policy for the resolution of solvency problems. Each of the banks is working up their capacity 
in this regard: they need to move faster to build the infrastructure and on an adequate scale 
in terms of a sufficient cadre of trained household debt work-out experts. 
Resolution will be effective only if it is guided by clear principles including (i) affordability for 
the borrower of any modified repayment plan (that is to say, recognising the true scale of the 
problem  based  on  a  sufficiently  comprehensive  assessment  of  household  financial 
conditions;  avoiding  unrealistic  plans  likely  to  result  in  recidivism);  (ii)  avoidance  of 
unnecessarily  formal  legal  procedures;  (iii)  avoidance  of  perverse  incentives  for  strategic 
default by those who can truly afford to pay; (iv) no unavoidable losses to lenders, but banks 
to absorb unavoidable losses using their increased capital. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Conclusion 
Let me conclude with this observation: resolving the arrears problem requires case-by-case 
action by the banks, so the banks must ramp up their effort to a scale sufficient to meet the 
problem  and  must  do  this  in  a  way  that  both  treats  their  customers  fairly  and  prudently 
manages their capital. The Central Bank is determined to ensure that progress is made here. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
