Masaaki Shirakawa: The transition from high growth to stable growth – 
Japan’s experience and implications for emerging economies 
Remarks by Mr Masaaki Shirakwa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Bank of Finland 
200th Anniversary Conference, Helsinki, 5 May 2011. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Thank you very much for inviting me to the Bank of Finland’s 200th Anniversary Conference1. 
It is an honor to take part in this panel session. 
After considering how I could contribute to the session “Global Shifts” as a discussant, I felt it 
would  be  best  to  compare  the  experience  of  the  Japanese  economy  from  its  high-growth 
period onward, with that of the emerging economies which are currently growing at a very 
rapid pace. Although it is not well-known, Japan’s automobile industry first ventured into the 
European  markets  through  Finland  back  in  1962.  At  that  time,  Japanese  automakers  had 
little  name  recognition,  and  one  firm,  in  order  to  prove  the  safety  of  its  car  to  Finnish 
consumers, had the car driven off a ski-jumping hill. I have been informed that the car landed 
safely and the driver was not harmed. The 1960s, when such episodes of Japanese firms 
were born, was the heyday of the Japanese economic miracle. 
Though needless to say, currently the emerging economies are the high-growth countries. In 
the past 10 years the global economy has grown at an annual rate of +3.6%. There is a large 
gap  among  countries.  The  BRIC  countries  have  averaged  +7.9%  growth  while  non-BRIC 
countries have grown at +2.1% (Slide 1). If one simply extrapolates these numbers, by 2040 
the BRIC countries would have more than an 80% share of the global economy, but we all 
know that is not realistic. As past economic history has shown, high-growth economies also 
begin to mature at some point in time. Japan was no exception. 
II. 
Japan’s patterns of economic growth 
High-growth period 
Japan’s post-war economic recovery began from a situation where capital stock equivalent to 
86% of GDP had been lost due to World War II. It is usually understood that Japan’s period 
of high growth began in the mid-1950s and ended in the early part of the 1970s. During this 
15 year  period,  the  average  rate  of  economic  growth  was  nearly  +10%  (Slide  2).  Let  me 
highlight three factors which I believe enabled such rapid growth. 
First, favorable demographics (Slide 3). Total population increased at an annual rate of +1% 
during  this  period  and  the  relative  youth  of  the  working-age  population  supported  both 
production  and  consumption.  At  the  beginning  of  the  economic  boom  period,  the  farming 
population reached approximately 40% of the total population and the migration of surplus 
labor  from  the  rural  areas  to  the  cities  enabled  the  rapid  growth  of  a  high  productivity 
manufacturing sector. 
Second,  the  use  of  competitive  forces.  It  is  sometimes  pointed  out  that  the  government’s 
industrial  policy  or  so-called  “Japan  Incorporated”  was  the  key  factor  behind  Japan’s 
economic miracle. I believe such public sector influence is overstated. When we look at the 
                                                 
1  The Conference was held on May 5th and 6th under the theme, “Monetary Policy under Resource Mobility”. 
Please refer to, 
http://www.suomenpankki.fi/en/tutkimus/konferenssit/tulevat_konferenssit/Pages/BOF200_2011.aspx 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
history of Japan’s leading firms, it is not rare to find cases where they entered into new areas 
dissenting against the government’s industrial policy or cases where they did not receive any 
favorable treatment. There are also examples where industries and firms which were well-
protected  gradually  lost  their  vibrancy.  Strong  competition  supported  Japan’s  high-growth 
period  by  stimulating  entrepreneurship  and  promoting  technological  innovation  which 
enabled Japanese firms to catch-up with those in advanced economies. 
Third,  the  benefits  of  global  free  trade.  When  one  looks  at  the  contribution  of  individual 
components to GDP growth, domestic demand is by far the main factor (Slide 4). However, 
this does not refute the important role that the overseas economy played. Japan produced 
large amounts of producer and consumer goods for the expanding global market, such as 
steel, electronic appliances and automobiles. The foreign exchange obtained through exports 
was  used  to  import  raw  materials  necessary  to  support  domestic  economic  development. 
The basic condition which made such a growth model possible was the continued growth of 
the world economy and the maintenance of the global free trade system. 
The bubble and its collapse 
Japan’s  high-growth  period  ended  in  the  early  1970s  and  the  pace  of  growth  gradually 
slowed. However, during the 70s and 80s, Japan still maintained a relatively high-growth rate 
when  compared  with  other  major  advanced  economies  (Slide  5).  Favorable  demographics 
and  strong global  competitiveness were  the  basic components  which continued  to  support 
economic growth. However, after the collapse of the bubble and the ensuing financial crisis 
in  the  1990s,  the  pace  of  growth  fell  below  that  of  major  advanced  economies.  Three 
elements  led  to  the  prolonged  period  of  economic  weakness  following  the  collapse  of  the 
bubble. 
First,  of  course,  there  was  the  direct  effect  of  the  collapse  of  the  bubble.  Balance  sheet 
problems  in  the  private  sector  constrained  expenditures  and  the  credit  intermediation 
capabilities of the banking sector, saddled with non-performing loans, deteriorated. This led 
to weak growth during the 1990s, but was not the cause of the tepid growth during the past 
decade. 
Second, the business model which had supported the strong growth of Japanese firms was 
no  longer  compatible  with  the  changed  economic  environment.  The  strength  of  Japanese 
firms was the pursuit of operational efficiency enabled by large scale production and sales. 
You all know the detailed management of production and inventories through the “just-in-time 
process” and the “Kaizen system” which has become a part of the English language. Such 
pursuit  of  efficiency  gains  is  naturally  important.  But  as  other  countries  such  as  the  Asian 
emerging  economies  rapidly  catch-up  with  advanced  economies  through  technological 
progress,  global  competition  becomes  more  intense  and  increased  profits  cannot  be 
generated  simply  through  such  efficiency  gains.  According  to  a  study  which  analyzed  the 
production costs of iPhones (Slide 6), of the 500 dollar sales price of the iPhone, component 
costs  add  up  to  173  dollars  and  assembly  costs  account  for  only  6.5  dollars.  Accordingly, 
gross profits reach 321 dollars. In other words, the added value for coming up with a product 
concept and developing it into a product is now quite significant. 
Third, demographics have changed (Slide 7). Our country’s working-age population, in other 
words population between the ages of 15 and 64, began to decrease in the mid-1990s. Our 
society is ageing at a very rapid pace. The share of people 65 and above went from 9% in 
1980  to  23%  in  2009.  Such  rapid  ageing  has  never  been  seen  in  past  economic  history. 
Japan had experienced the “population bonus” based on working-age population during the 
high-growth period. But now it has entered the “population onus” stage2. 
                                                 
2  There  is  no  consensus  on  the  definition  of  “population  bonus  period”  and  “population  onus  period”. 
Government reports and academic papers on demographic studies often focus on the level of the working age 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Comparison of high-growth periods: Japan and emerging economies 
III. 
Based on such an understanding of Japan’s growth pattern, I would next like to conduct a 
simple  comparison  of  the  high  growth  that  China  and  India  are  currently  undergoing  with 
Japan’s past experience (Slide 8). China’s rapid growth started at the beginning of the 1990s 
and  the  pace  of  growth  for  the  first  15  years  is  almost  exactly  the  same  as  Japan.  The 
difference  is  that  China  has  continued  to  grow  on  average  at  a  pace  above  +10%.  With 
regard to India, the growth rate is slightly lower than that of current China, or Japan during its 
boom  period.  This  is  perhaps  because  India  has  yet  to  enter  the  population  bonus  stage 
(slide 9). 
During a high-growth period, the supply of labor from rural areas plays a key role. When we 
compare  the  urban  population  rate  of  Japan  and  China,  China’s  current  level  is  roughly 
similar to Japan’s level in the 1960s. Looking at the car ownership rate as a reflection of a 
consumption  boom  due  to  strong  household  income  growth,  once  again  China’s  level  is 
similar to that of Japan in the 1960s. When seen from this simple comparison, I believe that 
the Chinese economy will continue its high growth for some time. With regard to India, the 
population bonus period will arrive around 2015, so its growth rate may accelerate further3. 
However, as Japan’s experience shows, when income levels increase together with strong 
economic growth, each society faces various new challenges. A smooth transition from high 
growth to stable growth is quite a challenge. From the perspective of a country which has 
been  facing  these  challenges  for  some  time,  I  would  like  to  share  with  you  some  of  the 
lessons we have learned. 
Preventing bubbles 
The first challenge is preventing the emergence of bubbles. When an economy experiences 
strong growth over an extended period, society often becomes over-confident. This seems to 
be  human  nature.  Japan’s  bubble  during  the  latter  half  of  the  1980s,  was  the  result  of  a 
complex interaction among multiple factors. However, the fundamental reason was the over-
confidence  which  cloaked  the  entire  country  and  the  ensuing  dramatically  aggressive 
economic  behavior.  At  that  time,  Japan’s  growth  rate  was  higher  than  other  advanced 
economies and the inflation rate was quite subdued. Japan was the perfect model student 
(Slide 10). It may sound ridiculous, but according to an estimate released at that time, the 
aggregate value of land in central Tokyo was equivalent to that of the entire United States. 
Financial supervision was also insufficient. Lending to real estate, construction and non-bank 
financial sectors increased sharply and lending conditions softened including the evaluation 
of  collateral.  The  prolonged  period  of  monetary  accommodation  also  played  a  role.  One 
reason  why  accommodative  monetary  conditions  continued  was  the  low  inflation rate.  The 
other  reason  was  the  serious  concerns  toward  a  stronger  yen  and  the  strong  overseas 
pressure  to  reduce  the  current  account  surplus.  A  strong  argument  was  put  forward  that 
accommodative monetary policy was crucial in order to prevent a stronger yen and to bring 
down the current account surplus. 
                                                                                                                                                      
population ratio, and when it is above 65%, it is considered to be the bonus period and when it is below 65%, 
the  onus  period.  On  the  other  hand,  economic  literature  often  focuses  on  the  change  in  the  working  age 
population  ratio.  When  it  is  rising,  it  is  considered  to  be  the  bonus  period  and  when  it  is  falling,  the  onus 
period. 
3  According to forecasts by the United Nations, India will overtake China to become the world’s most populated 
country in the middle of 2020s. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Reviewing business models 
The  second  challenge  is  what  we  may  call  the  review  of  business  models.  There  is  no 
universally optimal business model which is continuously applicable across time and borders. 
It  is  true  that,  during  the  economic  boom  period,  the  business  model  of  Japanese  firms 
matched the conditions of the world economy at that time. However, once a business model 
is successful, it is not easy for both the country and the firm to review it in line with changes 
in the environment. What is important is that regardless of whether it is a country or a firm, 
the ability to reinvent itself reflecting its stage of development plays a key role. 
Preparing for demographic change 
The  third  challenge  is  preparing  for  changes  in  demographics.  Rapid  ageing  of  the 
population  would  reduce  labor  supply  and  lead  to  a  drop  in  the  growth  rate.  A  drop  in 
domestic demand would be unavoidable. From a fiscal perspective, as long as the costs of 
public  pensions,  health  care  and  nursing  are  covered  by  contributions  from  the  working 
generation, and if the benefit levels for the elderly are not adjusted, ageing will lead to higher 
fiscal deficits. Concerns about demographic changes were already raised in the late 1980s, 
but at that time it was only considered vaguely as an issue for the distant future. However, as 
our experience shows, ageing has huge implications. It is evident that the vibrant emerging 
economies  in  Asia  will  age  in  the  not-too-distant  future  (Slide  11).  In  the  short  run, 
demographics  of  the  elderly  are  a  given.  Thus,  reviewing  the  current  social  welfare 
framework  in  order  to  make  it  viable  on  a  sustainable  basis,  taking  into  consideration  the 
longer-term changes in demographics, is an enormous challenge. 
Conclusion 
IV. 
When one looks back into history,  the “Global  Shifts” examined by Professor Eichengreen 
are  happening  continuously.  I  believe  Japan’s  catching-up  with  the  advanced  economies 
through its post-war miracle and its ensuing transition to slow growth, as well as the current 
high  growth  of  China  and  India,  can  be  understood  as  examples  of  the  “Global  Shifts” 
(Slide 12). High growth cannot last forever. In concluding, I would like to emphasize that what 
is important here is to introduce a smooth transition from high growth to stable growth. Even 
emerging economies which are currently enjoying high growth will likely face, in the future, 
the  same  challenges  that  Japan  is  currently  struggling  with.  For  this,  preventing  bubbles, 
reviewing  business  models  and  preparing  for  changes  in  demographics  are  especially 
important. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5
 6 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
