Vítor Constâncio: Laudatio for Professor Kenneth Rogoff, recipient of the 
2011 Deutsche Bank Prize in Financial Economics 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
Laudatio  for  Professor  Kenneth  Rogoff,  recipient  of  the  2011  Deutsche  Bank  Prize  in 
Financial Economics, Frankfurt am Main, 22 September 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure to address a few words to mark the awarding of the 2011 Deutsche 
Bank Prize in Financial Economics to Professor Kenneth Rogoff of Harvard University. 
I will recall some of Professor Rogoff’s outstanding contributions to economics and financial 
economics, and I will also comment on some of his research in the context of the responses 
to the current crisis. 
Let me first emphasise that research plays a crucial role for the Eurosystem – just as it does 
for other central banks. Indeed, research has provided an essential input to the definition of 
the  ECB’s  price-stability  monetary  policy  strategy.  I  would  thus  like  to  express  my 
appreciation to Professor Rogoff for the influential contributions he has made in many fields 
of  special  relevance  to  central  bank  policymakers,  ranging  from  monetary  policy  to 
international finance and financial crises. He merits particular praise for helping us to improve 
our understanding of some of the main causes and mechanisms behind the links between 
financial crises and sovereign debt crises. 
Early in his career Professor Rogoff worked as a central banker in the International Finance 
Division at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. In this period, he wrote 
two  of  the  most  celebrated  papers  in  monetary  economics  and  international  finance.  One, 
which appeared in 1985 in the Quarterly Journal of Economics under the title “The optimal 
degree  of  commitment  to  an  intermediate  monetary  target”,  is  especially  cherished  among 
central bankers (and still his most cited contribution according to Google Scholar with over 
2,100 citations). It forcefully laid out the rationale for the delegation of monetary policy to an 
independent  central  bank  with  an  explicit  price  stability  objective,  a  fundamental  principle 
obviously enshrined in the ECB mandate. 
The second contribution, co-authored with Richard Meese, appeared in 1983 in the Journal 
of International Economics under the title “Empirical exchange rate models of the seventies: 
Do  they  fit out  of  sample?”  and  is one  of  the  most  cited  papers  in  international  finance.  It 
established key empirical regularities about major currencies exchange rates. The implication 
that nominal exchange rates are best modelled as unpredictable “random walks” is still the 
basis of the best practice followed by many institutions. This paper marked the beginning of 
Professor  Rogoff’s  long-standing  prominence  in  the  field  of  international  finance  and  was 
followed by a steady flow of equally distinguished contributions, in some instances literally re-
writing history. This was the case with “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements: 
A Reinterpretation” co-authored with Carmen Reinhart and published in the Quarterly Journal 
of Economics in 2004. 
Professor  Rogoff  has  also  been  at  the  forefront  of  modelling  efforts  in  the  field  of 
International  macroeconomics,  particularly  with  a  view  of  replacing  the  Mundell-Fleming-
Dornbusch open economy model, previously the workhorse of virtually all policy analysis in 
international economics both inside and outside central banks. This ground-breaking effort, 
reflected  in  the  work  written  jointly  with  Maurice  Obstfeld  entitled  “Foundations  of 
International  Macroeconomics”,  gave  birth 
in  “new  open  economy 
macroeconomics”  and  spurred  a  vast  and  ever-growing  literature.  This  new  approach  has 
allowed both researchers and policymakers to analyse substantive issues, such as current 
to  a  new  field 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the 
account  and  fiscal  imbalances,  and  to  provide  a  welfare-theoretic  perspective  on  global 
macroeconomic  policy.  As 
IMF’s  chief  economist  between  2001  and  2003, 
Professor Rogoff  launched  the  development  of  a  large-scale  version  of  his  model  with 
Maurice  Obstfeld,  the  Global  Economy  Model  (GEM),  one  of  the  first  fully-fledged 
Dynamic Stochastic General Equilibrium (DSGE) models to be used for policy analysis. 
More  recently,  he  has  offered  us  invaluable  insights  into  financial  crises.  His  2009  best-
selling book with Carmen Reinhart, This Time Is Different, is a landmark work. This tour-de-
force,  drawing  on  data  for  70  countries  over  800  years,  provides  evidence  that  financial 
crises  are  far  more  universal,  and  that  there  are  far  more  quantitative  similarities  in  their 
aftermath,  than  previously  believed.  The  “this-time-is-different-syndrome”  is  a  powerful 
reminder  of  the  dangers  of  complacency.  One  key  observation  is  that  financial  crises  are 
followed by unusually prolonged recessions in economic activity. Another valuable insight is 
that  the  fiscal  and  financial  dimensions  are  closely  interconnected.  Fiscal  imbalances  can 
undermine the financial sector; financial sector imbalances can weigh down on the credibility 
of the sovereign; both can spillover into the real sector, and vice versa. The book foresaw 
that the massive implicit liabilities towards the financial sector accumulated by governments 
could result in unsustainable levels of sovereign debt. 
Despite  the  important  theoretical  and  empirical  advances  to  which  Professor  Rogoff  has 
contributed substantially, there is still much to be learnt about the root causes, the triggers 
and the propagation mechanisms of crises. The major challenges for policymakers posed by 
the existing knowledge gaps are reflected in the very controversial debates about the optimal 
responses  to  mitigate  and  resolve  the  current  crisis  and  to  prevent  future  crises.  In  this 
context, since his time at the IMF, Professor Rogoff has featured prominently in global policy 
debates,  producing  analyses  and  making  recommendations  on  how  to  contain  the  current 
crisis and restore overall macroeconomic stability in the euro area.  
On that very subject, as we all know, conditions in financial markets have taken a turn for the 
worse  since  the  second  half  of  July  and  early  August.  In  the  euro  area,  the  renewed 
intensification  of  financial  market  turbulence  is  leading  to  very  high  interest  rates  in  some 
countries,  to  potentially  damaging  volatility,  and  to  very  low  trading  volumes  in  some 
government  bond  markets  that  at  times  cease  to  function  appropriately.  The  tensions  to 
some extent resemble those of May 2010, but in some respects they are more broad-based 
than what we saw at that time. It is clear that sovereign debt challenges in individual euro 
area  countries  –  no  matter  their  size  –  can  undermine  the  stability  of  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole. 
In view of these developments, the authorities in the euro area have taken a multi-pronged 
approach to address the concerns about sovereign risk and its impact on the financial sector. 
Regarding fiscal support for crisis countries, euro area governments announced on 21 July a 
second  support  package  for  Greece  and  the  introduction  of  additional  flexibility  for  the 
European  Financial  Stability  Facility  and  the  future  European  Stability  Mechanism.  In  this 
respect, the full and timely implementation of the 21 July agreement between heads of state 
or government is crucial. A renewed commitment by all euro area governments to the agreed 
fiscal targets is of course equally essential.  
The  ECB  has  also  stepped  up  its  responses,  reflecting  its  full  commitment  to  ensuring  a 
continuing  smooth  functioning  of  the  key  euro  area  market  segments,  a  necessary 
prerequisite to achieve price stability in the euro area. First, it decided to continue to support 
ample  liquidity  conditions  by  conducting  its  refinancing  operations  as  fixed-rate  tender 
procedures  with  full  allotment,  at  least  until  mid-January  2012.  Let  me  point  out  that  the 
outstanding  Eurosystem  credit  in  our  refinancing  operations  currently  amounts  to  about 
€530 billion  and  has  come  down  since  last  year.  The  total  value  of  marketable  securities 
already  presented  and  approved  for  Eurosystem  credit  operations  amounts  to  €1.7  trillion 
and  our  counterparties  have  at  their  disposal  almost  €4  trillion  out  of  the  overall  total  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
resumed 
the  ECB 
interventions  under 
its  government  bond  market 
existing  eligible  securities  of  about  €14  trillion.  Therefore,  this  confirms  that  there  is  no 
liquidity or collateral shortage for the euro area banking system. 
Second, 
its 
Securities Markets Programme (SMP) in August. Via these interventions, the ECB Governing 
Council aims to help restore a more appropriate transmission of its monetary policy stance in 
an  environment  in  which  key  market  segments,  such  as  those  for  government  paper,  are 
dysfunctional.  The  interventions  do  not  influence  our  monetary  policy  stance.  In  order  to 
sterilise the impact of these interventions on the liquidity conditions in the banking system, 
we re-absorb the liquidity injected. 
Let  me  underline  that  the  secondary  market  purchases  are  not,  and  cannot  be  used  to 
circumvent the principle of budgetary discipline as a pillar of Economic and Monetary Union. 
Sustained buying of government paper by the central bank would only postpone problems 
and delay the necessary fiscal adjustments, ultimately resulting in a build-up of inflationary 
pressures. The ECB has never hesitated to reaffirm and remind all Member States, in very 
concrete  terms,  that  compliance  with  the  principles  of  budgetary  discipline  is  absolutely 
fundamental.  
Naturally,  since  member  states  do  not  control  their  currency  alone,  they  are  vulnerable  to 
liquidity  episodes  and  multiple  equilibria.  Creditors’  assessments  can  change,  e.g.  via 
contagion  effects,  even  when  the  fundamentals  would  not  justify  it.  The  high  degree  of 
financial  integration  within  EMU  means  that,  if  left  unchecked,  contagion  in  the  banking 
sector  can  spread  rapidly  via  cross-border  holdings  of  sovereign  debt.  For  the  sovereigns 
themselves,  sudden  shifts  in  market  re-pricing  of  risk  can  lead  to  unexpected  liquidity 
challenges.  These  dynamics  underscore  the  importance  of  strengthening  the  mechanisms 
that prevent such risks – the SGP, surveillance of broader macroeconomic imbalances and 
stronger financial supervision. However, the liquidity dry-ups and the contagion risks also call 
for  stronger  backstop  mechanisms,  to  provide  significant,  albeit  temporary,  liquidity 
assistance.  
The SMP aims to create a better functioning transmission mechanism of monetary policy to 
all  parts  of  the  monetary  union  and  is  therefore  in  full  compliance  with  the  prohibition  of 
monetary financing. Also, we sterilise the impact of the SMP on our total liquidity provision. 
The  relative  size  of  the  programme,  representing  just  1.6%  of  the  euro  area  GDP  against 
13.7% of GDP that has been bought by the Bank of England or the 11.4% purchased by the 
Federal Reserve, makes it easier to implement. The ECB continues to comply strictly to its 
mandate to ensure price stability and does not allow inflation to increase as a way of easing 
the burden of the debt. On this point we disagree with from some of the suggestions made 
recently by Professor Rogoff. The inflation tax is a blunt tool whose accidental effects would 
reflect mainly ex-ante institutional features (such as the degree of indexation or the maturity 
structure  of  liabilities)  rather  than  the  actual  necessity  to  adjust.  More  importantly, 
Professor Rogoff has said himself, inflating the debt away would unduly jeopardise the most 
precious capital of the ECB and of any independent central bank, namely its credibility. The 
ECB will never debase the currency, as our record shows: we have remarkably preserved 
both internal and external value of the euro by keeping inflation low and inflation expectations 
well-anchored. As we have learnt and repeatedly experienced, credibility and in particular the 
ability  to  anchor  inflation  expectations  are  crucial  for  the  smooth  functioning  of  monetary 
policy.  Their  key  role  has  been  highlighted  again  and  again  during  the  financial  crisis, 
particularly in preventing the danger of an entrenchment of deflationary expectations.  
The  euro  area  is  a  highly  integrated  economic  and  financial  area  which  needs  to  be 
managed through common decisions. However, aside from monetary policy, it lacks powerful 
decision-making institutions. This means that rules-based frameworks must act a substitute 
for centralised authority. For fiscal and economic issues, a unitary state would have a finance 
ministry  which  both  defines  and  vetoes  fiscal  and  broader  economic  policies.  EMU  must 
achieve  the  same  effect  through  its  economic  governance  framework.  We  know  from 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
research,  including  some  by  Professor  Rogoff,  also  corroborated  by  experience,  that  soft-
rules  will  not  achieve  the  desired  outcome.  Strengthening  the  rules  governing  fiscal  and 
broader macroeconomic policies is thus essential.  
The Stability and Growth Pact (SGP), which was created to discipline fiscal policy, has not 
worked  well  and  is  now  being  strengthened  and  complemented  by  a  macroeconomic 
imbalances  procedure.  Greater  automaticity  in  the  implementation  of  the  SGP  is  needed 
when  unsustainable  policies  put  the  stability  of  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  at  risk.  Credible 
economic governance needs to be consistent and predictable. It also needs to be backed by 
timely,  tough  sanctions  to  encourage  compliance.  Fiscal  surveillance  should  set  ambitious 
benchmarks  for  excessive  deficit  and  for  setting  the  adjustment  path  towards  a  country’s 
medium-term  budgetary  objective.  The  liquidity  dry-ups  and  contagion  risks  also  call  for 
stronger backstop mechanisms, to provide significant, albeit temporary, liquidity assistance. 
Stronger financial supervision at euro area level is also essential. Finally, national authorities 
need to take ownership of their European commitments. This means anchoring EU rules in 
their national legislation and making them mandatory and being held to account by domestic 
parliaments. 
Economic  governance  is  not  only  about  preventing  crises,  but  also  about  creating  the 
conditions  for  economic  growth.  At  present,  this  is  a  major  challenge  requiring  greater 
coordination across the euro area. Projections of the euro area’s long-term growth prospects 
remain  weak,  depressed  by  the  fiscal  burden  of  age-related  expenditure,  slow  productivity 
growth,  and  on  going  debt  sustainability  challenges.  I  agree  with  recent  comments  by 
Professor Rogoff that Europe needs to do more to reverse this trend. It is essential to give 
renewed  impetus  to  a  comprehensive  and  ambitious  programme  of  growth-enhancing 
structural reforms supported by intensive monitoring and follow-up. 
Let me conclude. It is precisely against the backdrop of the challenges stemming from the 
current  crisis  that  we  can  fully  appreciate  the  invaluable  contributions  of  scholars  like 
Kenneth  Rogoff.  I  extend  my  sincerest  congratulations  to  him  as  he  receives  the 
2011 Deutsche Bank Prize in Financial Economics, a well-deserved recognition for his work. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
