Subir Gokarn: Financial inclusion – a consumer centric view 
Speech  by  Dr  Subir  Gokarn,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
VIth V Narayanan Memorial Lecture, Kumbakonam, 21 March 2011. 
Inputs from Pallavi Chavan, Bhupal Singh and Muneesh Kapur are gratefully acknowledged. 
 Introduction 
I. 
It is a great pleasure for me to be delivering the VIth V. Narayanan Memorial Lecture. I never 
had the opportunity to meet Mr. Narayanan, but, from what I have heard and read about him, 
he was clearly a person dedicated to the mission of expanding the reach of and access to 
banking services in a way which benefitted both the customer and the service provider. As 
you may know, the financial inclusion agenda has assumed top priority in the Reserve Bank 
of India’s current scheme of things and the Bank is actively engaging with the financial sector 
to  ensure  that  the  objective  of  establishing  a  banking  presence  in  all  villages  with  a 
population of over 2000 people is achieved. More importantly, it needs to be achieved in a 
commercially viable way; banks and other service providers must not see it as a mandate 
whose burden they have to bear in terms of higher costs and lower earnings. As Governor 
Dr. Subbarao has put it, financial service providers must see inclusion as an opportunity, not 
an obligation. 
When I accepted the invitation to deliver this lecture and began thinking about an appropriate 
topic, the issue of commercially viable financial inclusion came quickly to mind. In effect, this 
is exactly what would characterize Mr. Narayanan’s career with the City Union Bank and his 
contribution to not just the institution that he was associated with but to the broader socio-
economic environment in which it functioned. Of course, while I have had the opportunity to 
work  in  a  commercial  organization,  I  have  never  worked  for  a  commercial  bank.  It  would, 
therefore, be presumptuous of me to approach the topic from the perspective of a business 
strategy  for  banks.  However,  as  we  all  know,  strategies  are  not  designed  in  a  vacuum.  A 
sound  understanding  of  the  market  environment  is  a  critical  input.  Who  the  potential 
consumers are,  what  motivates  and  drives  their  decisions, what  constraints  and  risks  they 
face and so on are all fundamental questions, the answers to which are the starting points of 
strategy formulation. In other words, the better the understanding banks and other financial 
service providers have about the potential consumers of their inclusion-oriented products and 
services,  the  more  likely  their  strategies  are  to  succeed  in  a  way  that  benefits  both 
consumers and producers. 
This is the issue that I would like to address in this lecture. I will attempt to characterize the 
potential consumer for financial inclusion products and services, using survey data reported 
by a number of survey institutions that have been observing the Indian consumer for some 
time now. Based on these characterizations, I will articulate some key messages emerging 
for commercially viable financial inclusion. 
The current status of inclusion: an overview 
II.  
Before I begin looking at consumer characteristics, let me provide a quick overview of the 
current status of access of consumers to financial services. Admittedly, this is not a complete 
picture, as it does not cover the role and activities of institutions other than banks. I merely 
want to emphasize the gap that currently exists, which in turn represents the opportunity that 
the  financial  sector  has  to  design  and  deliver  appropriate  products  and  services  to  a  very 
large number of potential customers.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Slide 1 provides a set of summary statistics relating to the penetration of various categories 
of  financial  products.  First,  the  relatively  low  penetration  of  bank  branches  must  be 
highlighted –  only  30,000  out  of  6,00,000  habitations  have  a  banking presence.  As  is  well 
understood,  the  goal  of  having  a  physical  banking  facility in  every  habitation  is  unrealistic, 
which  is  why  the  inclusion  strategy  is  largely  based  on  the  use  of  Information  and 
communication technology (ICT) to expand banking access virtually through the mechanism 
of a Business Correspondent (BC), who carries a handheld device networked to the bank’s 
systems.  This  is  an  enormous  technological  discontinuity  enabled  by  the  spread  and 
efficiency of the mobile telephone network and, clearly, the inclusion strategy must take full 
advantage of this resource. Even then, we must recognize that there are constraints to the 
rollout of the BC model, which also needs a certain minimum scale of operation to make it 
viable. Therefore, the strategy envisages a phased expansion, with larger habitations being 
targeted first to ensure the viability of as many BCs as possible. In this sense, the phased 
approach, which first focuses on habitations with populations above 2,000 is based on the 
acceptance of commercial viability as a key driver of the success of an inclusion strategy. 
The  other  statistics  on  Slide  1  provide  some  indication  of  the  size  of  the  opportunity.  Just 
because  penetration  in  certain  products  and  services  is  low  does  not  mean  that  they 
represent a natural and automatic opportunity; penetration could be low because there is no 
demand.  It  is  ultimately  a  matching  of  consumer  characteristics  and  the  potential  demand 
that is implied by them that allows the service provider to assess the opportunity. However, 
the  statistics  presented  on  the  slide  do  suggest  that,  apart  from  savings  accounts,  which 
have  about  40  per  cent  penetration,  there  are  several  other  financial  products  that  might 
meet existing consumer requirements, such as insurance, which have very low penetration. 
Similarly,  debit  cards,  which  facilitate  the  use  of  technology,  thereby  reducing  the 
dependence of bank customers on physical branches, may help to significantly expand the 
capacity of the banking network without necessarily setting up more branches. 
Apart from the aggregate picture, it is also useful to look at the status from the perspective of 
inequality.  Slide  2  and  Slide  3  present  some  data  that  reveal  the  differential  access  that 
people at different income levels have to the financial system. From Slide 2, it appears that 
households  with  an  income  below  Rs.  50,000  (in  2007)  find  it  relatively  difficult,  or 
unattractive, to open a bank account. The survey does not reveal whether the relatively low 
penetration  of  bank  accounts  in  this  income  segment  is  because  they  can’t  open  them  or 
they don’t want them. This is an important distinction, because it implies different actions by 
banks  to  improve  penetration  amongst  these  households.  If  access  is  a  problem,  then 
simplified procedures and lower thresholds may be sufficient to achieve the objective and, 
indeed,  this  is  exactly  what  is  being  done  by  means  of  no-frills  accounts.  However,  if  it  is 
because  people  don’t  find  adequate  value  in  opening  accounts,  the  challenge  of  inclusion 
becomes a little more complicated. Clearly, the mere opening of more and more accounts is 
not going to achieve the inclusion objective if these accounts are not used as the platform to 
access a range of financial services that meet the various requirements that the household is 
trying to satisfy. This raises the issue of product and service design as a critical component 
of a viable inclusion strategy, which I shall repeatedly come back to during the course of the 
lecture. 
Slide 3 looks at the situation with regard to access to loans differentiated by income levels. 
Here  again,  the  relatively  low  access  of  the  lowest  income  group  is  striking.  It  is  not  as 
though  these  households  do  not  need  credit;  if  the  banks  do  not  meet  their  requirements, 
they are clearly accessing other sources. The same question arises here. Are people in this 
income segment not getting bank credit because they can’t or because they don’t want to? 
As  in  the  case  of  accounts,  the  answer  to  this  question  is  critical  to  devising  an  effective 
inclusion  strategy.  It  may  underscore  the  need  to  look  for  product  design  solutions  to  the 
problem of low penetration. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
III. 
An exploration of consumer characteristics 
Employment and earnings differentials 
(a) 
Let me now move on to the core of this lecture, i.e., to characterize the potential consumer 
for products and services emerging from a financial inclusion strategy. Let me begin with the 
nature of employment in the country, which, to my mind, is a critical attribute to the kinds of 
financial services which people may want. Slide 4 provides the composition of the domestic 
workforce in terms of their sources of income. It is most striking that over half the workforce is 
categorized as being self-employed. Of course, this should not come as a surprise, as the 
majority of services we consume on a day-to-day basis are provided by people who logically 
fall into this category. Another significant proportion falls into the category of casual labour. 
Only a relatively small minority is placed in the category of regular wage or salary earners, of 
which a relatively large proportion is undoubtedly associated with the public sector. 
What  does  this  mean  in  terms  of  potential  demand  for  financial  services?  For  the  self-
employed, it clearly means, among other things, the need for a reliable and low-cost source 
of working capital, which allows them to optimize on their inventories, if they are occupied in 
trading  activities  or  acquire  productivity-enhancing  and  service-enhancing  assets,  which 
have relatively short payback periods. We all have seen how, first, pagers and, then, cheap 
mobile  telephony  completely  changed  the  economics  of  self-employed  service  providers. 
This, of course, happened at an aggregate level, but as we look deeper into the business 
models  of  different  self-employment  categories,  I  am  sure  we  will  discover  sector-specific 
opportunities to make similar productivity improvements. Discovering such opportunities and 
converting them into a viable lending model is something that the financial sector may benefit 
from,  both  in  terms  of  furthering  the  inclusion  agenda  and  expanding  their  revenue  and 
profitability bases.  
The data presented in Slide 5 and Slide 6 provide a somewhat different perspective on the 
potential consumer base. In Slide 5, we see the relative incomes of workers in different kinds 
of  occupations.  This  differentiation  is  important  because  it  reflects  a  number  of  underlying 
relationships  between  educational  status,  employment  opportunities  and  earning  potential. 
The ultimate goal of development policy, of which financial inclusion is a critical component, 
is to raise the incomes of as many households as possible in a sustainable way. There is, of 
course,  no  iron  law  which  says  that  incomes  earned  by  all  occupations  must  be  equal. 
Differentials  that  emerge  from  qualifications,  skills,  productivity  and  value  added  are  all 
legitimate  in  a  market  economy,  in  which  financial  incentives  drive  resource  allocations 
across  alternative  activities.  However,  from  the  policy  perspective,  we  must  also  be 
conscious of barriers and bottlenecks, which impede the productivity and, consequently, the 
earning potential from different activities. 
As Slide 5 indicates, in rural areas, people with some professional qualifications and those in 
regular jobs, such as in the administrative sector, earn more than people who are lower down 
on  the  skills  ladder  and  those  who  are  self  employed.  One  response  to  this  could  be  to 
employ as many people as possible in the former areas. In a sense, this was attempted a 
few decades ago. It generated benefits, but also imposed costs; in any case, as a strategy, it 
is inconsistent with the current emphasis on fiscal discipline and the efficient deployment of 
resources across the economy. The focus must, therefore, be on finding ways in which the 
earning potential of the other occupational categories can be raised. Access to appropriate 
financial products and services is surely one of these, even possibly the most important one. 
Of  course,  it  may  not  be  the  only  requirement  –  the  silver  bullet,  so  to  speak  –  and  it  is 
important  for  the  success  of  an  inclusion  strategy  to  identify  the  other,  complementary 
requirements.  
One observation that I can make from my recent exposure to and interaction with rural Self-
Help  Groups  and  other  livelihood  mechanisms  is  that  they  face  significant  challenges  in 
finding and accessing the right kinds of markets for their products, which results in relatively 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
low realizations for their products, thus constraining their earnings potential. To my mind, the 
general validity of this proposition and its implications for building appropriate complementary 
inputs into the financial inclusion strategy need to be explored further. 
Slide 6 presents the same data for urban workers. The pattern is essentially similar to the 
rural one and much the same set of conclusions can be drawn about the distinction between 
legitimate  sources  of  earnings  differentials  on  the  one  hand  and  those  caused  by  barriers 
and  bottlenecks  on  the  other.  The  reason  I  brought  the  urban  picture  separately  into  the 
presentation  is  to  emphasize  the  fact  that  the  financial  landscape  in  urban  areas  is 
completely different from that in the rural areas. If, indeed, lack of access to financial services 
is  a  significant  reason  for  the  persistence  of  earnings  differentials  in  urban  areas,  then  it 
suggests that a relatively well-penetrated environment is also not delivering inclusion to its 
potential.  If  this  is  the  case,  then  we  must  be  cautious  in  linking  the  mere  presence  of 
financial service providers with the achievement of financial inclusion. The strategy must go 
beyond organizational presence to the design of appropriate products and services, a point 
that has been made earlier in the lecture but can be re-emphasized. 
Expenditure patterns 
(b) 
Let me now turn to an analysis of how consumers, many of whom can be considered the 
target  segment  for  financial  inclusion,  spend  their  money.  Slide  7  presents  a  picture  of 
households’ routine expenditures, the largest segment of which is, understandably, food. The 
proportion  of  income  spent  on  food  clearly  goes  down  as  income  goes  up,  but  at  the 
aggregate level, the proportion is significant. But, this is not an issue I want to dwell on here. 
Let  me  move  on  to  Slide  8,  which  displays  what  have  been  described  as  “unusual” 
expenditures by households, which essentially means that these expenditures are generally 
incurred,  but  not  on  a  regular  or  predictable  basis.  The  pattern  suggests  that  the  most 
significant  unusual  expenditure  by  far  is  on  ceremonies.  This  is  followed  by  medical 
expenses.  The  two  categories  together  account  for  almost  80  per  cent  of  unusual 
expenditures across all households. Slide 9 is even more revealing. It suggests that, among 
lower  income  households,  the  proportion  of  unusual  expenditures  spent  on  these  two 
activities is even more significant. 
We have all heard of people whose household budgets are severely stretched, even broken, 
by  expenditure  on  ceremonies  and  healthcare.  We  can  perhaps  be  somewhat  dismissive 
about the first, arguing that this is purely discretionary and the household can work within its 
resource limitations. But then, who are we to judge the household’s perceptions of its social 
obligations? On the issue of medical expenditures, there is no room at all for such discretion; 
it usually is a matter of life or death. 
Given  the  significance  of  these  two  categories  of  expenditure,  particularly  amongst  lower 
income  households  but  also  in  others,  can  we  think  of  financial  products  that  allow 
households to meet these expenditures without bearing a crushing burden? The health issue 
clearly  lends  itself  to  a  low-cost  insurance  solution  and  there  has  been  some  progress  on 
widening access to health insurance. But, this needs to be matched with an increase in the 
supply of health care facilities, not to mention the promotion of low-cost treatments, which 
can  be  accommodated  by  a  mass  insurance  programme.  This  is  another  example  of  the 
need to visualize complementary inputs, which amplify the benefits of financial inclusion. 
The need to develop a financial buffer for expenditures related to ceremonies, though more 
complicated than health insurance, also appears to lend itself to product design. As a lifelong 
employee of the organized sector, I have had the benefit of being a member of one provident 
fund scheme or the other. One important feature of all the schemes I have been part of is 
that  they  allow  me  to  withdraw  a  substantial  portion  of  my  accumulated  funds  for 
expenditures connected with my daughter’s marriage (though, not my son’s, as I recall). This 
is,  in  essence,  a  systematic  investment  plan  for,  among  other  things,  ceremonial 
expenditures.  Products  of  this  nature  are  already  available  in  the  market;  the  question  is, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
essentially,  one  of  threshold  contributions  and  whether  they  can  be  lowered  to  provide 
access to large numbers of households, even while giving them a reasonable rate of return 
so there is sufficient accumulation.  
Savings and investment: choices and motivations 
(c) 
Let  us  now  take  a  look  at  the  way  in  which  households  deploy  their  resources  and  what 
motivates their savings decisions. This should provide a basis for both addressing specific 
needs, essentially an extension of the discussion in the previous section, and also getting a 
sense of the limitations on the options households have to deploy their savings.  
Slide  10  presents  a  very  striking  picture.  Across  all  households,  the  primary  channels  for 
deploying  financial  savings  are  bank  deposits  and  “kept  at  home”,  which  presumably 
includes cash, gold and jewellery. The latter is not surprising, given the earlier data point on 
the penetration of savings accounts. What may be surprising, though, is the significance of 
the  proportion  kept  at  home;  more  so,  the  finding  that  urban  households  actually  hold  a 
higher proportion of their savings in this form. Of course, this may reflect a greater ability to 
afford  gold  and  jewellery,  but  the  pattern  raises  a  fundamental  question.  Why  do  these 
households prefer to keep their savings in a form that does not optimize on the risk-return 
trade-off?  
Putting  all  (or  most)  of  your  eggs  in  one  basket,  which  is  essentially  the  message  from 
Slide 10, may be an appropriate strategy under some conditions; the complete absence of 
investment options, for example. But, clearly, at the aggregate level, options are not absent; 
the  Indian  financial  system  offers  an  increasing  variety  of  alternatives  with  finely 
differentiated  risk-return  profiles,  allowing  individual  households  significant  opportunities  to 
match  their  savings  patterns  with  their  anticipated  requirements.  In  all  probability,  these 
opportunities are also subject to some threshold requirements, which means that households 
below  a  certain  income  and  savings  level  cannot  as  yet  access  them.  From  the  inclusion 
perspective,  the  challenge  is  clearly  to  lower  this  threshold  in  a  way  that  does  not 
compromise the commercial viability of the service provider. 
Slide 11 presents a picture of the motivations that people say drive their savings behaviour. 
The question obviously allows people to acknowledge as many of the listed items as they 
want  and  the  responses  reported  indicate  the  percentage  of  households  who  marked  a 
particular motivation. Although the data reported does not distinguish between households 
by income, the height of some of the bars clearly suggests that these motivations cut across 
income groups. Let us focus on the four most frequently occurring responses. Of these four, 
we have already spent a fair amount of time on ceremonies. The other three are, as might 
have been quite reasonably expected, are old age, children’s education and emergencies. 
Once  again,  at  the  risk  of  repetition,  I  want  to  emphasize  the  point  that,  for  all  these 
requirements, the Indian financial system currently offers a variety of products and services, 
but threshold requirements apply, which means that many lower income households whose 
motivations are the same as those of more affluent ones cannot access the same products 
and services. One could argue that there are no products and services which can meet these 
requirements  with  commercial  viability.  But  this  is  a  proposition  that  needs  to  be  explored 
and, hopefully, proved wrong. 
The essential business-related point I would like to make with reference to savings decisions 
and  motivations  is  that  they  must  be  seen  in  a  dynamic  context.  In  an  economy  that  is 
growing rapidly, households are also equally rapidly evolving in terms of their consumption 
and savings choices and motivations. As many successful marketers have demonstrated, a 
life-cycle approach to the consumer is an extremely effective long-term strategy. A significant 
proportion of low-income households today will achieve middle income status in a few years. 
Their  choices  then  will  partly  be  dictated  by  their  experience  with  service  providers  during 
their transition. Service providers who get customers in first, even at relatively low levels of 
activity,  provided  that  they  take  a  forward  view  of  the  relationship,  can  realistically  look  at 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
benefitting from the increasing affluence and greater and more complex financial needs of 
those very customers.  
Borrowing motivations 
(d) 
Let me now turn to the last of the consumer characteristics that I have on my list. Slide 12 
presents data on the reasons why people borrow money. Considering all loans taken by the 
households surveyed, over 50 per cent of rural households and about 45 per cent of urban 
households report that they borrowed money to deal with financial and medical emergencies. 
Business purposes were also significant, but not dominant. Of course, since lending money 
to enable people to deal with such situations is not the conventional activity of banking or 
most other formal financial service providers, it is unlikely that this requirement would be met 
by  this  category  of  lenders.  The  data  in  Slide  12  validate  this  conjecture;  significantly,  the 
proportion of households who borrowed for these purposes from institutional sources was far 
less than those who borrowed from non-institutional sources. In fact, what may come as a 
surprise  is  how  many  households  actually  borrowed  from  institutional  sources  for  the 
purpose of dealing with emergencies! This suggests to me that the capacity to meet these 
requirements  exists.  Again,  it  comes  back  to  the  question  of  whether  the  right  kinds  of 
products exist to expand the coverage to households that are currently excluded from access 
to credit.  
Key messages 
IV. 
I have tried to introduce into the discussion a number of attributes of consumer behaviour 
and  motivations,  which  I  believe  are  important  inputs  into  a  devising  a  strategy  for 
commercially  viable  financial  inclusion.  These  related  broadly  to  the  (i)  the  sources  of 
livelihood of the potential consumer segment for financial inclusion (ii) how they spend their 
money,  particularly  on  non-regular  items  (iii)  their  choices  and  motivations  with  respect  to 
saving and (iv) their motivations for borrowing and their ability to access institutional sources 
of finance for their basic requirements. In discussing each of these sets of issues, I spent 
some time drawing implications for business strategies by financial service providers. In this 
section, I will briefly highlight, at the risk of some repetition, what I consider to be the key 
messages of the lecture. 
The  first  message  emerges  from  the  preliminary  discussion  on  the  current  scenario  on 
financial  inclusion,  both  at  the  aggregate  level  and  across  income  categories.  The  data 
suggest  that  even  savings  accounts,  the  most  basic  financial  service,  has  low  penetration 
amongst the lowest income households. I want to emphasize that we are not talking about 
Below Poverty Line households only; Rs. 50,000 per year in 2007, while perhaps not quite 
middle class, was certainly quite far above the official poverty line. The same concerns about 
lack of penetration amongst the lowest income group for loans also arise. To reiterate the 
question that arises from these data patterns: is this because people can’t access banks or 
other service providers or because they don’t see value in doing so? This question needs to 
be addressed if an effective inclusion strategy is to be developed.  
The second message is that the process of financial inclusion is going to be incomplete and 
inadequate if it is measured only in terms of new accounts being opened and operated. From 
the employment and earnings patterns, there emerged a sense that better access to various 
kinds  of  financial  services  would  help  to  increase  the  livelihood  potential  of  a  number  of 
occupational  categories,  which  in  turn  would  help  reduce  the  income  differentials  between 
these and more regular, salaried jobs. The fact that a huge proportion of the Indian workforce 
is either self-employed or in the casual labour segment suggests the need for products that 
will make access to credit easier to the former, while offering opportunities for risk mitigation 
and consumption smoothing to the latter. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The third message emerges from the analysis of expenditure patterns is the significance of 
infrequent,  but  quantitatively  significant  expenditures  like  ceremonies  and  medical  costs. 
Essentially,  dealing  with  these  kinds  of  expenditures  requires  either  low-cost  insurance 
options,  supported  by  a  correspondingly  low-cost  health  care  system  or  a  low  level 
systematic investment plan, which allows even poor households to create enough of a buffer 
to deal with these demands as and when they arise. As has already been pointed out, it is 
not as though such products are not being offered by domestic financial service providers. It 
is really a matter of extending them to make them accessible to a very large number of lower 
income  households,  with  a  low  and  possibly  uncertain  ability  to  maintain  regular 
contributions.  
The fourth message comes strongly from the motivations to both save and borrow, which, as 
one might reasonably expect, significantly overlap with each other. It is striking that the need 
to deal with emergencies, both financial and medical, plays such an important role in both 
sets of motivations. The latter is, as has been said, amenable to a low-cost, mass insurance 
scheme,  with  the  attendant  service  provision.  However,  the  former,  which  is  a  theme  that 
recurs through the entire discussion on consumer characteristics, certainly suggests that the 
need for some kind of income and consumption smoothing product is a significant one in an 
effective financial inclusion agenda. This, of course, raises broader questions about the role 
of social safety nets, which offer at least some minimum income security and consumption 
smoothing.  How  extensive  these  mechanisms  should  be,  how  much  security  they  should 
offer and for how long and how they should be financed are fundamental policy questions 
that go beyond the realm of the financial sector. However, to the extent that risk mitigation is 
a significant financial need, it must receive the attention of any meaningful financial inclusion 
strategy, in a way which provides practical answers to all these three questions. 
The  fifth  and  final  message  is  actually  the  point  I  began  the  lecture  with.  It  is  the  critical 
importance  of  the  principle  of  commercial  viability.  Every  aspect  of  a  financial  inclusion 
strategy  –  whether  it  is  the  design  of  products  and  services  or  the  delivery  mechanism  – 
needs to be viewed in terms of the business opportunity that it offers and not as a deliverable 
that has been imposed on the service provider. However, it is also important to emphasize 
that  commercial  viability  need  not  necessarily  be  viewed  in  terms  of  immediate  cost  and 
profitability  calculations.  Like  in  many  other  products,  financial  services  also  offer  the 
prospect  of  a  life-cycle  model  of  marketing.  Establishing  a  relationship  with  first-time 
consumers  of  financial  products  and  services  offers  the  opportunity  to  leverage  this 
relationship into a wider set of financial transactions as at least some of these consumers 
move steadily up the income ladder. In fact, in a high growth scenario , a high proportion of 
such households are likely to move quite quickly from very basic financial services to more 
and more sophisticated ones. In other words, the commercial viability and profitability of a 
financial  inclusion  strategy  need  not  be  viewed  only  from  the  perspective  of  immediacy. 
There is a viable investment dimension to it as well. 
Conclusion 
V. 
The  basic  premise  of  this  lecture  was  that  we  need  to  take  fully  into  account  various 
behavioural  and  motivational  attributes  of  potential  consumers  for  a  financial  inclusion 
strategy to succeed. In this sense, it is no different from any business strategy development 
exercise.  Where  it  does  differ  though,  is  in  terms  of  significance.  There  is  clearly  an 
enormous gap when it comes to access to and delivery of financial services. Closing this gap 
will contribute to enhanced livelihoods through higher productivity, and an improved ability to 
deal  with  occasional,  lumpy  expenditures  as  well  as  cushioning  the  impact  of  financial 
emergencies. This is not a matter of a few hundred or a few thousand consumers, but an 
issue of hundreds of millions. The social costs and consequences of badly conceived and 
executed inclusion strategy could be enormous. We need to bring all relevant knowledge and 
experience  into  the  development  of  the  strategy  in  order  to  maximize  the  possibility  of  it 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
succeeding. Understanding what the potential consumer needs and why he needs it is one 
such knowledge input; indeed, I have tried to argue, a critically important one. 
I  would  like  to  end  by  thanking  Sastra  University  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  this  prestigious 
lecture, to the management of the City Union Bank for their very generous hospitality during 
our  visit  to  Thanjavur  and  Kumbakonam  and  to  all  of  you  for  coming  here  to  listen  to  the 
lecture.  
 
 
 
 
  8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
  10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
