Deepak Mohanty: Wrap up and concluding remarks at the 
SAARCFINANCE Governors’ Symposium 
Wrap up and concluding remarks by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve 
Bank of India, at the SAARCFINANCE Governors’ Symposium, Kumarakom, Kerala, 10 June 
2011. 
 Governor  Dr.  Subbarao,  governors  of  other  SAARC  member  countries,  heads  of 
country delegations, Dr. Reddy, Dr. Caruana, Mr. Ninan and distinguished participants 
from the SAARC central banks and friends, 
It has been a long day of exciting and thought provoking discussions on the very important 
issue  of  financial  stability.  The  backwaters  of  Kumarakom  and  the  tranquil  atmosphere  of 
Zuri has provided the perfect setting for a free flow of ideas throughout the day. 
The  theme  of  this  symposium  –  financial  stability  issues  –  is  appropriate  for  four  major 
reasons, from the stand point of global, regional and India specific considerations:  
 
First, Financial stability has acquired the centre stage of public policy debate since 
the  global  crisis,  with  animated  discussions  seeking  clarity  on  the  role  of  central 
banks, particularly monetary policy.  
Second,  financial  stability  was  assigned  specific  attention  in  formulating  RBI’s 
monetary policy during the period when Dr. Reddy was the Governor of the RBI, and 
this  was  reinforced  considerably  by  Governor  Dr.  Subbarao.  Thus,  in  India,  the 
dimension of financial stability was given due attention in the conduct of monetary 
policy, even before the onset of global crisis. 
Third, India had started using counter-cyclical provisioning norms and risk weights 
prior to the global crisis, and in the post crisis period such measures – known widely 
as macro-prudential tools – have become the mainstream consensus. 
Fourth,  given  the  level  of  development  of  the  financial  systems  in  the  SAARC 
countries, the debate on financial stability and monetary policy interactions may be 
somewhat  different  from  what  we  see  in  the  advanced  financial  systems.  The 
development  of  the  financial  system,  thus,  has  to  be  seen  as  an  additional 
consideration in this debate. 
   Going  forward,  the  efforts  should  be  to  harness  the  true  potential  of  finance  in  promoting 
growth and development. In that process, increasing globalisation would require dealing with 
external contagion and managing spillovers.  
This  symposium  has  provided  us  the  opportunity  to  learn  from  each  other  in  the  SAARC 
region,  and  also  revisit  our  country  specific  perspectives  on  the  emerging  international 
standards. 
Deputy Governor Dr. Subir Gokarn in his welcome remarks set the tone for discussions to 
follow. He noted how the global financial crisis had shaken our faith on some of the pre-crisis 
persuasive  arguments  –  what  he  termed  as  near  truths.  He  highlighted  that  an  increasing 
number  of  central  banks  had  started  including  financial  stability  formally  in  their  policy 
mandates  along  with  price  stability.  But  the  definition  of  financial  stability  remains  largely 
informal. He emphasised that the financial stability mandate and governance arrangements 
for  central  banks  must  be  compatible  with  their  monetary  policy  responsibilities.  For  the 
SAARC countries, given the levels of development, he underscored the point that financial 
literacy and financial inclusion goals should not get marginalised because of the overdrive for 
financial stability.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Governor  Dr.  Subbarao  highlighted  issues  relating  to  the  mandate  of  central  banks  for 
financial stability in the international and Indian context. Making a strong case for the central 
banks  to  play  a  key  role  in  ensuring  financial  stability,  Governor  Subbarao  outlined  the 
challenges in managing the relative prioritization across multiple objectives. He also talked 
about the difference between a central bank’s role in ensuring financial stability in crisis times 
vis-a-vis during normal period. The recent trends in arrangements for financial stability giving 
increased responsibility for both systemic oversight and prudential regulation to central banks 
and  institutionalisation  of  collegial  arrangements  are  seen  as  important.  A  similar  move  in 
India is reflected in the creation of the Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC). 
In this context, Governor Dr. Subbarao emphasised particularly the “D” in FSDC.  
This stands for the development dimension of the financial sector. Irrespective of the type of 
new  institutional  arrangement,  he  stressed  that  coordination  mechanisms,  especially 
between the government and the regulators, must function in ways that do not compromise 
the autonomy of the regulators.  
The  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  a  world  with  macro-prudential  policies  could  pose  both 
known  and  unknown  challenges.  The  presentation  from  Mr.  Caruana  provided  possible 
approaches  to  adoption  of  macro-prudential  measures,  with  necessary  caution.  He  noted 
that  stable,  resilient  and  less  pro-cyclical  financial  systems  improve  the  effectiveness  of 
monetary policy transmission. He also viewed that macro-prudential policies should not be 
used  to  safeguard  macroeconomic  stability,  since  there  is  no  substitute  to  monetary  and 
fiscal policies for attaining that goal. He cautioned that expectations from macro-prudential 
policies  should  not  be  ambitious,  since  without  a  range  of  reinforcing  policies  and 
instruments,  the  effectiveness  of  prudential  measures  could  be  limited.  On  the  scope  for 
conflicts  between  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential  policies,  he  viewed  that  such 
concerns were overdone. He suggested that multiple objectives could be explicitly ranked, 
and that the timing of macro-prudential policy reviews could differ from monetary and fiscal 
policy cycles.  
Dr Y V Reddy emphasised in his address the potential “crisis ahead of us” as a motivation for 
such debates that we had today. He viewed that the lessons from “crisis behind us” could be 
extremely important in shaping the financial stability goal.  
He outlined some of the key aspects of the pre-crisis stability entrenching measures taken in 
India, including explicit attention given to financial stability as an objective. His reference to 
the  change  from  “lazy  banking”  to  “crazy  banking”  as  evidenced  by  significant  pick  up  in 
credit and money growth, exuberance in real estate and consumer credit needs to be seen in 
an  important  way,  i.e.,  the  driving  motivation  behind  use  of  macro-prudential  measures  in 
India for preserving financial stability. He emphasised on fiscal consolidation and in removing 
structural  rigidities  in  the  real  economy  to  reinforce  financial  stability.  He  expressed 
reservations  about  the  appropriateness  of  2019  target  date  for  new  capital  standards.  He 
drew  attention  to  the  power  of  large  conglomerates  in  diluting  disciplining  norms,  with  the 
potential to move to locations with less aggressive regulatory jurisdictions. 
In the two technical sessions that followed, country presentations were made. It was indeed 
an honour and privilege to have the Governors of the central banks of Afganistan, Bhutan, 
Nepal and Sri Lanka, and deputy governors of Bangladesh, Pakistan and Maldives to grace 
the  symposium  with  their  valuable  contributions  to  the  discussions.  The  country  papers 
besides reviewing financial sector developments brought to the fore the diversity that prevails 
across countries.  
The  Afghanistan  paper  drew  attention  to  vulnerability  to  fluctuations  in  forex  flows.  It 
highlighted the challenges that could arise from the failure of systemically important banks.  
The  paper  from  Bangladesh  highlighted  the  role  of  microfinance  as  also  asset  price 
pressures and balance of payments challenges arising out of volatility in remittance inflows.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  paper  from  Bhutan  drew  attention  to  legislative  changes  granting  the  central  bank 
autonomy in monetary management as also in the oversight of the financial system.  
Pakistan’s paper noted how high fiscal deficit is crowding-out private investment in a bank 
dominated financial system. 
The  paper  from  Maldives  underscored  the  importance  of  payments  system  for  a  sparsely 
populated country, particularly mobile phone payments system.  
The paper from Nepal showed how its banking sector encountered liquidity shortage arising 
from the slowdown in deposit mobilisation and contraction in forex reserves, and how large 
flow  of  credit  to  real  estate  reduced  the  availability  of  financial  resources  for  productive 
activities.  
The  paper  from  Sri  Lanka  highlighted  the  importance  of  principles  based  corporate 
governance norms and consolidated supervision.  
The  paper  from  India  presented  the  growing  interconnected  dimension  of  the  financial 
system and highlighted the significance of systemic risk analysis. 
The stimulating panel discussion that followed was anchored by Mr. T.N. Ninan, President, 
Editors’  Guild  of  India.  Financial  stability  in  the  post  crisis  period  has  thrown  several 
unanswered questions.  
First, the issue of price stability vis-à-vis financial stability. Second, the post crisis institutional 
arrangements  for  financial  stability.  Third,  the  challenge  of  implementing  the  international 
regulatory  and  supervisory  reforms  by  SAARC  countries  with  country-specific  adaptations. 
This  relates  to  the  Basel  III  framework,  regulation  of  SIFIs  and  OTC  derivatives  markets. 
Fourth,  the  challenges  of  micro-prudential  supervision  in  ensuring  stability  at  the  systemic 
level  and  the  importance  of  macro-prudential  policies.  Fifth,  the  link  between  asset  prices 
and financial stability.  
These are issues on which, as the panel discussion revealed, the search for consensus is 
on. However, lack of consensus should not be a reason for national authorities not to take 
country specific decisions. Preserving financial stability will continue to be a national priority. 
During the panel discussion several important points emerged, which included: 
• 
• 
the role of confidence in shaping macro-financial conditions; 
post  crisis  changes  in  regulatory  architecture  being  driven  largely  by  advanced 
economies; 
continued  relevance  of  the  role  of  the  public  sector  in  the  financial  sector  of  the 
region, particularly infrastructure financing; 
new arrangements on coordination between the Government and regulators are yet 
to be tested;  
  Mr.  Ninan  concluded  the  panel  discussion  by  emphasising  how  the  discussions  helped  in 
improving our understanding of complex issues. 
Let me attempt some specific takeaways from this symposium: 
 
First,  irrespective  of  the  nature  of  the  mandate  –  i.e.  whether  explicit  or  implicit  – 
central banks will have to assume greater responsibility for financial stability, which 
in turn may mean multiple and not single objective to conduct of monetary policy.  
Second, crisis prevention frameworks need to be strengthened in every country, but 
the approach to be adopted requires debate, consultations and coordination.  
Third,  given  the  level  of  economic  development  in  the  region,  the  usual  suspects 
that could trigger a financial crisis must be avoided. This implies sustained emphasis 
on fiscal consolidation, low inflation, appropriate policies to manage volatile capital 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
flows,  and  a  sustainable  balance  of  payments.  The  approach  to  reforms,  going 
forward,  must  seek  to  balance  the  “growth  and  efficiency  gain”  goals  on  the  one 
hand with “growth and equity goals” on the other.  
Fourth, since national policies at times may not be adequate in a globalised world, 
voice  of  countries  in  the  region  in  global  governance  may  have  to  be  collectively 
raised.  Global  safety  nets  and  global  surveillance  would  have  to  be  seen  as  an 
integral part of financial stability initiatives.  
Fifth,  financial  sector  development  would  require  a  cautious  approach  but  without 
stifling  innovations,  as  the  financial  markets  remain  incomplete  in  the  SAARC 
region. 
  Finally, I must thank now all involved in organising this symposium, having worked tirelessly 
for making this event a unique experience. I thank Governor Dr. Subbarao for his guidance 
for the conduct of the event. 
Our thanks to the distinguished guests from the SAARC region for making the discussions so 
lively. I thank the senior management of the Reserve Bank who are present in full strength. 
The burden of organisation primarily fell on the Regional Director of Kerala and the staff from 
our Kochi and Trivandrum offices. Our deepest appreciation to all of them. Thanks are due to 
the  organising  teams  from  the  Department  of  External  Investment  and  Operations  (DEIO) 
and Department of Economic and Policy Research (DEPR) from the central office of the RBI. 
I  thank  the  Government  of  India  and  Government  of  Kerala  for  their  support.  I  thank  the 
Kerala Police for providing security coverage. Special thanks are due to the Hotel staff and 
management  of  Zuri  resort  and  ERGO,  the  service  provider  for  making  excellent 
arrangements.  
I  once  again  thank  all  those  who  have  been  associated  with  this  conference  directly  or 
indirectly. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
