Malcolm Edey: General economic and financial environment in Australia 
Panel session speaking notes by Mr Malcolm Edey, Assistant Governor (Financial System) 
of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Property Council of Australia, Darwin, 25 July 2011. 
 I’ve  been  asked  to  speak  today  about  the  general  economic  and  financial  environment  in 
Australia. I’ll leave it to the other panellists to talk more specifically about the property sector.  
As you know, the Australian economy came through the recent financial crisis in better shape 
than most – certainly in the developed world. In fact, what is often referred to as  a global 
crisis was mainly a crisis of the United States and Europe. Those were the economies that 
experienced the most serious distress in their financial sectors, and they were also the ones 
that required significant public-sector capital support for their banks. They also experienced 
severe recessions, from which they are still recovering.  
The  Australian  economy  avoided  recession,  and  the  banking  sector  remained  in  relatively 
good condition throughout the recent period, though of course it was not immune from the 
international distress.  
The overall dimensions can be summed up in a few facts and figures:  
 
At the height of the downturn, the US economy contracted by about 4 per cent over 
a  year;  the  euro  area  by  5  per  cent,  and  the  UK  by  6  per  cent.  For  all  these 
economies, it was their most severe recession in the post-war period. 
In  contrast,  growth  of  the  Australian  economy  remained  positive.  It  dipped  to  an 
annual figure of around 1 per cent during much of 2009, before picking up to a pace 
that  was  around  trend  in  2010.  (I  note  in  passing  that  the  most  recent  growth 
outcomes  are  affected  by  the  temporary  effects  of  flooding  and  cyclone  at  the 
beginning of this year.)  
Unemployment  in  Australia  rose  only  moderately  during  the  global  downturn,  and 
has since fallen. 
And  Australian  banks,  in  aggregate,  remained  profitable,  although  they  did 
experience a decline in loan quality. Loan losses have generally now peaked, and 
banks have strengthened their capital and liquidity positions since the crisis. 
   When I’m asked to explain Australia’s good performance in this period, I usually attribute it to 
a mixture of good luck and good management.  
Australia was fortunate to have been at a relatively strong point in the business cycle when 
the crisis hit; and, in the recovery phase, as is often remarked upon, we have benefited from 
being well connected to the fast-growing economies in the Asian region.  
But I think there were also some important areas of good management in macroeconomic 
and regulatory policies:  
 
Australia’s strong fiscal position allowed plenty of scope for countercyclical action to 
support growth during the world downturn.  
Monetary  policy  was  well-positioned  to  cut  rates  aggressively  at  the  height  of  the 
crisis.  
And  our  financial  system  has  been  well  served  by  APRA’s  relatively  conservative 
prudential approach. Australian banks were held to higher standards than many of 
their  international  counterparts,  and  we’ve  been  well  served  by  a  prudential 
regulator prepared to ask banks tough questions about the risks they were taking. 
The  upshot  is  that,  although  there  was  some  deterioration  in  banks’  asset  quality 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
around mid-decade, this was nowhere near as pronounced as it was in the US and 
Europe.  
In saying all that, I also like to make the point that the resilience of the financial sector and 
the real economy are inter-related. The banks performed well partly because the economy 
itself kept growing; and the economy in turn was resilient partly because there was no major 
deterioration in the balance-sheet quality of our banks.  
One of my responsibilities at the RBA is to oversee production of the half-yearly  Financial 
Stability  Review,  which  reports  on  developments  and  risks  in  the  financial  system 
(both  globally  and  domestically).  I’d  like  to  pick  up  some  of  the  themes  from  our  recent 
reports.  
The most intense phase of the financial crisis is now some way behind us. It corresponded 
roughly  to  the  six-month  period  from  September  2008  to  March  2009,  which  was  just 
following the collapse of Lehman Brothers (along with a number of other high-profile failures 
in the US and Europe).  
That six-month period was the period of sharpest falls in world equity prices, and the most 
serious  dislocation  in  credit  markets.  Global  banks  posted  major  losses,  and  there  was  a 
sharp contraction in trade and output across the US, Europe and Asia.  
Since then, financial conditions have generally been improving, along with the recovery in the 
global economy itself. Global economic growth has picked up to a strong pace overall, led by 
China, India and a number of other economies of the developing world.  
In the most heavily crisis-affected countries, indicators of financial sector performance have 
improved across a range of fronts: 
 
 
 
 
These  are  encouraging  signs,  but  they  certainly  don’t  amount  to  a  return  to  pre-crisis 
conditions. Loan impairment rates are still high and property markets in the US and Europe 
are  still  weak,  and  these  things  have  contributed  to  some  ongoing  nervousness  in  global 
credit markets.  
In addition to all that there is a particular focus at present on sovereign debt. A number of 
countries are running with very high levels of government debt in relation to their GDP and 
large fiscal deficits; and there is obviously considerable focus on the sustainability of those 
positions and the risk of default.  
I’m  not  going  to  make  any  predictions  as  to  how  that  might  evolve,  partly  because  the 
situation  is  subject  to  ongoing  change  and  policymakers  in  the  various  countries  are  still 
developing their responses.  
But I would make two points regarding potential implications for Australia: 
 
Banks have generally returned to profitability 
Asset quality in the banking system has begun to recover 
Equity markets have recovered from their early-2009 troughs 
And conditions in credit markets have improved. 
First, the Australian banks have only limited direct exposures to sovereign debt in 
the  countries  regarded  as  being  most  at  risk.  So  potential  effects  on  Australian 
banks’ overall asset quality are not an issue. 
A  second  channel  of  possible  effect  would  be  if  there  were  some  generalised 
disruption in global wholesale funding markets. Here it is important to note that, in 
the  post-crisis  environment,  the  Australian  banks  have  significantly  strengthened 
their  positions.  They  have  increased  their  reliance  on  domestic  deposit  funding, 
lengthened  the  average  term  of  their  wholesale  funding,  and  correspondingly 
reduced  their  reliance  on  short-term  wholesale  debt.  These  changes  will  help  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 2 
 make  them  more  resilient  to  any  disruptive  event  in  international  credit  markets, 
should it occur.  
Let me make a few more general remarks about the Australian financial system in the current 
environment.  
I’ve  already  made  the  point  that  Australian  banks  came  through  the  crisis  in  good  shape. 
Bank  profits  did  decline  during  the  downturn  but  they  have  since  recovered,  largely  as  a 
result of declining loan loss charges. Arrears rates in some areas have continued to creep 
up, but asset quality generally remains good (especially by international standards).  
Despite  the  uncertainties  about  Europe  that  I’ve  already  referred  to,  conditions  in  funding 
markets  for  the  Australian  banks  have  improved  since  the  crisis,  and  so  has  system-wide 
growth  in  deposit  funding.  Domestic  securitisation  markets  have  been  recovering.  These 
developments have helped smaller lenders to regain some of the market share lost during 
the crisis period.  
Aggregate lending by banks has been relatively subdued in the past few years. Lending to 
the housing sector has continued to expand, but at a slow pace, while business lending has 
tended to fall, with businesses relying more on internal funding and equity raisings.  
These  trends  have  reflected  several  factors,  not  least  of  which  has  been  a  shift  towards 
greater financial conservatism by households and businesses. Household saving rates have 
increased, and there has been widespread de-leveraging by businesses.  
I expect this audience will be interested in the likely environment for lending by banks in the 
future.  The  trends  I’ve  just  described  can  be  seen  (at  least  in  part)  as  responses  to  the 
lessons drawn from the crisis – by households and businesses – regarding the dangers of 
excessive  debt.  Another  factor  is  that  the  funding  environment  for  banks  has  been  more 
difficult  than  it  was  before  the  crisis,  and  this  has  raised  the  net  cost  of  financial 
intermediation.  To  some  extent,  these  effects  might  be  expected  to  fade  as  economic 
expansion proceeds and confidence in global credit markets improves.  
Nonetheless, when  we think about what the post-crisis environment might look like further 
ahead, it seems unlikely that we’ll be going back to the days of consistent double-digit growth 
in lending that we saw in the pre-crisis years. That growth was driven in part by factors that 
can’t be repeated – the deregulation of the financial system in the 1980s, and the transition 
to low inflation in the 1990s. There was also a world-wide trend towards greater appetite for 
risk and leverage.  
In the post-crisis environment, borrowers and investors are more cautious than they were, 
both at home and abroad. That’s likely to mean less demand for leverage and more reliance 
on equity funding, even when the economy itself is growing strongly. If those trends continue, 
I think it will be good for financial stability, but it will also mean that our lending institutions 
have to get used to lower rates of expansion than were typical in the pre-crisis years.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
