H R Khan: Banking, electronic payments and road ahead 
Special address by Shri H R Khan, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
FICCI-IBA  (Federation  of  Indian  Chambers  of  Commerce  &  Industry  –  Indian  Banks’ 
Association) Conference on “Global Banking: Paradigm Shift”, Mumbai, 25 August 2011. 
 The  speaker  gratefully  acknowledges  the  assistance  provided  by  Shri.  G.  Srinivas,  General  Manager  and  
Shri. Saswat Mahapatra, Asst. General Manager in the preparation of this address. 
Distinguished Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am glad to be in your midst today to share my thoughts on “Banking, electronic payments 
and  the  road  ahead”.  In  fact  the  subject  of  my  address  very  well  fits  the  theme  of  the 
conference “Global banking: Paradigm shift” and its emphasis on productivity excellence. I 
am sure the experts whom you would have heard and interacted with over the last two days 
would have shared their thoughts on the changes and challenges that banking in India and 
globally is undergoing and has undergone over these last few momentous years, leading as 
it  were  to  a  paradigm  shift  in  the  way  banks  are  doing  their  business  and  retaining  and 
increasing their customer base. The basic underlying current that runs through this changing 
landscape is the ever increasing reliance on technology to cater to the needs of customers 
and process vast number of transactions including payment transactions. 
In  fact  as  you  all  are  aware,  payment  and  settlement  systems  form  the  backbone  of  any 
economy. They are the conduits or the arteries for conducting trade, commerce and other 
forms  of  economic  activities  including  remittances  in  any  country.  An  efficient  payments 
system can be envisaged as the lubricant which speeds up the liquidity flow in the economy, 
thereby creating the necessary impetus and momentum for economic growth. The payments 
process  is a  vital  aspect  of  financial  intermediation;  it  enables  the  creation  and  transfer  of 
liquidity  among  different  economic  agents.  A  smooth,  well  functioning  and  regulated 
payments  system  thus  not  only  ensures  efficient  utilisation  of  scarce  resources  but  also 
eliminates  systemic  risks.  The  payments  and  settlement  system  is,  therefore,  a  crucial 
component of the financial infrastructure of any country and more so of a country like ours. 
The  spectacular  growth  in  financial  transactions  in  the  country  has  necessitated  certain 
radical  changes  in  the  payments  and  settlement  system,  whether  it  be  in  the  area  of 
wholesale payments or retail payments. While the changes in the wholesale payments are 
devoted to providing an efficient channel for transmission of monetary policy signals, and for 
the smooth functioning of various markets, the changes in the retail payments are aimed at 
providing  efficient  and  timely  payment  mechanisms  to  the  citizens  of  this  country.  The 
payment system also assumes importance in the context of domestic financial sector reforms 
and global financial integration that the country is undergoing currently. Foreign investments 
(direct and portfolio) are encouraged by the availability of an efficient payments system, as 
also the need for a low cost remittance facility for migrants to send money to their kith and 
kin within the country. Improved, faster and cheaper domestic money transfers through the 
payments system is also a part of the emerging scenario.  
Given this scenario, let me through the remainder of this address devote myself to providing 
a  bird’s  eye-view  of  the  current  payment  system  landscape  in  the  country;  the  other 
significant  initiatives  that  have  been  undertaken;  the  game  changers  that  would  provide 
further fillip to this endeavour; identifying the potential goldmine as it were for deepening this 
process; the enablers to take this process forward; the challenges faced at the industry level; 
the role of the regulatory framework which could serve as a catalyst; and conclude with what 
I  would  call  the  5  A’s  of  payment  systems  for  providing  an  efficient,  robust,  safe,  cost-
effective payment services to our fellow citizens. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Section 1: payment system landscape in India 
The stage of payment system development in a country to a large extent depends upon the 
adoption of technology, introduction of new payment instruments and the confidence of the 
public in using these payment instruments. In India cash still continues to be the predominant 
payment  mode.  This  can  be  gauged  from  the  fact  that  value  of  bank  notes  and  coins  in 
circulation as a percentage of narrow money is very high at 60.07% for the year 2009–20101, 
when  compared  to  other  emerging  economies  like  South  Africa  (18.51%),  China(18.83%), 
Mexico  (39.14%).  Brazil  comes  close  to  India  with  52.70%  of  the  value  of  banknotes  and 
coins in circulation as a percentage of narrow money. This is perhaps a pointer that we have 
been  relatively  slow  in  embracing  cashless  payment  modes  and  using  them  as  cash 
substitute. The pre-dominant use of cash could also be attributed to the fact that the process 
for adoption of non-cash mode of payments started relatively late in the country.  
Notwithstanding  this,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  in  the  forefront  both  as  operator  and 
facilitator  for  promoting  the  use  of  cashless  payment  instruments  in  the  country.  The 
technology  implementation  in  banks  which  have  shaped  the  payment  system  in  turn  is 
largely driven by the recommendations of the various committees set up by RBI. Payment 
system  modernisation  started  in  late  eighties  with  introduction  of  MICR  based  cheque 
clearing in mid eighties. 
Paper  based  clearing:  Paper  based  Clearing  accounts  for  59%  of  the  total  volume  of 
transactions while it represents only 10% of the total value of transactions. RBI has taken a 
number of initiatives to promote efficiency in paper based clearing such as widespread use of 
MICR  technology  at  66  major  centres  in  the  country.  Simultaneously,  the  introduction  of 
speed  clearing  in  2008  has  facilitated  collection  of  outstation  cheques  on  a  local  basis 
leveraging on core-banking infrastructure of banks. Speed clearing is currently available in 
240 centres across the country.  
Cheque Truncation System was operationalised in the National Capital Region, New Delhi in 
February 2008. Chennai has been identified as the next centre for roll out of a grid based 
CTS (to be operationalised by NPCI) which will cover the states of Tamilnadu, Kerala and 
Karnataka.  All  activities  pertaining  to  roll  out  of  CTS  for  Grid-based  CTS  at  Chennai  have 
been completed and the system is ready for roll-out by NPCI.  
A new automation software package called “Express Cheque Clearing System” (ECCS) has 
been  developed.  ECCS,  being  implemented  jointly  by  SBI  and  NPCI,  would  replace  the 
Magnetic  Media  Based  Clearing  Software  employed  in  automation  of  Clearing  Houses 
available  at  1093  locations.  It  is  expected  to  be  rolled  out  across  all  these  centres  by 
September 2011 along with the speed clearing facility. 
Electronic Payment Systems: Electronic Payment Systems accounts for 41% of the total 
volume of transactions while it represents 90% of the total value of transactions. Introduction 
of  electronic  payment  products  such  as  Electronic  clearing  service  and  electronic  funds 
transfer,  which  over  the  years  have  metamorphosed  into  National  ECS  and  National  EFT 
and RTGS have ushered in new ways of payment processing.  
National Electronic Fund Transfer (NEFT): NEFT was introduced in November 2005 now 
covers 77,821 branches and offers eleven hourly near real-time settlements on week days 
and five settlements on Saturdays. One of the unique features of the system is a mandatory 
“Positive  Confirmation”  to  the  originator  confirming  successful  credit  to  the  beneficiary’s 
account. Since its inception, the system has witnessed a surge in the volume and value of 
transactions with 1.4 million transactions settling on a single day which is the highest volume 
processed till date. 
                                                 
1  Statistics  on  payment  and  settlement  systems  in  the  CPSS  countries  –  Figures  for  2009,  CPSS,  BIS,  
March 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Electronic  Clearing  Service  (ECS)  suite  including  NECS:  The  ECS  suite  of  products 
enables  bulk  payments.  The  ECS  suite  consists  of  local  ECS  (jurisdiction  limited  to  local 
clearing house branches), Regional ECS (state-wide jurisdiction in 9 centres) and National 
ECS (pan-India coverage). Both RECS and NECS facilitate STP-based processing of bulk 
payments  in  a  centralised  manner  in  all  core-banking  enabled  bank  branches  within  their 
jurisdiction.  Average  monthly  volumes  are  8.05  million  transactions  (ECS  Credit  –  NECS, 
Regional and local) and 13.40 million transactions (ECS Debit – Regional and local), while 
monthly  values  are  averaging  about  Rs.126.43  billion  and  Rs.60.60  billion  for  ECS  Credit 
and ECS Debit respectively. 
Real time Gross Settlement (RTGS): The RTGS system was introduced in March 2004 and 
now extends to 77,093 branches as at the end of June 2011. RTGS settles gross inter-bank 
and  customer  (Rs.2  lakh  and  above)  transactions.  On  an  average  RTGS  settles  1.8  lakh 
transactions  with  a  value  of  Rs.  4  trillion  on  a  daily  basis.  Considering  the  importance  of 
RTGS for settling large value payment systems, action has been initiated for putting in place 
a Next-Gen RTGS. 
Other retail payment channels: 
Credit/Debit  Cards:  One  of  the  fastest  growing  segments  is  the  card  segment  with 
18 million  outstanding  credit  cards  and  228  million  debit  cards.  During  the  year  2010–11 
(April–March)  265  million  transactions  for  a  value  of  Rs.755  billion  was  transacted  using 
credit cards. 237 million transactions for a value of Rs.357 billion were transacted using debit 
cards at PoS terminals. Maximum usage of debit cards happens at ATMs with 4235 million 
transactions for a value of Rs.11,144 billion. 
Pre-paid instruments: The pre-paid instrument issuers’ universe is populated by both banks 
and non-banks. In fact after the enactment of PSS Act, most of the non-bank entities who 
have  received  authorisation  to  operate  a  payment  system  are  in  this  business  segment. 
Policy Guidelines for issuance and operation of pre-paid payment instruments in India have 
been issued to provide for a framework for the orderly growth of this nascent market. Further 
measures have been recently announced by the Reserve Bank of India permitting banks to 
issue  prepaid  payment  instruments  to  corporates  for  onward  issuance  to  their  employees 
after adhering to the norms prescribed.  
Mobile Banking: The operating guidelines for mobile banking issued in October 2008 which 
were  later  relaxed  in  December  2009,  facilitating  mobile  banking  transactions  up  to 
Rs.50,000,  both  for  e-commerce  and  money  transfer  purposes.  Banks  have  also  been 
permitted  to  provide  money  transfer  facility  up  to  Rs.5,000  from  a  bank  account  to 
beneficiaries  not  having  bank  accounts  with  cash  payout  facility  at  an  ATM  or  Banking 
Correspondent. 50 banks have been permitted to offer Mobile Banking transactions, of which 
38 have started operations. The NEFT platform is used for settlement of all interbank mobile 
banking transactions. 
Inter-bank mobile payment system: The IMPS on the other hand is a service operated by 
NPCI  which  provides  an  instant,  24X7,  interbank  electronic  fund  transfer  service  through 
mobile phones. Publicly launched on November  22, 2010 this system facilitates customers 
registered  with  their  banks  for  this  service  to  use  mobile  instruments  as  a  channel  for 
interbank  fund  transfers  in  a  secured  manner  with  immediate  confirmation  features.  This 
service  is  in  consonance  with  the  Mobile  Payment  Guidelines  2008  issued  by  RBI  which 
stress  on  interoperability  both  across  banks  and  mobile  operators  in  a  safe  and  secured 
manner. Currently 27 member banks participate in this scheme.  
National Financial Switch (NFS): The National Financial Switch as its name indicates is a 
national infrastructure with pan-Indian presence provides a switching service for connectivity 
across  ATMs  of  banks.  The  NFS  enables  customers  to  perform  their  transactions  (both 
financial and non-financial) using ATMs under the NFS network without reference to the card 
issuing banks. NFS which is the largest ATM switching network connects 80000+ ATMs with 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
an  average  daily  volume  of  transactions  standing  at  4.7  million  (both  financial  and  non-
financial)2 and a value of Rs.2.5 billion. NFS is a service offered by NPCI.  
Section 2: other significant initiatives 
NextGen  RTGS:  Steps  have  been  initiated  to  replace  the  existing  RTGS  system  with  the 
Next Generation Real Time Gross Settlement (NG-RTGS) by adopting the latest technology 
and emerging business processes. Some of the new features proposed to be implemented in 
the  NG-RTGS  system  are  advanced  liquidity  management  facility;  extensible  mark  up 
language  (XML)  based  messaging  system  conforming  to  ISO  20022;  and  real  time 
information and transaction monitoring and control systems.  
Core  Banking  Solution  (CBS)  in  Reserve  Bank  of  India:  RBI  is  in  the  process  of 
implementing  a  core  banking  solution.  The  CBS  once  implemented  will  bring  significant 
benefits  to  all  the  key  stakeholders  like  government,  banks,  primary  dealers,  FIs  and  the 
common  citizens.  CBS  in  RBI  will  enable  anywhere  banking  (specially  payments)  to 
government  departments,  treasuries,  sub-treasuries  through  online  access  and  use  of  e-
payment  modes  /  delivery  channels.  In  other  words,  it  would  facilitate  government  to  use 
RTGS,  NEFT,  NECS  and  other  electronic  delivery  channels  for  making  all  its  payments 
through a single bank resulting in reconciliation being that much easier. Banks and financial 
institutions will benefit from system of having a centralised account for funds and securities 
and an on-line transaction tracking mechanism linking funds and security legs. CBS is also 
intended to provide limited functionality of RTGS in case the RTGS services are not available 
for any reason. 
Section 3: game changers 
Having given a brief on the payment system landscape in India let me draw your attention to 
some  of  the  trends  which  have  within  them  the  potential  to  drive  our  existing  payment 
systems into the next orbit.  
Entry of non-banks in payment systems: Payment systems in India till recently have been the 
domain of banks. With the legislation of Payment and Settlement System Act, 2007 (PSS Act) 
the arena has been opened up for entry of non-bank entities. Currently 31 non-bank entities have 
been permitted to operate payment systems such as issuance of pre-paid payment instruments, 
providing cross-border in-bound money transfer, cards payment network and ATM networks. The 
entry of non-bank entities has the potential to change the payment system landscape as these 
entities can leverage on their product offerings with latest technological features to cater to wide 
segment of the market. Of course the Reserve Bank has laid down appropriate guidelines and 
safeguards to protect the customers’ financial and other interest and promote orderly growth in 
the markets. Entry of non-bank entities will promote competition and thereby provide more choice 
to the customers. 
Unique Identification authority of India – Aadhaar project – The unique identity number 
(Aadhaar) is poised to be an important driver of financial inclusion initiatives. Aadhaar which 
will provide a unique identification valid through the country when integrated with payment 
system application has the potential to shape the payment system future in the country. 
Rapid improvements in the payment infrastructure: Last few years have seen expansion 
in  the  payment  system  infrastructure  as  a  whole.  There  has  been  entry  of  new  payment 
system operators, growing acceptance of new delivery channels, new products, increase in 
number of ATMs (80000+), PoS terminals (610156), augmentation and scaling of payment 
                                                 
2  Financial transaction includes cash withdrawal. Non financial transactions include balance inquiry, request for 
pin change and mini-statements. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
processing  infrastructure  etc.  We  have  also  witnessed  the  use  of  services  provided  by 
payment  facilitators  such  as  intermediaries,  technology  solution  providers  and  merchant 
acquirers gaining ground in the industry.  
Setting up of National Payment Corporation of India Ltd: NPCI has been set up as an 
umbrella organisation for retail payments with an objective of integrating and consolidating 
various clearing houses in the country for cheques and electronic payments and introduce 
new payment applications with focus on electronic payments. NPCI has already introduced 
RuPay, an indigenous domestic card scheme. It has also started operating Interbank Mobile 
Payment  System  (IMPS)  which  offers  an  instant  24X7,  interbank  electronic  fund  transfer 
service through mobile phones. 
Domestic Card scheme – RuPay: The need for a domestic payment card the “RuPay” card 
is on account of two factors: (a) the high cost borne by the Indian banks for affiliation with 
international  card  associations  in  the  absence  of  a  domestic  price  setter  and  (b)  the 
connection  with  international  card  associations  resulting  in  the  need  for  routing  even 
domestic  transactions,  which  account  for  more  than  90%  of  the  total,  through  a  switch 
located outside the country. NPCI has since been granted approval to launch the "RuPay" 
affiliated cards for use at ATMs and Micro ATMs. NPCI has been advised to ensure that the 
use  of  these  cards  under  the  Aadhaar  Enabled  Payment  System  (AEPS)  is  in  strict 
compliance  with  the  DBOD  guidelines  on  Business  Correspondents  (BCs).  4  banks  have 
started  using  the  RuPay  card.  These  include:  Kashi  Gomati  Gramin  Bank;  Bank  of  India 
DhanAdhar Card; The Gopinath Patil Parsik Janata Sahkari Bank Ltd; NKGSB Urban Co Op 
Bank Ltd.  
RRBs  in  the  payment  system  fold:  The  Report  of  the  Working  Group  on  technology  up 
gradation of Regional Rural Banks, set up by RBI in 2008, recommended that as a matter of 
policy,  all  RRBs  should  begin  moving  towards  CBS  and  achieve  100%  coverage  by 
September 2011. Currently, 45 out of 82 RRBs have achieved 100% CBS status, and the 
remaining  are  in  various  stages  of  implementation.  You  would  agree  that  a  CBS  enabled 
RRB opens up immense possibilities in terms of products and services. As a first step, the 
sponsor banks would need to integrate the CBS of RRBs with their own Core Banking. This 
would enable the customers of RRBs to enjoy the same benefits of anywhere and anytime 
banking  and  the  use  of  multiple  payment  delivery  channels  such  as  RTGS,  NEFT,  ECS, 
ATMs, internet, telebanking, mobile and SMS banking etc.  
Payments as a revenue model getting attention: There is growing feeling that increased 
competition has commoditised the payment services undermining its profit generating ability. 
However,  the  McKinsey  Global  Payment  Map,  2009  pegs  that  the  payments  services 
generate  worldwide  revenues  of  more  than  $900  billion  each  year  (figure  for  2007)  which 
represent roughly 25 to 30 percent of total bank revenues. Payments services thus not only 
provide a steady income stream for banks but also provide them daily opportunities to serve 
consumer thereby reinforce their brand. In India the recent spurt in cashless payment modes 
provide ample opportunity to payment system providers.3 It is therefore necessary that banks 
view  their  investment  in  technology  not  as  a  cost  but  as  a  revenue  making  proposition 
enabling  customers  to  access  banking  facilities  especially  various  payment  modes  at  their 
comfort without necessarily visiting a brick and mortar branch.  
Section 4: identifying the goldmine 
Let me know dwell upon some of the untapped opportunities for banks. 
Financial inclusion – Untapped market: It would become very evident from the following 
figures that financial inclusion should be seen not only as a social responsibility but also as a 
                                                 
3  McKinsey Global Payment Map, 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
potential business model because of the huge untapped market that it seeks to bring into the 
fold of banking services. In India almost halh the country is unbanked. Of the 6 lakh villages 
in India, the total number of villages with banking services stands at less than 1 lakh villages 
as at end March 2011. India has a highest number of households (approximately 145 million) 
who are excluded from banking. Thus this “bottom of the pyramid” which comprises a huge 
section  of  the  Indian  population  presents  a  large  untapped  market  with  a  tremendous 
business  potential.  Therefore,  the  banks  in  India  need  to  devise  appropriate  strategies  for 
tapping the banking value that is represented by these large number of households at the 
bottom of the pyramid.  
Government  transactions  –  Transfer  of  benefit  schemes:  The  largest  chunk  of 
government  transactions  with  the  citizens  comprise  revenue  collection  and  transfer  of 
benefits  under  various  social  programmes.  McKinsey  Report  2010  “Inclusive  growth  and 
financial security: The benefits of e-payments to Indian society” estimates that an electronic 
platform  for  government  payments  to  and  from  individual  households  could  save  an 
estimated  Rs.100,000  crore  a  year  –  representing  almost  10  percent  of  the  total  payment 
flows  between  the  government  and  households.  The  report  states  that  “delivering 
government  payments  electronically  to  the  poor  will  not  only  pay  for  itself  but  will  connect 
households to a formal and secure financial grid. The basic infrastructure and connectivity 
this provides will also create an attractive business proposition to encourage private players 
to enter this space and provide services to the poor”. The Reserve Bank has recently issued 
“Operational  Guidelines  on  implementation  of  Electronic  Benefit  Transfer  (EBT)  and  its 
convergence with Financial Inclusion Plan (FIP)”. These  guidelines are expected to give a 
fillip  to  financial  inclusion  efforts  and  lead  to  a  scalable  and  sustainable  financial  inclusion 
model. In fact as you may be aware the Union Finance Ministry has advised all state owned 
banks and financial institutions to make payments only through electronic transfers and not 
through cheques from 1st September 2011. This move is part of the e-governance initiative 
to  move  towards  a  paperless  funds  transfer  system.  For  the  banks  as  well  this  would  be 
economical proposition as it would reduce paper handling costs.  
Potential  triggers  –  Public  transport,  toll  payments,  tax  payments  etc.:  There  is 
tremendous scope for introducing stored value cards for public transport systems, toll taxes 
and local tax collections. The national highways alone constitute 40% of the total road traffic 
in  India.  The  government  had  appointed  a  committee  under  the  chairmanship  of  Shri. 
Nandan Nilekani, Chairman, UIDAI to examine all technologies available for Electronic Toll 
Collection (ETC) at the toll gates which has recommended use of RFID tags for electronic toll 
collection  on  national  highways.  Similarly  the  integrated  urban  transport  projects  being 
implemented  in  metros  like  Mumbai,  Delhi,  etc,  have  potential  for  stored  value  cards.  The 
store  value  card  could  be  used  for  both  contact  and  contactless  payments  for  low  value 
payments  and  could  be  modelled  upon  Oyster  card  in  London  and  the  Octopus  card  in 
Hong Kong.  
Tapping the value chain – Banks could identify the needs and requirements of customers, 
merchants, distributors, industry they are serving and create value proposition. With industry 
focusing on rural and semi-urban India, they would require a mechanism for channelizing the 
proceeds across vast geographical jurisdiction. Banks could tap this huge potential.  
Let me quote an example here. We all know about Fabindia which is a major player in the 
Indian  retail  market.  Fabindia  started  as  a  wholesale  export  company  in  1960.  It  has 
17 community-owned companies as its associate companies. “These companies have their 
own  warehouses,  contributing  to  the  efficiency  of  Fabindia’s  supply  chain.  Their  principal 
buyer  is  Fabindia,  which  positions  itself  as  an  ethnic-chic  store  for  a  variety  of  products, 
particularly garments. Fabindia focuses on retail, wholesale exports, and institutional sales to 
corporations, resorts and hotels. Fabindia had US$ 80 million in sales in 2007 and plans to 
establish growth to 250 stores over the next four years. Artisans Micro Finance Pvt Ltd owns 
49%  of  Fabindia,  while  20,000  artisan  shareholders  own  26%,  with  private  investors  and 
employees  making  up  the  final  25%.  As  a  community-owned  company,  the  value  of  the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
artisans’  shares  increase  as  the  company’s  stock  rises.  Some  artisans  have  doubled  their 
share  value,  which  they  can  use  as  collateral  for  loans”.4  Thus  the  lack  of  an  organised 
supply chain which usually results in extremely low price realisation for individual weavers 
and artisans, has been overcome in this case.  
I  would  therefore  urge  the  banking  industry  to  look  at  such  propositions  for  creating  and 
tapping the value chain.  
E-commerce  and  m-commerce  –  Future  ahead:  As  per  the  report  on  the  E-commerce 
released  by  the  Internet  and  mobile  Association  of  India  (IAMAI),  the  internet  commerce 
industry in India is expected to INR 46,520 crores by end of 2011. The e-commerce and m-
commerce are poised for a big stride in coming years. Banks and payment system operators 
could leverage on the huge potential of e-commerce and m-commerce.  
Section 5: the enablers 
Strategic Partnership – The evolving payment systems scenario offers new challenges and 
opportunities to all segments of this industry. The new evolving landscape especially in the 
retail  payments  area  which  I  have  highlighted  above  provide  interesting  challenges  in 
harnessing the potential of technology amongst different stakeholders such as banks, system 
providers and other technology partners. These challenges encompass the search for new 
business models, which are now cost effective and wider in their scope and reach in terms of 
both geographical and customer coverage. Therefore the evolving payment ecosystem not 
only  would  encompass  banks  and  the  technology  in  use  but  would  also  have  as  critical 
stakeholders non-bank technology solution providers and system operators. 
An example which readily comes into my mind is the need and relevance of crystallising such 
a  strategic  partnership  amongst  banks,  mobile  payments  service  providers  and  mobile 
network  operators  (MNOs).  This  is  very  much  required  as  RBI  as  well  as  Government  of 
India  have  consciously  adopted  a  bank-led  model  for  mobile  payments  as  opposed  to  a 
MNO-led model for achieving the financial inclusion objectives. As you are all aware financial 
inclusion  in  India  consists  of  four  set  objectives  which  include  (i)  Savings  cum  Overdraft 
Account; (ii) A Remittance Product for Electronic Benefit Transfer and other Remittances; (iii) 
A  Pure  Savings  Product  ideally  a  recurring  or  variable  recurring  deposit  and  (iv) 
Entrepreneurial  Credit  such  as  General  Credit  Card  (GCC),  Kisan  Credit  Card  (KCC). 
Moreover with the banks providing these products under the financial inclusion umbrella, it is 
but necessary that they also ensure compliance with KYC/AML norms, create adequate risk 
management framework and ensure prompt settlement of funds. Given this comprehensive 
focus  it  is  therefore  necessary  that  MNOs  actively  collaborate  with  the  banks  to  achieve 
objectives  for  financial  inclusion.  Therefore,  this  facet  of  a  strategic  and  collaborative 
partnership framework needs to be recognised and given due impetus as it would provide the 
basic banking services to the “aam aadmi”.  
Not  only  do  I  draw  a  reference  to  MNOs  here,  but  I  also  refer  to  the  role  of  payment 
aggregators  and  payment  gateways.  These  entities  are  essential  specialised  technology 
providers  who  have  come  to  occupy  a  niche  area  in  the  payment  industry.  Banks  find  it 
convenient  to  make  use  of  the  services  of  these  entities  to  help  them  in  their  payment 
processing  activities.  While  these  entities  play  a  significant  role,  it  should  be  taken  into 
account by the banking industry that proper service level agreements need to be put in place 
for minimising and mitigating risk including the safety of customer funds. I would draw your 
attention in this connection to the contents of the “Guidelines on Managing Risks and Code 
of Conduct in Outsourcing of Financial Services by banks” issued by Reserve Bank of India 
                                                 
4 
“The  Next  Billions:  Unleashing  Business  Potential  in  Untapped  Markets”  prepared  in  collaboration  with  The 
Boston Consulting Group, World Economic Forum, January 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
to  specialized  entities.  Whilst 
technology  related  being  outsourced 
and  the  measures  listed  therein  for  managing  and  mitigating  risks  associated  with 
outsourcing.  
One more area of strategic partnership is outsourcing of activities. Outsourcing is a reality 
that all of us have to live with. President Obama is fond of saying that jobs in USA have been 
“bangalored” drawing an obvious reference to the fact that outsourcing provide cost savings 
and efficiency in operation leading the business entities to focus on their core activities. We 
are  also  witnessing  a  similar  phenomenon  in  the  banking  sector  with  various  activities 
especially 
this 
arrangement has served the industry well, it must be recognised that outsourcing does not 
result  in  abdication  of  providing  efficient  services  to  the  customer  nor  should  it  result  in 
dilution  of  risk  management  practices  and  standards  including  the  concentration  risk  of 
relying on few specialised entities. 
Technology  trends  –  The  new  technology  trends  such  as  cloud  computing,  mobile 
telephony and Service Oriented Architecture (SoA) etc, are likely to bring about significant 
changes in the way payments would be processed in the future. 
The  Mobile  telephony  is  pervasive  and  ubiquitous  with  close  to  850  million5  subscribers  
(as on June 30, 2011) and is expected to have 97% tele-density by 2015 (TRAI source). With 
high  tele-density,  introduction  of  smart  phones,  new  technology  such  as  3G,  innovative 
mobile  payment  solution  providers  mobile  telephony  is  well  poised  to  emerge  as  retail 
payment  instrument  of  the  future  in  terms  of  costs,  convenience,  speed  and  reach.  The 
ASSOCHEM  and  Deloitte  report  “Mobile  Payments  in  India  New  frontiers  of  growth” 
April 2011 identifies the critical factors viz. mass reach (across small distributors, traders and 
delivery  agents),  security,  service  provider  agnostic,  ease  and  convenience  of  operation, 
leverage on existing infrastructure and competitive pricing as critical factors for the success 
of mobile payments in  India. The future of mobile payments in India will to a large extend 
depend  on  convergence  of  business  models  of  banks,  telecom  operators  and  other  stake 
holders.  
Another  technology  which  in  conjunction  with  mobile  phone  is  likely  to  drive  the  future 
payment  mode  is  NFC.  NFC,  or  near  field  communication,  enables  the  exchange  of  data 
between  devices  in  close  proximity  to  each  other.  Use  of  NFC  as  a  future  payment 
technology  is  gaining  attention  worldwide  with  many  technology  providers  notably  among 
them Google are experimenting with this technology. NFC is quite successful in countries like 
Japan. In India there have been a few test runs with NFC payments but products are yet to 
be rolled out. Challenge with NFC is finding an ideal solution to host multiple cards in the 
same  NFC  handset.  Further,  use  of  NFC  would  require  changes  in  payment  processing, 
upgrading the PoS terminals at the merchant ends. 
Liberalised  business  correspondent  (BC)  guidelines:  BC  guidelines  have  been 
significantly liberalised with corporates including MNOs having been allowed to come in as 
BCs. The banks are also now permitted to pay a reasonable commission/ fee to the BC. It is 
hoped  that  these  liberalised  guidelines  would  result  in  expansion  of  the  banking  coverage 
and along with technology provide a sustainable ecosystem for the unbanked and financially 
excluded segments of the population to be part of formal banking network.  
Aadhaar  Enabled  Payment  system:  NPCI  and  UIDAI  in  partnership  are  ushering  in  the 
Aadhaar  enabled  payment  system  (AEPS).AEPS  is  a  bank  led  model  which  allows  online 
financial  inclusion  transaction  at  PoS  (MicroATM  using  handheld  device)  through  the 
business  correspondent  of  a  bank  using  the  Aadhaar  authentication.  At  present  AEPS 
service can be availed by customers at their respective bank business correspondent outlets. 
AEPS will support four types of banking services viz. balance enquiry, cash withdrawal, cash 
                                                 
5 
Information Note to the Press (Press Release No. 45 /2011), Telecom Regulatory Authority of India. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
deposit and Aadhaar to Aadhaar funds transfers. UIDAI along with NPCI has piloted Aadhaar 
enabled Payment System in Jharkhand. Basic transactions permissible over these accounts 
include cash deposit, cash withdrawal, balance enquiry, and inter-bank money transfer. This 
system  also  envisages  the  creation  of  an  Aadhaar  Enabled  Payment  Bridge  which  would 
facilitate direct disbursement of government benefits to the beneficiary by credit to their bank 
accounts using Aadhaar. 
Section 6: industry level challenges 
Convergence  of  products  and  channels  –  Competition,  technology,  increased  customer 
demand for comfort and convenience and regulatory initiatives have resulted in introduction 
of several payment products and channels over the time. However, banks have built these 
products  and  channels  into  separate  silos  and  vertical.  The  CII-PWC  survey  “Payment 
Business in Indian Banks” brought out this issue of separate silos and lack of interoperability 
among these silos. For instance, in some banks the Core Banking System is usually different 
from  the  card  processing  system.  The  survey  also  highlights  the  issues  that  arise  from 
disparate payment infrastructure for banks such as duplicity in work, lack of scalability, lack 
of STP, increase in the cost of payment processing. So the moot point is whether banks have 
fathomed the benefits of convergence in payment systems?  
If analysed from a customer’s perspective, they maintain multiple payment instruments and 
multiple channels for different payment needs. Can we think of a regime where the all these 
payment instruments could be subsumed in a single instrument i.e. a single card acting as a 
debit  card,  credit  card,  pre-paid  card  and  all  purpose  smart  card?  Can  we  think  of 
convergence  of  channels  –  where  mobile  phones  given  their  ubiquitous  nature  replace  all 
payment channels and serve as portable device for all banking and financial service needs? 
Technology issues: Banks are on a spree to introduce and upgrade technology to cater to 
the increasing customer base and needs. However, the issue the technology adoption and 
absorption in banks need a closure look whether it is holistic in nature or it is in disjointed and 
disarray  mode.  I  have  already  drawn  your  reference  to  the  need  for  payment  system 
convergence in banks. 
Another challenge for banks would be how to address the technology obsolescence through 
continuous 
from  cost,  upgradation  poses  significant 
challenges  for  banks  in  terms  of  replication  across  all  technology  assets  and  building 
awareness of end users and customers.  
One more issue I want to highlight under the technology is preparedness of banks in terms of 
transaction processing to handle spurt in transactions on account of increased in customer 
base,  product  lines  and  increased  usage  of  non-cash  payments  without  compromising  the 
safety and efficiency. In my interactions with banks, I am told of fast approaching limitations 
in  increasing  the  TPS  (transaction  per  second)  volumes.  A  few  banks  find  it  difficult  to 
maintain the same level of efficiency and speed in all the payment channels on high volume 
and quarter ends.  
Finally  competition,  changing  customer  preference  for  low  cost  payment  alternatives, 
introduction  of  innovative  payment  instruments  and  payment  channels  and  burgeoning 
transaction volumes and above all regulatory requirements are forcing banks to review their 
existing infrastructure and migrate to an enterprise payment processing system or payment 
hub that could integrate all payment instruments, interfaces with the core banking solution. 
However, migration to payment hub should be carried out in a well thought out manner so 
technology  upgradation.  Apart 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
that  the  potential  benefit  in  terms  of  efficiency,  cost  reduction,  improved  customer  service 
and transparency in payment processing could be maximized.6 
Safety and security in an ICT environment: Given the increasing use of ICT including the 
use of new delivery channels, safety and security of transactions has assumed paramount 
importance.  All  the  new  delivery  channels  and  the  various  products  which  while  providing 
convenience  of  banking  services  to  the  customers  need  necessarily  have  to  incorporate 
sufficient security features to prevent fraud and misuse while at the same time ensuring ease 
and efficiency in operation. While the payment industry is alive to the challenge it must be 
kept in mind that fraudsters are always on the prowl for taking advantages of any chinks in 
the  armour.  Thus  product  design,  implementation,  availability  and  access  to  genuine 
customers  should  be  seen  in  conjunction  with  maintaining  high  security  standards  on  par 
with not only domestic but international standards as well. This therefore prescribes the need 
for  the  industry  to  continuously  engage  in  dialogue  with  security,  IT,  legal  experts  and 
relevant  regulatory  bodies  and  the  government  to  take  this  process  forward  of  ensuring 
safety and security of transactions.  
In this context I would like to bring to your notice the report of the Working Group constituted 
by RBI under the Chairmanship of Shri. G. Gopalakrishna, ED, RBI on Information security, 
Electronic  Banking,  Technology  Risk  management  and  cyber  frauds.  The  report  provides 
detailed  recommendations  in  areas  relating  to  IT  Governance,  Information  security,  IT 
operations, Information system audit, Cyber frauds, Business Continuity Planning, customer 
education  and  legal  issues  arising  out  of  the  use  of  IT.  I  would  urge  the  industry  to  pay 
special heed to these recommendations to continuously improve the safety and security of 
electronic  banking  transactions  especially  those  that  are  payments  related.  I  have  been 
informed that a “High level group” with representatives from banks, IBA, IDRBT and RBI has 
been set up to oversee the implementation of these recommendations.  
Coming to the safety and security measures related to specific payment products RBI is now 
looking at enhancing security of card present transactions. You would recall that the use of 
second  factor  authentication  for  all  card  not  present  transactions  has  since  been  made 
mandatory.  This  move  has  in  fact  encouraged  the  use  of  cards  over  the  internet  and  has 
instilled confidence amongst the users that their transactions are being conducted in safe, 
secured and efficient manner.  
You may also be aware that a working group constituted by the Reserve Bank has also come 
out  with  recommendations  for  securing  card  present  transactions  through  the  use  of 
additional factor of authentication. The group has observed that the Aadhaar biometric data 
which  is  perhaps  unique  to  India  could  very  well  serve  as  the  secured  additional  factor  of 
authentication,  which  would  enable  even  the  available  magnetic  stripe  cards  to  be  made 
more secured. Such a move would also obviate the necessity for switching over to an EMV 
chip  and  pin  card  regime  which  has  obvious  cost  implications  for  the  industry.  The  public 
consultation period having just been over the recommendations made in the report are being 
examined internally by the Reserve Bank of India.  
Customer service issues: For any new payment instrument to flourish it is necessary that it 
provides the same degree of comfort and convenience in its repeated and regular usage with 
minimum fail rate. Though banks should strive for a zero fail rate, it may not be feasible to 
eliminate  failures  fully.  Such  failures  give  rise  to  customer  service  issues.  Appropriate 
processes  have  to  be  implemented  for  speedy  resolution  of  such  complaints  within  a 
reasonable time period. RBI has taken a number of initiatives in improving the resolution time 
period especially in case of failed ATM transactions. However, there are a number of grey 
areas which need to be resolved. I will highlight one such aspect relating to internet banking 
                                                 
6  Convergent  Payments  Optimization,  Service-oriented  Technology  Creates  a  Single  Hallway  for  Payments 
Processing, Fiserv, South Africa. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India  constituted  Committee  under 
where dispute resolution mechanisms are yet to be fully developed. Complaints pertaining to 
un-reversed debits continue to be received. It is difficult to identify and fix the responsibility in 
this regard.  
Given the focus on customer service issues, it is perhaps necessary to look into the major 
recommendations  of 
the 
chairmanship  of  Shri  M.  Damodaran,  former  Chairman,  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of 
India, which looked at the banking services provided to retail and small customers, including 
pensioners.  Some  of  the  major  recommendations  towards  improving  customer  service 
amongst  others  are:  creation  of  a  toll  free  common  bank  call  number;  providing  small 
remittances  at  reasonable  price;  zero  liability  against  loss  in  ATM  and  online  transactions; 
prepaid instruments up to Rs. 50,000 / – for frequent travelers; differential merchant discount / 
fee for debit cards; instant blocking of ATM card through SMS – BLOCK for lost / misused 
cards. The report has been placed on the RBI website for public consultation and I would urge 
the distinguished gathering here to provide their valuable feedback.  
Financial inclusion – Tapping the value at the bottom of the pyramid: To quote the late 
Prof.C.K. Prahalad – “A significant opportunity for innovation in bottom of pyramid markets, 
centres  around  redefining  the  process  to  suit  the  infrastructure.  Process  innovation  is  a 
critical step in making products and services affordable for the poor. How to deliver it is as 
important as what to deliver.”7 In this context the efforts of the government, the Reserve Bank 
and the banking industry to provide banking services through financial inclusion have to be 
seen,  appreciated  and  pushed  forward  with  greater  vigour.  The  challenge  will  be  for  the 
banks to integrate and reinvent their payment system infrastructure to cater to the customers 
at the extreme ends of the value chain especially at the bottom of the pyramid. I have already 
recounted  some  of  the  initiatives  such  as  mobile  banking,  Aadhaar  enabled  payment 
systems,  liberalisation  of  BC  guidelines  etc,  which  when  deployed  with  a  sound  business 
plan can generate value not only to the customers but also to the banks. A simple example 
which readily comes to mind are the small ticket mobile prepaid coupons which are needed 
by customers at the bottom of the pyramid and are at the same time significant contributors 
to  the  revenues  of  mobile  operators.  So  also  is  the  case  with  single  serve  sachets  of 
shampoo and toothpaste which are convenient and easy to use. 
Developing an interoperable payment ecosystem: I will touch upon another dimension to 
distribution  of  payment  services.  Can  we  visualize  a  state  of  interoperability  where  a 
customer walks into any bank branch or post office for meeting his normal banking needs 
without necessarily visiting the bank/branch where he has an account? Whether the issue of 
availability could be addressed through inter-operability in the payment systems by building 
an ecosystem consisting of banks, post offices, BCs and may be non-bank participants in the 
system. 
Benchmarking  against  global  standards:  It  is  perhaps  appropriate  that  we  benchmark 
ourselves  against  global  standards  as  the  world  has  become  an  integrated  one  with  India 
becoming part of the global village. Cyber frauds are no longer restricted to onshore entities 
but could very well be triggered by offshore entities. In such a scenario it is extremely crucial 
that  we  benchmark  our  products,  processes  and  designs  with  the  globally  available  best 
practices and standards. Technology adoption and educating customers for appropriate use 
of technology is also part of this enabling process to usher in best practices and standards in 
the industry and the customer base that it serves. In this connection I may mention that RBI 
is  member  of  the  committee  of  payment  and  settlement  systems,  BIS,  Basel  which  is  the 
international  standard  setting  body  for  payment  and  settlement  systems.  As  part  of  this 
endeavour RBI is a member of steering group set up for framing the principles for financial 
market  infrastructure  (FMI).  The  principles  for  FMI’  report  has  just  concluded  its  public 
                                                 
7  C K Prahalad, Fortune at the Bottom of Pyramid, Prentice Hall. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
consultation and it is likely that the final report will be issued early next year. The principles 
for  FMI  report  has  24  recommendations  devoted  to  the  public  policy  objectives  of  safety, 
security of FMIs.  
Section 7: regulatory framework to serve as a catalyst 
For  the  industry  to  prosper  and  for  innovation  to  thrive  a  sound  complementary  regulatory 
framework is very much required. Such a framework should provide a level playing field for 
all providers to enable the customer to exercise his choices as regards choosing a particular 
service  provider.  Other  important  components  for  such  a  regulatory  framework  would  also 
encompass customer protection issues, fraud prevention issues, security related issues and 
fair pricing. Having said this I draw your attention to the RBI’s vision document for payment 
systems for the period 2009–2012 wherein the framework for operation of all payment and 
settlement  systems  in  the  country  has  been  clearly  stated  as  being  more  than  the  usual 
3Ss+E viz. safety, security, soundness and efficiency coupled with the 2As accessibility and 
authorisation. 
Concomitant  with  this  vision  some  of  the  regulatory  measures  taken  by  RBI  include  the 
creation and classification of the ATM network as a shared national payment infrastructure; 
mandating  safety  and  security  of  transactions  both  paper  based  and  electronic  and  card 
based  payment  systems;  prescribing  standards  for  cheques  under  cheque  truncation; 
creating  customer  comfort  through  provision  of  positive  confirmation,  creation  of  customer 
facilitation  centres,  reducing  the  time  taken  for  resolution  of  ATM  failed  transactions; 
telecommunication  connectivity  scheme  for  northeast  region  for  expanding  the  reach  of 
banking services; etc.  
The  regulatory  framework  also  promoted  innovation  and  orderly  developments  of  new 
payment products such as prepaid card and mobile banking etc. RBI has also undertaken 
selective  intervention  in  pricing  framework  for  various  payment  products  to  enhance  their 
reach amongst the public. 
Section 8: 5 A’s of payment system 
Before I conclude, let me attempt to provide a link with my topic with the next session, which 
is on cost efficient business model for low cost banking. 
In conclusion I would draw your attention to what I have generically termed as the 5 A’s of a 
payment  system.  These  are  availability,  accessibility,  acceptability,  affordability  and 
awareness of the system and the product.  
Availability combines the notion of a level playing field for the service providers along with 
the availability of choice of products for the consumers.  
Accessibility as a concept should be the cornerstone to expand the reach of the banking 
systems  and  the  various  payment  products  to  all  the  sections  of  the  society  including  the 
“aam aadmi” as part of the financial inclusion plan and efforts. 
Acceptability  is  the  thought  process  which  enables  the  customers  to  embrace  the  newer 
products  and  technology  such  that  these  become  ubiquitous  in  nature  just  as  mobile 
telephony has become in the country. 
Affordability is a key corner stone which should guide the product offering as being value 
for money for the customers with technology and innovation being the important drivers for 
providing cost effective and quality services by the service providers. 
Awareness  –  Creating  awareness  through  financial  literacy  campaigns  is  necessary  to 
increase  the  volumes  in  the  payments  business  and  to  generate  the  necessary  network 
effects for the successful operationalisation and implementation of newer technologically cost 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
effective sound payment products. It is also necessary to simultaneously create awareness 
for inculcating security consciousness among the users of the various payment products to 
prevent instances of fraud and misuse. I would urge the IBA to take a lead in this regard and 
conduct payment system awareness campaign in tier II and tier III cities especially to spread 
this  message.  To  supplement  and  to  generate  interest  interactive  software  in  the  form  of 
simulations and games could be part of this exercise.  
Even if I look back over the last couple of decades, I would commend the progress made by 
the industry collectively in building a modern payment system in the country. The payment 
system  today  is  vibrant,  robust  and  technologically  superior  with  multiple  payment 
instruments,  multiple  access  points  and  delivery  channels  to  choose  from.  However,  the 
benefit of modern payment system is yet to fully percolate to all segments of the society. As 
a  result,  a  substantial  portion  of  the  population  is  still  outside  the  realm  of  the  formal  and 
modern payment system. 
Thus  the  stage  is  set  for  all  of  us  especially  the  banks  and  the  Indian  Banks  Association 
along with other stakeholders in the industry to collaborate with each other in a co-operative 
effort  to  expand  the  reach  of  banking  sector  and  modern  payment  systems  by  making  all 
efforts  towards  financial  inclusion.  In  this  endeavour,  educating  customers  on  the  security 
comfort  afforded  by  the  payment  products  and  the  measures  required  to  be  taken  by  the 
customers for minimising fraud and misuse should also be an integral part. Only then would 
we  be  able  to  realise  productivity  excellence  in  this  sphere  which  has  a  direct  bearing  on 
sustainable  growth  of  the  economy  and  the  percolation  of  the  benefits  of  this  growth  to 
various sections of our citizenry. 
I thank you for your patient hearing. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
