Seiji Nakamura: Japan’s monetary policy and developments in economic 
activity and prices 
Speech  by  Mr  Seiji  Nakamura,  Member  of  the  Policy  Board  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a 
meeting with business leaders, Nara, 2 June 2011. 
 The Bank of Japan’s business operations  
I. 
Let me start my speech today by briefly explaining the business operations and functions of 
the Bank. The Bank conducts monetary policy with the aim of achieving price stability and 
thereby  contributing  to  the  sound  development  of  the  national  economy,  pursuant  to  the 
Bank of Japan Act. In the mind of the public, the Bank is most strongly associated with its 
role as the authority in charge of monetary policy, in order to achieve price stability and – as 
another of its objectives – financial system stability, but the Bank in fact carries out a wide 
range of business operations. 
Examples of the Bank’s business operations include the following. First, as part of its role as 
the  sole  issuer  of  banknotes,  the Bank  ensures  the  smooth  circulation  of  clean banknotes 
across Japan. As of the end of May, there were about 13.1 billion banknotes in circulation 
with a total value of around 78.84 trillion yen. Second, to maintain financial system stability, it 
acts  as  the  “bank  of  banks”  by  ensuring  the  smooth  settlement  of  funds  and  monitoring 
financial  institutions’  business  conditions.  Third,  it  acts  as  the  “bank  of  the  government,” 
receiving  and  disbursing  treasury  funds  and  conducting  services  relating  to  Japanese 
government  securities  (JGSs).  Fourth,  the  Bank  conducts  surveys  and  research  on 
developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices  at  home  and  abroad,  such  as  the  Tankan 
(Short-Term Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan), which requires the support of survey 
respondents  nationwide.  And  fifth,  in  cooperation  with  overseas  central  banks,  the  Bank 
executes  business  operations  in  the  field  of  international  finance.  These  various  business 
operations are carried out by the roughly 5,000 employees at the Head Office, 44 branches 
and local offices in Japan, and seven overseas representative offices. 
The flow of money in an economy is often compared to the circulation of blood in the human 
body in that, once it stops or slows, the whole system can fail. Maintaining the functioning of 
the nation’s payment and settlement system is, therefore, an important element of the central 
bank’s role in supporting economic activity. To this end, the Bank is continually improving its 
business continuity arrangements by preparing for emergency situations – natural disasters 
such  as  earthquakes,  terrorist  attacks,  computer  system  failures,  and  the  spread  of 
epidemics  such  as  influenza  –  including  ensuring  that  essential  staff  necessary  for  the 
conduct of business operations are always available. 
On  Friday,  March  11,  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake  occurred  during  normal  business 
hours at 2:46 p.m., and the Bank immediately set up a disaster management team headed 
by  the  Governor.  The  Bank  of  Japan  Financial  Network  System  (BOJ-NET)  –  the  core 
system for the interbank settlement of funds and securities – continued to operate as usual 
following  the  earthquake.  To  prevent  a  shortage  of  cash  in  the  disaster  areas,  the  Bank’s 
branches  in  the  Tohoku  region  provided  a  total  of  55  billion  yen  during  the  weekend 
immediately after the earthquake. Also, to ease liquidity concerns, the Bank provided ample 
funds to the money market, totalling 82.4 trillion yen, in the week starting March 14, the first 
business day after the earthquake, thus preventing any turmoil in the market. Power outages 
at  some  of  the  Bank’s  branch  premises  were  dealt  with  by  the  use  of  stand-by  in-house 
power generation systems. To exchange damaged or soiled banknotes and coins for clean 
ones, the Bank increased the number of staff at branches in the disaster areas and opened a 
temporary  cash  exchange  counter  in  Iwate  Prefecture,  where  the  Bank  does  not  have  a 
branch. As of the end of May, the amount outstanding of cash exchanged at the branches in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  Tohoku  region,  including  Sendai,  Fukushima,  Akita,  and  Aomori,  and  the  temporary 
counter  in  Morioka  in  Iwate  Prefecture,  was  1.883  billion  yen.  These  business  operations 
may  seem  distant  from  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  at  first  glance;  however,  public 
confidence in the currency and the Bank could be undermined, which in turn could hamper 
the  Bank’s  conduct  of  monetary  policy,  should  the  Bank  fail  to  provide  central  banking 
services in a stable manner. 
Recent developments in economic activity 
Overseas economies 
II. 
A. 
Next, I will discuss developments in economic activity at home and abroad, starting with the 
situation overseas. 
With advanced economies continuing to recover at a modest pace, the global economy has 
continued  to  recover  moderately,  driven  mainly  by  strong  growth  in  emerging  and 
commodity-exporting economies. According to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) World 
Economic Outlook released in April, the global economy is projected to grow 4.4 percent in 
2011 and 4.5 percent in 2012, indicating that global economic growth is likely to remain firm. 
The impact of the earthquake on overseas economies generally appears to be limited. 
Led mainly by robust domestic demand, emerging and commodity-exporting economies have 
continued relatively high growth and are driving global growth. However, in many of these 
economies,  concerns  about  inflation  have  been  mounting  due  to  the  earlier  rise  in 
international  commodity  prices,  prompting  their  central  banks  to  lean  toward  monetary 
tightening  by,  for  example,  raising  policy  rates  and  reserve  requirement  ratios.  China’s 
economy  currently  continues  to  grow  at  a  rate  of  around  9.0–10.0  percent,  while  inflation 
runs  at  a  rate  of  about  5.0–6.0  percent,  exceeding  the  government’s  inflation  target  of  4 
percent. Against this background, the People’s Bank of China recently implemented the fifth 
increase so far this year of the reserve requirement ratio and strengthened liquidity controls, 
including setting a ceiling on aggregate credit newly extended by banks, and is strengthening 
its stance to curb inflation. These measures may dampen economic growth to some extent, 
but  given  that  China  is enjoying  a virtuous  cycle  of  growth  in  exports, production, income, 
and spending, the economy, on the whole, is likely to continue to grow at a relatively high 
rate. 
The  U.S.  economy  has  been  recovering  and  is  likely  to  remain  on  a  recovery  trend.  The 
seasonally adjusted annualized quarter-on-quarter growth rate of real GDP in the January–
March quarter of 2011 was 1.8 percent. Although this is lower than the 3.1 percent recorded 
in the preceding quarter, it confirms that, mainly thanks to exports and private consumption, 
the U.S. economy continues to recover. However, balance-sheet adjustments in the heavily 
indebted household sector remain a major drag on the economy, the prolonged sluggishness 
in  the  housing  market  persists,  and  the  unemployment  rate,  which  stood  at  9.0  percent  in 
April,  is  still  high.  Although  private-sector  employment  has  continued  to  trend  up,  the 
improvement still lacks the momentum to make up for the approximately 8 million jobs lost 
since  the  Lehman  shock.  While  the  Federal  Reserve  has  announced  that  it  will  end 
purchases of an additional 600 billion U.S. dollars of Treasury securities by the end of June 
2011, as scheduled, it also emphasized that it will continue to maintain an accommodative 
monetary policy stance for an extended period in a situation where the U.S. economy lacks 
vigor as a whole. 
European  economies  as  a  whole  have  been  recovering  moderately,  albeit  with  some 
differences in growth by country. While peripheral countries in the euro area are registering 
low growth, large core economies, such as Germany and France, are enjoying steady growth 
supported  by  increases  in  exports,  particularly  to  the  emerging  economies,  and  private 
consumption. As for the outlook, the pace of economic growth in Europe as a whole is likely 
to  remain  moderate,  given  that  countries  in  the  euro  area  are  implementing  austerity 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
programs  as  part  of  their  fiscal  consolidation  measures  and  because  of  the  uncertainties 
regarding  how  the  debt  problems  in  countries  such  as  Greece  will  develop.  In  this 
environment,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  in  April  raised  its  policy  rates  for  the  first 
time since the Lehman shock owing mainly to increases in international commodity prices. 
However,  given  the  major  risk  factor  presented  by  problems  involving  the  credit  risk  of 
government bonds issued by peripheral countries in the euro area, the outlook for European 
economies, particularly Greece, remains highly uncertain.  
While  the  issue  of  fiscal  consolidation  in  Europe  and  the  United  States  has  been  gaining 
attention, let me touch upon the fiscal status of Japan. Although Japan has the highest ratio 
of public debt to GDP among major industrialized countries, yields on Japanese government 
bonds  (JGBs)  have  remained  stable  at  low  levels.  One  likely  explanation  is  that  JGBs 
continue  to  command  market  confidence,  despite  Japan’s  grave  fiscal  situation.  Fiscal 
consolidation is not a task that can be achieved over a short period of time. It is therefore 
important for Japan to steadily work on measures aimed at fiscal consolidation while market 
confidence regarding the creditworthiness of JGBs remains in place. 
Japan’s economy 
B. 
Following  a  V-shaped  recovery  after  the  Lehman  shock,  Japan’s  economy  had  been  on  a 
moderate  recovery  trend,  but  the  situation  changed  completely  with  the  earthquake  on 
March 11.  The  economy  is  currently  facing  strong  downward  pressure,  mainly  on  the 
production side. 
Although  the  preliminary  results  for  the  industrial  production  index  for  April  show  a  small 
increase  of  1.0  percent  from  March  –  mainly  due  to  progress  in  the  restoration  of  supply 
chains – the level of production remains at only around 85 percent of that in February, that is, 
just  before  the  earthquake.  Automobile  production  in  particular  dropped  sharply,  and  the 
number of passenger cars produced in April marked a year-on-year decline of 60.2 percent. 
In these circumstances, real exports have continued to decline, registering a 6.9 percent fall 
in April from the previous month, due largely to the substantial decline in automobile exports 
caused  by  production  constraints.  However,  production  is  likely  to  improve,  with  the 
production forecast index for May suggesting a month-on-month increase of 8.0 percent and 
that for June suggesting an increase of 7.7 percent. Moreover, in the automobile industry, 
production activity is gradually returning to normal. Parts makers announced that they would 
resume production of core components in June and hoped to achieve pre-quake production 
levels  by  the  end  of  October.  Major  automakers  also  announced  that  they  would  raise 
production so that, from early autumn, production levels would gradually return to close to 
normal. Thus, although at present production continues to be well below normal levels, firms 
in the Japanese auto and parts industries seem to have become more confident about the 
restoration of production sites in coming months, which significantly contrasts with the early 
post-quake stage, when they found it difficult to specify the timing of such restoration. These 
developments, I think, can be interpreted as a positive development. 
Private consumption has also been weak, caused by sluggish sales due to supply constraints 
and restraint in consumption due to a deterioration in consumer sentiment. That being said, 
looking at retail sales indicators for April, although sales at convenience stores slowed, they 
still showed a year-on-year increase of 3.0 percent, while the year-on-year rate of decrease 
in  sales  at  department  stores  decelerated  considerably  to  1.8  percent  in  April  from 
15.0 percent in March. A similar trend can be observed for sales in the food service industry. 
According to the Economy Watchers Survey for April, conducted between April 25 and 30, 
the  diffusion  index  (DI)  for  current  economic  conditions  remained  at  a  deeply  depressed 
level, but that for future economic conditions marked an increase of 11.8 percentage points, 
suggesting an improvement in business sentiment. Although consumers continue to restrain 
consumption  of  nonessential  items,  reports  in  the  media  as  well  as  anecdotal  evidence 
suggest that consumption has been gradually increasing since May, which included a string 
of holidays known as “Golden Week,” as voluntary restraint and supply constraints on goods 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
and  electricity  have  eased.  That  being  said,  substantial  differences  across  regions  and 
industries remain. 
The number of foreign visitors to Japan continued to fall substantially, registering a year-on-
year decrease of 62.5 percent in April, following a drop of 50.3 percent in March. Partly as a 
result,  the  occupancy  rates  of  major  hotels  in  Tokyo  (19  respondents)  and  Osaka 
(15 respondents) dropped sharply in April, according to a survey by Nikkei Inc. 
Baseline scenario of the outlook for the economy and prices 
C. 
Next,  I  will  talk  about  the  outlook.  The  main  reason  behind  the  current  drop  in  economic 
activity is the supply-side shock caused by the earthquake and, as highlighted in the Outlook 
for  Economic  Activity  and  Prices  (Outlook  Report)  released  at  the  end  of  April  2011,  the 
prospects for Japan’s economy crucially hinge on a recovery in production and exports. 
For the time being, Japan’s economy is likely to continue facing downward pressure, mainly 
on the production side, since it is likely to take some time to reconfigure supply chains and 
electricity supply constraints are likely to occur at peak times in the summer. However, from 
early autumn onward, with further progress in the reconfiguration of supply chains – which 
have  been  seriously  disrupted,  particularly  in  the  automobile  industry  –  and  easing  in 
electricity supply constraints, production and exports are likely to increase again against the 
backdrop of steady growth in overseas economies. In this situation, private consumption is 
likely to pick up again gradually and, together with a rise in demand for reconstruction, this is 
likely  to  accelerate  the  pace  of  recovery  in  the  second  half  of  fiscal  2011.  In  fiscal  2012, 
demand  for  reconstruction  is  likely  to  remain  high,  while  overseas  economies,  especially 
emerging and commodity-exporting economies, are likely to continue growing steadily. The 
transmission  mechanism  by  which  increases  in  exports  and  production  feed  through  into 
income and spending is likely to strengthen, and Japan’s economy is projected to grow at a 
pace  above  its  potential  in  fiscal  2012  due  in  part  to  a  rebound  from  the  significant 
deceleration in fiscal 2011. The Bank’s forecast for real GDP growth released for reference in 
the Outlook Report is 0.6 percent for fiscal 2011 and 2.9 percent for fiscal 2012. 
As  for  price  developments,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  change  in  the  consumer  price  index 
(CPI) for all items excluding fresh food in fiscal 2011 is likely to be slightly higher than in the 
previous  year  due  to  the  falling  off  of  the  effects  of  subsidies  for  high  school  tuition 
introduced  in  fiscal  2010  and  to  the  rise  in  international  commodity  prices.  The  Bank’s 
forecast  for  the  average  annual  rate  of  increase  in  the  CPI  is  around  0.7  percent  for  both 
fiscal 2011 and 2012. However, it needs to be noted that in August the Ministry of Internal 
Affairs and Communications, which is in charge of compiling the CPI, will announce revised 
CPI figures based on a change of the base year from 2005 to 2010, and that as a result the 
year-on-year rate of change in the CPI may be revised downward. 
Upside and downside risks to the baseline scenario of the outlook 
D. 
The baseline scenario I just presented is subject to various upside and downside risks, which 
warrant attention. 
First, there is a high degree of uncertainty – both on the upside and on the downside – about 
the effects of the earthquake on Japan’s economy. In addition, if firms and households were 
to maintain an overly pessimistic view regarding the outlook for Japan’s economy, domestic 
demand – such as business fixed investment and private consumption – could be restrained 
over the medium to long term, posing the risk of a decline in the expected growth rate of the 
economy.  Further,  economic  activity  might  turn  out  weaker  than  in  the  baseline  scenario 
presented in the Outlook Report if – due to delays in the reconstruction of supply chains, for 
example – firms accelerate the shift of production and/or parts procurement overseas or the 
share of Japanese products in overseas markets falls, or if the tense situation at the nuclear 
power plant and electricity supply constraints continue to linger. On the other hand, economic 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
activity in Japan might turn out stronger than projected if, due to the damage caused by the 
earthquake,  firms  strengthen  efforts  to  establish  new  production  sites  in  Japan  and 
reconfigure supply chains to diversify risks, make new investments aimed at promoting more 
efficient use of energy, or create new demand by developing new products in response to 
changes  in lifestyles.  Furthermore,  the  earthquake  has  brought  into  focus  a  wide range  of 
issues that have been left unaddressed for years. If this can be grasped as a chance to carry 
out  fundamental  reforms,  then  –  I  would  like  to  think  –  it  may  present  an  opportunity  for 
Japan’s economy to emerge from its prolonged stagnation.  
The  next  risk  factor  concerns  developments  in  overseas  economies.  For  the  U.S.  and 
European  economies,  downside  risks  prevail:  the  U.S.  economy  is  burdened  by  balance-
sheet  adjustments  in  the  household  sector,  while  in  Europe  sovereign  risk  problems  are 
lingering  in  some  peripheral  countries  such  as  Greece,  and  these  problems  may  act  to 
reduce  economic  activity  through  disturbances  in  financial  markets.  On  the  other  hand, 
emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies  for  the  time  being  are  likely  to  maintain 
relatively  high  growth  led  mainly  by  robust  domestic  demand.  However,  with  concern 
increasing over overheating or inflation, there is also a risk that due to monetary tightening to 
address  such  concerns,  activity  in  these  economies  might  fall  below  expectations,  which 
would pose a downside risk to Japan’s economy. 
Lastly, attention needs to be paid to the risk that private demand might be pushed down in 
Japan due to a deterioration in corporate profits triggered by a rise in raw material prices in 
international  commodity  markets,  reflecting  geopolitical  risks  such  as  increased  tension  in 
North Africa and the Middle East. 
Japan’s economy and the automobile industry 
E. 
As  I  mentioned,  automobile  production  has  continued  to  drop  sharply:  the  number  of 
passenger  cars  produced  in  April  marked  a  year-on-year  decline  of  60.2  percent  and 
automobile-related real exports a decline of 46.0 percent for the same month. This significant 
drop  in  production  and  exports  in  the  automobile  industry  has  played  a  large  part  in  the 
recent substantial downturn in Japan’s economy. 
Industrial  production  in  March  fell  15.5  percent  from  the  previous  month.  This  was  mainly 
attributable  to  a  significant  decline  of  49.7  percent  on  a  month-on-month  basis  in  the 
production  of  transport  equipment  excluding  ships  and  rolling  stock  (i.e.,  the  production  of 
two- and four-wheeled vehicles and related parts), which in 2005 accounted for 15.7 percent 
of Japan’s total industrial production. A key characteristic of automobile production is that, 
with  its  various  sub-sectors,  it  involves  a  wide  range  of  other  industries,  generating 
substantial  production  spillovers.  For  example,  according  to  the  Ministry  of  Internal  Affairs 
and Communications’ Input-Output Tables for 2005, the transport equipment industry (here 
including ships and rolling stock due to statistical constraints) generated production spillovers 
of a factor of 2.82. In other words, each unit of demand that arose in the transport equipment 
industry  both  directly  and  indirectly  generated  domestic  demand  that  was  2.82  times  that 
amount.  This  figure  illustrates  the  breadth  and  magnitude  of  the  transport  equipment 
industry, given that the average production spillover effect for all industries only has a factor 
of  1.93.  Together  with  the  fact  that  in  fiscal  2010  exports  in  this  sector  accounted  for 
21.6 percent  of  Japan’s  total  exports  on  a  customs  clearance  basis,  this  implies  that 
automobile-related industries are indeed the main engine of Japan’s economy. 
As is well known, in order to maximize efficiency, supply chains in the Japanese automobile 
industry form a complex system in which the production and supply of parts – of which there 
are  said  to  be  more  than  30,000  –  and  final  assembly  are  synchronized  across  corporate 
boundaries to  shorten  lead  times  and  minimize  inventories.  Moreover,  corporate  groups  in 
the  industry  are  in  fact  structured  like  multi-layered  pyramids  with  broad  bases,  each 
comprising a large auto assembler and its subcontractor parts makers. However, irrespective 
of  this  multi-layered  nature  of  the  supply  system,  there  had  been  a  consolidation  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
concentration of production bases and lines, aimed at enhancing cost-competitiveness and 
production efficiency, which led to a concentration of production lines for core components at 
certain parts makers and resulted in large assemblers relying heavily on a very small number 
of parts makers. This was a source of risk to which large auto assemblers paid little attention. 
It  was  this  defect  in  the  supply  system  that  led  to  bottlenecks  in  the  aftermath  of  the 
earthquake and affected automobile production worldwide. 
Given the large role the automobile industry plays in Japan’s economy, as highlighted earlier, 
it can be said that the speed and breadth of the economic recovery following the earthquake 
will greatly depend on the reconstruction of parts makers’ production sites and the recovery 
in production and exports of the automobile industry overall. 
As the earthquake unexpectedly revealed, Japan’s economy is highly dependent on certain 
industries. This entails the risk that when these industries contract sharply, so does Japan’s 
economy as a whole. Such an industrial structure also carries risks in the case of intensified 
competition when emerging economies rapidly catch up with Japan in these industries, or in 
the case of the emergence of powerful innovative products that replace those produced by 
Japanese  firms.  The  “Industrial  Structure  Vision  2010”  introduced  by  the  government 
advocates  a  shift  from  an  industrial  structure  heavily  dependent  on  a  small  number  of 
competitive  industries,  including  the  automobile  industry,  to  a  more  diversified  structure  in 
which multiple industries play the role of growth driver. Adopting such a structure is vital to 
build a nation that can withstand changes in the economic environment. 
Conduct of monetary policy 
III. 
I will now move on to the conduct of monetary policy. With a view to overcoming deflation 
amid  intense  global  competition  and  returning  the  Japanese  economy  to  a  sustainable 
growth path with price stability, the Bank, even prior to the earthquake, conducted aggressive 
monetary  easing  through  its  comprehensive  monetary  easing  policy  while  implementing 
measures such as the fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations 
for  economic  growth.  In  this  situation,  in  response  to  the  earthquake,  the  Bank  further 
enhanced  monetary  easing  through  its  comprehensive  monetary  easing  policy  and 
introduced measures to support financial institutions in disaster areas. I will discuss each of 
these measures in turn. 
A. 
Further enhanced monetary easing under the comprehensive monetary easing 
policy 
On October 5, 2010, the Bank decided to implement comprehensive monetary easing based 
on the recognition that it was highly likely that the return of Japan’s economy to a sustainable 
growth  path  with  price  stability  would  be  delayed  compared  to  what  had  been  projected 
earlier,  partly  due  to  the  slowdown  in  overseas  economies  and  the  effects  of  the  yen’s 
appreciation on business sentiment. 
In a situation where there was little room for a further decline in short-term interest rates due 
to  the  virtually  zero  interest  rate  policy  pursued  by  the  Bank,  the  policy  I  just  mentioned 
consisted of three measures aimed at further enhancing monetary easing: first, changing the 
target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate from “around 0.1 percent” to “around 0 to 
0.1 percent”  in  order  to  further  clarify  the  Bank’s  adoption  of  a  virtually  zero  interest  rate 
policy;  second,  clearly  stating  that  the  Bank  would  continue  the  virtually  zero  interest  rate 
policy until it judged that price stability was in sight; and third, establishing an Asset Purchase 
Program with a total size of about 35 trillion yen. 
After the earthquake, there were concerns that, amid expectations of unprecedented damage 
from the disaster, any deterioration in business and household sentiment and heightening of 
risk aversion in financial markets would adversely affect economic activity. In view of this, the 
Bank,  at  the  Monetary  Policy  Meeting  on  March  14,  2011,  immediately  following  the 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
earthquake, increased the amount of purchases of assets, mainly of risk assets, from about 
5 trillion yen to about 10 trillion yen, bringing the total amount of the Asset Purchase Program 
to about 40 trillion yen. In addition, given that the market faced severe stress following the 
earthquake,  the  Bank  provided  liquidity  in  a  timely  and  flexible  manner.  Through  these 
measures, the Bank helped markets to regain stability at an early stage. 
Introduction of measures to support financial institutions in disaster areas 
B. 
In  order  to  support  financial  institutions  in  disaster  areas  in  their  initial  efforts  to  meet  the 
need  for  funds  among  firms  and  individuals  for  restoration  and  rebuilding,  the  Bank 
introduced a funds-supplying operation for the provision of loans totalling 1 trillion yen with a 
loan duration of one year and a loan rate of 0.1 percent. On May 23, the Bank conducted the 
first  loan  disbursement  through  the  measure,  providing  financial  institutions  with  a  total  of 
74.1  billion  yen,  and  on  June  1  announced  that  it  would  conduct  its  second  loan 
disbursement on June 28. It plans to continue disbursing loans generally once a month. In 
addition  to  implementing  this  operation,  the  Bank  relaxed  the  eligibility  standards  for 
collateral  submitted  by  financial  institutions  in  disaster  areas  for  the  provision  of  funds.  I 
sincerely  hope  that  such  efforts  by  the  Bank  will  support  rebuilding  efforts  in  the  disaster 
areas. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
