Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Addressing imbalances in the euro area 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Halle Institute for Economic Research, Halle an der Saale, 14 February 2011. 
 I wish to thank Fédéric Holm-Hadulla and Beatrice Pierluigi for their contributions to this speech. I remain solely 
responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Introduction 
It is a pleasure to be here today and share with you my thoughts on a challenging topic: how 
to address imbalances in the euro area.  
The euro area has been expanding: five countries joined EMU between 2007 and 2011, and 
this  process  will  continue  in  the  years  to  come.  The  enlargement  process  is  one  of  the 
features that make EMU unique. The existence of a single monetary policy combined with 
national  responsibilities  for  fiscal,  structural  and  supervisory  policies  is  the  other  distinct 
characteristic of EMU. But within this unique and evolving structure something has not been 
working  properly.  The  accumulation  of  imbalances  and  vulnerabilities  in  some  countries 
during the upswing culminated, after the global recession, in a severe sovereign crisis. What 
has not been working? And what should be done to prevent future imbalances? 
To answer these questions I will organise my talk in three parts.  
First, I will discuss how and why imbalances and vulnerabilities have emerged in the euro 
area. The point that I will make is that fiscal discipline and sound prudential supervision have 
been lacking. In addition, many national authorities failed to implement important reforms in 
the  labour  and  product  markets  to  make  them  more  flexible  and  suited  for  the  change  of 
regime brought about by the adoption of the euro. 
Second,  I  will  consider  the  possibility  of  overcoming  past  failures  via  a  more  institutionally 
integrated monetary union, characterised, for instance, by a move towards a framework of 
fiscal  federalism  for  EMU.  I  will  emphasise  that  a  deeper  fiscal  integration  cannot  be 
considered the  only  solution  for  adjusting  current  imbalances  and  for avoiding  them  in  the 
future.  
Third,  I  will  argue  that  imbalances  and  vulnerabilities  can  and  should  be  addressed  by 
implementing,  at  national  level,  much  stronger  fiscal  discipline,  better  vigilance  of  financial 
developments  and  effective 
reform  measures 
increasing  productivity, 
competitiveness, employment and long-term growth. 
Let me now turn to the first part of my talk.  
that  deliver 
Imbalances in the euro area  
1. 
The imbalances which have accumulated over  the last few years in the euro area are the 
result of a combination of “good” and “bad” convergence. The so-called good convergence 
concerns the levels of per capita income. At the start of EMU the per capita income levels 
between  countries  differed  significantly.  Among  the  countries  that  joined  the  euro  area  in 
1999 and 2001, three – Spain, Greece and Portugal – were considered “cohesion countries”, 
i.e.  countries  that  qualified  for  very  sizeable structural  support  from  EU  funds  to speed  up 
their  convergence  to  the  European  average  per  capita  income  levels.  In  1999  GDP  per 
capita (measured in purchasing power standards) was around 80% of the euro area average 
in  Spain  and  around  70%  in  Portugal  and  Greece.  In  Ireland,  the  gap  with  the  euro  area 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
differs depending on whether it is measured in terms of GDP per capita (110%) or GNP per 
capita (95%).  
Neoclassical  growth  theory  suggests  that  catching-up  countries  would  experience  faster 
economic  growth.  With  the  disappearance  of  the  exchange  rate  premium,  convergence 
within  the  euro  area  was  facilitated  by  capital  flows  originating  from  wealthier  euro  area 
countries  with  higher  GDP  and  per  capita  capital  endowments.1  Between  1999  and  2008 
Greece and Spain witnessed a significant convergence of their per capita income to the euro 
area  average.  In  Portugal  this  convergence  came  to  a  halt  in  2003.  Ireland  continued  to 
experience  a  tremendous  increase  of  its  per  capita  income  between  1999  and  2007.  On 
average,  between  1999  and  2008  per  capita  GDP  increased  at  a  yearly  pace  of  3.4%  in 
Greece,  3.4%  in  Ireland  (GNP)  and  2.0%  in  Spain,  much  higher  than  the  average  for  the 
euro area (1.4%), which was broadly similar to that of the US (1.5%). 
The  “bad”  convergence  I  referred  to  was  the  speed  at  which  income  increased  in  the 
catching-up countries, which largely took place through debt, either public or private. As a 
result, their debt with the rest of the world increased tremendously over the past decade. The 
most dramatic development took place in Ireland, which moved from a net creditor position of 
52% of GDP in 1999 to a net debtor position of 71% of GDP in 2008. Greece increased its 
net  debtor  position  from  33%  to  76%  of  GDP;  Portugal  from  32%  to  96%  and  Spain  from 
28% to 79%.  
The  expectation  of  higher  levels  of  income  led  to  excessive  consumption  and  investment 
compared with the supply capacity of the economy. As a result, cost and price increases in 
the  non-tradable  sector  exceeded  productivity  gains.2  Higher  inflation  differentials  in  the 
catching-up countries could partly be attributed to Balassa-Samuelson effects3. However, the 
divergences in nominal developments were further fuelled by four pro-cyclical factors: 
 
First,  low  interest  rates,  especially  in  real  terms,  which  resulted  from  the  single 
monetary policy, and encouraged risk-taking behaviour; 
Second,  fiscal  policies  assessed  on  the  basis  of  nominal  variables  (deficit  as  a 
percentage  of  GDP)  turned  out  to  be  pro-cyclical  and  contributed  to  excessive 
domestic demand growth and the accumulation of external imbalances; 
Third,  supervisory  policies  in  many  countries  did  not  counteract  excessive  risk-
taking and the related excessive credit growth, which fuelled a housing boom and/or 
an overheating process; 
                                                   
1   See, for instance, Blanchard O. and F. Giavazzi (2002), Current Account Deficits in the Euro Area. The End of 
the Feldstein Horioka Puzzle?, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2002:2; and Abiad A., D. Leigh and 
A. Mody  (2007  ),  International  Finance  and  Income  Convergence:  Europe  is  Different,  IMF  Working  Paper 
WP/07/64. 
2   For a reference on the real interest rate mechanism, see European Commission (2006), The EU economy: 
2006 review. Adjustment dynamics in the euro area – Experiences and challenges, European Economy No 6, 
pages 131–174. 
3   The Balassa-Samuelson (BS) effect refers to inflation effects due to differences in relative productivity growth 
between tradable and non-tradable sectors. When productivity growth rises in the tradable sector, wages will 
follow without putting additional pressures on unit labour costs. However, due to labour mobility, wages in the 
non-tradable sector might rise as well and as productivity growth in the non-tradable sector is normally lower 
than  in  the  tradable  sector,  wage  increases  in  excess  of  productivity  growth  would  tend  to  put  upward 
pressures on unit labour costs and ultimately on inflation for some time. Several studies on the BS effect in the 
euro area, such as Rabanal (2009), Hofmann and Remsperger (2005) and Katsimi (2004) have found that the 
effect has been not very relevant during Stage III of EMU. The literature appears to suggest that the BS effect 
may have been somewhat more relevant during the 1990s. For the period 1992–2001, for example, Wagner 
(2005) finds a positive contribution of the BS effect which tends to capture the convergence during Stage II of 
EMU. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 Fourth,  financial  markets  and  rating  agencies  failed  to  differentiate  sufficiently 
between  euro  area  countries  with  different  risks,  contributing  to  the  significant 
compression  of  risk  premia  in  the  sovereign  debt  securities  markets.  Ten-year 
government  bonds  were  almost  equally  priced  across  all  euro  area  countries 
between  2001  and  2007,  while  economic  fundamentals  continued  to  be  very 
different.  
Let me now expand briefly on some of these points.  
The  excessive  demand  boom,  fuelled  by  private/public  consumption  and  residential 
investment  spending,  led  to  persistent  inflation  and  unit  labour  cost  differentials,  losses  of 
competitiveness and asset price inflation – notably in the housing market – in the countries 
that had to converge to the euro area average and also in Ireland. And it led to a build-up of 
large external indebtedness. At the same time, the supply side was not able to catch up with 
demand  because  investment  spending  was  not  channelled  towards  activities  able  to 
generate high future returns, and also because of important structural rigidities, which policy-
makers neglected to tackle in the boom years. The accumulation of external indebtedness 
was heavily financed by debt instead of FDI, which remained relatively low, another sign that 
little effort was being made to increase the supply side of the economies. 
Just to mention a few figures, a property worth 100 in 1998 would have been sold in 2007 at 
280 in Spain and Ireland and at 230 in Greece. Between 1998 and 2007 bank lending for 
house  purchases  increased  by  more  than  400%  in  Spain,  500%  in  Ireland  and  800%  in 
Greece. In 1998 household debt was less than 40% of GDP in Spain and about 50% of GDP 
in  Portugal,  in  2008  it  reached  84%  in  Spain  and  96%  of  GDP  in  Portugal.  In  Ireland, 
household debt was 55% of GDP in 20024 and reached 110% of GDP in 2008. Corporate 
indebtedness also reached alarming levels at the outset of the crisis.  
Banks did not seem to care about the rise in household and corporate indebtedness in the 
boom  years.  Lending  to  the  private  sector  and  investment  in  overvalued  assets  –  namely 
construction – continued apace. The surge in lending activities and risk-taking by banks was 
facilitated by a sharp increase in cross-border banking flows, as the deepening of financial 
integration  led  banks  to  search  for  profitable  investment  in  high-growth  countries.  And 
national regulators did not step in forcefully to curb excessive risk-taking in banks. 
Another  factor  which  contributed  to  the  accumulation  of  imbalances  was  the  rise  in  public 
sector wages. Between 1998 and 2007 civil service salaries increased cumulatively by 90% 
in  Greece  and  by  more  than  100%  in  Ireland.  Public  spending  growth  systematically 
exceeded  nominal  GDP  growth  up  to  the  2008–2009  recession.  Moreover,  in  several 
countries  the  authorities  failed  to  implement  important  reforms  in  the  labour  and  product 
markets to make them more flexible and suited for the change of regime brought about by 
the  adoption  of  the  euro.  The  ECB  repeatedly  warned  about  the  risks  arising  from  such 
divergences and called for sound fiscal policies and flexible product and labour markets to 
ensure the proper working of EMU.5 
When the 2008–09 crisis hit the euro area, all these imbalances translated into higher public 
debt, either as a result of a sharp drop in revenues or the transformation of private debt into 
public debt. Just to remind you of a few figures, the Irish general government debt increased 
from 25% of GDP in 2007, to 97% at the end of 2010. The Portuguese debt increased from 
63% of GDP to 83%, the Greek from 105% to 140%. The over-reliance on external borrowing 
made financing the increased public debt more difficult.  
                                                 
4   For Ireland the available data for household debt start in 2002. 
5   See  ECB  Monthly  Bulletin  Article  (2007),  Output  growth  differentials  in  the  euro  area:  sources  and 
implications, April 2007. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In  Greece  and  Ireland,  the  adjustment  towards  a  sustainable  government  debt  path  is 
currently being made with the help of an external financial assistance programme. In both 
countries the EU/IMF programme relies on very strong fiscal frontloading and comprehensive 
and  far-reaching  structural  reforms  which,  in  the  case  of  Ireland,  also  include  measures 
aimed  at  an  overhaul  of  the  banking  sector.  These  programmes  aim  to  correct  the 
divergences which have accumulated over the past decade.  
One issue which has emerged over the last few months relates to the extent that fragilities in 
the national economies that belong to the single currency may affect the overall euro area, in 
particular through contagion effects. The events which started last spring show that the euro 
area  was  not  ready  to  face  a  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  one  of  its  members.  Since May  last 
year,  a  series  of  measures  have  been  implemented,  starting  with  a  €110  billion  support 
package  for  Greece  and  the  creation  of  the  European  Financial  Stability  Facility,  and 
extending  to  a  strengthening  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  and  finally  a  change  in  the 
Treaty to allow for a permanent European Stability Mechanism. Some of the discussions are 
still ongoing, and I will not comment further on this issue. The ECB’s position has been made 
quite clear. We are in favour of a “quantum leap” in the governance of the euro area; it would 
ensure greater consistency between economic policies and the single currency. 
How big should the leap be? Some go as far as saying that a single currency is viable only if 
there is a full fiscal union, with a common budget and a transfer system which can account 
for  asymmetric  shocks  and  avoid  divergences  in  national/regional  fiscal  policies.  The  US 
would serve as a model here. There are indeed no precedents for a monetary union without 
a  fiscal  union.  Consequently,  many  think  that  a  monetary  and  fiscal  union  should  be  the 
longer-term model for the euro area.  
The  experience  of  German  unification  might  also  help  us  to  understand  whether  a  move 
towards full fiscal integration would indeed be desirable for the euro area.  
Centralised fiscal policy and monetary union  
2. 
The desirability of achieving a fully fledged fiscal union to complement monetary union can 
be assessed on the basis of the three main criteria characterising economic policy: stability, 
efficiency  and  equity.  I  would  like  to  consider  the  first  two  and  omit  equity,  which  has  a 
deeper  political  connotation  and  may  be  less  relevant  for  the  sustainability  of  a  monetary 
union.  
Let me start with stability. 
The key economic rationale for having a fully fledged fiscal union is to establish a common 
pool of resources that can be used to insure its members against adverse macroeconomic 
shocks and to reduce macroeconomic imbalances. In a monetary union, fiscal policy is the 
only  instrument  that  domestic  policy-makers  can  use  in  response  to  country-specific 
macroeconomic shocks. Since monetary policy is uniform within the currency union, it cannot 
be  tailored  specifically  to  the  economic  conditions  in  each  country.  If,  for  example,  a 
downturn proves to be especially pronounced in one country, the monetary stance adopted 
for the entire currency area may not be appropriate. This implies that fiscal policies may need 
to play an active role in stabilising macroeconomic developments at the domestic level. At 
the same time, the capacity of individual countries to adopt stabilising fiscal policies is very 
limited.  In  particular,  if  countries  enter  a  downturn  with  weak  budgetary  positions,  or  if 
economic  developments  prove  to  be  very  unfavourable,  market  confidence  in  the 
sustainability of public finances can evaporate quickly. This is the experience of a number of 
countries  in  EMU  which  –  after  failing  to  exploit  the  good  times  prior  to  the  crisis  to 
consolidate  public  finances  –  very  quickly  faced  excessive  budget  deficits  when  economic 
conditions  deteriorated.  In  such  a  situation,  fiscal  expansion  through  the  national  budget 
would  be  counterproductive  as  the  “negative  confidence”  effect  from  a  further  budgetary 
deterioration would outweigh any direct demand effect.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  separation  between  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  in  EMU,  which  prevents  the  use  of 
monetary  instruments  for  solving  budgetary  problems,  further  tightens  the  sustainability 
requirements  for  the  public  finances  of  the  Member  States.  Rising  public  debt  cannot  be 
curbed by keeping interest rates low or through inflation, but only through budget adjustment. 
Markets might be inclined to test the ability and willingness of the countries to maintain a tight 
control  over  their  budgets  even  in  a  severe  economic  downturn.  As  doubts  mount  in  the 
markets and credit spreads increase, self-fulfilling expectations may arise which worsen the 
debt dynamics. 
A further problem in the euro area derives from the role  played by governments as shock 
absorbers in the financial sector. Public funds are used to prop up banks which suffer losses 
in  a  financial  crisis  or  to  guarantee  banks’  liabilities  in  case  of  bank  runs  produced  by 
outflows.  
In  a  fully-fledged  fiscal  federation  these  problems  do  not  arise,  as  asymmetric  shocks  are 
partly offset by cross-region transfers through a federal budget. Furthermore, the stability of 
the banking system does not depend on the soundness of local or regional finances, but on 
that of the federation. The smaller the size of local or regional authorities’ budgets, the lower 
the risk that asymmetric shocks will endanger the stability of those authorities’ finances as 
the stabilisation function is performed by the federal budget.  
In essence, this mechanism aims to insure individual countries against idiosyncratic shocks 
which  in  turn  could  reduce  macroeconomic  volatility.  Theoretically,  this  mechanism  could 
even be designed so as to strengthen incentives to reduce macroeconomic imbalances such 
as unit labour cost divergence and high and persistent current account deficits. Contributions 
to intergovernmental grant schemes or access to joint bond issuance could, for example, be 
made conditional on a country’s progress with its structural and fiscal reform agenda. 
A federal budget does not necessarily mean, however, that the stabilisation function is better 
performed at the federal level, in particular when facing symmetric shocks. The experience of 
the  recent  crisis shows that  the  deficit  and  debt  levels  of  several  countries,  some  of  them 
with federal systems, others centralised, have increased even further than in some countries 
of the euro area. For instance, both the UK and the US experienced larger deteriorations in 
their fiscal positions from 2007 to 2009 than the average in the euro area. Over this period, 
the  budget  deficit  of  the  UK  increased  from  2.7%  to  11.4%  of  GDP  while  that  of  the  US 
increased from 2.8% to 11.2%. These deficit ratios are comparable to that of Spain, which is 
one euro area countries where the public finances have been particularly severely affected 
by the crisis.  
It can actually be argued that, with the market pressure which arises in a monetary union, its 
members have to think more about the long-run stability of their public finances than they do 
if  monetary  policy  eliminates  the  pressure  by  ensuring  the  financing  of  the  deficit.  Under 
pressure from the markets the euro area countries have adopted corrective measures which 
are  expected  to  stabilise  the  public  debt-to-GDP  ratio  in  the  coming  years.  In  Spain,  for 
instance, the latest available stability programme (which dates back to January 2010) aims at 
stabilising  the  government  debt-to-GDP  ratio  at  a  peak  of  74%  in  2013.  Moreover,  since 
then, the Spanish government has responded to market tensions by frontloaded to 2010 and 
2011 some of the fiscal adjustment planned for 2012 and 2013. 
To sum up, a federal budget might ensure greater stability in the face of asymmetric shocks, 
but when such shocks are large enough to affect the whole economy a federal system might 
not necessarily provide greater stability. 
Let  me  turn  to  the  second  criterion  that  characterises  economic  policy  –  efficiency  in  the 
allocation  of  resources.  Here  the  experience  of  German  unification  may  be  interesting 
because  it  helps  us  understand  the  challenges  that  a  union  composed  of  countries  in 
different  economic  conditions  may  face  in  integrating  those  economies  and  adopting  the 
same currency. This experience suggests that a single fiscal regime may impose obstacles 
to  economic  integration,  particularly  for  catching-up  regions.  In  the  euro  area,  countries 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
which entered with a lower per capita income caught up with the average much more quickly, 
maybe too quickly, as I mentioned earlier, than eastern Germany and attracted capital and 
labour inflow. There are several reasons for that. One is that the budgetary integration entails 
a harmonisation of taxation and public expenditures which may have a differentiated impact 
across regions, depending on their level of wealth. A given distribution of the tax burden may 
be appropriate for a given level of income but not necessarily for a lower one, and may lead 
to larger rather than smaller differences. Regions with less physical capital may for instance 
require lower taxation, and maybe also lower expenditure, to attract the capital necessary for 
the catching-up. There is extensive literature on these issues, so I won’t elaborate further on 
this. 
Another aspect refers to all the effects that arise, in terms of harmonisation, as a result of 
fiscal  integration,  such  as  tariffs,  administrative  costs,  public  wages,  etc.  which  weigh 
indirectly  on  the  costs  borne  by  business.  If  a  country  needs  to  grow  faster,  such  costs 
should be reduced.  
The same applies to other aspects of legislation which tend to be harmonised as a result of 
fiscal  union  and  tend  to  penalise  catching-up  regions.  These  costs  are  offset  by  resource 
transfers, from the richest to the poorest regions. However, experience in Germany, Italy and 
other dualistic countries shows that if these transfers are not well designed and are only the 
result  of  the  integration  of  the  tax  and  public  expenditure  systems,  they  may  create 
disincentives for growth and employment. These distortions lead to labour migration from the 
poorest  to  the  richest  regions.  In  countries  like  the  US,  labour  migration  used  to  be 
considered  as  a  “good”  and  somewhat  natural  adjustment  process,  resulting  from  the 
country’s westward expansion. The recent housing crisis has shown, however, the costs of 
an adjustment process which relies on such a mechanism: migrants have to sell their homes 
in depressed regions at depressed prices. In Europe, migration is valued if it represents an 
opportunity  rather  than  a  lack  of  alternatives.  Given  the  prevailing  cultural  differences, 
sometimes even within countries, migration entails welfare losses. 
In more general terms, some form of competition between regional budgets, in particular in 
terms of taxation, but also expenditure, may enhance efficiency and best practice. The fact 
that some countries have been able to better control public finances before and during the 
crisis may set an example to others. This applies also to the quality of public expenditures 
and  to  the  reforms  related  to  the  costs  of  ageing,  health  care  and  unemployment. 
Decentralisation also enhances accountability and allows better supervision by the voters. It 
would be quite damaging if “Brussels” were to be blamed also for the poor state of public 
finances, rather than the capitals of the Member States. 
To  sum  up,  a  federal  budget  is  better  capable  of  addressing  asymmetric  shocks,  but  not 
necessarily symmetric shocks, and may not be the most efficient approach in an area which 
catching-up countries will continue to join. On the other hand, if decentralised budgets are 
better attuned to the requirements of the catching-up countries, such budgets may lead to 
excessive pro-cyclicality and to instability if the catching-up is too quick and unsustainable.  
The above considerations suggest that it would be risky for the euro area to move to greater 
fiscal and budgetary integration in order to avoid the instability associated with the current 
system.  While  solving  some  of  the  problems  of  the  current  system,  the  new  regime  could 
import new problems which might be politically even more difficult to tackle. 
The way forward  
3. 
If it is not desirable or feasible, at least in the current times, to move to a full fiscal federation 
– or a transfer union as it is called in Germany – like the US, how can the current system be 
made more resilient, in particular in the face of asymmetric shocks?  
The crisis is, let’s not forget, the worst since WWII. It has shown that some of the elements of 
our economic and monetary structure need to be improved. The framework as it used to be 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
simply assumed that there would never be a crisis. That was done in good faith but proved to 
be  naïve.  The  status  quo  is  not  an  option.  But  it  is  precisely  to  avoid  moving  to  a  fiscal 
federation that some of the parts of the current system need to be modified.  
First, let’s consider the monetary part of the Union. It has worked very well. I won’t repeat the 
statistics  about  price  stability,  but  simply  say  that  the  figures  are  better  than  they  were 
previously.  The  ECB  has  proved  to  be  independent.  It  is  a  federal  institution  capable  of 
acting very quickly, as we have shown over the last three years. The euro is a stable and 
safe currency. 
It’s been said that in some countries, notably Germany, many people feel nostalgic for the 
Deutsche  Mark  and  believe  that  Germany  would  be  better  off  with  its  old  currency.  This 
sentiment is purely emotional and not based on statistical or empirical facts. 
The euro brought low inflation to Germany during the last decade, lower than ever before. 
More importantly, it has kept German exports very competitive, especially in the aftermath of 
the crisis. This is contributing to the pick-up in the German economy, ahead of the others in 
the  euro  area.  The  currency  movements  of,  for  instance,  the  Swiss  franc  in  the  last  few 
months  suggest  that  if  the  old  national  currencies  still  existed,  German  exports  would  risk 
becoming much less competitive.  
Let me hasten to add that Germany’s good economic performance is not solely attributable 
to the euro. In fact, the country’s economy has proved more capable than others of exploiting 
the opportunities provided by the euro, in particular by keeping costs under control for many 
years and ensuring sound public finances in good times. Other countries haven’t exploited 
the  benefits  provided  by  the  euro  so  well,  or  they  wanted  too  much  too  quickly  and  at  a 
certain point they came face to face with reality. We need to make changes that prevent such 
excesses from happening again in the future. 
To  sum  up,  there  is  nothing  to  change  in  the  monetary  set-up.  The  problem  is  in  the 
economic dimension of EMU. There are two fundamental elements to address to improve the 
“E”  of  EMU.  One  is  public  finances.  There’s  been  a  lot  of  talk  on  this  subject,  and  some 
decisions too. There is a need for more rules to constrain national budgets. There is also a 
need for an effective safety net, one that can prevent a crisis from spreading within the euro 
area as a result of a lack of discipline by one of its members. Several changes have been 
implemented and a few more are required to ensure that the system is effective. In this field 
we  don’t  need  to  innovate.  The  IMF’s  experience  should  be  a  useful  guide.  European 
countries,  including  Germany,  have  been  members  of  the  IMF  for  more  than  60  years. 
European taxpayers have never lost money from IMF operations. 
The  other  element  to  consider  is  an  avoidance  of  imbalances,  such  as  those  which  have 
emerged over the last decade. They have been the result of a loss of competitiveness and 
excessive reliance on external borrowing. These two factors have to be tackled. In my view 
they cannot be addressed through simple rules and micro-management, because the various 
economies have different structures. They require a change in governance of the euro area 
along two dimensions, which I will briefly consider. 
The first is competitiveness. The debate has rightly turned to that factor, especially in recent 
weeks.  It’s  a  welcome  move.  Last  autumn,  the  European  Council  adopted  a  procedure  to 
enhance  macroeconomic  surveillance  in  the  euro  area,  on  the  basis  of  indicators  such  as 
unit  labour  costs,  current  account  imbalances,  etc.  The  ECB  contributed  to  this  debate  by 
proposing a traffic light system to warn about emerging competitiveness losses. 
The problem lies in devising a system of governance to assess competitive positions. It has 
to be restricted to the euro area, i.e. 17 countries at the moment. It cannot be at the EU-27 
level.  Why  not?  Because  problems  of  competitiveness  within  a  single  currency  are  very 
different  from  those  of  countries  with  their  own  currencies.  I  suppose  I  don’t  need  to  give 
concrete examples to convince you of this. Currently, the only 17-country European body is 
the Eurogroup, an informal grouping consisting of the finance ministers of the euro area. The 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Eurogroup mainly deals with issues for which the finance ministers are responsible, notably 
budgetary  policies  and  international  financial  issues.  Competitiveness  depends  on  many 
other  aspects,  such  as  labour  and  product  market  regulations,  which  generally  do  not  fall 
within the competence of finance ministers. The ministers who deal with these other matters 
are typically not faced with issues related to the euro area. And all Council formations in the 
EU meet in full composition only, i.e. at the 27-member level.  
The  Heads  of  State  and  Government  have  met,  in  euro  area  composition,  on  numerous 
occasions during the crisis, starting in October 2008, when they decided to intervene jointly 
in  support  of  the  financial  system.  There  was  concern  about  and  even  opposition,  in 
Germany as well, to a more systematic role being given to the euro area composition of the 
European Council and possibly other formations of the Council. It was feared that this would 
interfere with, or be a counterweight to, the ECB, and would undermine its independence. 
The  experience  of  the  crisis,  and  of  the  first  decade  of  the  euro,  is  that  the  ECB  has 
remained  fully  independent  and  has  nothing  to  fear  from  a  more  cohesive  euro  area 
governance.  On  the  other  hand,  the  lack  of  a  strong  decision-making  body  at  the  political 
level may unduly constrain the effectiveness of and overburden the ECB’s actions. The crisis 
has  also  shown  what  the  founding  fathers  of  the  euro  knew  all  along,  i.e.  that  Monetary 
Union means much more than adopting a single currency. It entails a high degree of political 
union, for it requires many more decisions to be taken jointly, on account of the externalities 
and contagion that can result from sharing a currency.  
I personally consider it very important that the political authorities of the euro area countries 
have  decided  to  strengthen  their  ties  and  are  seeking  to  extend  their  cooperation  to  other 
areas. Exactly what form this will take is still unclear, but the change in direction is important 
and welcome. 
The second factor relates to the problems which have emerged in the crisis as a result of the 
imbalances that have built up within the national banking systems. Even when fiscal policy is 
sound, as it was in Ireland’s case, a country’s public finances can be derailed if its banking 
system  is  overextended,  poorly  regulated  and  insufficiently  diversified.  Furthermore,  given 
the integration of Europe’s financial system, contagion cannot be avoided. The euro area is 
characterised not only by the lack of a fiscal union but also by its decentralised supervisory 
system. The two aspects are to some extent linked. Supervision is decentralised, it is argued, 
because it  is  taxpayers  who  ultimately  have  to  bear  the  burden  of  any  supervisory  failure. 
Thus, by extension, if a decentralised fiscal system is to be accountable, then supervision 
also has to be decentralised, albeit with cross-border cooperation.  
The crisis has shown however that when a national banking system encounters difficulties, 
due to insufficient supervision or its size being out of all proportion to the country’s economy, 
taxpayers  may  not  be  able  to  absorb  the  shocks  and  may  ask  for  help  from  the  other 
countries’ taxpayers to tackle the situation. In addition, given the interconnections of the euro 
area  money  and  financial  markets,  any  failure  to  address  the  problems  arising  from  the 
banking system in one country may quickly spread to the other countries, thereby burdening 
their taxpayers. As a result, a national regulator may be inclined not to impose limits on the 
size and activities of the respective domestic system, thus creating an externality for the euro 
area as a whole. This may in particular overburden the central bank in its role of lender of 
last resort. 
To  sum  up,  the  crisis  has  shown  that  it  is  not  necessarily  true  that  national  taxpayers 
ultimately bear the responsibility for supervisory failures or the foolhardy actions of bankers. 
This happens only if the domestic banking system is small and not interconnected with the 
other systems, which cannot be the case within a monetary union.  
To avoid these externalities there is a need for a system of rules and procedures which binds 
the financial system, in the same way as the Stability and Growth Pact binds national fiscal 
policies. Some progress has been made towards implementing a single rule book within the 
EU, but margins for national discretion remain. Furthermore, the mechanisms for cooperation 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
among  supervisors  mainly  apply  to  large  and  complex  banking  groups  and  operate  at  EU 
level rather than the euro area level. It’s the smaller and local banks that have proved to be 
much more risky and burdensome for taxpayers. 
These  issues  have  not  really  caught  the  attention  of  the  political  authorities;  no  concrete 
proposals to address this issue have been made. But it’s an important and urgent matter. 
Conclusions  
To conclude, when looking at how to improve the institutional framework underlying the euro, 
we  should  avoid  reasoning  only  by  analogy,  as  that  often  leads  to  a  comparison  with  the 
United States. The crisis has shown that even politically integrated federations like the US 
encounter  major  difficulties,  and  the  fact  of  having  only  one  decision-maker  does  not 
necessarily  mean  that  the  right  decision  is  made.  I  actually  think  that  although  Europe’s 
cultural diversity and complexity might render the decision-making more cumbersome, in the 
end  it’s  wiser.  Excesses  in  one  direction  or  another,  which  would  have  been  the  case  if 
decisions had been taken only at national level, have been avoided. Euro area members had 
to consult each other and come to an agreement. No country was allowed to fail like Lehman 
Brothers  –  but  no  country  was  bailed  out  for  free  and  without  strong  conditionality.  The 
decision  to  start  the  consolidation  of  public  finances  earlier  rather  than  later,  which 
characterised  the  transatlantic  divide  at  the  London  2009  G20  Summit,  proved  to  be 
appropriate.  Inflation  expectations  remain  anchored.  And  the  euro  is  viewed  as  a  solid 
currency. 
The adjustment process which started in Europe is tough and will require continued efforts, 
but it is changing the structure of our economies in a way which will make them more resilient 
and  more  efficient.  This  is  the  best  way  we  can  face  up  to  the  challenges  of  global 
competition.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
