José De Gregorio: IMF challenges and policies for the global economy 
Statement  by  Mr  José  De  Gregorio,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Chile,  speaking  on 
behalf of the Southern Cone Countries of Latin America International Monetary and Financial 
Committee Meeting, Washington DC, 24 September 2011. 
 In  the  past  few  months,  the  near-term  prospects  for  the  global  economy  have  worsened 
significantly and financial risks have increased. What some time ago was a modest, albeit 
unbalanced  recovery,  risks  turning  into  a  new  economic  downturn,  particularly  in  major 
Advanced Economies (AEs). This new scenario poses urgent challenges to the IMF and to 
the  membership  in  terms  of  decisive  political  and  policy  responses  to  solve  fundamental 
weaknesses and mitigate the negative impact of this new downturn. Against this backdrop, 
the  Fund’s  surveillance  capacities,  and  a  well-functioning  International  Monetary  System 
(IMS), are being and will again be put to the test only a couple of years after the 2008–2009 
Great Recession and financial crisis. 
The immediate challenges ahead and the fund’s policy advice 
I.  
Two forces are influencing each other and weighing down on economic prospects in major 
advanced  economies.  On  the  one  hand,  uncertainty  and  volatility  have  increased  to  their 
highest levels since October 2008, constraining credit and leading to more cautious behavior 
by households and financial institutions. On the other hand, fully credible medium-term fiscal 
consolidation  in  those  economies  with  high  debt  burdens  is  still  lacking,  prompting  even 
higher  sovereign  spreads  and  more  calls  for  short-term  fiscal  retrenchment  when  private 
demand  has  yet  to  recover  to  its  pre-crisis  levels.  The  policy  debate  surrounding  the 
appropriate  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  mix,  as  well  as  the  assessment  of  public  debt 
sustainability,  have  become  muddled.  It  would  be  paradoxical  that  only  a  few  years  after 
witnessing an example of successful global policy coordination and sound financial policies, 
which  staved  off  another  Great  Depression,  the  lessons  learned  were  to  be  ignored.  The 
Fund  can  provide  guidance  and  leadership  on  a  number  of  issues,  and  the  membership 
should heed its advice. In particular, we would like to note that: 
 
The political will to achieve meaningful short-term fiscal adjustment is more present 
in those core AEs where public sector financing conditions are benefiting the most 
from flight to quality, whereas in cases of more acute solvency concerns, and thus 
higher spreads, adjustment fatigue is dangerously settling in. 
The negative growth implications of further short-term fiscal retrenchment have not 
been given proper regard by the global community. The bulk of the evidence, and 
appropriate risk considerations in the weak economic environment of today, suggest 
much  caution  should  be  exercised  when 
fiscal 
consolidation measures, especially in those cases where the long-term sustainability 
of public finances is not threatened. 
Structural  reform  fatigue  is  settling  in,  with  electorates  weary  in  both  creditor  and 
debtor  countries 
fiscal 
consolidation and containment of the sovereign crisis in Europe. Moreover, financial 
markets  remain  jittery  as  the  final  outcomes  of  agreed  commitments  are  not  a 
foregone conclusion. 
The  risk  of  disorderly  outcomes  is  high,  and  balance  sheet  repair,  especially  of 
those banks most exposed to the European periphery, should be bolstered. Hoping 
for  the  best  is  no  substitute  for  preparing  for  the  worst,  and  the  markets  are  well 
implementing  short-term 
to  ensure  medium-term 
tough  measures 
to  pursue 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
aware of that. More extreme measures on debt restructuring might be unavoidable if 
fiscal transfers are ruled out and fatigue settles in debtor countries. 
In an environment of financial uncertainty and fiscal retrenchment, monetary policy 
should remain supportive. 
 Emerging  Market  Economies  (EMEs)  and  smaller,  financially  stable  AEs,  are  threading 
carefully in this uncertain environment, and as we saw a few years ago, it is unlikely that full 
decoupling  will  occur  under  most  scenarios.  The  Fund’s  advice  should  properly  recognize 
that  the  rebalancing  challenges  are  not  the  same  across  this  heterogeneous  group  of 
economies; thus, an adequate level of differentiation in terms of policy advice is called for. In 
this regard, we would like to note that: 
 
If  the  external  scenario  should  worsen  significantly,  many  EMEs  with  flexible 
exchange rates and inflation-targeting regimes would have scope to adjust monetary 
policy,  thanks  to  a  timely  process  of  raising  interest  rates  to  contain  overheating 
risks.  Going  forward,  these  economies  will  be  able  to  react  flexibly  to  changing 
global circumstances in a context of anchored inflationary expectations. 
Other  EMEs  have  limited  room  for  maneuver,  as  their  economies  have  expanded 
beyond  their  potential  output,  with  widening  fiscal  and  external  deficits,  and  thus 
today face the risk that external shocks might unhinge inflationary expectations and 
force pro-cyclical monetary and fiscal policy adjustments. 
A  third  group  of  EMEs  has  maintained  structurally  high  national  saving  rates 
throughout the expansion phase of the global cycle and might be subject to a natural 
deceleration  as  the  global  economy  cools  down.  In  these  cases,  undertaking 
reforms  to  boost  domestic  demand  would  help  sustain  both  medium-term  global 
rebalancing and short-term policy accommodation. 
Economies  that  are  being  affected  by  high  commodity  prices,  particularly  Low-
Income  Countries  (LICs),  should  strive  to  develop  targeted  policies  to  the  most 
vulnerable  groups  through  efficient  cash  transfers,  instead  of  across-the-board 
subsidies. The international community should strive to support these efforts through 
similar measures, as demand subsidies or export constraints in non-LIC economies 
exacerbate commodity price pressures. 
   Policy advice by the Fund should be tailored to these different groups of economies. Policy 
recommendations that are appropriate for some economies are not necessarily suitable for 
other  economies.  One  salient  theme,  however,  is  that  fiscal  policy  space  is  more  limited 
across the spectrum than it was in the run up to the 2008–2009 financial crisis. Moving from 
broad policy recommendations to concrete messages on policy implementation is required to 
draw  the  policy-makers’  attention  and  establish  a  constructive  dialogue.  The  Consolidated 
Multilateral Surveillance Report is a positive step in that direction. 
The medium-term challenges and the fund’s action plan 
II.  
Under the current circumstances, the Fund should focus on its short-term policy challenges. 
Indeed,  one  of  the  main  issues  that  the  Fund  is  tackling  right  now,  namely  the  Triennial 
Surveillance Review, will be shaped directly by the lessons that the practice and traction of 
surveillance reveal in the current uncertain environment. Such surveillance practices will be 
the basis on which to revamp the surveillance framework, for instance, through an integrated 
surveillance decision that encompasses both its bilateral and multilateral aspects. 
The Fund’s resource adequacy is, in our view, directly linked to the functioning of Regional 
Financial  Arrangements  (RFA)  and  the  existence  of  bilateral  central  bank  swap  lines.  It  is 
welcome  that  major  central  banks  are  currently  cooperating  in  this  area.  A  reasonable 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
question is whether current Fund resources, plus those available through RFAs and bilateral 
swap lines, are sufficient to deal with a significant major financial dislocation.  
Assessing  these  resource  needs  is  critical  to  evaluate  whether,  for  instance,  the  New 
Arrangements  to  Borrow  will  have  to  remain  active,  even  if  the  quota  increase  is  fully 
implemented by next year. Moreover, the discussion of resources would have to be linked to 
a  broader  rethinking  of  the  need  for  alternative  lending  instruments  to  bolster  the  global 
safety net. 
This topic should be given higher priority at the current juncture and not, as in our previous 
IMFC  meeting,  simply  as  part  of  a  broader  agenda  for  IMS  reform.  The  activation  and 
deactivation,  and  the  criteria  for  conditionality,  for  the  Flexible  Credit  Line  or  similar 
instruments  could  be  reviewed,  towards  making  them  closer  substitutes  to  bilateral  swap 
lines that have been implemented by major central banks. This would help reduce the stigma 
associated  with  the  Fund’s  toolkit,  and  would  contribute  to  ensure  adequate  liquidity 
provision in times of market stress. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
