Stanley Fischer: Central bank lessons from the global crisis 
Dinner lecture by Professor Stanley Fischer, Governor of the Bank of Israel, at the Bank of 
Israel conference on “Lessons of the Global Crisis”, Jerusalem, 31 March 2011. 
This lecture is slightly modified from a series of lectures given during recent months: the Brahmananda Lecture at 
the Reserve Bank of India in February 2011; a lecture at the CEPR/ESI conference in Izmir on October 28, 2010; 
and a lecture at the conference of the Cyprus Economic Society in October 2010. I am grateful to colleagues at 
the Bank of Israel with whom I have discussed and lived through the issues of monetary policy during the last five 
years, and to Joshua Schneck of the Bank of Israel for research assistance.  
 During and after the Great Depression, many central bankers and economists concluded that 
monetary policy could not be used to stimulate economic activity in a situation in which the 
interest  rate  was  essentially  zero,  as  it  was  in  the  United  States  during  the  1930s  –  a 
situation  that  later  became  known  as  the  liquidity  trap.  In  the  United  States  it  was  also  a 
situation in which the financial system was grievously damaged. It was only in 1963, with the 
publication  of  Friedman  and  Schwartz’s  Monetary  History  of  the  United  States  that  the 
profession as a whole1 began to accept the contrary view, that “The contraction is in fact a 
testimonial to the importance of monetary forces”.2 
Twenty years later, in 1983, Ben Bernanke presented the view that it was the breakdown of 
the credit system that was the critical feature of the Great Depression3 – that it was the credit 
side of the banks’ balance sheets, the failure or inability to make a sufficient volume of loans, 
rather than the behavior of the money supply per se, that was primarily responsible for the 
breakdown  of  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  during  the  Great  Depression.  The 
Bernanke  thesis  gained  adherents  over  the  years,  and  must  recently  have  gained  many 
more as a result of the Great Recession. 
In this lecture, I present preliminary lessons – ten of them – for monetary and financial policy 
from the Great Recession. I do this with some trepidation, since it is possible that there will 
later be an eleventh lesson: that given that it took fifty years for the profession to develop its 
current  understanding  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism  during  the  Great 
Depression, just two and a half years after the Lehmann Brothers bankruptcy is too early to 
be  drawing even  preliminary  lessons  from  the Great  Recession.  But  let  me  join  the  crowd 
and begin doing so. 
Lesson 1: Reaching the zero interest lower bound is not the end of expansionary 
monetary policy 
Until  this  crisis,  the  textbooks  said  that  when  the  nominal  interest  rate  reaches  zero, 
monetary  policy  loses  its  effectiveness  and  only  fiscal  policy  remains  as  an  expansionary 
policy instrument – the pure Keynesian case. Now we know that there is a lot that the central 
bank can do to run an expansionary monetary policy even when it has cut the central bank 
                                                 
1  The qualification relates to the fact that some researchers, for example Clark Warburton, had emphasized this 
view before the publication of Friedman and Schwartz’s work. (See for example the papers reprinted in Clark 
Warburton, Depression, Inflation, and Monetary Policy; Selected Papers, 1945–1953, Johns Hopkins Press, 
1963.)  
2  Milton  Friedman  and  Anna  J.  Schwartz,  A  Monetary  History  of  the  United  States,  1867–1960,  Princeton 
University Press, 1963, p. 30.  
 Ben S. Bernanke, “Non-Monetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great Depression,” 
American Economic Review, 73 (June 1983), pp. 257–76. 
3 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
interest rate essentially to zero – as did the Fed, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, 
and other central banks during this crisis. 
In the first instance there is the policy of quantitative easing – the continuation of purchases 
of  assets  by  the  central  bank  even  when  the  central  bank  interest  rate  is  zero.  Although 
these  purchases  do  not  reduce  the  short-term  interest  rate,  they  do  increase  liquidity. 
Further, by operating in longer-term assets, as in QE2, the central bank can affect longer-
term interest rates, which may have an additional impact on the private sector’s demand for 
longer-term assets, including mortgages and corporate investment. 
During the crisis several attempts were made to calculate how much quantitative easing was 
needed at a particular point in time. The calculation used a Taylor Rule to calculate what the 
(negative) interest rate should have been in the given circumstances, combined that with an 
estimate of the increase in the money supply or central bank assets that would normally be 
needed  to  reduce  the  interest  rate  by  one  percentage  point,  and  thereby  calculated  the 
needed increase in central bank assets. This is a logical approach, but we should note that it 
extrapolates  economic  behavior  far  beyond  the  range  of  the  experience  on  which  the 
estimated Taylor rule is based. 4 
Second,  there  is  the  approach  that  the  Fed  unsuccessfully  tried  to  name  “credit  easing”  – 
actions  directed  at  reviving  particular  markets  whose  difficulties  were  creating  major 
problems  in  the  financial  system.  For  instance,  when  the  commercial  paper  market  in  the 
United  States  was  collapsing,  the  Fed  entered  on  a  major  scale  as  a  purchaser,  and 
succeeded  in  reviving  the  market.  Similarly  it  played  a  significant  role  in  keeping  the 
mortgage market alive. In this regard the Fed became the market maker of last resort.5  
In a well-known article, James Tobin in 19636 asked in which assets the central bank should 
conduct open market operations. His answer was the market for capital – namely the stock 
market – since that way it could have the most direct effect on the cost of capital, later known 
as Tobin’s q, which he saw as the main price through which the central bank could affect 
economic  activity.  Although  central  banks  have  occasionally  operated  in  the  stock  market  
–  most  notably  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary  Authority  in  1997  –  this  has  not  yet  become  an 
accepted way of conducting monetary policy.7  
Lesson 2: The critical importance of having a strong and robust financial system 
This is a lesson that we have all thought we understood for a long time – not least since the 
financial  crises  of  the  1990s  –  but  whose  central  importance  has  been  reaffirmed  by  the 
recent global crisis.  
This crisis has been far worse in many of the advanced countries – among them the United 
States, the United Kingdom, and some other European countries – than it has been in the 
leading emerging market countries. This was not the situation in the financial crises of the 
1990s, and it is not a situation that I expected would ever occur.  
The critical difference between countries that have suffered from exceptionally deep crises 
and  those  that  had  a  more  or  less  standard  business  cycle  experience  during  this  crisis 
                                                 
4  Jan Hatzius, “The Specter of Deflation”, in US Economics Analyst – Goldman Sachs Global ECS Research, 
March 2009. 
5  This term was introduced into the literature by Willem Buiter and Anne Siebert. 
6  James  Tobin,  “An  Essay  on  the  Principles  of  Debt  Management”,  in  his  Essays  in  Economics,  Volume I, 
Macroeconomics, Markham Publishers (Chicago), 1971. 
It is sometimes objected that such actions would require excessively detailed intervention by the central bank, 
since it would have to decide which companies' assets to buy. However it could simply buy very broad stock 
indices. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
7 
2 
 traces  to  what  happened  in  their  financial  sectors.  Those  countries  that  suffered  financial 
sector crises had much deeper output crises.  
In their important book, This Time Is Different, Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rogoff8 document 
the fact that over many centuries, downturns that also involved a financial crisis were more 
severe  than  those  that  did  not.  This  is  not  coincidental,  for  the  collapse  of  the  financial 
system not only reduces the efficiency of financial intermediation but also has a critical effect 
on  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism  and  thus  on  the  ability  of  the  central  bank  to 
mitigate the real effects of the crisis.  
If the financial system is intact, the standard anti-cyclical monetary policy response of cutting 
interest rates produces its response in the encouragement of purchases of durables, ranging 
from investment goods and housing to consumer durables. This happened during this crisis, 
in  that  many  countries  that  did  not  suffer  from  a  financial  crisis  but  had  cut  interest  rates 
sharply to deal with the negative effects of the global crisis returned to growth more rapidly 
than  other  countries,  and  soon  found  asset  prices,  particularly  the  price  of  housing,  rising 
rapidly.  Among  these  countries  are  Australia,  Canada,  China,  Israel,  Korea,  Norway  and 
Singapore.  
The next question is what needs to be done to maintain a strong and robust financial system. 
Some of the answers to this question are to be found in the blizzard of recommendations for 
financial sector and regulatory reform coming out of the Basel Committee – now extended to 
include all the G-20 countries plus a few more – and the Financial Stability Board (the FSB). 
In particular the recommendations relate to the capital requirements of the banks, which the 
Basel  Committee  and  the  FSB  recommend  raising  sharply,  including  by  toughening  the 
requirements  for  assets  to  qualify  as  Tier  1  and  Tier  2  capital.  In  addition,  there  are 
recommendations on the structure of incentives, on corporate governance, on the advisability 
of  countercyclical  capital  requirements,  on  risk  management,  on  resolution  mechanisms 
including  eventually  on  how  to  resolve  a  SIFI  (systemically  important  financial  institution, 
typically a bank with major international operations) – and much more.9 Further, there has 
been  a  focus  on  systemic  supervision  and  its  organization,  a  topic  to  which  we  will  return 
shortly. 
These recommendations make sense, and the main question relating to them is whether and 
how  they  will  be  implemented,  and  whether  political  pressures  will  either  prevent  their 
implementation and/or lead to their gradual weakening. There is already cause for concern in 
that  some  of  the  recommendations  are  to  be  implemented  only  by  2019  –  a  period 
sufficiently long for everyone to forget why such drastic changes are regarded as essential, 
and why they are indeed essential. One element of the conflicting pressures can be seen in 
the concern in many countries that the banks not tighten capital requirements too fast, since 
an expansion in credit is needed to fuel the recovery.  
Lesson 3: The need for macroprudential supervision10 
There  is  not  yet  an  accepted  definition  of  macroprudential  policy  or  supervision,  but  the 
notion involves two elements: that the supervision relates to the entire financial system; and 
that  it  involves  systemic  interactions.  Both  elements  were  evident  in  the  global  financial 
                                                 
8   Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff, This Time Is Different, Princeton University Press, 2009.  
9  For example: Financial Services Authority, The Turner Review: A Regulatory Response to the Global Banking 
Crisis, March 2009, Group of Thirty, Financial Reform – A Framework for Financial Stability, January 2009 and 
HM Treasury, A New Approach to Financial Regulation, July 2010. 
10   In  this  section  I  draw  extensively  on  comments  I  made  in  a  panel  discussion  at  the  Norges  Bank  at  a 
symposium,  “What  is  a  useful  central  bank”,  held  on  November  18,  2010,  and  due  to  be  published  in  the 
series, Norges Bank Occasional Papers.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
crisis,  with  analyses  of  the  crisis  frequently  emphasizing  the  role  of  the  shadow  banking 
system and of the global effects of the Lehman bankruptcy.  
Thus  we  are  talking  about  regulation  of  the  financial  system  at  a  very  broad  level,  going 
beyond  the  banking  system.  We  are  also  going  beyond  bank  supervision  in  considering 
macroprudential  policy  instruments  –  and  we  are  therefore  also  discussing  an  issue  that 
requires coordination among different regulators. 
It is not clear whether the inclusion of a responsibility for (or contributing to) financial stability 
in  modern  central  bank  laws,  such  as  those  of  the  ECB,  the  Bank  of  England  and  many 
others, including the Bank of Israel, reflects the concerns that have led to the emphasis on 
macroprudential  supervision,  or  rather  primarily  the  traditional  role  of  the  central  bank  as 
lender of last resort. No-one who has read Bagehot on panics can think that understanding of 
the  potential  for  systemic  crises  is  a  new  problem.  However  its  importance  has  been 
reinforced by the dynamics of the most recent crisis, in which a problem initially regarded as 
manageable – the subprime crisis – gradually developed into the worst financial crisis since 
the  Great  Depression,  involving  financial  instruments  built  on  mortgages,  and  after  the 
Lehman  bankruptcy  which  revealed  interactions  among  financial  institutions  to  be  much 
stronger than policymakers must have thought at the time.  
What macroprudential policy tools do central banks have? In the first place they have their 
analytic  capacities  and their  capacity  to  raise  policymakers’  and  the  public’s  awareness  of 
critical issues. These are reflected in the financial stability reports that some central banks 
have been producing for over a decade.  
What  about  other  macroprudential  policy  tools?  Central  banks  have  been  engaged  in  a 
search  for  them  since  the  financial  crisis,  but  the  search  has  not  been  especially  fruitful. 
Some have defined countercyclical capital requirements11 as a macroprudential policy tool, 
presumably because they reflect a macroeconomic assessment and because they apply to 
the  entire  banking  system.  Nonetheless  they  are  not  particularly  aimed  at  moderating 
systemic interactions, and thus it is not clear that they are the archetypical macroprudential 
policy tool.  
More generally, it seems that there are few specifically macroprudential policy tools, and that 
the main tools that central banks and financial supervisors will be able to deploy to deal with 
systemic  interactions  will  be  their  standard  microprudential  instruments  or  adaptations 
thereof. 
Like  other  economies  that  did  not  suffer  from  a  domestic  financial  crisis  during  the  global 
crisis,  Israel  has  had  to  deal  with  the  threat  of  a  housing  price  bubble  in  the  wake  of  the 
global  crisis.  Housing  prices,  after  falling  gradually  for  over  a  decade,  grew  by  around 
40 percent in the last two years. The Bank’s housing sector model suggests that while prices 
in the middle of 2010 were not far above their long-run equilibrium level, a continuation of 
their recent rapid rates of increase would definitely put them well above the equilibrium level. 
Further, the atmosphere in the housing market was becoming increasingly bubble-like, with 
discussion of the need to buy before prices rose even further. 
Because the exchange rate had been appreciating rapidly, the Bank preferred if possible not 
to raise the central bank interest rate too rapidly. Since bank supervision is located within the 
Bank  of  Israel,  policy  discussions  in  the  Bank  resulted  in  the  supervisor  undertaking 
measures  that  in  effect  increased  mortgage  interest  rates,  without  affecting  other  interest 
rates.  These,  together  with  tax  and  other  measures  undertaken  by  the  government,  along 
with government measures to increase the supply of land for building, appear to have begun 
                                                 
11  Although these capital requirements vary procyclically, the intent is to be anticyclical in terms of their effects 
on the economy. Hence they are usually defined as countercyclical. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to dampen the rate of increase of housing prices – though it will take some time yet to know 
whether that has happened.  
In  announcing  the  new  measures,  the  Bank  of  Israel  emphasized  that  they  were 
macroprudential,  and  that  our  aim  was  to  ensure  financial  stability.  In  speeches  we  noted 
that our measures operated on the demand for housing, and that it would be preferable to 
undertake measures that would increase the supply – as some of the measures undertaken 
by the government soon afterwards were designed to do.  
In  this  case  the  central  bank  was  in  the  fortunate  position  of  having  at  its  disposal  policy 
measures  that  enabled  it  to  deal  directly  with  the  potential  source  of  financial  instability. 
Further,  the  banks  are  the  main  source  of  housing  finance,  so  that  the  Bank  of  Israel’s 
measures  were  unlikely  to  be  circumvented  by  the  responses  of  other  institutions  not 
supervised by the central bank. Even so, we knew there were better ways of dealing with the 
price rises, and that it was necessary to cooperate with the government to that end.  
Even  within  a  central  bank  that  is  also  the  banking  supervisor,  questions  arise  about  how 
best  to  coordinate  macroprudential  policy.  In  the  case  of  the  Bank  of  Israel,  which  still 
operates under the single decision maker model (but will shortly cease to do so as a new 
central bank law goes into effect), it was relatively easy to coordinate, since it was possible to 
include the bank supervisor in the non-statutory internal monetary policy advisory committee, 
and to use the enlarged committee as the advisory body on macroprudential decisions.  
More generally macroprudential supervision could require actions by two or more supervisory 
agencies, and there then arises the issue of how best to coordinate their actions. A simple 
model that would appeal to those who have not worked in bureaucracies would be to require 
the supervisors to cooperate in developing a strategy to deal with whatever problems arise. 
However,  cooperation  between  equals  in  such  an  environment  is  difficult,  which  is  to  say 
inefficient, all the more so in a crisis. 
It  is  thus  necessary  to  establish  mechanisms  to  ensure  that  decisions  on  macroprudential 
policy  are  made  sufficiently  rapidly  and  in  a  way  that  takes  systemic  interactions  into 
account.  The  issue  of  the  optimal  structure  of  supervision  was  discussed  well  before  the 
recent  crisis,  with  the  FSA  in  the  UK  being  seen  as  the  prototype  of  a  unitary  regulator 
outside  the  central  bank,  the  twin  peaks  Dutch  model  as  another  prototype,  and  various 
models of coordination and non-coordination among multiple regulators providing additional 
potential models.  
The issue of the optimal structure of supervision came into much sharper focus in the wake 
of the financial crisis, with the failure of the FSA to prevent a financial crisis in the United 
Kingdom having a critical impact on the debate. Major reforms have now been legislated in 
the United States, Europe, and the United Kingdom. In the Dodd-Frank bill, the responsibility 
for  coordination  is  placed  in  a  committee  of  regulators  chaired  by  the  secretary  of  the 
treasury. In the UK, the responsibility for virtually all financial supervision is being transferred 
to  the  Bank  of  England,  and  the  responsibility  will  be  placed  with  a  Financial  Policy 
Committee, chaired by the Governor. The structure and operation of the new Committee will 
draw  on  the  experience  of  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee,  but  there  are  likely  to  be 
important differences between the ways in which the committees will work. In other countries, 
including France and Australia, the coordination of financial supervision is undertaken in a 
committee chaired by the Governor.  
At this stage it is clear that there will be many different institutional structures for coordinating 
systemic  supervision,  and  that  we  will  have  to  learn  from  experience  which  arrangements 
work and which don’t – and that the results will very likely be country dependent. 
It is also very likely that the central bank will play a central role in financial sector supervision, 
particularly in its macroprudential aspects, and that there will be transfers of responsibility to 
the central bank in many countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Lesson 4: Dealing with bubbles  
One casualty of the crisis has been the Fed doctrine that the central bank should not react to 
asset prices and situations that it regards as bubbles until the bubble bursts. This is known 
as “the mopping up approach” – which is to say, to wait for the bubble to burst, and then to 
mop up the mess that results. 
The origin of this approach may lie in the expansion and stock market boom of the 1990s. As 
is  well  known,  Chairman  Greenspan  announced  in  a  speech  in  1996,  at  a  point when  the 
Dow  Jones  was  about  6400,  that  the  stock  markets  were  showing  “irrational  exuberance”. 
Despite the Chairman’s authority, the markets paused for only a few days before resuming 
their upward climb, eventually rising above 10,000. The Fed was widely praised for allowing 
the  boom  to  continue  during  that  period,  based  on  their  conclusion  that  the  rate  of 
productivity growth had increased, and that the economy could grow faster than previously 
thought without generating inflation. 
When the dot-com bubble burst in 2000, the mopping up approach appeared to have been 
successful.  The  Fed  cut  interest  rates  rapidly  and  the  recession  was  relatively  mild.  The 
damage seemed to have been slight. There is of course much debate about whether in the 
wake  of  the  recession  the  Fed  kept  the  interest  rate  too  low  for  too  long,  thus  laying  the 
groundwork for the next – and far more serious – crisis. But even those who argue that way, 
do not suggest that the subsequent crisis was an inevitable result of the decision not to try to 
prick the bubble in the late 1990s. 
I  believe  that  the  mopping  up  discussion  was  misleading.  The  issue  was  generally  put  as 
“should the central bank try to prick the bubble?” with the “no” side of the debate arguing that 
the interest rate would have had to be raised by so much to prick the bubble that doing so 
would have caused a serious recession. If the question had been “should the Fed react to 
asset  prices  in  setting  the  interest  rate?”,  the  answer  might  well  have  been  yes,  though  it 
would likely have been provided through the lens of the inflation targeting approach – that is 
to  say,  if  excessively  high  asset  prices  were  expected  to  influence  future  price  or  output 
levels,  the  central  bank  would  be  justified  in  taking  them  into  account  in  its  interest  rate 
decision.  
If  the  same  question  were  asked  today,  it  would  likely  be  answered  in  terms  of 
macroprudential supervision, and with reference to the possibility that regulatory measures 
might be employed to supplement the effects of the interest rate on asset prices.  
It seems clear from the general acceptance of the need for macroprudential supervision that 
the mopping up doctrine is in retreat, though there could be circumstances – particularly a 
stock-market  boom  whose  collapse  would  have  no  major  implications  for  the  rest  of  the 
financial system – in which the approach could be justified.12 
Lesson 5: The lender of last resort, and too big to fail 
The  view  that  the  central  bank  should  be  the  lender  of  last  resort  has  a  long  and 
distinguished  heritage,  and  central  banks  operated  as  lender  of  last  resort  in  several 
countries in the recent crisis. The case for the central bank to be the lender of last resort is 
clear in the case of a liquidity crisis – one that arises from a temporary shortage of liquidity, 
typically in a financial panic – but less so in the case of solvency crises. 
The key difference is that in the case of a liquidity crisis, decisive central bank action along 
the lines advocated by Bagehot can resolve the situation without a long-term financial cost to 
                                                 
12  This  circumstance  is  sometimes  invoked  to  explain  why  the  mopping  up  approach  was  successful  in  the 
recession of 2001–02. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  public  sector.13  In  the  case  where  a  financial  institution  is  insolvent,  intervention  to 
restructure it may cause a long-term financial cost to the public sector – although in several 
crises  in  which  the  central  bank  and  the  government  intervened  massively  to  deal  with  a 
panic, the public sector ended up making a profit from the intervention.14  
Given  that  the  profits  of  the  central  bank  are  generally  sooner  or  later  transferred  to  the 
government, almost every financial action that the central bank takes has fiscal implications 
for  the  government.  This  is  particularly  so  when  the  central  bank  is  involved  in  actions  to 
support financial stability, such as providing emergency liquidity to specific banks or to the 
financial system as a whole.  
In principle the distinction between liquidity and solvency problems should guide the actions 
of the central bank and the government in a crisis. For instance, in Israel, the law provides 
that the central bank can intervene on its own to deal with a liquidity problem but needs the 
authorization  of  the  Treasury  and  the  government  to  take  over  an  insolvent  financial 
institution.  However  in  practice  the  distinction  between  a  liquidity  problem  and  a  solvency 
problem is rarely clear-cut during a crisis, and what initially appears to be a liquidity crisis can 
very rapidly become an insolvency crisis. In short, judgment is needed at every stage of a 
financial crisis – as it is in central banking in general. 
The  too  big  to  fail  issue  and  the  associated  issue  of  moral  hazard  have  been  recurrent 
problems in dealing with financial crises. If a financial institution has what is purely a liquidity 
problem, then the central bank in its financial stability role should act as lender of last resort 
to that institution in case of need. Special difficulties arise when the institution is “too big” or 
“too  interconnected”  to  fail.  That  is  to  say,  causing  it  to  fail  will  significantly  worsen  the 
financial  crisis,  for  instance  –  to  put  the  issue  dramatically  –  by  turning  a  recession  into  a 
depression.  
Ideally  the  regulatory  and  legal  system  should  have  developed  a  resolution  mechanism 
whereby an institution judged to be insolvent can be allowed to fail and to be wound down in 
an  orderly  process.  We  have  not  yet  seen  such  systems  in  operation  for  large  financial 
institutions (SIFIs), though one of the key lessons drawn from the recent crisis has been the 
need to develop a framework of this type. The difficulties are manifold, especially for global 
banks,  which  operate  in  many  jurisdictions  and  under  different  sets  of  laws  and 
organizational  frameworks  (e.g.  branches  versus  subsidiaries).  The  Basel  Committee  and 
the  Financial  Stability  Board  are  working  on  this  issue,  and  finding  it  to  be  among  the 
thorniest with which they have to contend. 
Moral  hazard  is  usually  present  when  governments  intervene  to  help  stabilize  a  financial 
system – or under any system of insurance. In the case of a lender of last resort, the valid 
concern is that the mere existence of such a lender encourages financial institutions to take 
more risks, since they know that in an emergency they will be bailed out, that is, they will be 
saved. The question here is “Who is ‘they’?” It is generally accepted – and appropriately so – 
that  equity  holders  should  not  be  saved  when  a  financial  institution  goes  bankrupt.15 
Generally it is assumed that to preserve the payments mechanism, deposit holders up to a 
certain  size  of  deposits  should  be  saved,  perhaps  up  to  deposit  insurance  limits  –  though 
frequently in financial crises government extend deposit safety nets well beyond their normal 
limits.  
                                                 
13  This leaves aside the moral hazard issue, which will be discussed shortly. 
14  It is tempting to say that a liquidity crisis can be defined as one in which the public sector makes a profit from 
its intervention. However the public sector’s profit depends on how its interventions are priced and structured, 
so that the question is more complicated.  
15  Presumably the same goes for non-financial institutions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The  most  difficult  issue  concerns  bondholders.  If  a  financial  institution  goes  bankrupt,  the 
bondholders  will  and  should  share  in  the  losses.  Nonetheless,  governments  sometimes 
extend guarantees to holders of non-deposit claims on banks, for instance short-term paper. 
Why? The answer may that in a financial crisis, governments are willing to go a long way to 
prevent  a  cascade  of  bankruptcies,  which  is  likely  to  develop  if  the  bondholders  have  an 
incentive to run. Or, to put it more simply, it may be difficult to draw the line between deposit-
like  obligations  of  banks  and  equity-like  claims.  Further,  it  may  be  argued  that  once  the 
markets  realize  that  bonds  –  particularly  short-term  paper  –  are  more  likely  to  be  written 
down in a crisis, the costs of bank financing in normal times are likely to rise.  
A similar issue was discussed about a decade ago, when the IMF pursued the possibility of a 
sovereign debt restructuring mechanism (SDRM). It was argued at the time that it should be 
easier  to  restructure  sovereign  bonds  than  it  typically  was  in  bonds  issued  in  New  York, 
which  required  unanimity  among  their  holders  to  be  restructured.  Accordingly  it  was 
proposed that sovereign bonds should include CACs, collective action clauses, which would 
permit majority (or at least less than 100%) approval for restructuring. This issue was highly 
controversial  and  potential  borrowers  objected  that  its  inclusion  would  increase  their 
financing costs. In the event it turned out that CACs already existed in some bonds issued in 
London  (so-called  British  Trust  Deed  instruments)  and  that  their  effects  on  the  cost  of 
financing  appeared  to  be  small.  Since  then  some  sovereigns,  including  Mexico,  have 
included CACs in their bonds, apparently without important effects on their cost of financing.  
In  the  case  of  financial  institutions,  some  banks  have  begun  to  issue  contingent  capital, 
bonds that automatically convert into equity when some objective criterion so signifies. In the 
last  two  years,  both  Rabobank  and  Lloyd’s  have  issues  such  bonds.  Appealing  as  this 
approach may be, the systemic dynamics of the triggering of these bonds in a crisis remains 
to be tested in practice.  
Nonetheless: while the use of contingent capital and other forms of financing that become 
more equity-like in a crisis – and more generally, the development of resolution mechanisms 
–  will  all  help  deal  with  moral  hazard  issues,  the  mere  existence  of  a  lender  of  last  resort 
raises  moral  hazard  issues.  That  is  true.  But  there  is  nothing  that  says  that  the  optimal 
reaction to moral hazard is to stop selling insurance. Rather its existence is one factor to be 
taken into account in dealing with any situation in which the state provides explicit or implicit 
forms  of  insurance  –  just  as  it  has  to  be  taken  into  account  in  private  sector  insurance 
contracts, for instance the provision of fire insurance. 
After  having  had  to  decide  how  to  deal  with  moral  hazard  issues  in  a  variety  of  financial 
crises, I have arrived at the following guide to conduct: if you find yourself on the verge of 
imposing massive costs on an economy – that is on the people of a country or countries – by 
precipitating a crisis in order to prevent moral hazard, it is too late. You should not take the 
action that imposes those costs. Rather in thinking through how a system will operate in a 
crisis, you need to take into account the likelihood of facing such choices, and you need to 
do everything you can in designing the system to keep that likelihood very small.  
Lesson 6: The importance of the exchange rate for a small open economy 
The  (real)  exchange  rate  is  one  of  the  two  most  important  macroeconomic  variables  in  a 
small open economy, the (real) interest rate being the other. No central banker in such an 
economy can be indifferent to the level of the exchange rate. But there are no easy choices 
in exchange rate management. 
There  is  first  the  choice  of  the  exchange  rate  system,  a  choice  that  is  tied  up  with  the 
question of capital controls. If capital flows can be controlled, then there may be advantages 
for a country in trying to fix its nominal exchange rate. Nonetheless, and without entering the 
long-running debate over exchange rate systems, I believe that it is better to operate with a 
flexible exchange rate system and with a more open capital account.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
“Flexible” does not mean that a country should not intervene in the foreign exchange market, 
or  that  the  capital  account  should  be  completely  open.  Rather  it  means  that  the  country 
should  not  draw  an  exchange  rate  line  in  the  sand  and  declare  “thus  far,  and  no  further”; 
countries should not commit themselves to defending a particular exchange rate. 
Market  participants  often  say  that  the  central  bank  cannot  stand  against  market  forces. 
However  we  need  to  recognize  the  asymmetry  between  defending  against  pressures  for 
depreciation and appreciation of the currency. In the case of pressures for depreciation, at 
the existing exchange rate the market wants more foreign exchange. The central bank has a 
limited supply of foreign exchange, and thus cannot stand against the pressure of the market 
for very long – though as the recent crisis has shown, large foreign exchange reserves can 
help  the  central  bank  deal  with  market  pressures,  as  for  example  in  Brazil,  Korea  and 
Russia.  
In the case of appreciation, at the existing exchange rate the markets want more domestic 
currency. The central bank can produce unlimited amounts of domestic currency – that is, it 
can  intervene  to  buy  the  foreign  exchange  flowing  into  the  country.  Of  course  to  prevent 
inflation,  it  will  have  to  sterilize  the  foreign  exchange  inflow.  But  that  can  be  done,  as  the 
Bank of Israel has shown over the last three years.  
In the case of pressures for appreciation, the central bank has to balance the net costs of 
holding additional reserves against the benefits of preventing unwanted appreciation. This is 
a complicated calculus,16 one which has led to the development of various rules for reserve 
holdings: when the current account was the dominant factor in the exchange market, the rule 
was specified in terms of holding reserves equal to the value of X months of imports; now 
that  the  capital  account  is  at  least  as  important,  reserve  holding  rules  of  thumb  relate  to 
capital flows, generally based on some form of the Greenspan-Guidotti rule that a country’s 
reserves should at least cover the economy’s short-term obligations falling due over the next 
year. The recent crisis has resulted in many countries deciding to hold more reserves than 
the  previous  conventions  implied.  In  addition,  country-specific  factors  may  be  relevant,  for 
instance in the case of Israel the central bank has explicitly noted our geopolitical situation in 
discussing our reserve holdings. 
Central bankers used to say that they have only one instrument – the interest rate – and thus 
can  have  only  one  target  –  the  inflation  rate.  That  view,  which  is  based  on  the  Tinbergen 
result that there should be as many instruments as there are goals of policy, is not generally 
correct.17 But in any case, I see the instrument of intervention in the foreign exchange market 
as in effect giving the central bank an extra instrument (or at least an extra half instrument) of 
policy,  which  enables  it  not  only  to  target  inflation  but  also  to  have  some  influence  on  the 
behavior of the exchange rate. 
As the pressures for appreciation increase, a country may want to limit further intervention, 
and is likely to turn to the use of capital inflow controls. Such controls are rarely elegant, are 
typically  difficult  to  administer,  and  are  continually  being  undermined  by  private  sector 
attempts to circumvent them. Central banks prefer to do without them. But sometimes they 
                                                 
16   One complication in measuring the costs of holding reserves relates to the numeraire in which the reserves 
are valued. Typically and appropriately, the central bank presents its accounts in local currency terms.  Any 
central bank that has intervened to moderate appreciation pressures is likely to show a capital loss in terms of 
the  local  currency  value  of  the  reserves.  However,  some  of  the  reserves  are  held  to  enable  the  country  to 
purchase foreign goods if the need arises, and in terms of the purpose for which the reserves are held, it is 
thus not clear that the numeraire should be the local as opposed to a foreign currency. Further, if capital flows 
reverse,  the  country  may  find  itself  intervening  to  prevent  depreciation.  One  central  bank  colleague  has 
remarked that his reserve holdings, at mark to market value, generally show a loss, but that whenever he has 
intervened in a crisis he has made a “profit”. 
17  See  Stanley  Fischer,  “Comment”  in  The  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia:  Fiftieth  Anniversary  Symposium, 
Christopher Kent and Michael Robson (editors), Reserve Bank of Australia (2010), pp. 38–41. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
are needed, as many countries faced with large short-term capital inflows – including Israel – 
have concluded in recent months.  
Exchange rate management can be difficult in a growing small open economy with a strong 
financial  system.  Capital  flows  are  likely  to  be  very  sensitive  to  interest  rate  differentials, 
which leads to the exchange rate bearing more of the burden of adjustment to inflation and 
aggregate demand than may be optimal from the viewpoint of policymakers. In such a case, 
the country may be tempted to join a currency bloc. 
Membership of a currency bloc demands disciplined management of the domestic economy 
– of fiscal policy, and of the financial system. The exchange rate cannot be changed without 
leaving the bloc, a step with unknown but certainly major, probably massive, consequences 
for the economy. At this time, many expound on the constraints that membership of the Euro 
area  impose  on  countries  that  cannot  devalue.  These  constraints  clearly  matter.  But  it  is 
rarely  noted  that  when  countries  did  have  the  freedom  to  devalue,  changes  in  exchange 
rates  were  frequently  disruptive  of  trade  with  their  neighbors  –  and  further  that  some 
countries that did have that freedom mismanaged it, and paid a significant price in terms of 
economic performance. Or to put it differently, whatever type of exchange rate arrangement 
a country has, there will be times when it wished it had a different one. 
I have emphasized the exchange rate problems likely to face small open economies, for that 
is the type of economy in which I operate. But the truth is that most of what I have said about 
exchange rate management in a small open economy is true of any open economy, large or 
small.  
Lesson 7: The eternal verities – lessons from the IMF 
While I have emphasized lessons that we central bankers have learned from the crisis, many 
of them lessons that our predecessors knew long ago, the crisis has also reinforced lessons 
we learned long ago. In particular, this crisis has reinforced the obvious belief that a country 
that  manages  itself  well  in  normal  times  is  likely  to  be  better  equipped  to  deal  with  the 
consequences of a crisis, and likely to emerge from it at lower cost. 
In particular, we should continue to believe in the good housekeeping rules that the IMF has 
tirelessly promoted. In normal times countries should maintain fiscal discipline and monetary 
and financial stability. At all times they should take into account the need to follow growth-
promoting structural policies. And they need to have a decent regard for the welfare of all 
segments of society. 
The  list  is  easy  to  make.  It  is  more  difficult  to  fill  in  the  details,  to  decide  what  policies  to 
follow in practice. And it is very difficult to implement such measures, particularly when times 
are good and when populist pressures are likely to be strong. But a country that does not do 
so is likely to pay a very high price.  
Lesson 8: Target inflation, flexibly 
How to summarize all these conclusions? Simply: flexible inflation targeting is the best way of 
conducting monetary policy. The tripartite set of goals of monetary policy set out in modern 
central bank laws provide the best current understanding of what a central bank should try to 
achieve. Namely, a central bank should aim:  
 
 
To maintain price stability 
To support the other goals of economic policy, particularly growth and employment, 
so long as medium term price stability – over the course of a year or two or even 
three – is preserved 
To support and promote the stability and efficiency of the financial system. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
 10 
 It is noteworthy that these goals of the central bank were defined well over a decade ago, 
that they were in place in the ECB, the Bank of England, and other central banks before the 
global  crisis  and  during  it,  and  that  there  is  no  reason  to  change  them  now,  despite  the 
lessons we have been discussing. Rather, we have learned better ways of trying to achieve 
those goals. 
Lesson 9: In a crisis, you do not panic 
Consistent  with  the  title  of  this  lecture,  all  the  lessons  so  far  are  reflections  on  the  most 
recent crisis. Nonetheless, I would like to add a lesson I learned in an earlier crisis, the first 
financial crisis in whose management I was deeply involved, that of Mexico in 1994–5. At the 
end of January 1995, the IMF was asked to come up at very short notice – about nine hours 
– with an extra twenty billion dollars of loans to Mexico. The senior management of the Fund 
met  in  Managing  Director  Michel  Camdessus’  office  very  early  the  next  morning,  to  find  a 
solution. The first words of the Managing Director at that meeting were: “Gentlemen: this is a 
crisis, and in a crisis, you do not panic.”  
This advice has stood the test of time and experience. 
Finally: Lesson 10 
In  a  crisis,  central  bankers  (and  no  doubt  other  policymakers)  will  often  find  themselves 
deciding to implement policy actions that they never thought they would have to undertake – 
and  these  are  frequently  policy  actions  that  they  would  prefer  not  to  have  to  undertake. 
Hence, a few final words of advice for central bankers: 
“Never say never” 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
