Peter Pang: The SME sector – an important pillar of many economies 
Statement by Mr Peter Pang, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary and Head 
of Delegation, at the 44th Asian Development Bank Annual Meeting, Hanoi, 5 May 2011. 
 I would like to thank the Government and the people of Viet Nam for their warm hospitality in 
hosting this year’s Annual Meeting of the Asian Development Bank. I would also like to take 
this opportunity to express my deepest condolences to the people of Japan affected by the 
recent tragic events. 
The global recovery has gained traction, with emerging Asia in particular rebounding strongly 
from the global financial crisis. Compared with the last Asian financial crisis, the damage to 
the  real  economy  of  the  region  was  much  more  contained  this  time.  This  is  in  large  part 
attributable  to  the  reforms  taken  by  regional  economies  over  the  years  to  strengthen 
economic fundamentals and improve the resilience of their banking and financial systems. In 
addition, a number of regional economies have also promptly taken temporary extraordinary 
measures to support their economies and cushion the impact on employment. A number of 
these supportive measures were targeted at assisting the small and medium-sized enterprise 
(SME) sector, which is an important pillar of many economies. 
SMEs  play  a  crucial  role  in  the  economic  growth  and  job  creation  of  both  developing  and 
advanced economies. In Hong Kong, China, for instance, SMEs account for 98% of business 
establishments and employ nearly half of the total workforce. They provide a broad range of 
employment  opportunities  and  play  an  important  role  in  reducing  urban  poverty.  It  is  no 
exaggeration  to  say  that  when  SMEs  thrive,  the  economy  prospers.  This  is  also  true  vice 
versa.  
SMEs are particularly vulnerable to economic downturns, as banks often reduce their lending 
to  the  SME  sector  due  to  credit  concerns.  The  exceptional  severity  of  the  credit  crunch 
during  the  global  financial  crisis  has  therefore  posed  great  challenges  to  the  SMEs.  In 
response, the Government of Hong Kong, China swiftly rolled out a temporary HK$100 bn 
Special  Loan  Guarantee  Scheme  (SLGS)  in  December  2008  to  alleviate  the  difficulty  of 
SMEs in obtaining bank finance and the potential surge in unemployment due to the closing 
down  of  SMEs.  Together  with  other  short-term  government  stimulus  measures,  the  SLGS 
has been successful in supporting the SMEs to sail through this once-in-a-century crisis and 
limit  the  potential  knock-on  impact  on  the  economy.  Unemployment  rate  increased  by  a 
modest 2.3 percentage point to peak at 5.5% in September 2009. This compares with the 
4.3 percentage-point increase during the Asian financial crisis when no such temporary SME 
support  measures  were  available.  The  economy  contracted  briefly  by  2.7%  in  2009  and 
rebounded strongly the following year to achieve 6.8% growth. 
As  economic  conditions  improved  and  market  liquidity  normalised,  the  Government  exited 
from this emergency measure and ceased to receive new applications of SLGS after end-
2010. In the meantime, the success of the SLGS has garnered a consensus to develop a 
sustainable, market-oriented platform to cater for the ongoing SME financing needs upon the 
phasing out of SLGS. Taking this opportunity, the Government-owned Hong Kong Mortgage 
Corporation launched a new SME Financing Guarantee Scheme (SFGS) on 1 January 2011 
to  facilitate  a  smooth  transition  from  the  temporary  SLGS  to  a  sustainable  market-based 
mechanism. 
Operating based on prudent commercial principles, the SFGS does not require government 
subsidy  and  the  scheme  size  can  be  flexibly  adjusted  to  respond  to  changes  in  market 
demand. The SFGS also provides a broad range of options on the product features such as 
tenor, facility type, loan amount and guarantee coverage to fit the different needs of banks 
and SMEs. Initial market response to the SFGS has been positive, with a good participation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
rate from banks and an encouraging number of applications received from a broad variety of 
SMEs. It is expected that the SFGS will over time play an important role in helping SMEs 
obtain  stable  and  sustainable  financing  while  assisting  banks  in  managing  their  risks,  in 
particular when market conditions become volatile and uncertain.  
I  am  happy  to  share  this  experience  of  Hong  Kong,  China  of  how  the  “exit”  of  an 
extraordinary  government  measure  has  facilitated  the  “entry”  of  a  long-term  market-based 
solution for sustainable SME financing. I am also pleased to see that, among other priorities, 
ADB  has  put  more  emphasis  to  private  sector  development  including  promoting  the  SME 
sector  in  recent  years.  A  vibrant  SME  sector  will  create  jobs,  improve  productivity  and 
expand opportunities for the poor in developed and developing economies alike. We hope to 
see  the  Bank  continue  with  its  efforts  on  this  front,  along  with  its  other  equally  important 
priorities in promoting the development of the region. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
