Svante Öberg: Economic conditions for wage formation 
Speech  by  Mr  Svante  Öberg,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the 
National Mediation Office, Stockholm, 16 June 2011. 
 The Riksbank’s task is to maintain a low and stable level of inflation. But the development of 
wages affects inflation and inflation affects the development of wages. Wage formation and 
monetary  policy  are  consequently  connected,  and,  consequently,  the  Riksbank  monitors 
wage formation with great attentiveness. 
The message of my speech today can be summarised by two points: 
 
Wage formation has worked well since the mid-1990s, and my assessment is that it 
will continue to work well in the years ahead.  
But if wage increases were to be slightly less than the approximately 3.5 per cent 
per year that the Riksbank estimated in April, not only inflation and unemployment 
could be lower, but so could interest rates.  
 I will start by taking a look back at wage formation over the last 40 years. Following this, I will 
address the economic conditions for wage formation in the years ahead. I will base this on 
the Riksbank’s most recent forecast for Sweden’s economy, from April. 
A look back at wage formation over the last 40 years 
Wage formation did not work well in the 1970s and 1980s  
Following  the  “record  years”  of  the  1960s,  a  period  of  weaker  development  for  Sweden’s 
economy began in the mid-1970s. This was partly the result of the deterioration of external 
conditions in the wake of the oil crisis of 1973. This gave rise to an international recession.  
At that time, we had a fixed exchange rate in principle. Having left the Bretton Woods fixed 
exchange  rate  cooperation  in  1971,  Sweden  joined  the  so-called  currency  snake  in  1973. 
This  entailed  a  fixed  exchange  rate  against  the  D-mark  in  particular.  The  idea  was  that 
wages and prices would then increase in line with their equivalents in Germany and that the 
fixed exchange rate would act as a “nominal anchor”. This strategy did not work. From the 
mid-1970s  until  the  early  1990s,  inflation  was  significantly  higher  than  in  Germany  (see 
Figure 1). 
Wages  also  increased  faster  than  among  our  competitors  and  the  competitiveness  of  the 
Swedish  economy  was  weakened.  Price  clauses  in  wage  agreements  meant  that  wages 
were  adjusted  upwards  at  the  prevailing  rate  of  inflation,  while  wage  clauses  in  the 
agreements  meant  that  wages  were  adjusted  upwards  as  a  consequence  of  other,  as  yet 
unknown agreements. In this way, a price/wage spiral developed, in which expectations of 
high inflation were built in to the wage agreements. At the same time, in practice, not much 
was left in wage earners’ wallets of these high wage increases, as they had been “eaten up” 
by  the  high  rate  of  inflation.  From  the  mid-1970s,  real  wages  developed  poorly  (see 
Figure 2).  
through  a  series  of 
Sweden  attempted 
devaluations.  These  devaluations  meant 
temporarily  be 
strengthened.  But  in  the  long  term,  this  strategy  was  unsustainable.  Expectations  that 
increased costs could be compensated for though devaluations weakened the incentive for 
restraint in price and wage formation. Put rather simply, for a devaluation to be successful, 
price  and  wage  increases  after  the  devaluation  must  return  to  the  same  level  as  among 
competitors. Sweden never succeeded with this in the 1970s and 1980s.  
that  competitiveness  could 
impaired  competitiveness 
to  mitigate 
this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The two larger devaluations of the early 1980s were followed by the deregulation of the credit 
market in the mid-1980s. This was followed by the dramatic expansion of credit and rapidly 
increasing property prices. This led to the overheating of the Swedish economy, a property 
bubble  that  eventually  burst,  and,  subsequently,  the  banking  crisis  of  the  early  1990s. 
Following increasingly persistent speculation on a new devaluation, the fixed exchange rate 
was abandoned in November 1992.  
Wage formation has worked well since the mid-1990s 
Since the mid-1990s, conditions for the strong development of the Swedish economy have 
improved  significantly,  compared  with  the  1970s  and  1980s.  In  particular,  three  important 
changes have taken place. 
Firstly,  the  framework  for  fiscal  policy  has  improved.  After  the  crisis  and  the  large  public 
finance deficit at the start of the 1990s, a new fiscal policy framework was established. This 
consists of three parts: an expenditure ceiling entailing that the Riksbank annually sets up an 
upper  limit  for  nominal  government  expenditure  for  the  next  three  years,  a  surplus  target 
requiring public finances to have a surplus of one per cent of GDP over an economic cycle1 
and  a  stipulation  that  municipal  and  county  council  budgets  may  not  have  deficits.  This 
framework has worked well. Unlike many other countries, Sweden was able to enter the most 
recent financial crisis with a large public finance surplus. 
Secondly, the monetary policy regime has been changed. Instead of a fixed exchange rate, 
we now have a floating exchange rate and an inflation target. After the fixed exchange rate 
was  abandoned  in  November  1992,  the  Riksbank  decided  in  January  1993  on  a  new 
“nominal anchor” in the form of an inflation target of 2 per cent, to apply from 1995. The new 
monetary  policy  regime  has  worked  significantly  better  than  the  old  one  with  the  fixed 
exchange  rate.  Inflation  has  decreased  considerably  since  the  1970s  and  1980s  (see 
Figure 3).  In  addition,  this  has  not  been  at  the  cost  of  lower  average  GDP  growth  than 
previously. On the contrary, since the mid-1990s, GDP growth has been higher than it was in 
the 1970s and 1980s.  
Thirdly,  and  perhaps  not  as  widely-known,  wage  formation  has  improved  since  the  mid-
1990s. The changes had already started by the early 1990s. The Rehnberg Agreements of 
1991–1992  resulted  in  significantly  lower  agreed  wages  than  previously  and  –  more 
importantly  –  they  removed  the  price  and  wage  clauses  from  the  agreements,  thus 
contributing to breaking the price and wage spiral. 
The  Industrial  Agreement  of  1997  was  another  important  change.  The  wage  bargaining 
rounds of 1995 had resulted in relatively high wage increases of over 5 per cent per year for 
the following two years. This resulted in pressure from the government of the time on social 
partners  to  change  wage  formation  through  negotiation.  The  Industrial  Agreement  was 
exactly  this  kind  of  change.  It  assumes  that  the  manufacturing  sector,  exposed  as  it  is  to 
international competition, should determine the level of wage increases. The Agreement also 
means  that  there  are  rules  for  the  conducting  of  negotiations,  for  example  that  demands 
should  be  specified  well  ahead  of  the  expiry  of  agreements  and  that  the  conclusion  of 
negotiations should be supported by mediators, the so-called impartial chairman. There are 
also similar, but not as far-reaching, agreements in other sectors. 
The National Mediation Office, which was set up in 2000, was another important change. As 
is widely known, the Office’s tasks are to mediate in labour disputes and to actively promote 
efficient  wage  formation.  The  active  promotion  of  efficient  wage  formation  entails,  among 
other  tasks,  ensuring  that  wage  formation  permits  the  strong  growth  of  employment.  In 
                                                 
1   The surplus target was originally 2 per cent of GDP, but this was later changed to 1 per cent, as a result of an 
EU decision to start recording premium pension fund saving as private saving rather than public saving. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
addition,  it  is  also  responsible  for  the  official  wage  statistics.  I  usually  view  the  National 
Mediation Office as the third party in wage negotiations. The Office ensures that there is a 
neutral arena in which the parties can meet outside formal negotiations. 
The outcome for wage earners has also been better in terms of higher real wage increases. 
Virtually no real wage increases took place during the 1970s and 1980s. 
The wage increases agreed upon in the wage bargaining rounds of 2007 were too high  
The  two  most  recent  wage  bargaining  rounds  have  taken  place  under  widely-differing 
circumstances. The wage bargaining rounds in 2007 took place at the crest of an economic 
boom, when the economic prospects were also strong for the following years, while the wage 
bargaining rounds in 2010 took place during a financial crisis and a deep recession. 
The wage bargaining rounds for 2007 did not work well from an economic perspective. The 
agreed  wages  were  too  high.  I  myself  was  quite  optimistic  ahead  of  the  negotiations.  My 
assessment  was  that  they  could  be  carried  out  in  good  order  and  could  result  in  wage 
increases in line with the Riksbank’s inflation target. But the result of the wage bargaining 
rounds  was  surprisingly  negative.  The  centrally-agreed  wage  increases  for  the  agreement 
period 2007 to 2009 were almost 3 per cent per year, which is almost one percentage point 
higher  than  during  the  previous  agreement  period.  Inflation  increased  and  the  Riksbank 
successively  raised  the  repo  rate  from  3  per  cent  at  the  start  of  2007  to  4.75  per  cent  in 
September 2008.  
In  addition,  the  financial  crisis  led  the  economic  conditions  to  change  radically  during  the 
agreement  period.  During  the  autumn  of  2008,  it  became  obvious  that  the  financial  crisis 
would  also  hit  the  Swedish  economy  hard.  The  Riksbank  and  other  authorities  made 
comprehensive efforts to prevent the Swedish banks from being dragged into the crisis. And, 
to  alleviate  the  consequences  of  the  crisis,  the  Riksbank  rapidly  lowered  the  repo  rate  to 
0.25 per  cent  in  July  2009.  Even  so,  developments  became  clearly  worse  than  expected. 
During  2009,  GDP  showed  the  greatest  fall  since  the  Second  World  War,  while 
unemployment rose to almost 9 per cent at the end of 2009. This reaffirmed the conclusion 
that wage increases had been too high. On average, wages increased by 3.7 per cent during 
the years 2007 to 2009. 
The wages agreed for 2010 contributed towards preventing the crisis from being so 
deep in Sweden 
In  many  ways,  the  wage  bargaining  rounds  in  2010  were  the  direct  opposite  of  the  wage 
bargaining rounds in 2007. Developments were marked by the financial crisis, which resulted 
in low wage agreements which were largely in line with the Riksbank’s forecasts. The crisis 
also meant that the commonest agreement period became two years instead of three years, 
as  had  been  normal  since  1995.  The  centrally-agreed  wage  increases  were  calculated  to 
average 1.8 per cent per year in 2010 and 2011.  
However,  the  economic  recovery  was  significantly  stronger  in  2010  than  most  people  had 
expected. The growth in GDP was the highest in 40 years. The labour market also developed 
above expectations. Among other reasons, this was because the decline in employment was 
primarily concentrated on the manufacturing sector, which is less labour-intensive than many 
other  sectors.  Furthermore,  the  so-called  crisis  agreements  in  the  manufacturing  sector 
contributed towards dampening the decrease of employment. Due to the low agreed wage 
increases,  the  wage  bargaining  rounds  in  2010  probably  contributed  to  the  strong 
development  of  the  Swedish  economy  we  experienced  in  2010  and  the  start  of  2011. 
According  to  our  present  assessment,  the  average  increase  of  hourly  wages  in  2010  and 
2011 has been 2.8 per cent per year, which is 0.5 percentage points per year more than we 
had estimated before the wage bargaining rounds. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
But at the same time, the wage bargaining rounds in 2010 entailed a couple of problems for 
future  developments.  One  such  problem  was  that  the  dates  for  the  expiry  of  the  various 
agreements  became  more  spread  out  than  before.  In  the  manufacturing  sector,  the  white-
collar workers’ collective agreement expires in September of this year, while the agreements 
for blue-collar workers run until the end of January 2012. This risks weakening the standard-
setting  role  of  the  manufacturing  industry.  The  social  partners  in  the  manufacturing  sector 
have now agreed to coordinate the negotiations for blue-collar and white-collar workers so 
that the new agreements will be ready in November. This coordination should improve the 
prospects  for  agreements  within  the  parts  of  the  economy  exposed  to  international 
competition to become normative for future wage bargaining rounds.  
This is because I believe that it is positive if the parts of the business sector that are exposed 
to international competition set the standard for other parts of the economy. This part of the 
economy  is  the  most  clearly  affected  when  wages  increase  too  rapidly  for  Sweden  to 
compete  successfully  on  the  world  market.  This  also  holds  true  when  there  is  a  floating 
exchange rate, as the inflation targets of our most important trading partners are largely the 
same and it cannot be assumed that a weakened krona would restore competitiveness after 
excessive wage increases. 
The  remaining  problem  is  that  other  agreements  will  expire  during  the  spring  of  2012,  a 
number of months after the first agreements. This means that the normative effect of the first 
agreements  remains  uncertain.  Among  other  circumstances,  it  will  depend  on  the  level  of 
coordination of negotiations between employers and employees.  
Another  problem  was  that  Teknikföretagen,  an  employers’  organisation  in  the  engineering 
industry,  revoked  the  Industrial  Agreement  last  year.  The  Industrial  Agreement  is  an 
important  reason  that  wage  formation  has  worked  so  well  since  the  mid-1990s.  The 
revocation  of  this  Agreement  by  one  of  the  signatories  meant  that  the  future  of  the 
Agreement became uncertain. This has been sorted out now, with a new proposed Industrial 
Agreement having been accepted by all parties except the Swedish Paper Workers’ Union. I 
view the new Industrial Agreement as a success. It cements the principle that the parts of the 
business sector that are exposed to international competition should play a normative role in 
wage bargaining and gives the impartial chairmen a stronger role in the coordination within 
the manufacturing sector.  
It  is  thus  positive  that  there  is  a  new  Industrial  Agreement.  But  there  is  reason  to  remind 
ourselves of our experiences from the wage bargaining rounds in 1995. The coordination of 
the demands from the Swedish Trade Union Confederation failed in these wage bargaining 
rounds.  The  Swedish  Paper  Workers’  Union  and  the  Employers’  Federation  of  Swedish 
Forest Industries were first out then, and concluded a relatively high agreement that set the 
level for a large part of the labour market. The result of this was wage increases of over 5 per 
cent  in  the  years  1996  and  1997,  levels  which  were  altogether  too  high  in  relation  to  the 
inflation target and the weak employment situation. 
The economic conditions for wage formation in the years ahead 
I  will  now  briefly  present  the  Riksbank’s  assessment  of  economic  development  in  recent 
years. I will refer to the most recently published forecast from April. Of course, quite a lot has 
happened  since  then,  but,  at  the  same  time,  two  months  later  you  don’t  normally  know  a 
great  deal  more  about  developments  two  to  three  years  ahead.  In  any  event,  we  will  be 
publishing an updated assessment in the Monetary Policy Report in July. 
The international recovery is proceeding at a good rate 
For the world as a whole, we expect to see a GDP growth of over 4 per cent per year for the 
next three years. This is a high growth rate from an historical perspective (see Figure 4). But 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
developments  across  the  world  are  divided,  with  weaker  growth  taking  place  in  the 
developed economies and stronger growth in emerging economies.  
The recovery of the United States and Europe is continuing at a fairly moderate pace. In the 
United States, GDP is now back to the level it was at before the crisis (see Figure 5). But the 
labour  market  has  yet  to  recover.  In  the  euro  area,  it  seems  likely  to  take  a  couple  more 
years  until  GDP  has  returned  to  the  same  level  as  before  the  crisis.  Growth  in  Europe  is 
being  restrained  by  the  fiscal  problems  in  several  countries  and  the  tightening  of  fiscal 
policies (see Figure 5).  
In contrast, in the emerging economies, GDP growth is strong. These countries account for 
almost half of the world’s GDP and for almost 70 per cent of the world’s growth this year. 
China is expected to continue to grow by almost 10 per cent per year, and India by about 
8 per cent over the years ahead. In the two other BRIC countries, Brazil and Russia, growth 
in the range of 4–5 per cent is expected (see Table 1).  
Differences around the world are also extensive in terms of inflation. In the United States and 
the euro area, inflation has risen in recent years, primarily as a result of rising energy and 
commodity  prices,  but  underlying  inflation  excluding  these  prices  is  still  low.  In  the  BRIC 
countries, on the other hand, inflation is high, and the monetary policies of these countries 
are now being tightened to avoid overheating (see Table 2).  
However,  there  are  also  risks  in  international  developments.  The  greatest  risk  for  us  in 
Sweden  is probably  whether  the  fiscal  problems  in certain euro  area  countries  will  lead  to 
renewed  turbulence  on  the  financial  markets.  Greece,  Ireland  and  Portugal  have  already 
received assistance from the EU and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), but it remains 
unclear  whether  Greece,  in  particular,  will  be  able  to  repay  its  debts.  Furthermore,  the 
possibility  that  Spain  may  also  encounter  difficulties  in  managing  its  problems  cannot  be 
ruled out. Naturally, the outlook is also being affected by the political unease in North Africa 
and the Middle East and the repercussions of the natural disaster in Japan, but contagion 
effects have as yet been limited. 
Another  risk  is  that  the  strong  growth  in  the  world  will  push  up  prices  for  energy  and 
commodities beyond expectations. A significant part of the rise in oil prices since February 
can  be  ascribed  to  uncertainty  over  how  the  supply  of  oil  will  be  impacted  by  the  political 
unease in North Africa and the Middle East. Essentially, however, it is the strong growth in 
Asia in particular that is making these commodity prices increase. This may result in higher 
inflation and lower growth in the United States, Europe and other developed economies. 
The Swedish economy remains strong 
The high rate of growth in Sweden in 2010 means that GDP has now returned to roughly the 
same level as prior to the financial crisis. This year, we expect a GDP growth of 4.6 per cent, 
while,  for  the  next  two  years,  we  expect  growth  averaging  2.4  per  cent  per  year  (see 
Figure 6).  
Employment is now increasing rapidly. Over the last year, it has increased by 120 000 jobs. 
This  increase  has  primarily  taken  place  in  the  service  sector  and  the  construction  sector, 
which  were  not  impacted  so  severely  by  the  crisis.  New  statistics  for  the  manufacturing 
sector, where employment has developed very weakly since the start of the crisis, also show 
that employment is increasing and that companies are planning for further new recruitment. 
We expect employment to continue to grow relatively strongly over the coming years (see 
Figure 7). 
Unemployment is now decreasing rapidly. It has fallen by over one percentage point over the 
last year. Our assessment is that unemployment will continue to decrease towards just over 
6 per cent by 2013 (see Figure 8). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
CPI inflation is presently unusually high. This  is primarily connected with the circumstance 
that we are now in a phase in which interest rates are being increased. Mortgage rates are 
included in the CPI and they are increasing at the same rate as the Riksbank raises the repo 
rate – or, recently, even slightly faster. We expect CPI inflation to remain high in the years 
ahead (see Figure 9).2 
CPIF  inflation  (the  CPI  with  a  fixed  interest  rate)  provides  a  better  view  of  underlying 
inflationary  pressures  and  shows  that  inflation  is  currently  low.  The  effect  of  rising  energy 
prices on inflation has so far been counteracted by the strengthening of the krona. However, 
the main reason for the low rate of inflation is the weak development  of unit labour costs. 
Productivity has increased rapidly at the same time as the rate of increase in hourly wages 
has  been  low.  Unit  labour  costs  are  expected  to  increase  marginally  in  the  present  year, 
before returning to a more normal rate of increase at the end of the forecast period. 
Inflation  expectations  are  important  to  follow  for  the  Riksbank,  particularly  in  the  present 
situation  when  the  difference  between  CPI  inflation  and  various  measures  of  underlying 
inflation is great. Inflation expectations five years ahead have so far been stable and close to 
2  per  cent.  This  indicates  strong  confidence  in  the  Riksbank’s  ability  to  meet  its  inflation 
target over the long term. On the other hand, inflation expectations one and two years ahead 
have increased significantly over the last 12 months. However, this is largely a consequence 
of  an  increase  in  the  actual  measured  rate  of  inflation  (see  Figure  10).  A  matter  of  some 
concern ahead of the wage bargaining rounds may be that wage expectations also largely 
seem  to  be  a  consequence  of  the  actual  measured  rate  of  inflation.  I  shall  return  to  this 
shortly.  
In  light  of  this  economic  development,  monetary  policy  has  been  aimed  at  successively 
increasing the repo rate towards a more normal level after the extremely low level it reached 
during the crisis. In April, we raised the repo rate by 0.25 percentage points for the sixth time 
in a row, to 1.75 per cent. Our assessment was that there is a need to continue to raise the 
repo rate in order to stabilise inflation at a level close to the inflation target of 2 per cent and 
to  avoid  too  high  a  level  of  resource  utilisation  in  the  future  (see  Figure  11).  However,  as 
usual, we would like to add that uncertainty concerning the future is great and the interest 
rate path we have calculated is a forecast, not a promise.  
Wage formation will probably continue to work well in the years ahead 
The conditions are good for wage formation to continue to work well in the years ahead, just 
as it has since the mid-1990s. This is also the assumption made in the Riksbank’s forecasts 
from April. The rapid improvement of the labour market means that the central agreements 
concluded  in  the  autumn  and  next  year  are  expected  to  reach  higher  levels  than  the 
agreements  concluded  last  year.  Wage  increases  over  and  above  the  central  agreements 
(“wage  drift”)  are  also  expected  to  contribute  towards  slightly  faster  wage  increases.  The 
Riksbank’s assessment is that overall hourly wages will increase by about 3.5 per cent per 
year in 2012–2013, which is compatible with a CPIF inflation rate (inflation excluding interest 
rate changes) of close to 2 per cent at the end of the forecast period.3  
But all forecasts are uncertain. This also applies to wage forecasts. It is normally easier to 
make good forecasts for the development of wages than it is for inflation. This is probably 
partially  because,  over  time,  there  are  smaller  variations in wage  growth  than  there  are  in 
inflation,  and  partially  because  wage  agreements  provide  important  information  on  future 
                                                 
2   See J. Johansson, S. Palmqvist and C. Selander, “The CPI will increase more rapidly than the CPIF over the 
next few years”, Economic Commentary no. 5, 2011, Sveriges Riksbank. 
3   Hourly wage costs are estimated to increase above hourly wages by 0.2 per cent per year. For the sake of 
simplicity, I have chosen to disregard this difference. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
wage  growth.  Over  the  last  14  years,  the  Riksbank  has  had  an  average  forecast  error  of 
0.4 percentage points in its spring forecasts of the next year’s wages. However, the error has 
been significantly larger in certain years. Wage increases in the years ahead will ultimately 
be determined both by the final agreements and by economic developments. 
There is a risk that the rapid improvement of the labour market will push up wage increases 
faster  than  we  have  calculated.  This  applies  to  both  agreed  wages  and  wages  over  and 
above  agreement.  There  are  signs  that  matching  on  the  labour  market  may  have 
deteriorated. Labour market shortages are increasing rapidly, even though unemployment is 
still relatively high (see Figure 12). 
The Beveridge curve, which shows the connection between unemployment and vacancies, 
also indicates impaired matching. On previous occasions when the vacancy rate has been at 
the current high level, unemployment has been just below 6 per cent. However, it is too early 
to draw any far-reaching conclusions, as it is a normal cyclical phenomenon for matching to 
become impaired during the recovery from a recession (see Figure 13). 
Another  risk  that  I  have  already  mentioned  is  that  the  high  level  of  CPI  inflation  may  be 
influencing inflation and wage expectations. Even if underlying CPIF inflation is low, the CPI 
is  increasing  rapidly  as  a  result  of  interest  rate  increases.  The  forecast  for  CPI  inflation  is 
close  to  3  per  cent  over  the  next  three  years,  and  will  probably  continue  to  be  high  for  a 
couple  more  years.  There  is  thus  a  risk  that  the  high  level  of  CPI  inflation  will  push  up 
inflation  and  wage  expectations.  Wage  expectations  are  closely  linked  to  inflation 
expectations,  which,  in  turn,  are  largely  determined  by  the  inflation  outcome  –  and  wage 
expectations have increased recently (see Figure 14).4 
It is important to emphasise that the high level of CPI inflation is a temporary effect. This is a 
delayed  consequence  of  the  low  level  of  the  repo  rate  during  the  crisis.  When  we  first 
lowered the repo rate sharply, CPI inflation was negative for at least a year. Over the last 
year,  the  repo  rate  has  successively  been  raised,  which  is  instead  contributing  towards 
increasing CPI inflation. A better measure of inflationary pressures at present is provided by 
CPIF inflation. 
The wage growth rate influences inflation, unemployment and interest rates 
In the Riksbank’s most recent forecast, we estimate that hourly wages will increase by about 
3.5  per  cent  per  year  in  2012  and  2013,  and  that  this  corresponds  with  underlying  CPIF 
inflation  of  close  to  2  per  cent  towards  the  end  of  the  forecast  period.  At  the  same  time, 
unemployment will only fall to just above 6 per cent at the end of the forecast period.  
The National Institute of Economic Research’s most recent report of wage formation, from 
May  of  this  year,  presents  calculations  of  the  impact  of  the  size  of  wage  increases  on 
inflation  and  employment.  These  indicate  that  wage  increases  would  have  to  be  limited  to 
about 3 per cent per year in 2012–2014 for unemployment to be sustainably decreased to 
5 per cent, in accordance with the government’s ambitions. I assume that we will be hearing 
more about this later today.  
The Riksbank has made similar calculations that also indicate a connection between wage 
trends, inflation and unemployment. The basic mechanism in these calculations is that higher 
wage  increases  lead  to  increased  costs  for  companies.  If  companies  wish  to  retain 
profitability, they have to choose between raising their prices or decreasing their personnel 
costs by reducing employee numbers. The most likely scenario is that a combination of these 
measures will be adopted. Inflation will increase and employment will decrease. To meet the 
                                                 
4   When  interpreting  the  figure,  it  may  be  useful  to  know  that  Prospera’s  wage  expectations  systematically 
underestimate wage trends by around 0.5 percentage points. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
inflation  target  in  such  a  situation,  the  Riksbank  would  have  to  raise  the  repo  rate  more 
rapidly. This would further dampen employment.  
However, the result also depends on the reason for the higher wage increases. If these are 
due to the stronger development of productivity, costs will not increase and the intensifying 
effects on inflation and unemployment will not be experienced.  
My assessment is still that if wage increases were to be slightly lower than the approximately 
3.5 per cent per year in 2012 and 2013 that the Riksbank estimated in its April forecast, not 
only  inflation  and  unemployment,  but  also  interest  rates,  could  be  lower.  This  would  be 
preferable from the wider perspective of welfare. It would also reduce the risk that increasing 
energy and commodity prices or rising inflation and wage expectations will push up inflation 
beyond our expectations. 
Conclusion 
The Riksbank is not a party in the collective bargaining process. It is the social partners that 
conclude  the  agreements.  But  monetary  policy  aims  to  maintain  a  low  and  stable  level  of 
inflation. This job is made easier if wage formation works well. The effective functioning of 
wage  formation  since  the  mid-1990s  is  due  to  the  improvement  of  both  the  conditions  for 
wage  formation  and  wage  formation  itself.  The  Riksbank’s  assessment  is  that  wage 
formation  will  continue  to  work  well  in  the  years  ahead.  I  therefore  look  ahead  to  the 
approaching wage bargaining rounds with confidence. 
 
 
 
 
 
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
 12 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13
  14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  15
