Nout Wellink: Looking beyond the current reforms 
Speech by Mr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  Amsterdam  Financial  Forum,  Amsterdam, 
17 June 2011. 
 The  history  of  The  Grand  dates  back  to  1578,  even  before  the  establishment  of  the 
Amsterdam Stock Exchange, which is the oldest in the world. In the course of the centuries, 
the buildings of The Grand underwent quite a few architectural changes and additions. As a 
consequence, they have not become outdated, and today they provide a great location for 
the Amsterdam Financial Forum. It is easy to see a parallel between the architecture of this 
site and the future global financial architecture, the topic of this session. We need to keep 
financial system regulation up to date as well and make quite a few changes and additions to 
it in the course of time. 
My  term  as  governor  is  coming  to  an  end.  In  about  two  weeks  time,  I  will  hand  over  the 
presidency of the Dutch Central Bank to my successor, Klaas Knot. In these last days, I am 
not going to look back on the past 14 years. Neither will I focus on what is going on in the 
financial system today. Instead, I will share some thoughts with you about the future of the 
financial system. That future is being shaped by a broad set of new regulations addressing 
weaknesses  exposed  by  the  financial  crisis.  In  this  speech,  I  will  briefly  highlight the  main 
elements  of  these  reforms.  After  that,  I  will  focus  on  the  consequences  for  the  financial 
system – both the intended and the unintended ones. Looking beyond the current reforms, I 
also have a few messages for regulators and for the financial sector. 
Key elements of the current reforms 
The financial system is currently being reformed. Some new rules are already fully in effect, 
others  are  being  phased  in  or  are  still  being  fleshed  out.  For  some  issues,  the  approach 
differs  per  country.  Nonetheless,  several  key  common  elements  can  be  identified.  I  will 
discuss the following four: capital requirements, liquidity requirements, measures to reduce 
excessive risk taking, and resolution measures. 
Capital requirements are a first key element. During the crisis, it turned out that banks had 
insufficient buffers to withstand large losses. The Basel III framework therefore sets tighter 
capital standards. Most importantly, it requires that the quality of bank capital be improved. A 
larger part of capital must consist of common equity, the most loss absorbing type. 
Furthermore, banks will have to increase the size of their capital buffer. The new regulations 
involve a higher minimum capital ratio as well as heavier risk weights for specific activities. 
For proprietary trading, which caused large losses during the crisis, and investments in re-
securitisations, a complex and relatively high-risk financial instrument, banks will have to hold 
much  larger  capital  buffers.  Still,  in  good  times,  risks  may  again  be  underestimated. 
Therefore the new regulations also set a limit for leverage regardless of risk weights. 
To further ensure the build-up of additional buffers in good times and enhance the capacity of 
banks  to  absorb  losses  in  bad  times,  the  Basel  III  framework  introduces  dynamic  capital 
requirements. These come on top of the minimum capital requirements that must be met at 
all times and by all banks. The dynamic buffer consists of two parts. One part, the capital 
conservation buffer, relates the build-up of buffers to the profits of an individual bank. The 
other part, the countercyclical buffer, relates it to conditions in the economy at large. This is 
truly a novelty: for the first time in history, a macroprudential element has been included in 
international banking regulations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
lending.  Together, 
these  measures  will  help 
On  top  of  the  minimum  and  dynamic  requirements,  there  will  be  a  capital  surcharge  for 
systemically  important  banks.  This  will  make  those  banks  whose  failure  would  pose  the 
greatest threat to the financial system yet a little bit safer. 
The second key element of the current reforms concerns liquidity requirements. These are 
essential to make the financial system more stable. Liquidity and maturity transformation is at 
the  core  of  the  banking  business  and  provides  a  large  benefit  to  the  economy.  It  enables 
households  and  companies  to  earn  interest  on  savings  that  they  can  access  at  any  time, 
while  providing  essential  long-term  financing  to  the  economy.  However,  when  excessive, 
maturity transformation creates a vulnerability to market shocks and can become a source of 
instability to the financial system. During the crisis, insufficient management of liquidity risk 
emerged as a major problem. Even well-capitalised financial institutions experienced liquidity 
problems and central banks needed to intervene, including with unconventional measures, to 
provide large scale financing and thereby prevent further escalation. 
Therefore the new liquidity requirements, introduced as part of the Basel III framework, are of 
utmost importance. They require banks to hold sufficient high quality liquid assets to cover 
net  cash  outflows  for  a  period  of  30  days  under  a  stress  scenario.  In  addition,  they  set 
minimum requirements for the use of long-term and stable funding sources to finance long-
term 
to  prevent  excessive  maturity 
transformation. Given the importance of these liquidity requirements, it is worrying that the 
EU  has  not  yet  shown  a  clear  commitment  to  implement  them  in  full,  without  any 
reservations. 
Next  to  capital  and  liquidity  requirements,  there  is  a  variety  of  other  measures  aimed  at 
reducing  excessive  risk  taking.  These  are  a  third  element  of  the  current  reforms.  For 
instance, in the US, the Volcker rule may impose direct restrictions on trading by banks for 
their own account. For banks based in Europe, excessive risk taking will be discouraged by 
remuneration  rules.  These  rules  require  that  traders  with  a  significant  risk-taking  role  will 
receive part of their bonus in the form of shares with a delay of several years. Thus, if high-
risk trading results in large losses, then traders will share in these losses. 
The fourth key element of the current reforms consists of resolution measures. The crisis has 
shown that with the current regulatory tools large banks cannot be allowed to fail, because 
the costs for society would be too large. However, a bank failure can never be fully prevented 
– not even with the new rules for capital and liquidity and the other measures. It is therefore 
essential  that  any  bank  failure  can  be  resolved  at  minimal  cost  and,  if  possible,  without 
taxpayer support. 
Resolution measures include the preparation of recovery and resolution plans, or living wills. 
These plans provide detailed guidance for emergency measures and, if these were to fail, an 
orderly restructuring or bankruptcy. In addition, in some countries there is a discussion about 
precautionary measures such as ring-fencing of retail activities. 
Regardless of  the  precise  regulatory  approach,  to  make  the  failure  of a  large  international 
bank – however unlikely it may be – a manageable event, some banks may need to change 
their structure. Unfortunately, for the near future, resolution frameworks will remain focussed 
on the national level, because an international resolution regime is not politically feasible. As 
a consequence, resolution can be inhibited by the complex structure of large banks, many of 
which consist of thousands of legal entities all over the world that are interconnected through 
a variety of financial arrangements. To be able to quickly restructure a bank in times of crisis, 
these interdependencies must be made transparent and reduced. 
Consequences for the financial system 
The  current  reforms  will  undoubtedly  increase  the  resilience  of  financial  institutions  and 
enhance  the  stability  of  the  system  as  a  whole.  However,  there  will  also  be  broader 
consequences for the financial system. Some of those consequences are intended, others 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
are  unintended.  Looking  beyond  the  current  reforms,  which  will  take  years  to  be  fully 
implemented,  I  will  now  say  something  about  the  outcomes.  What  follows  refers  to  the 
financial system as a whole, not to specific countries or institutions. 
First, besides reducing risks, the reforms will inevitably lead to unintended risk shifting. The 
new regulations will increase resilience and discourage excessive risk taking in of most parts 
of the financial sector, but elsewhere financial risks are likely to grow larger. 
For  instance,  risks  will  shift  to  households.  There  is  already  an  ongoing  trend  of  insurers 
providing less guarantees on new life insurance policies. This is largely driven by the lessons 
that institutional investors learned from previous crises, but they may well be reinforced by 
new regulations, such as Solvency 2. As a consequence, households are bearing more and 
more financial market risks, even though they  may not be very well equipped to deal with 
those risks. That is an unintended consequence. 
Like before the crisis, risks may also shift to unregulated entities that form a shadow banking 
system. Maturity and liquidity transformation do not only take place within the official banking 
system, but also outside it. To some extent, this is being addressed in the current reforms. 
However,  some  part  of  financial  innovation  will  always  be  aimed  at  circumventing  existing 
regulations. An unintended but likely outcome is therefore that over time, risks will again shift 
to  yet  unregulated  areas.  The  response  should  not  be  to control  innovation,  but  to  closely 
monitor the main vulnerabilities in the financial system and adapt the regulatory framework 
when necessary. 
A  second  consequence  for  the  financial  system  is  that  the  reforms  will  induce  changes  to 
business models. For banks and insurers, some activities and investments will become less 
attractive  due  to  the  current  reforms.  Banks  may  move  out  of  certain  trades  for  their  own 
account, for instance, because the required capital buffers will reduce the return on equity. 
Under  Solvency  2,  insurers  may  find  it  unattractive  to  continue  investing  in  complex 
structured products, because of the high risk weight and the detailed analysis that is required 
of the underlying assets. Furthermore, retail deposits will become a favoured source of bank 
funding, as a consequence of the new liquidity requirements. These are just some examples. 
Such changes in business models are not merely side effects; they are a necessary outcome 
of  the  current  reforms.  Changes  in  business  models  are  a  fully  intended  consequence.  If 
there would be no significant changes to business models, and if that would mean that risk 
profiles remained too high and potential threats to the stability of the financial system were 
insufficiently addressed, then we will need to see a further tightening of the rules. 
The  most  profound  changes  to  business  models  will  probably  not  result  from  capital  or 
liquidity requirements or from other measures to reduce excessive risk taking. Instead, the 
most  profound  impact  will  come  from  resolution  measures.  That  is  because  effective 
resolution  measures  will  put  an  end  to  the  “too  big  to  fail”  or  “too  big  to  save”  status  of 
systemically  important  financial  institutions.  When  they  loose  this  status,  large  financial 
institutions  will  also  loose  important  competitive  advantages  over  smaller  and  less 
interconnected institutions. 
At present, systemically important banks enjoy an implicit subsidy on their funding costs. This 
is apparent in credit ratings, for instance. Credit rating agencies assign higher ratings to large 
banks than their intrinsic financial strength would justify. The rating enhancement reflects the 
probability of government support and can be as large as five notches. For smaller banks, 
the enhancement is lower or even zero, because it is perceived that smaller banks are less 
likely to receive government support when they get in trouble. Effective resolution measures 
will  thus  eliminate  the  support-related  rating  advantage  and  lower  funding  costs  of  large 
banks.  A  capital  surcharge  for  systemically  important  banks  fits  with  this  reasoning  and 
compensates for the unfair benefits of being very large. This is a fully intended consequence 
and will enhance economic efficiency and market discipline. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
But  there  may  be  unintended  consequences  too.  Ideally,  governments  would  agree  an 
international resolution framework, but that requires international burden sharing in case they 
would  have  to  support  the  restructuring  of  a  cross-border  bank.  At  present,  this  is  not  a 
realistic  option.  The  alternative,  national  resolution  regimes,  imply  that  some  degree  of 
autonomy  for  domestic  retail  operations  may  be  a  necessary  precondition  for  effective 
resolution.  This  comes  at  a  cost.  Financial  integration  can  make  financial  markets  more 
efficient,  especially  within  a  common  market  like  the  EU.  It  enables  banks  to  raise  funds 
where  they  are  readily  available  and  invest  those  funds  where  they  generate  the  largest 
return,  even  if  that  is  in  another  country.  In  addition,  banks  can  diversify  their  risks  by 
combining  retail  and  investment  banking.  If  the  economic  benefits  from  international  and 
universal  banking  operations  cannot  be  fully  realised,  that  would  be  an  unintended  and 
indeed an undesirable outcome. 
A  third  consequence  of  the  current  reforms  is  that  they  will  have  an  impact  on  financial 
markets. We know for sure that there will be an impact and we can almost be sure about the 
direction  of  some  changes.  For  instance,  banks  will  need  to  attract  more  stable  long-term 
funding. At the same time, European insurers, which are important providers of bank funding, 
show an increasing preference for investment in covered bonds because of the low capital 
requirements under Solvency 2. Together with a range of other factors, this will give a boost 
to European covered bond markets. 
However,  we  cannot  be  sure  how  large  and  how  permanent  the  changes  will  be.  That  is 
because there are many different factors at work. Some market participants, such as pension 
funds  and  other  large  investors,  are  much  less  affected  by  the  current  reforms.  They  will 
respond to changes in market prices and this may partly offset the impact of new regulations. 
This makes the overall impact on financial markets uncertain. 
It is therefore important that major new regulations are phased in gradually. The new liquidity 
measures for banks provide an example of this approach. They are phased in over four to 
seven years to prevent large shocks to financial markets. In addition, they are subject to an 
observation period to facilitate mitigation of undesirable outcomes. 
A fourth consequence from the current reforms is that the financial system will continue to 
suffer  from  important  distortions.  In  other  words,  there  will  be  incentives  for  financial 
institutions to behave in a way that is not in the public interest. Of course, this will always be 
the case. The perfect world of economists, without distortions or frictions of any kind, exists 
only in their models. Still, it is worth pointing out a few important distortions that the current 
reforms have been unable to tackle. 
Perhaps the most important distortion is that high leverage will remain attractive for financial 
corporations  because  interest  payments  are  tax  deductible.  This  makes  it  attractive  for  a 
company to use more debt financing and less equity capital than would be desirable from a 
social point of view. Of course, this distortion exists for non-financial corporations as well. Yet 
in the financial sector it is more troublesome, because tax considerations do not just have an 
effect on the funding choices, they also stimulate the design of tax-driven financial products. 
Such products may add little economic value, but create leverage and complexity, increasing 
vulnerabilities in the financial system and making them more difficult to monitor. 
Another distortion is that the current reforms are not uniform across countries. For example, 
countries with a large financial sector, such as Switzerland, will require large banks to hold 
more capital than the international standard. Furthermore, EU remuneration rules will apply 
to the global operations of banks headquartered in Europe and the US Volcker rule will apply 
to the global operations of banks headquartered in the US. The lack of uniformity  has the 
unintended  consequence 
the  same  market,  but 
headquartered in different countries, will each have to observe different rules. This causes 
unfair  competition,  induces  arbitrage  and  creates  complexity.  However,  just  as  with 
resolution frameworks, it is a political reality that some reforms, however desirable they may 
be, can only be passed at the national level. 
that  banks  operating  abroad 
in 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Concluding remarks 
Looking  beyond  the  current  reforms,  there  will  be  major  changes  to  the  financial  system, 
some  intended  and  others  unintended.  Regulators  will  have  to  monitor  the  consequences 
carefully and respond to what they see. Risks will shift away from where they are regulated 
most tightly. Regulators will also need to evaluate the impact on financial markets and the 
effects  of  market  distortions.  If  they  detect  the  emergence  of  new  vulnerabilities,  rules  will 
need to be adjusted. Furthermore, business models have to be adapted. If the largest banks 
do not undergo a substantial transformation, a further tightening of banking regulations will 
be required to produce the intended outcome. 
One  thing  is  certain:  beyond  the  current  reforms,  further  reforms  will  be  necessary  to 
safeguard  the  stability  of  the  financial  system.  It  took  ten  years  to  develop  the  Basel  II 
framework.  The  current,  more  profound  reforms  will  have  taken  shape  in  about  half  that 
period.  Future  regulators  should  continue  this  trend  and  make  sure  that  regulation  of  the 
financial  system  keeps  evolving,  especially  when  public  concerns  about  global  financial 
crises fade away. And ideally, the next round of reforms should be even more harmonised at 
the  international  level,  to  reduce  unfair  competition  and  unproductive  barriers  to  financial 
integration. 
I also have two messages for the financial sector. First, within the new regulatory framework, 
it is important that financial institutions continue to strengthen their own risk assessments. To 
all executives that are present here, I would say: you have a responsibility of your own as 
well. 
Second,  risk  shifting  and  financial  innovation  imply  that  the  regulatory  framework  will 
continue to evolve and will never be completed. Therefore your business models should be 
sufficiently  flexible  and  not  fine-tuned  to  a  current  set  of  regulations.  You  have  seen  that 
most  of  today’s  regulators  are  quick  and  determined  to  pass  the  necessary  reforms.  I  am 
confident  that  this  will  also  apply  to  tomorrow’s  regulators,  who  will  continue  to  make 
changes and additions to the future global financial architecture. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
