Philipp Hildebrand: The international monetary system 
Opening remarks by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the High-Level Conference on the International Monetary System, Zurich, 
10 May 2011. 
 Good  morning,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen.  I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  the  second  joint 
SNB-IMF  conference  on  the  international  monetary  system.  It  is  a  privilege  for  the  Swiss 
National Bank to cooperate with the IMF and contribute to this important debate by yet again 
bringing  together  such  a  distinguished  group  of  policy  makers  and  experts.  The  IMF 
Managing  Director,  Dominique  Strauss-Kahn,  is  once  more  honouring  this  event  with  his 
participation.  
The reform of the international monetary system is subject to an ongoing debate. The global 
financial  crisis  put  a  sudden  end  to  a  near  decade  of  seemingly  healthy  growth  widely 
distributed  across  the  globe.  The  crisis  rocked  the  system  to  its  core.  It  has  brought  forth 
concerns about the stability of an increasingly complex and interconnected global economy. 
It  has  also  refocused  attention  on  the  potentially  destabilising  effects  of  unprecedentedly 
large and, at times, extremely volatile cross-border financial flows.  
Globalisation has led to dramatic changes. Emerging economies have been steadily moving 
to the fore of the international scene. It is imperative that the international monetary system 
adapts  itself  to  these  rapid  changes.  A  thorough  reassessment  and  reform  of  the  system 
have  become  a  priority  among  policy  makers.  Switzerland,  as  an  open  economy  with  an 
important currency and a leading financial centre, has a vital national interest in participating 
actively in the reform debate. The IMF occupies a central role in the international monetary 
system.  Therefore,  it  is  natural  that  the  Fund  has  also  come  under  scrutiny,  and  its  many 
activities are being reviewed.  
Judged by the recent proliferation of conferences about the international monetary system, 
one might conclude that the system is in need of a major overhaul. This is not necessarily the 
case. I share the Managing Director’s view, expressed recently in Nanjing, that the current 
system,  despite  many  imperfections,  also  has  good  features.  What  is  required  are 
improvements,  not  revolutionary  changes.  In  other  words,  the  current  system  can  be 
strengthened while preserving its core features. If progress is slow, it is because even small 
changes  typically  require  difficult  political  decisions.  Continuous  dialogue  and  cooperation 
are therefore essential. Only through a regular and open exchange of views can we hope to 
forge a common understanding of the strengths and weaknesses of the current system and 
address any remaining shortcomings – step by step.  
Since  our  last  conference,  the  international  community  has  made  progress  on  the  reform 
agenda. The Fund has greatly increased its capacity to provide financial support to members 
and  adapted  its  lending  tools.  It  has  modernised  its  surveillance  activity,  for  example  by 
introducing new tools to track spillovers. Furthermore, it has reopened the discussion on the 
management  of  capital  flows,  although  admittedly  this  has  been  controversial.  Under  the 
French presidency, the G20 has been at least as active as the Fund. Of particular relevance 
is  the  steady  implementation  of  the  Mutual  Assessment  Process,  a  new  instrument  for 
multilateral cooperation and oversight aimed at promoting economic adjustments worldwide. 
We will have the privilege of hearing from Minister Lagarde about this important endeavour 
later during lunch.  
In today’s conference, we would like to advance from diagnosis to treatment. Last year, the 
main  focus  was  on  the  sources  of  instability  and  the  inadequate  asymmetric  adjustment 
mechanisms  of  the  current  system.  This  year,  the  aim  is  to  progress  towards  a  common 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  1
understanding of the role of the Fund and to discuss concrete reform proposals. In doing this, 
it is important that we stay focused and realistic.  
The  two  main  tasks  of  the  IMF  are  crisis  prevention  and  crisis  resolution.  The  main  Fund 
policies for achieving these tasks are surveillance and financial support. Before leaving the 
floor to our panellists, allow me to reflect very briefly on these two topics.  
The  IMF  is  mandated  to  oversee  the  international  monetary  system  and  monitor  the 
economic and financial policies of its member countries. In this way, it helps to ensure the 
effective operation of the international monetary system, thereby promoting and  sustaining 
sound economic growth. In recent years, much has been done to make surveillance more 
focused  and  effective.  Attempts  to  better  integrate  financial  sector  issues  and  spillover 
effects are all steps in the right direction. However, for surveillance to be relevant and gain 
traction,  it  is  equally  important  that  the  IMF  is  sufficiently  independent  in  its  conduct  of 
surveillance. To deliver credible messages, the Fund’s technical expertise has to be beyond 
any suspicion of political manipulation. Surveillance, in other words, has to be an exercise in 
objectivity. Only then can it also be an exercise in collaboration and contribute to a sounder 
and  more  resilient  international  monetary  system.  This  being  said,  IMF  surveillance  and 
collaboration  does  not  release  national  policy  makers  from  their  responsibilities.  Keeping 
one’s own house in order is a prerequisite for an orderly global village. This is particularly 
true,  though  not  exclusively,  in  the  domain  of  fiscal  policy.  Fiscal  responsibility  is  the 
paramount challenge of our age.  
Let me now turn to the second main Fund activity, financial support. The scope and nature of 
this activity has changed considerably over the past few years. Fund resources have been 
strongly  supplemented,  and  the  Fund’s  lending  toolkit  has  been  made  more  flexible.  But 
multilateral financing has not been the only instrument used in tackling the crisis. Regional 
facilities  and  central  bank  swap  lines  have  also  played  a  very  important  role.  All  these 
instruments  have  acted  as  complements,  and  not  as  substitutes,  and  together  they  have 
prevented  a  breakdown  of  the  system.  Looking  into  the  future,  the  important  question  is 
whether it is necessary to proceed beyond the existing loose network of multilateral, regional 
and  bilateral  facilities  towards  a  truly  global  financial  safety  net.  This  would  imply  formal, 
systematic coordination between the different facilities to allow synchronised provisioning of 
liquidity during crises. Apart from the fact that any significant transfer of power from national 
to  supranational  authorities  is  extremely  difficult  to  achieve,  I  am  not  yet  convinced  that  a 
global financial safety net of this kind is necessary or even desirable. First, concerns about 
moral  hazard  must  be  taken  seriously.  Second,  we  have  to  be  careful  not  to  undermine 
established  mechanisms  at  the  national  level.  Finally,  let  us  not  forget  that  it  is  only  the 
central  banks  that  can  create  liquidity  as  needed.  And  their  cooperation  has  proven  to  be 
very effective during the recent crisis.  
Let me now shortly outline the topic of the five panels of today’s conference.  
The  first  panel  will  discuss  policy  discipline  and  spillovers  in  an  interconnected  global 
economy.  It  will  assess  proposals  for  improving  the  surveillance  of  the  system  and  global 
policy cooperation.  
The second panel will deal with global liquidity provision in systemic crises. It will evaluate 
the adequacy of currently available facilities and proposals on expanding them. 
The third panel focuses on capital flow management. It will follow up on the recently initiated 
discussion about a new, more uniform and balanced approach.  
The  fourth  panel  will  discuss  the  desirability  and  feasibility  of  a  multi-polar  currency  and 
reserve system, and the fifth panel will wrap up and outline realistic objectives for 2011 and 
beyond.  
I  am  looking  forward  to  a  lively  discussion  and  open  exchange  of  views.  Let  me  remind 
everyone  that  this  conference  is  being  conducted  strictly  in  accordance  with  the  Chatham 
House Rule. With these words, I open the conference and leave the floor to the panellists. 
2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
