Duvvuri Subbarao: Financial stability mandate of central banks issues in 
the international and Indian context 
Welcome address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
SAARCFINANCE Governors’ Symposium, Kumarakom, Kerala, 10 June 2011. 
 1.  
Financial stability has come centre stage in the post crisis scenario. The discourse 
has  been  quite  broad  spectrum  –  ranging  from  first  principles  such  as  the  definition  of 
financial stability to intellectually involved issues like the implication of financial stability for 
growth  and  welfare.  Although  the  crisis  originated  in  the  advanced  economies,  we,  in 
emerging economies too have been affected by it, and indeed by much more than we had 
thought  possible.  This contagion  brought  home  a  simple  message.  In a  rapidly  globalizing 
world, national and international financial stability are inter-linked. They are really two sides 
of the same coin. 
2. 
From  that  perspective,  the  international  efforts  now  under  way  to  put  in  place 
institutional  arrangements  and  policies  for  preserving  financial  stability  are  relevant  for  us 
here  in  South  Asia  too.  That  explains  the  choice  of  the  topic  “Financial  Stability”  for  this 
SAARC Governors’ Symposium. 
3.  
I have great pleasure in welcoming all the delegates to this symposium. In particular, 
I want to acknowledge the presence here of colleague Governors and Heads of Delegation 
from  Afghanistan,  Bangladesh,  Bhutan,  the  Maldives,  Nepal,  Pakistan  and  Sri  Lanka.  A 
special  welcome  to  Jaime  Caruana,  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements  (BIS)  and  formerly  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  and  to  our  very  own 
Dr. Y.V. Reddy,  my  distinguished  predecessor  at 
the  Reserve  Bank  and  now  an 
internationally renowned expert on financial stability. Between the two of them, they bring not 
only  years  of  rich  central  banking  experience  but  valuable  international  expertise  and 
enormous intellectual acumen. Lastly, and importantly, a special welcome to Shri T.N. Ninan, 
President, Editors Guild of India, one of India’s most erudite economic journalists and a very 
influential  thought  leader,  who  will  be  moderating  the  Governors’  panel  discussion  later 
today. 
4.  
Holding this symposium on financial stability here in the backwaters of Kerala, God’s 
Own Country, was a deliberate decision. It has now become fashionable to refer to the global 
crisis  that  we  had  just  gone  through  as  a  financial  tsunami.  Maybe  we  can  extend  that 
metaphor.  If  the  crisis  was  a  tsunami,  the  placid  backwaters  of  Kumarakom  represent  the 
financial stability that we aspire to. 
Given  the  depth  and  breadth  of  exposure  that  all  of  you,  especially  colleague 
5.  
Governors, bring to this forum, it will be presumptuous on my part to anticipate and debate all 
the issues that will come up. I will attempt something much less ambitious. Just by way of a 
curtain raiser, I will try to give an assessment of the global debate on financial stability and 
outline what we are doing here in India. 
Financial stability and central banks 
6.  
Given  that  central  banks  have  been  at  the  heart  of  this  crisis  –  being  blamed  for 
getting  the  world  into  the  crisis  and  being  praised  for  leading  from  the  front  in  getting  the 
world out of the crisis – a question that naturally arises is whether the crisis could have been 
averted  if  central  banks  had  an  explicit  mandate  for  financial  stability.  There  are  two 
presumptions  behind  this  question:  first,  that  central  banks  neglected  financial  stability 
because they had no explicit mandate, and second that in some sense, financial stability falls 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
within the purview of a central bank mandate. Evidently, there are no settled views on these 
presumptions but they do raise a host of important issues. Let me try and flag them. 
Financial stability – why is it important? 
7.  
Given the enormity of the crisis the world has just gone through, to ask why financial 
stability is important will sound inane, perhaps even outlandish. But that perception comes 
from the benefit of hindsight. Remember financial stability was not on anyone’s radar screen 
during the period of the Great Moderation. So, let me address the question of why financial 
stability is important. 
8.  
That financial stability is important for the macroeconomy is perhaps obvious. What 
clearly distinguishes a financial crisis from other types of economic crises, as evidenced by 
the  history  of  crises  since  the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s,  is  that  financial  crises  are 
deeper, the recovery from them is protracted and they leave behind deep scars by way of 
output  and  employment  foregone.  The  Great  Recession  of  2008/09  bears  this  out.  Global 
income, trade and industrial production had fallen more sharply in the first twelve months of 
this crisis than in the first twelve months of the Great Depression. Two years after the crisis, 
much of the world is still in a recovery phase. And there are apprehensions that there may be 
a permanent loss of output – a new normal as it were. So, on all parameters, the depth of the 
crisis, the length of the recovery and its lasting impact, this crisis has taken a devastating toll 
on global growth and welfare – conclusive evidence of why financial stability is vital from a 
macroeconomic perspective. 
9.  
More specifically, financial stability is particularly important to central banks because 
their  ability  to  deliver  on  the  growth  and  inflation  objectives  is  conditional  on  a  financially 
stable  environment.  At  the  heart  of  the  monetary  policy  actions  of  a  central  bank  is  the 
adjustment of short-term interest rates in the expectation that it will transmit to interest rates 
at the long end and thereby influence aggregate demand and inflation. The channel for this 
monetary transmission can get clogged, or in extreme cases even completely choke, if there 
is no financial stability. Recall that at the depth of this crisis, when credit and money markets 
went into a seizure, advanced country central banks tested the limits of policy action. Finding 
that they were unable to revive market confidence even after pushing policy interests down 
to  near  zero  or  even  zero,  they  had  to  top  up  interest  rate  action  with  initiatives  variously 
termed  quantitative  easing  and  credit  easing.  What  this  experience  demonstrated  is  that 
financial stability is a necessary pre-condition for monetary policy effectiveness. 
The role of central banks in financial stability 
10.  
So,  the  surmise,  from  the  experience  of  the  crisis,  is  that  financial  stability  is  a 
necessary – although not sufficient – condition for the central bank to deliver on its mandate. 
The follow on question then is what is it to do about it? More precisely, what is the role, if 
any,  of  a  central  bank  in  preventing  financial  instability,  and  what  is  its  role  in  managing 
financial instability should it occur? 
11.  
Before the crisis, the stereotype view was that price stability and financial stability 
complement each other i.e. monetary policy and policies for financial stability are  mutually 
reinforcing. The crisis has proved that wrong. Note that we saw the global financial sector 
come to the brink of collapse in the midst of a period of extraordinary price stability. Indeed 
the experience of the crisis has prompted an even stronger assertion – that there is a trade-
off between price stability and financial stability, and that the more successful a central bank 
is with price stability, the more likely it is to imperil financial stability. The argument goes as 
follows. The extended period of steady growth and low and stable inflation during the Great 
Moderation  lulled  central  banks  into  complacency.  They  thought  they  had  discovered  the 
holy  grail  and  declared  victory.  Only  with  the  benefit  of  hindsight  is  it  now  clear  that  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
prolonged  period  of  price  stability  blindsided  policy  makers  to  the  cancer  of  financial 
instability growing in the underbelly. 
12.  
So  that  much  is  now  clear.  Central  banks  should  be  mindful  of  financial  stability 
concerns. But does it necessarily mean that they should take care of it themselves? A review 
of  the  pre-crisis  institutional  arrangements  for  financial  sector  regulation  across  different 
countries suggests different answers. Abstracting from the details, it is possible to see two 
stylized models. The first is a model where the central bank is just a minder of inflation with 
no regulatory responsibilities, the rationale being that a central bank will be able to deliver on 
its price stability objective more effectively if it is not burdened by other responsibilities. The 
other  model  is  one  where  a  central  bank  has  also  some,  and  in  a  few  cases,  the  entire 
responsibility for regulating the financial sector, and hence has an implicit responsibility for 
financial stability. 
13.  
The experience of the crisis has generated a vigorous debate on whether a central 
bank can remain immune to financial stability concerns no matter how limited its mandate. 
Using a metaphor which is by now notoriously famous, is the central bank’s job confined just 
to mopping up the mess after the bubble has burst? This is not a totally settled debate, but 
the  dominant  view  post-crisis  is  that  central  banks  should  have  a  substantial  role  in  the 
financial stability function. Once again, abstracting from all the nuanced positions, there are 
three main arguments. 
(i) 
The first argument is that monetary policy and financial stability are generally inter-
linked.  Policies  in  one  dimension  have  implications  for  the  other.  For  example, 
monetary  policy  can  affect  systemic  risk  through  the  asset  price  channel.  Interest 
rates  represent  the  opportunity  cost  of  holding  assets  and  an  accommodative 
monetary  policy  can  influence  credit  expansion  for  financing  asset  purchases. 
Should  this  happen  in  times  of  excessive  optimism,  it  can  lead  to  asset  price 
bubbles  threatening  systemic  stability.  The  causation  can  run  in  the  reverse 
direction too – policies for financial stability can influence the monetary dimension. 
For example, as I said earlier, measures aimed at strengthening the resilience of the 
financial  system  potentially  buttress  monetary  policy  by  preventing  sharp  financial 
disruptions.  This  inter-dependency  between  the  two  dimensions  suggests  that  the 
central bank, with inherent responsibility for monetary policy, should also act as a 
systemic  regulator  in  charge  of  financial  stability.  With  such  a  mandate,  a  central 
bank can take a holistic view of policy options by factoring in costs and benefits in 
both dimensions. 
The second argument in favour of giving central banks a more substantive role in 
the financial stability function flows from the lesson of the crisis that a collection of 
healthy financial institutions does not necessarily make a healthy financial system. 
Systemic  safety  can  be  jeopardized  by  procyclicality.  As  the  crisis  demonstrated, 
there  is  a  strong  collective  tendency  among  financial  entities  to  overexpose 
themselves to the same type of risk during an upturn and become overly risk averse 
during  a  downturn.  Importantly,  individual  institutions,  indeed  microprudential 
oversight too, fail to take into account the spillover impact of the actions of the rest 
of the financial system on them. Hence the growing emphasis, as part of the post-
crisis  regulatory  reform,  on  macroprudential  supervision  at  the  systemic  level  to 
complement microprudential regulation at the institutional level. There are synergies 
to be gained by co-locating the responsibility for both microprudential regulation and 
macroprudential supervision in one institution. The grass root level knowledge from 
microprudential  regulation  can  be  used  to  look  out  for  fault  lines  at  the  systemic 
level;  vice  versa,  systemic  level  insights  from  macroprudential  supervision  will  be 
useful in instituting safeguards at the micro level. The logical candidate for housing 
both  the  microprudential  regulation  and  macroprudential  supervision  is  the  central 
bank. 
(ii) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
(iii) 
By  far  the  strongest  argument  in  support  of  integrating  financial  stability  and 
monetary policy flows from the lender of last resort (LOLR) function of the central 
bank. The central bank, it is argued, can discharge its LOLR function more efficiently 
if  its  mandate  extends  beyond  merely  monitoring  financial  institutions  to  taking 
preventive  action.  This  becomes  possible  if  the  central  bank  is  also  the  systemic 
regulator in charge of financial stability. 
14.  
Even as the case for giving a substantive responsibility for financial stability to the 
central bank is persuasive, the central bank itself will have a challenging task in managing 
the  relative  prioritization  across  its  multiple  objectives.  This  is  less  straight  forward  than  it 
seems especially as there are important trade-offs. For example, in India we mandate banks 
to hold 24 per cent of their net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) in a liquid portfolio under 
the  statutory  liquidity  ratio  (SLR)  regime.1  While  the  SLR  regime  provides  strength  to  the 
banking system and is hence stability enhancing, the large pre-emption that it entails reduces 
the  flow  of  credit  to  productive  sectors  with  potentially  adverse  impact  on  investment  and 
growth. As such, the SLR regime poses a growth-stability trade-off dilemma for the Reserve 
Bank. 
15.  
Such conflicts across the multiple objectives of the central banks can become more 
common  in  crisis  situations.  During  the  Asian Crisis,  for  example,  countries  raised  interest 
rates  to  stem  capital  outflows  and  contain  currency  depreciation.  These  external  sector 
adjustments took a heavy toll on the domestic macroeconomic situation by way of corporate 
losses, higher NPAs for banks, lower output and higher unemployment, all of which eroded 
financial  stability.  The  management  of  the  recent  crisis  is  an  example  in  the  reverse.  To 
restore financial stability, central banks stretched conventional expansionary policies to the 
limits and also pursued unconventional policies. Some analysts contend that the costs of this 
extraordinary  monetary  accommodation  will  unfold  over  time  by  way  of  lower  output  and 
higher inflation. 
Regulatory architecture for financial stability 
16.  
I  have  argued  the  case  for  central  banks  having  a  substantive  role  for  financial 
stability.  Clearly,  this  cannot  be  an  exclusive  responsibility.  In  most  jurisdictions,  there  are 
other  financial  sector  regulators,  and  the  government  too,  who  have  to  share  this 
responsibility.  That  raises  the  question:  what  regulatory  architecture  is  best  suited  for 
preserving financial stability? There is no definitive answer. As several analysts have pointed 
out, the crisis hit countries alike, irrespective of their regulatory architecture. For example, the 
US with multiple regulators and the UK with a unified regulator were both hit alike. But as we 
emerge out of the crisis, some broad contours of reform are emerging. 
17.  
These  contours  reflect  two  clear  trends:  first,  a  decisive  shift  towards  giving 
increased responsibility for both macroprudential oversight and microprudential regulation to 
central banks; and second, institutionalisation of collegial arrangements involving the central 
bank,  other  regulators  and  the  government,  with  the  primary  responsibility  of  identifying 
threats  to  financial  stability.  The  councils  can  make  recommendations  for  appropriate 
prudential  standards  in  the  interest  of  safety  of  the  financial  system,  but  notably,  not  for 
forbearance or relaxations. The two seemingly paradoxical trends make eminent sense and 
supplement each other. 
A  brief  review  of  the  situation  across  advanced  economies  shows  that  even  as 
18.  
details  differ,  the  thrust  is  the  same.  In  the  US,  the  Financial  Stability  Oversight  Council 
(FSOC)  is  headed  by  the  Treasury  Secretary  and  comprises  the  Fed  chairman  and  the 
heads of all the regulatory agencies. The FSOC will monitor systemic risks, designate non-
                                                 
1 
Incidentally, Basel III package finalized last year has a liquidity buffer provision similar to our SLR requirement. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
bank financial firms as systemically important and subject them to Fed supervision, approve 
proposals  from  Fed  to  break  up  large  banks  and  allow  orderly  resolution  of  failing 
systemically important financial institutions. 
19.  
The  European  Union  (EU)  has  opted  for  a  council  approach  with  significant 
responsibility  for  the  central  banks.  An  agreement  has  been  reached  on  creating  new 
supervisory bodies for the EU which became operational at the beginning of 2011, subject to 
approval by individual member states. The European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) is chaired 
by the President of the European Central Bank (ECB) and is a part of the European System 
of Financial Supervision which also comprises the three newly created systemic authorities 
for banking, insurance and occupational pensions and for securities markets. 
20. 
In  the  UK,  there  is  a  paradigm  shift  underway  in  terms  of  the  institutional 
arrangements for micro-prudential as well as macro-prudential regulation. The Government 
announced  plans  to:  (i)  shift  the  responsibility  for  prudential  oversight  from  the  Financial 
Services Authority (FSA) to a new Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA) under the Bank of 
England;  (ii)  set  up  a  Financial  Policy  Committee  (FPC)  within  the  Bank  of  England  to 
“monitor macro issues that may threaten economic and financial stability”; and (iii) set up a 
Financial  Conduct  Authority  (FCA)  which  will  be  responsible  for  the  conduct  of  business 
across various financial services and for consumer protection. The FPC will be a committee 
of the Bank of England’s Court of Directors and is to be chaired by the Governor. It will also 
comprise a representative each of the Treasury, the PRA and the FCA. In anticipation of a 
legislation  to  create  the  FPC,  an  interim  FPC  has  been  established  with  its  composition 
closely mimicking that of the proposed statutory body. 
The  above  trends  implicitly  acknowledge  that  while  all  financial  sector  regulators, 
21. 
and  indeed  the  government,  have  a  role  in  maintaining  financial  stability,  from  an 
effectiveness and accountability perspective and for preventing as well as managing a crisis, 
it is imperative to enjoin the executive responsibility for financial stability to a single entity and 
that  the  central  bank  is  best  positioned  to  be  that  single  entity.  The  participation  of,  and 
indeed  coordination  by  the  finance  ministry,  underlines  its  role  in  crisis  management  and 
resolution. 
Financial stability and central bank autonomy 
22.  
The much prized autonomy of central banks has come under assault post-crisis with 
an  influential  view  gaining  ground  that  one  of  the  principal  causes  of  the  crisis  was  the 
unbridled autonomy of central banks. The standard argument for central bank autonomy is 
that  autonomy  enhances  the  credibility  of  the  central  bank’s  inflation  management 
credentials. Monetary policy typically acts with a lag, and price stability therefore has to be 
viewed  in  a  medium  term  perspective.  Having  autonomy  frees  the  central  bank  from  the 
pressure  of  responding  to  short-term  developments,  deviating  from  its  inflation  target  and 
thereby  compromising  its  medium  term  inflation  goals.  Even  as  the  importance  of  central 
bank  autonomy  in  monetary  policy  is  now  broadly  accepted,  there  is  a  growing  view  that 
central bank decision making has to become transparent and that central bankers have to be 
more accountable for the outcomes of their decisions. 
23.  
With  central  banks  assuming  increasing  responsibility  for  financial  stability,  the 
autonomy  question  has  acquired  an  additional  dimension  and  greater  urgency.  The  main 
apprehension is that a formalized mechanism for coordination between the government and 
the central bank for financial stability will alter the level, content, process and frequency of 
interaction between the two, and over time this will erode the autonomy of the central bank. It 
is  argued  that  it  will  be  difficult  to  keep  monetary  policy  and  policies  for  financial  stability 
strictly  apart,  and  a  formal  forum  for  coordination  would  facilitate  “spillover”  into  monetary 
policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
This issue is non-trivial, and can become quite contentious in maturing economies 
24.  
where  institutions  for  checks  and  balances  are  not  ingrained.  Nevertheless,  it  is  not  an 
insurmountable problem. It is possible to build and respect Chinese walls between decision 
making for monetary policy and decision making for financial stability. In the US for example, 
the FOMC (Federal Open Markets Committee) is responsible for monetary policy decisions 
while  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  is  responsible  for  financial  stability 
decisions. Countries like Brazil and Sweden have a different model – they aim at extracting 
synergies between monetary and financial stability decisions through a single board. 
25.  
The burden of my argument therefore is that with sensitivity and understanding on 
both sides and through appropriate institutional mechanisms, it is possible to ensure that a 
central  bank  is  able  to  effectively  discharge  its  financial  stability  responsibility  without 
compromising its autonomy. 
Indian position on the issue of financial stability  
Where  do  we  in  India  stand  on  this  issue  of  financial  stability?  Historically,  the 
26.  
Reserve Bank has played an important role in preserving financial stability – drawing from its 
wide  mandate  as  the  regulator  of  the  banking  system  and  of  the  payment  and  settlement 
systems, regulator of the money, forex, government securities and credit markets, as banker 
to banks, as also the lender-of-the last resort. This unique combination of responsibilities for 
monetary policy combined with macroprudential regulation and microprudential supervision 
with an implicit mandate for systemic oversight has allowed the Reserve Bank to exploit the 
synergies across various dimensions. The micro-level information coming from supervision of 
individual institutions has been a valuable input for shaping the macro perspective. On the 
other hand, the broad understanding from macroprudential regulation has been effective in 
instituting prudential safeguards at the micro institution level. 
27.  
Even  as  the  Reserve  Bank  has  implicitly  been  the  systemic  regulator  in  India, 
financial stability cannot be its exclusive responsibility. Other financial sector regulators such 
as  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI),  the  Insurance  Regulatory  and 
Development  Authority  (IRDA)  and  the  Pension  Funds  Regulatory  and  Development 
Authority (PFRDA) too have important responsibilities. Beyond the regulators, the crisis has 
demonstrated the importance of the coordinating role the Government has to play, especially 
in crisis times.  
28.  
Across most jurisdictions, the post-crisis focus has been on shifting responsibilities 
and mandates among regulators. India has been somewhat different in this regard; our focus 
has been more on establishing an institutional mechanism for coordination among regulators 
and between the regulators and the Government. This has culminated in the establishment, 
in December 2010, of the Financial Stability and Development Council (FSDC) to be chaired 
by the Finance Minister. The FSDC is to be assisted by a sub-committee to be chaired by the 
Governor of the Reserve Bank. This sub-committee has replaced the erstwhile High Level 
Coordination Committee on Financial Markets (HLCC-FM). The Government has held out a 
clear assurance that the setting up of the FSDC will not in any way erode the autonomy of 
the regulators. 
29.  
In  terms  of  governance  structure,  the  two-tier  framework  of  FSDC  and  the  sub-
committee  presents  an  interesting  case.  The  crisis  has  clearly  demonstrated  the  need  for 
explicit  delineation  of  responsibilities  for  financial  stability  across  agencies  and  an  agreed 
protocol for coordination among such agencies. The crisis has at the same time brought forth 
the critical stake of the sovereign in ensuring financial stability – the spillover costs in a crisis 
have to be borne by the governments. However, the sovereign itself may not be the agency 
best suited to take on the mantle of financial stability – in most jurisdictions, including India, it 
is  the  central  banks  which  have  the  natural  mandate  for  this  responsibility.  In  the  Indian 
context,  the  proposed  structure  attempts  to  strike  a  balance  between  the  government’s 
objective of ensuring financial stability to reduce the probability of a crisis and the operative 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
arrangements  involving  the  central  bank  and  other  regulators.  While  the  Sub-Committee 
under the Governor of the Reserve Bank is expected to evolve as a more active, hands-on 
body  for  financial  stability  in  normal  times,  the  FSDC  would  have  broad  oversight  and  will 
assume central role in crisis times.  
30.  
There is another interesting dimension to the mandate of the FSDC. Note that the 
acronym also includes the letter “D” which stands for development. In the budget speech, the 
Finance Minister indicated that the development role will cover issues like financial inclusion 
and financial literacy which, by their very nature, are shared objectives of the Government 
and  the  regulators  and  have  to  be  pursued  synergistically.  I  am  pointing  this  out  to 
emphasize  that  in  India  we  view  financial  inclusion  as  a  fundamental  aspect  of  financial 
stability. 
Since the Reserve Bank has historically had a macroprudential overview, not all the 
31.  
governance  issues  surrounding  financial  stability  are  new  to  us.  Nevertheless,  there  are 
always unknown unknowns, and the system should be able to respond to them when they 
turn into known unknowns. Now that the regulatory architecture of the FSDC is in place, it is 
important  for  the  Government  and  the  regulators  in  India  to  develop  conventions  and 
practices  which  will  serve  the  goal  of  preserving  financial  stability  without  eroding  the 
autonomy of the regulators. 
Summing up  
32.  
Let  me  now  sum  up.  I  have  highlighted  why  financial  stability  is  important  for  the 
macroeconomy and for the central banks. I have argued that central banks should have a 
substantive,  although  not  exclusive,  responsibility  for  financial  stability  even  as  this  might 
involve the central banks having to manage some critical trade-offs. It is in recognition of the 
synergy  between  the  basic  monetary  functions  that  the  central  bank  conducts  and  of  the 
policies required for preserving financial stability that, across several jurisdictions, including 
in  more  mature  advanced  economies,  there  is  a  post-crisis  move  towards  giving  central 
banks more formalized, explicit responsibility for financial stability. 
33.  
At  the  same  time,  there  is  recognition  everywhere,  regardless  of  the  regulatory 
architecture,  that  preserving  financial  stability  requires  coordination  among  regulators,  and 
between  regulators  and  governments.  Even  in  the  midst  of  a  general  refrain  that  central 
banks,  and  indeed  all  regulators,  should  become  more  transparent  and  be  more 
accountable, it is generally acknowledged that these coordination mechanisms, especially as 
between the government and the regulators, must function in ways that do not compromise 
the  autonomy  of  the  regulators.  How  these  coordination  mechanisms  will  evolve  and  how 
much value they will add is yet too early to determine. The test really will be how effectively 
we can prevent the next crisis, and how effectively we will manage it, should one occur. 
34.  
The  recent  best  seller,  Lords  of  Finance,  likens  central  bankers  to  the  Greek 
mythological character Sisyphus. Sisyphus was condemned by Gods to roll a huge boulder 
up  a  steep  hill,  only  to  watch  it  roll  down  and  having  to  endlessly  repeat  the  task.  The 
challenge  for  central  banks  is  still  bigger.  They  have  to  manage  multiple  boulders  at  the 
same time. Only if they succeed in that multi-Sisyphean effort will they be able to preserve 
financial stability. Let me finish on that sombre note. 
Chasing the monsoon 
35.  
Before I do so however, I want to let our foreign friends here know that “chasing the 
monsoon” is a national pastime in India from June through September. The emotional well 
being of the country as well as our economic prospects are determined by the monsoon that 
breaks  here  off  the  coast  of  Kerala  every  year  in  early  June.  We  invite  you  to  enjoy  this 
wonderful experience of celebrating the great Indian monsoon. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
