Jean-Claude Trichet: Hearing at the Committee on Economic and 
Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, 
at  a  hearing  at  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Affairs  of  the  European 
Parliament, Brussels, 29 August 2011. 
 Dear Madam Chair, 
Dear Honourable Members, 
Thank  you  very  much  for  the  invitation  to  the  exchange  of  views  today.  You  asked  me  to 
begin with a brief overview of the main recent economic and monetary developments in the 
euro area and recent monetary policy decisions.  
Economic and monetary developments 
I. 
Incoming information since our last regular hearing in June continue to point towards ongoing 
growth in the euro area, although – as expected – at a slower pace. After a strong increase 
of 0.8% quarter-on-quarter in the first quarter of 2011, partly due to special factors, real GDP 
growth  decelerated  to  0.2%  quarter-on-quarter  in  the  second  quarter.  Looking  ahead,  we 
continue  to  see  the  euro  area  economy  growing  at  a  modest  pace  in  a  context  of  overall 
relatively sound economic fundamentals for the euro area as a whole. At the same time, not 
least because of the recently re-emerged tensions in financial markets, uncertainty remains 
particularly high. This mainly relates to ongoing fiscal and economic adjustment in a number 
of euro area countries and most other advanced economies, as well as the overall outlook for 
the global economy. In particular, the United States has been facing both fiscal and structural 
headwinds amidst weakened economic prospects.  
Inflation  in  the  euro  area  has  remained  elevated  for  some  months,  mainly  driven  by 
commodity prices. We expect to see inflation still above 2% over the months ahead. Risks to 
the  medium-term  outlook  for  price  developments  are  under  study  in  the  context  of  the 
ECB staff projections that will be released early September. 
Our  monetary  analysis  indicates  that  the  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion  remains 
moderate  but  monetary  liquidity  remains  ample,  with  the  potential  to  accommodate  price 
pressures. At  the  same  time,  monetary  liquidity  is  likely  to  be  held  more  for  precautionary 
reasons rather than for spending purposes. 
The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  is  determined  to  ensure  that  inflation  expectations 
continue to be firmly anchored in line with our aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close 
to, 2% over the medium term.  
II. 
Recent measures taken in response to the intensification of the crisis early 
August  
Let me turn to our response to the deterioration in financial markets in the second half of July 
and  early  August  in  the  euro  area  and  elsewhere.  Notably,  in  the  euro  area  the  renewed 
intensification  of  financial  market  turbulence  led  to  very  high  interest  rates,  potentially 
damaging volatility and very low trading volumes in some government bond markets that at 
times  ceased  to  function  appropriately.  The  tensions  to  some  extent  resembled  those 
observed in May 2010, but in some aspects they were more broad-based than what we had 
seen at that time.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
In view of these developments, the ECB decided earlier this month to continue conducting its 
refinancing  operations  as  fixed-rate  tender  procedures  with  full  allotment,  at  least  until 
mid-January 2012. “Full allotment” means that the Eurosystem fulfils, against collateral, in full 
the liquidity demands by any participating bank in our refinancing operations. Currently, the 
outstanding Eurosystem credit in our refinancing operations amounts to about € 530 billion, 
which  is  provided  in  operations  ranging  from  1  week  to  6  months.  We  decided  in  early 
August to conduct one refinancing operation with a maturity of approximately six months to 
help  banks  in  their  liquidity  planning,  and  enhance  support  for  their  lending  to  households 
and  corporations.  Currently  about  470  banks  participate  as  counterparts  in  our  refinancing 
operations;  and  over  6,000  banks  are  potentially  eligible.  The  total  value  of  marketable 
securities  eligible  for  Eurosystem  credit  operations  is  about  €  14,000  billion  (as  of 
31 December 2010; source: ECB Annual Report). Therefore, there is no liquidity or collateral 
shortage for the European banking system.  
The  ECB  resumed  government  bond  market  interventions  within  its  Securities  Markets 
Programme  (SMP)  in  August.  Via  its  securities  interventions,  the  ECB  Governing  Council 
aims at helping to restore a more appropriate transmission of its monetary policy stance in an 
environment  in  which  some  market  segments  are  dysfunctional.  The  interventions  do  not 
influence our monetary policy stance. In order to sterilise the impact of these interventions on 
the liquidity conditions in the banking system, we re-absorb the liquidity injected.  
On  the  broader  context  of  this  programme,  let  me  quote  what  I  said  in  May  20101:  “Our 
actions  are  in  full  compliance  with  the  prohibition  of  monetary  financing  and  thus  with  our 
financial  independence.  The  Treaty  prohibits  the  direct  purchase  by  the  ECB  of  debt 
instruments from governments. We are buying bonds on the secondary market only, and we 
stick  to  the  principles  of  the  Treaty,  which  are  price  stability,  our  primary  mandate,  and 
central bank independence. We expect from governments strict respect for the principle of 
budgetary discipline and effective mutual surveillance.  
The  purchases  made  on  the  secondary  market  cannot  be  used  to  circumvent  the 
fundamental  principle  of  budgetary  discipline.  The  Securities  Markets  Programme  strictly 
aims at correcting malfunctioning of markets. 
The prohibition of monetary financing underlines precisely the fact that budgetary discipline is 
of the utmost importance. We have taken note of the precise additional commitments taken 
by  some  euro  area  governments  to  accelerate  fiscal  consolidation  and  to  ensure  the 
sustainability of their public finances.” I have nothing to withdraw from these remarks of May 
2010. They remain fully valid.  
We  expect  from  governments  strict  respect  for  the  principle  of  budgetary  discipline  and 
effective  mutual  surveillance.  It  is  of  utmost  importance  that  these  commitments  are  now 
implemented strictly and timely. They need to be backed by concrete measures. This applies 
to both the IMF/EU adjustment programmes and the renewed commitment of all euro area 
governments to the agreed fiscal targets. The full and timely implementation of the 21 July 
agreement between Heads of State or Government is of essence in this respect.  
While a special arrangement for Greece has been launched, the inflexible determination of 
all other euro area governments to fully honour their own individual sovereign signature is 
key in returning to sustainable and healthy public finances and contribute to stable market 
conditions.  
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
1  Speech  on  “The  ECB’s  response  to  the  recent  tensions  in  financial  markets”,  Economic  Conference  of  the 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank, Vienna, 31 May 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
