Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Thailand’s economic outlook in 2011 
Opening  remarks  b  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  for  the 
JSCCIB  seminar  titled  “Thailand’s  investment  environment  –  looking  forward”,  Bangkok, 
21 July 2011. 
 Mr.  Chartsiri  Sophonpanich,  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Standing  Committee  on  Commerce, 
Industry and Banking (JSCCIB),  
Mr. Dusit Nontanakorn, Chairman of the Board of Trade of Thailand, 
Mr. Payungsak Chartsutipol, Chairman of the Federation of Thai Industries,  
Mr.  Nandor  G.  von  der  Luehe,  Chairman  of  the  Joint  Foreign  Chambers  of  Commerce  in 
Thailand (JFCCT), 
Distinguished Speakers and Guests, 
It  is  my  honor  and  a  pleasure  to  be  here  today,  to  give  our  distinguished  audience  an 
opening remark for this seminar, organized by the JSCCIB in cooperation with the JFCCT1. 
The theme, “Thailand’s Investment Environment: Looking Forward” is most timely and is of 
everyone’s  interest.  I  am  sure  that  the  discussion  and  exchange  of  views  and  ideas 
presented throughout the day will be fruitful and beneficial to both public and private sector 
alike.  
Before entering into a full-fledged panel discussion, I would like to give you, as an overture, 
an overview of Thailand’s economic outlook in 2011, focusing on two parts. The first part will 
convey that 2011 is the year of normalization in several aspects, and the second part is 
to  look  beyond  this  ongoing  normalization  process  and  lays  the  basis  for  many 
challenges ahead.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  over  the  past  years,  the  Thai  economy  has  been  very  resilient  to 
numerous economic shocks, ranging from the oil price shock, natural disasters such as flood 
and  drought,  series  of  political  uncertainties  as  well  as  the  2008  global  financial  crisis. 
Nevertheless,  Thailand’s  average  annual  growth  rate  for  the  last  decade  registered  at 
4.4 percent  which  is  within  the  range  of  our  estimated  potential  growth.  The  Bank  of 
Thailand  expects  economic  growth  for  this  year  to  return  to  this  normal  trend,  with 
moderate growth in the first half of the year and steady growth in the second half after the 
supply chain disruption unwound. This is the first aspect of returning to normalcy, or growth 
normalization, which is a feature of resilient economy.  
Such economic expansion is on the back of sound external and domestic demand. On 
the  external  side,  however,  risks  to  the  global  economy  have  increased  recently  due  to 
damages caused by Japan earthquake, a weaker-than-expected US economy and concerns 
over  Euro  area  fiscal  crisis.  These  developments  will  have  to  be  monitored  closely.  As  of 
now, we expect a slightly lower global growth prospect but this should not change Thailand’s 
economic outlook to the extent that derails the economy from its present growth path. 
In  particular,  Thailand’s  export  remains  robust.  Supply  chain  disruption  due  to  the 
Japan  earthquake  is  proven  to  be  limited  and  temporary;  limited  in  the  sense  that 
impacts are mostly felt in the production and exports of vehicles. Temporary in the sense that 
problems  in  Japan  have  been  mitigated,  at  the  same  time,  we  see  recovery  in  vehicle 
production for Thailand since late May.  
                                                 
1  JSCCIB stands for the Joint Standing Committee on Commerce, Industry and Banking. JFCCT stands for the 
Joint Foreign Chambers of Commerce in Thailand.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
As  for  the  domestic  side,  high  income  and  confidence  are  supporting  domestic 
economy going forward. Domestic demand, both consumption and investment have been 
and continue to be strong as underpinned by a high level of farm income, high employment, 
and good consumer and business confidence, complemented by a favorable credit condition. 
Tighter resource utilization also reflected these vibrant economic activities. The seasonally-
adjusted  unemployment  rate  fell  to  the  lowest  record  in  April.  Meanwhile,  the  capacity 
utilization rate is expected to accelerate in the second half of the year following the recovery 
in the vehicle sector.  
Overall, the economic momentum in 2011 remains sound. Nevertheless, political stability 
remains a key factor to facilitate this ongoing momentum. Having an orderly outcome of 
the election is one step, but the underlying conflict must continue to resolve in order to further 
boost confidence and business climate in the economy.  
Given the current economic development, the Bank of Thailand is more concerned with 
inflation  which  is  a  common  outcome  in  a  good  growth  prospect  environment. 
Increases in inflationary pressure have become a worldwide phenomenon particularly among 
emerging market economies. Thailand is no exception. Both headline and core inflation are 
expected  to  edge  up  from  last  year  despite  the  government’s  attempts  to  contain  inflation 
through administrative price controls.  
As such, the Bank of Thailand continues to gradually normalize the policy interest rate. At 
present,  the  policy  rate  is  still  deviated  from  the  norm  as  the  real  policy  rate  remains 
negative at around –0.7 percent. Thus, interest rate normalization is another feature for 
the  year  2011.  Last  Wednesday  rate  hike  marked  the  8th  increase  in  the  policy  rate  to 
3.25 percent. Many have asked at what level of interest rate the Bank of Thailand’s target is. 
There  is  no  definite  answer  to  when  the  upward  cycle  of  interest  rate  will  end. 
Theoretically, a desirable interest rate path would be the path that leads economy to 
its  potential  output  level  without  exerting  excessive  inflationary  pressure  on  the 
economy. However, this state is subjected to change with economic developments. Thus, 
the Monetary Policy Committee’s decision must be based  on their assessments of current 
economic development and outlook at each time of the meeting.  
Having said that, even if inflation has been curbed and the economy is on its normal trend 
growth,  Thailand  should  not  be  complacent  with  economic  normalcy.  We  need  to  look 
beyond  normalcy  which  is  the  second  part  of  my  focus  today.  Moving  the  country 
forward will be more challenging than the past especially now when competition intensifies 
across the globe. Raising productivity will be the key objective of economic development in 
this regard. 
Ladies and gentlemen, the current economic situation is comparable to the one in 2001 in 
the sense that the economy at both times has fully recovered from the crises, namely, the 
2008  global  crisis  and  the  1997  Asian  crisis.  However,  in  2001,  the  Thai  economy  still 
operated  at  the  level  far  below  the  potential  level.  At  that  time,  stimulus  policies  which 
encouraged  spending  were  suffice  to  lift  the  country  demand  to  the  level  closer  to  the 
potential output. Thus, the economy prospered without exerting much pressure on inflation. 
The  present  situation,  on  a  contrary,  characterized  by  rising  inflation,  reflects  that  the 
economy’s  capacity  is  operating  near  the  potential  level.  An  expansionary  fiscal  policy  is 
therefore no longer necessary. The situation today is not about bringing the economy to 
the potential level because we are already at it, but rather, it is about how to increase 
this  potential  level  of  output  which  has  to  be  done  by  improving  the  country’s 
productivity. 
Increasing productivity is a topic which has been discussed in many forums, nevertheless, let 
me stress again that to achieve such a goal, adequate investment in both physical capital 
and  human  capital  are  necessary.  In  this  regard,  there  are  several  challenges  for  all 
parties. For the new government, there will likely be three fundamental challenges.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
First,  the  government  must  find  the  right  balance  between  public  consumption  and 
investment. Over the last decade, government consumption has been gaining its share of 
the budget, while public investment growth was somewhat moderated. This does not bode 
well  for  productivity.  Thailand’s  infrastructure  continuously  needs  improvement  in  several 
areas, particularly logistics, irrigation and quality of education. These public investments will 
also  influence  private  investment  through  the  “crowding  in  effect”  as  public  and  private 
investment complement each other. Therefore, the government policies should be prioritized, 
be gradual and have specific target in their spending. Priority should be given to productivity 
enhancement  project  and  spending  should  be  selective  and  targeted  to  certain  areas  to 
ensure  policy’s  effectiveness.  At  the  same  time,  graduality  of  policies  is  necessary  to 
minimize inflationary pressure and allow time for private sector to adjust.  
Second, fiscal stance, like monetary policy, is also required to normalize in order to 
ensure  fiscal  discipline  and  sustainability.  In  a  time  of  normal  trend  growth,  there  is  a 
lesser  need  for  a  fiscal  stimulus.  Rising  public  debt,  together  with  increasing  contingent 
liabilities,  may  endanger  fiscal  sustainability  in  the  long  run.  Reforms  of  the  tax  revenue 
collection and tax structure should be implemented along with rising expenditure to ensure a 
healthy balance sheet of the fiscal sector. 
Third,  political  stability  is  a  vital  condition  to  the  private  sector  for  maintaining  an 
investment-friendly  environment.  These  three  challenges,  if  prevail,  will  put  Thailand  forth 
into a competitive frontier.  
Likewise,  the  private  sector  contribution  is  as  equally  important.  One  immediate 
challenge  which  businesses  face  today  is  the  problem  of  labor  shortages.  Under  a  strong 
baht  environment,  this  is  a  great  opportunity  to  import  and  invest  in  machinery  and 
equipment which will upgrade Thailand towards a more capital-intensive country. The private 
sector  can  also  help  to  improve  labor  quality  through  appropriate  education  and  training, 
which is one way to help spread the benefits to workers as their productivities improve. As a 
long-term  prospect,  shifting  input  factor  of  production  towards  capital  is  more 
superior than using immigrant labor  for  three  reasons.  First,  other  than  training,  capital 
investment  will  improve  labor  productivity  which  will  fully  benefit  Thai  labor  in  a  form  of 
increases  in  real  wage.  Second,  immigrant  labor  will  likely  worsen  income  inequality  as 
wages for low-skilled worker will be suppressed. Third, a cutting-edge technology as well as 
modern  machinery  and  equipment  help  facilitate  R&D  activities.  Therefore,  relying  on 
immigrant labor is not a long-term solution for Thailand. 
Promoting R&D investment is another key challenge for Thailand as current R&D spending is 
extremely low compared to our peers’ and only accounted for about 0.2 percent of GDP. The 
public and private sector must work together to promote R&D investment which then lead to 
value creation for the economy. In addition, businesses could speed up the R&D process by 
seeking regional alliance opportunity with strategic partner who can provide complementary 
advantage to us in the area.  
As  for  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  we  continue  to  improve  the  efficiency,  hence  the 
productivity, of the financial sector through the Financial Sector Master Plan II. It aims 
to  eliminate  unnecessary  regulatory  burdens,  increase  competition  and  improve  financial 
infrastructure  as  well  as  elevate  financial  literacy  with  sufficient  consumer  protection.  The 
payment  system  is  also  being  improved.  The  Imaged  Cheque  Clearing  and  Archive 
System or the ICAS, which allows physical cheques to be replaced by images in exchanges 
between commercial bank, is expected to be implemented within this year for the Bangkok 
and  vicinity  area  and  for  the  whole  Kingdom  at  a  later  stage.  This  more  efficient  payment 
infrastructure will eventually make Thailand a “one-day cheque clearing country”, which is a 
way to reduce financial cost of the private sector. 
Ladies and gentlemen, all parties can help improving the country’s productivity and let 
me now end my talk by stressing that our good economic fundamental and diversity make 
this  country  resilient to negative  shocks.  Returning  to  normalcy  is  one  resilient feature  but 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
moving  the  country  forward  in  a  global  competitive  arena  will  be  ever  more  a  challenging 
task.  A  strong  will  alone  is  not  enough,  all  parties,  including  Thai  and  foreign,  public  or 
private entity alike, must communicate, coordinate and take action in unity. I believe that with 
everyone’s efforts, we can prevail with prosperity for all. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
