Lim Hng Kiang: Towards a new era of growing connectivity between Asia and the 
Middle East 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Lim  Hng  Kiang,  Minister  for  Trade  and  Industry  and  Deputy 
Chairman  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  at  the  2nd  World  Islamic  Banking 
Conference: Asia Summit 2011, Singapore, 8 June 2011. 
Your Excellencies, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
1. 
I am honoured to be invited to deliver the opening address at the 2nd World Islamic 
Banking Conference: Asia Summit (WIBC Asia). I would like to extend a warm welcome to 
our overseas guests, especially our distinguished speakers who will be sharing their insights 
during this conference. 
Growing connectivity between Asia and the Middle East 
2. 
Despite  the  recent  spate  of  shocks,  the  world  economy  has  been  resilient  with 
growth projected to moderate slightly to 4.5%1, compared to 5.8% last year. Downside risks 
such as high energy and commodity prices, the European debt crises, geopolitical tensions 
in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) and the Japan tragedy have not substantially 
derailed the economic momentum. 
3. 
Asia  is  expected  to  remain  the  main  locomotive  driving  economic  growth.  The 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) projects Asia’s growth to reach almost 7% this year, led 
mainly by China at 9.6% and India at 8.2%. Asia has been, and will still be the key engine for 
global trade. In 2009, the region accounted for 35% of world exports, up sharply from 25% a 
decade  earlier2.  Within  Asia,  the  ASEAN-5  (Association  of  Southeast  Asian  Nations-5) 
countries3 are expected to expand by 5 to 6% this year and their external trade volume will 
reach around 60% that of China. ASEAN, which is a two-trillion-dollar economic grouping, is 
the fifth largest in the world in terms of purchasing power parity. ASEAN countries have been 
working steadily together towards greater economic integration and have committed to build 
the ASEAN Economic Community, a single market and production base, by 2015. 
4. 
In  2010,  MENA  as  a  whole  grew  3.8%,  led  principally  by  the  Gulf  Cooperation 
Council  (GCC)  economies.  Considering  the  uncertainty  in  parts  of  MENA,  the  IMF 
nevertheless still expects the GCC to grow by 7.8% this year, driven by the robust expansion 
of  oil  production  and  strong  public  spending.  The  medium-term  outlook  remains  good  as 
countries in the region lay the foundation for sustainable and diversified growth. 
5. 
Asia  will  become  increasingly  important  for  the  GCC  as  the  patterns  of  trade, 
investment and consumption shift from the West to the East. To reap greater benefits from 
these highly dynamic and fast-expanding regions, we should press on towards the goal of 
growing  connectivity  and  deepening  economic  cooperation  between  our  two  regions.  We 
                                                 
1  Sources:  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore,  Consensus  Economics  Inc,  weighted  by  shares  in  Singapore’s 
NODX. 
IMF, Regional Economic Outlook: Asia and Pacific, April 2011. 
2 
3  ASEAN-5 comprises Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand, Philippines and Singapore. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
need to create stronger linkages in the vital areas of trade and investment, business as well 
as financial linkages. There are several ways to achieve this: 
6. 
Firstly,  the  Asian  Development  Bank  (ADB)  has  identified  growing  South-South 
economic  linkages  via  trade  and  investment  as  a  potential  driver  of  global  growth  and 
emphasized the need for policymakers to further reduce barriers to trade and investment4. 
Trade between Asia, Middle East, Africa and Latin America has developed over the past two 
decades  but  still  remains  a  relatively  small  17%  proportion  of  world  trade.  Asia’s  share  of 
total trade with the GCC grew from just 10% in 1980 to 36% in 20095. Having identified this 
as a priority area, ASEAN and GCC foreign ministers met in Singapore last year and agreed 
upon  a  Plan  of  Action  to  boost  cooperation  in  trade  and  investment,  among  other  areas. 
Islamic  finance  can  potentially  play  a  part  in  facilitating  more  trade  between  Asia  and  the 
Middle East with the involvement of more global and Islamic banks from both regions. 
7. 
Secondly, the high level of savings and wealth accumulation in the GCC and Asia 
should  also  be  mobilized  by  the  financial  sector  and  channeled  towards  more  productive 
economic  uses  in  both  regions,  especially  to  meet  the  demand  for  national  infrastructure 
such as power plants, hospitals, roads and rail networks. The ADB Institute estimated that 
Asia  will  need  US$8.2  trillion  in  infrastructure  investment  between  2010  and  2020.  Seeing 
the  large  gap  between  the  demand  and  supply  of  infrastructure  investment,  the  ADB  and 
Islamic Development Bank (IDB) have jointly set up a US$500m Islamic Infrastructure Fund 
in 2009. Several ASEAN countries such as Malaysia and Indonesia have also outlined plans 
to tap global Islamic funding for their infrastructure projects.  
8. 
Thirdly, given the many ambitious initiatives and plans in the GCC for new industrial 
developments  and  infrastructure  projects,  the  Middle  East  remains  a  high-potential  market 
for  Asian  companies.  ASEAN-based  companies  should  therefore  invest  more  time  and 
resources to evaluate these opportunities and assess the risks, so as to help fill this demand. 
In  Singapore,  International  Enterprise  Singapore  and  the  Singapore  Business  Federation 
(SBF)  have  been  playing  a  vital  role  in  helping  our  local  companies  to  understand  and 
differentiate Middle East markets better and to expand their regional footprint. 
9. 
Lastly, many leading Middle East financial institutions have established a presence 
in Singapore to offer financial services such as wholesale banking, treasury services, trade 
finance,  and  wealth  management.  These  institutions  play  an  important  bridging  role  by 
guiding companies in the region to expand into the Middle East and vice versa. Bank Muscat, 
the largest bank in Oman, is the latest player to set up in Singapore. 
Sustaining the growth of Islamic finance  
10.  
As investors and businesses in the Middle East and Asia seek a wider range and 
diversity  of  financing  options  from  banks  and  capital  markets,  Islamic  finance  will  have  to 
respond  to  meet  their  rising  needs.  National  and  industry  players  have  to  work  closely 
together to address the many challenges faced by Islamic finance as it internationalizes into 
new markets. This morning, let me touch on just three issues, which I am sure you will be 
discussing in greater depth during the course of the conference. 
First, there is a fundamental need for further standardization and harmonization of 
11. 
both regulatory and Shariah standards across the Middle East and Asia. The greater use of 
standardized  legal  documentation  will  increase  efficiency,  certainty,  transparency  and 
liquidity.  This  would  allow  for  easier  cross-border  offering  of  financial  products  that  would 
reach a wider investor base and thereby bring about greater economies of scale and reduce 
transaction costs. Standardisation will also enable better risk management by ensuring that 
risks are clearly identified and appropriately mitigated between financial institutions and their 
                                                 
4  Asian Development Bank, Asian Development Outlook 2011 (April 2011). 
5  Economist Intelligence Unit, “GCC trade and investment flows: The emerging-market surge”, 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
counterparties. Shariah scholars and multilateral agencies such as the IDB, Accounting and 
Auditing  Organisation  for  Islamic  Financial  Institutions  (AAOIFI)  and  Islamic  Financial 
Services Board (IFSB) are already working to address these critical issues. As a member of 
the IFSB, the Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) will work with them in their efforts to 
allow greater access to an even larger global community, including non-Muslim countries. 
12. 
Second, we need to ensure that the legal and regulatory regimes remain robust in 
ensuring the safety and soundness of markets and institutions, and yet conducive for Islamic 
finance to grow at a sustainable rate. Some progress has been made on this front with the 
IFSB issuing new regulatory standards that serve as useful reference points for supervisors. 
However, as the global financial reforms take shape, all financial institutions including Islamic 
institutions  will  have  to  rethink  the  assumptions  underlying  their  business  strategies  and 
reassess their business models in light of the structural shift. They will have to retool their 
organizations so as to remain competitive and to serve their customers better. 
13. 
Third, the industry’s need for more manpower will be an important issue, given the 
lead time needed to develop new competencies. As Islamic finance becomes more widely 
accepted and more financial institutions begin to offer a greater variety of Islamic products, 
the demand for financial, accounting and legal professionals who are conversant with Islamic 
finance  will  rise.  In  this  regard,  institutes  of  higher  learning,  such  as  the  Singapore 
Management University’s International Islamic Law and Finance Centre, and quality training 
providers can play a vital role to increase the knowledge of Islamic finance, and develop new 
capabilities and products through industry-relevant research. 
Singapore’s role 
14. 
I  will  now  briefly  touch  on  Singapore’s  role  in  growing  connectivity  in  the  global 
arena.  Singapore  already  enjoys  excellent  and  long-standing  relations  with  the  GCC.  We 
have entered into investment guarantee agreements with Bahrain, Oman and Saudi Arabia 
and concluded the GCC-Singapore Free Trade Agreement in Doha in 2008 – the first such 
agreement signed by the GCC. We will do more to broaden our ties with the Middle East. 
15. 
We have identified three areas where Singapore can offer its services as a financial 
centre  to  support  the  growth  of  Islamic  finance  –  namely  in  wholesale  banking  services, 
asset management and capital markets. The MAS has facilitated the development of Islamic 
finance  in  Singapore’s  financial  markets.  Last  year,  we  saw  several  sizeable  cross-border 
transactions,  including  the  world’s  first  Shariah-compliant  data  centre  fund  (Securus  Data 
Property  Fund),  the  listing  of  the  world’s  largest  Islamic  Real  Estate  Investment  Trust 
(Sabana  Shariah-Compliant  REIT)  on  the  Singapore  Exchange,  as  well  as  Khazanah 
Nasional’s landmark S$1.5b Sukuk deal – the largest Singapore Dollar Sukuk to date.  
However, we need to continue working together with our key stakeholders to raise 
16. 
the  level  of  awareness  and  understanding  of  Islamic  finance,  and  to  enhance  the 
conduciveness  of  our  business  environment.  I  am  glad  that  the  SBF  and  industry  players 
such  as  The  Islamic  Bank  of  Asia,  CIMB  Islamic,  OCBC  Bank  and  Allen  &  Gledhill  have 
undertaken to organize business seminars to educate our local companies. 
17. 
To provide greater tax clarity and certainty to the industry, I am pleased to announce 
today that Singapore will issue new income tax regulations for Islamic finance. The Ministry 
of  Finance  will  provide  additional  clarification  and  detailed  explanation  of  the  income  tax 
treatment on more prescribed Islamic financing arrangements including financing through a 
partnership arrangement, project finance as well as interbank placement of funds6. This is in 
                                                 
6  The tax circular will cover Islamic financing arrangements based on Diminishing Musharaka (financing through 
a partnership arrangement) and Istisna (project financing) and interbank placement based on Wakala (agency 
contract) and Murabaha (sale at cost-plus) concepts. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
keeping  with  our  long-standing  principle  that  Shariah-compliant  products  should  not  be 
disadvantaged in terms of regulatory and tax treatment where the economic substance and 
risks are similar to conventional products. We hope that this will expedite the development of 
more such financial products in Singapore. 
Conclusion 
18. 
To  sum  up,  the  Middle East  and  Asia  continue  to  present attractive  opportunities. 
Both  regions  need  to  work  closer  together  to  achieve  greater  synergy  and  accelerate  the 
global  growth  of  Islamic  finance.  Singapore  will  play  its  part  in  this  international  effort 
together with our regional and industry partners.  
I am glad to see more players from Middle East and Asia participating in this year’s 
19. 
Summit. I hope that you will take up the challenge to work together to spur the development 
of Islamic finance as a bridge between Asia and the Middle East. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
