K C Chakrabarty: Linking entrepreneurship with credit – the role of the 
financial system 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
XII Convocation of Post Graduate Diploma in Business Entrepreneurship and Management 
and Post Graduate Diploma in Management of NGOs at the Entrepreneurship Development 
Institute of India (EDI), Ahmedabad, 4 April 2011. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Shri  Bazil  Shaikh  and  Smt  R  Kaushalya  in  preparation  of  this  address  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
1.  
Shri  R.M.  Malla,  President-EDI,  Members  of  the  Governing  Council,  Director 
Dr. Dinesh  Awasthi,  invited  dignitaries,  faculty  members,  passing  out  students  and  their 
parents, members of the print and electronic media, ladies and gentlemen. It is, indeed, a 
pleasure to be here amongst graduating students and I am thankful to Shri Malla and the EDI 
for this opportunity especially when it is an opportunity to return to my home state, Gujarat. A 
galaxy of speakers have addressed this forum in the past, this being the XIIth convocation. I 
am aware of my limitations to speak on an occasion such as this as I am neither an industry 
leader nor an academic. Nevertheless, I shall try to come up to your expectations.  
2.  
Convocations are always special. They are special because they are simultaneously a 
conclusion and a commencement. Convocations logically conclude a formal learning exercise. 
They are hence a time for relief, a sense of fulfilment and a feeling of joy to the graduating 
students and to the faculty. They are, however, even more special, because they commence a 
lifelong informal learning as graduates step out into the University of the World – step out with 
dreams, hope and expectation into the terra incognita of life. In our days when we passed out, 
it  was  not  a  dream  but  a  nightmare,  because  of  the  difficulty  in  getting  employment.  Now 
employment is available everywhere in the world. There are three types of employment. There 
are jobs with no work where one gets a salary without working. There are jobs where one can 
work for certain hours and get paid accordingly, and there are jobs where one can create and 
fulfil  one’s  dreams,  create  employment 
is  self-employment  or 
entrepreneurship. You belong to this class. It is a rare privilege to share this special day with 
the future businesses and social entrepreneurs of the country.  
3.  
You pass out as alumni from a venerable institution. While the EDI commenced its 
capacity building initiatives in 1983, we must not forget that its genesis dates back to 1969. 
The late 1960s were a period when India undertook brave experiments to use credit as an 
instrument  of  development.  In  fact,  entrepreneurship  and  credit  are  interrelated.  The  most 
important and perhaps the most significant amongst the public policy moves in this direction 
were  the  experiments  to  do  away  with  guarantees  and  collateral  and  move  from  “security 
based  lending”  to  “purpose  based  lending”.  The  entire  development  of  entrepreneurship 
would not have been possible if this transition had not taken place. 
The underlying thoughts in this policy intervention were that credit and finance were 
4.  
instruments of empowerment. By unfettering credit from security, those who were able and 
willing, creative and talented would not be constrained by lack of funds. The security for the 
funds  lent  would  not  be  physical  assets  but  the  discounted  value  of  cash  flows  that  the 
enterprise would generate. This marked a decisive shift in methods of lending – it reoriented 
lending from a static to a dynamic concept. Moreover, it was centred around people – the 
living entrepreneur rather than on inanimate physical capital. My present organization, RBI, 
plays a very significant role in this change. 
5.  
Such a policy shift was rooted not only in equality of opportunity which is enshrined 
in the Indian constitution and the need to provide employment, but, most importantly, it was 
rooted in the belief that it is talent and not necessarily capital that can make the difference; in 
for  others,  and 
that 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the  belief  that  resourcefulness  and  not  merely  resources  matter.  The  key  to  India’s 
development, thus, lay in unleashing the latent entrepreneurial potential of the country – the 
critical aim was to free those with talent and ideas from capital constraints. We had various 
problems but we were unleashed in the 1990s after a wait of 30 years. 
6.  
Entrepreneurship  and  finance  alone  are  not  sufficient.  Conducive  Conditions  are 
needed for entrepreneurship to thrive. To create a nurturing ecosystem conducive to building 
business,  a  host  of  policy  measures  have  been  put  in  place  by  central  and  state 
governments,  RBI,  and  other  institutions.  These  include  creating  infrastructure  –  financial 
institutions  to  lend,  institutions  to  assist  with  technical  skills  development,  assistance  with 
technological up-gradation, marketing, consulting, as well as capacity building in the form of 
entrepreneurship development programmes. I will be taking up some of these aspects which 
will be of help to you. 
7.  
The  purpose  of  capacity  building  was  to  draw  out  the  latent  talent  and  potential 
existing in society and provide the necessary guidance for it to flower when ideas meet with 
opportunity.  It  was  hoped  that  entrepreneurship  efforts  would  not  only  provide  self-
employment but the businesses would grow at a steady if not at a rapid pace. This would 
create further jobs opportunities, spur growth and mitigate migration. 
8.  
One of the early capacity building initiatives was the “Technician Scheme” launched 
in  1969  by  two  state-level  agencies  of  Gujarat  which  envisaged  100%  finance  without 
collaterals.  This  initiative,  over  time,  coalesced  into  the  setting  up  of  the  Entrepreneurship 
Development Institute (EDI) of India at Ahmedabad in 1983 as a joint effort of the IDBI, ICICI, 
IFCI and SBI. The EDI has since been spearheading entrepreneurship development efforts 
in India and, as an apex body, has played a critical role in India’s economic development.  
9.  
Today, it is heartening to see that the EDI is incubating talent not only for budding 
entrepreneurs who with their risk taking abilities will change the economic landscape of the 
country, but also for those idealists with starry notions who wish to change the country and 
the  world  and  make  a  difference  to  the  existence  of  others  through  its  course  in  NGO 
management. 
10.  
While the strategic aims for stimulating entrepreneurship have changed over time, 
the  core  purpose  of  inducing  dynamism  in  the  economy  remains  constant.  When  the  EDI 
was set up, it was hoped that entrepreneurship would stimulate India’s economic growth and 
provide  employment.  The  entrepreneurship  initiatives  of  today  are  helping  sustain  India’s 
growth  trajectory.  And,  as  I  see  you,  the  entrepreneurs  of  the  Class  of  2011,  I  trust  that 
entrepreneurship  of  tomorrow  will  surely  pitch  India  for  a  leadership  position  through 
innovations  and  ideas.  The  EDI,  thus,  has  its  hands  full  for  the  next  two  decades  for 
generating a new quality of entrepreneurial capital. I will briefly dwell on a few questions.  
Entrepreneurship: does it matter? 
11.  
First,  does entrepreneurship matter? Schumpeter and much later Kirzner certainly 
thought  it  did.  Indeed,  economists  often  add  entrepreneurship  as  the  fourth  factor  of 
production to the traditional trinity of Land, Labour and Capital. They saw an entrepreneur as 
an  innovator,  risk  taker  and  arbitrageur  who  introduced  new  technology,  competition  and 
created  new  markets.  More  recently  “entrepreneurial  capital”  is  a  term  that  is  increasingly 
being employed. 
12.  
Empirical  evidence  whether  the  level  and  rate  of  entrepreneurship  are  significant 
determinants  of  economic  growth,  productivity  or  employment,  is  mixed.  However,  the 
general consensus is that entrepreneurship matters not merely from its impact but also in the 
context of human development.  
13.  
Entrepreneurship  in  India  comes  in  four  shades.  First,  is  entrepreneurship  for 
survival. Typically, this involves promoting poverty alleviation and self employment projects 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
such  as  basic  animal  husbandry,  petty  business,  etc.  The  finance  vehicles  for  these  are 
poverty alleviation schemes and, today, this form of entrepreneurship is the focus of micro-
finance activities and banks in the rural areas. 
14.  
Secondly, there is entrepreneurship that relies on internal business sense for local 
ventures. These typically consist of employees with practical / technical skills striking out on 
their own such as producing ancillary items. These largely involve proven technologies and 
cater to established markets. 
Thirdly,  there  is  “add  on”  or  “lifestyle”  entrepreneurship  which  consists  of  life-
15.  
partners starting businesses on a part time basis such as tailoring, catering, pickle making, 
beauty parlours, day-care centres etc. These are driven by various motives – most start with 
the need to augment domestic resources especially during times of job losses of partners. 
Others do it for non-monetary benefits associated with being their own bosses and setting 
their  own  schedules.  At  times,  some  of  these  activities  succeed  to  an  extent  that  they 
become primary activities.  
16.  
Finally,  there  is  entrepreneurship  driven  by  ideas  and  innovation.  Typically,  these 
are start ups that have a well-defined growth plan and exit strategy and rely for funding on 
venture  capital  or  institutional  finance.  Typically,  these  involve  new  or  relatively  untried 
technologies  and  often  untried  promoters.  These  high  risk  ventures,  when  they  succeed, 
create  breakthroughs  and  have  the  potential  to  create  substantial  wealth.  The  success 
stories  are  legendary  and  too  many  to  enumerate.  It  is  in  this  realm  of  break-through 
technologies  and  innovation,  where  India  has  lagged  for  500  years  while  the  Industrial 
Revolution took place in the West, that the future of Indian entrepreneurship lies if India is to 
fully tap its greatest resource – its talent pool. It is here that you will contribute by bringing in 
new ideas and utilizing new technologies in the knowledge based activities. 
17.  
To  sum  up,  entrepreneurship  matters  for  both  growth  and  for  development.  It 
matters  not  merely  for  employment  generation,  the  development  of  backward  regions, 
mitigating  economic  concentration,  and  for  spurring  innovation,  but  also  to  enhance  the 
capabilities of society and enhance people’s freedoms and choices. Looking ahead, it is the 
area of entrepreneurial innovation, specially in the knowledge industry that has the potential 
to  pitch  India  into  an  economic  leadership  role,  which  then  can  make  a  difference  to  our 
development trajectory. 
Entrepreneurship and finance 
18.  
What then is the role of finance? While the entrepreneur brings in ideas, techniques, 
innovations and passion which go to constitute entrepreneurial capital, it needs to be backed 
by  command  over  a  real  resource.  This  is  provided  by  finance.  Finance,  thus,  enables 
entrepreneurship to become the fourth factor of production.  
19. 
India  has,  in  many  ways,  pioneered  the  concept  of  dovetailing  credit  into  the 
country’s  development  endeavours.  The  original  purposes  were  poverty  alleviation  and 
employment generation. The policy interventions were premised on providing credit to draw 
out  the  entrepreneurial  spirit.  This,  it  was  hoped,  would  enable  large  sections  to  lift 
themselves out of the vicious circle of poverty, create employment, spur growth, and contain 
rural to urban migration.  
Policy  measures  include  the  concept  of  priority  sector  lending  which,  through 
20.  
affirmative  action,  helps  channelize  credit  to  small  and  medium  industries;  collateral  free 
lending for loans up to Rs 10 lakh; guidelines for faster processing of loan applications by 
banks;  allowing  composite  loans  for  working  capital  and  term  loans;  specialised  MSME 
branch  in  most  districts;  adoption  of  the  cluster-centric  approach;  guidelines  to  expedite 
payments  to  MSME  suppliers;  collective  forums  to  resolve  issues  relating  to  MSMEs 
including State Level Inter-Institutional Committees (SLIICs) amongst others. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Today  institutions  such  as  SIDBI,  NABARD,  EXIM  Bank,  Housing  Finance 
21.  
Institutions (HFIs), and State Finance Corporations, the various commercial banks as well as 
venture  capital  providers  and  Micro  Finance  Institutions  are  a  part  of  the  financial 
infrastructure for providing finance to small entrepreneurs and to spur entrepreneurship. 
22.  
These  financial  institutions  have  played  a  critical  role  in  India’s  quest  to  draw  out 
entrepreneurship.  First,  they  have  been  instrumental  in  making  available  consultancy  and 
advisory services to entrepreneurs at a reasonable cost by setting up a network of Technical 
Consultancy  Organizations  (TCOs).  Second,  they  have  helped  spread  the  entrepreneurial 
culture  across  the  country  and  to  weaker  sections  of  the  society  by  providing  financial 
assistance  to  first  generation  entrepreneurs.  Third,  their  contribution  to  capacity  building 
through  entrepreneurship  development  programmes  (EDPs)  which  are  a  precondition  for 
lending  to  prospective  entrepreneurs  has  been  notable.  Finally,  they  implement  a  host  of 
government programmes such as the Prime Minister’s Employment Generation Programme 
(PMEGP).  These  programmes  not  only  provide  incentives  and  subsidies  but  also  impart 
technical skills, hand-holding support and assistance.  
from  providing 
for  entrepreneurship.  The 
Creating conducive ecosystems: role of government 
23.  
Entrepreneurship and finance are not ends in themselves. They require a favourable 
ecosystem  and  here  is  where  you  have  the  role  of  government.  Complementing  finance, 
entrepreneurship  needs  a  conducive  ecosystem  to  thrive.  What  is  the  support  a  budding 
entrepreneur  can  avail  of?  First,  the  central  and  state  governments  have  created  an 
extensive  infrastructure  at  the  central,  state  and  district  levels  to  create  an  enabling 
ecosystem 
technical 
infrastructure  ranges 
consulting facilities and advisory services to incubating projects.  
24.  
Many  of  these  infrastructure  initiatives  go  back  a  long  way  when  a  host  of 
institutions were set up. Some of these were the Small Industries Development Organisation 
(SIDO)  (1954),  the  Small  Industries  Services  Institutes  now  known  as  Micro,  Small  and 
Medium  Enterprises  Development  Institutes  (MSMEDIs),  the  District  Industrial  Centres 
(DICs),  etc.  These  organisations,  had  their  own  problems,  but  are  now  in  a  phase  of 
reinventing  themselves.  For  instance,  SIDO  is  now  an  agency  for  advocacy,  hand  holding 
and facilitation for the small industries sector providing a wide spectrum of services to the 
small industries sector.  
25.  
Capacity  building  endeavours  have  been  very  considerable.  These  are  organised 
not  only  by  the  national  and  state  level  institutions  such  as  the  national  entrepreneurship 
institutes at Ahmedabad, Noida, Hyderabad and Guwahati and MSMEDIs but also by various 
Industrial Training and Vocational Training institutes through specialized courses supported 
by the Ministry of Medium, Small and Micro Enterprises (MSME).  
26.  
to  create  a  culture  of 
entrepreneurship. This has been attempted by including entrepreneurship into the education 
curriculum. Entrepreneurship Development Cells (EDC) has been set up across the country. 
This  was  followed  by  the  Science  &  Technology  Entrepreneurs  Park  (STEP)  programme 
coordinated by the National Science and Technology Entrepreneurship Development Board 
(NSTEDB).  The  major  objective  of  STEP  is  to  forge  linkages  among  academic  and  R&D 
institutions on one hand and the industry on the other. 
27.  
start-up entrepreneurs are provided by Technology Business Incubation (TBI) Mechanisms. 
28.  
Finally,  there  are  hand  holding  schemes  such  as  the  Rajiv  Gandhi  Udyami  Mitra 
Yojana  (RGUMY)  which  provide  handholding  support  and  assistance  to  the  potential  first 
generation entrepreneurs, who have completed EDP or Vocational Training programmes. 
A  range  of  critical  support  services  and  needed  facilities  to  nurture  and  support 
facet  of  Government  policy  has  been 
Another 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Can entrepreneurs be created? This question is cast in the mould of the nature vs. 
29.  
nurture debate. There are no answers. However, ingrained in the idea of EDCs, the STEP 
programme  and  Technology  Business  Incubation  and  MSME  initiatives  is  the  idea  that  by 
creating  the  right  and  conducive  ecosystem  and  by  education  and  capacity  building, 
entrepreneurship  talent  latent  in  society  can  be  drawn  out,  and,  perhaps,  this  conducive 
ecosystem can also create new entrepreneurs. 
Inclusive growth and social entrepreneurship 
30.  
From the 1990s India’s growth rate has accelerated from the Hindu rate of growth of 
3.5%. India has had much to celebrate over the past two decades on the economic front. It 
has  become  one  of  the  world’s  fastest  growing  economies.  Indian  companies  have  made 
their mark abroad and indeed many are transforming themselves into multinationals with a 
global  presence.  Most  important,  there  is  a  new  found  sense  of  confidence.  Confidence 
reposed by the world in us and confidence by us in ourselves. There certainly is the feeling of 
“Yes, we can!”. To sustain this momentum, it is important that the growth that we have seen 
is inclusive, people centric and translates into overall development. It is important that this 
feeling and confidence permeates all sections of society and none are left out of the India 
growth story. Without this we will not be able to sustain high growth. 
While the growth story has been impressive, there are causes for concern on other 
31.  
dimensions.  Issues  of  income  distribution  are  important.  We  have  a  long  way  to  go  in 
addressing concerns of absolute poverty. In the context of human development, the country 
ranks 119 among 169 countries on the 2010 Human Development Index published annually 
by the United Nations Development Programme. We compare poorly on almost all indicators 
such  as  life  expectancy,  education  and  per  capita  income.  We  have  issues  of  water, 
sanitation, power, infrastructure and environmental degradation. More importantly, there are 
issues  of  social  and  economic 
inequalities  and  multiple  deprivations.  All  budding 
entrepreneurs have to face these challenges and find solutions. 
32.  
With  these  concerns  in  view,  Government  of  India  has  adopted  the  strategy  of 
inclusive growth in the ongoing Eleventh Five Year Plan. This entails triggering a series of 
development  process  that  ensures  broad-based  improvement  in  the  quality  of  life  of  the 
people, especially the poor, and the underprivileged. A number of schemes seek to address 
issues  of  livelihood  and  seek  to  act  as  social  security  nets.  To  make  these  schemes  and 
policy  interventions  effective,  it  is  important  that  the  common  person  in  general  and 
beneficiaries in particular have access to the banking sector to receive and make payments 
on their own account. As inclusive growth is not possible without financial inclusion, “financial 
inclusion” has become a major policy plank. RBI vision is that everyone in the country should 
have  access  to  financial  products  and  services  but  our  immediate  objective  is  that  every 
village with a population exceeding 2000 (and subsequently all villages) should be covered 
either by a bank branch or through a business correspondent by 2012. The rationale behind 
this is that access to finance, along with fair and transparent products/services, is a source of 
empowerment and allows people to participate more effectively in the economic and social 
process. Our dream of inclusive growth will not be complete until we create millions of micro-
entrepreneurs across the country. 
33.  
In  this  context  of  inclusive  development,  the  course  in  social  entrepreneurship 
offered at the EDI assumes importance. While the term social entrepreneurship is new, the 
activity of building social capital is not. In the mid 19th century Raiffeisen innovated the credit 
unions  and  set  in  motion  the  cooperative  movement;  Vinobha  Bhave  led  the  Bhoodan 
Movement  pooling  and  redistributing  land;  closer  to  the  present,  social  capital  built  by 
pioneers  such  as  Ela  Bhatt  of  SEWA,  Kurien’s  AMUL  initiative  or  Mohammed  Yunus’s 
Gramin Bank have charted new directions and have led the way. 
34.  
India,  today,  is  home  to  the  largest  number  of  NGOs  in  the  world.  A  recent 
government  study  estimates  the  number  of  NGOs  at  3.3  million.  This  is  many  times  more 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
than the number of primary schools and primary health centres in India. While we have the 
comfort  of  numbers,  we  do  not  have  the  comfort  of  commensurate  results.  We  trust  that 
some in our midst, who are stepping out to pursue a career in the social sector and become 
agents of social change, will not only fill in this deficit but will also pioneer new areas. 
Of profits and ideals 
35.  
While much of social capital creation has been driven by idealism and the non profit 
sector,  a  view  that  is  fast  gaining  ground  is  there  is  profit  while  serving  the  bottom  of  the 
pyramid  –  and  that  creating  access  to  essential  services  and  products  for  under-served 
communities – rural or urban, below or above the poverty line, can be profitable. In fact we 
believe that commerce for the poor is more profitable than commerce for the rich. Our young 
entrepreneurs should not forget this cardinal rule. 
36.  
While the idea is both innovative and has proved effective, we here tread a difficult 
area.  Business  entrepreneurship  is  easy  to  handle.  Its  immediate  results  are  easily 
quantifiable in wealth created and jobs generated. Social entrepreneurship is more difficult. 
Their efficacy can be gauged by changes in society. Social change and the creation of social 
capital are certainly commendable activities. However, any advocacy for social change and 
the nature of social capital created is rooted in values and one has to exercise due care and 
caution in imposing the values of one society on another. 
The issue of ethics 
37.  
As you graduate from the EDI, what is it that you should hold fast to? First, is the 
issue  of  values  and  ethics.  The  cries  for  values  and  ethics  in  business  stem  from  what  is 
alluded  to  as  the  “crisis  of  confidence”.  These  concerns  have  exacerbated  in  the  wake  of 
unexpected corporate failures and high profile collapses both abroad and in India. I will not 
spend time on the global meltdown which is well known. 
38.  
What then are the qualities needed to make ethical decisions? First, is the ability to 
recognise ethical issues; second, the ability to reason through the ethical consequences of 
decisions;  third,  the  ability  to  deal  with  ambiguity;  fourth,  the  ability  to  distinguish  between 
ends and means; fifth, the courage to go by conviction rather than consequences; sixth and 
most  important,  cultivating  the  integrity  to  face  ethical  dilemmas  that  you  will  face  in  the 
course of your career head on and to resolve them. Here, we should remember that, as in 
sport, what is important is not winning, but playing a fair game. Playing a fair game, may lead 
to failures and lost battles, but will surely win you the war in the arena of life.  
39.  
Schumpeter  referred  to  the  entrepreneur  as  “Mann  der  Tat ”  or  a  Man  (person)  of 
Action. The entrepreneur, he said, was someone who does not accept reality as it is. If there 
exists no demand for a good or service, the entrepreneur will create such a demand; s/he will 
make  people  want  it.  S/he  acts  decisively  and  does  not  feel  the  restrictions  that block  the 
actions of the other economic actors. 
40.  
While  you  may  strive  to  achieve  the  Schumpeterian  ideal,  I  must  caution  that  do 
whatever  you  have  to  do,  bounded  however,  by  ethical  norms.  These  norms  cannot  be 
taught in a class room; these will be learnt in the crucible of life. Pursue substance and not 
form. Remember, it is not compliance to set norms that matters, but what you feel deep down 
in  your  heart  is  fair  and  right;  seeking,  in  Wallerstein’s  words,  “the  good,  the  true  and  the 
beautiful”. 
41.  
And now for the customary homilies. As you leave the portals of this institution, we 
trust you will be persons of action, with hopes, aspirations and dreams. Dream on, but take 
care not make dreams your master. Enjoy what you do and do it with passion. Ensure that 
the excitement, passion and romance in building a new organisation and creating something 
new is shared by all in your team. Take those you work with, along with you. Deal with failure 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
as a guide and with triumph with humility. And most important, cultivate a sensitivity to the 
rights and vulnerabilities of others. 
42.  
Where you are concerned, the EDI and the faculty have done their job. It is now for 
you  to  go  out  and  find  yourselves.  Lastly,  three  pieces  of  advice,  which  I  give  to  primary 
students  and  postgraduates  alike,  which  you  should  remember  is,  first,  “be  information 
literate”, i.e. third generation literate. It is not enough to be a first generation literate, i.e. you 
know how to read and write, or to be second generation literate, i.e. to be computer literate, 
but  to  achieve  information  literacy.  When  transiting  to  a  knowledge  society  and  to  be  a 
successful entrepreneur, it is critical to be information literate. Second, you are passing out of 
EDI  and  have  dreams.  Many  of  you  will  be  highly  successful.  But  remember  to  “avoid 
complacency” during good times. Downturn may come any time. Third, life is not easy; it is 
difficult, whether of an individual or an institution. Bad times may come, and sometimes, all 
bad things will come together. In such times, do not become desperate. Do not lose hope, 
but  pray,  “wait  and  hope”  because  good  times  will  return.  I  look  forward  to  a  challenging, 
prosperous, and enterprising career for all of you passing out today. 
I wish you all the very best. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
