Denton Rarawa: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Solomon Islands 
Address  by  Mr  Denton  Rarawa,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Solomon  Islands,  at  the 
opening of the new ANZ branch, Honiara, 16 August 2011. 
 Mr. Vishnu Mohan, CEO ANZ North West Pacific 
Mr. Barry Sowman, CEO ANZ Bank Solomon Islands 
Staff of ANZ Bank 
ANZ Clients 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
Good Evening 
Let  me  thank  the  ANZ  Bank  for  the  kind  invitation  to  officiate  at  the  opening  of  this  new 
branch  facility  this  evening.  It  is  indeed  an  honor  and  privilege  for  me  to  be  part  of  this 
occasion.  
I am very encouraged when financial institutions in Solomon Islands expand their services 
through  opening  of  new  branch  facilities  and  financial  products  in  the  country.  This  allows 
financial  deepening  in  the  economy  and  brings  banking  financial  services  closer  to  their 
clients and the people. This, in turn promotes financial inclusion in the country.  
In this regard, I would like to congratulate and commend ANZ bank for the opening of this 
new  branch.  It  is  another  example  of  your  long  term  commitment  to  delivering  banking 
services in Solomon Islands.  
And the presence of Mr Vishnu Mohan, CEO ANZ North West Pacific makes this event extra 
special. Your presence with us this evening further reaffirms ANZ’s strong commitment and 
support to Solomon Islands.  
ANZ BANK OPERATIONS IN SOLOMON ISLANDS 
ANZ’s history in Solomon Islands go back a long way. I am told that ANZ established its first 
branch in the country in October 1966.  
Today  ANZ  is  the  biggest  bank  in  the  country  with  6  branches  and  an  extensive  range  of 
EFTPOS and ATM terminals. The development of electronic banking services continues to 
grow enabling more convenient and efficient ways of processing payments.  
ANZ  is  also  involved  in  providing  rural  banking  services  in  Guadalcanal  and  Malaita 
provinces serving 10,000 clients. The bank is further looking to the development of mobile 
phone banking in the country early next year. This will further benefit rural communities in the 
country.  
ANZ is a significant contributor to the banking system in the country and it is heartening to 
see that ANZ continues to invest in growing their presence in our country.  
For  this,  I  commend  ANZ  for  its  many  years  of  service  to  the  people  of  Solomon  Islands. 
ANZ has indeed played a valuable role in advancing Solomon Island’s financial system and 
also its economic development.  
I am sure that ANZ customers will appreciate this additional facility to conduct their banking 
business. This branch certainly has a modern look and feel about it. I feel as if I am in an 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
ANZ  branch  in  Sydney  or  Brisbane.  ANZ  has  certainly  raised  its  standard  in  terms  of  its 
facilities.  I  know  it  is  not  cheap  but  this  is  what  I  mean  when  I  say  that  Solomon  Islands 
deserve the best or world class facilities and products and not the “fitim Solomon” facilities 
or products.  
UPDATE ON SI ECONOMY 
Let me provide a brief update on our recent economic performance. At the beginning of this 
year we projected the Solomon Islands economy to grow by around 6 percent, slightly lower 
than last year. Based on available data for the last seven months, it appears that growth for 
2011 would be the same or even higher than last year.  
Economic  performance  in  the  first  half  of  2011  had  been  robust  with  key  macroeconomic 
indicators showing positive outcomes.  
In the Real Sector the production of all commodities were strong in the first half of 2011 with 
copra doubling, palm oil up 14%, cocoa up 26%, fish up 17% and logs up by 50%. Of great 
interest is log production, with total output up to July reaching 1,143,222 cubic meters. At this 
rate, total log production for 2011 would reach 1.9 – 2.0 million cubic meters.  
Gold production has also come on stream and is contributing to the country’s exports and 
growth.  
In the External Sector, strong commodity prices and production have led to:  
 
Improvements in the trade account with the June quarter posting a trade surplus, the 
first since 2006.  
Marked  improvement  in  export  receipts,  lower  import  payments,  donor  and 
investment inflows contributed to the positive outcome in the external sector.  
 As a result, foreign reserves rose by 24% to SBD$2.6 billion by last week, or equivalent to 
over 10 months of import cover.  
In the Monetary Sector, money supply (M3) grew by a moderate 3.0% as opposed to 0.8% 
growth  in  the  same  period  last  year.  At  the  same  time  credit  growth  has  been  subdued 
resulting in:  
 
A  22%  increase  in  liquidity  since  December  2010  despite  the  Central  Bank 
absorbing more than $200 million of this liquidity from the banking system.  
In terms of government finances, the country’s fiscal position has improved markedly. With 
sound  fiscal  management,  revenue  collection  has  increased  and  expenditure  contained 
within budget allocations. The Government had been able to build up its cash reserves. 
On  the  downside  and  a  major  concern  is  that  of  inflation.  Inflationary  pressures  in  the 
economy  are  being  driven  predominantly  by  external  sources  mainly  food  and  fuel  prices. 
Inflation in June 2011 was 7.3%, up from 1.3% in November 2010.  
The good news is that there are indications that the drivers of inflationary pressures in the 
country are easing. For example, fuel prices at the pump stations have declined, and further 
reduction is expected in the months ahead.  
The macro picture ladies and gentlemen, is that our economy is expected to record strong 
growth again this year. In fact, Solomon Islands is one of the few high growing economies in 
the region. I hope this will be an encouragement for all of us to continue to work hard for the 
betterment of our country.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
MONEYPACIFIC GOALS 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  want  to  say  a  few  words  about  financial  literacy  and  the 
MoneyPacific goals. Many of you may not be familiar with the MoneyPacific goals. These 
goals have been endorsed by the Ministers of Finance and Ministers of Education of Pacific 
Islands Forum Countries. The Governors of the central banks in the region including RBNZ 
and RBA have also given their approval to these goals. The aim is to achieve these goals by 
2020.  
The four MoneyPacific goals are:  
 
 
 
 
These  four  goals  can  be  reduced  to  three:  (1)  financial  education,  (2)  consumer 
protection  and  (3)  access  to  basic  financial  services.  Let  me  just  elaborate  further  on 
these goals and briefly report on the activities of the National Financial Inclusion Taskforce 
established early this year to address these issues.  
All school children to receive financial education through core curricula.  
All adults to have access to financial education.  
Simple and transparent consumer protection to be in place.  
To halve the number of households without access to basic financial services. 
Financial education 
We  all  agree  that  a  financially  literate  and  informed  person  usually  makes  sound  financial 
decisions.  The  same  applies  to  a  financially  literate  and  informed  population.  So  financial 
education is critical in any country because a lot of the decisions we (as individuals or as a 
country) make everyday involves finances.  
And better still, if financial education is introduced in our national education curriculum and 
taught in our primary and secondary schools. In this regard I am pleased to inform the public 
that  work  has  started  to  introduce  financial  education  into  our  primary  and  secondary 
schools.  Hopefully,  in  the  not  too  distant  future,  we  will  produce  a  generation  of  Solomon 
Islanders that are financially literate and equipped with basic entrepreneurial skills when they 
leave school.  
Consumer protection 
We always refer to the customer/consumer as the king. If our customers are kings then we 
should  look  after  and  treat  them  as  kings.  Therefore  having  simple  and  transparent 
consumer protection mechanisms in place is critical.  
For example, in the financial system, consumers need to be aware of the fees and charges 
they  have  to  pay.  What  do  they  do  and  where  do  they  go  if  they  have  complaints  about 
financial services and products?  
To  this  end,  the  Central  Bank  will  soon  introduce  a  voluntary  Banking  and  Financial 
Institutions Code for financial institutions in the country.  
I hope our banks and other financial institutions will sign up to this code because it is very 
important that our customers/consumers are protected and well informed. 
Access to financial services 
To achieve this objective, there is increasing focus on the use of technology as a means of 
overcoming the physical barriers to extending financial services in rural areas. The use of the 
mobile phone as channel to extend coverage of financial services to a greater portion of our 
rural people is a good example. There is also special emphasis on ensuring greater access 
to financial services by our women.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  three  goals  I  have  just  highlighted  form  the  key  activities  of  the  National  Financial 
Inclusion Taskforce (NFIT) established early this year. And I am encouraged that ANZ and 
other banks in the country are proactive members on the taskforce. And on their own banks 
have also been very proactive in conducting financial inclusion activities for their clients and 
the wider public.  
I  am  confident  that  with  on-going  support  from  all  stakeholders,  Solomon  Islands  would 
successfully achieve the MoneyPacific goals ahead of the other countries in the region.  
OFFICIAL OPENING 
Ladies and gentlemen, without taking anymore of your time, I would like to thank Barry for 
inviting me to this important occasion. I wish Barry and his team on-going success in their 
activities in Solomon Islands.  
With  these  few  words,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  now  have  the  pleasure  in  declaring  ANZ’s 
new Honiara Central branch here at the Hyundai Mall officially open.  
Thank you very much. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
