Subir Gokarn: Regulatory perspectives on derivatives markets in India 
Keynote address by Dr Subir Gokarn, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
International  Options  Market  Association,  World  Federation  of  Exchanges  Annual 
Conference, organised by the National Stock Exchange, Mumbai, 4 May 2011. 
 Inputs  from  Sudarsana  Sahoo,  Edwin  Prabhu,  Rajib  Das,  H.S.  Mohanty,  Nishita  Raje  and  G.  Mahalingam  are 
gratefully acknowledged. 
Introduction 
It  is  a  pleasure  for  me  to  be  speaking  at  this  conference  organized  by  the  International 
Options  Market  Association.  The  presence  and  role  of  derivatives  in  India,  both  OTC  and 
Exchange  traded,  has  been  increasing  steadily  over  the  years.  These  instruments  are  an 
important  component  of  the  overall  financial  sector  strategy  and  the  broad  regulatory 
objective is to ensure that they are used to their potential in ways that are consistent with 
both financial development and the contribution of financial markets to economic growth. 
I would like to begin by laying out a simple framework, which helps us think about financial 
sector development in terms of multiple objectives. This will provide a useful backdrop to the 
various issues relating to derivatives in India, which I will then go on to talk about. 
Financial sector development can broadly be viewed as pursuing four objectives. 
Efficiency: We can look at the notion of efficiency from two perspectives. For the provider of 
products and services, it means the ability to do this at the lowest possible cost, with the full 
benefit  of  technology  and  market  infrastructure.  For  the  user,  efficiency  relates  to  the 
availability  of  products  and  services  which  address  his/her  requirements  at  the  lowest 
possible price. 
Stability: From the viewpoint of the financial system, stability requires that aggregate risk is 
bounded  in  some  way.  This  requires,  in  turn,  that  individual  participants  be  required  to 
mitigate  and  manage  their  own  risks.  However,  in  situations  in  which  systemic  risk  goes 
beyond the aggregate individual risk, additional measures may be warranted. 
Transparency: The basic premise is: “what cannot be measured cannot be managed”. The 
more market participants know about overall activities and outcomes, the better able they are 
to  make  their  cost-benefit  calculations  and  act  on  them,  contributing  to  the  overall 
effectiveness of the market. 
Inclusion:  Financial  development  is  not  an  end  in  itself.  It  serves  the  broader  purpose  of 
facilitating economic activity, through resource mobilization and risk management. The more 
accessible the financial system is to individuals in pursuit of these two objectives, the better. 
Against this backdrop, I will address four sets of issues : 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
The landscape for OTC derivatives in India 
Regulatory concerns and steps taken 
The roadmap for OTC derivatives 
The development of markets in India. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The landscape for OTC derivatives in India 
The  primary  OTC  derivatives  in  India:  Interest  rate  derivatives  –  Interest  rate  swaps  (IRS) 
and forward rate agreements (FRA); FX derivatives- FX forward, options and swaps.  
The  IRS  and  FRA  were  introduced in  July  1999  to  help  banks  and  PDs  to  better  manage 
their  interest  rate  risk  in  the  wake  of  deregulated  interest  rate  regime.  Swaps  having 
explicit/implicit option features such as caps/ floors/ collars are not permitted.  
Currently,  there  are  four  benchmarks  used  in  Rupee  IRS,  viz.  MIBOR,  MIFOR,  INBMK, 
MIOIS.  The  trading  is  mainly  confined  to  MIBOR  benchmark.  The  average  daily  traded 
volume  in  the  MIBOR  swap  over  the  last  three  years  is  placed  at  Rs.8,873  crore,  quite 
comparable  with  that  of  the  G-Secs  at  Rs.  10,937  crore.  Often  the  daily  traded  volume  in 
MIBOR swaps remained above that of the G-Secs.  
Of the MIBOR swaps, the swaps on overnight MIBOR, i.e. OIS, is the most actively traded 
instrument.  The  OIS  trades  are  mainly  confined  to  1-year  tenor,  followed  by  2-year  and 
5-year tenors. 
The  relatively  high  volumes  suggest  that  the  product  is  providing  a  useful  way  of  hedging 
against interest rate risk. However, it needs to be pointed out that the market is mainly driven 
by inter-bank transactions. Customer-related transactions comprise only about around 1 per 
cent  of  the  volume.  Also,  the  participation  profile  remained  skewed.  The  share  of  foreign 
banks is at above 80%, whereas the share of public sector banks is at around 1%. The OIS 
curve has been below the G-Sec curve for most of the time.  
In the OTC FX derivatives, forwards have been the most widely used instrument followed by 
swaps  and  options.  USD-INR  futures  had  picked  up  substantial  volume  since  their 
introduction in August 2008, but the forwards still possess the dominant market share.  
It is evident that hedgers generally still prefer OTC forwards to futures, as these provide the 
benefit of customization, does not involve cash flows related to daily MTM margining and are 
linked to final remittances of foreign currency funds. Increased trading volume in the futures 
market is mainly attributed to the speculative interest in the backdrop of non-requirement of 
underlying exposure, absence of any restriction on cancellation and re-booking and above all 
the cash settlement which obviates the need for payment of principal amount. Significantly, 
easy arbitraging between the forward and futures had kept the spread between the futures 
and forward quite tight.  
Regulatory concerns and steps  
The recent global financial crisis has brought to light the weaknesses of the OTC derivatives 
market. Firstly, the complexity and opacity of the OTC market facilitated excessive risk taking 
by  the  market  participants.  Secondly,  the  lack  of  information  about  the  counterparties 
coupled with non-availability of the transaction information with the regulators led to seizure 
of the market. Thirdly, the bilateral counterparty risks have become complex given the variety 
of  structures  and  asset  classes  used  by  the  market  participant.  Further,  with  increase  in 
volumes  and  complexities  of  the  OTC  derivatives,  the  infrastructure  for  clearing  and 
settlement became a major impediment.  
We  believe  that  the  OTC  derivative  markets  in  India  are  well  regulated.  Some  of  the  key 
regulatory safeguards available in the OTC derivative transactions are: 
1. 
One  of  the  counter  parties  to  the  OTC  derivative  transactions  has  to  be  a  RBI 
regulated entity. 
Users  are  permitted  to  transact  in  derivatives  essentially  to  hedge  an  underlying 
exposure. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
2. 
2 
 3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
There are clear prescriptions about the roles and responsibilities of market makers; 
mostly banks and primary dealers (for interest rate derivatives) are permitted to act 
as market makers. 
The  market  maker  has  the  responsibility  for  assessing  customer  suitability  and 
appropriateness  and  they  are  required  to  fulfill  the  prescribed  set  of  requirements 
while selling any product to a user.  
The overall framework within which derivative transactions are to be undertaken has 
to be guided by the Board approved policy. The risk management framework should 
lay down the procedures to deal with any violation of risk limits.  
All derivative products are required to be marked to market if a liquid market in the 
product  exists  or  otherwise  marked  to  model,  provided  all  the  model  inputs  are 
observable  market  variables  and  full  particulars  of  the  model,  including  the 
quantitative algorithm are documented. 
In the aftermath of the global financial crisis, the principal theme of discourse internationally 
is to improve the efficiency and reliability of the OTC derivative markets. Two broad steps in 
this direction are (a) clearing and settlement of OTC derivative transactions through Central 
Counterparties (CCP) and (b) mandating reporting of OTC derivatives trades to designated 
trade  repositories.  Against  this  backdrop,  it  must  be  pointed  out  that,  over  the  years,  the 
Bank  had  taken  several  measures  to  improve  the  transparency  and  efficiency  of  OTC 
derivatives market. Some of the major ones are: 
1. 
The  Bank  had  instituted  mandatory  reporting  system  for  the  OTC  derivative 
transactions.  The  banks  have  been  mandated  to  report  the  inter-bank  IRS  trade 
data  on-line  to  CCIL  since  August  2007.  The  client  level  trade  data  are  also  now 
collected from the banks. In case of FX derivatives, the AD category-1 banks report 
the  aggregate  details  of  transactions  in  forward  contracts,  currency  swaps  and 
currency options to the Bank at fixed periodicity. The Bank uses the trade level and 
aggregate  level  data  to  monitor  the  overall  market  wide  exposure  as  well  as  the 
exposure level of the individual market makers along with their exposures to specific 
derivative instruments.  
The Bank has facilitated greater use of central clearing counterparty (CCP) based 
clearing  and  settlement  system  for  OTC  derivative  transactions  which  helps  in 
reducing the risk of financial loss through counterparty default and provides capital 
relief. Currently, the transactions relating to FX forward are settled on guaranteed 
basis through CCIL. The process for introduction of guaranteed settlement of IRS 
transactions is underway.  
Thirdly,  the  level  of  transparency  has  been  improved  by  way  of  increased 
dissemination of price and volume information. The price and volume data improves 
the risk management efficiency of the market participants and enhances the price-
discovery  function.  Moreover,  it  offers  greater  degree  of  protection  to  the 
unsophisticated class of end-users.  
2. 
3. 
The roadmap for OTC derivatives in India 
A  number  of  initiatives  for  the  further  development  of  OTC  derivatives  in  India  have  been 
initiated. Some of the major ones are: 
New Products: The product on anvil is the Credit Default Swap (CDS). The draft guidelines 
on  CDS  were  placed  on  RBI’s  website  in  February  2011  for  public  comments.  CDS  on 
corporate  bonds  issued  by  single  legal  residential  entities  have  been  proposed,  with  the 
underlying  bonds  to  be  listed  ones,  but  with  two  exceptions:  unlisted  but  rated  bonds  of 
infrastructure  companies  and  unlisted/unrated  bonds  issued  by  the  SPVs  set  up  by 
infrastructure companies. The final guidelines are expected soon. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Trade Repository: CCIL has been acting as the trade repository for IRS transactions since 
August 2007. There is no such trade repository structure for the FX derivatives at present. 
There  are  proposals  to  introduce  repository  structure  for  USD-INR  forwards  (including 
swaps) and options. 
Central counterparty clearing: CCIL has put in place guaranteed settlement for FX forward 
transaction effective from the date of contract since December 2009. In case of IRS, CCIL 
has  been  providing  non-guaranteed  settlement  since  November  2008.  It  is  expected  to 
transit to guaranteed settlement for IRS transactions shortly. 
Portfolio  Compression:  An  important  innovation  in  OTC  derivative  markets  introduced 
during the last few years relates to portfolio compression services. Since the only way to exit 
a  position  in  an  OTC  derivative  is  to  enter  into  another  with  opposite  pay  off,  the  gross 
notional  outstanding  multiplies  manifold  as  a  result.  Huge  build-up  in  gross  notional 
outstanding demands higher capital charges and reduces the available counter-party limits 
for  undertaking  other  business  transactions.  Moreover,  it  does  not  capture  the  economic 
essence of the portfolios. CCIL is the process of developing trade compression services.  
Generally  speaking,  our  approach  to  financial  markets  development  has  been  calibrated, 
keeping  in  mind  the  overall  objectives  of  financial  sector  development.  Particularly  at  this 
juncture, while we intend to expand set of products and instruments available, we also wish 
to  emphasize  the  improvement  in  the  pre  and  post-trading  infrastructure  as  well  as 
consolidation of the regulatory regime so that financial stability is not threatened. 
Development of markets in India  
Exchange  traded  products  provide  the  benefits  of  transparent  pricing  and  robust  risk 
management. The Reserve Bank introduced currency futures and interest rate futures on the 
exchanges with a view to increasing the depth and breadth of the derivatives market, in turn 
helping to provide an effective risk management framework to users.  
Currency futures were launched on the National Stock Exchange (NSE) in August 2008 and 
subsequently on other exchanges. European style option on USD-INR pairs was launched 
on  NSE  and  USE  in  October  2010.  The  biggest  challenge  in  designing  a  framework  for 
exchange traded currency derivatives in India was the prevailing regulatory system for the 
OTC  products.  In  the  OTC  environment,  there  is  an  elaborate  framework  for  regulating 
transactions,  including  derivatives,  and  the  presence  of  an  underlying  exposure  is  an 
essential requirement. It was not possible to carry over this requirement onto the exchange 
traded  market.  To  deal  with  this,  even  if  partially,  position  limits  have  been  imposed  on 
exposures to exchange traded products.  
Interest Rate Futures (IRF) contracts on 10-year notional coupon bonds were launched on 
NSE in August 2009. Persons resident in India and FIIs have been permitted to participate in 
the  market.  The  product  witnessed  significant  activity  during  the  initial  period,  but  liquidity 
tapered off subsequently. The muted market response to IRF is generally attributed to the 
illiquidity nature of the underlying G-sec market and lack of hedging interest in the wake of 
present HTM regime.  
Notwithstanding this experience, RBI has already issued guidelines for futures contracts on 
91-day  T-Bills,  which  are  expected  to  be  introduced  shortly.  We  are  also  considering 
introduction  of  IRF  contracts  on  2  year  and  5  year  G-Secs  to  provide  the  products  at  the 
shorter end which would offer flexible hedging options to the market participants.  
Concluding remarks 
I would like to go back to the four-objective framework with which I began my presentation. 
The roadmap for the development of derivatives, or for that matter, any new financial product 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
or  service,  will  strive  to  maintain  a  balance  between  these  four  objectives.  From  this 
perspective, the approach should be neutral to the form and nature of the product or service; 
it should be concerned only with whether it is helping to meet the objectives, or at least not 
detracting from any of them. I would particularly like to emphasize the objective of inclusion, 
which, in this context, looks at the desirability of a product in terms of how effectively it might 
meet  the  requirements  of  a  very  heterogeneous  group  of  producers  of  various  goods  and 
services. 
Taking the specific example of OTC forex products, it is apparent that they remain attractive 
to a majority of people with forex exposures because they can be customized to the specific 
characteristics of each transaction. However, the parallel development of the futures market 
suggests  that  there  may  be  some  complementarities  between  the  two.  A  hub-and-spoke 
analogy comes to mind, with OTC products serving as the spokes and the counter-parties to 
these  transactions  then  aggregating  their  exposures  and  managing  them  with  exchange 
traded products. Although this phenomenon is not quite prevalent in India at present, for me, 
this provides a useful way to think about the overall roadmap, with each component playing a 
legitimate role. 
I  would  like  to  thank  the  organizers  for  inviting  me  to  deliver  the  keynote  address  at  this 
IOMA Conference and trust that it has been a useful input.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
