Mugur Isărescu: Economic governance in the European Union 
Speech  by  Mr  Mugur  Isărescu,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Romania,  at  the 
Conference  “Economic  Governance  in  the  European  Union”,  jointly  organized  by  the 
European  Commission,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  the  National  Bank  of  Romania, 
Bucharest, 10 June 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Distinguished audience, 
It is a pleasure be the host of the Conference on “Economic Governance in the European 
Union”, an event jointly organized by the European Commission, the Ministry of Finance and 
the National Bank of Romania.  
We are glad to welcome you all and our special guests: Mr. Gheorghe Ialomiţianu – the 
Romanian  Minister  of  Finance,  Mrs.  Elena  Flores,  Director  for  Policy  Strategy  and 
Coordination  in  the  European  Commission’s  DGECFIN,  Mr.  Theodor  Stolojan,  Member  of 
European Parliament and former Prime Minister of Romania, Mrs. Iuliana Dascalu, Director 
in  the  Finance  Ministry  of  Romania,  Mr.  Hans  Martens,  chief  executive  of  the  European 
Policy  Centre  Think-tank  and  Mr.  Daniel  Dăianu,  Economics  Professor,  former  Member  of 
European Parliament and Finance Minister of Romania. 
A  special  note  of  thanks  to  my  colleagues  Deputy  Governor  Cristian  Popa  and  the 
Chief Economist Valentin Lazea, who, together with our special guests, have responded to 
the challenge of debating a hot topic.  
In  these challenging times,  economic governance was brought to the spotlight by the 
recent global economic and financial crisis. 
Governance may be seen as the manner in which power is exercised in the management of 
a  country’s  social  and  economic  resources  for  development.  We  all  know  that  good 
governance involves setting adequate policies, programs and regulations, which then have to 
be  translated  into  legislation.  As  I  often  say,  sustainable  development  hinges  on  the 
consistency of economic policies – there is no substitute for consistent, sound and 
stability-oriented economic policies.  
In this context, institutions are central to the way a country is governed and these are 
the  formal  and  informal  rules  in  a  society.  As  the  Nobel  Prize  winner  Douglas  North 
pointed  out  “the  formal  rules  are  set  by  the  state  through  laws  and  regulations,  while  the 
informal rules come from the culture, history and experience of each society”.  
Only in the last 10–15 years most economists have discovered good governance – with its 
four pillars: transparency, accountability, predictability and participation – as a major 
determinant  of  economic  growth.  Thus,  economic  governance  implies  the  need  to  ensure 
stable, transparent and predictable rules that encourage competition and fair access to public 
services. It is achieved through a country’s public and private sector institutions and the civil 
society. 
Moreover,  the  recent  international  crisis  has  underscored  the  need  for  an  in-depth 
reform of economic governance at both European and global levels. As the European 
Central Bank president, Mr. Jean-Claude Trichet has recently underlined “the international 
interdependencies are too large for purely national or regional rules to be optimal and there 
is a clear need to strengthen global governance, in particular in the financial field”. 
In the case of the European Union, the crisis has exposed fundamental weaknesses of the 
European economy, revealing growing internal imbalances. The functioning of the European 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
reinforcing the common economic agenda with closer European Union surveillance 
safeguarding the euro area stability  
and repairing the financial sector 
Monetary  Union  has  been  under  particular  stress  as  the  existing  surveillance  procedures 
proved to be not comprehensive enough.  
Therefore, more effective economic governance in the European Union and the euro area is 
seen  as  achievable  through  five  main  pillars:  fiscal  discipline,  broader  economic 
surveillance, closer coordination, a robust framework for crisis management, stronger 
institutions and rules-based decision making.  
At this point, let me say that just recently the European Union has taken important decisions 
to  ensure  that  Member  States  coordinate  their  economic  policies  more  closely.  The  new 
economic governance is therefore based on three main responses to the crisis: 
• 
• 
• 
As a result of these decisions, the EU’s interdependent economies will be better placed to 
chart a path to growth and job creation.  
To  conclude,  I  would  like  to  emphasize  here  that  economic  governance  is  a  topic  that 
concerns us all. I would say it is all about discipline – particularly fiscal discipline, and 
a changing culture.  
I am sure that, under the umbrella of this complex topic, all these issues are full of substance 
so that I strongly encourage participants to debate on the challenges the European Union, in 
general,  and  countries  like  Romania,  in  particular,  face  when  it  comes  to  economic 
governance. 
I wish you success and invite Mr. Gheorghe Ialomiţianu, Romania’s Minister of Finance, to 
deliver his address. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
