Ardian Fullani: Overview of recent economic developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the  Monetary  Policy  Decision  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  Supervisory  Council,  Tirana, 
27 July 2011. 
 Today,  on  27  July  2011,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  reviewed  and 
approved  the  Monetary  Policy  Statement  for  2011  H1.  Based  on  the  analysis  of  Albania’s 
latest economic and financial developments and following discussions on their performance 
outlook, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania decided to leave the key interest rate 
unchanged at 5.25 %. The Supervisory Council holds that the actual monetary conditions are 
appropriate  for  meeting  the  inflation  target  and  for  continuing  to  stimulate  the  economic 
activity. 
Let me now proceed with an overview of economic developments and main issues discussed 
at today’s meeting of the Supervisory Council.  
*** 
The Albanian economy continued to grow during 2011 H1, although in the presence of added 
challenges  generated  by  the  internal  and  external  economic  developments.  Tensions  in 
global  economies  and  financial  markets,  as  well  as  increased  prices  of  raw  materials  and 
foodstuff  led  to  shrinkage  of  Albania’s  economic  activity.  The  first  factor  raised  the 
uncertainty  of  economic  agents  as  well  as  risk  premiums  in  financial  markets,  while  high 
inflation imported from world markets decelerated domestic demand and increased inflation 
expectations at home. Despite unfavourable factors, Gross Domestic Product posted growth 
and main macroeconomic balances and financial stability remained stable. 
According  to  INSTAT  data,  Albania’s  annual  economic  growth  was  3.4%  in  the  first 
quarter,  supported  by  the  fiscal  stimulus  of  this  period  and  foreign  demand  for  Albanian 
products.  On  the  other  side,  private  consumption  and  investments  continue  to  be  slow, 
reflecting cautious consumer behaviour and existence of spare production capacities in the 
economy respectively.  
The Bank of Albania deems that economic activity posted similar growth even in the second 
quarter, with higher contribution of the private sector and downward public sector and foreign 
demand. 
Consumer  prices  were  under  added  inflation  pressures  during  2011  H1,  mainly  due  to 
foreign price increase in global markets. Average annual inflation during the first and second 
quarters of the year was 4.0% and 4.1%, respectively. 
As  regards  the  consumer  basket  items,  prices  of  processed  foodstuffs  had  the  main 
impact  on  the  formation  of  annual  inflation.  Their  contribution  to  headline  inflation  floated 
around 55%, close to this indicator’s all-time record. Inflation of non-food consumer goods, 
such as oil and other day-to-day consumer goods and services, was an added contribution to 
consumer price hike. On the other hand, the contribution of non-processed foods to inflation 
was stable.  
Gradual upsurge of domestic food products supply during the second quarter, balanced the 
effect of these items price increase in international markets. Lastly, administered prices and 
increased excise on some products had an increasing impact on annual inflation, albeit lower 
compared to a year earlier. 
Concerning the macroeconomic aspect, a number of factors contributed to inflation at this 
period, with various degrees of intensity and opposite directions of action. Upward inflation 
pressures  were  generated  mostly  by  conjunctures  of  raw  material  and  primary  commodity 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
prices  in  international  markets.  Imported  inflation  was  transmitted  directly  to  increased 
consumer goods prices in Albania. It exercised additional pressures on production costs and 
inflation expectations, but these second-round effects remained controlled. Furthermore, the 
negative output gap continued to exercise downward pressures on prices balancing, in part, 
the effect of foreign price increase. The expansion of economic activity continues to be below 
the potential of the economy, leaving unutilized capacities in the labour and capital markets. 
Under these conditions, inflationary pressures from the real sector of the economy remain 
controlled. This is reflected also on the base inflation performance, which, although upward, 
remains anchored within the Bank of Albania’s medium term inflation target.  
Moreover,  monetary  indicators  generated  contained  inflation  pressures,  reflecting  also  a 
prudent monetary policy of the Bank of Albania. In March, the Supervisory Council of the 
Bank of Albania decided to increase the key interest rate by 0.25 basis points, to 5.25%. This 
decision  was  made  in  response  to  added  inflation  pressures  of  foreign  origin.  It  aimed  at 
retaining the anchoring of economic agents expectations on inflation and minimising second-
round effects. Even after this increase, domestic monetary conditions remained stimulating 
and provided the economy with the appropriate support at this stage of its development. In 
line  with  the  action  time-span,  this  measure  is  considered  to  have  been  effective  in 
signalising the commitment of the Bank of Albania to comply with its inflation target and keep 
inflation  expectations  under  control.  In  addition,  it  kept  unchanged  the  stimulating 
characteristic of the monetary policy and conditions as reflected in comparatively low interest 
rates, banking system ample liquidity and exchange rates favouring Albanian exports. 
Let me now focus on economic highlights defining the inflation performance as well as their 
expected development. 
In line with its past year’s performance, the expansion of the Albanian economy during the 
first and second quarters of 2011 relied mostly on the industry and services sectors growth. 
Owing  to  foreign  demand,  industrial  output  increased  by  12.3%  in  annual  terms,  providing 
major contribution to the expansion of the economy in the first quarter. The services sector, 
topped by “Trade, hotels and restaurants”, continued to support economic growth, although 
less than last year’s quarters. This sector’s annual growth marked 1.8% in the first quarter of 
2011.  The  services  sector  performance  is  closely  connected  to  consumer  spending 
performance,  which  I  will  address  later.  After  five  quarters  of  contraction,  the  construction 
sector  posted  annual  growth  of  4.6%,  triggered  by  higher  public  investments  during  this 
period. Lastly, agriculture maintained growth and contribution rates similar to the last quarter 
of 2010.  
Indirect  data  obtained  from  business  surveys  and  monetary  indicators  suggest  that  this 
performance is and will continue to be along the same lines even during the second quarter 
and beyond. 
On the demand side, economic activity relied mostly on foreign demand and public spending, 
while private sector contribution was low. 
Indirect data support the assessment for a weak private consumption performance during 
2011 H1. In spite of increased available income and improved bank lending – as indicated by 
higher  employment,  real  wage  and  consumer  and  house-purchase  loans  –  consumer 
confidence  was  low.  The  Albanian  consumer  continues  to  be  cautious  in  spending, 
displaying added saving preference over a number of quarters. Naturally, this behaviour is a 
structural  correction  of  the  consumption  model  shown  over  the  past  years,  but  the  slow 
performance of consumer spending reflects, also, added uncertainty about the future.  
While  the  first  component  is  welcomed,  in  the  context  of  preserving  macro-  and  micro 
balances,  the  second  component  may  and  should  be  corrected:  households  consumption 
has the potential to grow and be stimulated in the short and medium run. Taking into account 
the significant impact of consumption on the GDP, its performance will substantially condition 
economic growth during this time span. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Private  investments  increased  at  moderate  pace  during  2011  H1  as  illustrated  by  higher 
loans  for  investment  and  imports  of  capital  goods.  Although  financial  terms  –  availability, 
liquidity  and  bank  interest  rates  –  are  significantly  improved,  the  existence  of  spare 
capacities in the economy limits the demand of businesses for investment. In the short run, 
the position of economic activity operating below its potential conditions a slow performance 
of  investments.  In  the  medium  run,  investments  performance  will  reflect  developments  in 
internal and foreign demand performance. Given the need for a more competitive Albanian 
economy  and  its  further  orientation  towards  exports,  stimulation  of  investment,  increase  of 
production capacities and adoption of more advanced processes and technologies should be 
priorities of the country’s development policies, in the macro- and micro economic aspects. 
Public expenditures provided a positive contribution to the aggregate demand of 2011 H1. 
Following  the  consolidated  behaviour  of  last  year,  the  fiscal policy  was  a  stimulating  one 
during  this  period.  Public  spending  increased  by  7.4%  in  annual  terms,  led  primarily  by 
current expenditures, with an added positive contribution of capital expenditures as well. On 
the  other  hand,  budget  revenues  were  slow,  increasing  by  1.1%  in  annual  terms.  The 
differences of growth rates for revenues and public spending materialised in the expansion of 
the  public  deficit.  In  GDP  terms,  budget  deficit  at  the  end  of  2011  H1  stands  at  4.1%  or 
about 1.5 p.p. higher than a year earlier. Expanded fiscal policy was more present during 
the first quarter of the year, while in the second quarter it was more moderate. Revenue and 
spending  growth  rates  reduced  during  the  second  quarter,  leading  to  the  need  for  the 
revision of the 2011 budget, in order to retain the parameters of public finance soundness in 
the  short  and  long  run.  On  the  other  hand,  measures  to  control  budget  deficit  through 
reducing public spending implies modelling the fiscal stimulus during the second half of 2011. 
Foreign  demand  continued  to  provide  a  positive  contribution  to  the  aggregate  demand. 
Nevertheless, as expected, its positive impact was lower than a year earlier. During the first 
five months of the year, Albanian exports increased by 23.3% y-o-y, which is lower compared 
with 2010. On the other hand, deterioration of trade terms and internal demand performance 
triggered the increase of imports in the first half of the year.  
Value of imports increased 14.1% y-o-y during January–May, thus, leading to higher trade 
deficit.  Following  its  narrowing  in  2010,  this  deficit  expanded  by  approximately  8.8%  y-o-y 
during this period.  
Trade deficit expansion, negative foreign currency flows in the services account and lower 
remittances are reflected in the expansion of the current account deficit in the first quarter, at 
the end of which, this deficit was at 11.8% of the GDP, illustrating the fragile position of the 
external sector of the economy. 
The  performance  of  the  four  demand  components  led  to  positive,  but  below  potential, 
economic growth during 2011 H1. Unutilised capacities in the economy controlled production 
costs and generated controlled inflation pressures. 
Monetary  indicator  analysis  confirms  our  assessments  for  contained  inflation  pressures 
suggesting  that  money  supply  growth  rates  are  moderate  and  in  line  with  the  economy’s 
demand  for  real  money.  In  average  terms,  M3  annual  growth  was  11.3%  in  January–May 
triggered  by  a  steady  growth  of  deposits  in  the  banking  system.  Demand  for  money  is 
dominated by public sector demand for funding, while the private sector’s demand was more 
moderate. Lending to the private sector increased on average by 11.5% during the first five 
months of the year, about 1.5 p.p. higher than 2010 H2. In contrast to previous years, lending 
is oriented more towards the national currency: ALL-denominated loans increased by about 
14% as at May. Lending continues to be impacted by a moderate demand for loans while the 
banking system has adopted prudent lending practices, with tightened lending standards for 
certain market segments. 
Financial markets were calm reflecting low risk premiums and a good liquidity situation. In 
the interbank market, interest rates fluctuated around the key interest rate, following its latest 
increase in March. The increase in the key interest rate is also followed by the yields in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Government securities primary market and is reflected less in the ALL-denominated deposits 
and loans, due to factors of liquidity and risk that accompany financial intermediation. The 
yields curve has retained its trend, indicating low inflation premiums in financial markets. 
Summing  up  the  expected  economic  performance,  our  projections  and  assessments 
suggest  that  economic  growth  will  continue  even  in  2011  H2.  Aggregate  demand  will  be 
supported less by the public sector and foreign demand, while the private sector is expected 
to  provide  a  larger  contribution  to  the  economy.  Nevertheless,  economic  growth  is  not 
expected to fill completely the negative output gap. The Albanian economy will continue to 
have spare capacities in the capital and labour markets, avoiding potential wage – inflation 
spirals and producing contained inflation pressures in the medium run.  
In  addition,  imported  inflation  is  expected  to  decline  and  administered  prices  effects  are 
expected  to  be  eliminated  in  the  medium  run.  In  the  presence  of  anchored  inflation 
expectations by economic agents, the Bank of Albania deems that consumer price inflation 
will gradually settle close to its target of 3% in the period ahead. 
 Drawing on the information above, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania deemed 
that inflationary pressures remain, in the short run, high. However, they are controlled and in 
the medium run they are expected to follow a downward trajectory.  
In the absence of unexpected shocks, inflation is expected to be within the target band of the 
Bank  of  Albania  throughout  the  monetary  policy  time  horizon.  Inflationary  expectations  of 
economic agents continue to be within the inflation target range, which is essential under the 
conditions of the simultaneous presence of the negative output gap and high foreign prices. 
The Bank of Albania is fully committed for anchored inflationary expectations in compliance 
with  its  inflation  target  and  stands  ready  to  accomplish  its  mandate,  by  preventing 
materialisation of constant pressures on inflation. 
We deem that the monetary conditions are appropriate to stimulate economic growth, without 
generating  additional  inflationary  pressures.  Given  the  fragile  equilibriums  of  the  Albanian 
economy, this philosophy will continue to lead our activity in the period ahead. 
At  the  conclusion  of  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  concluded  that  the  monetary 
conditions  remain  appropriate  for  meeting  the  medium-term  inflation  target  and  decided  to 
leave the key interest rate unchanged at 5.25 %. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
