Ryuzo Miyao: Economic activity and prices in Japan and monetary policy 
Summary of a speech by Mr Ryuzo Miyao, Member of the Policy Board of the Bank of Japan, 
at a meeting with business leaders, Oita, 23 March 2011. 
 Introduction  
It is my honor today to talk to Mr. Kugimiya, Mayor of Oita City, and business leaders in Oita 
Prefecture.  And  I  express  my  gratitude  for  your  understanding  and  cooperation  in  various 
business operations of the Bank of Japan’s Oita branch.  
First,  I  extend  my  deepest  condolences  to  the  people  hit  by  the  Tohoku-Pacific  Ocean 
Earthquake,  particularly  those  who  have  lost  their  loved  ones.  The  earthquake  was  the 
biggest  on  record,  and  the  damage  has  been  geographically  widespread.  The  quake  has 
exerted various adverse effects on daily life and economic activity, as seen in the heightened 
problem of power supply shortages associated with the damage. Although the situation may 
be deemed a national crisis, it is important for us to have our determination to overcome the 
difficulties and rise from the disaster.  
In my remarks today, I will talk about the upheaval caused by the earthquake and the Bank’s 
responses, followed by an overview of Japan’s economic and financial developments as well 
as monetary policy. I will conclude by offering my impression of the regional economy of Oita 
Prefecture.  
I. 
Effects of the Tohoku-Pacific Ocean Earthquake and the Bank’s responses  
Settlement systems and financial markets  
A.  
Looking first at the settlement systems following the quake, there were incidents – mainly in 
the Pacific coastal areas in the Tohoku region – including the destruction of some branches 
and disruption of automated teller machines at financial institutions. Moreover, on the day the 
earthquake  occurred,  there  were  system  troubles  at  some  financial  institutions.  Financial 
institutions  have  been  making  strenuous  efforts  to  combat  the  situation  by  utilizing  their 
undamaged branches and/or making deposit withdrawals through operations on weekends 
and holidays. Some clearing houses in the quake-stricken areas continue to suspend their 
bill and check clearing (15 clearing houses as of March 18), but through the efforts I have 
just  mentioned,  the  settlement  systems,  including  the  Bank  of  Japan  Financial  Network 
System (BOJ-NET), in other areas have been operating smoothly as a whole.  
The Bank has also been striving to ensure its own business continuity through, for example, 
setting up a disaster management team immediately after the quake occurred and making 
sure that the BOJ-NET is running as normal. The Bank has provided, through its branches 
and offices, cash to the quake-stricken areas on Saturdays and Sundays as well (the amount 
of cash provided through branches and offices in the Tohoku region was 55 billion yen for 
Saturday, March 12 and Sunday, March 13, and 256 billion yen during March 14–18). Also, 
in  response  to  the  subsequent  planned  power  outage  on  concerns  over  power  supply 
shortages,  the  Bank  has  been  taking  all  possible  measures  to  stem  an  interruption  in  the 
settlement  of  funds,  partly  by  continuing  its  business  using  in-house  power  generation  at 
some branches. The BOJ-NET has been provided with a  stable power supply, as it is the 
cornerstone  of  Japan’s  settlement  system  infrastructure.  Since  various  financial  needs  are 
expected  to  arise  in  the  quake-stricken  areas,  such  as  demand  for  cash  and  exchange  of 
damaged banknotes and coins, the Bank will do its utmost to support these areas. Through 
such  aggressive  responses,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  ensure  smooth  BOJ-NET  operation 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
and cash supply and make every effort to ensure the stability of Japan’s settlement system 
as a whole.  
In the money market, fund providers have increasingly held back their fund provisions since 
the morning of Monday, March 14, and it has become difficult to make transactions in the call 
market. In response, the Bank conducted same-day operations, the first since May of 2010, 
and offered 82.4 trillion yen in one week (21.8 trillion yen on March 14, 20.0 trillion yen on 
March 15, 13.8 trillion yen on March 16, 15.6 trillion yen on March 17, and 11.15 trillion yen 
on March 18), of which 57.8 trillion yen was actually provided to the market. As a result, the 
overnight call market has been relatively stable in recent days.  
By contrast, in the CP and corporate bond markets, investors’ risk aversion has been strong 
and underwriting of CP and corporate bonds has declined, resulting in a significant rise in the 
issuing  rates.  The  issuing  rates  have  recently  been  somewhat  high,  which  seems  to  be 
attributable in no small part to the protracted problem of the quake-stricken nuclear plant as 
well as the effects of the earthquake. In addition, in stock and bond markets, stock prices and 
long-term  interest  rates  have  fallen,  reflecting  investors’  risk  aversion  due  to  heightened 
uncertainty regarding the future. In particular, stock prices declined significantly, and on May 
15,  the  Nikkei  Stock  Average  plunged  by  1,015  yen  from  the  previous  day.  This  rate  of 
decline was the third largest in history, following only the declines recorded on Black Monday 
in 1987 and after the failure of Lehman Brothers in 2008. Moreover, in the foreign exchange 
market,  while  the  yen  depreciated  immediately  after  the  earthquake  occurred,  it  then 
appreciated – reflecting the trend of risk aversion – and reached the range of 76.0–76.5 yen 
against the U.S. dollar in the early  morning of  March 17.  Subsequently, due  mainly to the 
concerted  intervention  by  G-7  countries  on  Friday,  March  18,  the  yen  has  been  hovering 
around 80–81 yen against the U.S. dollar and stock prices have also recovered somewhat.  
Economic activity  
B. 
As  for  the  effects  of  the  earthquake  on  economic  activity,  the  damage  has  been 
geographically widespread, with social infrastructure including ports and roads having been 
heavily damaged in the Tohoku region, and some large-scale factories being damaged in the 
Tokyo metropolitan areas. It is expected that a return to normal for the distribution system will 
take  some  time  and  that  concerns  regarding  stable  power  supply,  including  in  the 
metropolitan areas, will continue. In the meantime, restoration efforts have been made day 
by day.  
In this situation, the following could be pinpointed, albeit qualitatively, as three future effects.  
First, for some time, the effects of the damage will be seen substantially on the supply side, 
including  production  capacity,  which  will  have  an  impact  on  economic  activity,  mainly  in 
production and distribution. Since there are many parts manufacturers for automobiles and 
electronic  devices  in  the  quake-stricken  areas,  supply  chains  at  home  and  abroad  will  be 
forced  to  be  cut  off,  albeit  temporarily.  Second,  uncertainty  over  the  future  could  put 
downward pressure on economic activity through a deterioration in household and business 
sentiment.  And  third,  while  various  forms  of  demand  associated  with  restoration  should 
emerge in the medium term, the timing and size of such demand is uncertain at present and 
quite difficult to envisage.  
While it is difficult to quantitatively gauge the effects of the earthquake at present, it is very 
much a situation in which the restoration of lifelines, utilities, and distribution has been slow, 
given  that  the  earthquake  was  the  biggest  on  record  for  Japan  and  accompanied  by 
enormous tsunami. With that in mind, at least the extent to which economic activity will be 
pushed downward from the supply side could be larger and might be prolonged compared 
with, for example, the Great Hanshin-Awaji Earthquake of 16 years ago, and this warrants 
due attention.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Policy responses  
C. 
With these things in mind, the Bank recognized that, in ensuring stability in public sentiment 
and in financial markets, it will be critical to examine the effects of the earthquake on Japan’s 
economic and financial conditions in the immediate future as well as promptly announce its 
guideline  for  money  market  operations.  Therefore,  the  Bank  shortened  the  duration  of  its 
Monetary  Policy  Meeting  to  one  day  from  an  initially  scheduled  two  days  and,  upon 
examining the current situation, judged it necessary to further enhance monetary easing. In 
particular, given that preventing any deterioration in business sentiment or any increase in 
risk aversion in financial markets from adversely affecting economic activity was considered 
to  be  the  most  appropriate  policy  response  at  present,  the  Bank  decided  to  increase  the 
amount of the Asset Purchase Program, mainly of the purchases of risk assets, by about 5 
trillion  yen  to  about  40  trillion  yen  in  total.  Specifically,  the  5  trillion  yen  increase  in  asset 
purchases  will  be  made  mainly  in  risk  assets  –  namely,  CP,  corporate  bonds,  exchange-
traded funds (ETFs), and Japan real estate investment trusts (J-REITs) – for about 3.5 trillion 
yen and in government securities for about 1.5 trillion yen.  
While there remains uncertainty over the future, the Bank will endeavor to gauge the effects 
of  the  earthquake  on  financial  institutions  and  the  financial  system,  as  well  as  take  all 
possible measures in order to secure stability in settlement systems and financial markets.  
II. 
Developments in economic activity and prices and monetary policy in Japan  
Overview  
A. 
The Bank has judged that Japan’s economy will get out of the soft patch and, from a longer-
term  perspective,  continue  to  recover  moderately.  At  the  same  time,  the  impact  of  the 
earthquake on Japan’s economy is projected to be by no means small, at least in the short 
run.  It  is  necessary  to  examine  with  vigilance  how  the  earthquake  will  affect  the  Bank’s 
previous outlook for economic activity and prices, together with the risk factors the Bank has 
highlighted. Next, I will examine those issues – although most are judgments made prior to 
the earthquake – starting with overseas economies.  
Overseas economies  
B.  
Let me first talk about the U.S. economy. The economy has continued to recover, coupled 
with  additional  stimulus  measures  both  from  the  financial  and  fiscal  sides.  Business 
sentiment has improved among manufacturing and nonmanufacturing firms, and stock prices 
have  been  improving  as  a  trend  supported  also  by  the  good  performance  of  global 
businesses. In this situation, business fixed investment has been on a recovery trend, albeit 
a moderate one, and private consumption has been recovering, exceeding the level before 
the Lehman crisis. On the other hand, balance sheet adjustments in the household sector 
are likely to take more time and housing investment has been at a low level, especially in 
terms  of  sales  of  newly  constructed  houses.  The  employment  and  income  situation  has 
improved somewhat, but the pace of improvement has remained moderate.  
In  such  circumstances,  due  attention  should  be  paid  to  how  the  recent  rise  in  commodity 
prices will affect the U.S. economy. Inflation expectations perceived by the market have been 
on an uptrend since the autumn of 2010. Household inflation expectations have risen since 
the turn of the year and the recent indicators of consumer sentiment have turned toward a 
decline.  
The pace of the rise in commodity prices has accelerated, due partly to speculative capital 
inflows  and  the  unrest  in  the  Middle  East  amid  originally  robust  demand  in  emerging 
economies. While commodity prices have recently been soft as risk aversion has heightened 
globally, triggered by the earthquake in Japan, the trend of price rises and continuous high 
prices is likely to remain to some extent if the basis of such a trend is the real demand on the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
back of high growth in emerging economies. I will pay close attention to future developments 
in commodities prices and their effects on inflation expectations around the world, including 
the United States. 
Next, looking at East Asian emerging economies, especially China, those economies have 
exited  the  deceleration  phase  starting  from  the  latter  half  of  2010  and  have  continued 
growing  at  a  rapid  pace.  The  structure  of  growth  indicates  the  ongoing  virtuous  circle  in 
which  the  continuing  robust  expansion  of  domestic  demand  in  the  Chinese  economy  is 
increasing exports to China from some peripheral Asian countries, which in turn is spreading 
to domestic demand in those countries.  
In  this  situation,  within  Asian  emerging  economies,  concern  over  inflation  has  started  to 
heighten  partly  because  of  the  rise  in  commodity  prices,  as  well  as  the  robust  domestic 
demand. Moreover, in terms of maintaining the domestic demand expansion, wage increases 
in  tandem  with  price  rises  are  inevitable.  This  might  in  turn  increase  upward  pressure  on 
inflation.  Therefore,  Asian  emerging  economies  have  proceeded  with  the  gradual  rise  in 
policy  rates  to  create  an  environment  for  sustaining  high  growth.  If  the  previous 
accommodative  policy  conduct  –  referred  to  as  “behind  the  curve”  –  prolongs  and  high 
inflation  takes  hold,  this  will  have  a  negative  impact  on  the  economy.  Thus,  in  order  to 
prevent  such  negative  impact,  it  is  important  to  act  ahead  of  time.  As  Asian  emerging 
economies  are  the  driving  force  behind  global  economic  growth,  attention  is  being  paid  to 
their potential future actions.  
Lastly, European economies are recovering moderately led by exports, driven in particular by 
Germany  and  other  major  economies.  The  rising  inflation  trend  has  become  more 
pronounced and the European Central Bank has suggested a future policy rate rise. In some 
peripheral  European  countries  that  suffered  fiscal  problems,  long-term  interest  rates  have 
stayed high and uncertainty has remained elevated.  
Japan’s economy  
C. 
In light of such recovery in the U.S. economy and high growth in Asian emerging economies, 
the  effects  of  inventory  adjustments  in  IT-related  goods  have  run  their  course  around  the 
world. Private consumption in Japan is showing signs of picking up after suffering the reverse 
following the sharp increase seen previously. Although this represents the judgment made 
prior to the earthquake, Japan’s economy is getting out of the soft patch, driven in particular 
by the recovery in exports and production. 
Looking  at  market  developments  prior  to  the  earthquake,  stock  prices  remained  on  an 
uptrend while the yen was in the range of 80–85 yen against the U.S. dollar. This is attributed 
to  the  fact  that  overseas  stock  prices,  especially  U.S.  stock  prices,  rose  in  reflection  of 
monetary  easing  in  the  United  States,  and  that  corporate  profits  and  their  cash  flows 
improved substantially. On the other hand, the improvement seen in components related to 
domestic demand, such as business fixed investment and private consumption, and in the 
employment  and  income  situation  remained  moderate.  The  pace  of  improvement  in  the 
output gap and price developments was generally moderate. Just like in the United States, 
the  channel  through  which  the  favorable  performance  in  the  corporate  sector  fed  into  the 
household sector seemed to be somewhat weak.  
The  likely  underlying  mechanism  is  as  follows.  Even  if  the  economy  were  to  achieve  an 
export-led  recovery,  a  rise  in  import  costs  due  to  the  increase  in  commodity  prices  would 
cause the terms of trade to worsen and real income to be undermined. As a result, even if 
the GDP figure increased, gross domestic income (GDI) would not increase that much. For 
example,  during  the  recovery  phase  in  the  2000s  –  that  is,  during  2002–2007,  before  the 
Lehman  crisis  –  the  real  GDP  growth  rate  was  1.8  percent  on  average  but  the  real  GDI, 
excluding  trading  losses,  remained  1.2  percent  on  average.  During  the  same  period,  the 
increase in real GDP brought by net export expansion, accumulated over the six-year period, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
amounted  to  23  trillion  yen.  The  trading  losses  during  the  period  amounted  to  18.7  trillion 
yen, meaning that the real GDI only grew by 4.3 trillion yen.  
These  figures  suggest  that  some  sectors  in  the  economy  have  been  burdened  with  these 
losses.  During  the  recovery  phase  in  the  2000s,  firms  contained  total  labor  costs  by 
constraining wages. The reduction in costs for wages represents firms’ strenuous efforts to 
achieve structural transformation and streamlining. The reduction in production costs plays a 
role in stimulating the economy from the supply side, thereby constraining price rises. On the 
other hand, the reduction in total labor costs and wages leads to a reduction in household 
income, which in turn undermines a transmission mechanism working on domestic demand. 
Thus, it can be said that the trading losses during the recovery phase in the 2000s burdened 
the household sector through the streamlining in the corporate sector.  
If such mechanism underlies the economic recovery led by exports and production, this trend 
seems to have continued even in the recovery phase after the Lehman crisis. It appears that, 
on  the  back  of  the  global  and  increasingly  competitive  environment  and  the  yen’s 
appreciation, firms have enhanced their efforts to proceed with structural transformation and 
to increase growth potential by accelerating their shifting of production sites overseas. It also 
seems that firms are maintaining their cautious stance in allocating corporate profits brought 
by the efforts just mentioned to domestic business fixed investment, or to employment and 
wages.  There  is  a  possibility  that  such  mechanism  has  continued  to  operate  while,  until 
recently, the uptrend in commodity prices has constrained domestic income.  
I will closely examine whether such a trend will continue and how it would affect the outlook 
for Japan’s economic activity and prices. Let me repeat that the views I have presented so 
far  were  in  consideration  before  the  earthquake  struck.  Therefore,  I  will  examine  with 
vigilance the earthquake-triggered risk aversion around the world and its effects on the global 
economy, as well as Japan’s economy. 
Monetary policy  
D.  
In  October  of  2010,  the  Bank  decided  to  implement  comprehensive  monetary  easing  to 
further  pursue  powerful  monetary  easing.  Comprehensive  monetary  easing  can  be  briefly 
summarized as follows. First, the Bank clarified its adoption of a virtually zero interest rate 
policy.  Second,  the  Bank  confirmed  that  it  would  maintain  the  virtually  zero  interest  rate 
policy until it judged that price stability was in sight, and that the judgment would be based on 
the  “understanding  of  medium-  to  long-term  price  stability.”  Third,  taking  into  account  that 
there was little room for a further decline in short-term interest rates, the Bank established 
the Asset Purchase Program, which aimed at purchasing various financial assets – namely, 
government  securities,  corporate  bonds,  CP,  ETFs,  and  J-REITs  –  with  a  view  to 
encouraging a decline in longer-term market interest rates and various risk premiums.  
This is a quite extraordinary and unconventional monetary policy package that includes the 
Bank’s commitment to the continuation of the virtually zero interest rate policy, balance-sheet 
expansion, and purchases of risk assets. When the package was introduced, on the back of 
the slowdown in overseas economies and the sharp appreciation of the yen, business and 
household  sentiment  deteriorated  and  asset  prices  including  stock  prices  were  sluggish. 
Correcting  the  sentiment  and  risk-taking  appetite  that  have  excessively  deteriorated  in  the 
markets is expected to produce sustained effects on lowering risk premiums. In fact, in the 
period  after  the  introduction  of  comprehensive  monetary  easing  until  the  earthquake,  risk 
premiums generally declined, as seen in the rise in stock prices and REIT prices. It is also 
expected  that  the  Bank’s  bold  measure  to  encourage  risk  taking  will  boost  firms’  “animal 
spirits,”  thereby  leading  to  an  increase  in  Japan’s  growth potential  and  an  improvement  in 
productivity.  
Also, in the United States, in the period following the Lehman crisis until the introduction of a 
large-scale asset purchase program – the so-called “quantitative easing II” – in November of 
2010, unconventional monetary easing measures were implemented four times. In particular, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
the decision to purchase 600 billion dollars of longer-term Treasury securities in November of 
2010  has  produced  some  effects  through  the  decline  in  long-term  interest  rates  and 
borrowing  costs.  It  also  appears  to  have  had  the  effect  of  boosting  stock  prices  through 
moderating overly pessimistic market views on the U.S. economy seen from the summer of 
2010  and  correcting  the  trend  of  excessive  risk  aversion,  thereby  continuing  to  affect  risk 
premiums requested by market participants.  
As  the  dollar  is  the  world’s  key  currency,  monetary  easing  in  the  United  States  may  have 
another  global  transmission  channel.  Specifically,  as  a  result  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
commitment to the virtually zero interest rate policy as a policy action after the Lehman crisis, 
economies  that  have  a  strong  linkage  with  the  dollar,  such  as  emerging  economies  and 
commodity-exporting economies, have ended up importing U.S. monetary easing, which in 
turn brings about economic expansion in countries other than the United States. U.S. global 
firms, both manufacturing and nonmanufacturing, are deeply involved in business operations 
widely around the world. Thus, economic expansion in areas with a strong linkage with the 
dollar would enhance the profits and growth expectations of U.S. businesses, which would in 
turn  entail  a  rise  in  U.S.  stock  prices  and  lead  to  a  recovery  in  private  consumption. 
Therefore,  it  can  be  said  that  the  powerful  monetary  easing  policy  that  has  continued  for 
more than two years in the United States has been entailing “international spill-over effects” 
of  stimulating  its  economy  at  home,  due  to  the  rise  in  U.S.  stock  prices  through  the 
expansion of overseas economies. 
It is important to note that the unconventional policy measures being implemented in Japan 
and  the  United  States  are  not  undisciplined,  unlimited  monetary  easing.  In  the  case  of 
Japan’s  comprehensive  monetary  easing,  and  to  clarify  that  it  is  after  all  a  temporary  and 
extraordinary  policy  measure,  the  Asset  Purchase  Program  has  been  established  and 
managed on the Bank’s balance sheet. Similarly, in the case of the United States, Federal 
Reserve  Chairman  Ben  S.  Bernanke  emphasized  that  the  large-scale  asset  purchase 
program is a short-term policy measure and the Federal Reserve is committed to achieving 
medium- to long-term price stability.  
So  far,  I  have  examined  monetary  policy  and  its  effects  on  Japan  and  the  United  States. 
What  has  been  highlighted  as  a  common  factor  is  that,  when  market  sentiment  and 
confidence have swung excessively in the direction of pessimism, central banks’ aggressive 
actions and asset purchases were made to correct that situation and influence risk premiums 
in a sustained manner.  
As mentioned earlier, in response to the earthquake, at the Monetary Policy Meeting held at 
the beginning of last week, the Bank decided to increase the amount of the Asset Purchase 
Program, mainly of the purchases of risk assets, with a view to further enhancing monetary 
easing. This measure is expected to have an effect similar to the one mentioned above, in 
that,  confronted  with  an  unprecedented  earthquake  disaster,  the  measure  aims  at 
counteracting  any  deterioration  in  business  sentiment  or  an  excessive  increase  in  risk 
aversion, thereby preventing economic activity from deteriorating. While uncertainty is likely 
to remain high, the measure taken by the Bank will exert powerful effects as various efforts 
toward normalization pay off.  
Concluding remarks: the economy of Oita Prefecture  
In conclusion, I will refer to the developments in this area.  
Oita Prefecture was designated as a new industrial city during the high-growth period, and it 
has been actively attracting growth-promising companies to the region, through cooperation 
between the public and private sectors, for a little less than the 50 years that have passed 
since the Oita coastal industrial zone was formed. Therefore, its industrial structure is quite 
well  balanced  and  solid,  with  not  only  materials  industries  such  as  steel  and  oil  having 
congregated  in  the  area,  but  also  processing  industries  such  as  precision  machinery, 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
semiconductors,  and  automobiles.  Looking  at  the  ratio  of  manufacturing  to  the  prefectural 
gross product as of fiscal 2007, Oita posted a high 23.3 percent compared with the national 
average of 21.2 percent and the Kyushu average of 17.1 percent. There are many factories 
with extremely high production efficiency, as suggested by the value of manufactured goods 
shipments per establishment and per worker both being number one in Kyushu and number 
three in the nation. Since this region has a high share of manufacturers, it was significantly 
affected by the decline in exports and production caused by the failure of Lehman Brothers. 
Subsequently, in view of the many productive and efficient new factories, Oita’s exports and 
production have been recovering relatively steadily in tandem with the recovery in overseas 
economies.  
Moreover,  I  rediscovered  that  Oita  is  blessed  with  an  abundance  of  resources  with  high 
brand recognition, ranging from fruits of the sea such as Seki aji, Seki saba, and Shiroshita 
karei, as well as dried shiitake mushroom and kabosu, for which production is the largest in 
Japan, to internationally popular hot springs resorts such as Yufuin and Beppu. Moreover, 
Oita  has  a  geographical  advantage  of  being  located  near  rapidly  growing  East  Asian 
economies, which gives the region a great advantage in terms of production and tourism. In 
addition,  the  improvement  in  traffic  infrastructure,  including  the  full  opening  of  the  Kyushu 
Shinkansen  Line  this  month  and  ongoing  extension  work  in  the  region  for  the  Eastern 
Kyushu  Expressway,  is  expected  to  intensify  the  interaction  within  the  Kyushu  region  and 
with other areas including the Kansai region.  
Looking toward the future for Oita’s economy, I am paying close attention to the following two 
issues that could lead to future growth in Oita Prefecture. First, wide-ranging cooperation in 
the  medical  and  welfare  areas.  Many  medical  equipment  manufacturers  have  been 
congregating  in  Oita  Prefecture  and  the  prefecture’s  total  value  of  medical  equipment 
production  ranks  fourth  in  Japan.  In  October  of  last  year,  Oita  Prefecture  formulated  an 
“Initiative  for  Eastern  Kyushu  Local  Medical  Industrial  Center  (or  Eastern  Kyushu  Medical 
Valley  Initiative)”  in  cooperation  with  its  neighbor  Miyazaki  Prefecture.  The  medical  and 
welfare areas have been considered as growth areas in the nation’s growth strategy, and, 
given  their  characteristics  of  not  being  influenced  substantially  by  a  business  cycle,  are 
expected  to  contribute  to  the  regional  economy.  I  believe  that  cooperation  among  the 
government,  industries,  and  the  academia  will  be  enhanced  based  on  such  wide-ranging 
cooperation, and that industrial congregation will advance in the future.  
The second issue is regional revitalization by utilizing natural energy. Oita Prefecture is the 
top in the nation in terms of the number of hot springs sources and the amount of hot water, 
and,  supported  by  such  geothermal  energy,  is  an  advanced  prefecture  in  natural  energy 
utilization,  with  the  supply  and  self-sufficiency  ratio  of  natural  energy  being  ranked  first 
among the prefectures in Japan. As for natural energy, there have recently been nationwide 
efforts  by  both  the  public  and  private  sectors  to  enhance  its  utilization  together  with  the 
beefed-up efforts toward solving environmental problems. Also in Oita Prefecture, there have 
been  signs  of  promoting  the  use  of  natural  energy  sources  other  than  geothermal  power 
generation,  including  small  hydroelectric  generation  and  biomass  generation.  In  perceiving 
the natural energy area as a business opportunity, some local firms appear to be crossing 
traditional  business  borders  and  entering  the  area  through  innovations,  in  which  I  expect 
future growth.  
With that, I will conclude my speech and move on to exchanging views with you. Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
