Daniel K Tarullo: Capital and liquidity standards 
Testimony  by  Mr  Daniel  K  Tarullo,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 16 June 2011. 
 Chairman Bachus, Ranking Member Frank, and other members of the Committee, thank you 
for your invitation to testify today about capital and liquidity standards and their relationship to 
international competitiveness.  
I will start by explaining how new international standards on regulatory capital and liquidity 
will  foster  global  financial  stability.  Next,  I  will  discuss  several  areas  in  which  international 
work  to  enhance  the  resiliency  of  the  financial  system  continues.  Then  I  will  turn  to  the 
agenda  for  implementation  of  these  standards  across  national  jurisdictions,  as  well  as 
reforms in other areas such as derivatives markets and resolution regimes. In particular, I will 
address  the  need  to  expand  the  implementation  agenda  beyond  assuring  that  the 
international  standards  are  incorporated  into  national  legislation  and  regulations.  This  is 
especially  the  case  where  the  opaqueness  of  financial  firms  hinders  observation  of 
compliance  with  applicable  standards,  such  as  with  minimum  capital  and 
liquidity 
requirements. Here it will be essential for international bodies of regulators to adopt effective 
oversight and monitoring mechanisms, in order to achieve the financial stability benefits that 
the  minimum  standards  promise,  to  prevent  the  emergence  of  significant  competitive 
disadvantages  for  internationally  active  firms,  and  promote  international  cooperation  in 
addressing the technical and policy questions that will arise.  
Capital and liquidity standards 
The  recent  financial  crisis  exposed  significant  weaknesses  in  the  regulatory  capital 
requirements for large banking institutions in many parts of the world, including the United 
States.  The  amount  of  capital  held  by  many  banking  institutions  proved  to  be  inadequate 
given  the  risks  that  had  built  up  in  the  financial  system.  In  some  cases,  especially  for 
holdings of asset-backed securities in the trading books of the largest banks, it was evident 
that capital requirements were set far too low.  
In  addition,  it  became  apparent  that  some  of  the  instruments  that  qualified  for  regulatory 
capital purposes as tier 1 capital, which was the core measure of capital adequacy, were not 
truly loss absorbing, at least not in a way that permitted a financial firm to remain a viable 
financial intermediary. During the crisis, market assessments of the strength of financial firms 
focused  on  common  equity,  the  most  loss-absorbent  form  of  capital.  Many  market 
participants questioned whether levels of common equity at the largest institutions would be 
sufficient  to  withstand  potential  losses.  In  conducting  stress  tests  under  the  Supervisory 
Capital  Assessment  Program  in  the  winter  and  early  spring  of  2009,  we  focused 
predominantly on common equity ratios. It was the disclosure of these ratios, along with our 
insistence  that  firms  raise  additional  common  equity  to  meet  these  ratios,  that  helped 
reassure  financial  markets  of  the  continued  viability  of  the  nation’s  nineteen  largest  bank 
holding companies.  
The uncertainty about institutions’ financial strength had also contributed to severe liquidity 
problems  at  the  height  of  the  crisis.  Investors  and  other  counterparties  were  unwilling  to 
extend  credit  of  any  sort  in  the  absence  of  reliable  information  on  the  firms’  true  capital 
positions. Institutions that substantially relied on short-term funding were unable to roll over 
this  funding.  Moreover,  exacerbating  this  liquidity  squeeze,  many  of  the  largest  institutions 
were unable to unwind positions that they had assumed could be liquidated even in stressed 
markets.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The crisis thus revealed capital and liquidity shortfalls and confirmed that weaknesses in one 
group  of  internationally  active  firms  could  quickly  be  transmitted  globally.  In  response, 
national prudential regulators represented on the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
have developed new standards to enhance the stability of the global financial system. In July 
2009, the Basel Committee adopted more stringent regulatory capital standards for trading 
activities  and  securitization  exposures.  Subsequently,  in  December  2010,  the  Basel 
Committee published its Basel III framework.  
Basel III represents a major step forward for capital standards. Basel III not only promotes a 
higher  quantity  of  capital  by  raising  the  minimum  level  of  capital  required  at  banking 
organizations.  It  also  addresses  the  quality  of  capital  by  introducing  for  the  first  time  a 
specific common equity capital requirement, thereby helping to ensure that a bank’s capital 
structure is composed of truly loss-absorbing forms of capital. In addition, Basel III enlarges 
the  range  of  risks  accounted  for  in  the  regulatory  capital  requirements  and  improves  their 
measurement,  particularly  for  the  counterparty  credit  risk  associated  with  over-the-counter 
(OTC) derivatives. The Basel agreement also adds for the first time an international leverage 
ratio as a complement to the long-standing Basel risk-based capital ratios.  
Basel III likewise includes two sets of international standards for liquidity, the first efforts to 
develop  quantitative  standards  for  liquidity  management.  One  standard,  the  Liquidity 
Coverage  Ratio  (LCR),  is  designed  to  ensure  firms’  ability  to  withstand  short-term  liquidity 
shocks through adequate holdings of highly liquid assets. The other, the Net Stable Funding 
Ratio  (NSFR),  is  intended  to  avoid  significant  maturity  mismatches  over  longer-term 
horizons.  These  new  standards  are  an  important  part  of  the  global  effort  to  enhance  the 
financial system’s ability to withstand stresses comparable to those faced during the recent 
financial crisis.  
Areas for continued international work 
The risk-based capital requirements finalized in Basel III, and applicable to all internationally 
active  banks,  will  be  central  to  an  effective  framework  for  financial  stability.  There  is  an 
additional capital  standard  –  along  with  the  liquidity  standards  just  mentioned  – where  the 
considerable work done to date still needs to be completed in the Basel Committee. Global 
initiatives have also been started in two other areas covered by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street 
Reform  and  Consumer  Protection  Act  (Dodd-Frank),  derivatives  regulation,  and  resolution 
regimes,  but  a  good  deal  remains  to  be  done  before  we  have  agreement  on  appropriate 
international  measures  to  promote  global  financial  stability  and  to  assure  congruence 
between U.S. practices and those of other major financial centers.  
An important capital policy initiative that has yet to be completed pertains to additional capital 
requirements  for  systemically  important  financial  institutions  (SIFIs).  Section  165  of  the 
Dodd-Frank  Act  directs  the  Federal  Reserve  to  impose  enhanced  prudential  standards, 
including  capital  requirements,  on  bank  holding  companies  with  consolidated  assets  of 
$50 billion or more. These requirements must be more stringent than those for firms that do 
not pose a similar risk to U.S. financial stability, and must increase in stringency based on 
the systemic footprint of the firm.  
Last  year,  we  proposed  development  of  a  comparable  enhanced  international  capital 
requirement  for  SIFIs.  Such  a  requirement  would  promote  international  financial  stability 
while  avoiding  significant  competitive  disadvantage  for  any  country’s  firms.  Work  on  the 
subject  of  SIFI  capital  surcharges  in  the  Basel  Committee  started  a  bit  slowly,  but  it  has 
picked  up  considerably  in  recent  months.  Although  there  is  not  yet  consensus,  we  are 
hopeful that in the next several months the Committee will agree upon a proposal and can 
seek  public comment.  This  international  process  would  roughly  coincide  with  the  domestic 
notice and comment process for rules proposed by the Federal Reserve covering enhanced 
prudential standards for SIFIs. The parallelism of the international and domestic processes 
should facilitate the goal of congruence between U.S. and international standards.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
implementing 
the  market  regulators  and  banking  agencies  are 
While the Basel III capital standards take effect during a transition period beginning in 2013, 
implementation of the two sets of liquidity standards will not begin until 2015 for the LCR and 
2018 for the NSFR. The central bank governors and heads of supervision recognized that 
there may be a number of unintended consequences arising from the specifics of the LCR. 
For this reason, the Federal Reserve, supported by our counterparts from a number of other 
central banks, suggested a multi-year observation period before the LCR takes effect. During 
this period, the U.S. agencies and a Basel Committee working group will collect data, solicit 
comments from banks, analyze the effects of the new liquidity measures on financial markets 
and  the  broader  economy,  and  determine  whether  the  standards  need  to  be  amended  to 
avoid  adverse  unintended  consequences.  With  respect  to  the  NSFR,  while  the  Basel 
Committee  countries are committed to having this standard in place in 2018, considerable 
technical work is still needed to refine this measure in the coming years.  
In addition to these ongoing efforts regarding capital and liquidity, I would like to emphasize 
the  importance  of  international  cooperation  on  reforms  to  the  derivatives  market.  In  the 
United  States, 
the 
requirements  of  the  Dodd-Frank  Act  to  strengthen  the  infrastructure  and  regulation  of  the 
OTC  derivatives  market.  This  task  includes  enhancing  the  role  of  central  counterparties, 
which  can  be  an  important  tool  for  managing  counterparty  credit  risk  in  the  derivatives 
market,  and  introducing  new  margin  requirements  for  certain  derivatives  activities  that  are 
not cleared with a central counterparty.  
Even as these initiatives are underway in the United States, it is important that progress on 
reforming the OTC derivatives market continue at the international level. In 2009, the Group 
of  Twenty  (G-20)  leaders  set  out  commitments  related  to  reform  of  the  OTC  derivatives 
markets  that,  when  implemented  by  national  authorities,  will  form  a  broadly  consistent 
international regulatory approach.1 As work on the G-20 commitments is being pursued in a 
number  of  international  groups,  continued  attention  will  be  required  to  ensure  that  the 
convergence process continues in a timely fashion. In addition, there is need for agreement 
on a topic not covered by the G-20 declaration – that of global minimum margin requirements 
for  derivatives  not  cleared  through  a  central  counterparty.  Such  an  agreement  would 
increase the stability of the financial system by reducing the likelihood of a race to the bottom 
in jurisdictions that do not implement equivalent standards.  
A final issue that must remain on the international reform agenda is the development in major 
financial  centers  of  effective  resolution  regimes  for  SIFIs.  The  Dodd-Frank  Act  gave  the 
Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC)  authority  to  resolve  failing  financial  firms 
where  necessary  to  mitigate  serious  effects  on  financial  stability.  The  efficacy  of  this 
mechanism  and market  discipline more generally  will both be increased if other significant 
jurisdictions  have  parallel  authority,  with  similar  expectations  for  how  SIFIs  operating  in 
multiple jurisdictions will be resolved. Work has been underway for some time at the Basel 
Committee and the Financial Stability Board to identify key attributes of effective regimes that 
will facilitate resolution of SIFIs while preserving critical market functions. In cooperation with 
our colleagues at the FDIC, we have encouraged these efforts, as well as an exploration of 
possible channels for avoiding impediments to successful resolution of firms with substantial 
operations in multiple jurisdictions.  
Implementation of international standards 
The  financial  stability  benefits  of  the  Basel  III  reforms  will  be  realized  only  if  they  are 
implemented rigorously and consistently across jurisdictions. In this regard, it is important to 
note  that  incorporating  internationally  acceptable  standards  into  national  legislation  or 
                                                 
1  See G-20 (2009), “Leaders’ Statement: The Pittsburgh Summit,” September. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
regulations  is  only  the  first  step  in  effective  implementation.  A  second,  critical  step  is 
ensuring  that  these  standards  are,  in  practice,  rigorously  enforced  by  national  supervisors 
and observed by firms across all the Basel Committee countries.  
In  the  United  States,  the  Federal  Reserve,  FDIC,  and  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the 
Currency (collectively, the banking agencies) are working to update and enhance risk-based 
capital standards, and introduce liquidity standards through a series of rulemakings. These 
rulemakings  will  be  used  to  align  U.S.  capital  and  liquidity  regulations  with  Basel  III.  In 
accordance  with  the  internationally  agreed-upon  implementation  timeframes,  the  banking 
agencies plan to issue a notice of proposed rulemaking in 2011 and a final rule in 2012 that 
would  implement  the  Basel  III  reforms.  We  expect  that  other  jurisdictions  will  be  adopting 
regulations or, where necessary, legislation in a similar timeframe. The Basel Committee will 
review progress and identify any potential inconsistencies with the terms of Basel III.  
Monitoring the incorporation of Basel agreements into national law is a fairly straightforward 
exercise,  though  no  less  important  for  that.  It  is  also  a  familiar  exercise  in  the  Basel 
Committee. In this regard, the international leverage ratio the Basel Committee has adopted 
and  is  currently  monitoring  serves  as  an  important  backstop  to  risk-based  ratios  that  rely 
extensively on banks’ models. It is notable that analysts that follow significant global financial 
institutions  use  a  leverage  ratio  to  gain  insights  into  the  credibility  of  banks’  average 
risk-weighted  assets.  The  Federal  Reserve  Board  is  fully  committed  to  ensuring  a  robust 
leverage ratio remains in place for internationally active institutions.  
Despite extensive sharing of information on supervisory practices, the Basel Committee has, 
over the years, found it difficult to achieve what I have characterized as the second critical 
step in the implementation of international capital accords – that is, rigorous and consistent 
application of those rules by supervisors and firms across countries, as reflected in reported 
capital  levels  and  amounts  of  risk-weighted  assets  of  individual  banks.  An  international 
process  for  monitoring  implementation  on  a  bank-by-bank  basis  has  become  increasingly 
necessary  as  capital  standards  have  relied  to  a  greater  extent  on  internal  market-risk  or 
credit-risk models, the parameters and operation of which are not transparent. This tendency 
has  combined  with  the  relatively  opaque  nature  of  bank  balance  sheets  to  complicate 
external efforts to assess how banks are meeting their capital requirements.  
One area that has deservedly received attention of late is the potential for differences in the 
calculation of risk-weighted assets across banks, both currently and prospectively under the 
Basel  III  standards.  In  particular,  market  participants  have  focused  on  differences  in 
measured  risk  exposure.  Analysts  have  pointed  out  that  large  U.S.  banks  generally  have 
markedly  higher  average  risk  weights,  ratios  of  risk-weighted  assets  to  total  assets,  and 
ratios of common equity to total assets, adjusted for differences in accounting, than some of 
their  foreign  competitors.  These  large  disparities  cannot  be  easily  explained  away  through 
differences in risk profiles, which are largely similar within the business lines of competing 
banks.  
Indeed, with regard to capital for trading activities, where a commonly disclosed measure of 
risk is one-day value-at-risk (VaR),2 U.S. trading banks appear to hold multiples of the capital 
non-U.S.  trading  banks  hold  per  unit  of  VaR.  Precisely  because  of  the  opacity  of  bank 
balance sheets and their internal risk models, we do not yet fully understand the reasons for 
these disparities. Some observers have suggested that U.S. stringency in application of the 
rules and standards may be a factor. Gaining insight into these differences and taking action 
to more closely align capital requirements for similar risk exposures across countries will take 
concerted work within the Basel Committee.  
                                                 
2  A  value-at-risk  approach  measures  the  potential  gain  or  loss  in  a  position,  portfolio,  or  organization  that  is 
associated with a price movement of a given probability over a specified time period. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The Basel Committee leadership has acknowledged that failing to implement Basel III in a 
globally consistent manner could lead to a competitive race to the bottom and increase risks 
to  the  global  financial  system.3  The  Committee  must  take  action  to  avoid  this  outcome, 
specifically  through  the  Committee’s  Standards  Implementation  Group  (SIG).  The  SIG  is 
initiating  this  year  a  peer  review  process,  through  which  teams  of  experts  will  assess  the 
extent  to  which  countries  have  implemented  Basel  Committee  standards.  While  these 
reviews will focus initially on standards other than capital, such as stress testing, the process 
should  nevertheless  provide  insight  into  how  approaches  and  outcomes  related  to  the 
implementation of Basel III can be meaningfully monitored and compared.  
The SIG has already begun sharing information on the status of Basel III implementation by 
member countries and is in the early stages of planning comparative work on risk-weighted 
assets across jurisdictions and banks to promote consistent implementation.  
As the Basel Committee moves into this next phase, we will urge the Committee to take a 
comprehensive  approach  to  monitoring  processes  that  includes  three  elements.  First,  the 
Committee  should  begin  work  as  soon  as  possible  to  develop  mechanisms  to  implement 
effective  cross-country  monitoring.  Second,  this  process  should  go  beyond  traditional 
stocktaking  exercises  to  include  a  careful  assessment  of  the  methodologies  national 
regulators  use  to  determine  the  appropriateness  and  acceptability  of  bank  practices. 
 Third – and here is where the real work will lie – the Committee must develop a mechanism 
to validate the actual risk-weighted assets calculated by individual banks under international 
capital standards.  
There are several possibilities for conducting this work. One that has been discussed in the 
Basel Committee would be to use tools such as benchmarks and test portfolios, in order to 
provide  an  accurate,  quantifiable  comparison  of  standards 
implementation  across 
jurisdictions.  Another,  more  far-reaching  option  would  be  to  use  validation  teams  working 
under  the  auspices  of  the  Basel  Committee  itself  to  verify  the  methodologies  used  at 
individual  banks  to  ensure  their  compliance  with  international  standards.  They  could  use 
expertise gained through horizontal reviews of institutions to make assessments of individual 
banks in different jurisdictions. A less far-reaching variant of this option would entail national 
supervisors collaboratively participating in examinations of specific institutions.  
As  a  result  of  these  monitoring  and  validation  processes,  outliers  (i.e.,  banks  whose  risk 
weights for comparable assets differ materially from those of other banks) could be identified 
so that national supervisors might perform more in-depth analyses of their banks’ processes 
and  outcomes.  This  would  lead  to  a  greater  understanding  of  the  disparity  in  results  for 
certain institutions or jurisdictions based on their assumptions, data, or risk profiles. There 
can be legitimate reasons that banks may have different risk estimates for similar portfolios. 
Where  disparities  are  identified,  however,  national  supervisors  of  outlier  banks  should  be 
called upon to explain the results to their fellow supervisors, as well as steps they are taking 
to address situations in which differences may arise from systematic underestimation of risk 
or manipulation of capital ratios to achieve desired outcomes.  
Any  of  these  options  would  require  the  Basel  Committee,  international  supervisors,  and 
banking organizations to work together to address confidentiality concerns, as well as other 
jurisdictional issues. Some options will surely prove more feasible than others. While we do 
not prejudge which will prove to be most effective, we do maintain that something of this sort 
is  necessary  in  order  to  assure  that  the  benefits  for  financial  stability  promised  by 
                                                 
3  See, for example, Nout Wellink (2011), “Basel III: A Roadmap to Better Banking Regulation and Supervision,” 
remarks delivered at the FSI High-Level Meeting on the New Framework to Strengthen Financial Stability and 
Regulatory Priorities, St. Petersburg, Russia, May; and Stefan Walter (2011), “Basel III: Stronger Banks and a 
More Resilient Financial System,” remarks delivered at the Financial Stability Institute Conference on Basel III, 
Basel, April. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
international capital standards are in fact being realized, as well as to prevent some banks 
from enjoying competitive advantage through lax application of these standards. At the same 
time, any of these options will give banking supervisors from the countries represented on 
the  Basel  Committee  an  opportunity  to  work  together  to  address  the  many  issues  of 
implementation, interpretation, and evasion that will surely arise under Basel III.  
Thank you for your attention. I would be pleased to answer any questions you might have.  
 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
