Eddie Yue: Hong Kong as an international financial center – the China 
factor 
Introductory remarks by Mr Eddie Yue, Deputy Chief Executive of the Hong Kong Monetary 
Authority,  at  the  “Hong  Kong:  China’s  Global  Financial  Centre”  conference,  New  York, 
1 March 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It’s my great pleasure to be here today. 
No doubt I fully agree with Ms Leung and Mr Wheatley as they have rightly set out the key 
strengths  of  Hong  Kong  in  serving  as  a  financial  hub  in  Asia.  But  I  would  also  like  to  go 
deeper into the matter and focus on one very important factor, which may explain why more 
and  more  asset  managers  have  been  looking  to  set  up  their  regional  operations  in  Hong 
Kong. And this is the China factor – a unique competitive advantage of Hong Kong that is 
difficult for other financial centers to replicate.   
The  China  factor  is  growing  in  prominence  as  China  continues  with  its  path  of  very 
impressive growth: over the past three decades, Mainland China’s GDP has registered an 
amazing 29-fold increase, from around US$200 billion to more than US$5.8 trillion in 2010, 
with an average annual growth rate of 10%. Today, Mainland China is already the second 
largest  economy  in  the  world  and  the  single  biggest  contributor  to  the  world’s  economic 
expansion, creating nearly one-fifth of the world’s newly generated economic activities.  
As an international financial center of China, Hong Kong stands to benefit the most from the 
country’s phenomenal development. Today I will highlight two aspects that I believe are key 
drivers  for  Hong  Kong’s  growth  in  the  next  few  years.  The  first  is  the  gradual  financial 
liberalisation  in  Mainland  China  and  the  second  is  the  wider  external  use  of  the  renminbi 
(RMB).  
The gradual financial liberalisation in mainland China 
In the gradual financial liberalisation process in Mainland China, we can observe three key 
patterns: inflows being de-regulated before outflows, direct investment flows being liberalised 
before  portfolio  investment  flows,  and  collective  investment  schemes  being  relaxed  before 
individual investors.  
Specifically, during the early stages of Mainland China’s reform process, in the late 1970s 
and  early  1980s,  only  Foreign  Direct  Investment  (FDI)  was  encouraged.  Hong  Kong  has 
been the largest source of FDI for the Mainland, accounting for more than half of the total 
amount in 2009.  
In the opposite direction, Mainland China’s Overseas Direct Investment (ODI) has also been 
liberalised gradually over the years. Hong Kong has been the largest recipient of ODI flows 
from the Mainland. At present, about 60% of ODI from the Mainland has gone to Hong Kong 
or via Hong Kong to other places.  
The significant share of Hong Kong in Mainland’s FDI and ODI underscores the unique role 
of Hong Kong as a gateway for foreign enterprises to access the Mainland market, while at 
the same time being a springboard for Mainland institutions to gain exposure to international 
markets. 
With  respect  to  portfolio  investment  flows,  market  attention  has  been  focusing  on  portfolio 
flows from advanced economies towards Mainland China. In my view, portfolio flows in the 
opposite  direction  –  i.e.  portfolio  outflows  from  Mainland  China  –  will  also  present  huge 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
opportunities to the asset management industry, especially given the fact that the Mainland 
economy is the single largest provider of savings in the world.  
Currently,  outward  portfolio  investment  (OPI)  from  the  Mainland  is  only  around  5%  of  its 
GDP, still far below 57% for East Asia, 42% for the US and over 100% for the UK. Our in-
house  research  findings  show  that  an  economy’s  portfolio  investment  outflows  as  a 
percentage of GDP tend to grow along with the level of economic development measured by 
per capita GDP.  
So,  given  the  huge  potential  outward  portfolio  investments  from  Mainland  China,  how  will 
they  be  allocated  across  different  financial  markets?  Our  researchers  have  studied  this 
particular  subject  in  depth  and  found  that  the  home  bias  is  still  very  much  there,  i.e.  the 
closer the potential investment destination to Mainland China, the more OPIs it will receive 
from  Mainland  China.  As  such,  Hong  Kong  is  likely  to  be  one  of  the  key  destinations  of 
Mainland’s  OPIs  and  the  amount  of  those  OPIs  Hong  Kong  will  receive  will  increase  as 
China’s GDP grows. Apart from being the final destination for these investments, Hong Kong 
can  also  act  as  an  ideal  launch  platform  for  these  investment  flows  to  reach  other  major 
global markets. 
Since the introduction of the QDII scheme, about US$67 billion worth of investment quotas 
have  been  granted  up  to  September  2010.  It  is  likely  that  a  significant  portion  of  these 
moneys is managed out of Hong Kong. In fact, over 40 Mainland companies providing fund 
management, securities and futures, insurance, and other services have already established 
a presence in Hong Kong to manage the funds flowing out of the Mainland and engage in 
fund advisory businesses.  
We  expect  the  process  of  financial  liberalisation  in  Mainland  China  to  be  a  gradual  and 
controllable one, as it has always been. It is however important to note that this process has 
begun and Hong Kong is bound to be a key destination as well as the management hub for 
the  expected  gradual  increase  in  portfolio  flows  from  Mainland  China.  This  is  a  trend  that 
financial services providers should not ignore in their business planning process. 
The wider external use of the RMB 
Now, let me move on to the second important trend: the wider external use of the RMB.  
Since the global financial crisis, Mainland China has taken steps to promote a greater use of 
RMB outside the Mainland. The rationale behind this policy move is easily understandable. 
At present, much of the cross-border trade and investment between the Mainland and other 
jurisdictions  are  conducted  in  US  dollars.  As  the  Mainland  continues  to  expand  its 
international trade and investment, and becomes more economically integrated with the rest 
of  the  world,  Chinese  traders,  investors  and  financial  institutions  will  face  growing  foreign 
exchange risk if they continue to rely on the US dollar. Thus, it is a natural development for 
Mainland China to allow a wider use of RMB in its cross-border trade and investment.  
From Hong Kong’s perspective, this policy move presents unprecedented opportunities to us, 
as  we  can  leverage  on  our  strengths  as  an  IFC  and  our  unique  position  as  a  gateway 
between China and the world to provide a premier testing ground for offshore RMB activities. 
Offshore RMB business has been conducted in Hong Kong since 2004. While the scope of 
RMB  business  was  limited  to  retail  banking  initially,  it  has  been  expanded  substantially  to 
cover bond issuance, trade settlement, wealth management and further to ODI settlement in 
January  this  year.  These  developments  have  built  a  solid  foundation  for  developing  Hong 
Kong into an offshore RMB center. Let me briefly summarise these developments in three 
dimensions.  
The first dimension is RMB financing. Hong Kong is the first place outside the Mainland that 
has developed an RMB bond market. So far, 34 RMB bonds have been launched in Hong 
Kong with a total issuance size of 80 billion yuan. The issuer base was expanded from only 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Mainland  Chinese  banks  at  the  start,  to  Mainland  subsidiaries  of  Hong  Kong  banks  and 
China’s  Ministry  of  Finance  in  2009,  and  further  to  Hong  Kong  corporations  and  famous 
international institutions like McDonald’s and the Asian Development Bank last year.  
Any  issuers,  including  foreign  corporations  and  multilateral  organisations,  can  now  issue 
RMB bonds in Hong Kong, just as they can issue bonds in any other currencies. Of course, if 
the proceeds are to be used on the Mainland, the moving of funds into Mainland China will 
have  to  meet  the  requirements  there.  By  the  same  token,  banks  can  now  also  offer  RMB 
financing  to  their  clients,  including  enterprises  which  conduct  direct  investments  under  the 
pilot scheme for the settlement of ODI in RMB introduced in January this year.  
As  the  pool  of  offshore  RMB  funds  in  Hong  Kong  continues  to  grow,  there  will  be  huge 
opportunities  for  financial  institutions  to  take  part  in  RMB  financing  as  well  as  in  the 
origination, distribution, investment and trading of RMB bonds.  
The second dimension is RMB trade settlement. The RMB trade settlement pilot scheme 
was introduced in July 2009. The initial scope of the scheme was rather limited. But in less 
than a year, the pilot scheme was expanded to cover enterprises in 20 provinces and cities 
on the Mainland and their trade transactions with any parts of the world can now be settled in 
RMB.  
The  expanded  scope  has  led  to  a  rapid  growth  in  the  transaction  volume  of  RMB  trade 
settlement in Hong Kong, which was increased from a monthly average of 4.5 billion yuan in 
the  first  half  of  2010,  to  more  than  87  billion  yuan  in  the  fourth  quarter,  representing  an 
almost twenty-fold increase during the period. 
To  date,  Hong  Kong  accounts  for  about  75%  of  Mainland’s  RMB  trade  settlement.  This 
clearly demonstrates the strong preference of market players for making use of Hong Kong’s 
platform for RMB trade settlement. The highly efficient and reliable RMB Real Time Gross 
Settlement (RTGS) system in Hong Kong has played a significant role here. We are the first 
and  so  far  the  only  place  outside  Mainland  China  that  has  developed  a  full-fledged  RMB 
RTGS  system,  enabling  us  to  handle  the  settlement  of  cross-border  trade  between  the 
Mainland and other economies in a safe and efficient manner.  
China is one of the biggest trading nations in the world. The potential for further increases in 
RMB trade settlement is considerable given that the current volume only accounts for a small 
fraction  of  total  trade  between  China  and  the  rest  of  the  world.  RMB  trade  settlement 
proceeds  will  represent  an  important  and  sustainable  source  of  growth  in  offshore  RMB 
funds in Hong Kong. 
The third dimension is RMB wealth management business. The RMB wealth management 
business in Hong Kong took off last year after the RMB Clearing Agreement was revised in 
July  2010.  The  RMB  Clearing  Agreement  lays  down  the  framework  for  RMB  business  in 
Hong Kong. I will not bore you with the details but just to highlight two important changes 
made in the Agreement.  
First,  the  restrictions  on  the  types  of  institutions  that  can  open  RMB  bank  accounts  were 
lifted.  This  effectively  means  that  securities  firms,  asset  management  companies  and 
insurance companies are now free to open RMB bank accounts. Second, the restrictions on 
RMB  interbank  transfers  between  personal  accounts  and  corporate  accounts  were  also 
removed.  
With  these  relaxations,  the  key  hurdles  that  had  previously  limited  the  development  of 
offshore  RMB  wealth  management  business  have  been  eliminated.  Market  players  have 
been  responding  to  these  relaxations  quickly  with  the  launch  of  a  wide  range  of  RMB 
investment  products.  These  include  RMB-denominated  insurance  policies  and  investment 
funds. Investor interest in these products has been phenomenal.  
In  developing  our  offshore  RMB  business,  let  me  stress  that  Hong  Kong  does  not  have  a 
monopolistic  power  and  we  are  also  facing  competition  from  other  financial  centers. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
However, Hong Kong does enjoy the first mover advantage over the others in a number of 
ways.  Over  the  years,  the  HKMA  has  built  up  a  very  good  working  relationship  with  the 
Mainland  authorities.  We  have  accumulated  a  wealth  of  operational  and  regulatory 
experience  in  RMB  business.  We  have  also  developed  the  most  advanced  financial 
infrastructure  for  RMB  transactions  with  cross-border  links  with  the  Mainland.  These  are 
some of our unique strengths, and it is not easy for others to replicate them, at least in the 
short term. 
With all these developments, where should we go next? At the policy level, I believe it would 
be important to build an effective two-way channel to increase interaction between the RMB 
onshore and offshore markets.  
A potential area that can be explored is to promote the use of RMB for conducting cross-
border  real  economic  activities  such  as  FDI  and  ODI.  Given  the  significant  share  of  Hong 
Kong in Mainland’s FDI and ODI, building such a two-way channel will also be conducive to 
the sustainable development of the offshore RMB market in Hong Kong. On this, I am glad to 
see that the People’s Bank of China has, as I briefly mentioned a few minutes ago, recently 
launched a pilot scheme, under which ODIs by Mainland Chinese enterprises are allowed to 
be settled in RMB upon approval of relevant Mainland authorities. As for FDI in RMB, there 
have already been some pilot cases (such as McDonald’s) and it is hoped that the relevant 
arrangement can be formalised in due course.  
Apart from FDI and ODI, we have been in close communication with the Mainland authorities 
to  explore  other  possible  channels.  In  particular,  we  welcome  the  announcement  of  the 
People’s  Bank  of  China  in  August  last  year  regarding  the  introduction  of  a  pilot  scheme 
allowing  eligible  entities  in  Hong  Kong  to  make  use  of  their  RMB  funds  to  invest  in  the 
Mainland’s interbank bond market. The launch of this scheme has opened up a channel for 
offshore RMB funds to invest on the Mainland. Market responses to this scheme have been 
very positive.  
As I mentioned at the beginning, Mainland China is now the second largest economy and the 
single largest source of new economic activities in the world. The increasing use of RMB in 
the  international  stage  –  although  that  will  be  a  gradual  process  –  will  have  profound 
implications on the global financial landscape in the years to come. 
Concluding remarks 
So,  the  trends  are  very  clear.  Now  is  a  critical  time  for  market  players,  including  banks, 
financial institutions and asset management companies, to prepare themselves well for the 
unprecedented opportunities presented by China. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
