Thomas M Hoenig: Rebalancing toward sustainable growth 
Speech  by  Mr  Thomas  M  Hoenig,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, before the Rotary Club of Des Moines and the Greater Des 
Moines Partnership, Des Moines, Iowa, 30 June 2011. 
 The  views  expressed  by  the  author  are  his  own  and  do  not  necessarily  reflect  those  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System, its governors, officers or representatives. 
Introduction 
The U.S. economic recovery is under way, but it remains more uncertain and volatile than 
anyone  would  like.  Some  believe  that  the  Federal  Reserve  can  speed  up  the  recovery  by 
keeping the federal funds rate near zero, where it has been for nearly two-and-a-half years, 
and  by  promising  to  keep  it  there  for  an  extended  period.  If  I  judged  –  or  if  evidence 
suggested – that a zero rate would solve our country’s unemployment problem or speed up 
the  recovery  without  causing  other  adverse  consequences,  I  would  support  it.  However, 
monetary policy is not a tool that can solve every problem. 
In  today’s  remarks,  I  will  outline  my  current  views  on  the  economy,  and  suggest  what 
alternative options and policies our leaders might consider as we search for ways to build a 
stronger, more resilient economy. 
U.S. economic conditions 
First, it is a testament to the U.S. economic system that even as this nation carries a heavy 
public and private debt burden, the economy is completing its second year in recovery. The 
level  of  activity,  as  measured  by  GDP,  has  now  surpassed  its  pre-recession  peak  after 
growing at  a nearly 3-percent pace last year.  However, I  am concerned that in working to 
offset the effects of this devastating crisis and to restore the economy to health, an extended 
zero-interest-rate policy is producing new sources of fragility that we need to be aware of and 
allow for in our future policy choices. 
Governments,  businesses  and  consumers  have  made  financial  choices  and  allocated 
resources  with  an  understanding  that  a  zero-interest-rate  policy  will  remain  in  place 
indefinitely. 
The longer we leave interest rates at zero, the more asset values will be defined by these low 
rates and the greater the negative impact will be once the inevitable move up in rates begins. 
Complicating  the  fragility  around  monetary  policy,  fiscal  policy  as  a  pro-growth  policy 
instrument  also  appears  to  be  approaching  its  limit.  The  government’s  stimulus  efforts  to 
support the economy, along with lower tax revenues, have resulted in historically large fiscal 
deficits and a very large debt level. Without a dramatic change, the deficit and the debt will 
only  become  more  daunting  with  the  rising  cost  of  entitlement  programs  and  likely  higher 
interest rates. 
For well over a decade, the U.S. consumer has been a principal source of world demand and 
economic growth. As a result, the United States has incurred consistently large trade deficits, 
contributing  to  imbalances  in  the  global  economy.  As  we  have  painfully  learned  from  the 
housing bust, growth built on imbalances is ultimately unsustainable. 
Circumstances require, therefore, that we transition from an economy that relies too heavily 
on  consumption  and  government  spending  for  growth  toward  more  sustainable  sources  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
demand and economic prosperity. How we undertake this transition will define our economy 
and country’s economic future. 
To start, over the next several years, we must change our national savings, consumption and 
investment  habits.  Such  shifts,  though  fundamental  to  long-term  economic  health,  are 
admittedly difficult to accomplish. They require changes in behavior and expectations. They 
involve  dramatic  shifts in  resource use,  which are  not  painless  as  workers  are  temporarily 
displaced and industries are disrupted. The pain is immediate, and the payoff comes slowly. 
However, the gains also can be significant, as more sustainable long-run economic growth is 
well worth the effort and sacrifice. 
In  a  recent  visit  to  Singapore,  I  witnessed  that  nation’s  commitment  to  job  creation.  For 
example, during the recent crisis and recession, Singapore developed a program to retrain 
unemployed  workers  to  ensure  they  would  have  the  skills  needed  when  its  manufacturing 
sector recovered. As is well understood, workforce training matters. I spoke with individuals 
who described the drive to bring new factories on-line, with the goal of bringing a factory on-
line with minimal delays and, by their description, without compromising safety. 
Lessons from Germany 
Other countries have made similar changes out of necessity or during a time of economic 
distress such as we are experiencing today. Countries have made deliberate choices and not 
relied  on  chance  to  change  economic  incentives  and  behavior  that  served  to  improve 
economic performance. I’m not advocating that we pick winners and losers – in fact, that is 
my biggest argument against too-big-to-fail financial institutions. Rather, I have observed a 
number  of  countries  that  are  building  and  expanding  their  manufacturing  bases  –  such  as 
Korea, Singapore and China – that have been able to experience strong GDP growth over 
long periods of time. 
Germany  offers  another  example  of  a  country  having  made  significant  changes  to 
accomplish real employment goals. In the mid-1990s, Germany’s trade deficit was similar to 
that  of  the  United  States.  Since  then,  Germany  has  moved  away  from  trade  deficits  to 
surging  surpluses,  while  the  United  States  has  continued  to  run  large  trade  deficits. 
Complementing  this  shift,  German  levels  of  employment  have  made  great  strides,  and  its 
unemployment rate has touched its lowest point in nearly 20 years. 
I  am  not  suggesting  that  the  United  States  attempt  to  be  Germany  or  Singapore,  two 
countries that differ from us in many ways. I am also not advocating that we suddenly strive 
to  achieve  a  large  U.S.  trade  surplus.  This  might  only  create  other  global  imbalances  and 
distortions. However, adjustments in our economy are necessary, and other countries have 
shown it can be done. 
Perhaps the most immediate, and obvious, observation is the simplest: We must change our 
national savings rate. To rebalance the U.S. trade position from deficit to balance requires 
that  the  sum  of  private  and  public  savings  match  domestic  investment.  In  other  words,  a 
country must not produce less than it consumes if it wishes to balance its trade position with 
the rest of the world. 
During the 2000s, Germany’s personal savings rate increased and is currently about double 
the U.S. rate. German households paid down debt and avoided heavily relying on debt, in 
contrast to the United States and so many other countries’ households. 
The personal savings rate in the United States has modestly increased since the start of the 
recession,  which  is  an  important  positive  trend.  Unfortunately,  this  improvement  has  been 
more than offset by the dramatic deterioration in public saving reflected in the nation’s fiscal 
deficits. Though a significant amount of the recent deterioration in public finances is related 
to the U.S. financial crisis, the fact remains that our national savings crisis has been under 
way for nearly three decades. Since the early 1980s, our nation has consistently chosen to 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
spend rather than save, as witnessed by the long-term decline in our private savings rate and 
our  tendency  toward  fiscal  deficits.  Most  importantly,  when  we  look  across  the  more 
developed  countries,  we  see  that  those  with  higher  national  savings  rates  tend  to  have 
smaller trade deficits and higher domestic production per person. 
Germany has also benefitted from managing unit labor costs in a manner that keeps its labor 
force globally competitive. Over the last decade, the German economy experienced relatively 
modest wage increases and important productivity gains. Both of these factors contributed to 
keeping  unit  labor  costs  in  check.  However,  another  important  component  of  its  success 
came in the form of labor policy reforms. 
In  the  early  2000s,  Germany,  with  labor  and  management  input,  passed  a  series  of  labor 
market  enhancements  called  the  “Hartz  laws.”  These  laws  modified  some  of  the  more 
generous employee benefits and reduced restrictions on temporary workers and the ability to 
lay  off  workers.  Germany’s  reforms  also  sought  to  incentivize  unemployed  workers  to 
transition  to  employment  by  making  changes  to  job  training  programs  for  the  unemployed 
and creating targeted subsidies to support some manufacturing job creation. 
Finally, Germany developed export markets by focusing on meeting the needs of parts of the 
world  experiencing  the  fastest  growth  and  demonstrating  strong  demand  for  capital  goods 
that  German  manufacturers  produce:  emerging  economies  in  Asia,  Europe  and  Latin 
America. 
The United States is well-positioned to match this kind of performance, if it chooses to do so. 
For  example,  since  2000,  the  share  of  our  exports  going  to  the  BRIC  countries  –  Brazil, 
Russia, India and China – has more than doubled. If we choose to increase our savings rate, 
if government, labor and management see the mutual advantage of investing in and building 
a competitive manufacturing environment, then job growth will follow. 
As the U.S. economy shifts gears to shrink its trade imbalances, many parts of the country 
will  have  a  role  to  play.  I  fully  expect  Iowa  to  be  an  integral  participant  in  this  shift.  Iowa 
already possesses a strong manufacturing base that is a key driver of the state economy. By 
some estimates, about half of the manufacturing firms in the state are small- and medium-
sized  enterprises,  which  provide  some  parallels  with  Germany’s  renowned  export 
powerhouses, known as the Mittelstand. 
Real solutions versus economic shortcuts 
Rebalancing our economy and improving our trade position is a necessary development, but 
unfortunately,  it  will  take  time.  And  as  our  immediate  desire  is  to  rush  to  improve  our 
economy,  I  warn  against  the  all-too-common  impulse  to  take  shortcuts  and  suffer  their 
unintended consequences. Here in Iowa, for example, one area where I suspect this tradeoff 
might be playing out is in the recent rapid run-up in agricultural land prices. 
Agricultural exports have played a significant role in the rapid rise of land prices. Since 2000, 
agricultural  exports  from  Iowa  have  increased  by  a  factor  of  six.  A  portion  of  this  growth 
reflects  surging  commodity  prices  due  to  factors  on  the  supply  side  –  such  as  extreme 
weather  in  parts  of  the  world  –  and  on  the  demand  side,  including  the  well-documented, 
rapidly growing food demands of emerging economies. 
In addition to anticipated strong future demand for agricultural commodities, there is another 
factor  affecting  these  prices:  exceptionally  low  interest  rates.  As  a  bank  regulator  in  the 
1980s,  responsible  for  financial  institutions  in  Nebraska,  Kansas,  Oklahoma,  Missouri, 
Wyoming, Colorado and New Mexico, I witnessed the devastating effects of easy credit and 
leverage in agriculture, real estate and energy. We closed or assisted nearly 350 banks in 
our region alone. 
With interest rates near zero and with additional massive liquidity poured into our economy, 
all interest rates are affected. Therefore, asset values of every kind are also being affected, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
including land values in Iowa. Loans for land are available at rates well below historical levels 
– in some instances, 400 basis points below historical averages. The effect on land assets, 
like any asset, is to artificially boost its value. And there is ample experience that tells us that 
if rates were to rise quickly, this would affect world demand for commodities and raise the 
cost of capital on land almost instantly. When – not if – the adjustment occurs, we will see a 
dramatic drop in values. In the meantime, if operators and speculators have incurred large 
amounts of debt, then a new crisis will emerge. 
Finally, we know that a crisis can affect more than one segment of the economy. It nearly 
always affects the broad economy and employment. Shortcuts don’t work. We need to focus 
on the real economy. We need to focus on real reform. 
Conclusion 
My point today is simply that as powerful as monetary policy is, it sometimes is not enough. It 
cannot ensure an economy that balances its savings and investing needs. It by itself cannot 
correct  our  current  account  deficit  or  enhance  savings  and  investment.  These  will  require 
important changes in our real economy. Providing the right environment in which government 
can play its role in supporting business and the consumer to save, invest, manufacture and 
service national and global needs in the end will create real income and wealth. 
We need to focus on long-term, stable monetary policy and fiscal policy goals that support 
these broader goals. Having seen the effects of financial crisis after financial crisis as short-
term policies beget short-term policies, we should know that an ever-present short-run focus, 
even if well intentioned, is the road to ruin. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
