José Manuel González-Páramo: The management of the banking sector 
and the economy – what have we learned about financial markets and 
regulations? 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the XXVII Reunión Círculo de Economía, Sitges, 3 June 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentleman, 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  have  the  opportunity  to  speak  at  this  prestigious  forum  today.  The  first 
round of the meetings of “Círculo de Economía” took place exactly 50 years ago (in 1961), 
constituting  a  very  unique  event  in  Spain  at  that  time.  Since  then,  these  meetings  have 
provided an excellent forum to exchange views and ideas on issues of European and global 
relevance. Today we meet at a time of multiple challenges for our world, so I am sure that 
inspiring discussions will take place.  
For more than three years we have been focused on the challenges that the financial crisis 
has  posed  to  our  economies  and  our  societies.  Still,  recent  developments  in  European 
sovereign debt markets as well as ongoing economic difficulties in some euro area countries 
remind us that the crisis is not over yet. While the ECB continues to confront, in a decisive 
manner,  the  tensions  in  financial  markets,  it  is  also  involved  in  the  reform  of  the  global 
financial system that is currently in progress.  
I  would  like  to  lay  out  today  what  I  believe  are  the  core  areas  of  the  regulatory  reform, 
detailing what has been achieved and what remains to be done. 
Introduction 
Let me start by saying that under the leadership of the G20, a remarkable amount of work 
has been done by the  Financial Stability Board (FSB) and the Basel Committee regarding 
financial reform. In Europe, the European Commission has also adopted several new pieces 
of  legislation  and  many  more  are  underway  in  order  to  strengthen  the  regulatory  and 
supervisory framework.  
I  believe  that  we  can  identify  the  following  key  areas  of  the  financial  reform:  First, 
strengthening the resilience of financial institutions. This includes the introduction of the 
Basel  III  framework  for  banks,  eliminating  the  too-big-to  fail  problem  as  well  as  ensuring 
adequate oversight of the shadow banking system. Second, increasing transparency and 
mitigating  the  pro-cyclicality  in  financial  markets  and  finally,  third,  introducing  macro-
prudential supervision, which can be considered as the missing link in the pre-crisis era. 
The crisis has shown the need for a systemic perspective of the financial system that takes 
into account the interactions within the system as well as with the real economy. 
Strengthening the resilience of financial institutions 
1. 
Let me first start with Basel III, which constitutes the cornerstone of regulatory reform for the 
banking  sector.  While  Basel  II  was  very  much  focused  on  a  single  ratio  (capital  to  risk-
weighted assets), Basel III takes a more comprehensive approach, addressing deficiencies 
of Basel II and further strengthening the armoury of prudential requirements. Let me highlight 
the main elements of the new Basel III framework: 
Basel  III  provides  for  higher  minimum  capital  requirements,  a  stricter  definition  of  eligible 
capital and more transparency. The crisis highlighted the urgency of establishing a common 
definition of capital. The fact that the definition of what constituted Tier 1 capital was neither 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
transparent nor harmonized across countries, contributed to a generalised loss of confidence 
in  the  quality  of  regulatory  capital.  In  addition,  it  proved  necessary  to  increase  the  overall 
level and loss-absorbing capacity of the capital held by banks.  
Moreover, Basel III introduces also entirely new concepts, such as non-risk-based leverage 
ratios  and  mandatory  liquidity  requirements.  The  leverage  ratio  will  offer  a  transparent 
measure to the market that will complement the risk-based capital calculations and introduce 
additional safeguards against model risk and measurement error. The new liquidity buffers 
will ensure, in the short term, that banks hold sufficient high quality liquid assets to withstand 
an acute stress. In the longer term, the buffers will increase banks’ incentives to use more 
stable sources of funding on a structural basis.  
Lastly,  beyond  the  micro-prudential  dimension  of  regulation  –  typically  represented  by 
institution-specific  solvency  requirements  –  Basel  III  also  introduces  macro-prudential 
elements,  most  prominently  the  capital  buffer  regime.  This  constitutes  an  important 
safeguard to protect the banking sector from periods of excessive aggregate credit growth.  
Let me say that, while generally supporting the underlying objectives of the regulatory reform, 
the  industry  has  been  critical  towards  the  new capital  requirements.  The  industry  is  of  the 
view  that  Basel  III  will  increase  costs  for  banks,  reduce  profitability,  lead  to  credit  supply 
restrictions  and,  ultimately,  hurt  the  economy.1  Theory  and  historic  experience  however 
demonstrate  that  those  claims  are  partly  based  on  misconceptions  that  are  important  to 
dispel. Although I will not elaborate in detail, let me highlight the following: 
In  the  long  run,  benefits  brought  by  the  enhanced  capital  and  liquidity  regulation  can  be 
substantial. They include a reduction in the frequency of crises and hence on the expected 
output losses associated with systemic events. The new framework should also improve the 
level  playing  field  for  the  international  banking  sector.  This  is  expected  to  help  financial 
institutions to save costs and to encourage cross-border activities. In turn, this should result 
in a more efficient financial sector and also bring benefits to non-financial corporations and 
households through higher competition and increasing availability of financial services.  
In the short term, given that financial markets are characterized by information asymmetries 
and frictions, the new regulatory requirements will most likely imply some transitional costs 
on the economy through tighter credit conditions. Adverse effects are however expected to 
be moderate, notably if they are spread over a long implementation period. Estimates by the 
BCBS as well as by the ECB concluded that a 1 percentage point increase in the capital ratio 
implemented  over  eight  years  would  result  in  a  moderate  cumulated  reduction  of  GDP  of 
around 0.15 percentage points. Indeed, the new measures will therefore only become fully 
effective on 1 January 2019. This long phasing-in period should provide the banking sector 
ample  time  to  adjust  to  the  new  regulatory  requirements  and  prevent  disruptions  in  credit 
flows.  
Looking forward, it is of the essence that Basel III is properly implemented at the global level. 
In addition, it is important that the proposals on the leverage ratio and liquidity risk framework 
are  rigorously  calibrated,  so  that  any  unintended  consequences  for  individual  banks,  the 
banking sector, and financial markets can be timely addressed. 
Second,  it  is  important  that  work  is  kept  apace  on  systemically  important  financial 
institutions, or so-called SIFIs. The financial crisis has evidenced that large, complex and 
cross-border  banks  pose  exceptionally  high  risks  on  the  financial  system  and  society  at 
large. By virtue of their “too big to fail” status, these financial institutions assume a systemic 
dimension which, in the event of a crisis, results in large wealth transfers from taxpayers to 
the banking system. 
                                                 
1 
Institute  of  International  Finance  (2010):  “Net  Cumulative  Economic  Impact  of  Banking  Sector  Regulation: 
Some new Perspectives”, October 11, 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Against this background, the G20 has endorsed an ambitious program that aims at reducing 
the probability of default of a SIFI.  As a key priority, it has been agreed that SIFIs should 
have  higher  loss  absorbency  capital  beyond  Basel  III  standards.  The  purpose  of  these 
requirements  is  threefold:  first,  to  increase  SIFIs  resilience  to  adverse  shocks;  second,  to 
internalise  the  costs  of  distress  they  impose  on  the  financial  system;  and  third,  to  restore 
proper incentives with respect to their risk-taking.  
Let  me  also  highlight  that  a  key  element  of  the  SIFI  policy  framework  is  to  develop 
strengthened resolution frameworks to ensure that all financial institutions can be resolved 
safely  and  quickly,  without  destabilising  the  financial  system  and  exposing  the  taxpayer  to 
the risk of loss. 
The FSB is focusing on the identification of the key elements of effective resolution regimes, 
which  will  identify  the  essential  features  that  national  resolution  regimes  for  financial 
institutions,  including  non-bank  financial  institutions,  should  have.  Let  me  mention  that  the 
EU is actively participating in the ongoing work and is also taking these global initiatives into 
account in the design of the European framework.  
Third,  another  important  area  where  work  needs  to  progress  relates  to  the  so-called 
“shadow  banking  system”.  The  financial  crisis  evidenced  that  systemically  important 
pockets  developed  in  the  financial  system  without  any  regulatory  oversight.  A  better 
understanding of the interconnections between regulated and unregulated entities is needed. 
Moreover,  it  is  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  introduction  of  more  stringent  capital 
requirements for credit institutions may provide further incentives to shift activities outside the 
regulatory perimeter. 
For  this  reason,  the  regulatory  reform  should  not  only  focus  on  regulated  banks.  It  should 
instead  be  based  on  a  comprehensive  system  that  extends  in  a  proportional  way  to  all 
actors, intermediaries, markets and activities that embed potential systemic risk.2 In this area 
the identification of data gaps and putting in place an effective monitoring framework as well 
as reinforce the accounting rules on consolidation internationally are key. 
2. 
Increasing transparency and mitigating the pro-cyclicality in financial markets 
I would now like to touch upon the measures taken with regard to the regulation of financial 
markets.  Here,  reform  must  ensure  greater  transparency  for  the  various  market  segments 
and products, sufficient competition in all markets, and attenuate as much as possible the 
pro-cyclicality that derives from information asymmetries, structural features such as ratings, 
market phenomena such as herding and short selling practices. In this speech I will focus in 
particular on improvements in the regulation of OTC markets. 
Private  financial  markets  cannot  function  properly  unless  there  is  enough  information  and 
reporting both to market participants and to relevant regulators and supervisors. The financial 
crisis  evidenced  the  increasing  opaqueness  of  the  financial  sector  and  the  resulting 
counterparty risk externality. Regulatory initiatives that are underway to remedy these issues 
are therefore of utmost importance.  
Let  me  begin  by  highlighting  the  importance  of  establishing  an  appropriate  regulatory 
framework for OTC derivatives. OTC derivatives markets have grown exponentially in size 
over the past decade and they are closely related to the underlying cash, bond and equity 
markets. However, the development of risk management practices for these products has not 
kept  pace  with  their  growing  use  and  systemic  importance  as  the  financial  crisis 
demonstrated in a number of instances, such as the Lehman default and the near-defaults of 
AIG and Bear Stearns.  
                                                 
2  Acharaya and Richardson (2009): “Restoring Financial Stability”, Wiley Finance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the 
Against  this  background,  regulators  are  currently  working  to  address  three  issues  in 
particular. First, to foster market transparency through reporting of all transactions to trade 
repositories, which in turn will disseminate the related data to regulators and the public in line 
with  their  information  needs.  Second,  to  mitigate  counterparty  risks  through  use  of  central 
counterparties  for  sufficiently  standardised  and  liquid  products.  Third,  to  ensure  the  safety 
and soundness of OTC derivatives central counterparties and trade repositories, given the 
concentration of risks in these new infrastructures. 
• 
forthcoming  EU  Regulation 
the  EU, 
In 
for  OTC  derivatives,  central 
counterparties  and  trade  repositories  is  the  key  initiative  to  implement  these 
objectives.  However,  given  the  global  nature  of  OTC  derivatives  markets,  the  EU 
framework will only be effective if it is consistent with legislative initiatives in other 
jurisdictions  and  cross-border  cooperation  among  authorities  in  ensured.  To  this 
end,  the  new  EU  rules  should  be  fully  in  line  with  the  global  supervisory  and 
oversight  standards  for  financial  market  infrastructures  that  are  currently  being 
reviewed by the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) and the 
Technical  Committee  of  the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commission 
(IOSCO). The CPSS and IOSCO issued a consultative report entitled “Principles for 
financial  market  infrastructures”  last  March  and  their  guidance  is  expected  to  be 
finalised in early 2012. 
Another important initiative relates to the enhanced oversight of Credit Rating Agencies 
(CRA’s) and the need to reduce the mechanistic reliance on external ratings. Ratings 
are crucial to investors’ decisions and are deeply embedded in the regulatory architecture. It 
is therefore essential that ratings that are independent, objective and of the highest possible 
quality, as shortcomings in rating activity can erode market confidence and adversely affect 
financial  stability.  Moreover,  the  crisis  has  evidenced  that  ratings  downgrades  have 
contributed to the pro-cyclicality of the financial sector. 
In the EU, the Credit Rating Agencies Regulation was adopted in 2009 and regulators and 
credit  rating  agencies  are  currently  preparing  for  implementation  of  these  rules.  In  our 
Opinion, the ECB supported the need to reduce reliance on external credit ratings. This could 
be pursued via two main avenues: first, firms should be required to undertake their own due 
diligence  and  internal  credit  risk  assessment.  Second,  supervisors  should  focus  on 
developing rules to appropriately combine internally developed credit judgment and external 
input with varying weights depending on the specific characteristics of the credit exposures. 
In addition, we fully support initiatives by the European Commission to enhance transparency 
and disclosure of the rating process and in launching a debate on enhancing competition. 
Introducing macro-prudential supervision  
3. 
The aim of macro-prudential supervision is to mitigate and prevent systemic risks to financial 
stability on the basis of identified vulnerabilities and systemic risk assessments. The financial 
sector regulations before the crisis very much focused on limiting each institution’s risk seen 
in isolation rather than on aggregate or systemic risk. As a result, financial institutions were 
encouraged to pass their risks around the system and to unregulated entities, increasing the 
vulnerability of the system to large macroeconomic shocks. In Europe, in particular, the crisis 
highlighted the absence of a proper framework for macro-prudential oversight.  
Against this background, a new European System of Financial Supervision entered into force 
on 1 January 2011. Alongside with national supervisory authorities, who will continue to be 
responsible for day-to-day supervision of firms, three European Supervisory Authorities have 
been created – respectively for the banking, insurance and securities markets. A new body, 
the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  has  become  responsible  for  macro-prudential 
oversight of the EU financial system. The primary task of this new body is to monitor the EU’s 
financial system as a whole identifying sources of systemic risk, and to issue risk warnings 
and  policy  recommendations  addressing  systemic  risks.  The  ECB  President  will  chair  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
ESRB and the ECB will provide analytical, statistical and logistical support to the ESRB, as 
well as its Secretariat.  
The  establishment  of  the  ESRB  is  a  key  milestone  in  how  Europe  deals  preventively  with 
systemic risks. It forms part of wider initiatives across the world, including in the US with the 
establishment of the Financial Stability Oversight Council.  
The European System of Financial Supervision is still in the starting-up phase and it will need 
time to establish itself. As regards the ERSB I believe that there are three key conditions in 
order for it to reach its full potential. The first is the need for an adequate infrastructure to 
identify and analyse systemic risks, which demands state-of-the-art analytical tools. And here 
I  believe  the  ECB  is  well-equipped  to  support  the  ESRB  with  its  analytical  expertise.  The 
second, given the non-binding nature of the warnings and recommendations, is building-up a 
strong  reputation.  Indeed,  credibility  will  be  key  in  ensuring  addressees  implement  the 
recommendations. Also here, I firmly believe that the expertise of the members sitting around 
the  table,  in  particular  the  expertise  of  central  banks  in  analysing  financial  stability  will  be 
crucial in successfully building up this reputation. And finally the third relates to the need to 
cooperate  and  exchange  information  effectively  among  all  members  of  this  new  European 
System of Financial Supervision. The experience of the European System of Central Banks 
will also prove useful, in this context. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude by mentioning that substantial progress has been achieved in key areas of 
regulatory reform. However, our work is not finished and there is no room for complacency.  
In  order  for  the  new  regulatory  regime  to  be  effective,  a  coherent  and  consistent 
implementation of the reforms at a global level is of paramount importance. Only then can 
regulatory arbitrage be prevented and a level playing field ensured. At the European level the 
three  European  Supervisory  Authorities  have  an  important  task  in  ensuring  a  consistent 
implementation of the regulations. 
We  cannot  forget  that  the  financial  crisis  and  its  aftermath  have  been  one  of  the  most 
disruptive  events  in  decades,  causing  massive  economic  and  social  costs.  Tensions 
originating from a relatively small segment of the international financial market evolved into a 
global crisis, revealing deficiencies in the regulatory framework which must be addressed. In 
the aftermath of the crisis, industrialized and developing nations pledged to adopt a common 
approach  to  reinforce  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  and  ensure  its  sustainable 
contribution to growth.  
We  cannot  lose  sight  of  this  shared  mission  and  responsibility.  Determination  and 
consistency in the implementation of these reforms is therefore now crucial. 
I thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
