Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Macro-prudential supervision and monetary policy – 
linkages and demarcation lines 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  39th  OeNB  (Austrian  National  Bank)  Annual  Economic  Conference  on  “The 
Future of European Integration: Some Economic Perspectives”, Vienna, 23 May 2011. 
 I wish to thank Lorenzo Cappiello, Marco Catenaro, Massimo Rostagno and Carmelo Salleo for their contributions 
to the speech. I remain solely responsible for the opinions contained herein. 
Introduction 
It is a pleasure for me to contribute to the Oesterreichische Nationalbank’s annual Economic 
Conference  on  the  future  of  economic  integration.  In  my  remarks  today,  I  would  like  to 
elaborate on the linkages and the dividing lines between macro-prudential supervision and 
monetary policy.  
I  will  structure  my  presentation  in  two  parts.  First,  I  will  discuss  the  interactions  between 
monetary  policy  and  the  financial  system,  showing  how  monetary  policy  can  create  the 
conditions for financial stability. As a matter of fact, price stability is a necessary condition for 
financial stability, in that asset prices and financial volumes are bound to reflect and amplify 
erratic swings in inflation expectations – if and when a central bank allows these to happen. 
But  price  stability  is  not  a  sufficient  condition  for  financial  stability.  I  will  elaborate  on  this 
insufficiency  paradigm  and  the  corollary  that  the  ECB  derives  from  it.  I  will  also  argue, 
inversely,  that  financial  stability  is  a  necessary  precondition  for  monetary  policy,  in  that  it 
creates the conditions for monetary policy to attain its objective.  
In  the  second  part  of  my  presentation  I  will  illustrate  the  rationale  for  the  main  macro-
prudential tools and discuss how they interact with monetary policy decisions.  
Interactions between monetary policy and the financial system 
1. 
Let me start by briefly considering how monetary policy decisions can influence the financial 
sector’s risk-taking behaviour, before moving on to discuss how the financial sector may itself 
also affect monetary policy. I will argue that monetary policy can influence such behaviour, 
for  instance,  by  affecting  the  overall  level  of  leverage  in  the  economy  and  the  maturity 
structure of financial liabilities, or by changing attitudes held by those in the financial sector 
about assuming risk. In turn, this may crucially impact on the likelihood of asset and credit 
bubbles forming and inflating, as they did before the global financial crisis. 
According  to  recent  studies  that  have  reconsidered  the  role  of  financial  intermediaries  in 
monetary  economics,  monetary  policy  may  be  regarded  as  an  extremely  “powerful”  tool. 
Those  studies  indicated  that  short-term  policy  rates  are  important  per  se  –  quite 
independently  of  their  impact  on  long-term  rates  and  on  expectations  of  future  short-term 
rates.1  Of  course, 
thinking.  Mainstream 
macroeconomic doctrine had long built on a finance-less construct in which short-term rates 
matter only to the extent that they determine long-term rates, as risk-adjusted expectations of 
future  short-term  rates.  The  crisis  has  suggested  that  finance  is  not  a  veil.  It  is  a  critical 
determinant of macroeconomic facts; it is a source of shocks and an intricate – and partly 
unpredictable  –  amplifier  of  disturbances.  A  new  series  of  studies  and  models  show  how 
this  marks  a  U-turn 
in  monetary  policy 
                                                 
1  Adrian and Shin (2009). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
finance  and  the  macro-economy  interact.  In  these  models,  short-term  monetary  policy 
instruments  seem  to  be  more  powerful  than  previously  thought  –  and  therefore,  more 
disruptive if misused.  
But  why  would  short-term  rates  be  important  in  their  own  right?  The  bulk  of  finance  for 
financial institutions, whether banks, broker-dealers, the so-called shadow banking system or 
hedge  funds,  is  very  much  short-term.  For  example,  broker-dealers  fund  themselves 
primarily  in  the  repo  market,  mainly  at  overnight  maturities,  while  shadow  banks  fund 
themselves  in  the  commercial  paper  market  and  the  majority  of  commercial  banks  rely  on 
retail  finance  –  chequing  and  savings  deposits  –  which  usually  consists  of  sight  or  short-
maturity instruments. Wholesale funding for commercial banks is, typically, very short-term 
as well. So, when a central bank decides on the short-term interest rate, it directly affects the 
marginal price of leverage for virtually the entire financial sector. 
Problems arise when, due to low interest rates that make short-term funding cheap, the total 
debt raised by financial institutions goes beyond what may be considered as socially optimal. 
This  is  frequently  the  case  for  the  unregulated  or  so-called  “shadow”  banking  system,  not 
subject to the stringent requirements of the regulated banking sector.2 
Low  funding  rates  can  inspire  risky  business  strategies.  For  example,  extreme  forms  of 
maturity transformation can become attractive, particularly if the risk adjustment calculus fails 
to make a proper correction for the expected gains. Business models based on “search for 
yield” with little or no concern for risk then become popular. In the search for a high nominal 
return on investment, financial institutions might be encouraged to buy assets, typically with 
long-term  maturity  and  possibly  illiquid,  financing  them  with  short-term  liabilities,  thus 
generating a large maturity and liquidity mismatch.  
Such new and destabilising business models do not apply only to securities. Evidence both 
for  the  euro  area  and  the  US  shows  that  banks  tend  to  accumulate  risk  during  economic 
upturns by optimistically easing lending standards. The same evidence shows that much of 
the  easing  comes  from  supply-side  adjustments.  In  other  words,  it  is  not  warranted  by 
improvements  in  the  borrowers’  risk  due  to  the  more  favourable  economic  conditions  in 
which those borrowers operate.3 This is particularly true for mortgages and is considered one 
of the factors that fuelled the real estate bubble.  
Furthermore,  research  has  shown  that  the  impact  on  risk-taking  of  low  short-term  interest 
rates  is  amplified  when  securitization  activity  is  high  –  for  it  improves  banks’  capital  and 
liquidity position and reduces borrowers’ risk – and when banking supervision standards are 
weak. As for the euro area in particular, there is some evidence that low short-term interest 
rates induce banks to lend to borrowers with a poor credit history or none at all. Naturally, 
such loans also have a higher “hazard rate”, that is to say a high probability of default.4 
When  financial  intermediaries  have  built  large  risks  into  their  balance  sheet  structures,  a 
negative  shock 
in  a  rather 
undiscriminating fashion. A negative externality to the whole system will then ensue. This is 
what  researchers  have  identified  as  a  “fundamental”  market  failure  –  unregulated  private 
money creation can ex post leave the system fatally exposed to a systemic crisis. A systemic 
crisis  is  in  essence  a  colossal  externality:  fire  sales  and  distressed  de-leveraging  are  the 
“correct” response that each financial institution in isolation should have to a funding crisis. 
But in the aggregate fire sales and the concomitant shedding of exposures cause a systemic 
failure which can damage institutions that would be healthy in different macro-environments.  
financial  system  as  a  whole, 
to  confidence  hits 
the 
                                                 
2  Stein (2011). 
3  Maddaloni and Peydró-Alcalde (2010). 
4  Jiménez, Ongena, Peydró and Saurina (2010). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In a simple institutional environment, this externality could be addressed with conventional 
monetary  policy,  complemented  with  either  deposit  insurance  or  a  lender-of-last-resort 
facility,  acting  ex  post.  But  for  policy-makers  to  intervene  ex  post  is  sub-optimal  and 
exceedingly reliant on instruments whose effectiveness in distress conditions is subject to a 
great deal of uncertainty. Ex ante policies are required to control the risk factors which can 
undermine the system. This provides an important rationale for deploying a broad range of 
measures (e.g. financial stability regulation). I will come back to this point in the second part 
of my remarks. 
What is clear from this narrative is that financial (in)stability has a profound role to play in 
creating  the  conditions  in  which  monetary  policy  operates.  Therefore,  monetary  authorities 
are very alert to developments that can have implications for financial stability, although this 
is not explicitly stated in the mandate of many central banks. As a matter of fact, the original 
motivation  for  creating  central  banks  in  many  countries  was  to  temper  the  financial  crises 
associated with unregulated “free banking” regimes.5 
A central bank’s task of maintaining price stability is facilitated if there is no financial turmoil 
and  such  events  are  rare.  Financial  stability  contributes  to  an  orderly  functioning  of  the 
transmission of monetary policy to the economy and, ultimately, to prices – a precondition for 
a  central  bank  to  be  able  to  discharge  its  primary  task  of  maintaining  price  stability. 
Therefore,  the  respective  policy  objectives  of  macro-prudential  oversight  and  monetary 
policy,  that  is,  contributing  to  financial  stability  and  maintaining  price  stability,  are  mutually 
reinforcing. 
But is there an ex ante role to play for the central bank alongside regulatory policies? Can it 
discourage risk-taking behaviour by the financial sector before excessive balance sheet risk 
is created?  
The developments in the run-up to the global financial crisis have shown that price stability, 
while being a necessary precondition, is not sufficient for financial stability. Low and stable 
inflation rates before the crisis coincided with a build-up of financial imbalances, leading to an 
increase  in  systemic  risk  and,  ultimately,  serious  risks  to  price  stability  later  on.  More 
generally, as a result of the establishment of credible low inflation environments over the last 
two-and-a-half decades, with firmly anchored inflation expectations, ample liquidity conditions 
and unsustainable economic imbalances seem to manifest themselves first in the build-up of 
financial imbalances rather than in immediate inflationary pressures. One reason for this may 
be  that  economic  agents  find  it  preferable,  under  supposedly  normal  circumstances,  to 
assume that in the future inflation will remain close to the central bank’s objective, but will 
suddenly and – even rather abruptly – revise such expectations once actual inflation edges 
up and uncertainty about future increases. Due to such stickiness, the potential inflationary 
pressure in the economy may be stronger than current inflation expectations indicate. 
That  financial  variables  could  be  important  for  monetary  policy  settings  was  recognised 
before  the  crisis  and  debated  –  somewhat  absent-mindedly  –  in  an  academic  world 
dominated by the inflation targeting doctrine. The debate had concentrated on whether asset 
prices  should  be  included  in  the  central  bank’s  definition  of  the  inflation  target,  or  in  their 
objective function, or at least as an argument, over and above inflation deviations, of their 
“feed-back  rules”.  The  consensus  conclusion  was  that  asset  prices  should  be  considered 
only to the extent that they might help predict inflationary pressures.6 
In  a  post-crisis  world,  the  debate  has  taken  a  different  tack.  For  one  thing,  it  is  not  asset 
prices alone that should enter policy considerations. It is financial and monetary imbalances 
in  general.  This  includes  asset  price  over-valuations  and  measures  of  risk  appreciation  in 
                                                 
5  Goodhart (1988). 
6  Bernanke and Gertler (2001). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
financial  instruments,  of  course.  But  it  includes  monetary  and  financial  quantities  as  well: 
over-leveraging  of  sectors  –  and  of  the  entire  economy  –  and  excessive  creation  of  cash 
balances.  It  is  by  now  established  that  monetary  policy  affects  financial  stability  by 
influencing the leverage, maturity mismatch and risk-taking behaviour of the financial sector. 
One could even argue that, in a near-paradox, it is precisely the success of monetary policy 
in taming inflation and therefore being able to deliver lower interest rates that introduces an 
element of instability, due mainly to the financial sector’s misperception that low interest rates 
are associated with a low-risk environment. When a financial crisis erupts, however, there is 
a risk that monetary policy and financial stability could lead to a so-called “low interest rate 
trap”, in that crises require low interest rates to keep the financial system alive; low interest 
rates maintained for long, in turn, induce too much risk-taking, thereby making a new crisis 
more likely.  
How  can  financial  imbalances  enter  the  process  of  monetary  policy  setting  in  a  way  that 
makes monetary policy itself less prone to systematic mistakes?  
The ECB has long practised a two-pillar approach to policy-making. But note the difference 
between a monetary pillar and a genuine “lean- against-the-wind” attitude, as was advocated 
by the early participants in the debate that I was mentioning before. It was discussed in a 
recent ECB paper.7  
It is not asset prices per se that a central bank should incorporate in its policy framework. 
After  all,  the  equilibrium  value  of  assets  –  particularly  real  assets,  such  as  claims  on 
companies and houses – is difficult to compute and is certainly state-contingent. So, there is 
little merit in an unconditional monetary policy response to asset price changes. The policy 
response  should  be  conditional.  And  the  critical  condition  that  a  central  bank  should 
ascertain before judging if an asset price trend is policy-relevant is whether the market trend 
is causing – and/or is being fed by – a concomitant monetary imbalance.  
A market bubble that progresses in symbiosis with a credit bubble, and which then spills over 
into excess money creation, is certainly a policy-relevant event. Being alert to the monetary 
imbalance means for a central bank being better able to discriminate between benign and 
less-benign phenomena in financial markets.  
This being said, monetary policy needs support in its ex ante action to resist the formation 
and build-up of toxic financial imbalances. There is a clear need for a corresponding policy 
framework to foster financial stability; we need to understand how it interacts with monetary 
policy in order to minimise frictions between the two and exploit possible synergies.  
Macro-prudential policies and monetary policy decisions 
2. 
The goals of macro-prudential policies can be broadly defined as preserving financial stability 
by reducing the pro-cyclicality of the financial sector, and improving its resilience to adverse 
shocks. However, even though the goals are clear in theory, the means to reach them are 
still open to discussion.  
Monetary policy has been at the centre of the debate in economics for almost a century, and 
there  is  now  a  high  level  of  consensus  about  its  goals,  its  tools,  and  how  to  gauge  its 
effectiveness. However, the macro-prudential framework is still fuzzy, and being developed 
with the benefit of hindsight after the crisis that started in 2007 with the bursting of the sub-
prime bubble. 
I will describe briefly the main tools that are being developed, dividing them into those that 
address  pro-cyclicality  and  those  that  attempt  to  improve  resilience.  I  will  discuss  their 
                                                 
7  Fahr, Motto, Rostagno, Smets and Tristani (2011). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
interaction  with  monetary  policy  and  the  conduct  of  that  policy,  and  draw  some  tentative 
conclusions about how they reinforce each other – and where I see possible problems.  
In order to tame the pro-cyclicality of the financial sector, the main tool being devised is the 
aptly  named  counter-cyclical  capital  buffer.  Without  going  into  too  many  details,  the  main 
idea is that as the economy booms and credit is cheap, there is an inherent tendency to relax 
lending standards, take risks and over-leverage. Subsequently, as the economy slows down, 
over-extended borrowers go bust, mounting losses at banks result in capital depletion and 
force them to reduce the loan supply. This can induce a credit crunch that turns a slowdown 
into an outright recession. Interest rates are generally set anti-cyclically, but they might not 
be enough to tame the swings of the financial sector, or might be too blunt an instrument if 
the boom (and subsequent bust) is concentrated in some specific sector, for example real 
estate.  On  the  other  hand,  banks  could  be  asked  to  build  up  more  capital  per  unit  of  risk 
during  the  upswing,  well  above  minimum  requirements  mandated  by  micro-prudential 
supervisors. This way, on the one hand, credit would become more expensive and therefore 
might slow down, while on the other hand, banks would not need to reduce the loan supply 
during  the  downswing  since  they  could  run  down  this  buffer  before  reaching  the  binding 
constraint of capital regulation. This instrument aims to limit supply-driven credit expansions 
and to soften contractions. 
One  instrument  which  has  similar  effects  but  is  designed  more  for  demand-driven  credit 
booms  is  a  ceiling  on  the  loan-to-value  ratio  for  collateralised  loans  (and  equivalently  on 
margins and haircuts for securities lending). By forcing the borrower to put up more of its own 
funds,  it  makes  credit  more  expensive  and  reduces  demand.  When  the  demand  for  loans 
heats up, macro-prudential authorities can decrease the loan-to-value ratio, thus increasing 
the cost of credit and slowing down or stopping its growth. 
Both counter-cyclical capital buffers and loan-to-value ratios increase the cost of credit and 
thus  limit  its  expansion,  as  does  an  increase  in  interest  rates.  So  why  do  we  need  this 
second set of instruments, and how do they interact with monetary policy decisions? 
The issue is one of timing and targets. Interest rates are generally set by looking at prices. 
Credit developments are also taken into account but mainly to the extent that they forecast 
an  increase  in  inflation.  However,  financial  stability  might  be  endangered  before  credit 
expansion  starts  spilling  over  into  inflation  and  might  require  an  action  that  is  both  more 
vigorous and more targeted than an increase in interest rates. 
While  in  normal  times  the  coordination  between  monetary  policy  and  macro-prudential 
policies might yield little benefit, when the shock to the financial system is severe there can 
be substantial gains if monetary policy “lends a hand” and temporarily puts more weight on 
restoring  financial  stability  than  on  short-term  price  stability.8  This  leads  towards  an 
institutional framework that involves central banks in macro-prudential decisions, such as the 
Financial Stability Oversight Council in the United States and the European Systemic Risk 
Board in the European Union. 
While monetary policy and macro-prudential policy might gain from coordination, we should 
also  consider  whether  they  affect  each  other.  For  example,  counter-cyclical  capital  buffers 
make  banks  increase  their  equity  during  upswings;  however,  better-capitalised  banks  are 
less  responsive  to  monetary  policy.9  This  alteration  of  the  lending  channel  (and  the 
symmetric effect during the downswings of the economic cycle) should be taken into account 
when evaluating the impact of changes in interest rates. Conversely, prolonged bouts of low 
interest  rates  can  so  alter  the  perception  of  risk  by  investors  that,  in  order  to  rein  in  risk-
taking,  macro-prudential  brakes  will  have  to  be  applied  much  more  vigorously  than  in  a 
                                                 
8  Angelini et al. (2011). 
9  Gambacorta and Marques (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
normal  business  cycle  situation.  There  is  a  dynamic  interaction  between  the  two  types  of 
policies that requires a constant assessment not only of how to combine them but also of 
their respective feedbacks. 
Let me move on to measures that increase the resilience of the financial system. I will divide 
them  into  those  that  strengthen  institutions  taking  them  as  given,  and  those  that  seek  to 
change the structure of the industry. 
In  the  first  category  we  have  mainly  levies  on  systemically  important  financial  institutions 
(SIFIs). 
SIFIs are deemed to generate negative externalities for financial stability, due to their sheer 
size  and  interconnectedness.  The  failure  of  one  of  them  would  cause  a  financial  crisis; 
however, this social cost is not borne by SIFIs’ shareholders only. Furthermore, moral hazard 
can  result  from  the  fact  that  they  are  aware  of  their  systemic  relevance.  This,  and  the 
externality illustrated above, would justify ad hoc regulation to ensure that SIFIs are extra-
safe.  
At first sight, there should be little interaction between additional requirements for SIFIs and 
monetary  policy.  During  a  crisis,  however,  SIFIs  would  be  prime  candidates  for  liquidity 
injections by the central bank.10 
In  the  second  category  of  macro-prudential  measures  that  increase  the  resilience  of  the 
financial  system,  we  have  market reforms such as a drive  towards centralising exchanges 
wherever possible at central clearing counterparties (CCPs), and structural reforms aimed at 
separating commercial banking from other activities. 
Centralising  transactions  should  reduce  counterparty  risk  and  allow  a  better  monitoring  of 
financial flows, especially of derivatives, for which little data is available in general. The extra 
information  should  be  useful  for  calibrating  monetary  policy.  The  concentration  of 
transactions should reduce uncertainty about who holds what – an uncertainty which, during 
a crisis, can end up freezing entire markets and forcing central banks to intervene. Therefore 
the development of CCPs seems beneficial to the conduct of monetary policy. 
The separation of commercial banking from other activities helps to protect deposit holders 
by insulating them from excessive risk-taking  activities by banks. It can take the form of a 
carve-out of some form of narrow bank,11 or by limiting trading with own funds (something 
similar  to  the  Volcker  Rule  adopted  by  the  United  States).  It  is  unclear  whether  this 
separation  reduces  the  overall  amount  of  risk  in  the  financial  sector,  or  simply  shifts  it  to 
institutions that are not deemed systemic.  
I would argue that if it is a mere redistribution it might be dangerous: how do we know that 
we won’t have a repeat of 2007, when we saw that vast pockets of risk had gone undetected 
and  had  grown  to  such  an  extent  that  they  threatened  the  stability  of  the  whole  financial 
system? The whole point of such a separation should be to change the incentives for risk-
taking.  By  separating  two  fundamentally  different  business  cultures,  investment  and  client 
services, it should be easier to redesign incentives to make the client part a safer place.12 At 
the moment, however, this second part of the structural reforms seems missing. 
Such a separation would reshape the financial industry and affect the transmission channels 
of  monetary  policy  in  ways  that  are  hard  to  predict.  On  the  one  hand,  commercial  banks 
would function in a more traditional way, reinforcing the lending channel; on the other hand, 
                                                 
10  This has more to do with the implementation of monetary policy than with its setting. 
11  As suggested by Kay (2010). 
12  Giovannini (2008). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
they might become relatively less important within the financial system, therefore reducing its 
impact. It would be an issue for empirical, policy-oriented research. 
So far, I have dealt mostly with solvency issues. But just as monetary policy affects not only 
risk-taking  (and  therefore  solvency)  but  also  general  liquidity  conditions,  macro-prudential 
policies should also address liquidity risk. 
Policies aimed at reducing liquidity risk are lagging behind those that improve the solvency of 
financial  institutions.  From  a  micro-prudential  perspective,  current  proposals  target  liquidity 
and  maturity  mismatches  of  individual  banks.  Regulators  have  suggested  that  each  bank 
holds  sufficient  liquidity  to  survive  a  sudden,  relatively  short-lived  shock,  and  that  it  funds 
long-term  assets  with  stable  sources  such  as  long-term  debt  and  deposits.  These 
requirements reduce liquidity risk for each institution but neglect the systemic dimension of 
liquidity,  and  might  be  very  costly  in  terms  of  limitations  to  maturity  transformation,  an 
essential  function  of  the  financial  system  for  which  there  is  high  demand.13  An  alternative 
proposal would impose liquidity risk charges or levies that penalise short-term funding, still at 
the  individual  level;14  to  help  ease  funding  pressures  on  banks  during  a  systemic  liquidity 
crisis one could think of instruments with contingent maturity.15 
In  fact,  at  the  moment  the  thinking  on  the  prevention  of  liquidity  crises  is  still  ongoing;  to 
mitigate acute liquidity shocks, as we have seen in the recent past, there is still no substitute 
for a determined intervention by central banks, even beyond the boundaries of their standard 
activity.  
During a crisis, individual banks’ liquidity positions matter since those perceived to be more 
risky might be excluded from the market;16 in this case, only the central bank can make the 
market for liquidity function, by acting as a central counterparty. In the short run, central bank 
intermediation  plays  a  stabilising  role;  however,  in  the  medium  run  it  can  increase  the 
persistence of the shock by interfering with a market-led adjustment and can lead to moral 
hazard.17 
The  bottom  line  here  is  that  we  need  to  develop  macro-prudential  policies  that  reduce 
liquidity risk ex ante in order to decrease the weight put on monetary policy tools during a 
crisis,  since  we  don’t  yet  know  very  well  the  long-run  impact  of  prolonged,  massive  non-
conventional interventions.  
Conclusion 
Let me finish with a few remarks on international coordination. 
Our experience with the international interplay of monetary policies goes back decades. The 
degree of freedom given by floating exchange rates allows central banks, especially for large 
countries or areas, to target domestic inflation rates without the need for much coordination. 
On the other hand, the high degree of integration of capital markets achieved over the past 
few  decades,  while  beneficial  in  terms  of  the  availability  of  funds,  means  that  macro-
prudential policies cannot be set in each country or region in an isolated way. Limits to credit 
growth  in  one  country  may  entail  a  spillover  of  funds  to  another  country,  and  imbalances 
building up on one side of the Atlantic can drag down the financial system on the other side. 
                                                 
13  Caballero (2009). 
14  Perotti and Suarez (2009). 
15  Nicoletti Altimari and Salleo (2010). 
16  Heider et al. (2009). 
17  De Walque et al. (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
As macro-prudential policies are developed and become effective, there will be a need for 
further international cooperation. 
Central banks have a long history of exchanging views and information; since they are very 
much  involved  in  macro-prudential  bodies  this  is  solid  ground  on  which  to  build  effective 
mechanisms of cooperation in the macro-prudential field. Could there be consequences for 
the setting of monetary policy? It is too early to tell, but given the various levels of interplay 
with macro-prudential policies that I have described, and the need to coordinate the latter, we 
need  to  think  more  about  the  international  dimension  of  monetary  policy,  which  may  be 
driven by financial stability concerns. This will be on our agenda for the coming years. 
Thank you for your attention. 
References 
Adrian,  T.  and  H.  S.  Shin  (2009),  “Financial  Intermediaries  and  Monetary  Economics”,  in 
Handbook of Monetary Economics (chapter 12). 
Angelini, P., S. Neri and F. Panetta (2010), “Monetary and Macroprudential Policies”, Banca 
d’Italia Temi di Discussione n. 801. 
Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler (2001), “Should Central Banks Respond to Movements in Asset 
Prices?”, American Economic Review, May, 91(2), pp. 253–257. 
Caballero,  Ricardo  (2009),  “The  “other”  Imbalance  and  the  Financial  Crisis”,  Baffi  Lecture, 
Bank of Italy, 10 December. 
De Walque, G., O.Pierrard and A. Rouabah (2010), “Financial (In)Stability, Supervision and 
Liquidity Injections: A Dynamic General Equilibrium Approach”, The Economic Journal, 120 
(December), 1234–1261. 
Fahr,  S.,  R.  Motto,  M.  Rostagno,  F.  Smets  and  O.  Tristani  (2011),  “A  Monetary  Policy 
Strategy  in  Good  and  Bad  Times:  Lessons  from  the  Recent  Past,”  ECB  Working  Paper 
No. 1336, May.  
Giovannini,  A.  (2010),  “Financial  System  Reform  Proposals 
CEPR Policy Insight No. 45, 29 December. 
Goodhart, C. (1988), “Evolution of Central Banks”, MIT Press, Cambridge. 
Heider, F., M. Hoerova and C. Holthausen (2009), “Liquidity Hoarding and Interbank Market 
Spreads: The Role of Counterparty Risk”, Discussion Paper 2009-40 S, Tilburg University, 
Center for Economic Research. 
Jiménez,  G,  S.  Ongena,  J.  L.  Peydró  and  J.  Saurina  (2010),  “Credit  Supply  -  Identifying 
Balance-Sheet Channels with Loan Applications and Granted Loans”, ECB Working Paper 
Series, No. 1179. 
Kay, J. (2009), “Narrow Banking: The Reform of Banking Regulation”, Centre for the Study of 
Financial Innovation. 
Maddaloni, A. and J. L. Peydró (2010), “Bank Risk-Taking, Securitization, Supervision and 
Low  Interest  Rates:  Evidence  from  the  Euro  Area  and  the  U.S.  Lending  Standards”,  ECB 
Working Paper Series, No. 1248. 
Marqués-Ibáñez D. and L. Gambacorta (2011), “The Bank Lending Channel: Lessons from 
the Crisis”, Economic Policy, 26, 66, 137–182.  
Nicoletti  Altimari,  S.  and  C.  Salleo  (2010),  “Contingent  liquidity”,  Banca  d’Italia  Occasional 
Paper No. 70. 
Perotti, E. and J. Suarez (2009), “Liquidity Risk Charges as a Macroprudential Tool”, working 
paper, CEMFI and University of Amsterdam. 
from  First  Principles” 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Stein,  J.  (2011),  “Monetary  policy  as  financial-stability  regulation”,  NBER  Working  Paper 
Series, working paper 1883. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
