Philip Lowe: Changing patterns in household saving and spending 
Speech by Mr Philip Lowe, Assistant Governor (Economic) of the Reserve Bank of Australia, 
to the Australian Economic Forum 2011, Sydney, 22 September 2011. 
 I would like to thank Jarkko Jaaskela, Luis Uzeda and Callan Windsor for extensive assistance in the preparation 
of this talk. 
Good morning. I am very pleased to be able to be part of this year’s Australian Economic 
Forum.  
Two weeks ago, the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA), Glenn Stevens, gave 
a  speech  in  Perth  titled  “Still  Interesting  Times”.  One  consequence  of  living  in  these 
interesting times is that there is no shortage of interesting things to talk about. There is the 
inexorable  shift  of  global  economic  weight  to  Asia,  the  public-debt  problems  in  the  North 
Atlantic economies, the multi-speed nature of the Australian economy, the more conservative 
approach to spending and borrowing by Australian households, and the list goes on.  
You will be relieved to hear that I don’t plan to talk about all these today. Rather, I would like 
to spend my time this morning exploring just one of these issues, and that is the changing 
patterns in household saving and spending in Australia. This issue is not only interesting in 
its  own  right,  but  understanding  these  changes  also  helps  us  understand  some  of  the 
broader changes that are occurring within the Australian economy.  
Household savings 
At the aggregate level, the story on household saving is, by now, well known.  
Graph 1 
From  the  mid  1980s  to  the  mid  2000s,  the  aggregate  household  saving  ratio  declined 
significantly (Graph 1). Then, over the past half dozen years, this decline has been reversed, 
and  the  aggregate  household  saving  ratio  is  now  back  to  where  it  was  in  the  mid  1980s. 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Glenn  Stevens  has  recently  spoken  at  length  about  why  these  changes  took  place.1  In 
particular,  he  drew  attention  to  the  fact  that  as  nominal  interest  rates  declined  and  the 
availability  of  credit  increased,  household  spending  grew  more  quickly  than  income  for 
around a decade or so. Although this adjustment was drawn out, it was, by nature, a one-off 
event. So even before the North Atlantic financial crisis, households were returning to more 
traditional norms of saving and borrowing, and, no doubt, the crisis accelerated this return.  
This aggregate story is interesting, but it can only take us so far in understanding what has 
been  going  on.  At  the  RBA,  we  spend  considerable  effort  delving  underneath  these 
aggregate  figures,  so  as  to  better  understand  the  factors  affecting  individuals’  decisions 
about  saving  and  spending.  One  way  that  we  do  this  is  to  use  the  HILDA  (Household, 
Income and Labour Dynamics in Australia) survey which, each year, tracks the finances of 
individual households. Although the survey does not ask households how much they saved 
each  year,  saving  ratios  can  be  estimated  from  2006  onwards  using  the  income  and 
spending  numbers  reported  in  the  survey.2  Having  done  this,  we  can  compare  how  the 
distribution  of  saving  ratios  across  the  population  changed  between  2006  and  2009,  the 
latest year for which data are available. This period is especially interesting because of the 
large increase in the aggregate saving ratio that occurred, with 2009 marking a peak in the 
aggregate ratio.  
Graph 2 
Perhaps  the  easiest  way  to  summarise  the  results  is  to  show  how  the  median  of  the 
distribution has changed over time (Graph 2). Between 2006 and 2007, the median saving 
ratio increased by 1 percentage point. It increased by a further 2 percentage points in 2008 
and then jumped by 4 percentage points in 2009, for a cumulative increase of 7 percentage  
 
                                                  
1  See Stevens G (2011), “The Cautious Consumer”, Address to the Anika Foundation Luncheon, Sydney 26 July. 
2  Similar changes are evident across the entire distribution of saving ratios. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
points  over  these  three  years.3  This  figure  turns  out  to  be  quite  close  to  the  8 percentage 
points  increase  in  the  aggregate  saving  ratio  over  this  period  calculated  from  the  national 
accounts.  The  micro  level  data  suggest  that  the  increase  in  saving  ratios  was  quite 
widespread  across  the  population.  It  also  confirms  that  an  increase  in  saving  ratios  was 
occurring  prior  to  the  financial  crisis,  but  that  the  crisis  saw  a  marked  acceleration  of  this 
trend.  
When  we  drill  down  into  the  data  in  more  detail,  an  increase  in  saving  ratios  is  apparent 
across the entire income distribution, although not surprisingly, the increase is smallest for 
households  with  the  lowest  incomes  (Graph  3).4  Many  of  these  low-income  households 
spend  a  significant  share  of  their  income  on  the  basic  necessities  and  they  have  limited 
scope to increase the share of their income that they save.  
Graph 3 
Another way of looking at the data is by housing tenure. Graph 4 shows that the saving ratio 
has  increased  for  those  that  rent,  for  those  with  a  mortgage  and  for  those  that  own  their 
dwelling outright. This again confirms that the increase in saving has been quite widespread, 
although,  the  increase  in  saving  has  been  smallest  for  those  households  that  own  their 
dwelling outright.  
                                                  
3  The actual levels of the saving ratios calculated from the HILDA data are substantially higher than those from 
the national accounts, as the HILDA survey does not capture all components of household expenditure. This 
difference should, however, have relatively little effect on estimates of the change in the saving ratio over time. 
4  For  the  purposes  of  classifying  households  into  income  bands,  income  is  measured as  average household 
disposable over the period from 2005/06 to 2008/09 in an effort to capture income in “normal” times. It is also 
“age matched” to avoid the effect of life-cycle factors and an adjustment is made for the number of people in 
the household. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Graph 4 
 It  is  also  possible  to  look  at  how  saving  rates  have  changed  for  different  age  groups 
(Graph 5). Doing this, it is clear that the increase has been largest for younger households 
and smallest for older households. This result holds for both households that are renting and 
those  that  are  owner  occupiers.  The  survey  suggests  that  younger  households  have 
experienced income growth broadly in line with that of other groups. However, their spending 
has not grown as quickly as these other groups, hence the relatively large increase in their 
saving.  
Graph 5 
Taken together, this evidence is consistent with the idea that higher housing prices and debt 
levels  have  contributed  to  a  reassessment  of  saving  decisions,  although,  obviously,  the 
 4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
reasons for the increase in saving go well beyond what has happened in the housing market. 
Higher  housing  prices  have  required  higher  deposits  and  this  requires  more  savings.  This 
trend has probably been reinforced by developments on the lending side, with most lenders 
lowering their maximum loan-to-valuation ratio over recent years. Saving decisions today are 
also likely being influenced by the earlier rise in debt levels relative to incomes and by debt 
servicing  burdens  that  are  staying  higher  for  longer.  The  adjustments  seem  to  have  been 
particularly  pronounced  among  younger  households  who  are  hoping  to  enter  the  housing 
market or who have recently entered the market.  
There  are  two  other  aspects  of  the  individual  level  data  that  I  would  like  to  draw  your 
attention to.  
The  first  of  these  is  the  relationship  between  the  change  in  saving  and  a  household’s 
holdings  of  financial  assets  (excluding  deposits).5  To  explore  this  relationship,  we  have 
divided  households  in  each  income  quintile  into  two  groups  –  those  with  above-average 
holdings of financial assets and those with below-average holdings – and then calculated the 
median change in the saving ratio for each group between 2008 and 2009, the year of the 
financial crisis. The results of this exercise are shown in Graph 6, with the top line showing 
the  median  increase  in  the  saving  ratio  for  households  with  high  financial  assets  and  the 
bottom line showing the change for those with low financial assets. It is clear that for all five 
income  quintiles,  households  that  had  relatively  high  levels  of  financial  assets  before  the 
financial turmoil increased their saving by more than households with relatively low levels of 
financial assets.  
Graph 6 
 This  evidence  is  consistent  with  the  idea  that  the  fall  in  financial  asset  prices  over  recent 
years led households to increase their saving out of current income in order to rebuild their 
asset positions. When share prices fell, household wealth declined and, as a consequence, 
                                                 
5  Financial assets include superannuation, cash investments (i.e. bonds), equity investments, trust funds and 
life insurance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
increased saving was required to attain any desired level of wealth. This was particularly the 
case for those households that held a lot of financial assets. This experience is the flipside of 
what happened during the decade to the mid 2000s. During that period, household wealth 
increased  substantially  by  way  of  increasing  asset  prices,  despite  households  saving 
relatively little out of their current income.  
The second aspect of the individual-level data that I would like to draw your attention to is the 
relationship between the change in the saving ratio and how much uncertainty a household 
feels about the future. This is a difficult issue to investigate, but it is an important one as the 
financial crisis of 2008/09 all too clearly illustrated. During that period, uncertainty around the 
world  increased  greatly,  with  the  result  that  both  households  and  businesses  delayed 
discretionary  spending  and  increased  their  savings,  amplifying  the  downturn  in  the  global 
economy.  
In the HILDA survey, households that are in employment are asked each year how worried 
they  are  about  the  future  of  their  job.6  Using  the  responses  to  this  question,  we  classify 
households into four groups: those that have become less worried over time; those that have 
become  a  little  more  worried  over  time;  those  that  have  become  a  lot  more  worried;  and 
those where there has been no change. As before, we calculate the change in the median 
saving ratio for each of these groups and the results are shown in Graph 7. It is clear from 
this graph that the largest increase in saving ratios is for those households that have become 
a lot more concerned over time about losing their job. And conversely, the smallest increases 
in saving have been for those who have become less concerned about losing their job.  
Graph 7 
 Here, the evidence is consistent with the idea that when people become more uncertain they 
save more to build up larger buffers against the possibility that something goes wrong later 
                                                 
6  Respondents  are  asked  to  rank  their  feeling  about  the  statement  “I  worry  about  the  future  of  my  job”  on  a 
scale of one to seven (strongly disagree to strongly agree). Households were classified as: “less worried” if 
their  perceived  job  insecurity  response  decreased  between  2006  and  2009;  “slightly  more  worried”  if  their 
response increased by one step; and “a lot more worried” if their response increased two or more steps. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
on. It is also consistent with earlier work at the Reserve Bank showing that households that 
are particularly uncertain about the future tend to spend less of any increase in income than 
do households that are more confident.7 
In summary, this work on savings using household level data confirms many of the popular 
explanations for the recent increase in savings. Higher housing prices and debt levels have 
had an effect, as have falls in the prices of investment portfolios and a general increase in 
uncertainty. This work also confirms that the increase in saving has been widespread across 
the population.  
Household spending 
I  would  now  like  to  turn  from  saving  to  spending  and  look  at  the  changes  that  have  been 
taking  place  in  household  expenditure  patterns.  The  two  most  comprehensive  sources  of 
data in this area are the quarterly national accounts and the Household Expenditure Survey, 
which  is  currently  conducted  every  six  years  by  the  ABS.  The  latest  survey  took  place  in 
2009/10 and was released just a couple of weeks ago. It covered almost 10,000 households 
and classifies expenditure into over 600 individual categories, ranging from “towels and face 
washers” to “road tolls” to “ten pin bowling charges”.  
Looking at the longer-term trends from both these sources, two changes stand out.  
Graph 8 
 The first is the significant rise over time in the share of total expenditure on housing. When 
the Household Expenditure Survey was conducted in the early 1980s, housing accounted for 
a little less than 13 per cent of total expenditure (Graph 8). By way of contrast, in the recent 
survey  this  share  had  increased  to  18 per  cent.  This  is  the  largest  change  in  any  single 
expenditure category. The bulk of this change took place over the past decade and largely 
reflects the rise in interest payments on mortgage debt due to higher levels of debt relative to 
income.  
                                                 
7  See Berger-Thomson L, Chung E and R McKibbin (2009), “Estimating Marginal Propensities to Consume in 
Australia Using Micro Data”, RBA Research Discussion Paper No. 2009–07 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
The  second  longer-term  change  is  a  decline  in  the  share  of  spending  on  goods  and  an 
increase  in  the  share  of  spending  on  (non-housing)  services.  For  example,  in  the  early 
1980s,  spending  on  clothing,  footwear,  household  equipment  and  furniture  totalled  around 
14 per  cent  of  total  household  expenditure.  Today,  the  figure  is  just  over  8 per  cent.  In 
contrast, there have been substantial rises in the shares of total expenditure accounted for 
by health, education and a range of household and personal services. While these increases 
are partly explained by a rise in the relative prices of many of these services, the volume of 
consumption of these services has also increased.  
These  broad  trends  can  be  seen  across  the  entire  income  distribution,  although  there  are 
some subtle differences across incomes. The decline in the share of spending on clothing 
and footwear, for example, is evident across all income groups. Conversely, households in 
all  income  quintiles  are  spending  a  higher  share  on  services,  with  the  largest  increases 
evident in expenditure on recreation services, such as pay TV and the internet (Graph 9). In 
addition,  for  many  middle  and  lower  income  households  there  has  been  a  noticeable 
increase  in  the  share  of  spending  on  holidays.  It  would  appear  that  rising  incomes,  the 
appreciation of the exchange rate and the emergence of low-cost airlines have made travel 
more affordable for many people.  There has also been a general increase in the share of 
expenditure devoted to education and, for higher-income households, a noticeable increase 
in spending on household and personal services. Looking forward, it is likely that these broad 
trends will continue.  
Graph 9 
Returning to the aggregate data, the different trends in spending on goods and services are 
also  evident  in  the  national  accounts  which  measure  changes  in  expenditure  adjusted  for 
movements in relative prices. The differences have been unusually pronounced over the past 
year, with consumption of goods increasing by around 1¾ per cent, compared with growth of 
around 4 per cent in the consumption of services (Graph 10).  
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 10 
 The  recent  relatively  weak  growth  in  the  consumption  of  goods  has  led  to  very  subdued 
trading conditions in many parts of the retail sector. In contrast, conditions have been better 
in a number of the service parts of the economy. Again, according to the national accounts, 
consumption of education services is up by 5 per cent over the year, recreation and culture is 
up by 7 per cent, hotels cafés and restaurants is up by over 6 per cent, and consumption of 
transportation services is up by well over ten per cent.  
These outcomes suggest that although households are saving a higher share of their income 
than in the past couple of decades, they have also been prepared to increase their spending 
on services quite significantly.  
Exactly why this is so is difficult to pin down. One can’t completely rule out the possibility that 
spending  on  some  goods  is  being  understated  due  to  increased  internet  purchases  from 
foreign retailers, although this is unlikely to be a particularly large part of the story. Another 
explanation is that there has been a gradual shift in household preferences away from goods 
and towards “experiences”. This would be consistent with the strong growth in spending on 
recreational activities that has occurred over recent times. A more important factor though is 
likely to have been the strong growth in household income. Over the past year, aggregate 
household disposable income is up by around 7½ per cent, and this has boosted spending 
on those services that are quite sensitive to income growth.  
This  increasing  importance  of  consumption  of  services  in  Australia  poses  a  challenge  in 
tracking overall growth in consumption in real time. The main high-frequency data that we 
have is on the consumption of goods. Australia has long had a comprehensive retail trade 
survey that is published on a monthly basis by the ABS, with this survey reporting separate 
results for various types of retail establishments. But the spending measured in this survey 
currently  accounts  for  only  about  one  third  of  total  consumption,  and  this  is  down  from 
around 40 per cent in the early 1980s.  
Unfortunately,  for  most  services  there  are  few  timely  and  comprehensive  measures  of 
spending. There are, however, a number of high-frequency indicators that the Bank tracks 
that provide some insight into this part of the economy. To take just one example, there are a 
variety of monthly indicators of spending on transportation including: the number of litres of 
petrol  sold;  the  number  of  domestic  flights;  the  number  of  international  flights;  and  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
number of passengers on certain public transport networks (Graph 11). Over recent times, 
the  data  on  international  flights,  in  particular,  have  provided  some  timely  insight  into  the 
relative  strength  of  services  consumption,  with  Australians  travelling  overseas  in  ever 
increasing numbers.  
Graph 11 
 However, while these various partial indicators are useful, they fall well short of being a full 
substitute  for  comprehensive  and  timely  measures  of  services  consumption.  The  ABS 
forward work program includes efforts to improve the measurement of services consumption 
and the Bank strongly supports these efforts.  
Conclusion 
So in conclusion, there are significant changes in saving and spending patterns taking place 
in Australia. The effects of these changes are probably most pronounced in the retail sector, 
with both increased saving and the switch towards services lessening growth in spending on 
goods. As a result, conditions are quite difficult for many retailers.  
The  increased  household  saving  is,  however,  a  positive  development  from  a  national  risk-
management  perspective.  Households  are  using  some  of  their  income  growth  to  build  up 
bigger  financial  buffers,  and  this  should  hold  them  in  good  stead  in  the  uncertain  world  in 
which we live. These higher saving rates are likely to be quite persistent and they represent a 
return  to  more  traditional  patterns.  While  they  partly  reflect  the  ongoing  adjustment  to  the 
earlier big run up in housing debt and housing prices, the evidence that I have talked about 
today  suggests  that  there  are  also  other  factors  at  play.  In  particular,  many  households 
appear  to  have  increased  their  saving  in  response  to  the  decline  in  equity  prices  and  an 
increase in uncertainty about the future. It is reasonable to expect that, at some point, the 
impact of these factors will begin to wane, although exactly when remains an open question.  
The Reserve Bank continues to monitor these trends very carefully, both at the national level 
and  the  micro  level.  Over  the  period  ahead,  the  way  in  which  households  respond  to  the 
global  uncertainties  and  the  continuing  growth  in  their  incomes  will,  no  doubt,  have  an 
important bearing on developments in the Australian economy.  
Thank you. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
