Yves Mersch: Europe and the Euro – the way ahead 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Member of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank 
and Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, at the OMFIF Investment Seminar, Tokyo, 
28 July 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  and  privilege  to  talk  in  front  of  this  distinguished  audience  about  the 
challenges we face after the crisis. 
Myths  on  the  premature  collapse  of  the  euro  are  currently  the  prevailing  topic  of  financial 
news. They do not withstand a reality check based on facts and figures. Rather, they show a 
lack of understanding how “Europe” works.  
I am therefore particularly happy to share with you some reflections beyond the headlines on 
the European Union (EU) and the euro area.  
Let  me  stress  that  the  members  of  the  Governing  Council  of  the  European  Central  Bank 
(ECB) are now in the purdah period, as the next Governing Council meeting will take place 
on 4 August. This means that nothing in what I will say is intended or should be interpreted in 
any respect in terms of future monetary policy. 
The first 12 years of the Euro: the single currency has been a success 
The euro is without doubt a success story.  
The  common  currency  unifies  more  than  330  million  people  in  a  region  that  is  among  the 
wealthiest and most developed of the world.  
For  more  than  12  years,  the  ECB  in  Frankfurt,  in  close  cooperation  with  national  central 
banks  –  to include  the Banque  centrale  du  Luxembourg  –  secured its primary  mandate  to 
maintain price stability in the euro zone as a whole.  
Price stability in the understanding of the ECB is given at a medium-term inflation rate below 
but close to two percent.  
Monetary policy in the euro area has accomplished this mission: the average annual inflation 
rate in the first twelve years since the introduction of the euro was 1.97 percent.  
Although  the  ECB  has  started  from  scratch,  it  secured  the  low  yield  curve  of  the  formerly 
most stable currencies. Many Critiques had expected that the yield curve of the new Euro 
would be an average – and thus higher – of the former basket of different currencies.  
This  result  is  remarkable  not  least  because  the  stability  of  the  euro  had  to  be  defended 
against a series of shocks. Let me name a few:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Since 1999 oil prices increased sharply peaking at $147 per barrel in 2008; 
Rising and volatile prices of food and commodities; 
The internet bubble burst at the beginning of the new millennium ;  
The events of 11 September 2001;  
In  September  2008  the  collapse  of  former  US  investment  bank  Lehman  Brothers 
triggered the most severe financial crisis since the Great  Depression some eighty 
years ago.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The euro area in an international comparison 
Price stability is a major contribution to sustainable growth and job creation. Indeed, other 
economic  indicators  stress  that  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  has  been  successful  since  its 
inception: 
1. 
Growth  in  the  euro  area  has  been  robust  in  the  first  12  years.  Adjusted  for  the 
differences  in  population  development  economic  growth  in  the  euro  area  and  the 
United States in the last decade were roughly the same. The growth of per capita 
income in this period amounted in both currency areas, about one percent per year.  
Since 1999, roughly 14 million jobs have been created in the euro area. In the U.S., 
by contrast, only eight million new jobs were created during the same period of time. 
Public finances in the euro area as a whole are sound. Although the financial crisis 
has stressed government deficits and debt in the euro area, forecasts indicate that 
in 2011 the euro area fiscal deficit will be somewhat less than half of that of the US 
and  Japan.  The  euro  area  as  a  whole  is  on  track  to  bring  the  deficit  to  Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) ratio below the 3 percent reference value by 2013 and to 
stop the adverse debt dynamics caused by the financial crisis. 
Trade  within  the  euro  area  and  the  EU  is  flourishing  as  well  as  the  exchange  of 
goods and services with the rest of the world. The euro area is the most open major 
economy in the world.  
Some argue that the US economy was more homogeneous than the economy of the 
euro.  But  the  dispersion  of  growth  rates  of  real  gross  domestic  product  (GDP) 
between  member  states  of  the  euro  area  is  comparable  to  the  differences  in  the 
states of the United States. The same holds true for the dispersion of inflation and 
unit labour costs (as an indicator of competitiveness). In short: Heterogeneity within 
the euro area and the United States have been quite similar over the past 12 years.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
The current edge: robust economic recovery at temporarily elevated inflation levels 
Incoming  statistical  data  releases  and  survey-based  indicators  point  towards  a  continued 
recovery of economic activity in the euro area, albeit at a slower pace. Looking ahead, euro 
area exports should be supported by the ongoing expansion in the world economy. Because 
of  the  favorable  level  of  business  confidence  in  the  euro  area,  private  sector  domestic 
demand  should  contribute  increasingly  to  economic  growth.  Benefits  stem  from  the  still 
accommodative  monetary  policy  stance  and  the  measures  adopted  to  improve  the 
functioning of the financial system. 
The most recent projections by the experts of the Euro system foresee the economy to grow 
between 1.5 percent and 2.3 percent for 2011 and between 0.6 percent and 2.8 percent for 
2012. 
In the last months, higher energy and commodity prices pushed the inflation rate in the euro 
area  to  relatively  high  levels.  In  the  view  of  the  ECB’s  Governing  Council  it  is  of  utmost 
importance that the temporary rise in the inflation rate does not feed through into second-
round effects in price and wage-setting behavior. This could lead to broad-based inflationary 
pressures.  
Inflation expectations must remain firmly anchored in line with our aim of maintaining inflation 
rates below, but close to, 2 percent over the medium term.  
To defend this goal the ECB has increased its policy rate already twice this year, in April and 
July by a cumulated 50 basis points to the current level of 1.5 percent. By doing so, the ECB 
was  the  first  major  central  bank  in  the  world  that  hiked  interest  rates  and  proved  its 
unconditional  commitment  to  its  primary  mandate  of  securing  price  stability  in  the  medium 
term and its independence.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Global liquidity: regional mandate facing global challenges 
A more structural issue basically all central banks have to tackle is abundant global liquidity. 
To many scholars and practitioners “ample global liquidity” has been repeatedly used as one 
potential explanation for financial developments before the financial crisis – and again more 
recently.  
“Ample  liquidity”  in  this  context  is  regularly  associated  with  phenomena  like  stock  markets 
rallies, low bond yields, rising commodity prices and real estate booms. For monetary policy 
these  developments  are  in  so  far  of  importance  as  they  might  have  an  impact  on  both 
consumer prices, i.e. inflation, and asset prices, i.e. financial stability.  
One  can  distinguish  between  monetary  liquidity  and  financial  market  liquidity.  Monetary 
liquidity is the ability of an economic agent to settle his transactions. Financial market liquidity 
describes  the  ease  with  which  large  volumes  of  financial  securities  can  be  bought  or  sold 
without affecting the market price.  
From a central bank perspective monetary and financial market liquidity should not be seen 
in isolation. They are related and influence each other. For example, if the transaction costs 
of an asset decline, i.e. financial market liquidity increases, it is more likely that this asset will 
be included in a specific measure of money.  
Similarly,  if  investors’  funding  increase,  i.e.  monetary  liquidity  is  higher,  this  will  probably 
increase financial market liquidity. 
Monetary  policy  has  to  distinguish  between  the  potential  short  and  long  term  impacts  of 
increased global liquidity. 
In  the  short  run,  global  liquidity  can  affect  asset  prices  and  as  such  indirectly  domestic 
economic  conditions.  Wealth  effects  and  international  capital  flows  are  possible  channels. 
Furthermore,  global  liquidity  may  affect  international  commodity  prices  and  the  prices  of 
these commodities can influence the terms of trade as they are used as inputs in production 
processes. Thereby, they can affect domestic prices of some goods.  
Indeed,  while  commodity  prices  have  retreated  more  recently,  many  are  still  close  to 
historically  high  levels  and  have  put  some  pressure  to  prices  via  the  described  channels. 
Interestingly  enough,  commodities  –  besides  serving  as  consumption  and  intermediary 
production goods – can to a large extent be understood as assets, which can be traded on 
futures markets and/or hoarded for speculative purposes. 
Also, with respect to consumer prices, empirical research has shown that national inflation is 
partly  determined  by  global  economic  dynamics.  Moreover,  recent  studies  indicate  that 
inflation in mature countries is “largely a global phenomenon”.  
At the current juncture, new sources of inflationary pressure may therefore emerge. Let me 
give  some  examples.  The  combination  of  dynamic  economic  growth,  accompanied  by 
accelerated inflation in emerging markets bears the risk that imported inflation will come to 
play a larger role in domestic price levels in the industrialized world. The recent increases in 
prices  of  certain  agricultural  products  and  raw  materials  may  therefore  be  more  persistent 
than currently assumed. The lagged effect of food prices could still add a layer of headline 
inflation 
In other words: The disinflationary impact of globalization, from which the industrialized world 
has benefited in the last 20 years, could turn into an imported inflationary impact.  
It seems reasonable that common global factors play an important role for domestic liquidity 
conditions.  Empirical  evidence  suggests  that  global  liquidity  is  affecting  consumer  price 
inflation.  This  is  even  more  apparent  for  asset  price  inflation  which  is  clearly  reactive  to 
global liquidity shocks.  
The growing importance of the external environment does not mean that domestic monetary 
policy is powerless. By contrast, under a flexible exchange rate regime the effects of global 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
liquidity  on  domestic  inflation  can  be  overcome  by  active  domestic  monetary  policy,  in 
particular  in  the  long  run.  An  independent  central  bank  is  able  to  stabilize  a  well-defined 
index of domestic prices despite economic fluctuations, be they domestic or foreign in origin.  
Nevertheless, the analysis of global liquidity should play a bigger role in central banking with 
regard to consumer prices but also asset prices. Let us recall that the so-called Jackson Hole 
doctrine – ignoring asset price bubbles during the upswing and clean up the mess by lose 
monetary  policy  after  the  bubble  burst  –  has  turned  out  to  be  one  of  the  most  expensive 
errors in economic thinking. 
The  ECB  is  particularly  well  prepared  to  face  these  challenges.  With  its  two-pillar  strategy 
that allocates an important role to the analysis of money and credit in its monetary analysis, 
the ECB has built up the necessary expertise to investigate and examine global liquidity with 
a  perspective  to  maximize  its  information  content  for  policy  makers.  This  helps  to  full  its 
primary mandate of price stability and is a major contribution to financial stability.  
The international role of the Euro: broad acceptance in financial markets 
Despite of the talks of a euro crisis the acceptance of the single currency on international 
financial markets has remained undoubted. The currency preferences for the Euro exhibited 
in 2010 showed a remarkable degree of stability.  
1. 
The euro continued to be the second most important international currency with a 
regional focus.  
At 9.3 trillion USD global foreign exchange reserves reached a new historical high at 
end-2010.  This  mainly  reflected  interventions  by  emerging  market  central  banks 
aimed at stemming off appreciation pressures on local currencies 
 
In 2010 the share of the euro in global foreign exchange reserves remained 
broadly  unchanged.  Adjusted  for  valuation  effects,  the  share  of  euro-
denominated  assets  in  global  reserve  portfolios  with  a  known  currency 
composition increased slightly to 26.3 percent from 26.0 percent at end-2009 
at  constant  end-2010  exchange  rates.  This  underscores  that  the  euro 
continued to be the second most important global reserve currency.  
2. 
3. 
In  international  bond  markets,  the  share  of  the  euro  decreased  slightly  by  around 
two  percentage  points.  This  was  mostly  due  to  negative  net  issuance  of  euro-
denominated international bonds. Temporary factors such as lower funding costs in 
the US dollar market mainly contributed to this somewhat lower share of the euro. 
In  the  turnover  of  foreign  exchange  markets  the  share  of  the  euro  increased  by 
around one percentage point. This stresses the euro’s use as an important regional 
vehicle currency. The relative importance of the euro also increased by almost half a 
percentage point in global derivatives markets such as OTC interest rate derivatives, 
and by around one percentage point when used in cross-border loans and deposits. 
When used as an invoicing currency in increased by around half a percentage point 
and  five  percentage  points,  respectively.  With  non-EU  countries,  however,  trade 
invoicing patterns remained relatively stable.  
The trading volume in global foreign exchange markets rose to almost 4 trillion USD 
in April 2010 as compared to 3.3 trillion USD in April 2007. 
In fact the Euro proved to be recognized as a safe haven currency. In a recent study the ECB 
found  that  the  best  predictor  of  a  safe  haven  status  is  not  the  interest  rate  spread,  as 
assumed in the carry trade literature, but rather the net foreign asset position, the country 
risk and external vulnerability. This confirms that macroeconomic fundamentals of the issuing 
country are an important determinant of “safe haven” currencies. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Sovereign debt crisis: the Greek challenge 
Although  the  talks  of  a  crisis  of  the  Euro  are  misguided,  there  is  no  reason  for  any 
complacency. We are still in challenging times. Especially in Greece, the situation is fragile.  
Athens has made remarkable progress in consolidating its public finances. Its population has 
to experience cuts, which are unprecedented in the post war European history. Nevertheless, 
an  additional  financial  aid  package  was  necessary  including  additional  fiscal  consolidation 
and privatization efforts.  
 
In  this  context,  Euro  area  Heads  of  State  and  Government  reaffirmed  their 
commitment to ensure the financial stability of the Euro area last Thursday. Bold and 
important decisions were taken, which include: 
Euro  area  Heads  of  State  and  Government  announced  159  billion  Euros  of  new 
financial support for Greece that will consist of 109 billion Euros from the Euro area 
and the IMF. Financial institutions will contribute 50 billion Euros after agreeing to a 
series of bond exchanges and buybacks that will reduce Greece’s debt burden. 
The interest rate on the loans will be reduced and maturities will be extended to up 
to  30  years  with  a  10-year  grace  period.  These  amended  conditions  will  also  be 
available for Portugal and Ireland. 
The  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF)  will  be  more  flexible  –  an 
amendment the ECB has suggested for quite a while. The EFSF will be empowered 
to buy debt across stressed euro countries on the secondary market. The fund can 
also  aid  troubled  banks  and  offer  credit-lines  to  countries  that  are  not  under  a 
program to repel speculators.  
Euro area governments will guarantee any Greek debt offered as collateral during 
money market operations in case a temporary credit event might be triggered. That 
will  enable  Greek  banks  to  keep  refinancing  themselves  via  the  ECB  without 
impairing the soundness of eligible counterparts.  
The  Member  States  and  the  Commission  will  mobilize  all  necessary  resources  to 
provide exceptional technical assistance to help Greece implementing its reforms. 
     In this environment, Greece can return to a path of growth and debt sustainability, provided 
the  reform  and  savings  requirements  of  the  troika  to  be  implemented.  This  alliance  of  the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF) and EU Commission in liaison with the ECB developed a 
program for Athens that has been calculated by senior experts.  
Two objectives are at stake: the return to growth and the sustainability of debt.  
1. 
Greece can resume growth when its potential is released. And its potential is huge. 
There is a vast supply of solar and wind energy which can be exported to the energy 
demanding  states  in  Northern  Europe.  Moreover,  Greece  could  turn  into  a  major 
transport  hub  between  Europe  and  Asia.  There  are  plenty  of  superb  engineers 
among  young  Greeks  longing  for  entrepreneurial  challenges.  Last  but  not  least, 
Greece is one of the most attractive places in the world for tourism of many kinds. 
Reform and effort, however, are necessary to lift that treasure. 
Debt sustainability requires a government to be able to repay its financial obligations 
at some point in the future. Therefore the government has to run primary surpluses 
in  the  future.  These  have  to  be  sufficiently  large  to  accommodate  the  cost  of 
servicing the government’s debt obligations, both at present and in the future.  
To put this challenge into perspective, lessons can be drawn from the experience of 
primary  budget  balances  in  EU  Member  States.  Many  of  which  have  indeed 
achieved  significant  primary  surpluses  over  extended  periods  of  time.  Several 
uninterrupted episodes of high annual primary surplus stand out:  
2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
    Finland maintained an average annual primary surplus of 5.7 percent of GDP 
over 11 years (1998–2008);  
Belgium sustained one at 5.4 percent of GDP over 11 years (1994–2004);  
The  average  primary  surplus  for  Denmark  was  5.3  percent  of  GDP  over 
26 years (1983–2008); Italy managed to generate an average primary surplus 
of 5.1 percent of GDP over six years (1995–2000). 
Overall, ten EU Member States (Belgium, Bulgaria, Denmark, Ireland, Spain, 
Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Finland and Sweden) recorded uninterrupted 
episodes of primary surplus for ten or more years, the lowest average annual 
surplus per episode being 1.6 percent of GDP.  
In  cumulative  terms  up  to  2009,  the  primary  balance  surplus  stood  at  over 
50 percent of GDP in seven EU Member States (Belgium, Bulgaria, Denmark, 
Ireland, Luxembourg, Netherlands and Finland). 
There are also lessons to learn from the Asian crisis in the 1990s. All Asian countries under 
stress at that time who engaged in an IMF program managed to return to creditworthiness 
and  regained  market  access  (with  the  exception  of  Indonesia).  The  programs  called  for 
endeavor  and  temporary  restraint  to  the  population  of  these  countries.  But  finally  they 
managed. 
Both solidarity and stability-compliant economic and fiscal policy are needed. They are the 
two sides of a coin in a monetary union. I am confident that the respective players live up to 
their responsibilities. 
Improving the institutional framework in Europe 
As  the  EU  is  not  a  country  with  a  central  government  but  a  union  of  sovereign  states,  it 
needs strong institutions to function. To quote Jean Monnet, one of the intellectual architects 
of  European  Unity:  “Nothing  is  possible  without  the  people,  nothing  is  lasting  without 
institutions.” 
This is even more important for the euro area as a monetary union. Because in a monetary 
union of sovereign states with the objective of a stable currency effective rules are required 
to  prevent  individual  countries  from  generating  negative  spillover  effects  by  their  national 
policy. This would undermine the credibility of the currency. 
As  early  as  in  1989  the  Delors  report,  a  blueprint  of  the  Monetary  Union  named  after  the 
President  of  the  European  Commission  at  that  time  Jacques  Delors,  stated  that  “an 
Economic and Monetary Union could only operate on the basis of mutually consistent and 
sound  behavior  by  governments  and  other  economic  agents  in  all  member  countries.  (…) 
Uncoordinated and divergent national budgetary policies would undermine monetary stability 
and generate imbalances in the real and financial sectors of the community.” 
The current sovereign debt crisis in three smaller euro area countries has disclosed several 
institutional weaknesses within the euro area and the European Union, respectively. But the 
current  difficulties  can  also  be  seen  as  an  opportunity  for  a  further  integration  of  the 
European  Union.  In  the  medium-term  we  must  improve  the  institutional  framework  for  the 
euro area. Europe has always made its greatest steps forward in times of crisis or at least 
difficult times.  
Important steps have already been taken to tackle the disclosed institutional shortcomings of 
the  existing  economic  governance  framework.  They  apply  to  the  fields  of  financial 
supervision, fiscal and economic sustainability and a crisis resolution framework.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Consolidated financial supervisory framework 
1. 
Before  the  crisis,  the  regime  for  financial  supervision  in  Europe  was  fragmented.  National 
bodies  which  supposed  to  supervise  cross-border  banks  had  no  effective  tools  to  resolve 
conflicts. The EU level financial services committees could only give advice and issue non-
binding guidelines and recommendations. The new consolidated supervisory framework, in 
place since the beginning of this year, reflects the single market in financial services: 
 
The European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) are three authorities created for the 
European banking sector (EBA), insurance and occupational pensions (EIOPA), and 
capital markets (ESMA) 
The  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB)  is  developing  the  tools  necessary  to 
warn  and,  if  appropriate,  make  recommendations  concerning  systemic  risk.  The 
ESRB constitutes the macro-prudential complement. It is chaired by the President of 
the ECB.  
 Reform of the Stability and Growth Pact 
2. 
The Stability and Growth Pact (SGP) will be reformed to improve the surveillance of national 
fiscal  policies  and  apply  enforcement  measures  at  an  early  stage  to  ensure  fiscal 
sustainable:  
 
Less room for discretionary decisions and more “automaticity” in the application of 
the preventive and corrective arm of the Stability and Growth Pact (burden of proof)  
Rapid  strengthening  of  national  fiscal  rules  –  to  facilitate  implementation  of  the 
Stability and Growth Pact 
Clearer rules for the reduction of debt, especially in euro area countries  
Earlier application of financial sanctions 
  Improved economic surveillance in Europe 
3. 
The  implementation  of  sound  macroeconomic  policies  is  the  best  insurance.  A  new 
macroeconomic surveillance framework will be established to check deviant behavior at an 
early  stage,  thus  preventing  fiscal  imbalances  before  they  emerge.  Surveillance  of 
competitive indicators is of the essence:  
 
 
New framework for the prevention and correction of macroeconomic imbalances  
Early  warning  indicators  and  economic  analysis  of  countries  to  identify  where 
imbalances might emerge,  
The  European  Council  may  make  appropriate  policy  recommendations  to  the 
country.  
If  serious  macroeconomic  imbalances  are  identified,  the  affected  country  must 
submit a plan to implement the recommendations.  
The application of such a plan will be monitored  
Possible financial penalties in case of serious macroeconomic imbalances and lack 
of implementation of the recommendations 
   Crisis management 
4. 
Prudence  and  prevention  are  important.  Yet  another  crisis  cannot  be  excluded  for  good. 
Therefore, a permanent crisis management facility has been agreed upon, that builds on the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
ad  hoc  stability  facilities  established  in  2010  to  dampen  contagion  and  preserve  financial 
stability. 
 
Current crisis mechanisms 
– 
The  EU  countries  and  the  IMF  granted  Greece  financial  assistance  of 
110 billion Euros. 
European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF):  Special  Purpose  Vehicle  of  the 
16  Member  States  of  the  euro  area  to  provide  assistance  guarantees  the 
member states of max. 440 billion Euro 
Financial  Stability  Mechanism  (EFSM):  European  Commission  grants  in  the 
amount of max. 60 billion Euros. 
   Mechanism from 2013 on 
– 
European  Stability  Mechanism  (ESM):  a  permanent  crisis-management 
institution designed to replace the EFSF and the EFSM in 2013. 
Concluding remarks 
Since  its  inception  more  than  12  years  ago,  the  euro  area  has  experienced  an 
unprecedented level of price stability. Moreover, the economic performance in terms of per 
capita  growth  and  job  creation  compares  positively  with  other  large  advanced  economies. 
This is mirrored by the high acceptance of the euro in international capital markets. 
Therefore, the widespread belief of a premature end of the euro is unfounded. 
Still, the management of a single currency remains more challenging in a union of sovereign 
states  compared  to  a  political  federation  with  centralized  responsibility  for  fiscal  and 
economic policy.  
I  am  confident  though  that  Europe  can  overcome  these  challenges.  Recent  institutional 
reforms to reinforce the euro area economic governance are going in the right direction.  
There  can  be  no  doubt,  however  that  future  steps  for  further  European  integration  will  be 
accompanied by a credible and stable Euro that deserves the faith of financial markets and 
international investors. 
Thank you for your attention. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
