Daniel K Tarullo: Assessing the regulatory, economic, and market 
implications of the Dodd-Frank derivatives title 
Testimony of Mr Daniel K Tarullo, Member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives, 
Washington DC, 15 February 2011. 
 Chairman  Bachus,  Ranking  Member  Frank,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I 
appreciate  this  opportunity  to  provide  the  Federal  Reserve  Board’s  views  on  the 
implementation of Title VII of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection 
Act  (Dodd-Frank  Act).  The  Board’s  responsibilities  with  respect  to  over-the-counter  (OTC) 
derivatives  fall  into  three  broad  areas:  consultation  and  coordination  with  other  authorities, 
both  domestic  and  international;  efforts  to  strengthen  the  infrastructure  of  derivatives 
markets; and supervision of many derivatives dealers and market participants.  
Consultation and coordination 
The  Dodd-Frank  Act  requires  that  the  Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission  and  the 
Securities and Exchange Commission consult with the Board on the rules they are crafting to 
implement Title VII. Immediately after passage of the act, the staff from the commissions and 
the Board met to fashion a process for this consultation; at the Board, we identified members 
of the staff with relevant expertise, both here and across the Federal Reserve System. Our 
staff  have  commented  on  proposed  rules  of  the  commissions  at  each  stage  of  the 
development  process  to  date.  In  providing  feedback,  we  have  tried  to  bring  to  bear  our 
experience  from  supervising  dealers  and  market  infrastructure  and  our  familiarity  with 
markets and data sources to assist the commissions.  
Important  coordination  activities  related  to  derivatives  regulation  also  are  occurring  within 
international  groups.  Most  prominently,  the  Group  of  Twenty  (G-20)  leaders  have  set  out 
commitments related to reform of the OTC derivatives markets that, when implemented by 
national authorities, will form a broadly consistent international regulatory approach. Work on 
the G-20 commitments is being carried forward in numerous groups of technical and policy 
experts,  and  staff  members  from  the  Federal  Reserve  are  actively  participating  in  these 
groups.  
More generally, the Board participates in many international groups that serve as vehicles for 
coordinating policies related to the participants and the infrastructure of derivatives markets. 
These  groups  include  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (Basel  Committee), 
which  has  recently  enhanced  international  capital,  leverage,  and  liquidity  standards  for 
derivatives, and the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, which is working with 
the  International  Organization  of  Securities  Commissions  to  update  international standards 
for  systemically  important  clearing  systems,  including  central  counterparties  that  clear 
derivatives instruments, and trade repositories.  
The  goal  of  all  of  these  efforts  is  to  develop  a  consistent  international  approach  to  the 
regulation and supervision of derivatives products and market infrastructures, as well as to 
the  sound  implementation  of  the  agreed-upon  approaches.  Our  aim  is  to  ensure  a  level 
playing  field  that  will  promote  both  financial  stability  and  fair  competitive  conditions  by 
preventing activity from flowing to less regulated jurisdictions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Infrastructure issues 
The  Dodd-Frank  Act  addressed  both  the  infrastructure  of  the  derivatives  markets  and  the 
regulation and supervision of its dealers and major participants. Central counterparties are 
given  an  expanded  role  in  the  clearing  and  settling  of  swap  and  security-based  swap 
(hereafter referred to as “swap”) transactions, and the Board believes benefits can flow from 
this  reform.  Since  2005,  Federal  Reserve  staff  members  have  worked  with  market 
participants  to  strengthen  the  infrastructure  for  OTC  derivatives,  including  developing  and 
broadening  the  use  of  central  clearing  mechanisms  and  trade  repositories.  Market 
participants have already established central counterparties that provide clearing services for 
some  OTC  interest  rate,  energy,  and  credit  derivatives  contracts.  If  properly  designed, 
managed,  and  overseen,  central  counterparties  offer  an  important  tool  for  managing 
counterparty  credit  risk,  and  thus  they  can  reduce  risk  to  market  participants  and  to  the 
financial system. Both central counterparties and trade repositories also support regulatory 
oversight and policymaking through provision of more comprehensive data on the derivatives 
markets.  The  Board  is  committed  to  continuing  to  work  with  other  authorities,  both  in  the 
United States and abroad, to ensure that a largely consistent international approach is taken 
to  central  counterparties  and  trade  repositories  and  that  their  risk-reducing  benefits  are 
realized.  
Title VIII of the act complements the role of central clearing in Title VII through heightened 
supervisory  oversight  of  systemically 
including 
systemically  important  facilities  that  clear  swaps.  This  heightened  oversight  is  important 
because  financial  market  utilities  such  as  central  counterparties  concentrate  risk  and  thus 
have the potential to transmit shocks throughout the financial markets. As part of Title VIII, 
the  Board  also  was  given  new  authority  to  provide  emergency  collateralized  liquidity  in 
unusual and exigent circumstances to systemically important financial market utilities. We are 
carefully considering ways to implement this provision in a manner that protects taxpayers 
and limits any rise in moral hazard. 
financial  market  utilities, 
important 
Supervisory issues 
Although  central  counterparties  will  provide  an  additional  tool  for  managing  counterparty 
credit  risk,  enhancements  to  the  risk-management  policies  and  procedures  for  individual 
market participants will continue to be a high priority for supervisors. As the reforms outlined 
in the act are implemented, the most active firms in bilateral OTC markets likely will become 
active clearing members of central counterparties. As such, the quality of risk management 
at these firms importantly affects the ability of the central counterparty to manage its risks 
effectively and to deliver risk-reducing benefits to the markets.  
Capital  and  margin  requirements  are  central  to  the  prudential  regulation  of  financial 
institutions  active  in  derivatives  markets,  as  well  as  to  the  internal  risk-management 
processes  of  such  firms.  The  major  rulemaking  responsibility  of  the  Board  and  other 
prudential  regulators  under  Title  VII  is  to  adopt  capital  and  margin  regulations  for  the 
noncleared swaps of banks and other prudentially regulated entities that are swap dealers 
and  major  swap  participants.  The  commissions  are  responsible  for  adopting  capital  and 
margin requirements for swap dealers and major swap participants that are not supervised 
by a prudential regulator. The prudential regulators and the commissions are consulting in 
developing  the  rules,  and  all  agencies  must,  to  the  maximum  extent  practicable,  adopt 
comparable  standards.  The  commissions  also  have  the  responsibility  for  defining  those 
dealers and major participants, and they have consulted with the Board prior to issuing their 
proposed rules. The commissions have tried to identify objective criteria that would enable 
firms to monitor whether they fall within the scope of the definitions. The comment process 
should  provide  information  as  to  the  effectiveness  and  appropriateness  of  the  proposed 
approaches.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The capital and margin rules for banks and other prudentially regulated dealers and major 
participants are to be developed jointly with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Housing Finance Agency, and the Farm 
Credit Administration. The Board and the other U.S. banking agencies played an active role 
in  developing  the  enhanced  capital,  leverage,  and  liquidity  regime  agreed  to  in  the  Basel 
Committee.  These  requirements  will,  among  other  things,  strengthen  the  prudential 
framework  for  OTC  derivatives  by  increasing  OTC  derivatives’  risk-based  capital  and 
leverage  requirements  and  by  requiring  banking  firms  to  hold  an  additional  buffer  of  high-
quality,  liquid  assets  to  address  potential  liquidity  needs  resulting  from  their  derivatives 
portfolios.  
The  statute  requires  the  prudential  regulators  to  adopt  rules  imposing  initial  and  variation 
margins  on  noncleared swaps  to  which  a  swap  dealer  or  major  swap  participant that  they 
oversee is a party. The statute also directs that these margin requirements be risk based. 
Within these statutory constraints, the Board and the other prudential regulators are working 
to implement the margin provisions in a way that takes appropriate account of the relatively 
low systemic risk posed by most end users. For example, we are considering if it would be 
appropriate to allow a banking organization that is a dealer or major participant to establish a 
threshold with respect to an end-user counterparty, based on a credit exposure limit that is 
approved and monitored as part of the credit approval process, below which the end user 
would  not  have  to  post  margin.  The  Board  appreciates  that  posting  margin  would  impose 
costs  on  end  users,  possibly  inhibiting  their  ability  to  manage  their  risks.  The  Board  also 
believes  that  the  margin  regime  should  be  applied  only  to  contracts  entered  into  after  the 
new requirement becomes effective.  
A much-discussed part of the act is the requirement that banks push portions of their swap 
activity into affiliates or face restrictions on their access to the discount window or deposit 
insurance. Under  the  push-out  provisions,  banking  organizations  with  deposit  insurance  or 
access  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  discount  window  will  have  to  reorganize  some  of  their 
derivatives activity, pushing certain types of swaps out of subsidiary banks and into separate 
legal entities that will require separate capitalization and separate documentation of trades 
with existing customers. The act permits domestic banks to continue to engage in derivatives 
activities that have been a traditional focus of banks, including hedging activities and dealing 
in interest rate swaps, cleared credit default swaps, and other swaps that reference assets 
that banks are eligible to hold. However, because of the specific language contained in the 
act, this exemption for traditional bank derivatives activities does not apply to foreign banking 
firms  that  have  access  to  the  Federal  Reserve’s  discount  window  through  their  U.S. 
branches.  A  possibly  unintended  effect  of  the  act’s  push-out  provision  may  be  to  require 
some foreign firms to reorganize their existing U.S. derivatives activities to a greater extent 
than U.S. firms. 
Conclusion 
As  the  implementation  process  for  the  act  continues,  the  challenge  facing  the  Board  is  to 
enhance  supervision,  oversight,  and  prudential  standards  of  major  derivatives  market 
participants  in  a  manner  that  promotes  more-effective  risk  management  and  reduces 
systemic  risk,  while  retaining  the  significant  benefits  of  derivatives  to  the  businesses  and 
investors who use them to manage financial market risks. The Board is working diligently to 
achieve these goals. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
