Inia Naiyaga: Engineers’ role in economic growth and financial stability 
Speech by Mr Inia Naiyaga, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Fiji, at the Fiji Institute 
of Engineers’ (FIE) workshop, Suva, 2 June 2011. 
 Welcome 
The President, Mr Pratarp Singh and Members of the Fiji Institute of Engineers; 
Distinguished Speakers; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen;  
Introduction 
My  presentation  this  morning  is  “Engineers’  Role  in  Economic  Growth  and  Financial 
Stability”. 
Let me begin with the outline of my presentation.  
Firstly,  I  will  look  at  the  recent  developments  in  the  international  and  domestic  economy 
followed by the contribution of the building and construction industry to the Fiji Economy. I 
will also elaborate on the economic costs arising from natural disasters and the importance 
of the National Building Code to Fiji and the way forward.  
Global economy 
Developments  in  the  world  economy  remain  promising.  Although  the  world  GDP  growth 
forecast was unchanged in April, conditions remain significantly varied across major regions 
of the world. While the recovery in the US economy is showing signs of slowing, growth in 
most  of  Asia  remains  strong.  However,  the  outturn  in  Asia  is  still  below  the  rapid  pace 
experienced  in  the  earlier  recovery,  with  the  exception  of  Japan  where  earthquake-related 
damage is having a significant effect on economic activity. At the same time, growth in other 
emerging markets and transition economies has been encouraging.  
However,  uncertainties  linger  on  the  horizon.  Global  risks  prevail  in  terms  of  rising 
unemployment and inflation, and even though global food prices were unchanged in April this 
year  –  they  are  still  higher  by  36  percent  when  compared  with  the  same  period  last  year. 
Furthermore,  global  imbalances  are  anticipated  to  widen  further  if  overheating  in  Asia 
worsens. 
Domestic economy 
Domestically,  the  performance  of  the  economy  last  year  was  supported  by  the  improved 
global economic recovery. In 2010, Fiji’s economy is estimated to have grown marginally by 
0.6 percent driven by the positive performance of the manufacturing, hotels and restaurants, 
mining, financial intermediation and services, and real estate sectors. This year, aggregate 
growth is expected to be 2.7 percent. 
Growth is predicted to be broad based in 2011 with the only decline (marginal) expected in 
the construction sector. Most sectors of the economy (like tourism and mining) are expected 
to maintain their 2010 momentum into this year. Additionally, the sugar sector is forecast to 
increase production this year given the reforms currently undertaken within the industry. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Looking  forward,  the  local  labour  market  conditions  are  anticipated  to  improve  through 
increased hiring intentions and incomes, on the back of higher economic activity forecast for 
this year. 
Construction sector 
In  2010,  the  construction  sector  is  estimated  to  have  grown  by  3.9  percent  –  an  upward 
revision  compared  to  the  previous  forecast  of  2.7  percent  growth.  The  upward  revision  is 
largely  from  the  Central  Government  activity.  As  expected  for  building  and  construction 
industries, activity in this sector can be volatile depending on construction projects. 
Over the period 2005 to 2009, the sector has contributed on average 3.0 percent to GDP. 
The contribution of the construction sector increased from 2001 onwards and peaked in 2003 
– contributing around 4.7 percent to GDP. This is attributed to increased construction activity 
due to the South Pacific Game in 2003. 
In  2009,  in  relation  to  other  sectors  of  the  economy,  the  Building  and  Construction  sector 
contributed around 2.9 percent to total GDP. In terms of formal paid employment, the sector 
contributed around 1.1 percent of total paid employment in 2010. As an indicator of building 
and  construction  activities,  the  latest  Construction  Report  by  the  Fiji  Bureau  of  Statistics 
(FBOS)  revealed  that  in  2010,  a  total  of  1,204  building  permits  were  issued  –  valued  at 
$123.3  million.  The  number  and  value  of  permits  issued  increased  by  7.6  percent  and 
21.0 percent,  respectively.  In  addition,  a  total  of  413  completion  certificates  valued  at 
$92.3 million  were  issued.  This  represented  an  annual  increase  of  19.0  percent  and 
42.9 percent, respectively.  
Following the real estate boom and increased investment in tourism industry in 2006, lending 
to  the  building  &  construction  sector  rose  to  $202.2  million.  In  2010,  loans  to  the  building 
& construction sector fell by 7.3 percent to $201 million, attributed to the decline in lending to 
the hotels & tourism sub-sector. 
Economic costs of natural disasters  
Fiji has been prone to numerous natural disasters. In a study by SOPAC, in the period 1970 
to 2007, Fiji was on the receiving end of numerous forces of nature. This includes tropical 
cyclones, floods and droughts. According to the report, the direct cost of disaster events in 
Fiji for 1970–2007 was estimated to be about US$532 million. Cyclones accounted for the 
highest proportion of total costs reported for Fiji during 1970–2007, reflecting its dominance. 
Let me now touch on the National Building Code (NBC), its importance and how the 
Reserve Bank of Fiji became involved in the early days. 
Buildings  are  an  important  part  of  the  infrastructure  of  our  society.  It  is  appropriate  that 
society  seeks  to  ensure  that  buildings  meet  certain  standards  which  are  outlined  in  a 
country’s  building  code.  Therefore,  Fiji’s  National  Building  Code  plays  a  significant  role  in 
disaster  management  reducing  human  losses  from  natural  disasters  directly  promoting 
economic and safe building structures. 
As most of you are aware, in Fiji, we have a National Building Code. 
What is it?  
It  is  a  standard,  which  essentially  is  a  set  of  provisions  designed  for  the  benefit  of  the 
community to address, structural sufficiency, fire safety; and health and amenity. This Code 
is intended for use throughout Fiji and sets out a consistent set of rules to ensure a building 
structure  is  able  to  withstand  the  reasonable  impacts  of  a  catastrophe.  The  code  also 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
complements other various legislative requirements such as Occupational Health and Safety 
Act, National Fire Authority Act and insurance industry guidelines. 
The National Building Code currently falls within the ambit of the Public Health Act Cap 111 
and is enforced by the Ministry of Health. 
Where does it come from? Why was it developed?  
In  the  early  1980’s  Fiji  suffered  a  high  incidence  of  damages  to  buildings  resulting  from  a 
series  of  tropical  cyclones  that  struck  the  country.  Some  of  you  may  recall  Cyclone  Erick, 
Nigel, Gavin and Hina which struck Fiji one after the other in 1985 to be followed by even 
more destructive cyclones.  
The losses sustained to the Fiji economy was no doubt very high. Fortunately, the bulk of the 
losses were met by overseas reinsurers as per the reinsurance arrangements with the local 
insurers.  This  resulted  in  the  overseas  reinsurers  not  wishing  to  reinstate  the  catastrophe 
covers for Fiji. 
Consequently,  a  special  trip  was  made  to  London  to  plead  with  the  London  reinsurers  to 
reinstate catastrophic covers and insurance underwriting for Fiji. The delegation, at that time, 
comprised  of  the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  who  was  also  the  Commissioner  of 
Insurance,  the  late  Mr.  Savenaca  Siwatibau,  Deputy  Commissioner  of  Insurance  Mr.  Clive 
Amputch and the Permanent Secretary for Finance. 
The meeting was a success, however, the conditions set by the London reinsurers required 
Fiji  to  develop  a  Building  Code  for  structural  sufficiency  and  insurance  coverage  eligibility.  
So, upon their return in September 1984, the then Governor, the late Mr. Siwatibau, formed 
the Fiji Buildings Standards Committee (FBSC), spearheaded by the Deputy Commissioner 
of Insurance Mr. Amputch. The Committee’s broad terms of reference were to “consider the 
adequacy of existing building standards as prescribed by law and  make recommendations 
for improvements”. 
In  1985,  the  Government  of  Fiji  officially  charged  the  FBSC  with  the  responsibility  of 
coordinating the preparation of the National Building Code. The Committee was also charged 
with  the  responsibility  of  exercising  surveillance  and  control  on  the  standards  of  building 
materials imported into the country. 
The  development  of  the  National  Building  Code  was  funded  and  carried  out  through 
Australian  Aid,  while  the  operations  of  the  FBSC  consisted  of  the  initial  contributions  from 
Government  and  the  Private  Sector.  In  1990,  the  Australian  Government  handed  over  the 
draft  documents  of  the  Fiji  National  Building  Code  and  the  Home  Builders  Manual  to  the 
FBSC,  upon  which  the  committee  approved  in  principle  the  technical  aspects  of  the  draft 
documents submitted. 
The administration of the FBSC was later transferred to the Ministry of Trade and Commerce 
in 1993 due to the enactment of the Fair Trading and Quality Control Decrees. 
In October 2004, the Fiji National Building Code was passed in Parliament, however falling 
within the ambit of the Fiji Public Health Act Cap 111. 
Why is the National Building Code important to our role as the Supervisor of the Fiji 
Insurance Industry?  
As  we  all  know,  Fiji  is  prone  to  natural  disasters  like  any  other  country  and  insurance 
provides a means of sharing the risks or losses resulting from such disasters. In order to be 
insured,  one  must  meet  the  underwriting  standards  of  insurers,  which  include  being  NBC 
compliant,  a  condition  set  by  reinsurers,  as  alluded  to  earlier.  Therefore,  the  National 
Building Code is the “bridge” providing the link between the insured, insurer and reinsurer. 
Meeting the requirements of the National Building Code is so important these days that even 
lenders require projects to be NBC compliant and insured, before funding is approved. It can 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
be noted therefore, that compliance with the National Building Code and insurance industry 
guidelines contributes to the reduction in economic and financial losses. 
The Reserve Bank’s role as the supervisor/regulator is to contribute to public confidence in 
Fiji’s  financial  system  and  safeguarding  insurance  policyholders  and  bank  depositors  from 
undue financial loss. To be an effective supervisor, the Reserve Bank participates in various 
forums to communicate with the industry and the public on its expectations amongst other 
forms of public medium such as publications, press releases and workshops. 
Regulating engineers  
The profession of Engineering is similar to that of accounting, medicine, law, architecture and 
so forth, as it requires a high degree of integrity and accountability. Therefore, to strengthen 
the effectiveness of the engineering profession, they need to be regulated by the Fiji Institute 
of Engineering (FIE), with an appropriate Code of Conduct. 
Why regulate? 
We view the profession of engineering, plays an important role in the building of an economy 
such as Fiji. Developments, whether they are infrastructure, private, public or tourism based 
cannot take place without proper input from professional engineers. 
It is for this reason, the profession of engineering must be regulated. 
• 
 
For Legislative Efficiency  
To  have  a  comprehensive,  consistent  statutory  registration  system  for  engineers 
that would alleviate inconsistencies across jurisdictions. 
For Professional Recognition 
So that the set of standards and skills expected of the engineers are maintained. 
And finally for the Industry/consumer efficiency 
To provide consumers with the level of experience and skills that is required of the 
engineer. 
 Way forward 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  let  me  emphasise  that  we  cannot  operate  in  isolation.  The  Fiji 
Government,  in  its  2010  Budget  Address,  amongst  other  key  important  economic  goals, 
announced the following medium term macro economic targets. The three key targets I have 
chosen, work hand in hand: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Investment is to be raised to above 25% of GDP; 
Economic Growth is to be increased to 5% over the medium term; 
Employment – annual employment rate is to increase by 3%. 
Concluding remarks  
We need to achieve higher investment and growth. Clearly, we – 
• 
• 
• 
Finally, I would like to congratulate Mr Pratarp Singh and the Fiji Institute of Engineers for 
organising this important seminar and bringing together the relevant key stakeholders. 
Need higher Private Sector Investments; 
Need Public and Private Sector Partnership; 
Need to speed up structural reforms. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Henry Ford once said that:  
“coming together is a beginning;  
 keeping together is progress;  
 working together is success” 
Vinaka vakalevu, Dhanyavad 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
