Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Contribution of global banks to financial 
stability 
Opening speech by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, at the 
International  Capital  Markets  and  Emerging  Markets  Roundtable,  Institute  of  International 
Finance (IIF), Washington DC, 17 April 2011. 
 Let me start by thanking the IIF for giving me this opportunity to present my views on global 
banks.  I  will  speak  from  my  perspective  as  Spanish  banking  supervisor.  And  I  should  say 
from  the  outset  that  in  my  country  global  banks  have  not  given  us  the  most  problems. 
Indeed, the main message of my intervention today is that we should not fall into the trap of 
automatically equating “global banks” with “dangerous banks” in terms of financial stability. 
This may be an intuitive reaction to the crisis. But it would be a mistaken one, in my view. In 
fact, based on our experience, I would like to give you some examples of how global banks 
can make a positive contribution to financial stability. Naturally, these are only examples, and 
I would certainly not presume to have all of the answers on this complex issue. But I hope 
these examples will be illustrative of the point I am trying to make.  
First of all, it is true that some global banks have experienced severe problems. We have 
seen  large,  complex  and  interconnected  banks  and  financial  companies  on  the  brink  of 
bankruptcy, both here in the United States, and across Europe. The taxpayers of some of the 
most  developed  countries  of  the  world  have  been  called  on  to  support  global  banks 
headquartered in their countries. Indeed, after the Lehman bankruptcy, it is fair to say that 
the entire global financial system was put at risk by the difficulties of some banks operating 
worldwide. 
It quickly became clear that an unprecedented and unacceptable level of systemic risk had 
built up over the “boom” years. And that a significant amount of taxpayer’s money had been 
put at risk as a result. This prompted a forceful, and understandable, reaction from all sides. 
The  public,  bank  investors,  regulators,  supervisors  and  politicians  alike  all  agreed  that  we 
needed a profound overhaul of the treatment of systemic risk. 
I believe that the reactions to this challenge from the G-20, at the highest political level, as 
well  as  from  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  and  the  Basel  Committee  of  Banking 
Supervisors (BCBS), have been proportionate to the size of the problems and risks we have 
encountered  since  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis.  The  costs  have  been  huge  and  there  is 
widespread agreement that we cannot allow this to happen again.  
Nevertheless,  we  should  also  recognize  that  a  number  of  global  banks  have  managed  to 
navigate these rough and unchartered waters without capsizing, Indeed, if you allow me to 
extend the metaphor, some have even been able to help to calm the waters. It is important to 
learn the lessons from all of our experiences, both good and bad, to help us better shape the 
future regulation and supervision of the financial system. And it is with this in mind that I want 
to comment on our experience with global banks headquartered in Spain. 
As I will stress throughout my intervention, the global nature of systemically important banks 
should  not  be  seen  as  a  negative  attribute.  Globalization  allows  countries  and  cultures  to 
learn from each others’ experiences, enriching us in a very broad sense. Of course we want 
a safer world, but a key foundation of safety is a world that is able to grow. And growth goes 
hand-in-hand with openness and globalization. In fact, globalization has been the engine of 
growth in the years before the crisis.  
And global banks have played a key role in this process and, therefore, in delivering growth 
to  our  societies.  Some  banks  have  become  global  because  they  have  accompanied 
domestic non-financial companies in their international expansion process.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Our largest global banks became international around fifteen years ago. They went first to 
Latin  America,  following  their  large  domestic  customers  (utilities,  oil  companies,  telecom 
firms, construction and technology firms and so on) into those new markets. Once in the new 
markets,  the  banks  were  able  to  familiarize  themselves  with  the  needs  of  other  local 
customers  and  started  to  provide  banking  services  to  local  households  and  firms.  The 
beneficiaries  of  this  process  were  not  only  Spanish  companies,  but  also  firms  and 
households of the host countries. 
This  natural  expansion  process  has  created  benefits  in  terms  of  risk  and  income 
diversification for the banks involved, thus reducing their probability of failure and contributing 
to  a  safer  financial  system  worldwide.  Moreover,  global  banks  help  to  better  allocate 
resources across the planet by contributing to fund investment processes in countries where 
savings  are  insufficient  and,  in  the  opposite  situation,  providing  more  opportunities  for 
depositors and savers to channel their funds to better opportunities. This natural expansion 
process should continue for banks in emerging countries whose non-financial companies are 
expanding abroad into other emerging countries or into more mature countries. We should 
not bring this process into a halt, reducing welfare across the board.  
And global banks do not only make contributions to growth, but can also act as a stabilizing 
force in the financial system, both in the countries in which they operate and at home.  
Our  experience  as  supervisors  is  that  our  large  and  global  banks  have  been  a  stabilizing 
factor during the crisis. Of course, our banking system has been affected by the crisis, but 
our problems have been concentrated in a limited number of small and medium-sized local 
savings banks. 
The performance of our large banks during the crisis has been very different from that of this 
group  of  savings  banks.  Since  August  2007,  like  the  rest  of  the  banking  sector  worldwide 
they have taken a hit on their share price. However, they have contributed positively to the 
restoration  of  financial  stability  worldwide,  by  helping  in  the  restructuring  of  other  banking 
systems,  buying  banks  or  pieces  of  banks  that  were  experiencing  difficulties.  They  thus 
contributed to stabilize markets and financial systems in a time of turmoil. Moreover, they have 
maintained their commitment to households and firms – both large corporate and SMEs – in 
the  emerging  markets  in  which  they  operate.  We  have  not  seen  any  halt  in  banking 
intermediation  in  those  markets  or  any  retrenchment  from  those  markets.  And  finally,  they 
are still entering new banking markets, both in Europe and in Asia.  
Resilient  global  banks  do  not  only  benefit  the  host  markets  in  which  they  operate,  in 
particular  emerging  countries.  They  have  also  been  very  beneficial  to  the  home  market. 
Wide-ranging  geographical  diversification  has  helped  these  banks  to  withstand  our  real 
estate  crisis  much  better.  They  have  been  able  to  compensate  the  difficulties  in  the  local 
banking  market  in  Spain,  resulting  from  a  recession  and  the  ongoing  slow  recovery,  with 
much more buoyant and dynamic banking business abroad.  
Until  now,  the  benefits  that  I  have  mentioned  can  be  said  to  apply  regardless  of the  legal 
structure chosen by the banks for their international expansion. But our large global banks 
have also adopted a business model which has some specific strengths that I would like to 
highlight. Namely that their international expansion was based on the subsidiary model, as 
opposed to the branch model. As a recent paper by IMF staff stresses, a branch model for 
internationalization may be cheaper than one based on subsidiaries. However, it may also be 
riskier, both for the host and the home markets. Although nobody expects that these banks 
will need to be liquidated, we have seen sufficient black swans in recent years to show us 
that  we  need  to  hope  for  the  best  but  be  prepared  for  the  worst.  And  if  liquidation  were 
needed,  a  stand-alone  subsidiary  model  would  have  important  advantages  over  a  branch 
model,  especially  if  there  is  substantial  deposit  taking  activity  at  the  local  level.  I  am  not 
saying that the liquidation of a global bank organized through subsidiaries would be an easy 
task. What I mean is that it would be much easier than for global banks which are deeply 
interconnected across countries through branches.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The stand-alone subsidiaries model has an additional advantage, from the perspective of the 
supervisor.  It  is  far  more  symmetric  for  the  local  supervisor  than  the  alternative  model, 
allowing them to really supervise the institution. And as a home supervisor, if a foreign bank 
has a significant share of a domestic market, I would rather have the domestic supervisor 
deeply  involved  in  the  monitoring  of  that  bank.  Our  experience  has  taught  us  that  local 
supervisors  usually  have  a  deeper  knowledge  and  more  accurate 
information  on 
developments in their home banking sectors than distant parent company supervisors. The 
expansion  of  global  banks  through  subsidiaries  provides  for  this  deep  involvement  of  the 
local  supervisor.  This  may  be  a  more  effective  –  and  therefore  safer  –  arrangement,  as  it 
provides for a double layer of supervision, by both home and local supervisors. Moreover, 
from  the  group’s  perspective,  the  combination  of  decentralized  management  and  strong 
controls  at  the  parent  company  creates  as  well  a  double  layer  of  control  within  the  group. 
This can have a drawback in terms of higher costs but some international active banks have 
demonstrated that it can be compatible with a good efficiency ratio.  
The subsidiaries model is one way of approaching this issue, but I am very conscious that it 
is not the only one. Nor is it suitable for all banks. It depends on many factors, including the 
type of business conducted by the institution – retail, investment banking etc. So let me be 
clear  that  I  am  not  prescribing  this  model,  and  that  I  do  not  think  it  is  the  answer  in  all 
circumstances. But it is a factor that makes certain international groups less dangerous for 
the rest of the system in terms of their likely impact in case of difficulties. In other cases, the 
institutions concerned may also be able to argue that they have other controls, or business 
models, in place which reduce their risks. The validity of all reasonable approaches should 
be explored.  
In this context, let me mention here the work underway in the FSB and BCBS to deal with the 
global SIFIs issue. In my opinion, this work is going in the right direction. For example, we 
have a general agreement that not all SIFIs are the same or pose the same degree of risk to 
the system, and that the framework should recognize this. Along the same lines, the idea is 
to  have  a  system  which  builds  in  a  sufficient  degree  of  supervisory  judgement  to  reflect 
aspects  that  cannot  be  quantified,  but  balanced  with  “constrained  discretion”  and  a  peer 
review process to ensure that there is a level playing field. And I think, and others think, that 
the resolvability of an institution should be taken into account in determining the systemic risk 
of a Global SIFI. For instance, a proper “living will” is a mechanism to reduce the impact of a 
bank failure and, therefore, to reduce the systemic risk these institutions pose. Finally, the 
FSB places strong emphasis on the importance of intensive supervision. 
The aspect of the FSB approach to SIFIs which has attracted most attention is the setting of 
higher capital requirements (or “loss absorbing capacity”) for SIFIs. We would be extremely 
naïve to think that extra capital is the answer to systemic risk. Holding extra capital does not 
resolve  the  problems  of  poor  management  or  ill-advised  risk  taking.  And  we  will  never  be 
able to require SIFIs to hold a level of capital sufficient to absorb the huge costs related to 
their potential bankruptcy. But capital does help to reinforce the system, because it provides 
an  incentive  for  institutions  to  reduce  the  risk  that  they  pose  to  the  system.  Banks  which 
show that they are less risky should be subject to lower requirements, thereby incentivizing 
responsible  and  safe  behaviour.  Instead,  those  banks  that  pose  higher  risks  should  meet 
more stringent requirements. 
Let  me  stress,  yet  again,  that  my  point  is  not  about  having  all  global  banks  following  this 
organizational philosophy. On the contrary, I do believe a diversity of institutions from either a 
business  model  or  an  organizational  perspective  is  needed  to  ensure  that  financial 
globalization  promotes  global  growth.  But  we  should  also  be  aware  that,  if  the  regulatory 
framework in areas such as SIFIs capital surcharge is ill defined, we may end up promoting 
the convergence of global banks towards the most complex business model of the current 
landscape.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
In this respect, I would like to draw your attention to the fact that we have recently raised 
core capital requirements – to 8% – for all institutions operating in Spain, in order to boost 
the stability of the financial system. However, we have also gone a step further and placed 
an additional 2% charge – to reach 10% – on those institutions which could potentially create 
more problems for the supervisor. To be more precise, this higher capital requirement will be 
applied on those which have less than 20% of their share capital or voting rights with third 
parties  and  that  have  wholesale  funding  of  more  than  20%.  These  institutions  are  not  the 
globally active ones, but they are the locally oriented ones that have created the highest risk 
for financial stability in Spain during recent times.  
While our largest banks have been more a support factor than a problem, and part of our 
savings banks sector is sound and profitable, we have faced serious challenges regarding a 
number of the local savings banks. Our experience in this crisis illustrates that we should be 
careful not to establish over-simplistic solutions to be applied generally. Instead, we should 
concentrate on solving the problems where they really originated. This is precisely the goal of 
the measures we have adopted in Spain during the last two years. We are currently dealing 
with a deep restructuring process that will end up by transforming those savings banks into 
larger commercial banks that, in the future, could also become global banks or a part of a 
global foreign bank.  
In  conclusion,  we  should  not  demonise  global  banks  for  being  global.  They  can  play  an 
important role in the international economy. Provided they are safe and soundly managed, 
they can facilitate the internationalization of non-financial firms, and they can bring greater 
competition, efficiency and stability to the markets in which they operate. What we need to do 
as  supervisors  is  to  make  sure  that  global  banks  have  adequate  risk  management 
capabilities,  sufficient  loss-absorbing  capital,  and  are  subject  to  intensive  and  coordinated 
supervision, so that we are able to contain the systemic risk they pose without curtailing their 
contribution to economic growth worldwide.  
We  have  nothing  to  fear  from  global  banks  which  are  well-managed,  well-capitalised  and 
well-supervised by home and host authorities. What we should do is prevent the emergence 
of badly managed, badly-disciplined banks, whatever their geographical dimension, as they 
can expose our financial systems to important risks. 
I hope that this humble contribution provides food for thought. As I said at the beginning of 
my intervention, I do not have all of the answers. But I do think that we can and should learn 
lessons from all experiences, both positive and negative. 
My  words  reflect  the  experience  that  we  have  had  with  our  global  banks  in  the  last  three 
years.  But  of  course,  past  successes  are  not,  per  se,  a  guarantee  of  future  success. 
Sophocles wrote in one of his tragedies that “we cannot call a mortal being happy until he’s 
passed  beyond  life  free  from  pain”.  Following  the  same  principle  of  precaution,  neither 
supervisors nor credit institutions should succumb to the temptation of unfounded optimism 
about  the  future.  This  is  the  reason  why  we  will  continue  pushing  for  a  very  intense 
supervisory process for these global institutions and we will ensure that they are complying 
with  the  highest  standards  in  any  field.  Supervisors  can  make  several  different  types  of 
mistakes, but one they cannot afford is complacency.   
Thank you very much for your time and patience. 
 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
