Prasarn Trairatvorakul: Global risks and the outlook for Thailand 
Address by Dr Prasarn Trairatvorakul, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Fitch Ratings 
(Thailand)’s 10th Anniversary Annual Conference, Bangkok, 1 September 2011. 
 Distinguished speakers and panelists, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to thank Fitch Ratings (Thailand)’s for inviting me to give an opening address at 
this year 10th Anniversary Annual Conference. I also like to say that the conference theme 
“Global  Risks  and  Outlook  for  Thailand”  is  most  timely  and  should  stimulate  quite  active 
discussion among the distinguished audience in this room. I am sure that the conference will 
help bring new insights on how we should look at the world, advanced, and Asian economies 
in the period ahead underlined by great uncertainties. For my part, I would like to highlight 
some key issues that can have potentially significant policy implications. I will touch briefly on 
three  areas,  namely  the  prospects  of  the  advanced  and  Asian  economies,  Thailand’s 
economic outlook, and finally the key policy challenges going forward.  
At the outset, it is fair to say that prospects of the global economy could be quite murky over 
the  year  ahead.  There  are  greater  uncertainties  with  regard  to  the  speed  of  recovery  and 
additional policy actions in the US and Eurozone economies, and the risks of misforecasting 
are  high.  Worldwide,  policymakers  and  markets  have  anticipated  that  the  US  sluggish 
recovery could face further downside risks as US fiscal and monetary policies could run out 
of “bullets” to provide the much needed stimulus. For the Eurozone, doubts on the potential 
contagion  of  sovereign  debt  crisis  to  other  European  countries  remain,  reflecting  the 
ineffective impact of domestic policy on the economic recovery in these economies. Looking 
ahead, a more positive sentiment on the Eurozone is contingent on the growth performance 
of  Germany  and  France  in  particular.  But,  recent  signs  of  economic  weakness  in  external 
and  domestic  demand  in  these  countries  have  been  somewhat  worrisome,  and  new  data 
release could either calm or jerk market sentiments.  
Despite  these  rather  gloomy  prospects  in  advanced  economies,  I  remain  cautiously 
optimistic on the performance of Asian economies for the rest of this year. My assessment is 
conditional on the ability of Asian economies to maintain economic resilience and pursue an 
appropriate policy mix to preserve economic and financial stability. Evidenced since the 2009 
US crisis, major economies in Asia have been able to cushion the adverse impact of global 
economic  roller  coaster  by  expanding  domestic  demand,  supported  by  expansionary  fiscal 
policy and monetary accommodation.  
Once world trade has resumed growth after the initial contraction in the aftermath of 2008 US 
crisis, Asian exports have continued to grow robustly on the back of regional trade expansion 
and strong growth in Asia, particularly China and India. Notably, some studies have shown 
that  the  ratio  of  Asian  exports  for  final  consumption  within  Asia  has  risen,  though  varying 
among individual countries. For example, approximately 70 percent of Indonesian exports to 
China are for final consumption in China. Such ratios for Singapore and Korea are 50 and 40 
percent, respectively. That said, it is wise not to jump quickly to conclusion because Asian 
economies and trade remain critically linked to the G3 economies. 
While this negative spillover from advanced economies to Asian economies could be partially 
cushioned  on  the  trade  side,  I  have  greater  concern  on  the  potential  spillover  through 
volatility in international capital flow and financial market movements. In addition to the risk 
aversion in time of market stress, emerging market economies have tried to live with spillover 
from exceptionally easy monetary policy in advanced countries. Such practices have created 
excess  global  liquidity  leading  to  volatile  capital  flows  into  emerging  market  countries 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
including Thailand. Moreover, excess global liquidity has been an important factor behind the 
rapid rise in oil and other commodity prices.  
Unless the advanced economies manage to get themselves out of sluggish growth path, all 
of  us  have  to  be  vigilant  and  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  the  US  may  need  to  find 
creative policy actions to stimulate its economy. And the impact of these efforts on emerging 
markets  can  be  quite  unpredictable  and  inconsistent  with  economic  theories,  due  to  the 
international  currency  status  of  the  US  dollar  and  the  safe  haven  status  of  US  dollar 
investment.  
Distinguished audience, 
Against  the  background  of  quite  an  unpredictable  external  environment,  I  believe  that  the 
Thai economy would still turn in reasonable growth rate for the year 2011. On the demand 
side,  I  see  consumption  and  investment  continuing  on  the  rise.  Consumer  spending  is 
expected  to  benefit  from  a  high  level  of  farm  income  from  rising  output  and  agricultural 
prices,  high  employment,  and  good  consumer  confidence.  Meanwhile,  investment  by  the 
private sector is also expected to grow, though at a slower rate than the periods following the 
crisis recovery. Currently, business sentiment and future investment plans are still showing 
an improving sign. And, public investment spending remains a key factor to keep demand 
momentum going forward.  
What we need to assess more cautiously is the future export performance. Of course, our 
export sector would be affected by the slowdown in the global economy to the extent that a 
large  proportion  of  final  demand  for  Asian  and  Thai  exports  remains  in  G3  economies. 
Having said that, I believe that exports will continue to grow along with world trade as long as 
the US and EU growth slowdown does not cause another global recession. I also want to 
stress  that  the  process  of  export  diversification  in  Thailand  has  advanced  continuously  in 
terms of markets and products. Today, the proportion of Thai exports to non-G3 countries 
growing significantly higher, particularly to China, and ASEAN. In parallel, the share of G3 in 
Thai exports has declined from more than 50 percent in 1995 to less than one-third.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Turning to the final part of my talk. As a central banker, our challenge is to constantly weigh 
the  balance  between  risks  from  global  slowdown  on  our  economic  growth  versus  rising 
domestic  inflation  pressure.  Despite  more  downside  risk  on  growth  at  present,  the  central 
bank  assesses  that  the  Thai  economy  is  growing  at  around  its  potential  and  demand 
pressure could transmit readily to higher inflation outcome as well as expectations. To this 
end, the Monetary Policy Committee has been raising the policy rate to normalize monetary 
policy  and  bring  the  real  policy  rate  closer  to  the  positive  range,  yet  remaining  sufficiently 
accommodative to cushion the downside risk on growth.  
With  many  uncertainties  ahead,  it  is  wise  to  keep  the  inflation  rate  low  to  ensure  that  the 
economy  remains  competitive  and  to  minimize  pockets  of  instability,  whether  through 
excessive growth of bank credits, fiscal spending, or asset price bubbles. Low inflation helps 
keep the health of the economy in check and preserve the purchasing power or real income 
of all segments of the population. This is especially important for salary earners and the poor, 
whose  real  income  could  easily  by  eroded  by  higher  inflation.  Worse  is  to  allow  inflation 
expectation to run away because it will be costly to get expectation well anchored again. 
Worth noting is that, similarly to Thailand, many Asian economies have also capitalized on 
the  opportunities  to  lessen  monetary  policy  easing  during  the  period  of  good  economic 
performance since the latter part of 2010. The main objective has been to preserve fiscal and 
monetary policy space for potentially more difficult times ahead. For Thailand, I believe that 
our policy space remains appropriate. But, any higher public spending should be done with 
special care. At this juncture, the need to increase government consumption is less urgent 
and  the  fiscal  focus  should  be  put  on  public  investment  to  expand  our  potential  output. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Therefore,  the  stimulus  should  be  prioritized  and  carefully  planned  to  leave  some  policy 
space for future needs.  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
I  would  like  to  end  my  talk  today  by  stressing  that  we  now  live  in  a  different  and  difficult 
world.  Current  global  risks  from  the  slowdown  in  advanced  economies  have  clearly 
heightened.  Given  good  economic  fundamentals,  the  Thai  economy  should  be  resilient 
enough  to  cope  with  such  risks.  I  would  like  to  urge  investors  not  to  swing  between  over 
pessimism and over-confidence and behave in a herd-like manner. Instead, all parties, public 
and  private,  should  be  cautious  and  prepared  for  the  global  risks  in  moving  the  country 
forward.  It  is  my  firm  believe  that  protecting  domestic  purchasing  power  and  let  everyone 
have equal chance to benefit from the economic growth can strengthen the future well being 
of the Thai economy in a sustainable manner in years ahead. 
Without  further  delay,  may  I  officially  open  the  Fitch  Ratings  (Thailand)’s  2011  10th 
Anniversary Annual Conference and wish everyone a fruitful deliberation.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
