G Padmanabhan: Secured online banking vs. customer 
convenience – opportunities and challenges 
Comments by Mr G Padmanabhan, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Annual Conference on Secure Banking 2011, Mumbai, 29 July 2011. 
 form, 
transactions  are 
carried  out  over 
Assistance provided by Shri K. Sivaraman and Shri P.K. Chophla in preparation of these comments is gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Good morning.  
It is my pleasure to be here amongst all of you in the Annual conference on secure banking 
2011, and share with you some of my thoughts on the subject. I thank IBA and MP TFCI, 
co-organizers for the event, for this opportunity.  
Banking,  as  all  of  us  know,  is  a  business  activity  synonymous  with  Trust,  and  security  in 
banking is a paramount presumption for trust. The concept and perception of such security in 
banking has, over a period of time, changed drastically, in tandem with changes in the way 
banking business is conducted. Assets with the banks are maintained more in digitized rather 
than  physical 
technology  enabled 
platforms/applications  and  communications  are  over  electronic  modes.  Physical, 
Geographical and “product” boundaries are no more the constraints for the growth of banking 
business,  which  is  rapidly  expanding.  There  are  newer  products  and  channels  of  delivery. 
Networked  environment  has  enabled  delivery  of  banking  services  at  the  doorstep  of  the 
customer.  Anywhere  anytime  banking  with  core  banking  and  newer  delivery  channels  viz., 
ATM,  online  banking,  mobile  banking  etc.  have  provided  convenience  of  banking  to  the 
customer and an increasing number of people rely upon the convenience and ease of use of 
Internet  banking  services  in  their  business  as  well  as  daily  life.  But,  this  also  enhances 
customer expectations about efficient delivery with security. Retaining customer loyalty and 
thus, business in a fiercely competitive electronic banking industry lies in delivering customer 
expectations. 
In the IT enabled banking environment, it has to be recognized that fraud possibilities have 
assumed international dimensions. As it is often said, in a chain, it is the weakest link that is 
most vulnerable. Therefore, it is not only important to ab initio set up a safe platform, one 
needs  to  make  sure  that  the  so  called  “Safety”  is  continuously  benchmarked  against 
international standards. In such a scenario, all the three attributes of information security viz. 
confidentiality,  Integrity  and  availability  at  all  the  relevant  stages  of  entry,  storage,  and 
transaction acquire immense importance. As such, there has to be a paradigm shift in the 
perception about security in banking and responses to the same. 
The threats which bother every one of us in the context are multifold, ranging from password 
hacking,  card  copying/cloning  to  data  and  identity  theft  at  various  levels  of  transaction, 
information storage as well as transmission stage. Managing security is more challenging in 
online and phone banking as compared to other delivery channels. Online threats in the form 
of phishing attacks, spyware, viruses, Trojans, key loggers are frequent. Threats from ATM 
take the form of ATM skimming, eavesdropping, spoofing, service denial, etc. Identity theft in 
the  electronic  transactions  is  a  growing  cyber  crime.  Innovative  methods  of  hacking  and 
stealing come to the fore regularly and the industry has to take prompt action to safeguard 
business and customer interest. 
As per information published by CSIS (Center for Strategic and International Studies, US), 
between March 2010 and April 2011, the FBI identified twenty incidents in which the online 
banking  credentials  of  small-to-medium  sized  U.S.  businesses  were  compromised.  As  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
April 2011, the total attempted fraud amounts to approximately $20 million; the actual victim 
losses are $11 million. I am flagging this issue to highlight the point that hackers have started 
to target medium and small organisations given the increasing safety standards put in place 
by  large  organisations.  Further  they  shift  geographical  locations  targeting  vulnerable 
jurisdictions with lax security. 
Apart  from  the  above,  lack  of  customer  awareness  itself  is  an  important  concern,  which 
aggravates threats to security. According to the findings of a survey, conducted by DSCI and 
KPMG in the year 2010, on the state of data security and privacy in Indian banking, “One of 
the most significant information security challenges highlighted by the banks in the survey is 
lack of customer awareness on information security and the threat from insecure customer 
end  points.  The  boundary-less  cyberspace  exposes  the  banks  to  internationally  organized 
crimes and new age threats. Further, with banks increasingly working with third parties and in 
the process, sharing business information, management of third party risks is also becoming 
a challenging task’. 
Let me amplify with a few examples on what I have been saying so far. 
You are aware that the Reserve Bank of India introduced the system of a Second Factor of 
Authentication  for  all  Card  Not  Present  transactions  almost  two  years  back.  This  measure 
has ensured greater security in online card transactions and instances of online frauds has 
considerably  dropped.  More  importantly,  this  has  resulted  in  a  significant  growth  in  card 
transactions in this mode reflecting the enhanced level of customer confidence. Perhaps as a 
consequence, the focus of fraudsters has shifted to card present transactions. For example, 
in Chandigarh, card data – including the PIN - was compromised at a few ATMs. The stolen 
information was used to clone the cards to withdraw cash from various locations across the 
country.  There  was  certainly  a  breach  of  security  at  the  ATMs  where  the  data  was 
compromised. It is important that bankers need to ponder on how to tackle this issue through 
technology. 
On  its  part,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  mandated  with  effect  from  July  01,  2011,  a  system  of 
alerts for all card transactions, irrespective of the channel used. Such a system will surely 
help in containing frauds. However, it is for the banks to make this effective by ensuring that 
the customers are persuaded to register their mobile phone numbers for receiving the alerts. 
Fraudsters  are  not  only  tech  savvy  but  have  clear  understanding  of  the  systems  and 
procedures obtaining in banks. There have reportedly been instances in Coimbatore where 
PoS terminals were set up after due compliance with the KYC requirements and stolen cards 
were used to transact at these terminals by the fraudsters. (I believe that the fraudsters used 
stolen card details purchased through online e-payment schemes operating internationally to 
acquire such information) 
In  Hyderabad,  fraudsters  posing  as  merchants  offered  Baskin  Robbins/mobile  recharge 
voucher talk time worth Rs.250 against payment of a mere Rs.50. The condition being only 
debit cards would be accepted. The kiosk machine set up was configured to prompt for PIN 
and  print  a  charge  slip  indicating  approval  of  the  transaction  by  the  Bank.  The  Magnetic 
Stripe Card data and the PIN were captured from the unsuspecting customers and later used 
to  make  counterfeit  cards  for  withdrawal  of  cash.  The  typical  customer  response  to  such 
incidents  was  “But  it  is  the  primary  responsibility  of  banks  to  ensure  safety  of  my  money. 
They cannot leave it to customers”. The same modus operandi was used at a Petrol Pump in 
Ranchi; only this time instead of mobile recharge voucher, customers were offered car wash 
liquid  and  air  freshener.  Bankers  may  argue  that  there  was  no  breach  of  security  of  their 
systems and these were driven by the customers‟  avarice. While conceding this point, the 
purpose  of  my  citing  these  instances  was  to  highlight  the  need  to  constantly  educate 
customers. With banks encouraging customers to move more and more towards electronic 
modes of payments, it is necessary to realize that however robust and secure the systems 
deployed may be, it is the customers’ perception that matters in the end. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It may not be out of place to mention that the Reserve Bank of India recently commissioned a 
survey  of  the  customer  service  obtaining  at  various  ATMs  across  the  country.  While  the 
overall satisfaction with the usage at ATM at the national level was found to be at 7.8 on a 
scale of 1-10, it was well below the national average in states like Uttar Pradesh, Gujarat and 
Chandigarh. However, the survey revealed scope for improvement in the grievance redressal 
mechanism. Over two third of the respondents revealed that they had noticed the help-line 
number at the ATMs. Over 52% of the respondents reported that complaint resolution took 
about two weeks or more. But what is disquieting is that the response of banks about their 
inability to offer a proper solution to the grievance in over 43% of the cases was “they are 
following  RBI  guidelines”.  I  think  it  is  necessary  for  the  customer  relations  personnel  are 
adequately trained to guide customers with greater clarity. 
While the focus of the conference is on secure banking, it is not adequate to ensure that all 
banking transactions are duly authorized and customer interests protected. It is important for 
banks to realize that they have a vital role and responsibility to ensure that appropriate risk 
management  measures  are  in  place  particularly  to  address  issues  relating  to  money 
laundering and terrorist funding. I recall that an year or so back, we found on enquiry that 
about 3-4 cards issued overseas were used extensively in the ATMs of one bank resulting in 
cash withdrawal of over Rs.2.00 crore in a short span of three months. Obviously, whoever 
used the card was not a tourist on a shopping spree ! When the matter was brought to the 
notice  of  the  bank,  they  conceded  that  with  reasonable  risk  mitigation  measures,  the 
transactions  could  have  been  identified  and  remedial  action  initiated.  In  this  regard,  we  at 
RBI also noticed that a bank overseas was offering prepaid cards which could be delivered in 
India by courier. While we had no idea about the KYC aspects overseas, these cards could 
be  used  at  any  ATM  in  India  to  withdraw  cash.  The  implications  of  such  a  system  to  our 
country are not hard to imagine. While RBI stepped in to halt the use of these cards in India, 
it  is  important  for  banks  to  be  vigilant  against  similar  events  and  alert  the  appropriate 
authorities if necessary. 
Another  area  of  concern  that  has  emerged  relates  to  fraudsters  soliciting  information  by 
directing unsuspecting customers to a website purported to be that of an authentic institution, 
through a link in the email. This has also happened when mails were received by members 
of the public that a huge amount was received in their name and held with the Reserve Bank 
of  India.  They  were  provided  with  a  link  which  masqueraded  as  RBI  website  and  inviting 
them  to  provide  their  bank  account  details.  While  RBI  has  cautioned  the  public  through 
advertisements in the media, banks also need to be watchful. But an important question that 
begs  an  answer  here  is  that  in  many  of  these  cases  money  has  been  paid  by  the 
unsuspecting public into bank accounts from where the funds have been withdrawn. How did 
these accounts get opened in the first place? Are banks lax in observing KYC requirements? 
Is monitoring getting increasingly lackadaisical once the machines have taken over the work 
hitherto done manually? 
Another challenge faced by the Industry is handling of systems, data and processes by third 
party vendors, which is a necessity today, and the need to have effective control over the 
actions of these vendors/ service providers. This is in addition to the internal threats as often 
computer criminals are employees of the same organization. So, while still aware of outside 
threats,  banks  have  a  new  threat,  inside  violations  concerning  data  at  rest.  Today’s 
employees  are  able  to  easily  export  sensitive  files  and  information  via  email,  FTP  or  by 
copying data to portable media. Banks have to control over where their sensitive information 
is, how it is used, and who obtains it. (e.g customer data being compromised at Citi Account 
Online, Hyundai Capital and Sony) 
Banking Industry has been conscious of the challenges to Security and appreciable efforts 
are being made by all the stakeholders in the context, viz. Governments, Regulators, banks 
and technology providers. As you know, a working group was constituted by RBI under the 
Chairmanship  of  Shri.  G.  Gopalakrishna,  ED,  RBI  on  Information  security,  Electronic 
Banking,  Technology  Risk  management  and  cyber 
frauds  which  provides  detailed 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
suggestions  in  areas  relating  to  IT  Governance,  Information  security,  IT  operations, 
Information  system  audit,  Cyber  frauds,  Business  Continuity  Planning,  customer  education 
and legal issues arising out of use of IT. 
The Group has given recommendations that need to be based on the nature and scope of 
activities engaged by banks and the technology environment prevalent in the bank and the 
support  rendered  by  technology  to  the  business  processes.  The  major  recommendations 
pertain to IT Governance. IT Operations, Information security, IT outsourcing, IS audit, Cyber 
fraud, Business Continuity Plan, Customer education and legal issues. 
The Group has recommended the policies that should be in place for the areas quoted above 
and  also  the  best  practices  to  be  adopted  by  banks  for  achieving  optimum  benefit  of 
technology in a secure and safe manner. While the implementation of the recommendations 
is being looked into by a Working Group constituted by the IBA, the banks may do well to 
make  a  self-assessment  of  their  position  vis-à-vis  the  recommendations  and  initiate 
appropriate measures 
Having stated as above I must add that the real challenge in this environment goes beyond 
merely  providing  additional  technology  solutions  and  increasingly  complex  security  layers, 
and  translates  into  providing  secured  banking  while  balancing  the  same  against  customer 
convenience requirements, which puts the regulators and security implementers on the horns 
of a dilemma. I would enumerate a few of such dilemmas here. 
 
like  network  availability,  restriction 
One  time  password  /  two  factor  authentication  is  one  of  the  methods  in  securing 
transactions.  However,  the  essential  requirement  of  such  OTP  being  sent  to  the 
registered  mobile  of  the  customer  leads  to  several  issues/  inconvenience  due  to 
factors 
to  a  particular  phone  number, 
non-availability  of  the  service  when  customer  travels  abroad,  timing  out  of  online 
transactions  due  to  slow  speed  of  OTP  transmission  etc.  It  also  has  cost 
implications  for  the  customer  as  he  has  to  pay  for  charges  at  international  data 
transmission tariffs. 
Multilayer  security  by  way  of  log-in  password,  transaction  password  and  some 
confidential data confirmation make on-line transactions secure in a better manner. 
But,  there  are  issues  like  memorizing  of  multiple  passwords,  „slogans‟ ,  pictures, 
answers to questions etc. and some transaction of urgent nature getting struck due 
to  these  problems  and  even  online  access  getting  blocked  some  times.  This, 
coupled  with  the  time  taken  for  access  re-activation,  password  generation  etc.; 
which 
irritation  and 
inconvenience to the customer. 
In mobile banking the challenge is to decide the transaction value limits up to which 
unencrypted data can be transmitted for payments/ funds transfer. If the limits are 
set too tight there can be cost and efficiency implications while making it too lax may 
invite the risk of information getting compromised. 
Surveillance cameras help in making ATM transactions more secure, but there are 
issues about privacy and more so, customer discomfort with the same.  
taking  process,  causes 
is  sometimes  a 
lengthy/ 
time 
   Overall, while the challenges to security are stiff and increasing by the  day, being  alive to 
threats  is  more  important.  This  involves  resources  -  human  and  monetary,  attitude  and 
aptitude. Having reasonably secured card not present transactions, RBI has started looking 
at enhancing security of card present transactions. If we recognize that compromise of cards 
could  happen,  not  only  at  ATMs  but  also  at  to  over  half-a-million  and  still  growing  PoS 
terminals,  the  task  is  indeed  formidable.  The questions  that  would  arise  are:  Is  a  move  to 
Chip  based  card  system  the  only  solution  against  the  risk  of  skimming  and  cloning?  Or  is 
there  a  relatively  less  expensive  alternative  like  a  second  factor  authentication  for  all  card 
present  transactions?  Should  the  2FA  be  static  or  dynamic?  How  will  it  help  if  the  static 
2FA is compromised? Will a dynamic OTP really work without impacting the efficiency of the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
merchant  operations  and  inconvenience  to  the  customers?  As  you  may  be  aware,  RBI 
constituted a  Working Group  to  address  these  issues.  The  report  of the  Group  which  was 
placed on the public domain for comments on June 02, 2011 is now being processed. The 
Group  has  noted  that  Aadhar  biometric  data  would  serve  as  a  secure  second  factor  of 
authentication even for Magnetic Stripe Cards obviating the need mandating a switch over to 
EMV Chip and Pin card regime, which has cost implications for the industry. The Group has 
recommended  that  the  need  for  a  move  to  EMV  Chip  cards  could  be  considered  after 
18 months depending on the progress of Aadhar. While the RBI is processing the report, we 
are aiming at a secure 2FA for all card present transactions without being prescriptive about 
the technology to be deployed for the purpose. 
Innovative  thinking  and  creative  solutions  by  the  industry,  focused  attention  on  enhancing 
customer  awareness  coupled  with  required  investments  in  suitable  technology  for  security 
risk  mitigation  will  be  imperative  for  ensuring  optimal  levels  of  banking  security  with 
appropriate customer convenience. 
RBI is with you in your endeavor to offer secure and convenient online banking.  
Thank you for your patience. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
