Njuguna Ndung’u: Sustaining transformation and innovations 
Remarks  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the  3rd 
ICPAK  (Institute  of  Certified  Public  Accountants  of  Kenya)  Financial  Services  Conference 
“Sustaining transformation and innovations”, Nairobi, 5 July 2011. 
 Mr. Patrick Mtange, Chairman, Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Kenya;  
Ms. Caroline Kigen, Chief Executive Officer, Institute of Certified Public Accountants 
of Kenya;  
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
It gives me great pleasure to be here today to open this 3rd financial services conference. Let 
me at the outset thank the Institute of Certified Public Accountants of Kenya for organizing 
this forum and for extending an invitation to the Central Bank of Kenya.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: The theme of this conference is “Sustaining Transformation and 
Innovations”. The choice of this theme is timely given the ongoing reforms in the Kenyan 
financial sector.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: Kenya’s current development blueprint Vision 2030 envisages the 
development  and  deepening  of  the  financial  sector.  This  will  enable  it  to  finance  the 
development  agenda  while  ensuring  financial  inclusion.  For  this  reason,  ambitious  targets 
have been set of raising savings and investments to GDP ratio from 14% to over 30%. In 
pursuit  of  this  strategy,  the  Central  Bank  in  collaboration  with  market  players  has  initiated 
several reforms geared towards creating an enabling environment and space for innovative 
financial  services.  With  these  reforms,  we  anticipate  the  financial  sector  will  be  stable, 
efficient  and  accessible.  But  also  able  to  effect  the  necessary  transformations.  These 
initiatives include:  
 Rollout of mobile phone financial services – The Central Bank has encouraged 
the adoption of innovative technological platforms such as mobile phones to extend 
the reach of financial services. Mobile financial services have in particular presented 
Kenya with an opportunity to significantly upscale access to financial services cost 
effectively.  The  Kenyan  mobile  financial  services  story  has  become  a  much 
acclaimed  global  case  study.  To  date,  over  15  million  Kenyans  transfer  about 
Ksh.3 billion to each other daily with over one million transactions.  
 Licensing Deposit Taking Microfinance Institutions (DTMs), whose focus is the 
lower  end  of  the  market,  which  is  concentrated  in  the  rural  and  peri-urban  areas. 
The Microfinance Act, 2006 which empowers Central Bank to licence and supervise 
DTMs, was operationalised in 2008. Formalizing the operations of DTMs is expected 
to  bring  more  people,  especially  those  previously  unbanked  or  underbanked,  into 
the  realm  of  the  formal  sector  not  only  through  their  lending  activities  but  also 
savings mobilization. This recognizes that in an economy with segmented markets, 
different vehicles are required for particular segments of the economy or market. So 
far 6 DTMs have been licensed with 1.35 million deposit accounts, 520,362 active 
loan accounts and Ksh.9.4 billion in deposits.  
 Introduction  of  agent  banking  mechanism  in  May  2010  where  banks  were 
allowed  to  engage  third  parties  to  provide  certain  banking  services.  The  aim  is 
increased  outreach  of  banks  to  the  vast  under-banked  and  unbanked  Kenyan 
populace  by  introducing  “banking  beyond  branches”.  It  also  enables  banks  to 
leverage on additional cost effective distribution channels to offer financial services. 
We have seen agency banking take banking to the people unlike previously when 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
people had to go to the banks. So far 6,368 agents have been approved and are 
delivering financial services to Kenyans.  
 Licensing  credit  reference  bureaus  to  collect,  collate,  analyze  and  disseminate 
credit information among credit providers. Credit information sharing provides credit 
history  (information  capital)  as  an  alternative  form  of  collateral  to  the  traditional 
physical collateral, to secure credit facilities from banks. Individuals will also be able 
to use their positive credit history to negotiate for better terms and conditions from 
their banks. On the other hand, banks will benefit from the mechanism since it will 
address  the  problem  of  information  asymmetry  that  was  used  to  raise  a  risk 
premium on loans and by extension the problem of non-performing loans which has 
in the past threatened the stability of the banking sector. The traditional problems of 
moral hazard and adverse selection that hinder financial sector growth have been 
minimized.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  These  innovations  have  seen  our  financial  sector  experience 
transformation as evidenced by the following outcomes:  
 Exponential growth of bank branches from 740 in 2007 to 1,072 in April 2011.  
 Increase in the  number  of  loan  accounts  from 1.2  million in  2007  to  2.1  million in 
from 
May  2011.  The 
Ksh.533.8 billion in 2007 to Ksh.1.05 trillion in May 2011.  
the  same  period  has 
loan  portfolio 
increased 
in 
 Increase in the number of deposit accounts from 4.7 million in 2007 to 14 million in 
April  2011.  Deposit  values  have  grown  from  Ksh.709.8  billion  in  2007  to 
Ksh.1.4 trillion in May 2011.  
 Increase in the automated teller machines (ATMs) from 1,012 in 2007 to 2,153 as at 
31st March 2011.  
to  over 
increased 
through  mobile  phones  have 
Micro  savings  accounts  operated 
700,000 with a deposit level of Ksh.737 million.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  structural  transformation  of  Kenya’s  financial  sector  has  not 
been achieved without challenges. Key among these challenges is the need to balance the 
goals of financial efficiency, stability and integrity on one side with financial inclusion on the 
other. The role of the regulator in an economy like ours is also to develop the market and 
balance out these challenges. The regulator should, and especially after the global financial 
crisis,  not  look  for  avenues  of  more  regulation  but  support  transformation  and  innovation 
through  better  regulation.  What  is  better  regulation?  From  Sir  Andrew  Crockett,  it  is  a 
regulatory regime that:  
 Can readily identify weaknesses and emerging vulnerabilities.  
 Is capable of analyzing risks and so adequately pricing risks.  
 Provides appropriate incentives (penalties) to induce prudent behavior in the market 
place.  
This will encourage innovations and strong institutions to develop in the economy.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  structural  transformation  experienced  thus  far  is  just  but  the 
beginning. The Central Bank and other players have earmarked several other reforms which 
are  expected  to  take  development  of  the  financial  sector  to  new  frontiers.  In  addition,  the 
Central  Bank  has  embraced  financial  education  as  a  critical  component  of  its  financial 
inclusion strategy. The consumers will then be equipped with knowledge to make informed 
financial decisions and to analyze alternatives.  
In the same token, Ladies and Gentlemen, as efforts progress towards a more developed 
financial sector, there is need to ensure existence of adequate disclosure of information by 
providers  of  financial  services,  efficient  dispute  resolution  mechanisms,  comparability  of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
offers  and  data  protection.  As  financial  institutions  embrace  innovations,  there  is  need  to 
ensure  that  innovations  have  adequate  consumer  protection  legislation.  It  is  therefore 
encouraging  to  note  that  the  constitution  promulgated  last  year  makes  provisions  for 
consumer protection. The constitution creates adequate space to build strong institutions to 
implement these provisions which will define appropriate incentives and rules of the game to 
encourage prudent behavior in the market.  
Finally, Ladies and Gentlemen: While discharging your duties as accountants, auditors and 
advisers of financial institutions, you play a critical complementary role to the Central Bank in 
ensuring that such innovations are supported by sound internal controls of these institutions 
not to undermine safety and efficiency of the financial system, but at the same time provide 
enough room for innovation and development. Therefore, the Bank appreciates your role in 
supporting the banking sector reforms. But now, we also require your support on new ideas 
to introduce innovations in the financial markets to support and sustain its transformation as 
the theme of this conference ambitiously shows.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: It is now my honor and privilege to declare this conference officially 
open and to wish you fruitful deliberations.  
Thank you 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
