Charles Bean: The Monetary Policy Committee’s policy dilemma 
Speech by Mr Charles Bean, Deputy Governor for Monetary Policy of the Bank of England, 
at the Association of British Insurers’ (ABI) Economics and Research Conference, London, 
3 March 2011. 
 Almost three years ago, in April 2008 when the financial crisis was still in its early days, I 
gave  a  speech  entitled  “Walking  the  Tightrope”1.  In  that  speech,  I  noted  that  the  United 
Kingdom was faced with an unenviable conjunction of developments. On the one hand, the 
dislocation in credit markets was weighing on demand. In due course, that could be expected 
to  put  downward  pressure  on  inflation.  On  the  other  hand,  rapid  growth  in  the  emerging 
economies, especially in Asia, had put upward pressure on oil prices, which went on to peak 
at nearly $150 a barrel in July of that year. Higher oil prices were squeezing demand too, but 
were adding to, rather than reducing, inflation. In the face of these twin forces, activity began 
to fall, but consumer price inflation rose sharply, reaching 5.2% in September. 
For the first eight months of that year, the Monetary Policy Committee was faced with setting 
interest  rates  so  as  to  balance  the  risk  of  downward  pressure  on  inflation  from  a  sharp 
slowdown  in  growth  associated  with  the  financial  crisis,  against  the  risk  that  the  period  of 
high oil prices and elevated inflation would result in a wage-price spiral. With hindsight, of 
course,  we  know  that  it  was  the  first  of  those  risks  that  materialised,  as  the  demise  of 
Lehman Brothers led to a near-seizure of financial markets and a collapse in global activity, 
while oil prices plummeted to around $40 a barrel. But it was by no means obvious during the 
first part of the 2008 that would be how things panned out. 
I recall this period because it bears some similarity to the current conjuncture. Inflation has 
been  running  well  above  our  2%  target,  in  part  reflecting  external  forces,  raising  the 
possibility that elevated inflation may persist into the medium term. But the recovery, while 
underway  for  more  than  a  year,  still  faces  significant  headwinds  and  has  recently  shown 
signs of fragility. Should the recovery prove weak, and significant spare capacity persist, we 
may yet be faced with inflation running below the target in the medium term. Monetary policy 
needs to balance those two risks. 
My talk today will focus on the sources of the currently elevated inflation, whether it is likely 
to persist and what policy should seek to do about it. But before turning to those topics, let 
me say a few words about the headwinds that still confront us on the demand side of the 
economy. 
To  begin  with,  this  was  not  a  typical  downturn  and  we  should  not  anticipate  a  typical 
recovery.  After  normal  cyclical  downturns,  economies  typically  return  to  the  previous  trend 
growth path within a few years. But after financial crises, economies often take much longer 
to  recover.  Indeed,  the  evidence  suggests  that  output  typically  stays  well  below  a 
continuation of the previous growth path for many years thereafter. For instance, a study by 
the  IMF2  found  that  across  88  past  crises,  output  per  head  was,  on  average  about  10% 
below such a path fully seven years after the onset of the crisis, though there is considerable 
heterogeneity  in  the  experience  of  individual  countries  (Chart  1).  Unless  crises  are  also 
associated with an equivalent impairment of supply capacity, that implies an increase in the 
margin of unused resources. 
                                                 
1  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2008/speech342.pdf 
2 
IMF World Economic Outlook, October 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The  primary  reason  for  such  a  slow  recovery  is  that  the  unwinding  of  earlier  financial 
excesses  takes  time.  Moreover,  banking  crises  are  also  frequently  associated  with  a 
subsequent  deterioration  of  the  public  finances,  as  governments  provide  support  to 
vulnerable  financial  institutions  and  tax  revenues  drop  back.  Both  these  features  are,  of 
course, present today in many of the advanced economies, including in the United Kingdom.  
UK banks have made considerable progress over the past year in improving their balance 
sheet positions, but funding costs remain elevated and over the next two years they face the 
challenge of replacing around £400 billion of maturing wholesale funding. Credit availability 
to larger corporates has improved significantly, but small and medium-sized enterprises still 
face difficulties in securing affordable credit. As a result, conditions in the banking sector are 
likely to continue to act as a brake on the recovery.  
As  far  as  the  public  finances  go,  the  public  deficit  widened  sharply  in  the  wake  of  the 
recession,  reaching  more  than  11%  of  GDP  in  2009/10,  in  large  part  reflecting  the 
endogenous response of spending and revenues to the downturn in activity. Action would be 
needed to address such an unsustainable deficit, unless an early resumption of the pre-crisis 
growth path is expected. As already noted, that is usually not the case after banking crises. 
And the maintenance of such a large deficit for any length of time runs the risk of the cost of 
debt finance rising sharply, as we have seen in the countries of the euro-area periphery. But 
the  necessary  fiscal  consolidation  that  is  now  under  way  is  likely  to  weigh  on  domestic 
demand in the coming years. Moreover, a worsening of the sovereign debt problems in the 
euro-area periphery could also hold back the recovery here, particularly through its impact on 
the banking systems here and abroad. 
Finally, household and business spending, both of which fell sharply in the recession, remain 
depressed. In part, that reflects subdued growth in households’ real incomes since the onset 
of the crisis. But in addition, it takes time for confidence and spending to recover after such a 
shock. Some households need to maintain higher savings in order to repay debts taken on 
before the crisis. And businesses are unlikely to want to expand while capacity is lying idle 
and  there  is  still  much  uncertainty  about  the  outlook  for  demand.  But  the  substantial 
depreciation of sterling – down nearly 25% since the start of the crisis – should, over time, 
help to boost the contribution of net exports to UK growth. We have seen some of the fruits 
of that in the robust performance of manufacturing over the past year. 
As I already noted, the economy began to grow again more than a year ago, in the fourth 
quarter  of  2009.  And  over  the  first  year  of  the  recovery,  growth  was  around  the  UK’s 
historical average rate. In part, that was on the back of the boost to growth from a slowing in 
the rate of inventory de-stocking. Given the prospective fiscal consolidation, the maintenance 
of such growth rates requires a pickup in the contribution of private domestic final demand 
and in net exports. In our November Inflation Report, our central view3, predicated on market 
interest  rates,  was  for  the  recovery  to  be  maintained,  with  the  boost  from  a  stimulatory 
monetary  stance  and  from  the  past  depreciation  of  sterling  offsetting  the  continuing 
headwinds from de-leveraging and fiscal consolidation.  
Since  the  November  Report,  we  have,  of  course,  had  the  first  estimates  from  the  ONS  of 
growth in the final quarter of last year. They suggest that the economy contracted by 0.6%. In 
part,  that  was  down  to  the  disruption  caused  by  the  snow.  But  even  abstracting  from  the 
snow, activity seems to be have been broadly flat. 
How much should we read into that? One possibility is that the figure is simply erratic or will 
be  revised  away  in  due  course.  But  other  indicators  –  particularly  some  measures  of 
consumer  and  business  confidence  –  also  weakened  during  the  second  half  of  the  year, 
                                                 
3  While some outside commentators regarded that projection as being on the optimistic side, it would still have 
left output below its pre-crisis level until 2011 Q4 and broadly in-line with the average experience after banking 
crises recorded by the IMF (Chart 1). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
suggesting that something more substantial may have occurred. It could just be a short-lived 
soft  patch  –  after  all,  recoveries  are  rarely  smooth.  Indeed,  that  is  the  judgement 
incorporated in the projections we published a couple of weeks ago (Chart 2). But it could 
instead be the harbinger of a more durable slowing – only time will tell. 
Let me now turn to the sources of the recent elevated inflation and the chances of inflation 
remaining  above  our  2%  target  into  the  medium  term  and  beyond.  A  year  ago,  in  our 
February 2010 Report, our central expectation was that inflation would be around 1% in the 
first quarter of this year. Yet in January, CPI inflation reached 4% and is likely to move higher 
in the coming months, in part reflecting the recent surge in oil prices. And taking the period 
since the beginning of 2007 as a whole, inflation has averaged 3.2%, implying a cumulative 
excess rise in prices of 5 percentage points relative to the path prescribed by our target. Why 
has inflation turned out both above the 2% target, and higher than the MPC expected? 
There have been primarily three factors at work: strong global price pressures, particularly for 
energy  and  other  commodities;  the  nearly  25%  depreciation  in  the  sterling  effective 
exchange rate between the onset of the crisis and the end of 2008; and the increase in the 
standard rate of VAT to 20%. We estimate that the rise in the price of energy, incorporating 
both  direct  and  indirect  effects  can,  in  an  arithmetic  sense,  account  for  between  3  and 
5 percentage points of the rise in consumer prices since the beginning of 2007. The rise in 
non-fuel  import  costs,  which  is  mainly  attributable  to  the  fall  in  sterling,  can  account  for 
between 5 and 7 percentage points. And, while the cut in VAT in 2009 and its subsequent 
reversal should be broadly neutral, the latest rise in January 2011 should, on the assumption 
of complete pass-through by suppliers and retailers, have added over 1 percentage point.  
Global  prices  have  risen  sharply  as  the  international  economy  –  particularly  the  emerging 
economies – rebounded from the globally synchronised downturn that followed the collapse 
of Lehman Brothers. World export prices, weighted by their share in UK imports, rose by over 
5% in 2010, one of the fastest calendar-year rises in the past thirty years. The bulk of that 
rise  can  be attributed  to  the  direct and  indirect  effects  of  higher  commodity  prices,  though 
some may be indicative of more generalised global inflationary pressures.  
What  has  been  driving  higher  commodity  prices  and  are  they  likely  to  continue  rising 
strongly?  Most  commodities  have  seen  sharp  price  rises, particularly  in  the  past  semester 
(Chart  3).  The  rebound  in  global  activity  is  a  common  thread,  but  there  are  significant 
differences in supply conditions that are relevant to gauging future prospects. 
In  the  case  of  agricultural  commodities,  there  have  been  a  number  of  extreme  weather 
events  that  have  adversely  affected  supply,  including  droughts  in  the  Commonwealth  of 
Independent States, South America and China, and excessively wet weather in other parts of 
Asia, Australia and North America. But barring further weather shocks, larger harvests can 
be expected to lead prices to fall back. In addition, the present high prices should encourage 
more planting, adding to the potential downward pressures. 
In the case of oil, such supply disruption – at least until the recent events in the Middle East 
and  North  Africa  –  has  been  less  marked  and  the  primary  driver  has  been  demand, 
especially from the emerging economies. Moreover, the income elasticity of energy demand 
is typically larger in the fast-growing emerging economies than in the advanced economies 
(Chart 4). As a manifestation of this, China’s energy consumption per head in 2009 was half 
that of the UK level, having been just a fifth a decade earlier. Moreover, demand tends to be 
relatively price-inelastic, at least in the short run, though over a longer time frame there is 
surely some scope for increased substitution towards more energy-efficient practices. 
The immediate prospects for oil prices are, though, likely to hinge on supply conditions. Oil 
stocks are at reasonably healthy levels and can be utilised to meet short-term demand. More 
importantly, OPEC is believed to have spare capacity equal to around 5% of consumption, 
compared to a long-run average level of nearer 3% (Chart 5). That is more than enough to 
meet any shortfall resulting from the withdrawal of Libyan supply from the market (around 2% 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
of total oil production). But if the present political upheavals were to disrupt Saudi Arabian 
supply, then that could potentially lead to very sharp upward pressure on oil prices. 
Prospects for the medium to longer term must depend on how quickly new sources of supply 
can be brought on stream to meet growing demand. The investment cycle in oil extraction is 
relatively long, and the current elevated level of prices is in part a reflection of low investment 
a  decade  ago.  Capital  spending  since  then  has  been  somewhat  higher,  but  the  marginal 
return from investment in existing fields has been declining, while the costs of tapping new 
sources of supply, such as Canadian oil sands and deep water fields, are relatively high.  
The bottom line is that while agricultural prices may fall back a little this year, oil (and also 
metals) prices are more likely to remain elevated. And there must be a risk that continued 
turmoil  in  the  Middle  East  and  North  Africa  results  in  a  substantial  oil  price  spike,  present 
OPEC spare capacity notwithstanding. Looking even further ahead, there may continue to be 
general  upward  pressure  on  the  prices  of  exhaustible  resources  as  demand  from  the 
emerging  markets  continues  to  grow.  As  a  net  commodity  importer,  such  an  adverse 
development in the terms of trade between commodities and final goods and services would 
represent yet another headwind for the United Kingdom. 
The second factor behind the current elevated level of inflation is the substantial depreciation 
of sterling during the crisis – as noted earlier, down almost a quarter from pre-crisis levels 
(Chart 6). That fall occurred in two legs: a general drift down over the first year of the crisis, 
and a second, sharper, fall during the peak of the crisis immediately following the collapse of 
Lehman  Brothers.  Since  early  2009,  the  effective  exchange  rate  for  sterling  has,  though, 
been pretty stable. 
Unlike commodity prices – and world prices more generally – over which the United Kingdom 
has no direct control, an exchange rate represents the relative price of two currencies and is 
thus  affected  by  monetary  policy  decisions  at  home  and  abroad.  The  timing  of  the 
depreciation, however, and its subsequent relative stability makes it natural to attribute the 
fall not to changed expectations of monetary policy at home and abroad, but rather to the 
perceived real impact of the crisis on the UK economy. 
Prior to the crisis, the United Kingdom was consistently running a moderate current account 
deficit.  At  some  stage,  that  deficit  needed  to  be  closed,  most  probably  through  a  higher 
national savings rate. The natural counterpart to that would be a real depreciation of sterling 
in order to improve UK international competitiveness, boosting net exports and leading to a 
re-balancing of the composition of output away from meeting domestic needs and towards 
internationally tradable sectors. Moreover, the crisis has probably also resulted in a loss in 
net  foreign  earnings  by  some  parts  of  the  financial  sector,  necessitating  an  even  larger 
decline in the real value of sterling to re-balance the economy.  
In order to get a handle on the likely impact of the depreciation of the exchange rate, we can 
follow a couple of approaches. One approach is to compare inflation rates here with those in 
other jurisdictions with stable exchange rates. As the euro area suffered a broadly similar fall 
in activity to the UK, is similarly exposed to global price shocks, and probably has a similar 
inflation  process,  it  represents  a  natural  comparator.  The  goods  price  inflation  differential 
between the United Kingdom and the euro area is shown by the green line in Chart 7.  
A  second  approach  is  to  compare  the  inflation  rates  of  services  with  that  of  goods  in  the 
United Kingdom. As goods are typically more import-intensive than services, the inflation rate 
of goods should rise relative to that of services after depreciations and vice versa (there is a 
differential  between  the  two  on  average,  because  productivity  tends  to  rise  faster  in  the 
goods  sector  than  in  the  services  sector).  The  inflation  rate  of  goods  (excluding  energy) 
relative to that of services is the blue line in Chart 7 and has the same general profile as the 
green  line.  That  is  somewhat  reassuring,  since  there  are  factors  other  than  the  exchange 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
rate  that  could  affect  one  or  other  of  these  relative  inflation  rates,  but  usually  not  both 
together4. The fact that the two series move broadly in step suggests that the exchange rate 
is probably a dominant common driving factor. 
If  one  has an  estimate  of  the  relative  import  intensities,  then  one  can  go  a  bit  further  and 
back out a direct estimate of the contribution of the exchange rate to inflation5. Input-output 
data  suggests  that  goods  are  between  two  and  three  times  more  import  intensive  than 
services. The implied contributions of import prices to inflation under these two assumptions 
are shown in Chart 8, with import prices contributing between 2 and 3 percentage points to 
inflation in late 2009/early 2010.  
Back in 2009, our central view, embodied in successive Inflation Report projections, was for 
inflation  to  oscillate  around  the  2%  target  over  the  next  couple  of  years,  with  the  upward 
pressure  from  sterling’s  depreciation  very  broadly  offset  by  the  downward  pressure  from 
spare capacity and additional volatility induced by the restoration of the crisis-driven cut in 
VAT.  That  view  was  predicated  on  a  considerable  body  of  research,  for  this  and  other 
countries,  which  suggested  that  the  pass-through  of  exchange  rate  movements  into 
consumer  prices  had  fallen  in  the  past  two  decades6.  That  research  pointed  to  better 
anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  as  one  possible  cause,  coupled  with  an  increased 
tendency  to  “price  to  market”,  meaning  that  more  of  exchange  rate  movements  were 
absorbed in either profit margins or in other costs, rather than being passed on into prices. 
In  the  event,  the  pass-through  seems  to  have  been  rather  larger,  and  closer  to  that  seen 
prior to the Great Moderation. In part, that may reflect the recognition by market participants 
and  businesses  that  a  substantial  decline  in  the  real  value  of  sterling  was  necessary  to 
re balance the economy and the fall was consequently likely to be permanent. 
We  can  bring  all  this  together  by  asking  what  has  been  the  net  contribution  to  inflation  of 
higher  global  prices,  the  exchange  rate  depreciation  and  the  movements  in  VAT  over  the 
past  few  years.  A  range  of  estimates  is  shown  by  the  blue  swathe  in  Chart  9.  The  green 
swathe then just shows the corresponding inflation generated from other sources, such as 
pay  and  producers’  profit  margins.  It  can  be  seen  that  this  has  been  running  at  very  low 
levels, especially over the past year and a half. 
It  is  worth  emphasising  that  this  is,  in  essence,  merely  an  accounting  exercise,  attributing 
inflation  to  various  proximate  causes.  The  green  swathe  does  not  provide  an  estimate  of 
what  inflation  would  have  been  if  commodity  prices,  the  exchange  rate  and  VAT  had  all 
remained at their 2007 levels. If that had been so, consumers would have had more to spend 
on domestically produced output, pushing up prices. And producers utilising imported inputs 
would also have had less incentive to bear down on other costs, including wages. So, in the 
absence of the movements in global prices, sterling and indirect taxes, inflation might have 
been somewhat higher than indicated by the green swathe. But these effects would have to 
be quite powerful for inflation to be materially above target in those circumstances. 
                                                 
4  For instance, a cyclical divergence between the United Kingdom and the euro area would affect the relative 
price of goods in the two jurisdictions, but would not affect the price of goods relative to that of services within 
the United Kingdom. Similarly, a period of unusually rapid productivity growth in manufacturing compared to 
that of services would affect the affect the price of goods relative to that of services within the United Kingdom, 
but not goods prices in the United Kingdom relative to those in the euro area. 
5  See pp.34–35 of our February 2011 Inflation Report for details on how to do this. 
6  See e.g.: J. Campa and L. Goldberg (2002), “Exchange rate pass-through into import prices: a macro or micro 
phenomenon?”,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  Working  Paper  no.  8934;  IMF  (2006),  “How  has 
globalisation affected inflation?”, World Economic Outlook, Chapter 3; H. Mumtaz, O. Oomen, and J. Wang 
(2006),  “Exchange  rate  pass-through  into  UK  import  prices”,  Bank  of  England  Working  Paper  no.  312; 
J. E. Gagnon  and  J.  Ihrig  (2004),  “Monetary  policy  and  exchange  rate  pass-through”,  International  Finance 
Discussion Papers no. 704, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
What are the implications of all this for monetary policy? Our remit from the Chancellor of the 
Exchequer tells us that our target is 2% inflation “at all times”, but also recognises “that the 
actual  inflation  rate  will  on  occasions  depart  from  its  target  as  a  result  of  shocks  and 
disturbances.  Attempts  to  keep  inflation  at  the  inflation  target  in  these  circumstances  may 
cause  undesirable  volatility  in  output.”  Economists  and  monetary  policy  makers  have  long 
understood  that  there  is  generally  no  conflict  between  stabilising  inflation  and  stabilising 
output  when  the  economy  is  subject  to  adverse  demand  shocks.  But  that  there  is  a  real 
choice to be made when there are adverse cost shocks: inflation can be stabilised, but only 
at the cost of volatility in output. 
From  a  monetary  policy  perspective,  the  rise  in  commodity  prices  and  VAT  are  both 
essentially adverse cost shocks. And so, in my view, is the rise in import prices associated 
with the depreciation in sterling, given that it was not primarily a consequence of monetary 
policy actions (though the subsequent stance of monetary policy will surely have affected the 
extent  to  which  that  rise  in  import  prices  has  passed  through  into  consumer  prices).  The 
exercise above suggests that together they account for a rise in the level of consumer prices 
of 9 to 13 percentage points. Since the “excess” inflation relative to the 2% target is a little 
over 5 percentage points, that suggests that, in practice, we have ended up accommodating 
around half the impact of the shocks on inflation. 
In  terms  of  the  outlook,  a  key  issue  that  the  Committee  faces  in  deciding  the  appropriate 
stance of policy is the extent to which the current elevated levels of inflation will persist into 
the medium term. Our most recent projections, conditioned on market interest rates, existing 
fiscal plans and the futures prices of commodities, are shown in Chart 10. The central view is 
for  inflation  is  to  rise  further  in  the  near  term  as  recent  commodity  price  increases  pass 
through, but then to fall back, particularly in 2012 as the rise in VAT to 20% drops out of the 
twelve-month comparison.  It then continues to ease back, reflecting the continuing – though 
uncertain – drag from the margin of spare capacity in the economy. 
A number of factors will determine the rapidity of that return to target. Profit margins have 
been squeezed during the recession and businesses are likely to want to rebuild these as the 
recovery  proceeds.  But  the  real  purchasing  power  of  wages  has  also  been  severely 
squeezed and employees may also seek to recoup some of that. Ultimately this is about how 
the costs of the recession and the deterioration in the terms of trade associated with higher 
real import costs are shared out7, but during the adjustment phase it may be manifested in 
temporarily higher wage and price inflation.  
Consistently above-target inflation, whatever its cause, may also lead people to believe that it 
will remain high in the future. That in turn may lead them to set higher wages and prices to 
compensate  and  thus  to  the  elevated  level  of  inflation  persisting.  Measures  of  inflation 
expectations for the year ahead, for both households and businesses, have moved upwards, 
though no more than one would expect given the outlook for inflation (Chart 11). Measures of 
inflation expectations further ahead, which might be more indicative of a fundamental shift in 
perceptions of the inflation climate, have though mostly remained well anchored (Chart 12). 
But this is something we are watching closely, in particular for any signs that higher inflation 
expectations are leading businesses to raise pay and prices.  
There are elements of all these mechanisms present in our latest projections, but there is a 
risk that they will turn out to be more powerful than in our central view. And, as noted earlier, 
there  is  the  risk  of  further  increases  in  the  prices  of  commodities,  especially  that  of  oil. 
Certainly, my own judgment is that, if anything, inflation may prove a little more persistent 
next year than presently embodied in our projections. 
                                                 
7  This is sometimes referred to as the “battle of the mark-ups” in the unemployment literature; see e.g. P. R. G. 
Layard, S. J. Nickell and R. Jackman (1991), Unemployment: Macroeconomic Performance and the Labour 
Market. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
On its own, that might appear to imply that Bank Rate needs to rise faster than implied by the 
market yield curve that underpins our projections. But the risk of inflation staying above the 
target into the medium term needs to be weighed against the downside risk to growth and 
the prospect of a persistent margin of unused resources in the economy. Allowing inflation to 
come back gradually towards the target would allow the margin of spare capacity to close 
more rapidly, and would be in line with our remit that tells us that temporary deviations of 
inflation from the target are permissible if they help to avoid excessive volatility in output. 
I  hope  my  remarks  today  have  given  you  some  insight  into  the  issues  that  the  MPC  is 
presently grappling with. You will be aware that the spread of opinion on the Committee is 
unusually wide right now. That is in large measure a reflection of the substantial challenges 
and uncertainties facing the UK economy at the current juncture. Indeed, given the extreme 
nature  of  recent  events,  it  would  be  surprising  if  the  Committee  were  entirely  at  one  in  its 
assessment  of  the  outlook  and  its  judgement  of  the  appropriate  policy  response.  But  the 
Committee is united in its objective of meeting its inflation mandate in the medium term and 
playing its part in restoring the economy to a high and stable level of activity. Thank you! 
 7
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  9
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
  12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
