Ben S Bernanke: The economic outlook and monetary and fiscal policy 
Testimony  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Committee  on  the  Budget,  US  House  of  Representatives, 
Washington DC, 9 February 2011. 
 Chairman Ryan, Ranking Member Van Hollen, and other members of the Committee, I am 
pleased to have this opportunity to offer my views on the economic outlook, monetary policy, 
and issues pertaining to the federal budget.  
The economic outlook 
The economic recovery that began in the middle of 2009 appears to have strengthened in 
the past few months, although the unemployment rate remains high. The initial phase of the 
recovery,  which  occurred  in  the  second  half  of  2009  and  in  early  2010,  was  in  large  part 
attributable to the stabilization of the financial system, the effects of expansionary monetary 
and  fiscal  policies,  and  the  strong  boost  to  production  from  businesses  rebuilding  their 
depleted  inventories.  But  economic  growth  slowed  significantly  last  spring  and  concerns 
about  the  durability  of  the  recovery  intensified  as  the  impetus  from  inventory  building  and 
fiscal stimulus diminished and as Europe’s fiscal and banking problems roiled global financial 
markets.  
More recently, however, we have seen increased evidence that a self-sustaining recovery in 
consumer and business spending may be taking hold. Notably, real consumer spending rose 
at an annual rate of more than 4 percent in the fourth quarter. Although strong sales of motor 
vehicles  accounted  for  a  significant  portion  of  this  pickup,  the  recent  gains  in  consumer 
spending  appear  reasonably  broad  based.  Business  investment  in  new  equipment  and 
software increased robustly throughout much of last year, as firms replaced aging equipment 
and as the demand for their products and services expanded. Construction remains weak, 
though,  reflecting  an  overhang  of  vacant  and  foreclosed  homes  and  continued  poor 
fundamentals  for  most  types  of  commercial  real  estate.  Overall,  improving  household  and 
business  confidence,  accommodative  monetary  policy,  and  more-supportive  financial 
conditions,  including  an  apparently  increasing  willingness  of  banks  to  lend,  seem  likely  to 
result in a more rapid pace of economic recovery in 2011 than we saw last year.  
While  indicators  of  spending  and  production  have  been  encouraging  on  balance,  the  job 
market  has improved  only  slowly.  Following  the  loss  of  about  8 3/4  million jobs  from  2008 
through 2009, private-sector employment expanded by a little more than 1 million in 2010. 
However, this gain was barely sufficient to accommodate the inflow of recent graduates and 
other  new  entrants  to  the  labor  force  and,  therefore,  not  enough  to  significantly  erode  the 
wide margin of slack that remains in our labor market. Notable declines in the unemployment 
rate in December and January, together with improvement in indicators of job openings and 
firms’ hiring plans, do provide some grounds for optimism on the employment front. Even so, 
with  output  growth  likely  to  be  moderate  for  a  while  and  with  employers  reportedly  still 
reluctant to add to their payrolls, it will be several years before the unemployment rate has 
returned to a more normal level. Until we see a sustained period of stronger job creation, we 
cannot consider the recovery to be truly established.  
On the inflation front, we have recently seen increases in some highly visible prices, notably 
for gasoline. Indeed, prices of many industrial and agricultural commodities have risen lately, 
largely as a result of the very strong demand from fast-growing emerging market economies, 
coupled, in some cases, with constraints on supply. Nonetheless, overall inflation is still quite 
low and longer-term inflation expectations have remained stable. Over the 12 months ending 
in December, prices for all the goods and services consumed by households (as measured 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
by  the  price  index  for  personal  consumption  expenditures)  increased  by  only  1.2  percent, 
down  from  2.4  percent  over  the  prior  12  months.  To  assess  underlying  trends  in  inflation, 
economists  also  follow  several  alternative  measures  of  inflation;  one  such  measure  is 
so-called core inflation, which excludes the more volatile food and energy components and 
therefore  can  be  a  better  predictor  of  where  overall  inflation  is  headed.  Core  inflation  was 
only 0.7 percent in 2010, compared with around 2 1/2 percent in 2007, the year before the 
recession began. Wage growth has slowed as well, with average hourly earnings increasing 
only  1.7  percent  last  year.  These  downward  trends  in  wage  and  price  inflation  are  not 
surprising, given the substantial slack in the economy.  
Monetary policy 
Although  the  growth  rate  of  economic  activity  appears  likely  to  pick  up  this  year,  the 
unemployment  rate  probably  will  remain  elevated  for  some  time.  In  addition,  inflation  is 
expected to persist below the levels that Federal Reserve policymakers have judged to be 
consistent over the longer term with our statutory mandate to foster maximum employment 
and  price  stability.  Under  such  conditions,  the  Federal  Reserve  would  typically  ease 
monetary policy by reducing its target for the federal funds rate. However, the target range 
for the federal funds rate has been near zero since December 2008, leaving essentially no 
room for further reductions. As a consequence, since then we have been using alternative 
tools to provide additional monetary accommodation. In particular, over the past two years 
the  Federal  Reserve  has  further  eased  monetary  conditions  by  purchasing  longer-term 
securities – specifically, Treasury, agency, and agency mortgage-backed securities – on the 
open market. These purchases are settled through the banking system, with the result that 
depository  institutions  now  hold  a  very  high  level  of  reserve  balances  with  the  Federal 
Reserve.  
Although large-scale purchases of longer-term securities are a different monetary policy tool 
than the more familiar approach of targeting the federal funds rate, the two types of policies 
affect the economy in similar ways. Conventional monetary policy easing works by lowering 
market expectations for the future path of short-term interest rates, which, in turn, reduces 
the  current  level  of  longer-term  interest  rates  and  contributes  to  an  easing  in  broader 
financial conditions. These changes, by reducing borrowing costs and raising asset prices, 
bolster  household  and  business  spending  and  thus  increase  economic  activity.  By 
comparison,  the  Federal  Reserve’s  purchases  of  longer-term  securities  do  not  affect  very 
short-term  interest  rates,  which  remain  close  to  zero,  but  instead  put  downward  pressure 
directly  on  longer-term  interest  rates.  By  easing  conditions  in  credit  and  financial  markets, 
these  actions  encourage  spending  by  households  and  businesses  through  essentially  the 
same  channels  as  conventional  monetary  policy,  thereby  strengthening  the  economic 
recovery.  Indeed,  a  wide  range  of  market  indicators  suggest  that  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
securities purchases have been effective at easing financial conditions, lending credence to 
the  view  that  these  actions  are  providing  significant  support  to  job  creation  and  economic 
growth.1 
                                                 
1   For example, in August 2010 we announced our policy of reinvesting principal payments on agency debt and 
agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities in longer-term Treasury securities and signaled that we were 
considering  additional  purchases  of  longer-term  Treasury  securities.  Since  then,  equity  prices  have  risen 
significantly,  volatility  in  the  equity  market  has  fallen,  corporate  bond  spreads  have  narrowed,  and  inflation 
compensation as measured in the market for inflation-indexed securities has risen from low to more normal 
levels. Yields on 5- to 10-year Treasury securities initially declined markedly as markets priced in prospective 
Fed  purchases;  these  yields  subsequently  rose,  however,  as  investors  became  more  optimistic  about 
economic  growth  and  as  traders  scaled  back  their  expectations  of  future  securities  purchases.  All  of  these 
developments  are  what  one  would  expect  to  see  when  monetary  policy  becomes  more  accommodative, 
whether  through  conventional  or  less  conventional  means.  Interestingly,  these  developments  are  also 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
My colleagues and I have said that we will review the asset purchase program regularly in 
light of incoming information and will adjust it as needed to promote maximum employment 
and stable prices. In particular, we remain unwaveringly committed to price stability, and we 
are  confident  that  we  have  the  tools  to  be  able  to  smoothly  and  effectively  exit  from  the 
current  highly  accommodative  policy  stance  at  the  appropriate  time.  Our  ability  to  pay 
interest on reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve Banks will allow us to put upward 
pressure  on  short-term  market  interest  rates  and  thus  to  tighten  monetary  policy  when 
needed, even if bank reserves remain high. Moreover, we have developed additional tools 
that  will  allow  us  to  drain  or  immobilize  bank  reserves  as  needed  to  facilitate  the  smooth 
withdrawal  of  policy  accommodation  when  conditions  warrant.  If  necessary,  we  could  also 
tighten policy by redeeming or selling securities.  
As  I  am  appearing  before  the  Budget  Committee,  it  is  worth  emphasizing  that  the  Fed’s 
purchases of longer-term securities are not comparable to ordinary government spending. In 
executing these transactions, the Federal Reserve acquires financial assets, not goods and 
services; thus, these purchases do not add to the government’s deficit or debt. Ultimately, at 
the appropriate time, the Federal Reserve will normalize its balance sheet by selling these 
assets back into the market or by allowing them to run off. In the interim, the interest that the 
Federal  Reserve  earns  from  its  securities  holdings  adds  to  the  Fed’s  remittances  to  the 
Treasury; in 2009 and 2010, those remittances totaled about $125 billion.  
Fiscal policy 
Fiscal  policymakers  also  face  significant  challenges.  Our  nation’s  fiscal  position  has 
deteriorated  appreciably  since  the  onset  of  the  financial  crisis  and  the  recession.  To  a 
significant  extent,  this  deterioration  is  the  result  of  the  effects  of  the  weak  economy  on 
revenues and outlays, along with the actions that the Administration and the Congress took 
to  ease  the  recession  and  steady  financial  markets.  However,  even  after  economic  and 
financial conditions return to normal, the federal budget will remain on an unsustainable path, 
with  the  budget  gap  becoming  increasingly  large  over  time,  unless  the  Congress  enacts 
significant changes in fiscal programs.  
For  example,  under  plausible  assumptions  about  how  fiscal  policies  might  evolve  in  the 
absence of major legislative changes, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projects the 
deficit  to  fall  from  its  current  level  of  about  9  percent  of  gross  domestic  product  (GDP)  to 
5 percent of GDP by 2015, but then to rise to about 6 1/2 percent of GDP by the end of the 
decade.2  In  subsequent  years,  the  budget  situation  is  projected  to  deteriorate  even  more 
rapidly, with federal debt held by the public reaching almost 90 percent of GDP by 2020 and 
150 percent by 2030, up from about 60 percent at the end of fiscal year 2010.  
The long-term fiscal challenges confronting the nation are especially daunting because they 
are  mostly  the  product  of  powerful  underlying  trends,  not  short-term  or  temporary  factors. 
The  two  most  important  driving  forces  behind  the  budget  deficit  are  the  aging  of  the 
population  and  rapidly  rising  health-care  costs.  Indeed,  the  CBO  projects  that  federal 
spending for health-care programs will roughly double as a percentage of GDP over the next 
                                                                                                                                                      
remarkably similar to those that occurred during the earlier episode of policy easing, notably in the months 
following our March 2009 announcement of a significant expansion in securities purchases. 
2   This alternative fiscal policy scenario, which assumes, among other things, that most of the tax cuts enacted in 
2001  and  2003  are  made  permanent  and  that  discretionary  fiscal  outlays  rise  at  the  same  rate  as  gross 
domestic  product,  is  presented  in  Congressional  Budget  Office  (2010),  The  Long-Term  Budget  Outlook 
(Washington: CBO, June (revised August)). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
25 years.3 The ability to control health-care spending, while still providing high-quality care to 
those who need it, will be critical for bringing the federal budget onto a sustainable path.  
The  CBO’s  long-term  budget  projections,  by  design,  do  not  account  for  the  likely  adverse 
economic  effects  of  such  high  debt  and  deficits.  But  if  government  debt  and  deficits  were 
actually to grow at the pace envisioned, the economic and financial effects would be severe. 
Sustained  high  rates  of  government  borrowing  would  both  drain  funds  away  from  private 
investment and increase our debt to foreigners, with adverse long-run effects on U.S. output, 
incomes, and standards of living. Moreover, diminishing investor confidence that deficits will 
be brought under control would ultimately lead to sharply rising interest rates on government 
debt and, potentially, to broader financial turmoil. In a vicious circle, high and rising interest 
rates would cause debt-service payments on the federal debt to grow even faster, resulting in 
further increases in the debt-to-GDP ratio and making fiscal adjustment all the more difficult.  
In thinking about achieving fiscal sustainability, it is useful to apply the concept of the primary 
budget  deficit,  which  is  the  government  budget  deficit  excluding  interest  payments  on  the 
national  debt.  To  stabilize  the  ratio  of  federal  debt  to  the  GDP  –  a  useful  benchmark  for 
assessing fiscal sustainability – the primary budget deficit must be reduced to zero.4 Under 
the CBO projection that I noted earlier, the primary budget deficit is expected to be 2 percent 
of GDP in 2015 and then rise to almost 3 percent of GDP in 2020 and 6 percent of GDP in 
2030. These projections provide a gauge of the adjustments that will be necessary to attain 
fiscal  sustainability.  To  put  the  budget  on  a  sustainable  trajectory,  policy  actions  –  either 
reductions in spending, increases in revenues, or some combination of the two – will have to 
be taken to eventually close these primary budget gaps.  
By definition, the unsustainable trajectories of deficits and debt that the CBO outlines cannot 
actually happen, because creditors would never be willing to lend to a government with debt, 
relative  to  national  income,  that  is  rising  without  limit.  One  way  or  the  other,  fiscal 
adjustments sufficient to stabilize the federal budget must occur at some point. The question 
is whether these adjustments will take place through a careful and deliberative process that 
weighs  priorities  and  gives  people  adequate  time  to  adjust  to  changes  in  government 
programs or tax policies, or whether the needed fiscal adjustments will come as a rapid and 
painful  response  to  a  looming  or  actual  fiscal  crisis.  Acting  now  to  develop  a  credible 
program to reduce future deficits would not only enhance economic growth and stability in 
the long run, but could also yield substantial near-term benefits in terms of lower long-term 
interest rates and increased consumer and business confidence. Plans recently put forward 
by  the  President’s  National  Commission  on  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Reform  and  other 
prominent  groups  provide  useful  starting  points  for  a  much-needed  national  conversation. 
Although these proposals differ on many details, they demonstrate that realistic solutions to 
our fiscal problems do exist.  
Of course, economic growth is affected not only by the levels of taxes and spending, but also 
by their composition and structure. I hope that, in addressing our long-term fiscal challenges, 
the Congress and the Administration will undertake reforms to the government’s tax policies 
and spending priorities that serve not only to reduce the deficit, but also to enhance the long-
term growth potential of our economy – for example, by reducing disincentives to work and to 
save, by encouraging investment in the skills of our workforce as well as new machinery and 
equipment,  by  promoting  research  and  development,  and  by  providing  necessary  public 
                                                 
3   See the two long-term scenarios for mandatory federal spending on health care shown in figure 2–3, p. 39, in 
CBO, The Long-Term Budget Outlook, in note 2. 
4   This  result  requires  that  the  nominal  rate  of  interest  paid  on  government  debt  equals  the  rate  of  growth  of 
nominal  GDP,  a  condition  that  might  plausibly  be  expected  to  hold  over  time.  If  the  interest  rate  on 
government debt is higher than the growth rate of nominal GDP, as might happen if creditors become wary of 
lending, then a primary budget surplus rather than primary balance would be needed to stabilize the ratio of 
debt to GDP. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
infrastructure.  Our  nation  cannot  reasonably  expect  to  grow  its  way  out  of  our  fiscal 
imbalances, but a more productive economy will ease the tradeoffs that we face.  
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
