Axel A Weber: Strong, sustainable and balanced growth – the 
contribution of financial market regulation 
Speech  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
11th WHU New Year’s Conference, Vallendar, Rhineland-Palatinate, 14 January 2011. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
Thank you for the invitation to be keynote speaker at your 11th New Year’s Conference. It is 
a pleasure to be here once again. The beginning of a new year lends itself to looking back 
and  reflecting  on  the  past  year  which  turned  out  satisfactory  –  all  the  more  so  as  the 
economic outlook has brightened considerably.  
This is not just true for Germany but also for the euro area in general. Hence, even though 
for the euro area risks for the economic outlook are still tilted slightly to the downside, the 
recovery  should  continue.  Against  this  background,  the  recent  increase  of  inflation  in  the 
euro area above 2% has attracted some attention. Whilst this is largely the result of short-
term upward pressure on prices, mainly owing to energy prices, inflationary pressures over 
the  policy-relevant  medium  term  are  expected  to  remain  contained  and  in  line  with  price 
stability. Therefore, the Governing Council yesterday confirmed that the current key interest 
rates  still  remain  appropriate.  Nevertheless,  risks  to  the  medium  term  outlook  for  inflation 
which  are  so  far  still  broadly  balanced  could  well  move  to  the  upside.  Thus,  price 
developments have to be monitored very closely. 
In spite of the favourable economic outlook, the financial and economic crisis is not over yet, 
and  even  though  Germany  fared  much  better  during  the  crisis  than  many  other  advanced 
economies, the welfare losses have been huge. Thus, one of our top concerns must be to 
ensure that measures are taken to prevent the occurrence of another crisis of this scale. But 
first, I would like to address the issue of regulatory reform on financial markets. So let us take 
a look back and cast a look at the interlinkages between the real economy and the financial 
system and at how the crisis originated. 
2. 
The financial system – driver of growth, but also the origin of the worst crisis 
in the post-war period 
The  state  of  the  real  economy  and  economic  well-being  are  usually  measured  in  terms  of 
economic  growth.  As  you  will  probably  recall  from  your  macroeconomic  courses,  simple 
textbook  models  basically  identify  three  determining  factors  of  economic  growth:  capital, 
labour and technological progress. Of those three, the one most obviously affected by the 
financial  sphere  is  the  first  –  capital.  Considered  on  its  own,  the  financial  sector  not  only 
plays a crucial role in capital accumulation but is also a part of the economy with a distinct 
value  added  that  contributes  to  an  economy’s  growth.  Beyond  that,  however,  the  financial 
system  performs  another  very  important  task  with  regard  to  economic  growth:  it  not  only 
funds innovations but also helps in identifying them. The financial system therefore helps to 
further the state of know-how and promotes technological progress. Sound economic growth 
relies  upon  an  efficient  financial  system.  With  each  advancing  stage  of  economic 
development,  the  financial  system  also  refines  and  increases  its  complexity  together  with 
advancements in the real economy. 
The  massive  repercussions  and  enormous  costs  for  the  real  economy  during  the  current 
crisis  have  demonstrated  impressively  how  important  financial  stability  is  for  economic 
performance and welfare: The second phase of the crisis, that is after the Lehman Brothers 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
insolvency in September 2008, not only marked the point of conversion to a systemic crisis, 
causing  transactions  on  the  interbank  market  to  virtually  ground  to  a  halt,  stock  prices  to 
plummet  and  investors  to  flee  to  the  safety  of  government  bonds.  The  disruptions  of  the 
financial  system  were  also  passed  on  to  the  real  economy.  Financing  conditions  for 
enterprises and households tightened, and as consumers and firms feared what was still to 
come,  expectations  in  the  private  sector  as  well  as  the  outlook  for  the  world  economy 
deteriorated sharply. As a result, manufacturing and trade were at the heart of the crisis and 
suffered  globally,  and  particularly  in  the  advanced  economies,  output  dropped  at  rates 
hitherto unseen in the post-war period.  
Financial stability has therefore rightly become a top priority on the policy agenda, and the 
increasing role of the G20 testifies to the global dimension of this task. Yet the objective is 
not  to  avoid  financial  crises  completely.  Historically,  these  crises  have  occurred  regularly 
over time and can be viewed as an element of market economies. In this context, attempts to 
increase financial market stability should therefore not be understood as an attempt to avoid 
crises altogether, but as an attempt to increase the system’s resilience and, by doing so, to 
limit the dire consequences. 
The  usual  fear  is  that  stricter  regulation  may  introduce  additional  frictions  and  hamper 
economic  growth.  The  challenge  policy  makers  face  when  reforming  the  regulatory 
framework of financial markets lies in striking the right balance between the stability of the 
financial  system  and  its  efficiency.  Luckily,  both  intentions  are  to  a  significant  degree 
complementary,  and  the  context  is not  that  of a  zero-sum game.  Well-designed  regulatory 
reform can make the financial system more stable without cutting into sustainable growth. In 
order to construct regulation wisely, it is first necessary to understand the underlying reasons 
for the current crisis. Otherwise regulation runs the risk of curing the symptoms but not the 
cause.  
Prior  to  the  crisis,  the  global  economy  grew  at  a  rapid  pace.  The  integration  of  rapidly 
catching-up  emerging  markets  contributed  largely  to  this  significant  upturn.  The  labour 
potential,  that  is  the  number  of  people  who  are  readily  available  to  the  labour  market, 
increased greatly in these economies and they presented plenty of high-yielding investment 
opportunities.  Both  led  to  a  significant  growth  in  per  capita  income.  However,  the  phase 
before the crisis was also characterised by extremely favourable financing conditions and a 
high  propensity  to  take  risks.  As  a  result,  capital  was  not  always  channelled  into  its  most 
productive use, and in various countries this fostered an unsustainable asset price increase 
that  led  to  high  private-sector  debt  and  excess  domestic  demand;  the  housing  markets  in 
several  advanced  economies  are  a  prominent  example.  These  undesirable  developments 
were  further  encouraged  by  loopholes  and  weaknesses  in  the  regulatory  framework. 
Eventually, the underlying imbalances erupted and came to the surface; we still have to deal 
with those consequences. 
The  deficiencies  of  the  financial  system  that  reinforced  the  unhealthy  development  were 
many  and  encompassed  the  microeconomic  as  well  as  the  macroeconomic  level.  On  the 
microeconomic level the factors that led to the financial crisis were a lack of transparency, 
insufficient  capital  buffers,  the  unhampered  development  of  a  scarcely  regulated  shadow 
banking  system  and  moral  hazard,  for  example  in  the  form  of  ill-designed  remuneration 
schemes or an insufficient risk and liquidity management at the level of individual institutions, 
to name but a few. Furthermore, the systematic importance of certain agents, ie their crucial 
role they played for whole financial market segments, had been underestimated for too long. 
Regulatory reform as a lesson to be learned from the crisis 
3. 
Where the causes are multilayered, multilayered regulation is the appropriate measure. As a 
first  line  of  defence,  the  microprudential  level  of  regulation  will  be  strengthened.  The 
measures that policy-makers set up in September 2010 and agreed on at the G20 summit in 
Seoul, commonly termed “Basel III”, comprise higher capital and liquidity requirements which 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
are  intended  to  enable  an  institution  to  better  cope  with  losses  itself  and  thus  lower  the 
probability of it’s insolvency. In this context, higher capital requirements mean both, a higher 
quantity  of  capital  as  well  as  a  higher  quality.  Particularly,  the  minimum  core  capital 
requirements  will  rise  from  currently  2%  to  then  4.5%,  plus  an  extra  2.5%  that  will  be 
introduced in stages from 2016 on. Tier 1 capital requirements will increase from currently 
4% to then 8.5%. Furthermore, a stricter definition of core capital is to be implemented.  
Yet, this first line of defence is not sufficient and needs to be supplemented. In market-based 
economies  the  failure  of  individual  enterprises,  including  banks,  should  not  be  ruled  out  a 
priori. Thus, a second line of defence will be drawn, on the macroprudential level, which will 
only come into play if an institution breaks the first line of defence and becomes insolvent. Its 
aim will be to curtail the impact of individual insolvencies on the financial system as a whole 
and  to  increase  the  financial  system’s  transparency.  The  European  Union  only  recently 
established an institution for macroprudential analysis and monitoring in order to recognise 
systemic risks early on, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB). Germany passed a law 
on the restructuring of insolvent financial institutions last autumn, which is certainly a step to 
be  welcomed.  However,  the  various  national  restructuring  mechanisms  will  only  be  fully 
effective  if  they  are  mutually  compatible.  As  in  other  areas  of  regulation,  this  requires  an 
internationally coordinated approach.  
Additionally,  measures  of  macroprudential  oversight  are  currently  being  developed  and 
implemented  also  to  address  systemic  risk.  Dealing  with  systemic  risk  is  complex  and 
requires  a  multi-faceted  approach.  It  should  encompass  systemically  relevant  financial 
institutions, markets and infrastructures, while transparency is crucial. 
Topics that either still need further discussion or at least ratification include, for example, the 
question of how exactly to deal with institutions that are “too big to fail”. Stricter regulation 
and  more  intense  supervision  lead,  not  least,  to  the  internalisation  of  otherwise  negative 
external effects of these institutions. The improvement of corporate governance, not least the 
implementation  of  the  FSB’s  international  compensation  standards,  is  also  the  subject  of 
debate.  Further  topics  on  the  agenda  are  the  mandatory  registration  of  institutions  that 
currently  operate  in  the  shadow  banking  system,  and  the  standardisation  of  contracts  and 
handling of derivatives. All these topics need to be concretised further. Once implemented, 
these measures will have a profound impact on the financial system. They will increase the 
system’s resilience and, with that, its stability. 
Especially with Basel III there have been concerns that the increased capital requirements 
will  have  a  potentially  negative  impact  on  economic  performance.  However,  studies  have 
revealed that these fears are not well-founded. In anticipation of the new rules banks have 
already  started  to  increase  their  capital.  Additionally,  the  transition  period  before  the  new 
requirements fully enter into force has been set with a long horizon. These are clear signs 
that policy-makers have found the right balance between regulation for stability and ensuring 
strong  and  sustainable  growth.  In  fact,  there  is  no  inherent  conflict  between  the 
G20 agenda’s  objectives  of  a  more  stable  financial  system  and  of  strong,  sustainable  and 
balanced growth. 
What we have to be careful with is public debt. The (sadly) new feature of the current crisis 
has been its third phase, the debt crisis, which hit us hard in May 2010. Towards the end of 
2009, investors and rating agencies were increasingly turning their attention to the financial 
risks that the government sector worldwide had already incurred or was likely to incur. The 
default  risk  of  these  countries’  government  debt  securities  had  until  then  been  considered 
safe. However, with deteriorating public debt through fiscal programmes and guarantees to 
financial  institutions  in  particular  as  rescue  measures,  the  default  risk  was  revalued  on  a 
more  differentiated  basis.  As  a  result,  intra-euro-area  yield  spreads  widened  significantly  
–  especially  to  the  detriment,  above  all,  of  periphery  countries  like  Greece,  Ireland  and 
Portugal. Although this third phase of the crisis has so far not impacted significantly on euro-
area  economic  developments,  and  financial  markets  have  continued  to  recover,  too,  the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
sovereign debt crisis still poses a serious challenge for the euro area as a whole that needs 
to be resolved before it potentially becomes a more serious threat to the recovery. Policy-
makers have already taken important first steps in this regard, both to embark on ambitious 
and timely consolidation as well as to strengthen the institutional framework within the EU. 
Keywords in this context are a strengthened Stability and Growth Pact, better enforcement 
measures 
imbalances  and  a  crisis  resolution 
mechanism that helps to deal with future crises but does not undermine the incentives to rein 
in public deficits. 
to  correct  excessive  macroeconomic 
Conclusion 
4. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  the  major  drivers  of  growth  for  the  world  economy  have  not  been 
impaired by the financial crisis. Emerging markets are still undertaking great efforts to catch 
up, and technological progress will continue. As I pointed out, even the regulatory measures 
already implemented, as well those measures that will be implemented once the discussion 
process has come to an end, will not hamper fundamental economic growth. The crisis has 
warned us of the risks of exaggerated growth and has painfully demonstrated some major 
weaknesses of the regulatory system. But the crisis does not mark the end of the world as 
we know it. If we manage to improve the regulatory framework for the financial system and 
maintain  well-disciplined  government  budgets,  we  will  be  well  on  the  way  towards  strong, 
sustainable and balanced growth in the future.  
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
