DeLisle Worrell: Coping with the economic crisis 
Address by Dr DeLisle Worrell, Governor of the Central Bank of Barbados, to the Lions Club 
of Christ Church West, Christ Church, 8 January 2011. 
 Thanks for the opportunity to address you tonight. Let me commend you for the work that the 
Lions’ organisation has done, in this country and worldwide, to strengthen the bonds of civil 
society. We have grown to appreciate that voluntary organisations, religious organisations, 
sporting clubs, cultural clubs and other service organisations constitute an essential part of 
the  fabric  that  hold  civilised  society  together.  Too  many  of  us  still  believe  that  our  civic 
responsibility  ends  at  the  ballot  box,  that  once  we  have  voted  we  have  done  our  duty  to 
society,  and  we  can  get  back  to  purely  selfish  pursuits.  Not  so.  The  society  lives  and 
breathes through the multitude of daily interactions among all its members, and we have a 
responsibility to help to guide and influence these interactions, in whatever way is open to us. 
We  must  seek  every  possible  avenue  to  do  so,  with  a  view  to  bettering  our  society  as  a 
whole, and to taking care of our brothers, sisters and neighbours. That is the only way for us 
to  ensure  our  own  happiness.  The  vote  offers  each  one  of  us  a  vital  tool  to  empower 
ourselves, but it is only one tool of many which are available to us. Organisations such as the 
Lions, with their international network and strong tradition of good works, are also a tool for 
personal empowerment. You are to be commended for the work you do, and I am sure you 
also derive immense personal fulfillment from your involvement with your organisation. 
This evening I want to talk about how individuals and small enterprises are coping with the 
economic crisis, as far as I can tell. I need to remind you that the Barbados economy is not 
an abstraction; it is thousands of us ordinary people finding ways to make ends meet, as best 
we  can,  and  having  to  do  so  in  very  uncertain  circumstances.  It  is  a  tribute  to  Barbadian 
ingenuity that the country has made such notable economic strides and improvements in the 
quality  of  all  our  lives,  with  so  few  physical  resources.  Barbadians  are  down  to  earth,  as 
demonstrated by the reaction to the recent budget austerity measures. We had a sense that 
if the countries from which we derive our foreign exchange weren’t doing very well, there was 
no way we would avoid feeling the pinch. We have to depend on the British, the Americans, 
the Canadians and people from our other source countries to lead us out of these woods. 
Until they do, we must be watchful, but patient. Although the signs are encouraging, we are 
not yet confident of recovery, so we must continue to be in a holding pattern, and make do as 
best we can. 
The impact on individuals 
Too many jobs have been lost as a result of this recession and the unemployment rate has 
risen to about 11 percent of our workforce. Some of those who have been laid off have found 
part time or informal work, with a consequent reduction in wages. However, the number of 
people seeking jobs, who have found nothing suitable for as long as a year or more, is now 
quite high. What is more, many of those still in jobs have suffered reduced hours, poor sales 
and reduced income. The overall result is that family incomes have typically not kept up with 
inflation in the past two years, and for many families earnings are substantially lower than 
they were before the recession. 
Families in this situation have no option but to reduce their spending. Difficult as this may be, 
the  average  Barbadian  household  may  in  a  better  position  to  adjust  than  is  the  typical 
American household, because Barbadians do not like debt. I would expect that the amount 
we are committed to pay to service our debt obligations of all kinds is far lower than is the 
case in America, as a percentage of our incomes. Debt service is an obligation you cannot 
easily cut back on, though there is a possibility of renegotiating the terms of mortgages and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
other debt, if your income has been drastically reduced. On the other hand, our utility bills 
take up a higher portion of our income than is typical in America. In any event, we have little 
option but to adjust to whatever happens to our incomes. It was an airport taximan who said 
to  me  that  if  you’ve  lost  your  job  and  you  don’t  know  where  your  next  month’s  income  is 
coming from, it makes no sense to borrow to pay your rent. 
So let me say something about the various ways that I have observed, in various places and 
at  different  times,  that  people  have  managed  to  cope  with  adversity  of  the  kind  we  are 
witnessing in Barbados and in most of the countries of the Caribbean. 
One way to take advantage of a period of enforced idleness is to invest in developing your 
own personal skills and knowledge, through education or training. To do that, of course, you 
must at least have a source of livelihood, perhaps through a spouse who is working, or by 
moving back in with parents or relatives. If you can afford to, this may be the best option, 
because  it  enhances  your  chances  of  success  in  future  job  search,  it  fills  in  what  would 
otherwise be a gap in your CV, and it avoids the potentially demoralising chore of job seeking 
in a market where more jobs are being lost than are being created. 
You  may  also  want  to  volunteer  in  a  profession  or  activity  in  which  you  have  skills, 
experience or qualification, for little or no pay in the first instance. Again this option depends 
on your having a source of income or support. Volunteering gives structure to your working 
week, and the systematic activity involved gets you accustomed to the rhythms of working 
life, for those who are entering the work force for the first time. It also brings you to the notice 
of  potential  employers,  who  may  seek  out  your  services  when  their  companies’  fortunes 
improve to the point where they are able to resume hiring. Even when there is little prospect 
of a permanent job volunteerism still makes sense, because it contributes to your sense of 
self-worth,  and  the  satisfaction  you  get  from  contributing  to  the  institution,  community  or 
society, in the realm of culture, sport, education or similar activity can be a source of great 
fulfillment. 
This is an especially trying time to be entering the labour force for the first time. You will need 
to  be  systematic  and  persistent  in  your  job  search.  Don’t  be  afraid  to  seek  assistance 
wherever  you  may  find  it,  in  pointing  you  to  the  right  person  to  whom  to  address  an 
application,  in  helping  you  to  look  out  for  suitable  opportunities,  in  helping  you  to  stay 
focused and stay positive, and in providing a shoulder to cry on when everything seems to be 
going against you. 
Pensioners have been hard hit by the financial crisis. The interest they earn on their financial 
investments has declined, just as prices have started to climb, and the value of their assets, 
especially liquid and financial assets, may well have declined. In such circumstances some 
pensioners have had to come out of retirement, often to take unskilled jobs.  
Times of recession put a high premium on managing your money carefully. It’s not as difficult 
as it sounds. You don’t have to be an accountant, and you don’t have to be one of those 
fiercely  self-disciplined  individuals  who  makes  a  note  of  every  purchase.  What  works  for 
Monica and myself is to keep all our receipts; once every month Monica sits down, adds up 
everything, compares it with my monthly salary, and figures out whether we’re in deficit or 
surplus, and by how much. If you do that every month for a few months, you develop a sense 
of your spending patterns, and you are able to pinpoint, without much difficulty, the things 
that you might well do without, which take you over budget. In normal times you will want to 
put  aside  a  little  every  month,  to  add  to  the  reserve  against  a  rainy  day.  When  times  get 
tough you may have to suspend this additional saving for a while. But only if things get really 
dire will you want to dip into that reserve. 
The prolonged recession also poses challenges for small businesses. Their cash flows are 
diminished, but  their  expenses  remain  much  the  same:  wages,  utilities,  interest  payments, 
VAT, NIS, office supplies, and inputs for fabrication, finishing or retailing. Government has 
offered some temporary relief on NIS payments, but nonetheless most small businesses are 
faced with a need to cut back on overheads. It is best to make a medium term adjustment 
2 
 plan, with the help of a bank or financial adviser, rather than to attempt to dig yourself out of 
a hole in a hurry. In extreme cases it should be possible to arrange debt restructuring with 
your bankers, if the alternative is to build up arrears which you have no means of paying. 
How much longer before things start to improve?  
We’re already seeing some positive signs (in tourism, for example), but it is too early to say. 
We shouldn’t rush. After making all this sacrifice for the past 2 years, we cannot afford to 
jump the gun, only to find that we are spending more on imports than our foreign exchange 
earnings will support. It is better to err on the side of caution. Only when it is very clear that 
we have emerged from the recession, when foreign exchange inflows are robust once again 
and  foreign  reserves  are  building  up  without  any  need  for  foreign  borrowing  for  general 
purposes,  only  then  can  we  confidently  ramp  up  employment  generating  activities.  In  this 
way we cannot be caught wrong-footed if the recovery turns out to be more sluggish than 
expected. 
All in all, Barbadians have kept level heads in the current crisis. We have accepted that we 
must  tread  water  for  a  while,  until  the  prospects  for  tourism  and  international  business 
services, which are the main sources of our foreign exchange, are clearly established on a 
new path of expansion. We must respect that foreign exchange limit because there is no way 
we can be self sufficient and maintain our standard of living. Thankfully, we can tread water 
for  a  while  without  sacrificing  that  standard  of  living.  We  have  been  doing  so  for  the  last 
24 months.  We  are  not  yet  sure  when  the  storm  will  end,  so  that  we  can  start  making 
progress once more. There are signs of a break in the clouds, but it’s too early to be sure. In 
the meanwhile, things have been kept stable: we have been able to pay for the things we 
need to import out of the receipts from tourism, international business, other exports, foreign 
investment and modest government borrowing from abroad. As a result we have not had to 
dip into the country’s reserve of foreign assets, which remain almost at the level of a year 
ago,  at  about  $1  ½  billion.  Barbados  has  a  good  name  in  tourism  and  in  international 
business,  and  we  are  poised  to  resume  growth  when  international  economic  conditions 
improve. In the meanwhile, things are by no means dire. We are doing as well as we may, 
under the circumstances, and our best strategy is to be patient while doing what we can to 
equip  ourselves  with  the  knowledge  and  skills  we  will  need  for  the  recovery,  whenever  it 
comes.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
