Yves Mersch: Is inflation back? 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  President  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Luxembourg  and 
Member of the Governing Council of the European Central Bank, at the Bank Finance 2011 
Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 3 March 2011. 
 Headline inflation in the euro area is on the rise. According to Eurostat’s flash estimate euro 
area  annual  HICP  inflation  increased  by  0.1  percentage  points  to  2.4%  in  February.  This 
figure  is  more  a  snapshot  than  an  incipient  violation  of  the  ECB’s  medium-  termoriented 
definition of price stability, – namely of inflation below but close to 2% –, but there is no room 
for complacency. 
The key question is whether we are facing a “hump” – in other words, is this acceleration in 
headline inflation temporary –, or is it the edge of a plateau, where the pressure on prices is 
more persistent than currently assumed. 
The judgment on this is three-forked: we envisage a good, a bad and an ugly scenario. The 
good scenario, i.e. the good news, is that we have been here before. Temporary increases in 
headline inflation have not prevented the ECB from managing to keep the average annual 
inflation rate in the euro area at 1.97 over the past 12 years. The bad news is that things 
might be slightly different this time, as forecasting inflation is, indeed, a complex task. The 
really  ugly  news  is  that  there  may  be  even  drivers  at  work  that  could  lead  to  errors  in 
forecasting inflation significantly, especially in underestimating future price levels. 
Let me discuss this in more detail. 
The good scenario: the hump scenario is the most benign 
Annual headline inflation in the euro area increased steadily in the course of 2010, from 1.0% 
in January to 2.2% (in December, an increase of 1.2 percentage points within one year. This 
11-month  increase  in  headline  inflation  is  due)  almost  entirely  to  the  food  and  energy 
components of the HICP. 
Crude oil prices, for example, have surged by around 35% over the last half year, peaking 
above  120  Dollar  very  recently,  and  pushing  up  import  prices.  Recent  political  turmoil  in 
some oil exporting countries in the Arabian world may lead to further price increases. 
The contribution from the other components of the HICP basket was relatively stable, though 
mildly accelerating. 
According  to  the  consensus  among  monetary  authorities,  these  sources  of  price  pressure 
can and should be ignored by central banks, as long as the increases are truly temporary 
and inflationary expectations stay anchored at levels consistent with price stability: One-off 
and unpredictable price shocks cannot be tackled by the traditional instruments of monetary 
policy. Nevertheless, second-round effects must be avoided by all means. They materialize 
when  a  one-time  shock,  e.g.  a  transitory  price  hike,  becomes  entrenched  in  other  prices, 
particularly through a wage-price spiral. Has this happened in 2010? Labour cost indicators 
were subdued in the third quarter of 2010 and data on euro area negotiated wages for the 
fourth quarter suggest an ongoing moderate growth in wages. But industrial producer prices 
(construction excluded) increased significantly in the course of 2010 and reached the level of 
5.3 % in December.  
Today  we  have  published  the  ECB’s  staff  projections  on  growth  and  inflation  in  the  euro 
area. The time horizon of these staff projections is similar to that in which monetary policy 
has  its  effects,  namely  18–24  months.  According  to  the  staff  figures  that  have  been 
significantly  revised  upwards  from  earlier  projections,  overall  HICP  inflation  is  projected  to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
stay  above  2%  for  the  rest  of  this  year,  with  annual  inflation  averaging  2.3%  in  2011. 
Thereafter, average inflation is projected to decline to 1.7% in 2012.  
The growth projection has also been revised upwards compared to December. Real GDP is 
expected to grow by 1.7% and 1.8%, respectively, in 2011 and 2012.  
According  to  this  scenario,  one  might  expect  a  “hump”  in  inflation,  i.e.  suggesting  the 
observed increase in the inflation rate is only temporary.  
The bad scenario: the complexity of inflation forecast 
The problem is that one cannot be sure that this benign scenario will come true. Forecasting 
inflation is a difficult task – this holds in particular for times of increased uncertainty like in the 
aftermath of a financial crisis and, more recently, political exceptionality. 
Even  in  normal  times,  the  models  may  be  wrong.  Let  me  mention  only  some  potential 
sources of error. 
 
Firstly, although there are sound reasons generally to treat shocks to the economy 
as  one-time  events,  the  cumulative  effect  of  a  series  of  shocks,  and  thus  on  the 
development of the price level, cannot be excluded. The standard macroeconomic 
models also widely used in central banks tend to underestimate headline inflation. In 
the first 12 years since the introduction of the Euro, the staff projections performed 
well as far as core inflation was concerned. The projection of the head line inflation, 
however, was systematically too low, because – among other reasons – the scale of 
the pass-through of past energy or commodity price shocks into output prices has 
been underestimated.  
Secondly,  upward  risks  to  headline  inflation  stem  from  pronounced  base  effects. 
Base effects occur when variations in the annual growth rate of the HICP are the 
result  of  an  atypical  movement  in  the  index  in  the  base  period.  They  tend  to  be 
particularly influential during periods when inflation volatility 12 months earlier was 
high,  for  example  as  a  result  of  sharp  movements  in  commodity  prices.  It  is 
expected that 2011 will benefit from negative cumulative base effects from energy 
and food in 2010 of up to 0.7 percentage points.  
Thirdly, the choice of leading sub-indicators is a tricky one. Let me give an example. 
In  recent  years  energy  prices,  namely  for  crude  oil,  contributed  to  an  increasing 
extent  to  the  volatility  of  headline  inflation.  There  is,  in  fact,  not  just  one  price  for 
“oil”.  Traditionally  West  Texas  Intermediate  (WTI)  commands  a  higher  price  than 
Brent crude. Most recently the price differences between the two benchmark sorts of 
crude oil showed anomalies: on 1 March, WTI was trading around 100 US Dollar per 
barrel, while Brent was at 114 US Dollar per barrel. While this huge difference could 
be partially explained by regional factors like the cold winter in Europe and the large 
stock of WTI oil in the US, the reliability of these prices to signal global scarcity can 
be questioned. 
Fourthly, one major driver of inflation is the dynamics of the economy. To measure 
the slack in the economy, the deviation of aggregate demand from the economy’s 
potential supply – the so-called “output gap” – is often seen as a helpful guide for 
policymakers.  On  this  logic,  inflation  rises,  when  aggregate  demand  exceeds 
potential output. However, the concept of a stable relationship between output gap 
and  inflation  is  not  only  frequently  challenged  in  theory  but  also  hard  to  apply  in 
practice. The operational appropriateness of the output gap as a guide to policy is 
limited by the availability of reliable real-time estimates. For example, estimates of 
the euro area output gap, as published by international organizations from 1999 to 
2004, underwent significant revision. Some revisions matched or even exceeded the 
original estimate of the gap itself.  
   2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Complexity has increased further because of the financial crisis: In this context, the crisis has 
had two effects:  
 
In the first place, the crisis triggered a probable one-off permanent loss in the level 
of  potential  output,  in  particular  because  of  the  downsizing  of  the  financial  and 
construction  sectors.  Whether  the  longer-term  growth  rate  of  potential  output  will 
also  be  affected,  remains  to  be  seen.  In  any  case,  the  reliability  of  output-gap 
measures as real-time clues to future inflation is weakened. 
In the second place, the financial crisis has impacted the effectiveness of monetary 
policy.  The  exceptional  liquidity  requirements  of  banks  after  the  dryingup  of  the 
money  market  in  the  summer  of  2007,  as  well  as  the  severe  tensions  in  some 
segments  of  the  market  for  euro-area  government  bonds,  have  affected  the 
transmission  channels  of  monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area.  To  restore  the 
effectiveness  of  monetary  policy,  the  authorities  have  had  to  adopt  several 
unconventional measures of temporary nature. 
 The general complexity of the art of forecasting inflation, coupled with heightened uncertainty 
in the aftermath of the financial crisis, calls for prudence and humility. Policy makers have to 
be  wary  when  deducing  real-time  policy  implications  from  inflation  forecasts.  For  the  euro 
area,  a  thorough  exchange  of  views  between  all  members  of  the  governing  council  of  the 
ECB is of utmost importance in bringing to bear a great wealth of experience. 
The ugly scenario: the threat of a plateau 
At the current juncture, new sources of inflationary pressure may emerge. Below the surface 
may lie new potential threats to price stability. Let me highlight three of them.  
 
Firstly, the combination of dynamic economic growth, accompanied by accelerated 
inflation in emerging markets, and an intensification of world-wide linkages bears the 
risk that imported inflation will come to play a larger role in domestic price levels in 
the  industrialized  world.  For  instance,  the  current  increases  in  prices  of  certain 
agricultural  products  and  raw  materials  may  be  more  persistent  than  currently 
assumed. In other words: The disinflationary impact of globalization, from which the 
industrialized world has benefited in the last 20 years, could turn into an imported 
inflationary impact.  
The lagged effect of food prices could still add a layer of headline inflation.  
Secondly,  in  several  countries  of  the  euro  area,  the  diminishing  labour  force 
presents  a  demographic  challenge  kicking  in  2013.  There  is  anecdotal  evidence 
that, in countries characterized by a dynamic recovery, there is already a shortage 
of skilled workers such as electricians. With resistance to adjust pension ages or to 
extend participation rates among age or gender cohorts with low employment, this 
all in all may cause an upward pressure on wages, bearing the risk of a wage-price 
spiral. Informal contacts with NFC point to expectations of wages rising in 2011 in 
line with inflation. 
Thirdly, the output gap may be closing faster than anticipated – not to mention the 
measurement  problems  attached  to  that  leading  indicator  of  inflation.  As  the 
economic  recovery  continues,  there are  new  indices,  which we  will  have  to  follow 
closely. For example, capacity utilization is coming back very rapidly to normal. In 
accordance, 
the 
manufacturing  sector  have  shown  a  particularly  steep  rise  in  selling  price 
expectations to a level even surpassing the 2008 peak. Spillovers to producer prices 
and producer prices of consumer goods are only a question of time. Moreover, the 
momentum for structural reform to lift potential growth is still a bit lackluster. A raised 
potential for growth could somewhat ease inflationary pressures. 
the  European  Commission’s  February  2011  surveys 
in 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Concluding remarks: credible and effective alertness 
The  scenarios  I  mentioned  should  not  be  interpreted  as  predictions.  Nor  can  one  attach 
precise probabilities to any of them. They indicate, however, that our assessment of risk to 
the medium-term outlook for the price level in the euro area needed to be adjusted upwards. 
The Governing Council of the ECB will make sure that the uncomfortable scenario will not 
materialize, and that the assumed temporary increase in the inflation rate will not prevail over 
the medium term. 
If  indirect  and  second-round  effects  were  to  materialize  on  large  scale,  monetary  policy 
would be reactive instead of being ahead of the curve. Once the genie of inflation is out of 
the bottle it might be too late. In order to avoid these effects, we will exert strong vigilance. 
Therefore, be assured that any threat to price stability in the medium term will be combated 
preemptively and vigorously. We will not let the genie out of the bottle. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
