Michael Mambo Mukete: Role of the Bank of Namibia in consumer 
protection issues 
Speech by Mr Michael Mambo Mukete, Assistant Governor of the Bank of Namibia, at the 
launch of Namibia Consumer Trust, Windhoek, 15 March 2011. 
 Director of Ceremonies, and the Executive Director of Namibia Trust – Mr Michael Gawaseb,  
The Chairperson of Namibia Consumer Trust – Mr Sandi Tjarondo,  
The Board of Trustees of Consumer Rights Trust,  
Distinguished Invited Guests,  
Members of the Media,  
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is my great pleasure to be here today to witness the launch of Namibia Consumer Trust. 
My research indicates that this Trust is the first of its kind set up to advocate for the rights of 
consumers in Namibia. The launch comes at the most opportune time when many Namibians 
are  finding  themselves  without  appropriate  avenues  to  find  redress  when  their  rights  are 
infringed and often feel powerless to stand up against giants in the business and the financial 
sector. 
It  is  with  this  view  in  mind  that  the  Bank  of  Namibia  regards  this  initiative  as  a  welcomed 
development at a time when concerted efforts are made to assess the regulatory landscape 
for  consumer  protection  measures.  This  is  because  there  are  dozens  pieces  of  laws 
developed many decades ago, and most of them surely have outlived their usefulness. It will 
therefore  take  much  determined  effort  and  coordination  not  only  from  the  audience  in  this 
room,  but  also  across  sectoral  regulators  and  Government  Institutions  to  address  the 
inefficacies  in  our  existing  laws.  It  is  worth  noting  that  the  Law  Reform  And  Development 
Commission has already issued public invitation to this effect and I wish to urge you all to 
participate in this indispensable exercise.  
Director of ceremonies, Ladies and gentlemen  
Allow me to ask a very rhetoric question, why should Financial Regulators be concerned 
about the right of consumers of financial services?  
Lack of information – or “information asymmetry” between consumers and Financial Services 
Providers places customers at a disadvantage. Consumer protection therefore seeks to level 
the playing field between suppliers and consumers of financial services. Financial services 
are in fact often complicated, while often involving large amounts of money for individuals. It 
is  true  that  the  need  for  consumer  protection  is  not  unique  to  the  financial  area. 
Nevertheless, there is a considerable difference in degree compared with most other 
areas, partly because it is often difficult even with hindsight to assess the quality of 
the financial services.  
In  the  Namibian  case,  the  challenge  we  are  facing  is  not  only  to  protect  the  existing 
customers, but we need to put more effort in bringing the estimated 51% of the population 
excluded  from  the  mainstream  of  financial  services.  It  is  against  that  background,  that  the 
Bank of Namibia has recognized the need to advocate for financial inclusion as one of its 
new  key  strategic  focus.  Director  of  Ceremonies,  empirical  research  reveals  that  financial 
exclusion  allied  phenomenon  are  amongst  others;  lack  of  financial  education,  lack  of 
consumer protection and therefore, financial discrimination; and the lack of suitable products 
and services. My speech today will focus mainly on consumer protection as the Ministry of 
Finance is going to present our collective strategy on financial literacy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Director of Ceremonies, Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Let me inform you of the role of the Bank of Namibia on consumer protection issues arising 
from  financial  services  providers  falling  within  its  purview.  There  are  many  pieces  of 
legislations directly administered by the Bank, which have a bearing on consumer protection. 
I will highlight them later in my speech when I introduce some of our initiatives and strategies 
aimed specifically to consumer of banking services. These laws allow the Bank, to among 
others,  act  as  the  prudential  regulator  and  supervisor  of  commercial  banks  to  ensure  that 
customers’  deposits  and  investments  of  are  safe.  Concomitantly,  the  Bank  ensures  that 
through its banking licensing process only “fit and proper” persons are permitted to own and 
manage  banking  institutions  to  prevent  potential  depositors  to  loose  their  money  from 
scrupulous persons.  
Director of Ceremonies, I am equally honoured to express myself on some of the current 
and future initiatives pursued by the Bank of Namibia in the area of consumer protection. 
These  include  the  recent  enactment  of  the  Banking  Institutions  Amendment  Act  of 
2010,  which  enables  the  Bank  to  recommend  to  the  Minister  of  Finance  to  issue 
regulations  on  unfair  terms  in  contracts  between  commercial  banks  and  their 
customers.  By  its  very  nature,  banking  services  often  require  that  customers  enter  into 
agreements with banks. Sometimes unaware of their rights and without having been afforded 
an opportunity to study and agree to certain contractual terms and conditions, customers in 
their desperation for services sign these contracts, which in the end bind them for extended 
periods.  These  contracts  are  at  present  considered  binding  on  customers,  irrespective  of 
how onerous, unreasonable or unexpected such terms might be.  
As a banking regulator, the Bank of Namibia has an interest in encouraging standards 
of  good  banking  practices  whereby  commercial  banks  act  fairly  and  reasonably  in 
relation  to  their  customers.  It  is  against  this  background  that  in  addition  to  a  possible 
regulation on unfair terms, the Bank is busy developing Code of Good Banking Practice. 
The Code shall set out the banking industry’s key commitments and obligations to customers 
on standards of practice, disclosure and principles of conduct in relation to banking services. 
Director of Ceremonies, in terms of the best practices, the Code shall provide that contract 
between the commercial banks and customers shall have a clear, plain and simple terms, for 
the understanding of which no special knowledge is required.  
A very good example to draw from is when President Obama signed the new Credit Card Bill 
of Rights into law, he challenged the industry to create a simple, easy to understand credit 
card agreement that you “don’t need a law degree or a magnifying glass to understand.” This 
means  eliminating  provisions  and  confusing  terminology  used  by  lawyers  for  reasons  of 
tradition  or  habit,  replaces  the  legalistic  with  plain-language,  and  introduces  information 
design  to  enhance  readability  and  comprehension.  It  is  thus  the  intention  of  the Bank  that 
contracts should be simple, short, and preferable designed to fit on one or two pages.  
The other key aspect of this Code will be to enforce good lending practices by banks 
to avoid over-indebtedness. Banks will, therefore, be expected to act in the best interest of 
its customers by ensuring that they Know and Understand the customer’s needs, only offer 
them  products  and  services  that  are  suitable  to  such  needs,  and  provide  them  with 
information to enable them to make informed choices.  
The  Code  will  further  require  banks  to  have  in  place  effective  complaints  handling 
procedures and appropriate timelines within which complaints should be dealt with. 
This also means that banks will be directed to be the first “port-of-call” to offer redress for 
customers, by having dedicated complaints desks to handle customer grievances.  
At this juncture I wish to inform you that the Bank of Namibia, together with the Industry, will 
issue the said Draft Code of Good Banking Practice, during the course of this year for public 
comments. Therefore, Director of Ceremonies, I humbly request the audience present in 
this room to spend time and do justice to all consumer protection initiatives, which we 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
all agree are close to our hearts by providing extensive comments to the Bank on the 
Draft Consultative Paper.  
Director of Ceremonies, Ladies and Gentlemen, The other initiative being pursued by both 
the Bank of Namibia and our sister Regulator, the Namibia Financial Institutions Supervisory 
Authority, is the establishment of Financial Services Ombuds Office, in terms of the Draft 
Financial Institutions and Markets Bill. This Office will be financed and resourced by the two 
institutions.  It  is  expected  to  serve  as  an  additional  mechanism  for  redress  for  consumers 
who are aggrieved by their financial service providers.  
Director of ceremonies, Ladies and Gentlemen 
In  another  attempt  to  protect  the  consumers,  the  Bank  of  Namibia  wish  to  use  this 
unique  occasion  to  once  again  warn  the  consumers  against  the  persistent 
mushrooming of pyramid schemes and related schemes. These types of entities have 
started  to  proliferate  in  Namibia  and  ordinary  citizens  are  continuously  lured  with 
unbelievable  testimonies  of  opportunities  on  how  to  get  themselves  out  of  poverty.  The 
downside is however, that entire families, households and even pensioners are targeted and 
may loose their hard earned cash and suffer at the hands of these schemes. In our efforts to 
protect consumer and the general public, the Banking Institutions Amendment Act of 2010 
made the participation and operation of such schemes a criminal offence.  
Before I conclude, Director of Ceremonies, kindly permit me the opportunity to inform the 
audience  that  in  2010,  the  Payment  System  Management  Amendment  Act  was 
promulgated  giving  the  Bank  the  mandate  and  authority  to  regulate  bank  fees  and 
charges where necessary. Thus, the Act enables the Bank of Namibia to set standards to 
protect consumers from being exploited through exorbitant fees and charges.  
Chronologically,  I  am  sure  the  audience  will  agree  that  the  starting  point  should  be  cash 
deposit fees which are main barriers for the majority of people wanting to open or maintain 
accounts with commercial banks. Accordingly, it is the Bank of Namibia’s intention to focus 
on  cash  deposits  fees  for  individuals  and  SMEs  in  2011.The  standard  will  also  call  for  a 
compulsory introduction of a low-cost basic retail bank account, which should be treated as 
a  public  utility  rather  than  a  money  making  product  for  commercial  banks.  It  is  worth 
mentioning that some of the commercial banks already have in place a similar account. All 
these  efforts,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  have  built-in  mechanisms  geared  towards  enforcing 
consumer protection.  
In conclusion, Director of Ceremonies, this initiative by Namibia Consumer Trust certainly 
has the potential to become the vehicle for large scale consumer protection initiatives. The 
Bank of Namibia is pleased to be associated with the launch of this initiative today. We are 
committed to maintaining and enhancing market confidence in a strong, fair and progressive 
way,  but  we  cannot  do  this  alone.  Regulation  is  a  complex  balancing  act  and  it  is  only 
through collaboration with other regulators, the industry and consumers that we can make it 
work for the financial system as a whole.  
The  Bank  believes  that  a  strong  relationship  with  the  Consumer  Trust  will  enhance  the 
important role you will play in influencing policy and strategic outcomes. My final message in 
this  context  is,  therefore,  an  invitation  to  consider  how  we  can  support  each  other  and 
develop stronger relationships, communicating with consumers together at a grassroots level 
to ensure that they are in a position to make informed and confident financial decisions.  
I  am  sure  it  was  long  and  difficult  road  to  get  where  you  are  today,  and  the  launch  will 
certainly not remove all obstacles on the road ahead. I therefore wish to urge you to continue 
working hard towards your objectives of protecting and educating consumers in Namibia of 
their rights in all sectors of the economy.  
Director of Ceremonies, Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
