K C Chakrabarty: Impact of global financial crisis on financial consumers 
– global and Indian perspective on need for consumer protection – role 
of ombudsmen 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Annual Conference of the International Network of Financial Services Ombudsman Schemes 
– INFO 2011, Vancouver, 21 September 2011. 
 Assistance  provided  by  Shri  Rajesh  Verma  and  Shri  D.G.  Kale  in  preparation  of  this  address  is  gratefully 
acknowledged. 
Introduction 
Mr.  Douglas  Melville,  Chairman  INFO  2011,  all  the  delegates  attending  the  annual 
conference  of  INFO,  Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  It  gives  me  immense  pleasure  to  be  here  in 
British Columbia and particularly, Vancouver, the beautiful city and share my thoughts on a 
subject that has occupied centre stage ever since the global financial system has been hit by 
crisis  leading  to  concerns  being  raised  about  the  efficacy  of  laws,  regulations  and  their 
implementation  with  the  stated  objective  of  protecting  the  consumer.  All  the  Ombudsmen 
who are present here may definitely be exercised over the limited role they may be able to 
play in such situations. Nonetheless, it would be worthwhile looking at certain fundamental 
issues which are at the root of the need for financial consumer protection. 
The focus of current international discourse is on financial sector stability. It may not be out 
of place to recall what the great American President Abraham Lincoln had to say “If we could 
first know where we are, and whither we are tending, we could better judge what to do and 
how to do it”. Financial Sector stability, as we all know, in simple terms, is the absence of 
instability in the financial system. As a policy objective, it refers to the avoidance of financial 
crisis  as  also  to  the  ability  of  the  financial  system  to  limit,  contain  and  deal  with  the 
emergence  of  imbalances  before  they  constitute  a  threat  to  the  economic  processes. 
Financial  sector  stability  also  has  deep  linkages  to  the  principle  of  financial  consumer 
protection. 
Securing the customer 
As I come from India, I would like to convey the message of Mahatma Gandhi who said “A 
customer is the most important visitor on our premises. He is not dependent on us. We are 
dependent on him. He is not an interruption in our work – he is the purpose of it. We are not 
doing him a favour by serving him. He is doing us a favour by giving us the opportunity to 
serve him”. Thus, irrespective of whether the business has good or bad times, the consumer 
and  his  protection  are  central  to  the  existence  of  business.  Consumer  protection  is 
achievable by having appropriate commercial laws and open competition. But our experience 
in dealing with provision of financial products and services indicates that the law is heavily 
loaded in favour of the financial services industry. As far as competition is concerned, it has 
no implications for the most vulnerable sections of the society. Further, the legal processes 
tend to be expensive and unaffordable in terms of both time and money. The good times for 
the financial services industry have meant expensive services and products for the common 
person while bad times have meant inadequate or no supply of even basic financial services. 
Can the above contradictions be balanced without having consumer protection at its core? 
What did the consumer gain when the times were good for the financial services industry and 
why is he made to suffer today, for no fault of his, just because the industry has fallen into 
bad times? The disconnect between business strategy and consumer protection can only be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
a recipe for disaster. When Mr. Bill Gates made the famous statement “world needs banking 
but it does not need banks” everyone perhaps was euphoric that we would soon breach the 
final  frontier  of  banking.  But  it  is  going  to  be  quite  some  time  before  we  say  good  bye  to 
banks. The recent past has seen product innovation and product penetration through use of 
technology.  The  challenge  posed  by  the  rapid  changes  in  products  and  service  delivery 
models  is  our  ability  to  scale  up  our  efforts  regarding  financial  education  and  customer 
awareness. A financially literate and enlightened customer would be able to better judge the 
suitability of a product to meet his requirements. 
The question I am often asked is: “Why as a regulator, are you concerned about customer 
care and protection? Why is it not left to the market forces and competition to take care of?” 
The  answer  to  this  lies  in  the  fact  that  in  a  service  industry  where  market  forces  and 
competition play out freely, this may well be the case. However, banking / financial services 
industry  being  a  highly  regulated  service  industry  with  very  stiff  entry  norms,  consumer 
protection  cannot  entirely  be  left  to  the  market  forces.  Hence,  the  regulator  has  a  role. 
Availability of financial services / products at affordable prices on an uninterrupted basis is 
the  purpose  and  result  of  financial  sector  stability.  Responsible  marketing,  responsible 
lending, responsible grievance redress mechanism and responsible consumer protection are 
not mutually exclusive but are inter-dependent. The public deposits and the funds available 
to the financial services industry represent a nation’s wealth. As such, the least we can think 
of is protecting the owners of this wealth, not merely in terms of deposit insurance but also in 
terms  of  day  to  day  transactions  and  contractual  relationships  a  consumer  has  with  the 
banking and financial services industry. 
Consumer trust and protection has always been an issue of interest and concern for policy 
makers and the entire financial industry. The debate has become particularly acute over the 
last  few  years  in  view  of  the  recent  market  developments.  In  times  of  globalization,  new 
opportunities in terms of new financial products, new instruments and technologies became 
available  posing  new  challenges  for  the  consumers  such  as  understanding  the  risks 
associated  with  complex  products.  The  current  levels  of  transparency  and  the  consequent 
difficulty of consumers in identifying and understanding the fine print from a large volume of 
information  leads  to  an  information  asymmetry  between  the  financial  intermediary  and  the 
consumer. From the perspective of policy makers, including the Reserve Bank of India and 
other  financial  sector  regulators,  financial  literacy  is  a  must  to  gauge  the  needs  of  the 
population and financial institutions, so that financial resources can be translated into higher 
economic growth while minimizing the financial stability risks. 
It is widely believed that the complex financial instruments that contributed to the financial 
crisis essentially had their basis in the boom period home loans, the credit quality of which 
was poorly assessed. Apart from the credit quality issues which went against the interest of 
the  lenders,  the  interest  of  the  borrowers  were  also  severely  compromised  as  they  were 
lured into the complex yet alluring deals without being assessed for their repaying capacity 
based on their prospective income and net worth. Costs of such irresponsible lending and 
borrowing were borne by tens of millions of tax payers in the form of bailout of beleaguered 
institutions. 
The financial services industry players need to evolve efficient consumer policies that must 
be  based  on  two  main  pillars:  financial  education  and  transparent  information  on  one  side 
and  competition  on  the  other.  These  aspects  are  central  to  foster  the  confidence  of 
consumers  and  help  them  make  informed  financial  decisions  and  select  the  products  best 
suited for their needs. Competition is an important dimension of consumer policy which has a 
positive impact on prices, quality of service and choice of products. Was this evident when 
we  were  going  through  turmoil  in  the  global  financial  services  industry?  Perhaps  not.  We, 
therefore,  have  to  harmonize  the  role  of  regulation,  competition  and  financial  education  to 
achieve the twin objectives of consumer protection and financial sector stability. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Financial  consumers  need  protection  because  they  are  at  a  structural  disadvantage 
inasmuch as they have difficulty in exercising their market power since their heterogeneity 
and mass make it difficult for them to organize themselves into pressure groups. Additionally, 
the  fixed  costs  of  procuring  information  can  be  high.  A  greater  degree  of  protection  may 
therefore  make  sense.  Information  asymmetry  between  financial  service  providers  and 
customers,  especially  in  emerging  economies,  works  to  the  advantage  of  the  former. 
Therefore,  transparency  rules  or  disclosure  regulations  should,  at  the  minimum,  seek  to 
create  standardized  and  comparable  information  about  pricing,  suitability  of  the  product  to 
different  population  groups,  terms  and  conditions  and  risks  to  customers  and  supervisory 
authorities.  Full  disclosure  of  quality  information  should  be  combined  with  mechanisms  to 
ensure  that  clients  properly  understand  the  information  provided  and  their  impact  on  their 
personal financial decisions. 
For  countries  where  banking  with  formal  institutions  is  still  emerging,  consumer  protection 
measures must be a top priority. In all such cases the targeted client groups come from the 
most vulnerable and low income segments. This is a major challenge for the credibility and 
sustainability of the whole financial sector. If not properly addressed, some of the problems 
faced by these consumers could lead to a long-term mistrust in formal financial institutions 
and loss of confidence in the banking system. It is, therefore, imperative that all consumers 
should benefit from the same level of security and protection, whatever be the institution they 
operate  with.  Unchecked  market  forces  and  lax  policies,  combined  with  relaxed  regulatory 
oversight, can result in customers being exploited while efforts to open financial markets to 
serve  the  bottom  of  the  pyramid  are  made  through  financial  inclusion  measures.  While 
financial inclusion is a necessary pre-condition for financial stability and inclusive economic 
development,  the  negativities  that  may  affect  a  poor  ill-informed  new  customer  can  be 
enormous  –  from  high  level  of  indebtedness  due  to  excessively  high  prices  and  predatory 
lending, to complete loss of savings and assets created out of loans and those collaterally 
charged to the banks. Hence, the financial services industry cannot blindly follow a strategy 
of customer acquisition without providing new accesses to new customers by using the ICT 
led financial inclusion models or brick and mortar structures or the business correspondent 
model. These initiatives must not be seen as costs but need to be reckoned as investment 
necessary for business stability. 
It is important to highlight that customers have rights but responsibilities also. While financial 
service  providers  have  to  ask  the  relevant  questions  to  their  prospective  customers  and 
ensure that the proposed products and services are the most appropriate according to their 
needs and means, it is the customers’ responsibility also to provide relevant, complete and 
accurate information on their financial situation and taking their personal as well as financial 
circumstances into account when making their decisions. The responsibility of the financial 
service  provider  may,  therefore,  be  read  and  assessed  in  the  light  of  the  customer’s 
responsibilities. Financial Service providers need to understand that for their businesses to 
survive,  their  customers’  must  survive  and  for  that,  they  need  to  understand  the 
appropriateness of the products themselves to be able to explain it to their customers. 
The  financial  entities  must  not  use  the  vulnerable  sections  to  cross-subsidize  the  clientele 
with power to bargain and command a price of their choice. The reasonableness of service 
charges  /  interest  rates  must  be  ensured  by  way  of  commitment  to  the  cause  of  financial 
inclusion. Further, the service charges / penalties must not be disproportionate to the level of 
default. The bundling of products by banks with a view to generate more non-interest income 
would  fall in  the  category  of  exploitative  pricing.  Every  bank  /  financial  service  provider,  in 
order to expand its customer base, needs to understand the requirements of their customers, 
the risks involved and return to be achieved.  
The  USA,  which  was  affected  the  most  by  the  crisis,  had,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis, 
initiated  exemplary  policy  and  other  structural  reforms  to  guard  against  financial  instability 
(Dodd–Frank  Wall  Street  Reform  and  Customer  Protection  Act).  Among  the  measures 
initiated, the customer protection aspect had received prime attention resulting in enactment 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
of Customer Protection Act and creation of Customer Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB) to 
assure  that  markets  for  financial  products  and  services  worked  in  a  fair,  transparent,  and 
competitive  manner  and  were  subject  to  meaningful  and  consistent  oversight.  In  India, 
setting up of Financial Stability and Development Council has also been with a similar view to 
strengthen  and  institutionalize  the  mechanism  for  maintaining  Financial  Stability  by  way  of 
macro-prudential  supervision  together  with  focus  on  developmental  aspects  of  customer 
protection, viz. financial literacy and financial inclusion. 
Where the banking ombudsman comes in 
The  role  of  the  Ombudsmen  adjudicating  financial  consumer  disputes  is  onerous  and  the 
recent  upheavals  in  the  market  place  have  only  heightened  the  consumers’  expectations. 
The existence of a legal framework is a must for consumer protection. The Ombudsmen, by 
definition, deal with individual grievances about which the common person is agitated. They 
cannot  substitute  effective  legal  and  regulatory  systems.  Expecting  them  to  bring  about 
systemic improvements of a sustainable nature by resorting to class action may be to expect 
too much from the schemes. The Ombudsman Schemes achieve two important objectives 
viz.,  timely  disposal  of  grievances  and  continuing  the  relationship  between  the  financial 
service provider and the consumer. While the courts of law decide cases in finality, many a 
times  bringing  contractual  relations  to  an  end,  the  decisions  or  awards  passed  by 
Ombudsmen generally do not have such implications. 
What  needs  to  be  done  is to  have a  constant  interaction  between  law makers,  regulators, 
standards & codes setting bodies and the Ombudsmen to sort out systemic issues that may 
be  leading  to  individual  grievances.  The  regulators  also  need  to  be  aware  of  their 
responsibility  of  protecting  the  vulnerable  sections  of  the  poor  in  matters  of  pricing,  fair 
treatment, non-discriminatory approach to consumer care and transparency in dealings with 
customers. Very often, the Ombudsmen are bogged down with issues of jurisdiction, either 
pecuniary or physical. This should not hinder them from encouraging a conciliatory approach 
to  redress  the  grievances.  We  just  cannot  leave  it  to  the  care  of  the  market  forces  and 
competition and expect them to serve the cause of the consumers. The standards and codes 
setting  bodies  must  evaluate  the  quality  and  effectiveness  of  consumer  care  measures 
including the financial education initiatives taken by the service providers. The Ombudsmen 
need  to  move  out  of  their  Offices  to  spread  awareness  about  existing  redress  systems 
available  within  the  framework  of  the  financial  services  industry.  All  the  initiatives  must  be 
aimed at empowering the customer to be able to make a studied and reasonable choice of a 
financial product or service. The effectiveness of the Ombudsmen is not to be judged by the 
number  of  complaints  handled  every  year  but  by  the  cases  that  resulted  in  bringing  about 
sustainable continuous systemic improvement. 
In this age of networking, fora like the INFO play an important role in broadening our outlook 
and understanding of issues from a local as well as global perspective. While globalization 
has had its share of success in improving markets and competition, it has also exposed the 
limitations  of  national  regulators  in  protecting  their  consumers  from  actions  arising  out  of 
trans-border transactions. Hence, the Ombudsmen who are part of INFO and the regulators 
must adopt the high level principles on financial consumer protection that have been put in 
public domain by G-20 OCED. 
What are we doing in India 
In  India,  for  the  banking  industry,  we  have  the  following  broad  structure  for  consumer 
protection  that  is  underpinned  by  Deposit  insurance.  India  has  the  statutory  framework  for 
consumer protection by way of a Consumer Protection Act. We also have the Banking Codes 
and  Standards  Board  of  India  and  a  Banking  Ombudsman  Scheme.  The  Banking 
Ombudsman Scheme has been in existence for over fifteen years and is cost free for access 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
by  the  common  person.  The  Banking  Ombudsman  Scheme  (BOS)  is  fully  funded  and 
managed by India’s central bank i.e. the Reserve Bank of India. As of now, bank customers 
can  lodge  a  complaint  with  any  of  the  fifteen  Offices  of  the  Banking  Ombudsman  situated 
across  the  country,  on  twenty  seven  different  grounds  of  deficiency  in  banking  services. 
These grounds of complaint cover all the delivery channels as also customer touch points. 
The  number  of  complaints  handled  under  the  BO  Scheme  during  the  year  2010–11  was 
71274  as  against  79266  during  2009–10.  Though  these  numbers  may  not  reflect  the  true 
picture about the quality of consumer care or the hardships faced by the common persons, 
given the vastness of our country and the large customer base numbering over 800 million, 
we  are  seized  of  the  need  for  bringing  about  greater  awareness  about  the  Ombudsman 
Scheme,  especially  in  small  towns  and  villages.  The  bigger  challenge  facing  us  is  that  of 
financial inclusion and financial education. To address these issues, we have embarked on 
an ambitious plan of financial inclusion and are committed  to providing access to financial 
services to every village with a population of 2000 or above by March 2012. The challenge of 
financial  education,  in  a  multi  lingual  and  multi  ethnic  country  like  India,  poses  many 
operational  difficulties,  given  the  low  levels  of  financial  literacy  and  a  population  of  30% 
which is uneducated. We are trying to tide over this situation by adopting multi-disciplinary 
and multi-channel strategies. 
Despite having undertaken a number of initiatives for ensuring fair treatment to customers, it 
was  realized  that  the  efficacy  of  the  tiered  mechanism  for  customer  grievance  redress  in 
banks was far from satisfactory. It was necessary to further develop a credible and effective 
functional  system  of  attending  to  customer  complaints  by  strengthening  banks’  internal 
structures  to  attend  not  only  to  the  basic  customer  needs  but  the  special  needs  of 
disadvantaged  groups  such  as  pensioners  and  small  borrowers,  including  farmers.  Taking 
into account these considerations, a Committee was constituted by the Reserve Bank. The 
committee was to look into the banking services rendered to retail and small customers and 
pensioners,  structure  and  efficacy  of  the  existing  grievance  redress  mechanism,  the 
functioning of Banking Ombudsman Scheme, possibility of leveraging technology for better 
customer  service  in  the  light  of  increasing  use  of  Internet  and  IT  for  bank  products  and 
services, etc. and to recommend steps for improvements. 
Conclusion 
The lessons that the global financial crisis had to teach us have been expensive and painful. 
Let  us  not  blindly  believe  in  the  ability  of  the  markets  and  competition  to  take  care  of  all 
segments of the population. There are sections of financial consumers who always have the 
highest sense of protection and there are the vulnerable sections of the society who feel left 
out. We, therefore, have to move to an order where the market forces, competition, effective 
regulation  and  a  vibrant  Ombudsman  scheme  all  co-exist  and  handle  matters  concerning 
financial consumers’ protection in a harmonized way. 
As I conclude, I would like to thank the organizers of INFO 2011 and in particular, the host 
country Canada. It is a matter of pride that Canada has decided to host this event a second 
time around in the last five years. It speaks volumes for their concern for the cause of the 
financial sector consumer. 
Thank you, Ladies and Gentlemen. 
Annex 
The major highlights of the recommendations made by the Committee on Customer Service 
in Banks constituted by the Reserve Bank of India are as follows: 
 
 
Creation of a toll free Common Bank Call Number 
Providing plain vanilla savings account without prescription of minimum balance 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
 6 
 Prescription of service charges for basic services 
Providing small remittances at reasonable price 
Providing floating rate housing loans on non-discriminatory basis 
Compensation for delayed return / loss of title deeds in the custody of banks 
Zero Liability against loss in ATM and Online Transactions 
Enhancement of DICGC cover up to Rs 5,00,000/- 
Transition to Chip based card (EMV) with Photograph 
Every bank to have a Chief Customer Service Officer (CCSO) for grievance redress 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
