Louis Kasekende: Opportunities and challenges of financial inclusion 
Remarks by Dr Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the National 
Microfinance  Conference,  organized  by  the  Association  of  Microfinance  Institutions  in 
Uganda (AMFIU), Jinja, 5 May 2011. 
 Hon. Syda Bbumba,  
Minister of Finance, Planning and Economic Development,  
The CEO of Association of Microfinance Institutions in Uganda (AMFIU)  
Distinguished representatives of the various members of AMFIU;  
The representatives of the Donor Community;  
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen  
I am very pleased to be here this morning to address the National Microfinance Conference 
organized  by  the  Association  of  Microfinance  Institutions  in  Uganda  (AMFIU).  I  am  indeed 
delighted that the theme for this year’s annual conference “Opportunities and Challenges 
of Financial Inclusion” is something that is close to our hearts, and is a very topical issue in 
the current times.  
The importance of this topic is underscored by the high levels of financial exclusion prevailing 
especially  in  the  developing  countries  including  Uganda.  Although  access  to  an  array  of 
financial  services  and  tools  is  growing,  the  Alliance  for  Financial  Inclusion  (AFI)  estimates 
that more than two billion adults around the world do not have access to financial services – 
whether formal or informal.  
Financial services such as savings products, credit and loans, payment and money transfer 
services, insurance, and many others, provide poor people with greater capacity to stabilise 
and  even  increase  their  incomes,  build  assets  and  cope  with  shocks.  These  financial 
products  have  proven  to  be  great  tools  that  mitigate  the  effects  of  low,  irregular  and 
unreliable incomes which keep many people below the poverty line.  
In Uganda, Financial Inclusion remains a challenge in spite of the many gains and successes 
we have achieved in the financial sector. The 2009 Finscope study revealed that only 28% of 
the  adult  population  above  16  years  of  age  are  served  by  formal  institutions  such  as 
Commercial Banks, Credit Institutions and Microfinance Deposit-Taking Institutions (MDIs); 
while  42%  are  served  informally  by  Savings  and  Credit  Cooperatives  (SACCOs),  Village 
Saving  and  Loan  Associations,  etc.  The  remaining  30%  of  the  Ugandan  population  is  not 
served by either formal or informal financial service providers. The study also revealed that 
the  most  commonly  used  source  of  credit  were;  shops  (54%),  friends  (25%)  and  informal 
groups (24%). Only 7% were found to have borrowed from commercial banks while 3% and 
2% were borrowing from MDIs and SACCOs respectively.  
Financial inclusion is a central theme for all of us because most of those in poverty do not 
have access to financial services as already mentioned. Poverty alleviation is a top priority 
for  the  Uganda  Government  and  financial  inclusion  is  an  essential  component  of  the 
country’s  poverty  alleviation  strategy.  It  is  our  hope  that  greater  financial  inclusion  will 
ultimately reduce poverty and inequality. This conference is, therefore, timely for AMFIU to 
regroup  and  discuss  a  contemporary  issue  of  financial  inclusion.  I,  therefore,  thank  the 
management of AMFIU for facilitating this conference.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  allow  me  to  delve  deeper  into  the  pertinent  issues  which  must  be 
taken into account by all financial service providers in order to foster financial inclusion.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
        2 
 Assuring savers of the safety of their member-savings.  
The lack of such assurance can be a great source of suffering to savers whenever 
there  is  collapse  of  any  service  provider.  This  is  mostly  pronounced  among  the 
many  semi-formal  and  informal  service  providers  like  SACCOs  and  Community 
Groups.  Prudential  regulation  and  other  safety  nets  for  service  providers  should 
always  be  in  place  to  reduce  on  this  risk.  In  that  way,  the  country  will  be  able  to 
attract more savers into formal institutions.  
Reducing  lending  risk  and  risk  perceptions  inherent  in  lending  to  key 
productive sectors particularly Agriculture and SMEs.  
While  agriculture  forms  the  backbone  of  the  Ugandan  economy  and  provides 
employment  to  the  majority  of  Ugandans,  there  is  little  evidence  that  credit  is 
churned into this sector in adequate proportions. Exclusion of agriculture in lending 
is indeed exclusion of many people especially in Uganda.  
It is therefore crucial that service providers should design financial products suited 
for  the  agricultural  sector,  i.e.  reasonable  priced  credit  facilities  and  agriculture 
insurance.  Innovation  allows  financial  products  and  services  to  be  customised  to 
those  who  need  it  and  it  is  crucial  for  creating  a  diversity  of  solutions  to  financial 
inclusion.  
The Bank of Uganda is currently implementing an Agricultural Credit Facility set up 
by  the  Government  of  Uganda  in  partnership  with  Commercial  Banks;  Uganda 
Development Bank Ltd, Micro Deposit Taking Institutions and Credit Institutions. The 
facility is for the purpose of providing medium/long term loans to agricultural loans to 
agricultural sector. However, no single MDI has participated in the scheme as the 
bulk of their clientele are small scale farmers requiring loans of a short term nature.  
Expanding outreach  
The cost of locating a financial institution branch in a rural set up where the road 
network  is  poor,  electricity  is  non-existent,  and  the  population  is  so  dispersed  is 
enormous.  It  is  also  expensive  for  savers  who  travel  long  distances  to  go  and 
deposit  small  savings  in  their  accounts.  The  cost  of  credit  administration  and 
borrowing becomes very dire in such situations. It is therefore important to explore 
the use of agents and the new technology such as mobile phone banking and points 
of sale as tools for financial inclusion.  
Harnessing  the  advantages  that  new  technology  offers  may  reduce  the  cost  of 
opening outlets especially in hard-to-bank areas that may initially not be profitable 
for  financial  service  providers.  Technology  will  continue  to  offer  low-cost  solutions 
and opportunities that were never thought about in the past. Service providers need 
to harness these opportunities.  
Promoting alternative banking methodologies  
Methodologies  such  as  group  lending  in  microfinance  and  Islamic  Banking  & 
Finance which use collateral substitutes and other risk-sharing mechanisms that 
are  not  used  by  conventional  bankers  provide  viable  alternatives  that  should  be 
critically assessed. This opportunity should be supported by a flexible (different laws 
and  regulations  for  different  sectors)  and  strong  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework that guarantees safety and soundness of institutions. Innovative financial 
inclusion  works  better  when  a  strong  legitimate  framework  balances  International 
Standards and national conditions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
   Financial literacy and the improved financial capability within the majority of 
the population  
One  of  the  issues  limiting  financial  inclusion  is  paucity  of  information  provided  to 
clients and the lack of a good understanding or interpretation of that information. We 
need  a  national  framework  to  address  financial  literacy  and  financial  consumer 
protection. This framework should assign roles to different stakeholders within the 
financial sector plus providing for coordination among financial service regulators.  
We  should  design  and  enhance  twinning  and  financing  arrangements  with  the 
Ministry of Education and Sports, the National Curriculum Development Centre and 
financial service providers to roll out a Financial Literacy and Financial Consumer 
Protection  program  to  schools,  colleges  and  universities,  building  on  the  recent 
launch  of  the  publication  on  “Towards  an  Effective  Framework  for  Financial 
Literacy and Financial Consumer protection in Uganda by Bank of Uganda”.  
For our part, the BOU has been actively involved in exchanges with the Ministry of Finance 
planning and Economic Development on the regulation of Tier 4 institutions. In addition, the 
Bank has reviewed the Financial Institutions Act (2004) and the Microfinance Deposit-taking 
Institutions Act (2003) to accommodate alternative banking methodologies (Bank assurance, 
and  Islamic  Banking  and  Finance).  The  Bank  has  also  drafted  Consumer  Protection 
Guidelines  for  all  licensed  institutions  and  has,  with  support  from  GIZ,  commissioned  a 
consultancy  to  undertake  a  Regulatory  Diagnostic  to  establish  the  suitability  of  Uganda’s 
financial sector legal framework to branchless banking. The results of this study should result 
into  roll  out  of  branchless  banking  under  a  suitable  regulatory  framework  and  consequent 
reduction of cost of opening outlets in hard-to-bank areas. The Bank has also licensed three 
Mobile money network operators (MNOs), MTN, Airtel and UTL in partnership with Stanbic 
Bank, Standard Chartered Bank and DFCU bank respectively. By end March, the operators 
had  1,968,125  registered  customers  and  in  the  period  January  to  March  2011,  the  total 
number of transactions were 13,220,674 with a total value of Shs.551,010 million. It is our 
belief  that  a  combination  of  the  above  initiatives  will  open  new  opportunities  for  financial 
intermediation and Inclusion in a safe and sound system.  
In  conclusion,  the  quest  for  Financial  Inclusion  should  be  complemented  by  safety  and 
soundness to ensure that gains made in inclusion are not eroded by loss of savings or loss of 
confidence  in  financial  institutions.  The  BOU  will  continue  to  support  formalisation  of 
innovative  approaches  through  improvements  in  regulatory  framework  as  well  as  working 
with other stakeholders. However, unlicensed institutions that take deposits from the general 
public under the guise of member-savings and those intermediating compulsory savings are 
doing so illegally and must stop.  
I also wish to state, as I conclude, that new technology especially in the area of electronic 
money transfer and agency banking are destined to drive most of the future efforts aimed at 
financial inclusion. A lot of care must therefore be taken to build sufficient risk-mitigation and 
regulatory mechanisms that ensure safety of savers’ funds but at the same time promoting 
further advances to avoid stifling technological development.  
With  these  remarks  I  once  again  thank  AMFIU  for  the  foresight  which  led  to  the 
establishment of the AMFIU calendar at which very useful topical issues are discussed. It is 
my ardent hope that the conference will achieve its objectives as set out in the Agenda.  
I thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
