K C Chakrabarty: Beyond Core Banking Solutions (CBS) – fast forward to 
Banking 2.0! 
Address  by  Dr  K  C  Chakrabarty,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Executive Roundtable organised by the Institute for Development and Research in Banking 
Technology (IDRBT) in collaboration with Union Bank of India, Mumbai, 18 February 2011. 
 Assistance provided by Smt Nikhila Koduri in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
1. 
Shri  M  V  Nair,  Chairman  &  Managing  Director,  Union  Bank  of  India,  Shri  B 
Sambamurthy, Director, IDRBT, Shri S S Mundra, Executive Director, Union Bank of India, 
Shri  M  G  Sanghvi,  Executive  Director,  Bank  of  Maharashtra,  senior  bankers,  other 
distinguished guest, ladies and gentlemen. It is a pleasure to be in your midst today at this 
Executive  Roundtable  organised  by  IDRBT  in  association  with  Union  Bank  of  India  on  the 
theme “Beyond Core Banking”. As you may be aware, this is a part of a series of roundtable 
organised by IDRBT in collaboration with banks on the subject and I am happy to have been 
associated with some of them. IDRBT has been doing a commendable job in enlarging the 
role banking technology and research and I do not recall of any other comparable institution 
in the world. Under Mr Sambamurthy’s leadership, in keeping with its mandate, it is moving 
away from transactional areas into more strategic areas and research.  
2. 
The  next  information  revolution  is  well  under  way.  Peter  Drucker  in  the  New 
Information Revolution has said and I quote “The next information revolution is forcing us to 
redefine what business enterprise actually is – the creation of value and wealth.” But it is not 
happening where information scientists, information executives, and the information industry 
in  general  are  looking  for.  It  is  not  a  revolution  in  technology,  machinery,  techniques, 
software,  or  speed.  It  is  a  revolution  in  CONCEPTS-internet,  web  etc.  It  is  age  of  the 
“Prosumer”: producer and consumer of information. This Prosumer is you – a web user who 
creates and uses content and information on the web. So far, for 50 years, the information 
revolution  has  centered  on  data  –  their  collection,  storage,  transmission,  analysis,  and 
presentation. It has centered on the “T” in IT.  
The next information revolution asks two pertinent questions:  
What is the meaning of information, and what is its purpose?  
3. 
And  this  is  leading  rapidly  to  redefining  the  tasks  to  be  done  with  the  help  of 
information, and with it, to redefining the institutions that do these tasks. This holds good for 
banks  also.  My  address  today  would  be  centered  on  the  ways  of  bringing  in  the  focus  of 
banking to a new level which would be based on a “whole new customer service” and the 
significance of a customer-centric strategy. We must understand here that customers want a 
great  banking  service,  tailored  to  their  needs  and  in  a  timeframe  that  works.  I  would  also 
touch  upon  what  are  the  technologies  beyond  core  banking  and  the  business  and 
technological  requirements  of  Financial  Inclusion.  I  would  be  briefly  be  touching  upon  the 
alignment between business and IT and concluding with the recent initiatives taken by the 
RBI in the area of technology.  
Out with the old, in with the new  
4. 
All  of  us  would  agree  that  technology  has  no  longer  remained  just  a  means  for 
automating processes. It has revolutionized every industry in the world by rendering faster 
and cost effective delivery of products and services to customers, who in the normal course 
could not have afforded the same, and at the same time producers of goods and services 
would  remain  viable  and  profitable.  Technology  is  the  surest  and  most  appropriate  way  of 
bringing inclusion in respect of any product and/or service.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Banking services is no different. The major technological innovation in banking was 
5. 
the ATM over 25 years ago, and up until the early 1990s this was the only customer-facing 
technology that existed. Following this came the phone banking, IVR systems, advent of the 
internet,  increasing  complex  database  mining,  and  remote  distribution  channels.  While 
banking and retail financial services are generally considered a traditional business area, the 
fact is that there have been more changes in this sphere in the last 10 to 15 years than in the 
preceding 100 years. If I had told you 15 years ago that Google would be one of the largest 
global brands, you would have said “who”? If 5 years ago, I had told you the total number of 
facebook users today would be greater than the physical population of about half countries in 
the  world,  you  would  have  said  “what”?  In  a  similar  fashion,  it  is  possible  that  some 
enterprising corporate incubator will figure out the customer behaviour secret and construct a 
purpose-built retail bank that would take off like Twitter globally. We are experiencing an age 
where the impact of internet and mobile devices have made the rules in managing delivery 
channels and the mode of reaching customers a “moving target”. How the banks can reach 
this target would be challenge to be addressed by the banks.  
6. 
I would pose a question here: What came first in this chicken and egg argument – 
technology  or  customer  demand  for  technology?  Does  technology  change  customer 
behaviour or is it customer demand that influences technology in banking. In the earlier days, 
it used to be said about banking that: “build it and they will come”. However this will not hold 
well  in  the  present  day.  Technology  should  work  for  the  business  in  its  aim  to  make  its 
products and services relevant and accessible to its customers, instead of a fixed sunk cost 
that sits heavily on a bank’s P&L account. Technology should also not only be looked as a 
cost  cutting  tool  but  as  a  value  creating  opportunity  to  customers  and  through  this  to  the 
organisation.  
7. 
I  would  like  to  talk  to  this  august  group  about  the  increasing  acceptance  of 
technology and innovation in our lives. I would like you to appreciate that while the telephone 
took  approximately  50  years  to  reach  “critical  mass”,  television  took  half  of  that  
(25–35 years), PCs about 12–14 years and, the Internet about just seven years. Ultimately 
now  facebook  and  twitter  are  now  being  adopted  not  in  years  but  in  months.  The  lesson 
learnt here is that as we become more used to technology and innovation, it is taking less 
time to adopt these technologies into our lives, and this further encourages innovation and 
this, increases the impact on business. What I am trying to say here is that banks have less 
time to react and anticipate the impact of such changes on their business unless they deliver 
fast.  
Navigating rapid change  
8. 
Technological advancement enables a broader and inclusive banking sector and in 
the  process,  is  a  key  driver  for  the  sustained  and  inclusive  growth  of  the  economy. 
Technology by itself is not a panacea. But technology has evolved to such an extent that it 
can hold the key to achieving your goals – if banks are willing to accept the changes that 
they will need to make to get there. Banks have implemented Core Banking Solutions (CBS) 
which  marked  a  paradigm  shift  in  more  senses  than  one  and  branch  customers  are  now 
bank customers as they can access their accounts from any branch for defined purposes. It 
was  envisaged  that  the  CBS  would  offer  new  opportunities  for  information  management, 
better customer service and improved risk management. However banks have not been able 
to  reap  the  benefits  of  this  technology  in  terms  of  reduction  in  costs  of  small  value 
transactions, speed with which the transactions are done if both successful and unsuccessful 
transactions  are  considered,  improved  customer  services  and  effective  flow  of  information 
within the banks as also to the regulator. Banks have not gained in terms of efficiency partly 
because  the  much  needed  business  process  re-engineering  was  not  done.  Further,  banks 
have deployed technology for transaction processing and the same has not been explored 
extensively  for  analytical  processing  like  customer  relationship  management  and  decision 
making. Thus, there is a need to take care of what we could not achieve in the first round of 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
technology  implementation  and  think  beyond  CBS.  Supported  by  the  latest  technology, 
banks  would  need  to  identify  new  business  niches,  to  develop  customized  services,  to 
implement  innovative  strategies  and  to  capture  new  market  opportunities.  With  further 
globalization,  consolidation,  deregulation  and  diversification  of  the  financial  industry,  the 
banking sector is set to become even more complex. But successful banks make it simple 
and those who are able to achieve that will be more successful. It is here that the concepts of 
Next  generation  Banking  is  taking  centre  stage.  There  is  a  need  to  fast  forward  to 
Banking 2.0.  
Next generation banking  
9. 
Bill  Gates  has  once  said  “Banking  is  necessary  but  banks  are  not”.  The  next 
generation  banking  should  aim  to  provide  customer-centric  features,  giving  users  an 
extremely personalized experience while at the same time  providing increased intelligence 
and  automation  to  help  banks  sell  appropriate  products  and  services  to  their  customers. 
Changes  in  demography  and  how  banks  reposition  themselves  to  reap  the  advantages  of 
demographic dividend will be a crucial deciding factor for the success of bank. The GenNext 
banks  would  be  providing  life  cycle  wise  products  and  services,  right  from  birth  till  death, 
under one roof. The essential idea is that a relationship once built at birth carries on till death 
and all the products and services are made available under one umbrella. Technologically, 
next  generation  banking  would  mean  several  interconnected  applications  and  flexible 
orchestration, driven by business needs, and without a long intermediation cycle. This would 
call  for  seamless  their  customers.  Changes  in  demography  and  how  banks  reposition 
themselves to reap the advantages of demographic dividend will be a crucial deciding factor 
for the success of bank. The GenNext banks would be providing life cycle wise products and 
services, right from birth till death, under one roof. The essential idea is that a connectivity 
across systems and operating units. It would also demand that all this be achieved with costs 
absolutely  under  control.  The  technology  that  will  support  this  new  world  must  be  able  to 
incorporate all these features and more. Our technology adoption was not customer-centric, 
it was employee-centric. I would like to mention a few illustrative technologies beyond core 
banking that are likely to which can add value to a bank and gain prominence in the near 
future are delineated below:  
Customer Relationship Management: In order to enhance the effectiveness of the various 
channels such as branch banking, mobile banking, internet banking, Banks may consider the 
use  of  a  comprehensive  Sales  Customer  Relationship  Management  (CRM)  solution  which 
enables  the  user  to  access  the  entire  customer  details  and  provides  a  360  degree  view 
across  channels  and  products  and  enhances  service  quality.  This  will  enable  customer 
interactions  across  various  touch  points  (such  as  a  call  or  email)  to  be  captured  on  a 
centralised  single  system.  We  need  to  transit  from  transaction  orientation  to  customer 
orientation.  
Use  of  Data  Analytics  (Business  Intelligence):  Business  intelligence  (BI)  helps  a  bank 
decide  on  various  business  strategies  including  customer  segments,  product  mix,  channel 
mix  etc.  A  good  data  warehouse  can  also  enable  call  center  technologies  like  outbound 
dialing to be used for active marketing and sales channels and not just for transactions. 
Human  Resources  Management:  For  medium  to  large  enterprises,  an  effective  Human 
Resources Management System (HRMS) can bring remarkable efficiencies and handle the 
various needs of the employees. Such systems can also handle the localised requirements 
of banks operating in multiple countries. The demographic dividend alluded to earlier not only 
has implications from customers expectation side but from human resources side as a larger 
pool of talent is potentially available.  
Mobile Banking: The fast-paced growth of consumer mobility has made the mobile phone, a 
channel of choice for last-mile end-user connectivity. The business imperatives of a mobile 
banking platform include:  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
   Mobile presents the lowest per transaction cost for the Bank as compared to other 
channels. 
Push-based  offers  that  can  be  delivered  over-the-air  and  can  result  in  increased 
offtake of services. 
Value  added  services  such  as  Prepaid  mobile  recharge,  funds  transfer  and  bill 
payment can also be enabled.  
Capital Adequacy Framework: In order to meet the requirements of the Capital Adequacy 
framework, Application Systems are available which provide capability to compute the capital 
adequacy  as  per  the  RBI  guidelines  with  Standardized,  Advance  internal  Ratings  Based 
(AIRB), advanced management approach (AMA) for Operations risk and other management 
reporting. Thus, credit risk, market risk and operations risk can be measured, simulated and 
controlled using these systems.  
Alternate Channel (TV Banking): Today, it is imperative to reach Banking services to the 
maximum  number  of  households  and  television  is  an  ubiquitous  medium  in  today’s 
households.  TV  Banking  empowers  TV  viewers  to  access  banking  product/service 
information at the touch of a button.  
Treasury systems: As a key component of a bank’s activities, treasury needs to accorded 
adequate attention in terms of technology solutions. Integrated platforms for dealing with the 
broad  range  of  assets  including  foreign  exchange,  money  market,  fixed  income  and 
derivatives etc. would be of great value. Such systems may cover the range of functionalities 
including  pricing,  booking,  risk  management,  value  at  risk,  limit  control,  confirmation, 
payment and accounting etc. More efficient treasury operations and better controls would be 
the key outcomes of such systems.  
The right mix  
10. 
As institutions in the banking industry adjust to an altered competitive landscape and 
a revised set of priorities, the role of the core system is becoming more important. The new 
era of banking demands a fresh technological approach, as banks must rid themselves of the 
burden of inflexible solutions designed and implemented when the financial world was a very 
different place.  
11. 
As might be expected, well-established operational objectives – such as increasing 
revenues and efficiencies while simultaneously decreasing costs – remain prominent. Here I 
would like to draw a parallel to Darwin’s theory of evolution, as published in his work “The 
Origin  of  Species”  that,  purports  that  populations  evolve  through  a  process  of  natural 
selection, whereby favourable traits become more common and unfavourable traits become 
less  common.  Over  the  time,  this  process  may  result  in  adaptations  for  particular  niches, 
resulting in the emergence of new species. If we apply this theory to banking systems, we 
can  draw  a  number  of  parallels  one  of  them  being  that  unfavourable  technologies  would 
become  extinct,  while  newer,  more  agile  and  flexible  technologies  provide  competitive  
edge – and will ultimately survive the test. The theory of they (customers) needed the bank 
more than the bank needed them (customers) is surely undergoing a transformation.  
Customer imperatives  
I  would  like  to  dwell  on  the  five  customer  imperatives  that  would  drive  the  Next 
The writing on the wall is clear: “keep your customers happy and survive”.  
12. 
Generation banking: 
Channel  improvement:  Banks  would  need  to  develop  a  right  mix  of  assisted  and  self-
service  channels  to  provide  a  rich  unified  and  consistent  banking  experience.  Most  of  the 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
time, customers choose a channel because they do not have a choice. Towards this, banks 
need  to  transform  their  business  with  a  channel  strategy  with  the  idea  that  a  customer’s 
approach to channels is additive not substitutive. This would result in better communication, 
better mobility and better customer insight.  
Service  Accessibility:  Banks  also  have  opportunities  to  incorporate  technologies  which 
would make banking accessible for a broader base of population. By this I mean banks can 
look  at  trends  like  providing  for  talking  ATMs,  provision  of  Braille  statements,  ATMs  with 
Braille keyboards, dedicated service line for customers with hearing or speech impairment, 
setting that allow persons with low vision to customize the internet.  
Customer  serviceability:  You  would  agree  with  me  that  today  customers  can  access 
banking  services  24  hours  a  day,  7  days  a  week  and  they  can  do  so  in  person,  over  the 
phone, online and in some places through the television. The growing customer bases are 
the product of instant gratification. While banks need to balance their service offerings across 
customer segments, they also need to provide a responsive, reliable and competent service 
model which offers a uniform level of information and interaction across various channels.  
Data  Privacy  and  Security:  Data  privacy  is  still  a  relevant  area  of  concern  for  banking 
customers despite technological advances and strong risk management processes within the 
banks  not  only  minimise  the  financial  loss  to  the  customer  but  also  safeguard  emotional 
victimization of customers.  
Simplified  Banking:  It  would  be  more  meaningful  if  banks  would  make  banking 
sophisticated,  yet  simple,  in  terms  of  processes  and  services,  to  enhance  banking 
experience. Providing a simplified yet fully loaded banking experience is the need of the hour 
for banks.  
Financial inclusion with IT  
Business requirements: I would like to emphasise that it is imperative to facilitate 
13. 
opening  new  accounts,  provide  need  based  credit,  remittance  facilities  and  help  promote 
financial  literacy  in  rural  India.  It  is  expected  that  new  technologies  and  business 
correspondents will drive this movement. In the long run, it is expected to cover the economic 
distance between rural and urban India. It is here that technology would play a major role in 
achieving the objectives set out. For all services that entail payments to citizens, the last mile 
interface  is  the  weakest  link.  An  efficient  payments  and  transfers  system  warrants  bank 
connectivity  to  every  individual  and  institution,  including  those  in  remote  rural  areas.  This 
coupled  with  building  a  technological  interface  for  ensuring  this  would  result  in  creating 
wonders for Financial Inclusion.  
Technological  requirements:  Technology  helps  the  financial  institution  to  go 
14. 
where  the  customer  is,  while  playing  an  important  role  in  reducing  the  operating  costs  for 
providing  banking  services,  particularly  in  remote  rural  areas.  Internet  and  mobile 
technologies  have  spread  out  and  are  visible  at  various  levels  of  the  technology  delivery 
chain.  But,  the  challenge  hereon,  in  the  context  of  financial  inclusion,  would  be  to  get  the 
technology  pieces  together  in  a  complete  whole  that  is  viable  and  sustainable.  All  banks 
should accord top priority to provide connectivity to ensure that banking facilities reach all its 
customers ubiquitously.  
Need for a clear strategy and planned approach  
15. 
For a plan to succeed there must be a vision and strategy driving implementation. 
There  is  clearly  an  absence  of  vision  of  how  technology  is  going  to  drive  business  and 
customer relationship. Thus technology adoption in banks is a result of external pressures 
rather  than  a  vision  shared  by  the  bank  staff  percolating  right  down  from  right  up  or  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
corporate vision of the positive externalities that will result. Consequently, this lack of long-
term vision and strategy has impacted the way technology has been utilised.  
Alignment between business and IT  
16. 
The Business-IT Wall is only a figurative wall, but it literally separates the Business 
and  IT  in  most  organizations  today.  The  success  of  all  enterprise  information  initiatives 
requires that this wall be torn down, ending the conflict between the Business and IT, and 
forging a new collaborative union.  
Back office centralization  
17. 
Indian  banks  have  been  on  the  forefront  of  back  office  technology  adoption  – 
successfully harnessing the power of information technology to gain operational and strategic 
advantage.  This  has  been  possible  largely  through  the  adoption  and  upgradation  of 
technology  in  the  back  office  operations.  Computerisation  of  back  office  operations  was 
envisaged  to  release  manpower  for  various  front  office  jobs  to  the  satisfaction  of  the 
customer. Customers were to get better services at lower direct and indirect costs. But this 
has not happened the way it was planned. Banks are still involving a sizeable number of their 
back  office  staff  in  the  preparation  and  submission  of  various  returns.  There  is  an  urgent 
need for building an MIS server to generate returns automatically. In this connection, I would 
like to inform you that the RBI has prepared an approach paper on automated data flow (a 
straight  through  process)  of  information  from  the  core  banking  solution  (CBS)  or  other  IT 
systems  of  commercial  banks  to  the  Reserve  Bank.  The  approach  paper,  inter  alia, 
discusses  the  methodology  to  be  adopted  by  banks  to  classify  themselves  into  a  cluster 
based on its technology and process dimensions. Accordingly, banks have been advised to 
conduct a self-assessment and furnish the estimated timelines for the project.  
Report on information security, electronic banking, technology risk management and 
tackling cyber fraud  
18. 
RBI  has  recently  released  a  report  on  Information  Security,  Electronic  Banking, 
Technology Risk Management and Tackling Cyber Fraud. The Group that has prepared the 
report  has  delved  into  various  issues  arising  out  of  the  use  of  Information  Technology  in 
banks  and  made  its  recommendations.  The  detailed  recommendations  are  comprehensive 
and if adopted by the banks, they would go a long way in minimizing the risks that the banks 
are more often than exposed to. I would like to speak upon some of the issues highlighted in 
the report which have a major bearing on the functioning of banks: 
Bankers need to feel confident that investments in IT are likely to realise value in the 
IT governance  
19. 
enterprise. They should consider these questions regarding their IT:  
 
 
 
 
Gaining  this  understanding  will  enable  them  to  unlock  and  maximise  value  from  these 
investments  and  enhance  their  business  operations.  In  this  regard,  IDRBT  has  already 
prepared  a  model  IT  Governance  framework  which  can  be  emulated  by  banks  for  their 
benefit. This model framework derives inputs from the Business Goals. These inputs are put 
Are we doing the right things?  
Are we doing them the right way?  
Are we getting them done well?  
Are we getting the benefits?  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Indicators  which  can  be 
through a four dimensional inter-linked view of IT as a Function – Strategize, Build, Operate 
and  Assure  (SBOA)  –  aimed  at  delivery  of  the  desired  results  in  terms  of  the  pre-defined 
Performance 
the  evolving 
expectations of the bank’s business. The model suggests the SBOA cycle for the IT Function 
be  brought  under  effective  IT  Governance  through  appropriate  linkages  and  inter-
dependencies. It is for banks to derive benefit from the pioneering work done by IDRBT in 
this regard.  
further  depending  on 
tweaked 
Information security  
20. 
As  the  use  of  critical  IT  systems  becomes  widespread  within  banks,  the  growing 
connectivity between these information systems, the Internet and other infrastructure, create 
opportunities for increasingly sophisticated attacks on such systems. It is therefore essential 
to  ensure  that  any  disruptions  of  critical  information  systems  are  contained  and  managed 
effectively to minimize their impact. The security team for important projects must be best in 
class, and the security solutions must always be cutting edge at all times. Security is widely 
regarded  as  a  hygiene  factor  which  comes  to  fore  only  in  times  of  disaster,  while  in 
organizations that manage security well, the ownership of security vests at the highest levels 
of  governance.  Implementing  security  is  often  considered  a  one-time  activity,  which  is 
effectively discharged when funding approvals are accorded for a technology stack. It is often 
perceived that having a set of information security tools will ensure adequate protection for a 
reasonable  period  of  time.  The  information  security  landscape  is  dynamic  in  nature  and 
techniques that worked at one point may not suffice for that year. Often a regular high level 
review and monitoring framework is not in place, leading to a reactive rather than proactive 
approach to information security.  
Banks may look at IS Audits being conducted periodically, the scope of audits may 
IS audits  
21. 
include:  
Technology review covering all the technology components of the IT projects such as:  
(a) 
(b) 
Ethical hacking: Vulnerability assessment and Penetration testing of the network.  
Application Security: Application security audit to identify known vulnerabilities and 
source code review:  
Design Review: Review the IT architecture from security point of view and identify 
single point of failure.  
(c) 
Process review covering all the process related to security adopted by the IT project.  
Third party review: Review should the security controls deployed by the third parties on the 
Government data/information.  
Business continuity plans  
22. 
If a bank is to survive a disaster, it must select the “right” strategy. Development of 
alternative  Business  Continuity  Plan  strategies  should  be  based  upon  the  outcome  of  the 
business impact analysis.  
Cyber frauds and security  
23. 
Even though the actual value of losses accruing on account of cyber crime in India 
might not be substantial, nearly 39 per cent of these cases are related to banks and financial 
institutions  excluding  those  of  the  government.  The  cyber  criminals  find  banks  to  be  a 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
lucrative  target  for  their  ingenuity.  Instances  of  Credit-card  fraud  have  become  common 
given the growing popularity of credit card transactions, Internet banking and ATMs. As of 
now, the cyber criminals seem to be a few clicks ahead of cyber-crime sleuths. This is where 
the banks may need to take preventive action.  
Fraud management  
24. 
Frauds  directly  impact  the  bottom  line,  hence  it  would  be  imperative  that  banks 
combat them effectively. If the Business Intelligence framework unifies various data sources, 
it  would  be  possible  to  mine  the  data,  detect  suspicious  transactions  on  different  online 
channels  and  suggest  an  appropriate  action.  Therefore,  banks  need  to  put  in  place 
appropriate  policies  and  systems.  In  this  era  of  technology,  even  small  suspicious 
transactions cannot be ignored as it can have larger implications.  
Conclusion  
25. 
I would like to conclude by adding that the long term success of any bank cannot be 
achieved without the development of new business ideas, innovative products and services 
and intense focus on customer retention. Banks have to instil in their DNA the enablement of 
a positive and consistent customer experience that can transform them into trusted advisers. 
At no time in banking history has this been more important. Banks have adopted technology 
but the benefit of technology has not percolated in terms of cost, speed and convenience. 
The banks should move towards empowering the present day customers of information or 
digital  age  by  greater  choice,  greater  access,  and  better,  faster,  more  efficient  modes  of 
delivery  and  service.  Customers  are  not  going  back  to  the  old  ways  of  banking.  They  are 
moving  forward.  If  the  banks  do  not  complement  their  speed,  the  customers  will  pass  by. 
Things move so fast technologically that you cannot wait until a trend is three years into its 
cycle to adapt. Because by three years into the adoption cycle, the next big thing will already 
on its way. Therefore I say GET GOING, INNOVATE and EXPERIMENT! 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
