Manuel Sánchez: Systemic risk – policy challenges 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  MFI 
International Harper Lecture, Milton Friedman Institute, Mexico City, 11 May 2011.  
 It  is  a  pleasure  and  an  honor  to  participate  in  this  panel  of  the  MFI  International  Harper 
Lecture.  For  me,  this  conference  is  particularly  relevant  as  the  key  note  speaker  is 
distinguished economist, Lars Peter Hansen, my former professor, a member of my thesis 
committee and a good friend. As in the days when I took courses from Lars at the University 
of Chicago, today I have learned a lot from his interesting presentation on systemic risk.  
I would like to comment on some policy challenges related to systemic risk, hoping that they 
may complement Lars’ deep empirical insights on this issue. In my remarks, I will emphasize 
three points: first, that the available definitions of systemic risk are dependent on judgment in 
an environment of uncertainty; second, that we need a deeper understanding of the causes 
of  systemic  risk,  particularly  regarding  the  distinction  between  root  factors  and  symptoms; 
and third, that policy measures should be clearly designed to mitigate the causes of systemic 
risk. I would like to mention that these comments are entirely my own and do not necessarily 
reflect those of the Bank of Mexico.  
The notion of systemic risk  
Let  me  begin  by  recognizing  that  there  is  no  widely  accepted  definition  of  systemic  risk. 
However, any overview of research and policy reports in this area uncovers a frequently held 
notion of systemic risk as the possibility of a disruption affecting the normal functioning of the 
financial system. 
There are at least three noteworthy elements of this common concept. One is the reference 
to  the  financial  system.  This  definition  implies  a  potentially  large  scope,  as  the  referred 
system can comprise all financial intermediaries, regulated and unregulated; the markets of 
all  financial  assets;  the  infrastructure  that  the  financial  system  uses  to  perform  its  tasks, 
including payments and settlements; and, the regulatory framework.  
The second element is the allusion to normal functioning. The activities of any well operating 
financial  system  are  many,  but  they  can  be  summarized  as  intermediating  payments, 
converting savings into lending usually through maturity transformation, and managing risk. 
However, to my knowledge, there are no clear indicators of what normal functioning is meant 
to be, which makes this qualification subjective, as it calls for the judgment of the observer or 
the policy maker.  
For  instance,  do  stock-market  crashes  or  sudden  and  substantial  currency  depreciations 
constitute interruptions to normal functioning? What must be the depth of these adjustments 
in order to consider them deviations from normality? When does a “credit crunch” become 
disruptive? Unfortunately, neither economics nor experience gives an unequivocal answer to 
these questions. Still, any answer has necessarily policy implications.  
The subjective characteristic of this notion does not disappear by resorting to the opposite 
concept of financial stability. Here again, although there is no universal definition, stability is 
usually interpreted as a situation in which the financial system is resilient to disturbances that 
may threaten its normal functioning. In both concepts, sometimes disruptions are meant to 
be turbulences that may have a substantial negative impact on the real economy. Yet, this 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
qualification  only  translates  the  vagueness  from  one  term  to  another  –  i.e.,  when  is  the 
impact substantial? – maintaining the nature of the assessment subjective.1 
The third element is the reference to a probabilistic world, as risk refers to the possibility of 
incurring in a negative outcome. For example, The Oxford English Dictionary defines risk as 
“the  possibility  of  loss,  injury,  or  other  adverse  or  unwelcome  circumstance;  a  chance  or 
situation  involving  such  a  possibility”.  However,  any  risk  definition  assumes  all  possible 
outcomes and their associated probabilities as known. As the unprecedented nature of the 
recent global crisis reminded us, prior knowledge of the probability distribution of the different 
kinds and degrees of disruptions can easily be incomplete. Hence, some potential negative 
events may be truly “unknown unknowns” and fall into the realm of uncertainly, not risk, as 
defined by Knight. In uncertainty, not all possible outcomes and their associated probabilities 
are known.2 
The conclusion from this analysis is that available concepts of systemic risk are vague and 
too wide to be operationally useful. If any policy framework is to be designed and applied in a 
meaningful way to counteract systemic risk we need to narrow this concept and make it more 
precise.  
In this sense, precision implies measurability. As correctly stated by Lars Hansen, unless we 
are able to measure systemic risk objectively, quantitatively, and regularly, it is impossible to 
determine  the  appropriate  trade-off  between  such  risk  and  its  rewards  and,  from  a  policy 
perspective and social welfare objective, how best to contain it. Lars’ concern regarding the 
challenges  of  monitoring  these  risks  in  terms  of  modeling,  measurement  and  data 
accessibility is of prime relevance.3 
Sources of systemic risk  
While the notion of systemic risk is vague, our knowledge about its possible causes is also 
limited.  The  inherent  vulnerabilities  of  the  financial  system  are  relatively  well  understood. 
Examples are the term mismatches and leverage of individual financial intermediaries, and 
the imperfect information about risk exposure and soundness of particular banks and assets. 
Imperfect  information  and  the  interconnectedness  of  the  different  agents  can  transform 
individual  vulnerabilities  into  systemic  weakness.  It  is  possible  that  a  difficulty  occurring  in 
one component of the system could be extended to other elements. For example, economic 
agents interact with each other and an asset in one institution may be a liability in another, 
giving  rise  to  interdependence  and  to  a  counterparty  risk.  Financial  institutions,  such  as 
banks,  usually  carry  out  analogous  transactions  that  could  also  lead  to  similar  risk 
exposures.  
Instability is often thought to originate from a shock, triggered by a piece of information or 
rumors that may lead to a loss of confidence and panic. For instance, if a given intermediary 
is in trouble, there could be certain worries, derived from incomplete information, about the 
financial shape of other intermediaries. Although there may be cases of flawed news, usually 
this kind of shocks uncovers truly high risk exposures on the part of the intermediaries and 
participants  being  questioned.  Furthermore,  the  unknown  buildup  of  imbalances  within  the 
                                                 
1   For example, the Riksbank defines “systemic risk” as the risk that a disruption will occur in the financial system 
that could lead to substantial cost for society, and “financial stability” as a situation where the financial system 
can maintain its basic functions and has resilience to disruptions that threaten these functions. See Sveriges 
Riksbank, The Riksbank and Financial Stability 2010, December. 
2   See Knight, F. H. (1921). Risk, Uncertainty, and Profit. Boston, MA: Hart, Schaffner & Marx; Houghton Mifflin 
Co. 
3   See  Brunnermeier,  M.,  L.P.  Hansen,  A.  Kashyap,  A.  Krishnamurthy  and  A.  W.  Lo.  (2010).  “Modeling  and 
Measuring Systemic Risk”, October 15. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
system, like maturity mismatches and excessive leverage, might become evident once such 
rumors begin to affect the financial intermediaries.  
The  design  of  policy  measures  to  strengthen  the  financial  system  against  systemic  risk 
requires  identifying  the  root  causes  of  the  excessive  risk  taking  that  typically  precedes 
financial  disruptions.  This  diagnosis  is  obscured  because  symptoms,  such  as  poor  credit 
evaluation by rating agencies and massive securitization, are often mistaken for causes.  
In  order  to  find  causes,  economics  suggests  searching  for  incentives.  In  this  attempt,  it  is 
convenient  to  begin  by  verifying  that  no  government  policies  induce  excessive  risk 
exposures. Factors with possibly unintended consequences may include policies to maintain 
low  interest  rates  for  too  long;  measures  to  promote  borrowing  under  artificially  favorable 
conditions,  perhaps  in  the  pursuit  of  social  objectives  such  as  home  ownership;  and, 
government’s  guarantees  for  bailing  out  private  risk  exposures.  These  policies  have  the 
potential of promoting moral hazard.  
In particular, when a market or infrastructure is capable of suffering difficulties that may lead 
to a disruption in the financial system, they are classified as “important”. One problem with 
this categorization is that the possible systemic importance of institutions varies in time; an 
entity  which  is  not  considered  systemic  today  may  become  one  in  the  future.  However,  a 
deeper limitation of such classification is that it may exacerbate the risk taking of the agents 
involved, if they know in advance that, in case of difficulties, the government will protect them 
against losses.  
Two factors currently stressed as important contributors to the emergence or aggravation of 
the 
risk.  However, 
notwithstanding their importance, it is not clear if they can be considered root causes of the 
crisis.  
Global  imbalances  come  from  the  hypothesis  that  a  “saving  glut”  during  the  years  prior  to 
2007 caused interest rates to fall in the United States, thus promoting excessive risk taking 
on  the  part  of  economic  agents.  The  existence  of  a  “saving  glut”  has  been  debated. 
Arguments against it include historically low saving rates during those years and a possible 
negative effect from expansionary monetary policy on the U.S. low saving rate. Additionally, 
one  must  recognize  the  fact  that  open  economies  naturally  exhibit  current  account 
imbalances as a reflection of investment opportunities and saving motives.4  
Nevertheless, while their relevance is still under debate, somehow global imbalances have 
taken a prominent role in risk diagnosis, ranging from threats to the world economic growth 
to the eventual emergence of a financial crisis. Consequently, the need for balancing current 
accounts in the world has gained ample acceptance. A potential dangerous outcome of this 
prescription  is  a  movement  toward  protectionism  and  the  implementation  of  a  variety  of 
distortive  measures.  Some  of  this  has  been  evidenced  in  the  capital  controls  imposed  by 
some emerging economies experiencing currency appreciation.5 
As for sovereign risk, the unsustainable path of certain euro member countries’ public debt 
has threatened the stability of the European Monetary Union (EMU). The main reason is that 
banks  and  other  financial  institutions  are  substantial  holders  of  the  debt  of  troubled 
governments,  and  the  associated  default  probabilities  implicit  in  market  debt  prices  are 
already too high and rising.  
imbalances  and  sovereign 
financial  crisis  are  global 
recent 
                                                 
4   For  opposing  views,  see  Bernanke,  B.S.  (2005).  “The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account 
Deficit.” Remarks at the Sandridge Lecture, Virginia Association of Economics, Richmond, Virginia, March 10; 
and, Taylor, J. B. (2009). Getting Off Track. Hoover Institution Press. 
5   For example, Mervyn King has warned that if an agreement on how to reduce imbalances is not reached, at 
best, there will be a weak recovery; at worst, the seeds of the next financial crisis will be sown; see King, M. 
(2011). “Global Imbalances: the Perspective of the Bank of England”, February. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
While there has likely been a negative effect from sovereign to systemic risk, one should not 
exclude  causation  in  the  other  direction.  Among  other  factors,  financial  institutions  took 
considerable  exposure  on  the  public  debt  from  different  countries  because  they  rated  all 
EMU  sovereign  issuers  virtually  risk-free.  Apparently,  they  assumed  that  in  case  of 
difficulties, fiscally strong governments would bail out the weak ones, as it has been the case 
until now.  
individual 
Policy measures  
In light of the limited knowledge about the possible taxonomies of systemic risk, economic 
policy has to be both preventive and reactive to problems. In both cases, it is preferable not 
to  introduce  additional uncertainty. Hence,  to  the  extent  possible,  it  is  advisable  to  rely  on 
pre-announced rules rather than discretion.  
On the preemptive front, any design should begin by eliminating incentives for excessive risk 
taking  that  might  stem  from  economic  policy  itself.  Once  this  is  cleared,  the  regulatory 
framework  should  be  strengthened  to  mitigate  the  built-in  fragilities  of  the  financial  system 
and further align private incentives toward prudent risk taking.  
For 
liquidity  requirements  are 
intermediaries,  stringent  capitalization  and 
necessary. Also, as the crisis revealed, systemic risk is a super-additive phenomenon where 
the risk of the system is greater than the sum of risk of its parts. Therefore, these standards 
should  be  complemented  with  macro  prudential  regulation.  For  example,  regulatory 
standards can be proportional to the institution’s potential contribution to estimated systemic 
risk and may include also countercyclical buffers such as those incorporated in the Basel III 
Accord. Additionally, public information about markets and institutions should be enhanced.  
On  the  reactive  front,  authorities  face  the  dual  challenge  of  trying  to  opportunely  detect 
possible  systemic  problems  and,  if  they  arise,  attempt  to  neutralize  them,  without 
suppressing market discipline. Examples of macro prudential policy actions are lower loan-
to-value  ratios,  securitization  restrictions,  and  more  stringent  capital  and 
liquidity 
requirements.  It  is  convenient  that  these  measures  deal  with  the  problem  of  systemic  risk 
and not with other objectives, such as targeting certain values of a currency exchange rate, 
under the guise of a macro prudential approach.  
A  major  challenge  in  accomplishing  this  task  is  the  timely  identification  of  systemic  crisis 
signs. One should remember that recurrence of financial crises has been the norm and many 
of  them  have  come  as  a  surprise  to  supervisors,  as  it  dramatically  was  the  case  with  the 
recent financial debacle. Hence, it is important to avoid excessive expectations about what 
macro prudential policy can achieve, since this comfort could lead to distortive measures and 
moral hazard.  
The final role refers to crisis management. This includes supplying liquidity on good collateral 
at penalty rates, according to the prescription of Bagehot, and the design and implementation 
of  expedient  resolution  mechanisms, 
financial 
institutions.6 
including  “living  wills”, 
insolvent 
for 
Concluding remarks  
Preventing and counteracting systemic risk poses important challenges for policy making. A 
more specific notion of systemic risk is much needed and, as put by Lars Hansen, leaving 
the concept vague may become a justification for regulatory discretion. Also, understanding 
                                                 
6   See Bagehot, W. (1873). Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market. E. Johnstone; Hartley Withers, 
eds. London: Henry S. King and Co. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the sources of systemic risk is essential. Certainly, it would be quite inconvenient to combat a 
phenomenon  that  is  not  a  root  cause  of  systemic  risk,  generating  inefficiencies  such  as 
protectionism. Finally, policy measures must avoid producing inadequate incentives and be 
both  preventive  and  reactive,  without  removing  the  market  discipline  that  is  necessary  for 
prudent risk taking. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
