Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa – economist, policy-
maker, citizen in search of European unity 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  a  Conference  in  memory  of  Tommaso  Padoa-Schioppa,  European  University 
Institute, Badia Fiesolana, 28 January 2011. 
 Francesco  Papadia  coordinated  the  preparation  of  the  speech  with  contributions  by  Ignazio  Angeloni,  Ettore 
Dorrucci,  Mauro  Grande,  Gabriel  Glöckler,  Francesco  Mongelli,  Francesco  Papadia,  Pierre  Petit,  Massimo 
Rostagno, Daniela Russo, Pierre van der Haegen, Chiara Zilioli. 
It  is  an  honour  for  me  to  deliver  this  speech  today  in  honour  and  memory  of  Tommaso 
Padoa-Schioppa. This speech has been prepared by a group of colleagues who immediately 
volunteered  to  contribute  as  soon  as  they  learned  that  I  had  been  invited  to  give  such  a 
speech.  They  were  colleagues  of  Tommaso  during  his  time  at  the  ECB  and  I  am  very 
pleased to be their porte-parole today. 
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa had a very rich and complex personality, which I can’t sum up in 
a few minutes or a few paragraphs. So I’ll talk about him as an economist, a policy-maker 
and  a  citizen.  The  leitmotif  in  all  these  areas  of  Tommaso’s  life  was  a  Kantian  quest  for 
European unity, a mission to which he dedicated his professional and private life.  
The economist 
If there is one trait that stands out throughout Tommaso’s career, spans all his activities and 
engagements, all his speeches and books, it is the energy and determination with which he 
pursued his convictions and causes. Once Tommaso started “owning” a new idea, he would 
relentlessly seek out all its implications and communicate it to all possible fora and audiences 
until  the  impossible  became  possible,  and  the  inconceivable  started  making  sense.  He 
always did so with rigour, but also with a very personal flair; some called it the “TPS style”. 
Tommaso  defined  himself  as  a  “practitioner”,  a  policy-maker,  but  his  action  was  always 
deeply  and  unambiguously  grounded  in  economic  thought.  At  the  same  time,  he  shared 
Keynes’  view  that  practical  men  are  often  slaves  of  some  defunct  economist.  Even  in  his 
early years as an economist, he identified those risks of enslavement and then sought to free 
himself from them by way of his life-long policy engagement: the dichotomy between general 
economic equilibrium theory and monetary theory; the dichotomy between Nationalökonomie 
and  international  economy;  and  the  dichotomy  between  economic  theory  and  institutions.1 
He  always  aspired  to  bring  these  dichotomies  to  an  end,  by  properly  integrating  the 
monetary, international and institutional dimensions into his assessment of economic policy. 
I specifically wish to mention two ideas here, two strands of economic literature: the theory of 
optimum currency areas and the impossible trinity proposition. But he was no slave to them; 
rather, he mastered and reinterpreted them, and turned them into food for thought. 
Mundell’s  theory  of  optimum  currency  areas  offered  a  critique  of  the  overlap  between 
“money” and “state”, a link which, in the early 1960s was still considered as immutable and 
irreversible. While a similar critique had led to Friedrich Hayek’s idea of the privatisation of 
money, supra-nationalisation was Mundell’s response. Tommaso’s great insight was that this 
second avenue would make it possible to improve the Treaty of Rome and to move beyond 
                                                 
1  See “Moneta, Commercio, Istituzioni: Esperienza e Prospettive della Costruzione Europea” – Lectio Doctoralis 
di Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa per il conferimento della Laurea Honoris Causa in Economia Internazionale del 
Commercio e dei Mercati Valutari (Trieste, 19 November 1999). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
it, thus setting the conceptual foundations for the Treaty of Maastricht. Monetary Union was 
not  seen,  however,  as  an  end  in  itself,  but  rather  as  a  dynamic  process  that  would  prove 
sustainable  only  if  policy  behaviours  and  economic  configurations  in  Europe  remained 
consistent  with  the  prescriptions  contained  in  the  theory  of  optimum  currency  areas.  I  will 
come back to this issue when discussing Tommaso’s legacy.  
The  impossible  trinity  proposition,  a  corollary  of  the  Mundell-Fleming  model,  stated  that  a 
group of countries cannot simultaneously keep a fixed exchange rate, pursue autonomous 
monetary policies, and maintain full capital mobility: in pursuing any two of these goals, the 
third one must be necessarily given up. This raised a major intellectual and policy challenge 
for  European  countries  trying  to  strengthen  economic  cooperation  after  the  Second  World 
War: it seemed simply inconceivable to jettison any of the three goals.  
Tommaso realised that financial repression would have provided only a temporary response 
to this question. The accomplishment, in the early 1990s, of the central goal set down in the 
Treaty  of  Rome  –  a  European  common  market,  implying  free  trade  and  free  capital 
movement  –  called  for  enhanced,  and  eventually  fixed,  exchange  rate  stability  across 
member  countries.  This  is  because  exchange  rate  volatility,  coupled  with  systematic 
devaluation  of  a  group  of  currencies  against  other  currencies,  would  have  eventually 
impaired  the  very  functioning  of  the  common  market,  a  theme  to  which  I  will  return  later. 
Indeed, the whole history of European monetary cooperation between the collapse of Bretton 
Woods and the early 1990s is marked by attempts to maintain fixed exchange rates. These 
attempts were periodically punctuated by major tensions between national currencies (with 
consequent clashes between Member States) each time a country was forced (or tempted) 
to devalue or even abandon the common fixed exchange rate arrangement. In this context, 
the  economically  most  coherent  way  to  reconcile  intra-regional  free  trade  and  free  capital 
movement  with  fixed  exchange  rates  would  have  been  for  European  countries  to  adopt  a 
single monetary policy and therefore a single currency floating against the rest of the world. 
This was, in Tommaso’s view, the right approach to the solution of the impossible trinity once 
the  objective  of  the  Single  Market  had  been  attained  (Figure  1).  And  indeed  Tommaso 
preferred  to  talk  about  an  “inconsistent  quartet”  (quartetto  inconciliabile),  which  included  a 
fourth element, free trade, in order to take full account of the European context. In the early 
1980s these ideas were still pioneering and visionary, but we all know how influential they 
have become in shaping the history of our continent, to the extent that they have transformed 
themselves from vision into reality. 
Tommaso Padoa-Schioppa’s view of the impossible trinity proposition 
Figure 1 
2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
While Tommaso saw a role for exchange rate adjustments at global level, he was very well 
aware that, to avoid imbalances accumulating and crises – even systemic crises – breaking 
out,  sovereign  countries  have  to  pay  proper  attention  to  the  negative  externalities  of  their 
domestic  policies  and  to  enhance  their  cooperation,  also  as  members  of  stronger 
international  institutions  and  fora.  Growing  economic  and  financial  interdependence  led,  in 
his view, to the identification of public goods not only at country or regional level but also at 
world  level.  A  couple  of  examples  would  be  global  financial  stability  or  a  multilateral  trade 
system.  As  I  will  further  elaborate  below,  he  was  no  fan  of  benign  neglect  and  of  leaving 
exchange  rates  solely  in  the  hands  of  the  market.  Once  again,  we  can  see  today  how 
compatible his view of the world is with the current international situation. 
Tommaso’s  call  for  greater  cooperation  and  supranationality  in  certain  areas  of  policy- 
making was fascinatingly complemented by his full belief in the principle of subsidiarity, also 
enshrined in the Maastricht Treaty, according to which each policy should be conducted by 
the  lowest  and  least  centralised  competent  authority  possible.  From  this  perspective,  the 
ideas of cooperation and supranationality were understood as economic necessities, not as 
abstract political stereotypes.  
Not  long  ago  Tommaso  became  actively  involved  in  an  initiative  of  the  Triffin  International 
Foundation,  which  is  based  in  Louvain-la-Neuve.  Last  February  he  delivered  a  speech 
entitled  “The  Ghost  of  Bancor”.  Bancor  was  a  far  more  ominous  presence  than  Il 
Commendatore Don Pedro who drags Don Giovanni to hell in Mozart’s opera of the same 
name. His aim in that speech was to revisit the arguments proposed by J.M. Keynes in 1943 
for  a  new  international  monetary  system  and  eventually  a  world  currency  called  Bancor. 
Tommaso  argued  that  the  “Triffin  dilemma”  is  still  unresolved:  if  the  main  international 
standard  and  reserve  currency  is  a  national  currency  there  is  an  insurmountable 
inconsistency between domestic needs (in the short term), and global policy needs (in the 
long  term).  This  inconsistency  had  led,  over  time,  to  the  collapse  of  the  Bretton  Woods 
system  in  the  late  1960s  and  early  1970s.  It was  not  resolved  either  under  the US  dollar-
based non-system that took its place: a market-led system without a clear anchor. Over the 
last 10–15 years this has been referred to as Bretton Woods II. However, Tommaso noted 
that “exchange rates were determined by a bizarre combination of market behaviour and of 
policy actions vis-à-vis the dollar. Floating European currencies, including the euro, were at 
the  mercy  of  the  waves  of  a  market  prone  to  prolonged  misalignments.  Asian  currencies 
were largely sheltered from the vagaries of the market and subjected to intense management 
by  the  national  authorities”.  Thus,  the  illusion  of  flexible  exchange  rates  was  exposed  yet 
again:  incidentally,  this  is  another  long-lasting  preoccupation  of  Tommaso  (like  the 
“impossible trinity” I mentioned previously).  
Now,  coming  closer  to  our  current  situation  and  challenges,  Tommaso  noted  that,  while  a 
consensus has emerged about some of the main factors at the roots of the present crisis – 
such  as  the  growing  and  persistent  current  account  imbalances,  inadequacies  in  financial 
regulations  and  supervision,  the  systemic  risk  generated  by  excessive  leverage  combined 
with risky financial products, and so on –, there’s a lack of recognition about the fundamental 
flaws in the present monetary (non-) arrangements. He quoted Herbert Stein: “That which is 
unsustainable  comes  to  an  end”.  Tommaso  also  warned  that  “when  an  unsustainable 
process ‘comes to an end’, variations in prices and quantities are of a magnitude and drama 
incomparably greater than one sees in the healthy conduct of economic life on a daily basis”. 
The “end”, the breaking point, often occurs at an unexpected moment and in an unexpected 
way. It’s a concept that is reminiscent of the Minsky moment.  
“It  is  easy  to  argue  today  that  if  the  monetary  regime  had  sounded  the  alarm  bell  and 
triggered  an  adjustment  in  time,  the  crisis  would  have  been  either  averted  or,  at  the  very 
least,  mitigated.”  Instead,  “monetary  oversight  headquarters’  alarm  systems  and  internal 
adjustment  mechanisms  were  switched  off”.  To  their  credit,  “the  G7  and  the  international 
institutions kept pointing out year after year that the imbalances were unsustainable. Yet they 
could do nothing to correct them or to prevent the crisis because they had neither the tools 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
nor the authority to force the use of domestic measures to address the problem”. Moreover, 
“there  is  no  way  to  get  round  the  requirement  of  a  policy  framework  anchoring  the  global 
standard to an objective of global stability”.2 
Thus, the ghost of Bancor “has returned to claim his due”. At the least, we need a common 
exchange  rate  mechanism  “in  which  every  country,  bar  none,  agrees  to  shoulder  its 
responsibility and to enter into a commitment with the other countries regarding its currency’s 
external value; and in which the exchange rate is determined by the interaction between the 
market and economic policy”. This would provide the foundations for a genuine international 
monetary order.  
But  it  will  not  be  easy  to  achieve  this  goal,  warned  Tommaso,  as  “the  elements  that  are 
helping to keep this disorder alive are robust political and economic interests but also, and 
above all, the prevailing practical and intellectual inertia. The thoughts that I have expounded 
to you here tonight are an invitation to overcome that inertia.”  
The policy-maker  
Tommaso joined the Banca d’Italia in 1968. This was not an obvious decision for someone 
with  his  background:  an  affluent  and  cultivated  family  from  the  north  of  Italy.  This  choice 
clearly  reflected  a  wish  to  serve  his  country  rather  than  pursue  personal  enrichment.  The 
Banca d’Italia, with its tradition of technical expertise and high standards of public service, 
was the obvious place to go. Yet in that choice there was not only a drive to do something 
but also an urge to understand. That same urge led him to give all those who attended the 
conference  held  to  mark  his  leaving  the  European  Central  Bank  a  small  bookmark  with  a 
drawing by Goya of an old man with the motto “Aun aprendo”, or “still learning”.  
The need to combine doing and understanding was strong for a young economist working in 
the research department of the Banca d’Italia at the end of the 1960s. The Bretton Woods 
system, which had given Italy a solid monetary framework, was starting to show the signs of 
wear, while the growth miracle of the Italian economy was approaching its limits. The country 
clearly had problems reacting to the changing times with an appropriate economic policy: the 
budgetary  policy  started  to  show  the  lack  of  control  that  would  beset  it  for  decades 
afterwards.  Monetary  policy,  which  was  about  to  lose  its  exchange  rate  anchoring  to  the 
dollar, had difficulties finding an alternative anchor. Tommaso saw in the efforts to establish a 
European monetary order not only a chance to make decisive progress towards the objective 
of a unified Europe but also an opportunity to help Italy get out of its difficulties in managing 
the  economy  in  a  sound  and  stability-oriented  manner.  Hence  his  support  for  Italy’s 
membership of the European Monetary System (EMS), even against those who argued, with 
some reason, that Italy would have difficulty in complying with the exchange rate constraints 
of the EMS. He was, of course, aware of this, yet he did not want such an endeavour to start 
without  Italian  participation.  Moreover,  he  believed  that  the  so-called  “monetarist”  view  – 
according to which taking decisions on the exchange rate, and a fortiori moving towards a 
common currency would have effects on the conduct of monetary policy and on the economy 
–  reflected  the  reality  better  than  the  so-called  “economist”  view,  according  to  which 
exchange rate constraints and, again a fortiori, a common currency can only be the climax of 
a perfect convergence of monetary policy and economic conditions. 
These same ideas informed his action when he served at the European Commission from 
1979  to  1983,  the  early  years  of  the  European  Monetary  System.  There  again  he  was 
confronted with an apparent trade-off between national and European forces and between 
                                                 
2  From The Ghost of Bancor: the Economic Crisis and Global Monetary Disorder, speech given by Tommaso 
Padoa-Schioppa, Louvain-la-Neuve, 25 February 2010. See 
http://www.uclouvain.be/cps/ucl/doc/triffin/documents/TPS_EN_finale_clean.pdf 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
monetary stability and a European monetary project. All his efforts, again as an economist 
and as a policy-maker, were devoted to solving these tensions and taking them in a single 
direction – towards a European monetary endeavour that would bring monetary stability. 
Tommaso followed the same course when he returned to the Banca d’Italia in 1984, even if 
he had then to deal more directly with the continuing difficulty of Italian governance to deliver 
sound and stability-oriented macro policies, notwithstanding the efforts of the Banca d’Italia, 
where he was a member of the Board.  
While  actively  aiming  to  bring  monetary  stability  to  Italy  and  to  move  towards  monetary 
unification  in  Europe,  Tommaso  started  working  in  payment  systems  –  an  apparently 
obscure  area  of  work.  Before  he  took  on  responsibilities  in  this  area  at  the  Banca  d’Italia, 
payment  systems  were  not  considered  an  independent  (and  even  less  core)  function  of 
central banks. The activities carried out by payment system departments today largely did 
not exist at that time and to some extent were done by IT departments and back offices. 
Tommaso  provided  the  conceptual  and  economic  rationale  for  a  greater  involvement  by 
central banks in this area. A smooth functioning of payment systems is essential to ensure 
that  money  performs  one  of  its  key  functions,  being  a  “means  of  exchange”.  Ensuring  an 
adequate means of exchange (i.e. confidence in the currency and its adequate and effective 
circulation) is one reason why central banks were originally established. Central bank money 
is  indeed  universally  recognised  as  the  safest  mean  of  exchange  and  therefore  as  the 
ultimate means to discharge financial obligations. Smooth functioning of payment systems is 
also crucial for the effective conduct of monetary policy and financial stability. 
Between 1985 and 1991, Tommaso promoted and developed in Italy all the components of 
an efficient and sound payment system. The action plans were described in two publications 
issued by the Banca d’Italia. Led by Tommaso, the Banca d’Italia played a central role as an 
operator of settlement facilities, regulator and catalyst. 
As  an  operator,  the  Banca  d’Italia  launched  the  Italian  RTGS  system  (Birel)  for  interbank 
money market uncollateralised transactions and the settlement system for Italian government 
bonds. As a catalyst, the Banca d’Italia ensured cooperation within the banking industry that 
led to the creation of the other necessary infrastructure for large-value, retail and securities 
transactions.  As  a  regulator,  the  Bank  created  the  conditions  for  “oversight”  of  the 
infrastructure.  And  indeed  Tommaso  was  the  first  person  to  use  the  word  “oversight”  to 
describe  the  function  to  be  conducted  for  payment  systems,  as  opposed  to  “(banking) 
supervision”.  
These activities were launched by Tommaso before the Banca d’Italia was assigned formal 
specific statutory competence in this field. “The function begets the organ and leads to the 
establishment  of  the  legal  basis”  as  he  used  to  say.  With  hindsight,  it’s  evident  that  what 
Tommaso did in Italy laid the foundations for the development of an analogous process at 
European level. 
His  view  was  that  each  integrated  currency  area  should  have  its  own  “domestic” 
infrastructure.  Tommaso  introduced  a  definition  of  “domestic”  that  went  beyond  national 
borders and covered the whole euro area.  
As at the Banca d’Italia, almost everything Tommaso did at the European Central Bank in the 
field of payment systems was innovative. Indeed he developed a paradigm of model for the 
operational features that each integrated monetary area should have, and continuously and 
consistently pursued their implementation.  
Tommaso  once  again  had  a  chance  to  be  involved  more  actively  in  policy-making  at 
European level when he acted as secretary for the Delors Committee when it prepared the 
blueprint for the single currency in 1987–89. Tommaso was not a member of the Committee 
and,  as  such,  he  was  not  supposed  to  intervene  during  the  meetings,  but  his  personal 
relations  with  Jacques Delors  and with  Carlo  Azeglio  Ciampi,  then  Governor  of  the  Banca 
d’Italia and a member of the Committee, as well as his role as “rapporteur” allowed him to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
greatly  influence  the  deliberations.  That  was  an  excellent  opportunity  to  combine  his  two 
aspirations:  a  stable  currency  but  also  one  that  would  powerfully  contribute  to  European 
Union. 
In  the  1989–91  negotiations  that  led  to  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  Tommaso  fought  hard  to 
maintain the momentum towards monetary union which had been established by the Delors 
Committee.  Indeed,  he  feared  that  the  decision  to  establish  a  temporary  institution,  the 
European  Monetary  Institute,  instead  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  would  be  a  critical 
mistake, also considering that in the meantime in a number of countries, again including Italy, 
policies were not sufficiently stability-oriented.  
We know the story since then: the project of monetary unification came close to failure with 
the  repeated  exchange  rate  crises in  the  first  half  of  the  1990s.  But  Europe’s  efforts  in its 
historical endeavour eventually succeeded. In the 1993–97 preparatory work for the launch 
of the euro, Tommaso had yet another chance to show his unique ability to build on the one 
hand, a strong conceptual, analytical and policy framework (the “vision”) and, on the other 
hand, to implement a concrete set of measures and actions to turn the vision into reality. 
In the area of financial stability, Tommaso elaborated and worked towards the realisation of 
three fundamental ideas. 
First,  he  provided  a  far-sighted  yet,  in  the  end,  realistic  contribution  to  the  design  of  the 
architecture for financial supervision in Europe. He was convinced that in a single market, 
and  even  more  so  within  a  single  currency  area,  the  supervisory  framework  had  to  be  as 
convergent as possible, entailing a transfer of supervisory responsibilities from national to EU 
level. Indeed, he was convinced that the public good of financial stability also needed to be 
provided at EU level, and that would have necessitated the creation of an EU supervisory 
framework. At Maastricht, the Member States could not agree on this. Tommaso considered 
this a mistake – and the EU had to learn its lesson from this omission the hard way, during 
the financial crisis. 
Tommaso  regarded  the  convergence  of  supervisory  rules  and  of  supervisory  practices 
through  enhanced  cross-border  cooperation  as  intermediate  steps  towards  the  final 
objective. Notably, he was the first person to coin the term “EU supervisory rulebook” and, 
moreover,  he  was  the  founder  of  FESCO,  the  forum  for  supervisory  cooperation  in  the 
securities  field.  In  his  view,  cross-border  supervisory  cooperation  should  be  so  strong  and 
effective that the collective behaviour of supervisors would appear as a single one. All these 
ideas  started  to  take  shape  with  the  establishment  of  the  Lamfalussy  Committees  (CEBS, 
CESR  and  CEIOPS),  whose  main  purpose  was  to  enhance  supervisory  convergence  and 
cooperation. But his ideas have only been fully realised recently, with the setting-up of three 
new European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) as part of the European System of Financial 
Supervision.  The  ESAs  have  the  main  task  of  pursuing  the  EU  supervisory  rulebook  and 
strong coordination powers over national supervisors. 
The second fundamental idea Tommaso worked on was to define the role of central banks in 
financial stability. He saw this role as being clearly distinct from the one that central banks 
may have in prudential supervision since it entails monitoring, controlling and managing the 
risks to the financial system as a whole (what is now commonly referred to as systemic risk) 
instead of managing the risks incurred by individual financial institutions, a task performed by 
supervisors. In attempting to design a fully fledged framework for this function, he recognised 
the need to identify specific policy instruments which could address systemic risk, including 
the  interplay  with  the  instruments  used  for  monetary  policy  purposes.  In  doing  so,  he 
essentially anticipated the issues which eventually came to the fore in the wide policy debate 
stemming from the financial crisis under the heading of macro-prudential supervision. This 
debate eventually led to the establishment in Europe of the European Systemic Risk Board. 
He contributed to the development of the financial stability function at the European Central 
Bank, mainly by pushing for the publication of the ECB’s Financial Stability Review, which 
provides a euro area-wide perspective of risks to financial stability. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
His third fundamental idea was to defend, constantly, the role of central banks in prudential 
supervision. While he recognised that it was probably impossible to define an optimal model 
for the organisation of financial supervision,  he firmly believed in the synergy between the 
central banking and supervisory functions, and supported a close relationship between the 
two.  He  expressed  this  position  in  all  discussions  on  reforms  of  supervisory  structures  at 
national level. It is telling that one of the main lessons of the financial crisis is that, where a 
clear separation between central bank and supervisory functions exists, the trend is to shift 
the responsibility for prudential supervision to the central bank.  
In the area of international relations, Tommaso was convinced that, as the central bank of an 
economy  roughly  the  same  size  as  that  of  the  United  States,  the  Eurosystem  had  to 
gradually develop its international role and policy: it owed this to its “domestic constituency” 
as well as to the global community, in which monetary unification in Europe could play an 
important  role  by  enhancing  global  policy  cooperation.  In  this  area  too,  Tommaso  was  a 
fervent advocate of the national central banks of the euro pooling their forces, acting as a 
system  and  playing  a  role  consistent  with  the  institutional  mission  and  interests  of  the 
Eurosystem. His belief in international cooperation was founded on the conviction that there 
are,  on  the  global  agenda,  many  economic  issues  –  including  trade,  finance,  global 
imbalances, energy and the emergence of new global and regional players. Their scale and 
complexity  call  for  policy  efforts  that  go  beyond  national  borders  and make  cooperation  at 
global  level  desirable  and  feasible.  In  a  series  of  lectures  he  gave  here  at  the  European 
University  Institute  shortly  before  the  end  of  his  term  at  the  European  Central  Bank,  he 
argued that the long-term solution, what he had earlier called the “royal way”, would be to 
adapt  institutions  to  today’s  policy  needs,  to  reform  them  with  a  view  to  enhancing  their 
effectiveness  and  representation,  extending  in  many  cases  some  of  their  operational  and 
decision-making  practices.  Tommaso  belongs  to  that  group  of  personalities  who  played  a 
decisive  role  in  shaping  international  cooperation.  He  contributed  to  formal  and  informal 
group  discussions  at  global  level,  but  also  worked  on  a  bilateral  basis  with  countries, 
institutions,  and  people  from  Africa,  Asia,  Latin  America  and  from  the  Mediterranean 
countries. 
One of his initiatives was to set up the high-level Eurosystem Seminars, regularly bringing 
together the members of the Governing Council with governors from selected central banks, 
for  example, 
the 
Mediterranean,  or  from  countries  in  Africa  or  the  Middle  East  that  were  considering  a 
monetary  union  for  their  own  region,  or  even  from  Latin  American  countries.  It  was 
something unique to have – regularly sitting around the same table –  the Governor of the 
Central Bank of Israel and the Governor of the Palestinian Monetary Authority sharing views, 
in an open and candid manner, on the challenges that they were facing, together with their 
European counterparts.  
Tommaso’s  intellectual  curiosity  was  not  constrained  by  borders,  on  the  contrary.  He 
constantly  wanted  to  grasp  the  essence  of  what  was  at  stake  for  central  banks worldwide 
and  to  share  his  vision  of  a  “textbook  central  bank”,  while  at  the  same  time  taking  into 
account the particular circumstances and institutional structures of a given central bank. 
from  EU  candidate  countries,  or 
from  countries  around 
those 
The citizen  
As I said in my introduction, Tommaso was more than an economist and a policy-maker. He 
had a sense of history, a determination to bring the civilization of Europe to a higher level. He 
was  proud  of  Europe  but  also  recognised  its  fragility,  and  was  acutely  aware  of  the 
continent’s rivalries, divisions and conflicts over the centuries. 
The relationships between the nations of Europe changed immensely during the almost 40 
years of Tommaso’s career as a central banker. He was a central banker by profession, and 
an  advocate  of  a  united  Europe  by  conviction.  As  a  child  he  had  seen  cities  bombed  and 
soldiers  marching  through  the  streets  outside  his  house.  As  a  teenager  he  listened  to  his 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
its  mission  successfully. 
history teacher explaining that the day before (25 March 1957) an important treaty had been 
signed in Rome. Six European countries had just committed themselves to establishing the 
free  movement  of  goods,  persons,  services  and  capital.  To  achieve  this  goal  they  were 
prepared  to  renounce  part  of  their  sovereignty.  The  project  was  economic  in  content  and 
political  in  nature.  A  united  Europe  then  became  the  strongest  of  Tommaso’s  personal 
convictions.  
Tommaso  was  convinced  that,  after  the  four  freedoms  were  established,  after  common 
economic legislation was adopted, after the Single Market and a single institution to enforce 
common  competition  rules  were  set  up,  the  next  step  was  a  monetary  union.  He  saw  the 
creation of the euro as a key integrative step in the field of monetary policy and was very 
aware  of  the  ECB’s  responsibility  to  make  it  a  success  and  a  stepping  stone  for  further 
integration.  But  monetary  union,  he  realised,  was  a  project  fraught  not  only  with  political 
difficulties but also with deep conceptual problems. The economist and the policy-maker in 
him helped the citizen to find and contribute solutions to these conceptual problems.  
In  the  second  half  of  the  20th  century,  the  debate  over  monetary  policy  resulted  in  a 
consensus: the central bank must be both independent and accountable. An important part 
of Tommaso’s work, before and at the European Central Bank, was to help establish both 
independence and accountability as part of a central bank’s profile. The two form a critical 
pair, he thought, with the latter naturally complementing the former. 
The independence of the Eurosystem is a means to an end. It is instrumental in achieving 
the objective of price stability assigned to the central bank of the euro by the Treaty, which 
has  deliberately  established  both  the  primacy  of  price  stability  and  the  principle  of 
independence of the central bank. Independence would be much harder to justify if monetary 
policy  had  been  given  the  responsibility  to  bring  two  objectives  into  balance,  say  price 
stability and high employment. So, independence is essential if the Eurosystem is to carry 
out 
from  short-term  political 
considerations.  But  it  does  not  mean  the  absence  of  democratic  control.  In  a  democracy, 
independence and accountability are two sides of the same coin.  
Accountability  means  that  the  central  bank  is  subject  to  the  scrutiny  of  the  elected 
representatives of the people. In Tommaso’s analysis this is an essential part of our political 
order.  The  European  Central  Bank  has  been  assigned  a  specific  mission  and  given  the 
independence to effectively pursue it, so the ECB has to be held accountable for fulfilling it. 
The ECB must explain and justify its decisions. It is accountable to the people of Europe. In 
the political order of the EU this means being accountable to the European Parliament, the 
only body that derives its legitimacy directly from the people. 
The  ideas  Tommaso  developed  as  economist  emerged  powerfully  in  his  function  as  a 
leading  thinker  at  the  ECB.  Deeply  convinced  that,  especially  in  all  European  matters, 
“Nothing  is  possible  without  humans,  but  nothing  is  lasting  without  institutions”  (as  Jean 
Monnet  said),  his  concern  was  to  shape  the  ECB  as  an  independent  institution  that  is 
nevertheless – and necessarily – embedded within the overall institutional context of the EU. 
This  shaping  was  a  dynamic  process,  because  the  EU  as  a  “polity  in  the  making”  is 
constantly  evolving.  He  also  devoted  particular  attention  to  making  the  ECB’s  actions  and 
policies  understandable  for  the  people  of  Europe,  to  whom  the  ECB  is  ultimately 
accountable. 
When  Monetary  Union  was  established  he  pushed  for  a  “customer-friendly”  name  to 
embrace what he called “the central bank of the euro” as well as the ECB and the national 
central banks of the euro area. The Treaty was difficult to read, even for lawyers: so the first 
Bulletin  of  the  ECB  introduced  the  term  “Eurosystem”,  which  has  been  used  since  by  the 
national central banks implementing monetary policy. Today the word “Eurosystem” is well 
known and is included in the Lisbon Treaty.  
When  the  opportunity  came  to  change  the  Treaty  to  make  it  closer  to  the  citizens,  it  was 
proposed  to  make  the  ECB  one  of  the  EU  institutions,  recognising  its  role  in  the  further 
the  Eurosystem 
It  protects 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
integration of Europe. Traditional central bankers were sceptical, fearing that a closer link to 
the  other,  more  “political”  Union  institutions  would  undermine  the  independence  of  the 
European Central Bank. Tommaso was at the centre of this debate; he managed to strike a 
balance between, on the one hand, maintaining and even reinforcing the European Central 
Bank’s independence and keeping its special features and, on the other hand, reinforcing the 
role that the ECB, as a newly recognised institution, more visible to the people, could play 
jointly  with  the  other  institutions  to  foster  European  unification.  Notably,  the  Lisbon  Treaty 
explicitly mentions the financial independence of the ECB and that it has a legal personality 
separate from that of the EU. 
A key concern in the early years of the European Central Bank was to implement the concept 
of central bank independence in a concrete and practical manner, also in interactions with 
the  political  authorities  of  the  Union,  whether  the  Council  of  Ministers  or  the  European 
Parliament.  There  were,  after  all,  very  different  national  traditions  concerning  central  bank 
independence – in some countries, the notion of an independent central bank was a more 
recent  phenomenon,  not  fully  anchored  in  the  day-to-day  political  reflexes  and  actions  of 
national  authorities.  While  being  a  staunch  defender  of  the  European  Central  Bank’s 
independence whenever necessary, Tommaso never viewed the emergence of an effective 
economic decision-making structure at European level with trepidation, as a potential threat 
to the ECB’s independence. On the contrary: he thought it indeed desirable from the central 
bank’s perspective, and that of the people of Europe – that “independence should not mean 
institutional loneliness”.  
Tommaso’s legacy 
Jean  Giono,  the  Frenchman  who  turned  pacifist  after  experiencing  the  horrors  of  the  First 
World War, wrote once that in order to appreciate the exceptional qualities of human beings 
we  must  observe  how  they  behave  over  a  long  period  of  time.  We  certainly  did  that  with 
Tommaso for many years before his untimely departure. But, I would add, we should also 
consider  the  influence  he  will  continue  to  exert.  This  is  something  that  today,  with  the 
memory  of  his  dramatic  last  moments  still  fresh,  we  can  only  venture  to  guess.  Only  the 
passing of time and reflections on his actions and writings can give shape and measure to 
his legacy as an economic thinker, a policy-maker and institution-builder, and above all else, 
as an inspiring leader for future generations. 
On the subject of leadership, the first point I would like to make is his commitment to and 
almost boundless passion for work. For Tommaso, no draft was ever perfect, no project ever 
completed, no idea ever worked out in a full and satisfactory manner. The limits to work were 
set  by  deadlines,  not  by  exhaustion  or  satisfaction  or  even  less  by  personal  need.  Then 
came the motivation, the purpose of working. He used to say that people must decide early 
on if they want “to earn, to learn or to serve”; in other words, if their goal in life is material 
reward  in  business,  intellectual  pleasure  in  academic  research  and  teaching,  or  the  moral 
satisfaction of serving the collective good as a civil servant. As I said earlier, when opting to 
work for the Banca d’Italia, he undoubtedly chose to serve. The two other options were for 
him,  at  most,  occasional  and  ancillary  complements.  And  there  is  no  doubt  that  he 
demanded the same commitment from his collaborators.  
Yet, above all, the legacy that Tommaso leaves to those who observed and helped him over 
the years concerns how he dealt with issues. The first step was always to define a problem, 
to  find  the  right  combination  of  words  to  convey  its  meaning  and  content.  Defining  as  a 
means  of  understanding  and  communication;  a  perfect  example  is  the  speech  he  gave  in 
2000 entitled “An institutional glossary of the Eurosystem”. This spoken “glossary” came in 
eight parts, with headings such as mission, independence and accountability, and each part 
started  with  a  definition  and  continued  with  a  rigorous  dissection  and  analysis,  always 
conducted  in  a  positive  frame  of  mind.  Amid  the  disorder  of  conflicting  and  discouraging 
elements there was always a constructive way out; the problem was to find it. And in order to 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
find it – this was a cornerstone of Tommaso’s intellectual approach – one should not have 
prior  judgement  guiding  thoughts  and  actions,  but  rather  have  firm  beliefs  on  the  ultimate 
aims.  
Tommaso had also a clear working method, which influenced many of us, especially at the 
start  of  our  professional  lives.  Setting  precise  deadlines,  what  economists  call  “time  T”, 
getting  a  good  understanding  of  what  has  to  be  done  by  that  time,  for  example,  writing  a 
document,  a  speech,  a  regulation,  and  producing  something  which  would  be  clearly 
understood even by somebody unfamiliar with the topic. Ideas are influential if they arrive in 
time and can be easily understood. “Form matters as much as substance” he used to say. 
To give you a better idea of his working methods, let me add here a personal memory. In the 
second half of 1990 Italy held the Presidency of the Council of the European Communities 
(as  it  was  then).  A  key  task  of  the  special  Council  summit  in  October  of  that  year  was  to 
finalise  the  preparation  of  the  intergovernmental  conference  on  Economic  and  Monetary 
Union.  A  lot  of  preparatory  work  had  been  done  since  the  Delors  Committee  by  various 
groupings. A political decision was now needed. By holding the Presidency Italy would have 
a key role in influencing the outcome of the Council meeting.  
In the spring – several months before the start of the Presidency – Tommaso managed to 
convince the Italian Prime Minister to set up a group of four sherpas, with representatives 
from the President’s office, the Finance Ministry, the Foreign Ministry and the Banca d’Italia. I 
accompanied  Tommaso  on  several  of  these  occasions.  A  few  preliminary  meetings  were 
held before the summer but were largely inconclusive. Most participants considered that the 
October  summit  was  too  far  away  and  that  there  were  too  many  imponderables  to  start 
meaningful preparatory work. In their view they needed “political guidance”.  
Back  at  the  bank  after  one  of  these  meetings,  Tommaso,  visibly  irritated  by  the  lack  of 
progress, asked me to come into his office. When we got there he told me that we had to 
start the preparatory work for the European Council ourselves –  “Nobody else will do it.” I 
had  no  clue  what  the  work  would  involve.  But  in  his  view  it  was  quite  simple.  The  main 
outcome  of  the  European  Council  was  a  statement  mandating  the  intergovernmental 
conference  to  change  the  Treaty  to  allow  for  monetary  union,  the  so-called  Council 
Conclusions. We had to write a first draft of these Council Conclusions, even if the meeting 
was four months away. “Three pages, no more!” he told us. In terms of content, it was vital to 
specify a starting date for the transition to monetary union (1994), and to make a reference to 
the  final  stage  and  to  the  single  currency.3  That  would  be  the  starting  point  for  the 
discussions and negotiations with the other governments. “The one who holds the pen – he 
used to say – has the most influence”. And so I went back to my office and started writing the 
three pages, which after numerous iterations, amendments, insertions and deletions resulting 
from  the  negotiation  process,  evolved  into  the  final  October  1990  European  Council 
Conclusions, including the long negotiated footnote reporting the fact that one country could 
not agree with the Conclusions. Back home, Mrs Thatcher was unable to convince her critics 
that such a footnote was a defeat, a failure to stop monetary union. 
I  would  like  to  close  with  what  can  be  considered  the  five  strong  elements  of  Tommaso’s 
legacy as an economist and policy-maker.  
The  first  and  most  obvious  is  his  faith  in  Europe.  I  don’t  need  to  add  much  more  on  this. 
Europe as a continent of peace, a “gentle” force helping to find the roots that unite us and a 
way  to  overcome  problems  that,  approached  nationally,  might  retrigger  the  divisions  and 
horrors of the past. Europe was always the focus, even when – in Tommaso’s sometimes 
unexpressed opinion – its representatives or actions did not deserve it. Tommaso’s Europe 
                                                 
3  Bini  Smaghi,  L.,  Padoa-Schioppa,  T.  and  F.  Papadia,  “The  Transition  to  EMU  in  the  Maastricht  Treaty”, 
Essays in International Finance, Princeton, No 194, November 1994. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
was an aspiration and an ideal, much bigger and longer lasting than the individuals that may 
at any given time symbolise it.  
The  second  element  is that  the  future  development  of  the  Union  can and  will  probably  be 
built on the “solidarité de fait” created by economic interdependence. Tommaso was fond of 
reminding us that it was a single article in the US constitution – the one regulating inter-state 
commerce  –  that  was  used  to  lay  the  foundation  of  a  significant  role  for  the  federal 
government  in  US  economic  policies.  In  very  much  the  same  way,  the  necessities  of 
managing  interdependence  will  –  and  indeed  do  –  lead  to  embryonic  joint  economic 
management:  the  EFSF/EFSM/ESM  has  put  €500  billion  at  the  disposal  of  the  Monetary 
Union’s “federal” level to manage the sovereign liquidity crisis. Who would have thought this 
possible one year ago? The same is true for the European System of Financial Supervision. 
And for a reinforced economic governance framework with a stronger role for EU institutions 
and  processes.  But  solidarity  must  go  hand-in-hand  with  responsibility,  and  the  common 
European  destiny  requires  a  reinforcement  and  a  clarification  of  the  common  rules  of  the 
game. Tommaso was right: the asymmetry between a single monetary policy and national 
economic policies must be transitory. Now we need to make another step forward towards 
European integration. 
The third element or guiding compass in his approach to European and other issues was his 
faith  in  institutions.  Let’s  adopt  his  method  and  look  at  the  definition  first:  “structure  or 
mechanism of social order and cooperation governing the behaviour of a set of individuals 
within  a  given  human  community”,  reads  the  Stanford  Encyclopedia,  which  continues: 
“Institutions  are  identified  with  a  social  purpose  and  permanence,  transcending  individual 
human  lives  and  intentions,  and  with  the  making  and  enforcing  of  rules  governing 
cooperative human behaviour”. Only institutions (whether simple gatherings or fora, or formal 
debating and decision-making groups, up to structured organisations with physical premises) 
give continuity and strength to human efforts and aspirations that are, by nature,  transient 
and mortal. “Nothing is possible without humans, nothing is lasting without institutions”, Jean 
Monnet  wrote.  It  mattered  little  to  Tommaso  that  institutions  could  experience  periods  – 
perhaps long ones – of inconclusiveness and idleness. Their existence itself had value, as 
the premise and promise of future progress.  
The  fourth  key  element  is,  I  think,  his  approach  to  economics.  There  is  no  doubt  that 
Tommaso  was  an  economist  of  the  highest  order:  his  early  studies  at  MIT  with  Franco 
Modigliani, his outstanding scholarly publications, his constant use of sophisticated economic 
thinking bear witness to this. But there is likewise no doubt that Tommaso was a particular 
economist,  unique  in  his  own  way.  Economics  was  not  for  him  –  as  for  many  in  the 
profession  today  –  an  intellectual  exercise  in  which  implications  are  drawn  from  axioms 
through deductive logic. It was a method to analyse problems and to devise solutions that 
should constantly be tested in real life and discarded, if necessary, in a Popperian sequence. 
Economics should adapt to circumstances – not the other way round.  
His  clashes  with  doctrinaire  economists  (often  classical,  but  not  only)  are  proverbial.  Time 
prevents me from telling you more, but there’s one that should be mentioned here because it 
turned out to be central to his career, namely his views on the role of exchange rates as an 
instrument for adjusting economic imbalances. The doctrine, for which several Nobel prizes 
have been awarded, is that exchange rates are, in a wide variety of circumstances, an easier 
and  less  painful  way  to  correct  accumulated  disequilibria  among  countries  than  changes 
(notably, reductions) in nominal wages and prices at national level. Not for Tommaso. As I 
said, he viewed exchange rate variability, with the possibility of competitive devaluations and 
currency wars that it entails, as a fundamentally uncooperative and undesirable way to settle 
economic  divergences.  Hence  his  preference  for  monetary  cooperation  and  ultimately 
monetary union, in Europe and elsewhere. Cooperation, to be effectively durable, was to be 
supported by institutions, notably central banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
This  brings  me  to  the  fifth  and  last  cornerstone  of  Tommaso’s  thinking  and  practice,  his 
conceptions of central banking and his actions as a central banker. This is the area to which 
he devoted most of his professional life. He did not start his career as a central banker – he 
often joked, particularly with those he considered not concrete enough, about his early job as 
a clothes seller – but in the end he incarnated the quintessential and all-round central banker 
as nobody else did, though always in an original way. He viewed central banks as complex 
and multifaceted financial institutions pursuing the public good along several interconnected 
paths. It is the polar opposite of the notion, prevailing in the years prior to the current crisis, 
of a single-minded and ring-fenced authority regulating interest rates just to achieve stable 
prices.  Price  stability  is  key,  but  should  be  filtered  through  a  broader  notion  of  monetary, 
financial  and  economic  performance.  And  it  should  never  be  attained  –  typical  of  modern 
macroeconomic models – by simplistic decision rules, by some kind of autopilot. The strategy 
and transmission of monetary policy cannot abstract itself from the interconnections between 
the  financial  system  as  a  whole,  from  the  money  markets  where  short-term  assets  are 
bought  and  sold,  or  from  the  payment  system,  the  technology  through  which  money  is 
exchanged for goods and services.  
Tommaso was bothered by the simple-mindedness and lack of solidity in the analytical fads 
and fashions of modern macroeconomists, whose published models tag money to the rest of 
the economy in an artificial way as an afterthought. To understand money, he felt, one must 
explore the functions it provides as a means of payment, a measure of value, and a store of 
value. He was impatient with conceptions that considered only part of this tripartite structure 
or  disregarded  the  interconnections.  This  is  at  the  heart  of  his  long-standing  interest  in 
financial  stability  and  the  working  of  payment  systems,  areas  he  considered  inextricably 
linked to monetary policy. It seemed, at times, as if he was looking for a deep understanding 
of money in the links between the three functions, for something like a unifying theory for all 
three. But such theories are hard to devise, as physicists know only too well. I’m not sure if, 
in the end, Tommaso felt he had solved the puzzle, or at least broadened his understanding 
of it. What I am sure is that it is precisely in the areas of financial stability and payments that 
he provided some of his most outstanding and lasting insights.  
Conclusions 
This  review  of  Tommaso’s  life  and  legacy  is  obviously  partial,  with  a  focus  on  his  central 
bank experience, in particular at the ECB. But his contribution is much broader. He certainly 
believed in exchanging ideas. I heard him say once, during his short tenure at the Finance 
Ministry,  “If  people  are  willing  to  discuss  issues  in  a  rational  way  and  in  good  faith,  I  am 
confident  a solution  can  be  found”.  I  am  not  sure  it  really  applied  to  the  specific  issue  we 
were  talking  about  at  that  time,  but  it  certainly  applies  to  the  way  Europe  has  been 
constructed since the start, including over the last few months. It reflects his vision of, and 
hopes for, Europe in the 21st century. 
It is a distinct trait of human nature to become pessimistic as we grow older, to think that the 
worst is to come when faced with unexpected events, to distrust the younger generation, to 
foresee the risk of war and terrible events. Tommaso was not like this. He profoundly trusted 
human beings and invested heavily in younger collaborators because he firmly believed that 
only by getting the people of Europe closer together there will be a better world.  
This is the inspiration we need. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
