Hirohide Yamaguchi: Japan’s economy and monetary policy 
Speech by Mr Hirohide Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with 
business leaders, Aomori, 23 February 2011. 
 Introduction  
I  am  honored  today  to  have  this  opportunity  to  speak  and  to  exchange  views  with 
administrative  and  business  leaders  in  Aomori  Prefecture.  And  I  express  my  gratitude  for 
your cooperation in various business operations of the Bank of Japan’s Aomori branch.  
I have taken a Tohoku Shinkansen bullet train to come to the region. The full opening of the 
bullet train line was said to be eagerly awaited by you, and I imagine that you were especially 
thrilled by the opening. I have heard that you have been working to make the most of the 
bullet  train  line  to  stimulate  the  local  economy,  with  enhancing  the  region’s  rich  tourism 
resources and public relations activity.  
As  some  of  you  may  know,  Mitsuru  Yoshida, known  also for  his  book  Senkan  Yamato  no 
Saigo (The last days of the battleship Yamato), was the manager of the Aomori branch from 
1965 to 1968. He also wrote a book titled Aomori Sanka (Praise of Aomori). In a chapter on 
the economy of Aomori Prefecture, he discussed the potential and challenges to the regional 
economy,  and  concluded  that  tapping  the  limitless  potential  of  Aomori  should  be  the  most 
pleasant mission for people living here. The phrase still gets to our hearts after more than 
40 years,  and  even  if  we  rephrase  “Aomori”  to  “Japan.”  Just  like  your  efforts  to  tap  the 
potential  of  the  Aomori  economy,  for  Japan’s  economy  as  a  whole,  it  has  become  an 
important challenge of exploring its potential and paving the way for sustainable growth.  
Keeping in mind those issues, in my remarks today, I will talk about economic and financial 
developments  at  home  and  abroad  and  medium-  to  long-term  challenges  to  Japan’s 
economy. Then, I will explain the Bank’s policy response.  
I.  
Global economic developments  
Current state and outlook for the global economy  
I will begin with the developments in the global economy.  
Looking back on the global economic developments in 2010, in the first half, the economy 
recovered  from  the  plunge  following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers.  The  pace  of  growth 
slowed from the summer to the autumn. That was because the sharp rise often seen in the 
early phase of economic recovery slowed down and the effects of various demand-boosting 
measures, such as subsidies for car purchases, implemented in many countries to address 
the financial crisis almost ran their course.  
Since the autumn of 2010, the global economy has gotten out of the temporary deceleration 
phase and its growth rate has started increasing again.  
Looking  at  the  developments  by  region,  the  growth  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting 
economies has started accelerating again since the autumn of 2010. Consumption has been 
buoyant  associated  partly  with  improved  household  income  and  growth  in  investment  has 
been  high  in  a  broad  range  of  areas  including  social  infrastructures,  such  as  roads  and 
railways,  and  factory  machines  and  equipment.  In  addition,  on  the  back  of  large-scale 
monetary  easing  in  advanced  economies,  funds  that  could  not  find  profitable  investment 
opportunities  in  their  own  economies  have  been  flowing  in.  That  has  been  stimulating 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
economic  activity  through  asset  transactions  and  investment,  which  has  also  induced 
economic expansion in emerging and commodity-exporting economies.  
Looking  at  the  developments  in  advanced  economies,  the  U.S.  economy  has  been 
recovering  moderately.  Exports,  especially  to  emerging  economies,  have  been  increasing, 
and as for private consumption, Christmas sales in 2010 marked the highest growth since 
the mid-2000s. While pessimistic views on the prospects for the economy heightened in the 
summer  of  2010,  they  have  rapidly  subsided  and  rather,  optimistic  views  have  become 
prominent,  partly  reflecting  Federal  Reserve’s  large-scale  accommodative  monetary  policy 
and  fiscal  measure  of  the  extension  of  tax  cuts.  In  that  situation,  stock  prices  have  been 
rising.  In  Europe,  countries  called  peripheral  ones  such  as  Greece  and  Ireland  have 
confronted severe fiscal problems, which I will refer to later, and have been forced to make a 
difficult  economic  policy  maneuver.  By  contrast,  major  economies  such  as  Germany  have 
been strong due mainly to the increase in exports to emerging economies. Economic activity 
in Europe as a whole has continued to recover moderately, with some differences in pace by 
country as I have just explained.  
My projection is that the global economy is likely to continue to record relatively high growth 
led by emerging and commodity-exporting economies that will continue growing rapidly. The 
International Monetary Fund projects that the global economy, following a 5 percent growth 
in 2010, will grow at a high rate of more than 4 percent in 2011 and 2012. The figures are 
comparable to those during the historical high growth period that had continued for several 
years prior to the 2008 financial crisis.  
Uncertainties over the outlook of the global economy  
The projection I have just noted entails various uncertainties.  
First,  a  risk  of  overheating  in  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies.  In  those 
economies,  China  in  particular,  amid  continuing  high  growth  and  capital  inflow,  economic 
overheating has become pronounced as seen in rising inflation and asset prices. Therefore, 
many of those economies have been shifting away from accommodative monetary policies, 
but  concern  about  overheating  of  the  economy  and  inflation  is  not  fully  dissipated.  If 
overheating  of  those  economies  cannot  be  retrained  successfully  through  somewhat 
tightened policy conduct, from a longer-term  perspective, there is a risk that an unwinding 
activity from the excess will become large and those economies will be forced to make sharp 
and substantial adjustments.  
Second,  developments  in  advanced  economies.  In  the  United  States  and  Europe,  through 
the mid-2000s while asset prices including real estate prices were rising, households made 
excessive borrowing and home purchases, and financial institutions increased lending to an 
extent that can be seen as excessive from now. It was the generation of the so-called credit 
bubble.  The  bursting  of  that  bubble  induced  a  financial  crisis  and  an  economic  plunge 
following  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers.  Households  have  had  to  continue  reducing 
borrowing to repair their balance sheets, which weakened due to a decline in home prices. 
Financial institutions have also been pressed to dispose of a large amount of impaired assets 
and become cautious about new lending. As Japan had experienced since the 1990s, once 
the economy is burdened by balance sheet adjustments, it is likely that economic activity will 
continue to be in a situation in which it is unlikely to turn upward and remains vulnerable to 
downward pressure. As I mentioned earlier, in the United States, the optimistic views for the 
future have recently become strong reflecting favorable economic indicators. However, one 
cannot  deny  a  possibility  that  the  optimistic  views  will  change  in  the  future.  European 
peripheral countries, such as Greece and Ireland, have been faced with deteriorating fiscal 
conditions called as a sovereign risk problem. Amid the investment boom due to the credit 
bubble, the governments borrowed excessively from overseas and, in the process of crisis 
responses after the bursting of the bubble, the governments expanded their fiscal spending 
significantly  to  replace  private  financial  institutions’  risks  and  debts.  That  can  also  be 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
considered one  kind  of  balance-sheet  adjustment  in  the  government  sector.  Since  it  takes 
considerable time to solve the problem of fiscal deterioration, due attention should be paid to 
how, during the process, a spread of concern about such public debt will affect international 
financial markets.  
The third uncertainty is developments in international commodity prices and their impact on 
developments  in  economic  activity  and  prices  in  the  world.  International  commodity  prices 
have been on an uptrend since the beginning of 2009. The pace of increase has accelerated 
especially in food prices since the autumn of 2010, and prices of some nonferrous metals 
and  grains  have  been  around  or  surpassed  their  historical  highs  recorded  around  the 
summer  of  2008.  The  factors  behind  that  are  the  rise  in  demand  due  to  high  growth  in 
emerging and commodity-exporting economies and the decrease in grain supply owing to the 
adverse weather. The rise in commodity prices seems to have been also boosted by the fact 
that, amid the large-scale monetary easing in advanced economies, some investment funds 
have flowed into commodity future markets. At any rate, amid uncertainty about the Middle 
East, attention should be paid to how international commodity prices will develop and how 
those developments will specifically affect economic activity and prices both in advanced and 
emerging economies.  
II.  
Developments in Japan’s economy  
Economic conditions and outlook  
Based on the developments in the global economy, I will next talk about the developments in 
Japan’s economy. To state the conclusion in advance, I am currently  somewhat optimistic 
about  a  short-term  economic  outlook  in  the  immediate  future,  but  I  have  no  choice  but  to 
have a cautious view on a medium- to long-term outlook. Let me first talk about the current 
state of the economy.  
Japan’s economy was picking up relatively clearly until around the autumn of 2010, but such 
improvement  paused  from  the  autumn  to  the  end  of  2010.  As  the  growth  in  the  global 
economy decelerated somewhat, exports became somewhat weak, especially of machinery 
and electronic parts to Korea and Taiwan, partly due to inventory adjustments in IT-related 
goods such as personal computers. In addition, the plunge following the last-minute increase 
in demand for energy-efficient cars ahead of the expiration of subsidies has also affected the 
economy significantly. According to the data released at the beginning of last week, the real 
GDP  growth  rate  for  the  October–December  quarter  of  2010  is  minus  0.3  percent  on  a 
quarter-on-quarter basis, the first negative growth in five quarters. The GDP data also proved 
that the improvement in Japan’s economy was in a pause.  
Economic  indicators  released  after  the  turn  of  the  year  have  suggested  that  Japan’s 
economy appears to be gradually getting out of the pause. Exports have started to resume 
an  uptrend,  as  evidenced  by  high  growth  across  almost  all  the  regions  and  goods  in 
December  2010.  Production,  partly  reflecting  such  export  developments,  has  been 
continuing  to  increase  since  November.  As  for  private  consumption,  sales  of  electrical 
appliances such as flat panel televisions increased substantially, almost double the previous 
year’s level, in November immediately before the revisions in the eco-point system, but the 
sales suffered the reverse since then. On the other hand, sales of cars have been recovering 
gradually  since  bottoming  out  around  October  and  November,  when  the  sales  plunged 
following the last-minute surge ahead of the expiration of subsidies. Firms’ fixed investment 
and  households’  housing  investment  have  started  to  pick  up.  According  to  the  Bank’s 
quarterly  branch  managers’  meeting  in  January,  upbeat  views  expressed  by  business 
managers  were  returning.  Such  views  were  that  “demand  for  smart  phones  and  tablet 
devices  has  been  strong  and  there  are  prospects  for  inventory  adjustments  particularly  of 
electronic  parts  to  be  completed,”  or  that  “orders  from  emerging  economies  especially  for 
machine tools have been increasing in number.”  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
As for the outlook, it is projected that Japan’s economy will get out of the pause in the not so 
distant  future  and  return  to  the  moderate  recovery  path,  on  the  back  of  high  growth  in 
overseas economies.  
Prices  
Let me turn to the price developments. The year-on-year rate of change in Japan’s consumer 
price index (CPI) excluding fresh food registered a substantial decline of 2.4 percent in the 
summer  of  2009,  but  the  rate  of  decline  has  steadily  continued  to  slow  since  then  as  the 
economic slack gradually improved in line with the economic recovery. The latest December 
figure showed that, excluding a one-off factor of subsidies for high school tuition, the year-on-
year  rate  of  change  in  the  CPI  was  plus  0.1  percent.  Given  that  international  commodity 
prices are on an uptrend while the economy is expected to return to the moderate recovery 
path, the year-on-year rate of growth in the CPI is likely to gradually increase toward fiscal 
2012. However, the base year revision for the CPI, which is conducted regularly every five 
years, is scheduled for August 2011. In the past five years, goods for which prices declined 
substantially,  such  as  flat  panel  televisions,  have  increased  their  share  in  consumption. 
Partly because that factor will be reflected in the base year revision, it is likely that the year-
on-year rate of growth will be revised downward. Including that point, there will still be twists 
and turns until overcoming deflation is in sight.  
III.  
Toward a medium- to long-term revival of Japan’s economy  
A declining growth rate and its background  
I have explained that Japan’s economy appears to be getting out of the pause for the time 
being, and, on the price front, the deflationary situation is improving at any rate. However, 
there might be not a few people who think that such views do not feel real. One reason for 
that might be that the recovery is export-led and is mainly enjoyed by large manufacturers 
and  needs  some  time  to  feed  into  domestic  private  demand  and  regional  economies. 
However, the greatest concern might be that it is difficult to have prospects for future growth 
in  Japan’s  economy  and  for  the  industrial  structure  leading  the  growth.  As  a  result,  many 
might  be  feeling  that  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  the  prospects  for  the  regional  economy.  I 
mentioned earlier that I have a cautious view on a medium- to long-term outlook for Japan’s 
economy. That view probably more or less coincides with your concern. With that, I will move 
on to discuss Japan’s medium- to long-term growth.  
The  average  annual  growth  rate  of  Japan’s  economy  declined  significantly  from  around 
5 percent in the 1970s, in the range of 4–5 percent in the 1980s, to around 1.5 percent in the 
1990s, and below 1 percent in the 2000s.  
When the growth rate trends downward in that manner, firms’ and households’ expectations 
for future growth and future income growth will decline and therefore firms and households 
will become cautious about their investment and consumption. That has caused a protracted 
demand shortage in the economy and has become a fundamental cause for deflation. On the 
fiscal front, the decline in the growth rate has led to an increase in fiscal deficits through, for 
example,  a  decline  in  tax  revenues.  The  fact  that  the  decline  in  the  growth  rate  is  not 
temporary  but  prolonged  suggests  that  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  has 
decreased.  
Various factors have been cited as the reason why Japan’s growth potential has declined. 
Some have pointed out institutional factors including the delay in regulatory reform. Others 
have questioned Japan-style management and labor practice. The role of education has also 
been discussed. While it is true that those factors have been complexly intertwined, broadly 
speaking, the following can be pointed out. That is, Japan’s various systems, practices, and 
firms’ principle of behavior that were formed to adapt to the high-speed growth era might not 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
be able to sufficiently adapt to the two significant changes in the environment that evolved 
since the 1990s. The two changes in the environment were, first the intensification of global 
competition and second, the demographic vortex.  
The first change, the intensification of global competition, started to advance from around the 
end  of  the  1980s.  In  the  high-speed  growth  era,  Japan  had  no  formidable  rivals  among 
industrial  countries  except  for  the  United  States  and  European  countries.  Therefore, 
Japanese firms introduced advanced technologies in the United States and Europe and then 
implemented  a  competition  strategy  in  which  they  increased  exports  of  low-priced,  high-
quality  standardized  industrial  products  with  relatively  inexpensive  capital  and  labor.  That 
was an optimal strategy at that time. However, amid the rapid progress in the globalization of 
a  market  economy,  such  as  China’s  and  other  emerging  economies’  entry  as  peers  of  a 
market  economy,  and  the  striking  development  of  the  information  and  telecommunication 
technology,  the  global  economy  entered  the  era  of  so-called  mega  competition.  The 
environment changed so that competition to reduce capital and labor costs became severe, 
and  at  the  same  time,  firms  around  the  world  had  to  compete  fiercely  seeking  for  earning 
opportunities by utilizing IT technologies. It has become difficult for a firm to enjoy high profits 
unless it uncovered a new business area ahead of other firms around the world and allocated 
management resources such as personnel and capital promptly and intensively to such new 
business area. It exactly became an era when selecting and concentrating resources in key 
strategic areas have increasingly been required.  
The  second  change  in  the  environment  is  the  demographic  vortex.  Japan’s  working-age 
population,  namely,  the  population  aged  between  15  to  64,  started  to  decline  in  the  mid-
1990s, and the total population peaked in 2007. That exactly shows that population aging is 
rapidly progressing. The rate of the elderly population aged over 65 to the total population 
was 9 percent in 1980 and more than doubled in 2009 to 23 percent. If the trend continues, 
the ratio of the elderly population is projected to rise to nearly 40 percent in 2050. Population 
aging will hamper growth from the supply side of the economy in that it will bring a shortage 
of workers. To address that issue, it is necessary to make further efforts to increase female 
labor market participation and accept foreign workers. At the same time, population aging will 
have  a  large  impact  on  the  demand  side  of  the  economy;  for  example,  it  will  bring  a 
substantial shift in the components of consumer demand. Specifically, there is a possibility 
that  demand  for  homes,  cars,  and  eating  out  will  decrease,  while  demand  for  health  and 
nursing care, as well as businesses such as tours targeting the elderly will increase. A key to 
winning competition is how firms will be able to respond to such substantial shift in demand 
for goods and services.  
In  sum,  the  two  changes  in  the  environment  indicate  that  the  source  of  economic  growth 
would expand substantially from advanced economies such as Japan, the United States, and 
Europe, to a broader world including emerging economies, and in terms of domestic markets, 
from  markets  especially  for  young  and  middle-aged  generation  to  broader  markets  for  a 
wider  range  of  generations  including  the  elderly.  The  decline  in  Japan’s  growth  potential 
since  the  1990s  suggests  that  Japanese  firms  were  not  able  to  sufficiently  adapt  to  such 
changes in the environment.  
Policy direction  
If we summarize such significant changes in the environment taking place in Japan and their 
impact in that way, we can see that addressing the change in the demand structure will be a 
key  to  increasing  the  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy.  In  that  regard,  it  is  critical  to 
create  an  environment,  in  which  firms  can  embark  on  new  business  areas  with  creative 
ideas, and smoothly transfer their management resources, such as personnel and capital, to 
those areas.  
If  I  point  out  some  critical  challenges,  promoting  deregulation  remains  to  be  one  of  those. 
There  have  been  some  areas,  such  as  mobile  phones  and  couriers  whose  markets  have 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
expanded due to deregulation. Those often pointed out as promising areas are health and 
nursing care as well as education. While it is true that the institutional design in those areas 
is  required  to  take  account  of  safety  and  fairness,  it  is  also  the  fact  that  regulations  have 
shrunk  room  for  originality  and  ingenuity  of  private  firms,  as  seen  in  the  difficulty  in 
integrating kindergartens and nursery schools. In addition, population aging can provide new 
business opportunities if new demand is tapped through the collaboration between different 
areas such as tourism and health and nursing care. Not to hamper the creation of a cross-
industrial business model, efforts to constantly review the regulations are essential.  
Moreover, in promoting creative corporate activity, it is important to create an environment 
that will ensure the smooth transfer of resources both in terms of personnel and of capital 
and funds. As for personnel, while there are industries with excess employment on one hand, 
there are industries, including nursing, which are short on staff on the other hand. To resolve 
such mismatch, it is necessary to further enhance the flexibility of the labor market by, for 
example, making job changes easier. The weakness of Japan’s economy is that such lack of 
market  flexibility  is  observed  here  and  there.  In  addition,  the  expansion  of  a  safety  net 
including  unemployment  policy  will  be  important  in  generating  personnel  who  make 
challenges  for  new  business  areas.  That  is  because  without  a  framework  for  supporting 
those  who  have  taken  risks  and  make  challenges  by  society  as  a  whole,  the  transfer  of 
personnel resources to new business areas will not make progress.  
As  for  capital  and  funds,  it  is  critical  to  have  an  environment  that  will  enable  them  to  be 
allocated  smoothly  to  growth  areas.  It  is  a  fundamental  function  of  financial  markets  to 
discover promising businesses and investment areas and allocate capital and funds to them. 
For firms that raise funds, a hurdle in embarking on new businesses will become lower by 
obtaining funds from financial institutions and markets. On the other hand, it is also possible 
to encourage firms’ efforts to increase profitability by attaching severe terms to businesses 
with low profitability accordingly. In that regard, financial institutions are particularly required 
to identify promising businesses and flexibly provide funds to them. In addition, it is essential 
to have the so-called risk money to foster new growth areas. In other words, it is important to 
improve  various  financial  markets  such  as  for  stocks,  corporate  bonds,  and  asset-backed 
securities, which are underwritten using firms’ receivables and assets such as real estate as 
collateral.  
While the measures I have mentioned are not achieved easily, given that Japan’s economy 
continues to be stagnant for such a protracted period and is burdened by a serious challenge 
of further aging of the population in the future, there is no time to lose. I do not have time to 
go into details today, but fiscal consolidation is also an important topic that should be kept in 
mind.  The  deterioration  in  fiscal  conditions  would  become  a  factor  to  restrain  spending 
especially  of  working-age  generations  by  reducing  their  expectations  for  future  income 
growth. If firms’ and households’ sense of security about the outlook will be fostered through 
fiscal  consolidation,  it  will  stimulate  spending  and  also  contribute  to  increasing  the  growth 
potential  of  the  economy.  I  recognize  that,  with  a  view  to  raising  the  growth  potential  of 
Japan’s economy, it is significant that various entities including the Bank work on addressing 
problems, with a widely shared sense of urgency.  
The Bank of Japan’s policy response  
IV.  
I will now explain the Bank’s policy response.  
The Bank has implemented various measures not only to address the challenge of ensuring 
economic  recovery  and  overcoming  deflation,  but  also  the medium-  to  long-term  structural 
challenge of increasing the growth potential of Japan’s economy. That is because the Bank 
considers that the decline in growth potential lies at the root of deflation.  
In October 2010, the Bank adopted a powerful monetary policy package of “comprehensive 
monetary  easing.”  Specifically,  the  uncollateralized  overnight  call  rate,  which  is  the  policy 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
interest  rate,  is  encouraged  to  remain  at  around  0  to  0.1  percent.  The  Bank  has  also 
committed  itself  to  continue  the  virtually  zero  percent  interest  rate  level  until  it  judges  that 
price stability is in sight. That is considered to encourage longer-term interest rates to be low 
and stable. Moreover, the Bank has implemented an Asset Purchase Program to purchase 
not  only  safe  assets  as  government  securities  but  also  purchase  risk  assets  such  as  CP, 
corporate bonds, investment funds that link stock price indexes, and real estate investment 
trusts.  The  outstanding  amount  of  total  assets  purchased,  including  those  through  the 
operation that provides funds at a fixed low rate, has set to be about 35 trillion yen by around 
the  end  of  2011.  The  measure  aims  at  influencing  longer-term  interest  rates  and,  from  a 
viewpoint  of  enhancing economic  growth  potential,  is  also  expected  to  activate  the  flow  of 
risk money. In the measure, the purchase of risk assets in particular is extraordinary for a 
central  bank.  The  Bank  ventured  to  decide  to  implement  it  with  a  view  to  promptly 
overcoming deflation.  
Moreover,  in  2010,  the  Bank  introduced  a  new  framework  of  lending  called  the  “fund-
provisioning  measure  to  support  strengthening  the  foundations  for  economic  growth.” 
Through  the  measure,  the  Bank  provides  long-term  funds  at  a  low  interest  rate  to  private 
financial  institutions  that  are  making  efforts  in  terms  of  lending  and  investment  toward 
increasing the growth potential of Japan’s economy. The total amount of loans provided so 
far  in  two  disbursement  accounts  for  about  1.5  trillion  yen,  and  the  third  disbursement  is 
scheduled  for  the  beginning  of  next  month.  In  response  to  the  Bank’s  measure,  financial 
institutions have been preparing a framework for actively supporting lending and investment 
by, for example, establishing special sections devoted to investment and lending to the new 
areas of growth or establishing new credit lines. There seems to be some firms that have 
taken a more active stance of fixed investment in new growth areas. With such new moves 
emerging, it seems that the recognition that increasing the growth potential of the economy is 
a pressing challenge has started to spread. Including such a change in the recognition, the 
fund-provisioning measure seems to start gradually producing expected positive effects as a 
catalyst. The Bank will continue to examine possible ways to strengthen the foundations for 
economic growth.  
Concluding remarks  
I  have  talked  about  the  economic  and  financial  developments  at  home  and  abroad,  the 
medium-  to  long-term  challenges  to  Japan’s  economy,  and  the  Bank’s  monetary  policy 
conduct. In closing, I will offer my view on the potential of Aomori’s economy based mainly 
on what has been reported from the Bank’s branch.  
In the Aomori Prefecture’s basic plan, “A Challenge for the Future,” which indicates the state 
of the region in 2030, three industries of food, energy, and tourism are identified as major 
industries.  
In  the  food  industry,  I  hear  that  agriculture  and  fishery  industries  are  aiming  at  increasing 
profitability  by  establishing  an  integrated  production  and  sales  system  that  contains  from 
processing  to  distribution  procedures.  I  also  hear  that  efforts  have  been  made  to  expand 
exports especially to emerging economies. For example, Aomori’s apples have established 
their brand recognition as high grade fruit, and further expansion of exports is expected.  
As for energy-related businesses, nuclear power generation has already been established as 
a key industry in the region and several nuclear reactors are under construction. In addition, 
a plant for nuclear fuel cycle, which is the only such plant in Japan and the fourth one in the 
world, has been preparing for its operation. The volume of wind power generation in Aomori 
Prefecture  is  number  one  in  Japan.  It  is  proved  that  Aomori  is  exactly  in  the  front  line  of 
renewable energy.  
With regard to the tourism industry, Aomori Prefecture is blessed with attractive tourist spots 
such as Lake Towada and Mount Osore. It is also endowed with cultural events including the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Nebuta Festival, as well as an abundance of seafood. It is projected that the full opening of 
the  Tohoku  Shinkansen  Line  will  lead  to  a  further  increase  in  the  number  of  tourists. 
Strengthening tourism is an effective tool for tapping demand not only in Japan but also in 
emerging economies especially in Asia.  
In  the  meantime,  I  understand  that  financial  institutions  in  Aomori  Prefecture  have  been 
active in supporting firms in such areas as nursing care and other health care and welfare 
services  as  well  as  food-related  areas  including  agriculture  by  partly  utilizing  the  Bank’s 
“fund-provisioning measure to support strengthening the foundations for economic growth.”  
With  those  various  efforts,  Aomori  Prefecture  has  been  demonstrating  its  potential  while 
incorporating the vitality of rapidly growing Asian countries. I wish you the best of success.  
The Bank will continue to firmly support economic activity in various areas from the financial 
side and continue to consistently make contributions as the central bank in order for Japan’s 
economy to return to the sustainable growth path with price stability. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
