Charles L Evans: The Fed’s dual mandate responsibilities and 
challenges facing US monetary policy 
Speech  by  Charles  L  Evans,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago,  at  the 
European Economics and Financial Centre, London, 7 September 2011. 
 In the summer of 2009, the U.S. economy began to emerge from its deepest recession since 
the 1930s. But today, two years later, conditions still aren’t much different from an economy 
actually  in  recession.  GDP  growth  was  barely  positive  in  the  first  half  of  the  year.  The 
unemployment rate is 9.1%, much higher than anything we have experienced for decades 
before the recession. And job gains over the last several months have been barely enough to 
keep pace with the natural growth in the labor force, so we’ve made virtually no progress in 
closing the “jobs gap”. 
The Federal Reserve has responded aggressively to the deep recession and weak recovery, 
cutting short-term interest rates to essentially zero and purchasing assets that expanded its 
balance sheet by a factor of three. But since undertaking the so-called QE2 round of asset 
purchases last fall, the Fed’s aggressive policy actions have been on hold. 
Some  believe  that  this  pause  is  entirely  appropriate.  They  claim  that  the  economy  faces 
some  kind  of  impediment  that  limits  how  much  more  monetary  policy  can  do  to  stimulate 
growth. And, on the price front, they note that the disinflationary pressures of 2009 and 2010 
have given way to inflation rates closer to what I and the majority of Fed policymakers see as 
the Fed’s objective of 2%. These considerations lead many to say that when adding up the 
costs and benefits of further accommodation, the risk of over-shooting our inflation objective 
through  further  policy  accommodation  exceeds  the  potential  benefits  of  speeding  the 
improvement in labor markets. 
I would argue that this view is extremely, and inappropriately, asymmetric in its weighting of 
the Fed’s dual objectives to support maximum employment and price stability. 
Suppose we faced a very different economic environment: Imagine that inflation was running 
at 5% against our inflation objective of 2%. Is there a doubt that any central banker worth 
their salt would be reacting strongly to fight this high inflation rate? No, there isn’t any doubt. 
They  would  be  acting  as  if  their  hair  was  on  fire.  We  should  be  similarly  energized  about 
improving conditions in the labor market. 
In  the  United  States,  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  charges  us  with  maintaining  monetary  and 
financial conditions that support maximum employment and price stability. This is referred to 
as the Fed’s dual mandate and it has the force of law behind it. 
The  most  reasonable 
is  an 
unemployment  rate  near  its  natural  rate,  and  a  fairly  conservative  estimate  of  that  natural 
rate  is  6%.  So,  when  unemployment  stands  at  9%,  we’re  missing  on  our  employment 
mandate by 3 full percentage points. That’s just as bad as 5% inflation versus a 2% target. 
So, if 5% inflation would have our hair on fire, so should 9% unemployment. 
Today, I would like to explore further the implications of the Fed’s dual mandate framework 
for monetary policy-making in today’s environment. And don’t worry, the views I am about to 
express are my own and not necessarily those of my Federal Reserve System colleagues. 
interpretation  of  our  maximum  employment  objective 
Brief update on the U.S. economy 
It’s useful to start with a brief update on the U.S. economy. The economic outlook clearly has 
deteriorated this year. Early in 2011, most forecasters thought that the recovery was gaining 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
traction and that economic activity would increase at a solid – though not spectacular – rate 
this year and next. 
The financial repair process seemed to be progressing well, and, at least among large firms 
with access to the bond market, borrowing costs were quite low. We also had finally begun to 
see a long-awaited improvement in labor market conditions, with private job gains running 
about one-quarter million per month during the winter of 2011 and the unemployment rate 
falling about 1 percentage point over a four-month period. Higher prices for energy and other 
commodities were taking a bite out of purchasing power and the disasters in Japan were a 
drag,  but  these  influences  were  expected  to  be  temporary  and  growth  was  expected  to 
strengthen. 
The  news  over  the  past  several  months  has  proved  this  forecast  wrong.  Gains  in 
employment  have  slowed  markedly,  and  the  unemployment  rate  has  edged  back  up  over 
9%.  The  earlier  improvements  in  labor  markets  now  appear  to  have  reflected  the  lagged 
influence of previous output growth and not – as we had hoped – the start of a virtuous circle 
of  hiring  and  spending.  Furthermore,  revised  data  now  indicate  that  real  GDP  began  to 
decelerate  in  late  2010  and  then  barely  edged  up  in  the  first  half  of  this  year.  Consumer 
spending  was  particularly  sluggish.  Importantly,  the  weakness  in  growth  began  before  the 
bulk of the effects of higher energy prices hit the economy and before the disaster in Japan. 
This timing, and the continued softness of most economic indicators into the early summer, 
indicates that the headwinds facing consumers and businesses are even stronger than we 
thought. 
What  are  these  headwinds?  First,  even  though  credit  conditions  overall  have  been 
improving,  many  households  and  small  businesses  still  seem  to  be  having  trouble  getting 
credit. In addition, the repair process in residential real estate markets is painstakingly slow, 
and households are still in the process of paring debt and adapting to the huge losses in real 
estate and financial wealth that they experienced during the recession. 
Of course, these forces are not new – indeed, they are important reasons why in this cycle 
forecasters  never  predicted  rapid  gains  in  output  such  as  those  that  followed  the  deep 
recessions  in  the  1970s  and  1980s.  But  they  now  appear  to  be  even  deeper  and  more 
persistent than we thought earlier in the year. 
Many  households  and  business  may  still  feel  they  have  inadequate  buffers  of  assets  to 
cushion  against  unexpected  shocks.  This  leads  to  cautious  behavior  that  holds  back 
spending. For example, I regularly hear from business contacts that they do not want to risk 
hiring new workers until they actually see an uptick in demand for their products. They do not 
appear  to  be  paring  back  at  the  moment,  but  they  would  rather  sit  on  cash  than  risk 
undertaking a potentially unprofitable expansion. In addition to these long-running problems, 
continued uncertainty about the European debt crisis and the difficulties dealing with the U.S. 
fiscal situation have held back growth. 
Against  this  backdrop,  the  outlook  has  weakened  substantially.  Last  June,  most  private 
sector forecasters were expecting real GDP to increase 2-3/4% in 2011 and 3.1% in 2012. 
By  early  August,  these  forecasts  had  dropped  to  1.6%  and  2.7%,  respectively.  This  2012 
growth rate is barely above most analysts’ views of potential growth – so it certainly won’t 
make much of a dent in the unemployment rate and other measures of resource slack. 
On the price front, with energy prices increasing markedly, headline inflation – as measured 
by the 12 month change in the total personal consumption expenditures price index – rose 
from about 1-1/4% last fall to 2-3/4% in July. Excluding food and energy, PCE inflation has 
moved  up  from  about  1%  to  1-1/2%  over  the  same  period.  Energy  prices  have  dropped 
sharply over the past month and the prices for many other commodities also have softened. 
And with the unemployment rate still high and capacity utilization low, resource slack is likely 
putting  downward  pressure  on  prices.  In  addition,  market  measures  of  longer-run  inflation 
expectations are at the low end of the range they have been running since last November. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Putting these factors together, my outlook is for overall inflation over the medium term to fall 
back towards core and remain below the 2% level I see as consistent with the price stability 
leg of the Fed’s dual mandate. 
Monetary policy and the dual mandate 
In  my  view,  central  banks  should  focus  on  medium-term  inflation.  Over  shorter  periods, 
measured  inflation  rates  are  affected  by  all  sorts  of  short-term  influences,  such  as 
fluctuations  in  food  and  energy  prices  that  are  beyond  the  control  of  monetary  policy. 
Furthermore, there are significant lags before policy actions influence inflation. So reacting 
too strongly to short-run influences simply adds noise to the policy-making process. 
So, by this appropriate standard I think inflation likely will be below our goal of 2%. And of 
course,  unemployment  is  much  above  its  natural  rate.  Thus,  at  the  moment,  there  is  little 
conflict  between  our  two  goals.  Both  suggest  at  least  some  additional  monetary  policy 
accommodation would be helpful. However, given how truly badly we are doing in meeting 
our employment mandate, I argue that the Fed should seriously consider actions that would 
add very significant amounts of policy accommodation. Such further policy accommodation 
does increase the risk that inflation could rise temporarily above our long-term goal of 2%. 
But I do not think that a temporary period of inflation above 2% is something to regard with 
horror. I do not see our 2% goal as a cap on inflation. Rather, it is a goal for the average rate 
of inflation over some period of time. To average 2%, inflation could be above 2% in some 
periods and below 2% in others. If a 2% goal was meant to be a cap on inflation, then policy 
would result in inflation averaging below 2% over time. I do not think this would be a good 
implementation of a 2% goal.1 
With this in mind, I want to discuss the nature of policy-making under a dual mandate when 
we are far from our goals. 
What’s a central banker to do? (Warning: math ahead) 
Normally,  the  deviations  of  the  real  economy  and  inflation  from  our  objectives  are  small 
enough that any conflicts are minor. And the well-known Taylor Rule captures normal policy 
adjustments well, appropriately weighting output gaps and inflation deviations in the setting 
of  our  policy  rate.  However,  the  Taylor  Rule  is  a  rule-of-thumb,  whose  claims  of  empirical 
validity are based on its ability to track policy during periods of relatively modest volatility.2 
The  current  recession  is  outside  of  the  empirical  experience  of  Taylor  Rules  calibrated  to 
describe Federal Reserve actions. 
We  need  to  look  beyond  heuristic  descriptions  like  the  Taylor  Rule  to  a  more  complete 
analysis of optimal monetary policymaking within a dual mandate framework. This topic has 
been  studied  extensively  in  the  macroeconomic  literature.  Interestingly,  one  of  the  first 
                                                 
1  The Committee’s interpretation of its mandate often is expressed as inflation of “2 percent, or a bit less.” This 
does not mean keeping inflation in a narrow band capped by 2%. The “2 percent, or a bit less” interpretation of 
our price stability mandate comes from the responses to the Survey of Economic Projections  which FOMC 
participants submit four times per year, and in which the majority of participants have said 2% is their long-run 
forecast under conditions that include appropriate monetary policy. Because inflation is determined in the long 
run by monetary policy, it follows that these long-run forecasts can be interpreted as participants’ views on the 
level  of  inflation  most  consistent  with  the  Committee’s  mandate.  The  “or  a  bit  less”  is  added  because  a 
minority of participants submit long-run forecasts that are below 2%. 
2  The  exercise  is  described  in  Taylor,  John  B.  1993.  “Discretion  Versus  Policy  Rules  in  Practice,”  Carnegie-
Rochester  Series  on  Public  Policy  39,  pp.  195–214;  and  Taylor,  John  B.  1999.  “An  Historical  Analysis  of 
Monetary Policy Rules,” in John B. Taylor (ed.) Monetary Policy Rules, University of Chicago Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
modern treatments is due to John Taylor in an article published in Econometrica in 1979.3 
This  framework  continues  to  be  a  mainstay  of  optimal  policy  analysis,  as  evidenced  by  a 
large literature that includes work by Michael Woodford in recent years.4 Taylor expresses 
the central bank’s dual-mandate objective as monetary policymakers attempting to minimize 
the weighted sum of squared deviations of inflation and the level of output from their goal 
values. That is, a central bank attempts to minimize a simple quadratic loss function like the 
following: 
L = (π – π*)2 + λ * (y – y*)2 
Here π and y are inflation and the (natural) logarithm of output, and π* and y* are the policy 
goals for these variables. In most formulations, y* is the log of the level of potential output  
– the level of output at which resource slack has a neutral influence on the level of inflation. 
Thus,  (given  the  properties  of  logarithms)  y  –  y*  is  the  usual  output  gap,  the  percentage 
difference between actual and potential output. And π – π* is the gap between the actual and 
desired  rates  of  inflation.  Ideally,  we’d  like  both  of  these  gaps  to  be  zero,  but  this  usually 
won’t  be  the  case.  We  measure  the  costs  associated  with  the  overall  deviation  of  actual 
outcomes from the ideal with the quadratic loss function L. Note that for each policy goal, this 
loss function equally weights same-sized misses above and below target. 
The  coefficient  λ  determines  the  relative  weight  policymakers  give  to  their  misses  on  real 
output  versus  those  on  inflation.  If  λ  is  equal  to  1,  then  a  1  percentage  point  deviation  of 
inflation from its target gets the same weight in computing the overall costs of being away 
from the optimum as a 1 percentage point deviation of output from its potential. 
However,  Ken  Rogoff  (1985)  and  others  have  argued  that,  in  order  to  avoid  inflationary 
biases  that  might  creep  into  policy,  a  good,  conservative  central  banker  ought  to  conduct 
policy  as  if  λ  were  less  than  one.5  It’s  reasonably  conservative  to  set  λ  equal  to  ¼.  That 
means the costs of a 1 percentage point output gap are judged to be only one-quarter as 
high as the costs of a 1 percentage point deviation of inflation from its goal. So a λ of ¼ puts 
a good deal of weight on keeping inflation near its goal. 
Given  that  the  Fed’s  mandate  is  expressed  in  terms  of  employment,  it  is  helpful  to  recall 
Okun’s Law, which says that a 1 percentage point gap between actual and potential output 
corresponds to a one half percentage point gap between unemployment and its natural rate. 
Making  this  translation  in  the  loss  function,  we  see  that  the  conservative  central  banker 
attempts  to  minimize  the  equally  weighted  sum  of  squared  inflation  and  unemployment 
deviations: 
L = (π – π*)2 + 1 * (u – u*)2 
where u and u* are the actual and natural rates of unemployment6 
The  bottom  line  is  that  a  conservative  and  tough-minded  central  banker  can  still  value 
deviations in unemployment from the natural rate equally with deviations in inflation from its 
target.  Accordingly,  an  inflation  rate  of  5%  against  an  inflation  goal  of  2%  presents  this 
                                                 
3  Taylor,  John  B.  1979.  “Estimation  and  Control  of  a  Macroeconomic  Model  with  Rational  Expectations,” 
Econometrica 47 (5) September, pp. 1267–1286. 
4  For  example,  Woodford,  Michael,  2005.  “Central-Bank  Communication  and  Policy  Effectiveness,”  Paper 
presented  at  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Symposium  on  “The  Greenspan  Era:  Lessons  for  the 
Future,” Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 25–27, 2005. Available at: 
http://www.columbia.edu/~mw2230/JHole05.pdf 
 
5  Rogoff,  Kenneth  S.  1985.  “The  Optimal  Degree  of  Commitment  to  an  Intermediate  Monetary  Target,” 
Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 November, pp. 1169–1189. 
6  That  is,  Okuns’  Law  says  (y  –  y*)  =  2*(u  –  u*),  where  u  and  u*  are  the  actual  and  natural  rates  of 
unemployment. Making this translation in the loss function (so squaring and multiplying by ? = ¼ yields L =  
(? – ? *)2 + 1 * (u – u*)2. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
policymaker  with  an  equal-sized  loss  as  a  9%  unemployment  rate  against  a  conservative 
estimate of 6% for the natural rate of unemployment. (I call this conservative, because while 
we think a number of factors such as increased job mismatch and extended unemployment 
insurance  benefits  have  temporarily  boosted  the  natural  unemployment  rate  in  the  U.S., 
these factors are not expected to persist in the long-run). 
There also is an immediate corollary: If you aren’t as riled up over 9% unemployment as you 
would be over 5% inflation, then you either put even less weight on unemployment deviations 
in your loss function or you think that the natural unemployment rate is substantially higher 
than 6%. 
I’ll  address  the  latter  possibility  later.  However,  I  now  want  to  turn  to  reasons  why  the 
challenges to policymaking in the current situation are orders of magnitude larger than those 
we face during more normal times. To preview, these are because: (a) we find ourselves in 
the  aftermath  of  a  Reinhart-Rogoff  type  financial  crisis,  which  has  resulted  in  severe 
headwinds weighing on the recovery process; (b) the economic costs of the vast amounts of 
unused resources in the economy are very large; and (c) the zero lower bound is a constraint 
on  standard  monetary  policy  actions,  requiring  a  broader  monetary  policy  framework  if  we 
are to provide more policy accommodation. 
Additional challenge #1: Reinhart and Rogoff’s great contraction and debt overhang 
The Financial Crisis of 2008 left an enormous obstacle in the path of the U.S. recovery. From 
peak to trough, $13 trillion of wealth was erased from household balance sheets. Although 
the value of households’ assets declined dramatically, their debt levels remained roughly the 
same.  Many  borrowers  took  on  additional  debt  during  the  period  of  high  and  rising  asset 
valuations,  and  high  employment  and  income  growth  were  key  fundamentals  for  servicing 
these  debt  payments  into  the  future.  These  debt  burdens  are  key  contributors  to  the 
headwinds  I  discussed earlier  when  I  talked  about  the  economic  outlook.  As  I  noted  then, 
they appear to be substantially more onerous than we had expected. 
In  their  book  This  Time  is  Different,  Carmen  Reinhart  and  Ken  Rogoff  documented  the 
substantially  more  detrimental  effects  that  financial  crises  typically  impose  on  economic 
recoveries.7 Recoveries following severe financial crises take many years longer than usual, 
and  the  risk  of  a  second  recession  before  the  ultimate  economic  recovery  returns  to  the 
previous business cycle peak is substantially higher. In a related study of the current U.S. 
experience,  Reinhart  and  Rogoff  show  that  the  current  anemic  recovery  is  following  the 
typical post-financial crisis path quite closely, given the size of the financial contraction.8 It 
would be nice to point to some features of the recovery that suggest greater progress relative 
to the Reinhart-Rogoff benchmark. But those are hard to come by. 
It bears keeping in mind that the Reinhart-Rogoff predictions of a slow recovery are based on 
historical averages of macroeconomic performances across many different countries at many 
different  times.  They  highlight  a  challenge  we  face  today,  but  from  the  standpoint  of  the 
underlying economic analysis, there is nothing pre-ordained about these outcomes. They are 
not  theoretical  predictions  –  rather,  they  are  reduced  form  correlations.  The  economy  can 
perform better than it did in these past episodes if policy responds better than it did in those 
                                                 
7  Reinhart,  Carmen  M.  and  Kenneth  Rogoff,  2009.  This  Time  is  Different:  Eight  Centuries  of  Financial  Folly. 
Princeton University Press. New Jersey: Princeton. 
8  Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth Rogoff, 2011. Remarks at the 2011 NBER Summer Institute. For similar 
analyses, see Reinhart, Carmen M. and Kenneth Rogoff, 2008. “Is the 2007 US Sub-Prime Financial Crisis So 
Different? An International Historic Comparison” American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 98(2), 
pp.  339–344;  and  Reinhart,  Carmen  M.  and  Kenneth  Rogoff,  2008.  “The  Aftermath  of  Financial  Crises” 
American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 99(2), pp. 466–472. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
situations.  In  my  opinion,  maintaining  the  Fed’s  focus  on  both  of  our  dual-mandate 
responsibilities is a necessary and critical element of an appropriate response to the financial 
crisis that can produce better economic outcomes. 
Additional challenge #2: trying new and nontraditional policy responses when the 
economic stakes are enormous 
The  second  critical  challenge  is  to  take  actions  that  respect  both  the  feasibility  of  what 
monetary policy can accomplish and the enormous risks to the future prospects of the U.S. 
economy. 
For  me,  these  risks  are  clear.  It  is  painfully  obvious  that  the  large  quantities  of  unused 
resources  in  the  U.S.  are  an  enormous  waste.  And  it’s  not  just  the  current  loss  –  over 
substantial  periods  of  time,  the  skills  of  long-term  unemployed  workers  decline,  their  re-
employment  prospects  for  similar  jobs  fade,  and  these  reductions  in  skills  have  a  lasting 
effect on the future growth potential of the economy. 
As  I  noted  in  the  introduction,  some  argue  that  there  currently  are  severe  limits  to  what 
further  accommodative  monetary  policies  can  do  to  address  these  risks.  It  is  essential  to 
delineate clear alternative scenarios in which this additional accommodation would be futile. 
Such  scenarios  clearly  exist,  but  they  are  very  dark  and  pessimistic  interpretations  of  our 
current  situation.  I  am  personally  much  more  optimistic  and  I  don’t  subscribe  to  this 
pessimistic view; but let me describe it as I understand it. 
Essentially, the hypothesis that limits aggressive policy actions assumes that the productive 
capabilities of the U.S. have declined markedly in recent years and that many workers who 
were  productively  employed  just  a  few  years  ago  are  now  essentially  obsolete.  In  this 
scenario, either much of the past decade of prosperity was an illusion or, alternatively within 
the  space  of  only  a  few  years,  the  productive  potential  of  the  U.S.  collapsed  for  some 
unexplained reason. 
I suppose it is natural to believe that some elements of the story are true. But for me, the 
evidence  for  this  is  minimal,  and  the  implications  for  productive  capacity  are  exceedingly 
pessimistic. And even if it is true, the market mechanism should cause wages and prices to 
adjust in order to reemploy unused resources. For example, there should be some lower real 
wage  that  would  make  it  profitable  for  firms  to  fund  the  necessary  on-the-job  training  for 
workers  who  need  some  modest  acquisition  of  skills.  According  to  this  pessimistic 
hypothesis,  something  is  preventing  the  market’s  pricing  mechanism  from  achieving  such 
results within a satisfactory time frame. 
My own view is more optimistic and, I believe, more consistent with the idea that our best 
days  are  ahead.  Without  a  compelling  explanation  for  the  hypothesis  that  the  productive 
capability  of  the  U.S.  has  been  diminished,  I  think  the  evidence  favors  the  belief  that 
aggregate demand is simply much too low today. After all, today there are roughly 14 million 
unemployed Americans. Only a few years ago, there were only about  half that many. It is 
hard to believe that an additional 7 million Americans have suddenly lost the necessary skills 
to work in today’s economy, and I have not seen any evidence supporting such a dramatic 
and rapid loss of skills. 
In the more optimistic case to which I subscribe, the productive capacity and potential wealth 
of  the  U.S.  have  not  been  permanently  damaged  and  currently  unused  resources  are  still 
productive. Accordingly, in my opinion, monetary policy should be used more aggressively to 
increase  aggregate  demand.  In  time,  a  reduction  in  excessive  risk  aversion,  supported  by 
natural market forces would reestablish the fundamentals that previously supported stronger 
growth  and  full  employment.  In  this  way,  large  social  losses  would  be  mitigated.  By 
stimulating aggregate demand, we can have “Morning in America, again” and our best days 
can still be ahead of us. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But the clock is ticking – the longer we wait, the more likely it is that unutilized skills diminish 
to the point that more permanent damage takes hold. 
Challenge #3: monetary policy held back by zero lower bound 
By now, the third obstacle is quite well-known: the federal funds rate in the U.S. is currently 
constrained  by  the  zero  lower  bound  on  interest  rates.  Given  the  economic  scenario  and 
inflation  outlook  I  have  discussed, were  it  possible,  I  would  favor  cutting  the  federal  funds 
rate by several percentage points. But since the federal funds rate is already near zero now, 
that’s not an option. 
To date, the Fed’s policy-making committee, the FOMC, has used a number of nontraditional 
policy tools to impart greater financial accommodation. I have fully supported these policies. 
Today, however, I simply think we need to do more. 
In a recent Financial Times comment, Michael Woodford of Columbia University discussed 
how  greater  clarity  in  policy  communications  would  help.9  As  I  see  it,  current  financial 
conditions are more restrictive than I favor, because households, businesses, and markets 
place  too  much  weight  on  the  possibility  that  Fed  policy  will  turn  restrictive  in  the  near  to 
medium term. 
The  FOMC’s  announcement  in  August  that  it  anticipates  short-term  rates  remaining  low 
through mid-2013 was certainly a step in the right direction, because it significantly raised the 
hurdle for early policy tightening. However, I think our dual mandate responsibilities and the 
strong impediments of the financial crisis argue for a more aggressive approach. 
One way to provide more accommodation would be to make a simple conditional statement 
of policy accommodation relative to our dual mandate responsibilities. The goal would be to 
enhance  economic  growth  and  employment  while  maintaining  disciplined 
inflation 
performance. This conditionality could be conveyed by stating that we would hold the federal 
funds  rate  at  extraordinarily  low  levels  until  the  unemployment  rate  falls  substantially,  say 
from its current level of 9.1% to 7.5% or even 7%, as long as medium-term inflation stayed 
below 3%. 
With regard to the inflation marker, we have already experienced unduly low inflation of 1%; 
so against an objective of 2 percent, 3 percent inflation would be an equivalent policy loss to 
what we have already experienced. On the unemployment marker, a decline to 7.5% would 
be quite helpful. However, weighed against an overly conservative estimate for the natural 
rate of unemployment of 6%, it still represents a substantial policy loss – indeed, one that is 
higher than the policy loss from high inflation of 3%. 
Accordingly, these triggers remain quite conservatively tilted in favor of disciplined inflation 
performance over enhanced growth and employment, and it would not be unreasonable to 
consider an even lower unemployment threshold that would be enough progress to justify the 
start of policy tightening. 
There are other policies that could give clearer communications of our policy conditionality 
with  respect  to  observable  data.  For  example,  I  have  previously  discussed  how  state-
contingent, price-level targeting would work in this regard.10 Another possibility might be to 
target  the  level  of  nominal  GDP,  with  the  goal  of  bringing  it  back  to  the  growth  trend  that 
                                                 
9  Woodford, Michael. 2011. “Bernanke Should Clarify Policy and Sink QE3” Financial Times August 25, 2011. 
10  See Evans, Charles. 2010. “Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment: Developing a State-Contingent 
Price-Level Target.” Remarks delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s 55th Economic Conference 
on October 16, 2010, in Boston, Mass.; and 2010 Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Annual Report: Monetary 
Policy Rules for Non-Traditional Times, available at:  
http://www.chicagofed.org/digital_assets/publications/annual_report/2010_annual_report.pdf 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
existed before the recession. I think these kinds of policies are worth contemplating – they 
may provide useful monetary policy guidance during extraordinary circumstances such as we 
find ourselves in today. 
The trigger policy I noted above and level-targeting policies may result in inflation running at 
rates that would make us uncomfortable during normal times. But we should not be afraid of 
such  temporarily  higher  inflation  results  today.  As  I  noted  earlier,  Ken  Rogoff  (1985)  has 
written that in normal times, we may want conservative central bankers as institutional offsets 
to what would otherwise be inflationary biases in the monetary policy process. But these are 
not usual times – we are in the aftermath of a financial crisis with stubborn debt overhangs 
that are weighing on activity. And as Rogoff himself wrote in a recent piece in the Financial 
Times,  higher  inflation  could  aid  the  deleveraging  process.11  To  quote  him:  “Any  inflation 
above 2 percent may seem anathema to those who still remember the anti-inflation wars of 
the 1970s and 1980s, but a once-in-75-year crisis calls for outside-the-box measures.” 
Conclusion 
Last  year  about  this  time  economic  conditions  deteriorated  to  the  point  that  we  undertook 
discussions on how to provide further monetary accommodation – and we ended up with our 
second round of large scale asset purchases. Now, one year later, we again find ourselves 
with a weakened economic outlook and again trying to decide what further accommodation 
to  provide.  I’m  sure  everyone  will  agree  that  we  seriously  don’t  want  to  be  in  this  position 
again at this time next year. I believe that means we need to take strong action now. 
Thanks. 
                                                 
11  Rogoff, Kenneth S. 2011. “The Bullets Yet to Be Fired to Stop the Crisis” Financial Times August 8, 2011. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
