Brian Wynter: Jamaica’s recent economic path and prospects – the view 
from the Bank 
Address by Mr Brian Wynter, Governor of the Bank of Jamaica, to Montego Bay Chamber of 
Commerce & Industry, Breakfast Forum, Montego Bay, 21 April 2011. 
 the 
trends 
in  Jamaica’s 
indebtedness,  entrenching 
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
Thank you for inviting me to address your function this morning. It is interesting that this is 
taking place just one week before the Minister of Finance presents his plans to finance the 
Government’s expenditures for fiscal year 2011/12. In addition to the obvious interest that we 
all have in the outcome of this annual national event, there is another reason to take special 
note  of  it  and  that  is  to  see  in  action  the  early  fruits  of  the  focus  on  reforming  the  entire 
budget  process  that  represents  a  major  step  in  a  series  of  policy  initiatives  aimed  at 
reversing 
fiscal  discipline  and 
accountability  and  engineering  sustainable  GDP  growth.  This  is  an  enormous  challenge 
made more acute by, first, the severe negative impact of the global financial crisis of 2008/09 
on our export markets and, more recently, by the large increases in international commodity 
prices over the last nine months or so.  
Let me tell you what has happened so far in this series of initiatives. In January last year, the 
Government negotiated the highly successful Jamaica Debt Exchange with local investors. 
This,  together  with  a  large  tax  package,  public  sector  wage  restraint  and  aggressive 
commitments to off-loading loss-making public sector entities, paved the way for the signing 
of a Stand-by Agreement with the International Monetary Fund. This in turn unlocked access 
for  the  Government  to  unprecedented  levels  of  funding  from  the  multilateral  financial 
institutions  for  fiscal  and  balance  of  payments  support.  These  developments  induced  a 
restoration  of  investor  confidence  that  has  permitted  the  central  bank  to  ease  monetary 
policy  progressively  thereby  bringing  interest  rates  on  money  market  instruments  and 
government bonds to levels not seen in Jamaica in decades. The same dynamic, supported 
by monetary policy and fiscal policy initiatives, created conditions for inflation expectations, 
which  research  has  shown  is  the  most  significant  driver  of  inflation  in  Jamaica,  to  fall 
dramatically.  
As the year ended, headline inflation for the fiscal year was 7.8 per cent, close to the bottom 
of the target range of 7.5 per cent to 9.5 per cent. Last week, STATIN released its inflation 
report for March, which saw consumer prices increasing by 1.1 per cent for the month. This 
matched the central bank’s projection exactly and reflected the impact of increased oil prices 
on electricity and transportation-related costs as well as the announced increase in minimum 
wages. More broadly, for the year, world prices for commodities increased. For example, oil 
prices rose by 18 per cent and the price of corn rose by 31 per cent. This is worth stressing 
so that we can appreciate that the success of the policies in reducing inflation from 13.3 per 
cent  the  year  before  to  7.8  per  cent  last  year  (a  reduction  of  5.5  percentage  points)  was 
achieved in an environment of sharply higher world commodity prices.  
The  success  in  bringing  down  inflation  occurred,  though,  in  a  weaker  economy  than  had 
originally been projected. Adverse local and international weather conditions (Tropical Storm 
Nicole,  ash  clouds  in  Europe)  and  the  temporary  fall-out  that  the  economy  experienced, 
particularly  in  the  tourism  sector,  from  the  disturbances  in  West  Kingston  in  May  played  a 
part. Overall, however, the tourism sector remained the brighter star. Stopover tourist arrivals 
for the full fiscal year are estimated to have grown in the region of 3.5 per cent to 4.0 per 
cent. Cruise passenger arrivals, of which about a third come through the Montego Bay port, 
recorded growth of approximately 5.0 per cent following three successive years of decline. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The industry is now poised to grow substantially in the coming year because of the opening 
of the new port in Falmouth.  
To round out the picture, the balance of payments left us with even stronger net international 
reserves. The NIR ended the year at US$2.5 billion, up US$800 million for the year. Gross 
reserves  ended  at  US$3.4  billion,  representing  nearly  23  weeks  of  projected  imports  of 
goods and services. This performance was underpinned by heightened confidence about the 
prospects  for  the  economy  as  the  government  demonstrated  repeated success  in meeting 
the quantitative targets under the agreement with the IMF. We saw this confidence reflected 
in the strong preference for Jamaica Dollar assets which influenced the steady appreciation 
in the exchange rate that we experienced last year.  
What is our prognosis for the next fiscal year? We are expecting that the process of fiscal 
consolidation will continue, even while the government embarks on a path to induce growth. 
We are currently expecting inflation for the fiscal year to fall further even in the face of rising 
commodity prices. The fall will not be as pronounced as the 5.5 percentage points fall that we 
saw  in  the 2010/11  fiscal  year.  The  uncertainties  unleashed  on  the  global  economy  in  the 
form of highly volatile and rising commodity prices will make a repeat of the extent of last 
year’s success all but impossible. But we will be striving for a meaningful reduction all the 
same,  a  reduction  that  is  aimed  at  taking  us  decisively  along  the  path  towards  our  longer 
term  goal  for  Jamaica,  which  is  the  average  inflation  rate  of  our  major  trading  partners 
(currently about 4 per cent).  
We are also expecting that, with lower inflation and interest rates and an abundance of credit 
resources  in  the  economy,  there  will  be  a  smooth  handover  of  the  growth  driver  from 
state-led spending to private investment. In this regard, Bank of Jamaica has been projecting 
a moderate economic recovery in the current fiscal year.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
