Njuguna Ndung’u: Cooperation between the Bank of Mauritius and the 
Central Bank of Kenya 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the signing 
ceremony  of  the  Memorandum  of  Understanding  between  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  and  the 
Central Bank of Kenya, Central Bank of Kenya, Nairobi, 8 August 2011. 
 Mr. Rundheersing Bheenick, Governor of the Bank of Mauritius; 
Members of the Press; 
Colleagues; 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
I  am  privileged  to  welcome  Governor  Rundheersing  Bheenick  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  to 
Nairobi and to the Central Bank of Kenya. 
Governor, we thank you for making the time to be here at this auspicious occasion and trust 
that you are having a pleasant stay so far. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Today’s  event  is  a  monumental  one  in  that  it  marks  the 
establishment  of  formal  supervisory  relations  between  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  and  the 
Bank of Mauritius. 
We began the process of establishing formal cooperation between the Bank of Mauritius and 
the Central Bank of Kenya in 2009 and today’s signing of the Memorandum of Understanding 
between the Bank of Mauritius and the Central Bank of Kenya will be a culmination of that 
process.  The  MOU  is  premised  on  the  need  to  enhance  cooperation  in  the  sharing  of 
supervisory information between our two institutions. It will help define and guide our working 
relationships  in  addition  to  enabling  the  smooth  exchange  of  supervisory  information 
between us. 
One Kenyan bank (I & M Bank) has already established a presence in Mauritius while other 
banks  are  also  considering  exploring  opportunities  in  Mauritius.  Similarly,  banks  from 
Mauritius have direct and indirect commercial relations with our Kenyan institutions. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The global financial crisis has reinforced the importance of effective 
dialogue and collaboration between banking supervisors. Indeed, one of the biggest lessons 
learnt from the financial crisis has been the need for better regulation of financial institutions. 
The  crisis  has  also  provided  an  abundance  of  examples  highlighting  the  importance  of 
supervisory  cooperation.  As  a  result,  a  key  initiative  of  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision  has  been  to  recommend  enhanced  promotion  of  cooperation  between 
supervisors globally in order to facilitate an efficient exchange of information.  
Such  coordination  and  communication  is  the  basis  for  promoting  robust  risk  management 
practices  and  developing  sound  supervisory  standards.  Cross-border  cooperation  is  a 
prerequisite for establishing effective resolution techniques for systemically important banks 
having cross-border operations. 
It  is  therefore  apparent  that  it  is  no  longer  possible  for  any  one  regulator  to  adequately 
supervise  institutions  that  operate  across  the  globe,  hence  cooperation  among  regulatory 
authorities  is  essential.  As  Regulators,  we  need  to  encourage  and  support  transformation 
and innovation through better regulation instead of looking for avenues of more regulation. 
As per Sir Andrew Crockett, better regulation is a regime that:  
 
 
Can readily identify weaknesses and emerging vulnerabilities;  
Is capable of analyzing risks and adequately addressing pricing risks;  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
 Provides appropriate incentives (penalties) to induce prudent behavior in the market 
place;  
But also to add in our case, the regulator is an agent of market development.  
 
Better regulation encourages innovation and strong institutions to develop in the economy. 
Cross border banking has its opportunities and challenges. As regulators, it is in our mutual 
interest to ensure the soundness and stability of our respective financial sectors. We should 
therefore play our rightful role in ensuring effective supervision of banking entities operating 
in  our  respective  jurisdictions.  We  should  also  ensure  that  any  systemic  risk  that  may  be 
posed by one bank operating in another jurisdiction is mitigated and promptly brought to the 
attention of the home regulator. The MOU  which we are signing today will thus enable us 
share a wide range of supervisory information on a more defined framework.  
Ladies and Gentlemen; Both Mauritius and Kenya are leading international hubs. Mauritius 
is  a  renowned  international  financial  centre  for  its  offshore  financial  services.  Likewise, 
Kenya, because of its leadership in mobile money transfer services, is now referred to as the 
Silicon  Valley  of  Africa.  We  can  both  learn  from  each  other  and  share  our  respective 
experiences  so  as  to increase  the competitiveness  of  our  markets  as  well  as  our  financial 
institutions.  The  signing  of  this  MOU  will  therefore  set  forth  a  pragmatic  approach  for 
cooperation  and  the  sharing  of  supervisory  information.  We  accordingly  look  forward  to 
building on the existing good relations between the Central Bank of Kenya and the Bank of 
Mauritius  and  to  a  future  of  enhanced  supervisory  cooperation.  I  now  invite  Governor 
Bheenick to make some remarks before we proceed to sign the MOU. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
