Duvvuri Subbarao: Statistics in the world of the Reserve Bank of India 
Inaugural address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Statistics Day Conference of the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, 5 July 2011. 
 We  are  gathered  here  today  for  the  5th  Annual  Statistics  Day  Conference  of  the  Reserve 
Bank to honour the signal contribution of late Prof. P.C. Mahalanobis to the Indian statistical 
system. Let me start by noting that the United Nations declared October 20, 2010 as the first 
World  Statistics  Day.  In  recognizing  the  importance  of  statistics  and  statistical  analysis  to 
public policy formulation, we in India have been ahead of the world. 
Statistics day in RBI 
I note with satisfaction, indeed some pride, that the celebration of the Statistics Day in the 
Reserve Bank is much more than an annual calendar event. We are deeply conscious of the 
fact that our policy calibration, be it monetary policy, regulatory actions or decisions in pursuit 
of  financial  stability,  is  improved  by  the  quality  of  data  at  our  command  and  our  ability  to 
analyze  and  interpret  that  data.  The  decisions  that  we  in  the  Reserve  Bank  make  have  a 
profound  impact  on  the  macroeconomy,  and  errors  can  be  costly.  Our  policy  judgement 
should therefore be based not only on state of the art skills in data analysis and interpretation 
but also on an intellectual value system of ruthlessly honest validation and peer review.  
While on the subject of intellectual integrity, I must pay a tribute to Prof. Suresh Tendulkar 
who  passed  away  a  couple  of  weeks  ago.  Prof.  Tendulkar,  as  many  of  you  know,  was  a 
director on the Central Board of the Reserve Bank. He was a distinguished economist and 
was  widely  respected  for  his  teaching  and  scholarship  as  well  as  for  his  authoritative 
comments on Indian macroeconomic issues. Among Prof. Tendulkar’s many strengths was 
his unwavering commitment to base whatever he said on data analysis. You could rely on 
what he said because you knew that it came from painstaking empirical work and a sharp 
mind that could relate what the data said to the real world situation. It is that value system 
and that judgemental capability that we must pursue and promote in the Reserve Bank. 
This year’s conference 
I  gather  this  year’s  conference  has  two  special  themes:  (i)  time  series  analysis;  and 
(ii) financial  statistics.  I  can  hardly  overemphasize  the  relevance  of  the  two  themes.  Time 
series  analysis  is  important  for  understanding  the  underlying  trends  and  for  identifying 
inflexion points. In interpreting time series analysis, we need to apply judgement on whether 
the future would be different from the past, and if so in what way. In other words, we must be 
able  to  say  if  the  underlying  trend  has  turned  non-linear.  The  second  conference  theme, 
Financial  Statistics,  has  always  been  important;  indeed,  its  importance  has  grown  in  the 
rapidly  globalizing  world.  In  a  globalizing  world,  financial  systems  are  interconnected  both 
within  and  across  jurisdictions.  In  analyzing  and  interpreting  Financial  Statistics,  we  must 
keep these interconnections in view.  
We  are  privileged  to  have  with  us  today  two  eminent  guest  speakers  –  Prof.  Sastry 
G. Pantula  from  the  University  of  North  Carolina,  USA  and  Prof.  Rajeeva  Karandikar, 
Director  of  the  Chennai  Mathematical  Institute  –  two  statisticians  in  the  forefront  of  their 
respective  fields  of  specialization.  They  bring  together  enormous  intellectual  acumen, 
wisdom  and  expertise  in  two  vital  branches  of  statistics:  time  series  analysis  and  financial 
statistics. On behalf of all of us, I want to extend a hearty welcome to both of them.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Global crisis and statistical analysis 
Let  me  make  another  observation  on  a  larger  canvas  before  turning  to  specifics.  As  we 
emerge  out  of  the  global  crisis,  the  deepest  financial  crisis  of  our  time,  there  are  many 
lessons  being  drawn.  Among  the  “big  picture”  lessons  is  that  the  real  world  is  not 
deterministic but that the real world is stochastic. Our analysis and policy judgements should 
not lose sight of this truism.  
Let me explain this by drawing an analogy from physics. In the Newtonian world view, we 
have a clockwork universe. All we need to know are the basic laws of physics and the initial 
conditions,  and  it  would  be  possible  to  determine  the  outcome  of  the  universe  at  any  and 
every point of time in the future with absolute precision. Newtonian physics requires a God, 
but a God who is no more than a clockmaker. 
With the benefit of hindsight, we now know that the mistake economists made was to extend 
the Newtonian world view, applicable to the world of machines, to the real world inhabited by 
capricious human beings. In line with the “deterministic reductionism” that was the defining 
feature of Newtonian mechanics, economists deluded themselves into thinking that the laws 
of  economics  can  be  reduced  to  precise  and  deterministic  mathematical  equations.  We 
should  have  known  better.  It  took  a  devastating  crisis  to  tell  us  that  this  was  a  serious 
mistake.  How  the  economy  evolves,  both  at  the  macro  level  and  the  micro  level,  is 
determined by human behaviour which can scarcely be fitted into an analytical mathematical 
equation.  The  sub-prime  crisis  and  the  financial  engineering  that  caused  it  are  a  powerful 
illustration  of  the  fact  that  it  is  human  behaviour  that  drives  the  destiny  of  finance  and 
economics. 
In that sense, the crisis reinforced the importance of empirical analysis in interpreting the real 
world. People inhabiting the real world act, react and respond to the evolving situations in 
inexplicable, unpredictable and often capricious ways, and the only way to capture that real 
world sociology and psychology as it translates to economic trends is through collection of 
reliable  and  relevant  data  and  analyzing  and  interpreting  that  data.  Statistical  analysis 
therefore has to be an increasingly important support system for our policy formulation. 
Statistics in RBI’s policy making 
Let me now move on from the big  picture to the world of  RBI. Needless to say, statistical 
analysis is critical to RBI’s policy formulation. We face many challenges and dilemmas in this 
area. I will address the more important of these under the following heads: (i) Quality of data; 
(ii) Data revisions; (iii) Data interpretation; and (iv) Data gaps.  
Quality of data 
At the outset, I must say that India has a rich tradition of statistics. Given the size, diversity 
and  as  yet  low  levels  of  literacy,  this  is  a  tribute  to  the  diligence  of  our  public  statistical 
agencies.  Surely,  some  of  the  basic  statistics  such  as,  for  example,  the  poverty  ratio  are 
highly  contentious.  Both  the  methodology  used  for  estimation  of  the  poverty  ratio  and  the 
quality  of  data  used  have  frequently  been  called  into  question.  Actually,  I  see  this  as  a 
positive sign. I would read this as an indication of the intellectual watchdog function that is 
built  into  our  statistical  tradition.  What  is  put  out  by  a  public  agency  should  after  all  be 
contestable.  
Having said that, in the Reserve Bank we are handicapped by the reliability of some of the 
basic  data  that  we  need  to  use  in  policy  calculations.  In  particular,  the  data  we  get  on 
unemployment and wages do not inspire confidence as regards quality. The recently put out 
data on employment throw up a paradox as they simultaneously indicate fewer jobs created 
in the five year period to 2010 along with a decline in the long-term unemployment rate. On 
the  issue  of  wage  statistics,  the  upward  pressure  on  wages  in  the  unorganized  sector  is 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
inconsistent with what are believed to be high rates of unemployment and underemployment 
in the informal economy.  
The Index of Industrial Production (IIP) is another statistic that has shown counter-intuitive 
trends. During the period when the global financial crisis was at its peak – December 2008 to 
June  2009  –  IIP  growth  was  positive  according  to  the  then  available  IIP  series.  This  was 
contrary to our assessment of the underlying trend of some deceleration on account of the 
crisis. The new IIP series, revised with 2004/05 as the base, now shows that IIP growth was, 
in fact, negative during that period vindicating our intuition. Again, the old IIP series indicated 
that industrial activity slowed in the second half of last year (2010/11) relative to the first half 
but  the  revised  IIP  series  shows  that  industrial  growth  maintained  roughly  the  same  pace 
between the two halves of the fiscal year.  
Another  problem  with  IIP  has  been  its  volatility,  with  the  volatility  being  even  larger  in  the 
capital goods sector. This is analytically bewildering. The volatility persists in new series too. 
It is important for policy purposes to determine whether the root cause of such behaviour is 
the production decisions in the wake of uncertainty or whether it is due to the compilation 
process.  Several  explanations  have  been  offered  for  this  including  that  IIP  captures  the 
product  manufactured  in  the  month  and  not  the  product’  under  production’.  Hence,  items, 
particularly  with  a  manufacturing  cycle  of  longer  than  a  month,  can  lead  to  sharp 
month-to-month  spikes/dips,  not  necessarily  consistent  with  the  underlying  demand  in  the 
economy.  
The  above  illustrations  demonstrate  how  poor  quality  data  could  potentially  mislead  policy 
calculations. 
Data Revision 
The Reserve Bank’s policy formulation is also handicapped by frequent revisions to data. We 
make policies in real time and if the provisional data that these are based on are inaccurate, 
the resultant policies can turn out to be sub-optimal choices. Take estimates of GDP growth. 
For  the  year  2009–10,  for  example,  the  Advance  Estimate  of  GDP  growth  rate  at  market 
prices from the expenditure side, that came out in February 2010, was 6.8 per cent. That was 
changed to 7.7 per cent in the Revised Estimate in May 2010 and further to 9.1 per cent in 
the Quick Estimate in February 2011. Therefore, policy that per force had to use information 
on  Advance  Estimate  of  GDP  was  fraught  with  the  risk  of  underestimating  the  growth 
momentum. 
The more critical data on wholesale price index (WPI) inflation too has been subject to large 
revisions. For example, initial estimates of WPI inflation were 8.2 per cent for January 2011 
and 8.3 per cent for February 2011. Both these numbers were substantially revised upwards 
by 120 basis points each. Oftentimes, it is not clear if the revisions are occasioned by one-off 
factors or systemic factors. Nevertheless, each time we have to make an assessment of the 
inflation  situation,  we  are  left  to  double  guessing  how  the  provisional  number  might  be 
revised.  
I think it was Groucho Marx who said, “never make a forecast, especially about the future”. 
The Reserve Bank does not enjoy the freedom of choice in this regard. As a matter of policy 
guidance for stakeholders, we are obliged to give our projection of inflation. Such a projection 
is evidently based on data available at that point in time. But if the provisional data that we 
feed into the econometric model is off-track and does not exhibit any systematic pattern, our 
projections of inflation too gets off-track. 
The  Reserve  Bank’s  inflation  projections  systematically  under-predicted  year-end  inflation 
during  2010–11.  The  under-prediction 
the 
larger-than-expected  increase  in  prices  of  international  crude  oil  and  other  commodities; 
(ii) the less-than-expected decline in food prices, despite a normal monsoon, which in turn 
reflected structural changes in food consumption and more demand for protein-based food 
to  a  variety  of 
is  owed 
factors: 
(i) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
items;  (iii)  erroneous  signals  from  the  then  available  IIP  data  which  suggested  some 
moderation  in  growth  and  demand  pressures  in  the  second  half  of  2010–11,  whereas  the 
revised IIP series, now available, shows no such deceleration in growth and demand; and 
(iv) larger than usual upward revisions to the past inflation data. In this context, persistently 
high  inflation  during  2010–11  and  the  continuation  of  this  trend  through  the  first  half  of  
2011–12  suggest  that  we  need  to  revisit  our  estimates  of  the  potential  growth  rate  of  the 
economy.  
Admittedly,  data  revisions  are  unavoidable  in  real  world,  real  time  statistics  but  we  must 
make a conscious effort to minimize the quantum as well as the number of revisions in order 
to make policy choices better informed and more effective.  
Interpretation of inflation data 
This is possibly an appropriate context for me to address some criticism against the Reserve 
Bank’s use and analysis of inflation data. Abstracting from all the details and nuances, the 
criticism can be summarized as follows: 
(i) 
The use of WPI as the headline inflation index is flawed as it does not capture the 
final goods prices that consumers actually experience in the market. RBI should be 
guided more by the CPI which more accurately reflects demand pressures because 
it is demand pressures that monetary policy action can influence.  
RBI’s  interpretation  of  non-food  manufacturing  inflation  as  a  proxy  for  demand 
pressures is flawed as it reflects more supply side price adjustments and cost push 
factors than demand side pressures. 
(ii) 
At  the  outset,  I  must  admit  that  this  criticism  has  some  merit.  Conceptually,  the  CPI  is  a 
better indicator of demand side pressures than the WPI. An increase in wholesale prices, if 
sustained, either results in an eventual increase in prices by retailers or a squeeze in their 
margins. If demand is strong, retailers may exercise pricing power and pass on the increase 
in wholesale prices to consumers. In case demand is weak, retailers will be forced to partly 
absorb  the  increase  in  wholesale  prices  in  their  margins.  Thus,  there  is  no  denying  that 
consumer prices better reflect demand side pressures than wholesale prices.  
Even so, in India, we have opted for WPI over CPI as a second best choice for a number of 
reasons. First and most importantly, we do not have a single CPI that is representative of the 
whole  country.  Until  recently  we  had  four,  and  of  those,  currently  we  have  three  CPIs 
representing  different  segments  of  the  population.  While  WPI  is  computed  on  an  all-India 
basis, CPIs are constructed for specific centres and then aggregated to an all-India index. 
Second, WPI is available with a slightly shorter lag than the CPIs. Third, WPI has a broader 
coverage  than  the  CPIs  in  terms  of  the  number  of  commodities,  number  of  quotations, 
inclusion of non-agricultural products and tradeable items.  
Finally, the revision of the basket for CPI series lags that of the WPI series. Last year, the 
WPI series was revised to the base of 2004–05 whereas the existing CPIs continue with the 
old base – for CPI-RL (1986–87), CPI-AL (1986–87) and CPI-IW (2001) which makes CPIs 
ill-equipped  to  capture  the  price  behaviour  caused  by  the  rapid  structural  changes  in  the 
economy. The revision of the base year in the case of WPI also led to some increase in the 
weights  towards  fuel  and  power  and  manufactured  products  away  from  primary  articles. 
Although  changes  in  the  weights  for  manufactured  products  were  not  substantial  for  the 
group  as  a  whole,  there  has  been  a  tilt  in  the  weights  towards  non-food  manufactured 
products  reflecting  changes  in  the  production  pattern  over  the  decade.  The  number  of 
commodities  included  in  the  new  WPI  series  increased  from  435  to  676,  even  after 
dropping/revising 176 items from the old series.  
Given the limited efficacy of monetary policy to deal with food and fuel inflation, and the limits 
on  using  core  CPI  inflation  measures,  we  have  focused  our  attention  on  non-food 
manufactured products inflation as an indicator of demand-side pressures in the economy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Generally,  core  inflation  is  a  derived  inflation  measure  from  the  headline.  The  transitory 
component of the headline, food and fuel, is excluded. This is the standard practice though 
there  are  many  statistical  methods  of  exclusion.  The  short  point  is  that  core  inflation  is 
designed to capture the persistent component of inflation, which is amenable to policy. While 
it is true that commodity prices influence the non-food manufactured products component of 
WPI,  it  is  also  true  that  the  pass-through  from  higher  commodity  prices  to  WPI  depends 
critically upon the underlying demand conditions in the economy.  
Let  me  reiterate  what  we  have  said  several  times  in  the  past.  For  an  assessment  of  the 
inflation situation, in the Reserve Bank, we look at all the measures of inflation, both overall 
and disaggregated components, in conjunction with other economic and financial indicators. 
In  the  context  of  monetary  policy  formulation,  it  is  important  to  have  a  robust  primary 
measure of inflation at the national level. In this direction, the compilation and dissemination 
of CPI (Urban), CPI (Rural) and the CPI for the country by CSO is an important step forward. 
However, long time series data, especially for the back period are not available for these new 
indices making them unsuitable for policy analysis. There is also a need to augment the price 
indices  with  appropriate  coverage  of 
their  overall 
representativeness. Moreover, regular and more frequent updating of the base year for price 
indices  is  also  important  to  reflect  the  structural  changes  in  the  economy  and  to  enhance 
their representativeness.  
Data interpretation is also important in areas other than monetary policy. One of the critical 
building blocks of the post-crisis Basel III package is the build up of countercyclical buffers 
during the upswing of a business cycle and their use during the downturn of the business 
cycle.  This  means  we  need  to  be  able  to  make  a  judgement  on  the  inflexion  point  in  the 
business cycle in real time. Quite evidently, both pre-mature action or delayed action can be 
costly in macroeconomic terms. In order to deploy countercyclical buffers, we need to hone 
our skills in business cycle analysis which again is based on time series analysis – one of the 
two focus areas of this conference.  
the  service  prices 
improve 
to 
Data gaps 
Let me under this heading address some of the areas where we have to made improvements 
in statistical measurement. 
Potential output 
First,  we  need  a  more  reliable  measure  of  the  potential  output  of  the  economy.  Potential 
output, as we all know, is the maximum output that the economy can produce without putting 
pressure on the trend/average inflation rate. When the economy is operating at the potential 
level, aggregate demand and supply in the economy are balanced so that inflation tends to 
its long run expected value. A measure of potential output is therefore important not only to 
capture output data but to assess the inflation dynamics in the economy. The measurement 
of  potential  output  depends  on  reliable  data  on  employment  and  wages.  I  commented  on 
both these statistics earlier while speaking about the quality of data. I am happy to note that 
the  National  Statistical  Commission  and  the  official  statistical  agencies  are  engaged  in 
improving  the  quality  of  both  employment  and  wage  data.  As  that  happens,  we  can  look 
forward to a statistically more robust potential output measurement of the economy, and that 
in turn should improve our inflation watch. 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  growth  rates  in  major  advanced  economies 
remain  sluggish  despite  large  output  gaps.  Past  experience  with  financial  crises  episodes 
suggests that growth and investment rates typically remain below the  pre-crisis levels and 
potential growth rates take a hit. Similar dynamics are at play in the aftermath of the recent 
financial crisis. There is a perception that potential growth rates of advanced economies are 
likely  to  be  lower  than  their  pre-crisis  trends.  If  so,  given  the  growing  trade  and  financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
globalization, potential growth rates of the fast-growing emerging market economies can be 
expected to be lower than the pre-crisis trends. Against this backdrop, it would be useful to 
re-assess  India’s  potential  growth  rate  consistent  with  our  objective  of  low  and  stable 
inflation.  
Services sector production and price index 
A defining feature of the Indian economy is the large share of the services sector, unique at 
this level of per capita income. In order to assess our growth and inflation dynamics, we need 
reliable indicators of services sector production and prices. Admittedly, the output of services 
sector  is  less  tangible  than  that  of  the  traditional  industrial  sector,  and  that  makes 
measurement  of  output  and  price levels  of  services  intellectually  challenging.  I  understand 
our  official  statistical  agencies  are  engaged  in  addressing  this  challenge.  I  urge  them  to 
expedite their efforts. 
Financial stability 
Financial stability  has  come  centre  stage  post crisis.  As  much  as  we  now  know  that  price 
stability and macroeconomic stability do not guarantee financial stability, we need to develop 
additional  metrics  to  monitor  financial  stability.  The  IMF  initiative  on  financial  soundness 
indicators offers a model in this regard. Its “monitoring grid” focuses on four major areas, the 
first  of  which  is  financial  market  surveillance.  For  evaluation  of  the  risk  arising  from 
imbalances or  shocks, we  need  data  on  asset prices, as  also  on  early  warning  indicators. 
The  second  area  of  focus  of  the  IMF  grid  is  macro-prudential  surveillance,  which 
concentrates on the impact of shocks on the financial sector. The third area consists of the 
analysis of macro-financial linkages, particularly on the credit spreads, credit to the private 
sector and balance sheet data for different sectors of the economy. The fourth area of focus 
is the surveillance of macroeconomic conditions.  
To get started on adopting the IMF framework, we need to take stock of what data we have 
and of what quality. Off-hand, I can say that we need to improve our data and data analysis 
skills relating to real estate, capital flows, and with reference to banks and non-banks, data 
relating to credit, liquidity and market risk indicators. 
Summing up 
Let me now conclude. To sum up very briefly indeed, I have tried to communicate to you the 
importance of statistics and statistical analysis to the quality of RBI’s policy formulation and 
emphasized areas where we need to improve the quality of data, areas where we need to 
learn  to  better  interpret  data  and  areas  where  we  need  to  explore  new  frontiers.  My 
exposition  is,  by  no  means,  intended  to  be  comprehensive,  but  I  do  hope  it  conveys  the 
importance the Reserve Bank, as an institution, should attach to statistical analysis.  
I wish this conference all success. 
© Reserve Bank of India. All Rights Reserved. Best viewed in 1024x768 resolution in IE 5 
and above.
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
