Subir Gokarn: Sustainability of economic growth and controlling inflation – 
the way forward 
Address  by  Dr  Subir  Gokarn,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Federation  of  Indian  Chambers  of  Commerce  and  Industry’s  (FICCI)  National  Executive 
Committee Meeting, Mumbai, 5 April 2011. 
 Inputs from Bhupal Singh, Sitikantha Pattanaik and Mridul Saggar are gratefully acknowledged. 
It  is  my  pleasure  to speak  at  FICCI’s  National  Executive  Committee  Meeting  this  year.  As 
many  observers  have  been  highlighting,  after  a  relatively  long  phase  of  benign,  growth-
friendly  macroeconomic  conditions,  things  have  begun  to  look  somewhat  hostile  on  the 
macroeconomic  front.  The  most  significant  manifestation  of  this  is  the  acceleration  of 
inflation, a trend that was visible even before the impact of the financial crisis was felt in late 
2008, but which very quickly and strongly re-emerged as the economy began to recover in 
the second half of 2009–10. Despite significant actions on both policy rates and liquidity by 
the Reserve Bank, inflation remains high, giving rise to some very fundamental questions: is 
this high rate of inflation, previously believed to be unacceptable, now the new normal? Is it 
an unavoidable price to pay for sustaining the current growth trend? Or, will it actually work to 
undermine the sustainability of the current trend? 
Before  arriving  at  a  firm  policy  position  on  this  issue,  we  must  examine  all  the  risks 
associated with persistently high rates of inflation over relatively long periods of time. In this 
address, I propose to do three things: 
1.  
Examine the growth-inflation dynamics in the Indian economy over the past couple 
of decades to see if any patterns can be discerned; 
Examine the drivers of the recent trends in inflation and relate them to underlying 
growth drivers; 
Present  some  key  issues  and  concerns  that  I  believe  should  influence  our  policy 
thinking. 
2.  
3.  
The growth-Inflation relationship in India: the post-1991 experience 
Slide 1 displays the trajectories of growth and two indicators of inflation over the past two 
decades – the Wholesale Price Index (WPI), reflecting headline inflation and the Non-Food 
Manufacturing component of it. In our policy framework, we see the latter as a measure of 
“core”  inflation  –  that  which  is  driven  by  demand  side  pressures.  A  number  of  patterns 
emerge that might provide a useful backdrop to the discussion of what lies ahead. 
First,  we  do  see  a  striking  contrast  between  the  two  episodes  of  high  growth  that  the 
economy  experienced  after  1991.  During  the  first  episode,  1994–95  –  1996–97,  both 
measures of inflation ran relatively high. In fact, the growth began to accelerate in the midst 
of an already uncomfortable inflationary environment, reflected by both the headline and core 
measures.  The  proximity  between  the  two  suggested  that  demand  pressures  were 
predominant. In this scenario, the only way that inflation would come down would be through 
demand  compression  and  that  is  indeed  what  happened.  An  anti-inflationary  monetary 
stance  combined  with  a  shock  to  exports  in  the  wake  of  the  East  Asian  crisis  and  a  bad 
monsoon  achieved  this.  Over  the  next  few  years,  both  growth  and  inflation  rates  were 
relatively low. 
The second high-growth episode began in 2003–04 and, with the exception of the slowdown 
during  the  crisis  period,  is  still  continuing.  However,  from  the  inflation  perspective,  this 
episode itself has two distinct segments. In the first few years, high growth was accompanied 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
by  low  inflation,  both  headline  and  core.  On  the  eve  of  the  crisis  period,  both  indicators 
increased  significantly,  suggesting  the  emergence  of  demand-side  pressures.  During  the 
brief slowdown, both inflation indicators dropped sharply, but core fell far more than headline, 
indicating that supply-side pressures were now visible. The resurgence of inflation over the 
past year is the result of both demand and supply forces, as can be seen from sharp climb in 
both inflation indicators and the persistent gap between them. 
One  impression  from  the  contrast  between  these  two  episodes  is  that  growth  in  a  low-
inflation  environment  can  be  more  robust  and  enduring.  This  is  partly  because  monetary 
policy can afford to accommodate growth by keeping interest rates low. However, as we saw, 
even in the more recent episode, demand pressures were driving inflation up, which saw the 
monetary policy stance, which I shall discuss in somewhat more detail later, reverse course 
during  that  period.  A  second  observation,  relating  to  recent  developments,  is  that,  while 
supply-side  pressures  have  clearly  impacted  headline  inflation,  the  relatively  brief  and 
shallow slowdown did not fully eliminate demand-side pressures from the system and these 
too have contributed to the recent behaviour of inflation. 
For comparison purposes, I will briefly discuss the Chinese growth-inflation dynamics before 
coming  back  to  a  more  detailed  discussion  of  recent  Indian  patterns.  Slide  2  depicts  the 
growth rates achieved by the Chinese economy since its own liberalization of the late 1970s 
and the behaviour of its Consumer Price Index over the period. Two episodes – one in the 
late 1980s and one in the mid-1990s – stand out. In both, a sharp rise in the inflation rate 
was followed by a decline in the growth rate. This was quite pronounced in the first episode 
and  somewhat  moderate,  though  unmistakable  in  the  second.  After  that,  growth  has 
sustained at a relatively fast pace accompanied by relatively low inflation. Immediately before 
the  crisis  period,  both  growth  and  inflation  accelerated  sharply,  suggesting  the  build-up  of 
demand-side  pressures.  However,  the  overall  impression,  over  a  somewhat  longer  period 
than for India is that sustained high growth is concomitant with relatively low inflation. 
A final issue that I want to look at in this long-term perspective is the behaviour of crude oil 
prices. Slide 3 displays the trend of nominal prices as well as real prices, derived by deflating 
by  the  US  Producer  Price  Index.  During  the  period  that  we  have  been  talking  about,  both 
moved  in  tandem.  The  1990s  were  a  benign  period,  with oil  not  exerting  significant  global 
inflationary  pressure.  In  contrast,  oil  prices  have  risen  persistently  over  the  past  decade, 
aggravating  demand-driven  inflationary  pressures  in  the  period  before  the  crisis  and 
continuing to do that after a brief respite. 
Recent Inflation dynamics  
To provide a backdrop, let me first talk about some important characteristics of the recent 
episode of fast growth. Slide 4 displays the annual contribution to growth made by each of 
the components of aggregate demand. Private Consumption, the largest single component 
makes a steady contribution throughout the period, a factor influenced by its sheer size. But, 
the most significant feature of the period is the relatively large and sustained contribution of 
capital  formation,  or  investment.  The  acceleration  in  growth  seen  since  2003–04  was 
preceded  by  a  surge  in  investment  spending,  which  then  remained  a  very  significant 
contributor to growth over the entire episode. It slumped during the crisis period, reflecting its 
high sensitivity to macroeconomic conditions, but recovered noticeably in the following year. 
When  we  bring  the  inflation  trajectory  back  into  the  picture,  we  might  infer  that  the 
combination  of  fast  growth  and  low  inflation  is  actually  very  conducive  to  high  investment 
spending.  With  reference  to  today’s  theme,  this  is  obviously  a  relationship  of  great 
significance. Investment has the twin virtues of creating demand for goods and services in 
the  present  while  simultaneously  expanding  the  capacity  to  produce  them  in  the  future.  It 
follows that a growth process that is more conducive to investment spending is more likely to 
be sustainable than one that is less conducive. The recent episode of fast growth in India 
suggests  that  low  inflation  is  one  factor  that  encourages  investment  spending.  From  this 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
perspective, the reduction of the contribution of investment to growth in 2010–11 raises some 
concerns. 
Let me now provide some perspectives on recent inflation dynamics in India. Slide 5 displays 
the relative contributions of different components of the WPI to aggregate inflation over the 
past decade. There are a number of significant patterns in the graph. First, food inflation may 
have  grabbed  the  headlines  in  recent  months,  but  the  fact  is  that  it  has  been  steadily 
increasing  its  contribution  to  overall  inflation  for  some  time  now.  A  combination  of  factors 
may have aggravated the situation in the recent past, but the impact of sustained high growth 
on  food  consumption  patterns  cannot  be  wished  away.  In  the  absence  of  a  strong  supply 
response,  increasing  demand  will  inevitably  lead  to  higher  prices,  a  trend  that  may  be 
reinforced by a monsoon failure or other shocks. This is what we are seeing on the food front 
today.  
Second,  even  though  crude  oil  prices  were  increasing  steadily  over  this  period,  the 
contribution of energy prices to inflation was variable. This was the result of a combination of 
differential  rates  of  annual  increases  and  restrictions  on  pass-through  to  domestic 
consumers. In fact, during the three-year period 2005–08, while aggregate inflation remained 
relatively steady, the relative contributions of food and energy swapped positions. In a sense, 
incipient food inflation was being offset by the moderating contribution from oil.  
Third, non-food manufacturing inflation, which, as I indicated earlier, we interpret as reflecting 
demand-side  pressures,  while  contributing  to  inflation  throughout  the  period,  was  fairly 
steady. However, in 2007–08, as overall inflation accelerated, so did this component. One 
explanation for this is that, with capacities being stretched, producers had significant pricing 
power. Consequently, the intensification of supply-side drivers, which is clearly visible in the 
graph  that  year,  spilled  over  into  a  more  generalized  inflationary  process.  Of  course,  the 
picture changed  dramatically  during  the  crisis  period,  but it  is striking  that  in  2010–11,  the 
pattern is quite similar, with the added contribution from rising non-food primary articles. We 
do appear to be in a situation in which capacity constraints are helping convert supply-side 
pressures  into  generalized  inflation.  If,  in  fact,  the  contribution  of  investment  spending  to 
growth  is  declining,  the  constraints  can  only  become  more  binding,  further  aggravating 
inflationary  pressures  if  the  growth  momentum  is  kept  going  by  other  components  of 
demand. 
I will end this section with a brief discussion on the monetary and fiscal policy trajectories 
during  this  period.  Slide  6  displays  the  movement  of  monetary  policy  instruments  before, 
during and after the crisis period. In the first phase depicted on the graph, there was a steady 
reduction in policy rates, motivated by a moderating inflation scenario. This was presumably 
supportive of investment activity, which, as we saw earlier, was relatively buoyant during this 
period. In 2005–06, the cycle turned and there were steady increases in policy rates and the 
cash reserve ratio (CRR) in response to the acceleration in inflation that was displayed in the 
previous graph. It is important to point out that investment activity apparently did not change 
course  even  as  interest  rates  were  being  increased.  This  suggests  that  it  is  not  just  the 
immediate  interest  rate  scenario  that  influences  investment  decisions.  Actions  taken  to 
control inflation also help by providing reassurances about macroeconomic stability. 
 As  the  impact  of  the  crisis  was  felt,  there  as  a  sharp  reversal  in  all  policy  instruments,  a 
movement consistent with the inflationary pattern during the year, as seen by the complete 
disappearance of non-food manufacturing inflation. As the economy recovered, bringing with 
it a rather quick resurgence of inflationary pressures, the monetary stance has responded. 
The  pace  of  action  has  been  influenced  by  a  number  of  domestic  and  global  factors;  the 
primary  motivation  being  to  keep  the  recovery  going,  while  preventing  the  spill-over  of 
supply-side pressures into a more generalized inflationary process. 
Slide  7  displays  trends  in  the  fiscal  position,  showing  the  combined  revenue  and  fiscal 
deficits for centre and states. The main point that I would like to make from this picture is with 
reference  to  the  fast  growth  episode  of  2003–08.  On  the  fiscal  front,  this  period  was 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
characterized by a steady decline in the combined fiscal deficit, but, most importantly, a very 
sharp decline in the revenue deficit. What this meant was that not only was the government 
claiming  relatively  fewer  resources,  it  was  devoting  a  greater  proportion  of  its  spending  to 
creating capital assets. In terms of the virtuous combination of high growth, low inflation and 
high investment that I have already characterized the episode by, these fiscal characteristics 
add another dimension to the understanding of conditions conducive to sustaining growth. 
The way forward: issues and concerns 
I would like to highlight three key messages from the preceding discussion as we look ahead 
at  the  challenges  of  sustaining  growth  while  controlling  inflation.  First,  from  our  own 
experience, low inflation and fiscal moderation, particularly on the revenue deficit, seem to be 
conducive to high investment rates and, consequently, to high and sustainable growth rates. 
Second, when growth is relatively rapid, supply-side inflationary pressures do spill over into 
more  generalized  inflation,  presumably  reflecting  high  pricing  power  of  all  producers, 
including workers. The implications of this for monetary policy are quite clear and direct: if 
there are signs of spill-over from supply-side to core, then a monetary response is warranted 
to prevent the process from spiralling out of control. Third, looking back at the previous high-
growth episode, slower growth over a period of time will result in lower inflation, but we must 
recognize that both high inflation and slow growth have significant welfare costs. In essence, 
the challenge is to keep growth as high as possible without the risk of inflation spiralling out 
of control. 
In this context, there are two bodies of evidence that have a bearing on policies intending to 
sustain growth while controlling inflation. First, analysis of a large sample of countries over 
long periods of time does not suggest that more rapid growth phases were accompanied by 
higher rates of inflation. There have, of course, been periods when inflation rates have been 
high, but these have typically been followed by a slowdown in growth rates, presumably as a 
result of monetary actions but, more fundamentally, because the prospect of macroeconomic 
instability may lead to lower rates of investment. In general, the evidence across a large set 
of  countries  bears  out  what  we  observed  in  India  over  the  high  growth  episode  in  India 
immediately before the crisis period and also in China over the past decade. Faster growth 
seems to persist in an environment of low inflation. 
Second, recent analytical work on the Phillips Curve, which represents the trade-off between 
growth  (unemployment)  and  inflation  suggests  a  break  in  the  relationship  between  growth 
and  inflation  at  some  threshold  rate  of  inflation  (See  of  Akerlof,  et  al.,  20001  and  Palley, 
20032,  20083).  If  inflation is  below  that  rate,  the  analysis  suggests  that  there  is  a  trade-off 
between  growth  and  inflation;  growth  can  be  accelerated  (unemployment  can  be  reduced) 
with some concomitant increase in inflation. However, above that threshold, the relationship 
is  reversed;  higher  rates  of 
inflation  are  accompanied  by  slower  growth  (higher 
unemployment). The main reason for the existence of such a threshold rate of inflation is the 
speed and magnitude with which the inflation rate feeds into inflationary expectations. Below 
the threshold, workers and producers do not raise their wage and price demands very often 
because  the  impact  of  inflation  is  not  too  visible.  By  contrast,  they  respond  very  quickly 
above the threshold because they are worried that high inflation will rapidly erode their living 
                                                 
1   Akerlof, G.A., Dickens, W.T. and Perry, G.L. (2000), “The Near-Rational Wage and Price Setting and the Long 
Run Phillips Curve”, Brookings Paper of Economic Activity, 1: 1–60. 
2   Palley, T.I. (2003), “The Backward Bending Phillips Curve and the Minimum Unemployment Rate of Inflation 
(MURI): Wage Adjustment with Opportunistic Firms”, The Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies, 
71(1): 35–50. 
3   Palley T. I. (2008), “The Backward Bending Phillips Curves:A Simple Model”, Working Paper No. 168, Political 
Economy Research Institute, University of Massachusetts, Amerhest 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
standards  or  profitability.  In  short,  when  inflation  is  high,  the  behaviour  of  workers  and 
producers increases the likelihood that it will increase further. 
Putting  the  two  together,  one  could  argue  that  keeping  inflation  below  the  threshold  at  all 
times  serves  both  the  short  term  objective  of  macroeconomic  stability,  or  minimizing  the 
deviation of the growth rate from its sustainable trend, and the long-term objective of raising 
the trend by encouraging investment activity. Do we know what the threshold is for the Indian 
economy?  The  Report  on  Currency  and  Finance,  an  annual  research  publication  of  the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India,  examined  this  question  in  its  2000–01  issue  and  came  to  the 
conclusion that the “growth-maximizing rate of inflation” for the Indian economy was 5 per 
cent.4 Of course, in a rapidly evolving environment, this number could well be different now; 
the  average  rate  of  inflation  during  the  pre-crisis  period  high  growth  episode  was  slightly 
below  this  number.  But,  even  if  it  is  different,  it  is  unlikely  to  be  significantly  higher.  The 
current  rate  of  inflation  does  raise  concerns  about  the  risks  of  spiralling,  as  high  inflation 
becomes increasingly entrenched into the wage and price setting behaviour of workers and 
producers. In turn, if this were to adversely impact investment activity, the growth momentum 
would  inevitably  slow  down.  In  essence,  the  trade-off  is  more  between  inflation  now  and 
growth in the future.  
Before I conclude, I would like to briefly address the very fundamental issue of food inflation. 
Slide  8  displays  the  relative  contributions  made  by  different  food  groups  to  overall  food 
inflation.  For  much  of  the  past  several  months,  the  dominant  contributors  to  it  have  been 
pulses,  milk,  eggs,  fish  and  meat  and  fruits.  Cereals  have  made  virtually  no  contribution, 
while vegetables, with the exception of the onion spike (other vegetables also contributed) in 
late 2010, were not very significant contributors. To reiterate a point we have been making in 
both  our  policy  statements  and  other  communications:  this  pattern  is  the  outcome  of 
consumption baskets being diversified by an increasing number of households as they cross 
some income threshold. The increase in prices indicates that supply is just not keeping pace 
with demand. The only way to keep food prices in check is to produce more of what people 
want to consume. There are several initiatives in the Union Budget for 2011–12, which are 
based  on  this  recognition.  Now,  the  emphasis  must  be  on  implementing  the  schemes  for 
quick increases in productivity and output of the items in question. 
Concluding remarks 
I  began  by  raising  three  questions:  is  this  high  rate  of  inflation,  previously  believed  to  be 
unacceptable,  now  the  new  normal?  Is  it  an  unavoidable  price  to  pay  for  sustaining  the 
current growth trend? Or, will it actually work to undermine the sustainability of the current 
trend?  
Based  on  the  preceding  discussion,  let  me  attempt  a  combined  answer.  Acceptance  of  a 
higher rate of inflation as the new normal – an inevitable consequence of rapid growth – will 
raise risks of accelerating inflation. In turn, this is likely to weaken incentives for investment, 
which will threaten the sustainability of growth. This is a vicious circle of high inflation, low 
investment and slowing growth. 
The alternative is the kind of virtuous circle that the economy has already experienced during 
the  five  years  preceding  the  crisis  period.  This  was  characterized  by  low  inflation,  high 
investment and fiscal consolidation, particularly on the revenue account, accompanying high 
growth as well as resilience during the crisis period. That is the configuration that we need to 
re-create to sustain growth. 
                                                 
4   Reserve Bank  of India (2002), “Growth, Inflation and the Conduct of Monetary Policy”,  Report on Currency 
and Finance 2000–01. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Both monetary and fiscal policies have a role in achieving this configuration. The challenge 
for  monetary  policy  is  to  prevent  supply-side  inflationary  pressures  from  spilling  over  into 
more generalized inflation, both by managing expectations and by reining in demand. This 
needs  to  be  done  with  minimal  disruption  to  growth,  particularly  investment  activity.  The 
challenge  for  fiscal  policy  is  to  bring  down  the  fiscal  deficit,  particularly  on  the  revenue 
account.  This  needs  to  be  done  while  ensuring  both  resource  allocation  and  effective 
implementation of programmes dealing with critical supply constraints in food and elsewhere. 
Significantly, both sets of challenges have to be met amidst an uncertain global environment, 
both generally and with respect to oil prices. 
I shall end with reference to the topic of today’s address. The issue is not so much one of 
higher inflation for faster growth in the present. It is about the risks that higher inflation now 
poses for faster growth in the future. In other words, sustainability of growth over the long 
term does require controlling inflation. 
I thank the National Executive Committee of FICCI for inviting me to speak on this occasion 
and wish them success both for a successful event and a successful year ahead. 
 
 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
 10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
