Svante Öberg: My view of monetary policy 2006–2011 
Speech  by  Mr  Svante  Öberg,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at 
Handelsbanken, Stockholm, 18 March 2011. 
 I  have  now  been  at  the  Riksbank  for  over  five  years  and  my  appointment  as  Deputy 
Governor  of  the  Riksbank  expires  at  the  turn  of  the  year.  I  will  have  celebrated  my  65th 
birthday by then and I have informed the General Council of the Riksbank that I will not be 
seeking reappointment. This makes it natural for me to look back at the conduct of monetary 
policy  over  the  last  five  years  and,  in  the  light  of  this  experience,  discuss  the  direction  of 
monetary policy in the years ahead. The three theses that I will argue for in this speech are: 
 
 
 
Monetary policy was too expansionary before the financial crisis 
Monetary policy worked well during the crisis 
The repo rate needs to be raised at every meeting this year (and perhaps next year 
too) 
Monetary policy was too expansionary in the years before the financial crisis 
My first thesis is thus that monetary policy was too expansionary in the years before the full 
force of the financial crisis hit the world in September 2008. This applies both in Sweden and 
abroad. I will present arguments to support this thesis in this section. 
Abroad 
Monetary policy was expansionary in the years before the financial crisis in both the United 
States  and  the  euro  area.  The  short-term  real  interest  rate,  that  is  the  short-term  nominal 
interest  rate  minus  inflation,  is  commonly  used  to  describe  how  expansionary  monetary 
policy is. This can be assumed to average approximately 2 per cent in the longer term. In the 
United States, the real interest rate was negative in the period 2003–2005, while in the euro 
area it was approximately 0 per cent in the same period (see Figure 1).  
At the same time, China and other countries had their currencies tied to the US dollar, which 
resulted in expansionary monetary conditions in these countries too. Large current account 
surpluses in China and in oil-producing countries led to capital flows to the United States and 
the euro area and this also kept down long-term interest rates. 
The  consequences  of 
the 
development of the economy. Inflation in the United States was over 2 per cent measured 
using  various  measures  of  core  inflation,  Resource  utilisation  was  higher  than  normal  and 
there  was  a  rapid  expansion  of  credit.  From  the  mid-1990s  to  2006,  real  housing  prices 
increased unusually rapidly, by approximately 80 per cent, after having been relatively stable 
from the early 1950s to the mid-1990s (see Figure 2). 
Housing prices increased dramatically in some parts of Europe too, for example in Ireland 
and  Spain,  while  they  remained  largely  stable  in  other  countries,  for  example  Germany. 
However,  for  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  the  increase  in  prices  was  not  as  large  as  in  the 
United States. 
The expansionary monetary policy contributed to the very high level of growth in the world in 
the period 2004–2007. GDP growth was between 4.5 and 5 per cent per year. Such a long 
period with such rapid growth around the world had not occurred since the early 1970s (see 
Figure 3). 
the  expansionary  monetary  policy  became  apparent 
in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
The high level of global growth led in turn to a substantial increase in the price of oil between 
2004 and 2008 and to rising inflation in many countries towards the end of the period. The 
similarities to the years preceding the oil-price shocks of the 1970 are striking. In these years 
too, monetary policy was expansionary, GDP growth was high and oil prices were increasing. 
The price of crude oil increased rapidly in 1973 and 1979, which led to higher inflation (see 
Figure 4). 
It was, however, not just an expansionary monetary policy that caused the credit expansion 
and  housing  price  bubble  in  the  United  States.  There  were  a  number  of  other  causes,  for 
example the new financial products that spread risks from the banks to investors who did not 
understand the risks. The aim of housing policy in the United States had also long been to 
increase  home  ownership  by  providing  support  from  the  semi-nationalised  mortgage 
companies  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac.  There  were  also  several  other  problems,  for 
example the fact that regulation and supervision of the financial markets were too weak. 
In Europe, the common currency was introduced in 1999. This meant that interest rates in 
several countries that had previously had a higher interest rate than Germany were reduced 
to a common euro level. In these countries, this contributed to a dramatic expansion of credit, 
rapid  growth  and  a  high  level  of  inflation.  In  addition,  regulation  and  supervision  of  the 
financial  markets  were  national  processes,  despite  that  fact  that  the  operations  concerned 
were  crossborder.  However,  it  did  not  become  apparent  that  this  situation  was  untenable 
until the spring of 2010 in connection with the crisis in public finances in Europe. 
Each  country  certainly  believed  that  they  had  good  reasons  for  conducting  their  particular 
choice of monetary policy. But for the world as a whole, which in itself is a closed economy in 
which  overall  monetary  policy  affects  growth  and  inflation,  monetary  policy  became  too 
expansionary. This resulted in strong GDP growth and rapidly increasing prices for crude oil 
and other commodities, as well as a rapid credit expansion and rising asset prices, above all 
for  housing  in  certain  regions.  This  ultimately  led  to  the  financial  crisis  when  the  housing-
price bubble burst. 
Now, you may say that it is rather pointless to criticise something with hindsight. It is easy to 
say now what should have been done then. However, my point is not to criticise what was 
done  but  to  learn  from  history.  Even  today,  we  can  see  the  same  pattern:  that  is  an 
expansionary monetary policy for the world as a whole, strong growth and rising energy and 
commodity prices.  
Sweden 
My view, with hindsight, is that monetary policy in Sweden was also too expansionary in the 
years preceding the financial crisis. The repo rate was gradually reduced to 1.5 per cent in 
July 2005. I think it was reduced too much and was too low for too long. Both the nominal 
and the real short-term rates were lower than normal for most of the period leading up to the 
crisis.  In  my  opinion,  a  normal  level  for  the  nominal  short-term  rate  is  around  4  per  cent, 
while a normal level for the real short-term rate is around 2 per cent1 (see Figure 5). 
Swedish economic growth was high in the years before the crisis. Resource utilisation was 
also higher than normal. The GDP gap was positive, while unemployment was lower than the 
average  for  the  preceding  years.  Inflation  was  nevertheless  low  in  the  period  2004–2006. 
Measured in terms of the CPIF2 and in terms of the measure used at that time, the CPIX,3 it 
                                                 
1   Sveriges Riksbank, “What is a normal repo rate?”, article in Monetary Policy Report, February 2010. 
2   The CPIF is calculated as the CPI with a fixed mortgage rate and is thus not directly affected by changes in 
mortgage rates. 
3   The CPIX excludes  households’ mortgage  interest expenditure and the  direct effects of changes in indirect 
taxes and subsidies from the CPI. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
was  well  below  2  per  cent.  In  their  evaluation  of  Swedish  monetary  policy  in  the  period  
1995–2005, Giavazzi and Mishkin say that this was a sign that monetary policy had been too 
tight from the beginning of 2002.4 
I do not agree with them. Looking back after the event, we can perhaps say that a couple of 
repo rate increases in 2001 and 2002 could have been avoided. The previous Governor of 
the Riksbank, Lars Heikensten, also admitted this at a hearing in the Riksdag Committee on 
Finance on 1 April 2004. But my view is that the repo rate was then reduced too much and 
was too low for too long. I can see four factors that support this. 
First, resource utilisation was probably higher than the Riksbank then estimated. The GDP 
gap  is  difficult  to  calculate,  particularly  at  the  end  of  a  time  series  and  in  connection  with 
severe downturns. According to the two GDP gaps presented in the Monetary Policy Report 
in  February,  the  GDP  gap  prior  to  the  crisis  was  approximately  +4  per  cent.  My  own 
assessment is that the GDP gap was in fact approximately +2 per cent.5 However, the fact 
that resource utilisation was so high was not as apparent before the crisis. This can be seen, 
for example, by comparing the calculations of the GDP gap in real time, that is at the point in 
time concerned, and the most recent calculations. The calculations in real time show that the 
GDP gap was actually assessed as relatively normal before the crisis (see Figure 6). 
Second, inflation gradually increased in 2007 and 2008 to over 4 per cent. Inflation increased 
rapidly even if the effect of rising mortgage rates is discounted. This was largely due to rising 
energy  and  food  prices.  These  price  rises,  as  I  mentioned  earlier,  were  rooted  in  the 
expansionary  monetary  policy  and  the  high  level  of  growth  in  the  world  as  a  whole.  The 
impact of monetary policy comes after a considerable time lag and the rate of inflation we 
see in these years is affected by monetary policy in previous years (see Figure 7).  
Third,  inflation  expectations  also  increased.  The  fact  that  inflation  expectations  one  year 
ahead increased is natural given that the measured inflation rate also increased. However, 
inflation  expectations  five  years  ahead  can  be  interpreted  as  an  indication  of  whether 
monetary policy is credible or not. As long as these expectations are close to the inflation 
target, then this is a sign that the respondents expect the Riksbank to attain its target in the 
long term. The fact the long-term inflation expectations increased to over 2.5 per cent was 
therefore more worrying (see Figure 8). 
Fourth, there was a rapid expansion of credit and a rapid increase in housing prices. Lending 
to  non-financial  companies  and  to  households  increased  by  10–15  per  year  in  the  years 
preceding the crisis and house prices increased by around 10 per cent per year. The prices 
of tenant-owned apartments increased even  more rapidly. This trend began already in the 
mid-1990s, but it accelerated in the years preceding the crisis6 (see Figure 9).  
                                                 
4   Giavazzi,  Francesco  and  Mishkin,  Frederic:  An  evaluation  of  Swedish  monetary  policy  between  1995  and 
2005, Riksdag Committee on Finance, November 2006. 
5   See for example Svante Öberg: Potential GDP, resource utilisation and monetary policy, Sveriges Riksbank, 
7 October 2010. 
6   Giavazzi and Mishkin (op. cit.) said that one reason why inflation had been low in the period 2002–2004 was 
that the Riksbank, since 2002, had begun to take house prices into account. However, in later papers Mishkin 
wrote that one lesson from the crisis is that that there are stronger reasons for monetary policy to counteract 
credit-driven asset price bubbles, see for example Mishkin, Frederic: Monetary Policy Strategy: Lessons from 
the Crisis, October 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
A comparison with a simple Taylor rule7 also indicates that the repo rate should have been 
significantly higher. A Taylor rule can indicate whether the level of the repo is reasonable. 
Based  on  inflation  measured  in  terms  of  the  CPIF  or  the  HICP8  and  the  GDP  gaps  I 
presented earlier, the repo rate, according to the Taylor rule, should have been around 7 per 
cent in the third quarter of 2008. I now believe, as I said earlier, that the presented positive 
GDP gaps are exaggerated. With my assessment of the GDP gap, the repo rate according to 
the Taylor rule would instead have been around 6 per cent in the third quarter of 2008, but 
still considerably higher than the 4.75 per cent it reached before the crisis (see Figure 10). 
When I look back on the monetary policy conducted since I joined the Riksbank on 1 January 
2006  up  to  the  point  when  the  financial  crisis  hit  Sweden  in  September  2008,  I  therefore 
believe that monetary policy was too expansionary in the years preceding the crisis. Inflation 
increased  and  reached  a  level  that  was  tangibly  higher  than  the  inflation  target,  Resource 
utilisation was higher than normal and there was a rapid expansion of credit. Despite this, the 
repo rate was lower than normal for most of the period leading up to the crisis. A more rapid 
increase of the repo rate would thus have been better.  
There are also two other circumstances that I for my own part believe were unfortunate. The 
first is that I did not enter a reservation in April 2006 when the Executive Board decided not 
to  increase  the  repo  rate,  which  I  regretted  afterwards.  This  would  not  have  made  any 
difference to the actual development of interest rates, but it would have been a good idea to 
make my view clear already at that time. I did subsequently enter reservations in favour of an 
increase in the repo rate several times in 2007 when the  majority on  the Executive Board 
decided not to increase it.9 
The second thing is that I accepted such a low repo-rate path the first time we presented our 
own  path  in  February  2007.  This  was  just  before  the  completion  of  wage  negotiations  for 
large parts of the labour market and it sent the wrong signal to the social partners; that is that 
wages could be significantly increased without consequences in the form of too high inflation. 
Wage expectations had then risen to the highest level since the mid-1990s. But we were too 
focused on all the work that was required to produce and decide on the repo-rate path for the 
first time for me to adequately realise the consequences of the decision.  
When visiting different venues to speak about monetary policy, I have often been asked why 
we  raised  the  repo  rate  from  4.50  to  4.75  per  cent  in  September  2008,  just  before  the 
financial crisis hit Sweden with full force. The members of the Executive Board were divided 
on the issue, with three for (including me) and three against and Stefan Ingves had to use his 
deciding vote to push the decision through. I usually say that with the information we had at 
the time I would have made the same decision again. I feared that we were facing a period of 
stagflation;  that  is  high  inflation  and  low  growth,  similar  to  the  period  that  followed  the  oil-
price increases of the 1970s. In such a situation we must, under the terms of our mandate, 
give  priority  to  keeping  inflation  down  close  to  the  inflation  target.  However,  the  financial 
crisis radically changed the preconditions for monetary policy. 
                                                 
7   Taylor,  J.B.,  (1993).  Discretion  versus  policy  rules  in  practice.  Carnegie-Rochester  Conference  Series  on 
Public Policy 39 (1993) 195–214. Amsterdam: North-Holland. The Taylor rule has the following simple form 
and describes the monetary policy conducted in the United States in the period 1987–1992 well: r = p + 0.5y + 
0.5(p-2) + 2 where r = the policy rate, p = inflation over the last 12 months in per cent and y = the GDP gap in 
per cent. In the formula, it is assumed that the inflation target is 2 per cent and that the real policy rate in the 
long term is 2 per cent. 
8   The  HICP  is  a  harmonized  index  for  consumer  prices  that,  among  other  things,  is  used  in  the  EU  for 
comparisons between the member states. Mortgage rates are excluded when calculating the HICP. 
9   Minutes of the monetary policy meetings held on 29 March 2007, 3 May 2007 and 18 December 2007. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Monetary policy worked well during the financial crisis 
My second thesis is that monetary policy worked well during the financial crisis. I will explain 
why. But first I would like to describe very briefly what characterised the crisis. 
The characteristics of the financial crisis 
I have experienced two crises in the past, one in the late 1970s and early 1980s and one at 
the  beginning  of  the  1990s,  and  have  seen  them  both  mainly  from  the  perspective  of  the 
Ministry  of  Finance.  When  I  came  to  the  Riksbank  I  believed  that  the  worst  crises  were 
behind us. However, this was not the case. Instead we experienced a third crisis, which in 
international terms was the most severe crisis since World War II. 
The  financial  crisis  hit  Sweden  and  the  rest  of  Europe  with  full  force  in  September  2008, 
when the major US investment bank Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy. It became much 
more  difficult  for  the  banks  to  fund  their  operations  as  the  financial  markets  were  not 
functioning normally. Some markets were not functioning at all. The central banks took on 
the role of lenders of last resort and several governments provided guarantees and support 
programmes for the banking sector. Monetary policy also quickly became more expansionary 
in  the  United  States,  the  euro  area  and  other  countries.  In  addition,  a  number  of  central 
banks adopted measures to also push down the longer-term interest rates. There was also a 
shift towards a more expansionary fiscal policy. 
Despite extensive policy stimulus, the financial crisis led to a severe downturn in the United 
States  and  Europe  and  in  developed  countries  in  other  parts  of  the  world.  Experience  of 
previous  financial  crises  shows  that  they  are  usually  followed  by  long  periods  of  weaker 
growth, higher unemployment and seriously weakened public finances.10 GDP fell in both the 
United States and the euro area in 2009 and unemployment increased. Inflation fell rapidly, 
mainly  because  the  earlier  increases  in  the  prices  of  energy  and  food  turned  into  price 
decreases. However, there were other parts of the world that were not affected by the crisis 
to  any  great  extent.  Countries  such  as  China  and  India  continued  to  enjoy  high  rates  of 
growth.  The  financial  crisis  mainly  affected  Sweden  through  the  fall  in  the  international 
demand  for  Swedish  exports.  GDP  fell  by  5.9  per  cent  between  2007  and  2009,  but  then 
increased  by  5.5  per  cent  in  2010.  Already  a  year  after  the  downturn  had  bottomed  out, 
production had returned to more or less the same level as before the crisis. But GDP was still 
far below the level that a postulated trend increase without the crisis would have led to (see 
Figure 11). 
Unemployment peaked at almost 9 per cent at the turn of the year 2009/2010. The increase 
in unemployment was much less than predicted in the Riksbank’s earlier forecasts and much 
less than indicated by normal Okun links between GDP growth and unemployment.11 This is 
probably because the crisis primarily affected the industrial sector with substantial effects on 
GDP  but  smaller  effects  on  employment,  while  activity  in  other  parts  of  the  economy  was 
kept up by expansionary monetary and fiscal policies (see Figure 12).  
CPI inflation has fluctuated considerably in recent years, mainly because the repo rate was 
cut  rapidly  in  connection  with  the  crisis.  CPIF  inflation,  which  excludes  these  effects  on 
inflation, has fluctuated much less and if we also adjust for energy and food then inflation has 
been close to the long-term target for the CPI of 2 per cent (see Figure 13). 
                                                 
10   Reinhart,  Carmen  and  Rogoff,  Kenneth:  “This  Time  is  Different:  A  Panoramic  View  of  Eight  Centuries  of 
Financial Crises”, 2008. 
11 Sveriges Riksbank, “The effects of the financial crisis on the labour market – a comparison of Sweden, the euro 
area and the United States”, article in Monetary Policy Report, February 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
In  2009, 
The Riksbank’s measures during the crisis 
My  second  thesis  is  thus  that  monetary  policy  worked  well  during  the  crisis.  But  the 
Riksbank’s  efforts  did  not  just  concern  monetary  policy,  they  related  to  an  even  greater 
degree to measures to preserve financial stability. The experience gained from the financial 
crisis tell us that measures to preserve financial stability and monetary policy measures must 
cooperate to counteract the negative consequences of the crisis and that it is not always so 
easy to relate one type of measure to a certain problem and the other type to another. The 
reasons why I think the Riksbank was able to handle the crisis well are that the measures 
were taken quickly and were forceful and that they helped to preserve financial stability and 
keep up domestic demand. They were also implemented during a limited period of time and 
thus did not become part of a more permanent support system. 
The Riksbank thus reacted quickly to the problems that arose. Of course, the Swedish banks 
were not exposed to the US housing market to any great extent. But they were dependent on 
the markets functioning in order to get funding. In order to cover the loss of normal funding 
channels, the Riksbank provided loans of approximately SEK 500 billion during the autumn 
of 2008.12 This increased the Riksbank’s balance sheet total from approximately 7 per cent to 
approximately  22  per  cent  of  GDP,  that  is  more  than  the  balance  sheets  of  the  Federal 
Reserve (FED) and the European Central Bank (ECB) in relation to GDP. Around half of this 
lending was in kronor and half in dollars. In order to be able to lend so much in dollars, the 
Riksbank borrowed dollars from the FED through a rapidly-concluded swap agreement. The 
Riksbank’s own dollar assets were far too small. In the autumn of 2008, the foreign currency 
reserve  corresponded  to  SEK  200  billion  and  was  invested  in  a  number  of  different 
currencies. 
reserve  was  strengthened  by  borrowing  approximately 
SEK 100 billion via the Swedish National Debt Office (see Figure 14).  
Monetary  policy  also  reacted  quickly  and  forcefully.  The  repo  rate  was  cut  rapidly  from 
4.75 per cent in September 2008 to 0.25 per cent in July 2009. The largest cut came already 
in December 2008. The repo rate had never been this low before. In July 2009, the Riksbank 
also  assessed  that  the  repo  rate  would  remain  at  this  exceptionally  low  level  for  the  next 
12 months or so. This was expressed in the repo-rate path at the time. In order, to underline 
the  assessment  that  the  repo  rate  would  remain  at  this  low  level  throughout  the  following 
year,  and  to  keep  down  longer-term  interest  rates  too,  the  Riksbank,  on  three  different 
occasions, provided loans totalling almost SEK 300 billion at a fixed interest rate of 0.25 per 
cent for one year (see Figure 15). 
In  July  2010,  the  Riksbank  began  normalising  monetary  policy.  The  repo  rate  was  raised 
from 0.25 per cent to 0.5 per cent and has subsequently been raised another four times to 
1.50  per  cent  in  February  2011.  The  large  loans  were  repaid  by  the  banks  without  being 
replaced by new, similar loans. The Riksbank’s balance sheet total thus fell to approximately 
10 per cent of GDP. This is in contrast to the balance sheet totals of several other central 
banks, which have continued to increase. It has been possible to carry out the reduction of 
the Riksbank’s balance sheet without giving rise to any significant problems on the financial 
markets.  This  is  because  the  Riksbank  only  lent  money  to  the  banks and  did  not,  like  the 
Fed, the ECB and the Bank of England, purchase bonds and other assets during the crisis.13 
If the Riksbank had done so, this could have led to more serious problems when the time 
came to phase out the support measures. 
It  is  of  course  difficult  to  estimate  the  effects  of  the  measures  taken  by  the  Riksbank  in 
connection  with  the  crisis  as  so  many  other  things  also  had  an  impact  on  the  course  of 
events,  not  least  fiscal  policy  and  the  measures  taken  by  other  authorities  to  preserve 
the 
                                                 
12   The  Riksbank  also  extended  the  types  of  collateral  that  could  be  approved  for  loans  and  provided  liquidity 
assistance to two small banks, Kaupthing and Carnegie. 
13   By only lending money, the Riksbank also avoided exposure to a substantial interest rate risk. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
financial  stability.  Nevertheless, it  can  be  noted  that  the  Swedish  banks  came  through  the 
crisis well. Total lending to households and non-financial companies continued to increase 
throughout  the  crisis.  It can  also  be  noted  that the  fall  in  production  and  employment  was 
less  than  feared.  Domestic  demand  has  been  kept  up  by  the  expansionary  fiscal  and 
monetary policies. 
Conclusions 
With  hindsight,  I  think  that  we  can  draw  two  conclusions  about  the  actions  taken  by  the 
Riksbank in connection with the financial crisis. First, we did not see the crisis coming. Of 
course,  not  many  other  observers  saw  the  crisis  coming  either.  However,  we  did  draw 
attention to the problems on the housing and mortgage markets in the United States, and in 
our Financial Stability Reports we did mention the problems relating to the Swedish banks’ 
credit expansion in the Baltic countries. But the new feature of this financial crisis was that 
the banks were unable to fund their operations on the market and this was something we 
were not prepared for.14 
Second,  the  Riksbank  reacted  quickly  and  forcefully  once  the  crisis  hit  Sweden.  The 
Riksbank’s  extensive  lending  to  the  banks  and  the  rapid  reduction  of  the  repo  rate  to  an 
exceptionally low level softened the impact of the crisis on the Swedish economy. Together 
with an expansionary fiscal policy this kept up the level of domestic demand and meant that 
employment  decreased  less  and  unemployment  increased  less  than  could  have  been 
expected,  and  that  inflation  was  kept  at  a  reasonable  level.  Underlying  inflation  was  kept 
close to 2 per cent and inflation expectations five years ahead, which had increased before 
the crisis, fell back again and stabilised at around 2 per cent. 
Monetary policy needs to become less expansionary in the period ahead 
My  third  thesis  is  that  the  repo  rate  needs  to  be  raised  at  every  meeting  this  year,  and 
perhaps next year too. I will now explain why I make this assessment. I begin with a brief 
description of international developments over the next few years and then present my view 
of Swedish monetary policy in the period ahead. 
Abroad 
There are many similarities between the situation in the autumn of 2008 and the spring of 
2011. For the world as a whole we once again expect to see a GDP growth of over 4 per 
cent per year, although there are considerable differences between different regions. Growth 
is continuing in the United States and Europe although, due to the financial crisis, at a slower 
rate than after a normal downturn. We expect to see a GDP growth of around 3 per cent per 
year  in  the  United  States  and  of  just  below  2  per  cent  per  year  in  the  euro  area,  with  an 
inflation rate of almost 2 per cent in both areas. But the emerging economies are growing 
rapidly (see Figure 16). 
The  strong  increase  in  demand  in  the  emerging  economies  is  pushing  up  the  demand  for 
energy and commodities. There has therefore been a substantial increase in crude oil prices 
and the prices of other commodities recently. There is a risk that these prices will continue to 
rise and that inflation will therefore also rise in both the emerging markets and the developed 
countries. Inflation expectations have also increased in recent months and there has been an 
upward shift in monetary policy expectations (see Figure 4). 
                                                 
14   Report of the Swedish National Audit Office 2011, “Measures taken by the authorities to safeguard financial 
stability: Lessons in the light of developments in the Baltic countries 2005–2007”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Recent developments in North Africa and the Middle East have pushed up the price of crude 
oil even further. Uncertainty about the future supply of oil has contributed to the oil price now 
being higher than it was when the Monetary Policy Report was published in February. This 
illustrates the fact that price trends become even more sensitive to supply disruptions when 
demand is high in relation to supply. 
The earthquake in Japan is the greatest catastrophe the country has suffered since World 
War II. The consequences for the Japanese people are devastating and the material damage 
is huge. It is still too early to determine what the economic consequences of the earthquake 
will be. In the short term it has already led to production losses, but later this year production 
may  rise  in  connection  with  reconstruction  work  following  the  disaster.  The  fact  that  some 
nuclear power stations are now out of operation has already led to disruptions in the supply 
of electricity and in production, but in the longer term a reduction in the capacity to generate 
electricity using nuclear power in both Japan and other countries may lead to rising prices for 
other types of energy, including oil. As always, we are monitoring developments carefully and 
in connection with the Monetary Policy Update in April will make a renewed assessment of 
the international outlook in which we will also take into account how events in Japan may 
affect the development of the global economy in the slightly longer term. 
Sweden 
At  the  latest  monetary  policy  meeting  in  February,  we  decided  to  raise  the  repo  rate  from 
1.25 per cent to 1.50 per cent and our assessment was that the repo rate would need to be 
increased to 3.6 per cent by the end of the forecast period, that is in three years’ time. My 
assessment was that we will need to raise the repo rate by 0.25 per cent at every meeting in 
2011 to 2.75 per cent at the end of the year. This entails a somewhat steeper upward path in 
the  second  half  of  2011  than  the  repo-rate  path  presented  in  the  main  scenario  of  the 
Monetary  Policy  Report.  However,  in  light  of  the  uncertainty  about  the  development  of 
interest rates, I did not enter a reservation against the repo-rate path but confined myself to 
commenting on this at the meeting (see Figure 17). 
I will now discuss my view of monetary policy in the years ahead in a little more detail and 
take the picture of the economic outlook presented in the latest Monetary Policy Report as 
my  starting  point.  The  discussion  is  based  on  the  analytical  framework  and  so-called  loss 
function  used  at  Norges  Bank.15  This  includes  the  deviation  of  inflation  from  the  inflation 
target, resource utilisation, the interest rate level in accordance with simple interest-rate rules 
and changes in the interest rate. Asset prices, the exchange rate and market rates can also 
be taken into account. 
Inflation 
The  forecasts  for  inflation  are  sufficiently  close  to  the  inflation  target  to  justify  a  repo  rate 
increase and the presented repo-rate path. The forecast for CPI inflation is 2.4 per cent per 
year on average during the forecast period, while the forecast for CPIF inflation is 1.8 per 
cent. It is estimated that CPIF Inflation will be around 2 per cent at the end of the forecast 
period. However, there is considerable uncertainty concerning forecasts for inflation and in 
relation to this the deviations from the target may be regarded as small (see Figure 18).  
My assessment is, however, that the inflationary risks are primarily on the upside; in other 
words the risk of a higher rate of inflation than expected is greater than the risk of a lower 
rate of inflation. If inflation increases more than is expected in the Monetary Policy Report, it 
is, in my view, likely that the repo rate will need to be raised more quickly than predicted in 
the repo-rate path. In this case it is quite possible that it will need to be raised by more than 
                                                 
15   Monetary Policy Report 1, 2011, pages 17–19, Norges Bank. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
0.25 percentage points at one or more meetings and that it will need to be increased to 4 per 
cent already next year. 
Resource utilisation 
In my overall assessment, resource utilisation is more or less normal at present and with the 
present  forecasts  it  will  be  higher  than  normal  and  rising  towards  the  end  of  the  forecast 
period. This also indicates the need for a higher repo-rate path than the presented path. 
The  Riksbank  uses  several  different  measures  of  resource  utilisation.  According  to  these 
measures, the GDP gap, for example, will be approximately –1 per cent in the first quarter of 
2011. My own assessment is that it will be a little higher than this, more or less zero. The 
level indicated by the so-called RU indicator also supports the claim that resource utilisation 
is largely normal. The RU indicator, which has been developed by the Riksbank and weighs 
together  a  large  number  of  indicators  to  form  a  summary  measure  of  resource  utilisation, 
reached a normal level already in the fourth quarter of 2010. Several other measures also 
indicate that resource utilisation is normal (see Figure 19).  
Unemployment, on the other hand, is still higher than normal. Unemployment varied between 
6 and 8 per cent around an average of 7 per cent during the ten years preceding the financial 
crisis.16 If the current rate of fall in unemployment continues, it will reach a normal level in the 
autumn of 2011. Although, the assessment in the Monetary Policy Report is that this will not 
take  place  so  quickly,  we  should  remember  that  both  the  Riksbank  and  others  have 
underestimated the strengthening of the labour market in recent years (see Figure 20). 
Monetary policy must also take into account how the development of the economy affects 
wage  formation.  Monetary  policy  must  resist  the  temptation  to  stimulate  production  and 
employment  in  the  short  term  over  and  above  the  level  that  is  compatible  with  a  stable 
development of wages and inflation. A very rapid improvement of the labour market may lead 
to  problems  in  the  wage  negotiations  that  will  begin  in  the  autumn.  Wage  formation  has 
worked  well  in  the  last  15  years  and  this  has  helped  to  keep  inflation at  a  low  and  stable 
level. It would be unfortunate if wage negotiations had to be conducted in a situation where 
there is overheating on the labour market.  
In the current situation, the shortage of labour is probably a better measure of how strained 
the labour market is than unemployment. The shortage of labour in the business sector was 
back to an almost normal level in the fourth quarter of 2010. In several parts of the business 
sector,  however,  the  shortage  was  greater  than  normal,  for  example  in  the  manufacturing 
industry and the construction industry, and for several types of labour, for example technical 
white-collar workers in the industrial sector and computer consultants (see Figure 21). 
The  fact  that  the  shortage  of  labour  is  already  so  high  even  though  unemployment  is  still 
higher  than  normal  indicates  that  matching  on  the  labour  market  has  deteriorated.  This  is 
also indicated by the Beverage curve, which shows the relation between unemployment and 
vacancies. This has shifted outwards, that is a certain level of vacancies is compatible with a 
higher rate of unemployment. In part, this may be a cyclical phenomenon, but the change is 
so large that it may also relate to a structural deterioration (see Figure 22). 
                                                 
16   One  difficulty  at  present  is  to  assess  whether  the  normal  rate  of  unemployment  has  changed  due  to  the 
financial  crisis  and  economic  policy.  In  connection  with  a  severe  downturn,  the  sustainable  rate  of 
unemployment (NAIRU) usually increases, at least initially. But the NAIRU will probably also be affected by 
the  labour-market  reforms  implemented  in  recent  years.  Some  of  these  reforms  will  probably  reduce  the 
NAIRU while others may increase it. It remains to be seen what the net result of these factors will be. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Repo rate level 
I also believe that we should take the level of the repo rate into account when deciding on 
monetary policy. Particularly strong reasons are required for setting a repo rate over a long 
period of time that is considerably lower than what can be regarded as a long-term average. 
Monetary policy can sometimes be used to stimulate the economy and sometimes be used 
to tighten the economy, but not to  permanently stimulate the economy by  means  of a low 
interest rate. 
Long periods with a very low interest rate can namely lead to financial imbalances. They can, 
for example, lead to a rapid expansion of credit which in the long term may lead to some 
households being unable to afford to meet the interest and amortization payments on their 
mortgages.  The  households’  interest  rate  expectations  are  retrospective  and  long-term 
expectations are reduced by the low interest rates that have prevailed for a number of years. 
Problems  arise  when  interest  rates  then  rise.  But  this  is  not  just  about  households  and 
mortgages. As I said in the first part of the speech, a too-expansionary monetary policy can 
also contribute to other kinds of financial imbalances. 
I  therefore  usually  also  look  at  what  the  Taylor  rule  mentioned  above  would  entail  for  the 
repo  rate  level.  The  Taylor  rule  indicates,  as  I said  earlier,  that  the  repo  rate  should  have 
been higher than it actually was before the crisis, which I think is reasonable. The Taylor rule 
also indicates that the repo rate should have been reduced more or less as quickly and as 
much as we actually did when the crisis hit. If instead we, members of the Executive Board, 
had followed the results of the simulations in the Riksbank’s model Ramses when the crisis 
hit, then the repo rate would have been reduced very slowly. Applied to the current situation 
in Sweden, the Taylor rule would give a repo rate of 3 to 4 per cent. This indicates that the 
repo-rate path should be even higher than it is. 
Repo rate changes 
Even though there are thus factors that with the current forecasts indicate that the repo rate 
should be increased more rapidly, I believe that there is a value in changing the repo rate at 
a  steady  pace  in  small  steps.  Unexpected,  substantial  changes  may  entail  costs  for 
households  and  companies  and  could  cause  instability  on  the  financial  markets.  This  was 
also  my  reasoning  in  2006  and  2007  when  the  Riksbank  was  in  a  period  of  repo  rate 
increases. I entered a reservation at every meeting in 2007 when the majority did not want to 
increase the repo rate by 0.25 percentage points. 
The most important thing for me therefore is that the repo rate continues to be raised in small 
steps meeting by meeting. My assessment at the latest monetary policy meeting was that it 
will need to be raised by 0.25 percentage points at every meeting this year so that it reaches 
2.75 per cent at the end of the year. 
However, it is more difficult to assess the situation after the turn of the year. This is partly 
because uncertainty increases in the longer term, and partly because I myself will no longer 
be a member of the Executive Board and nor, by the way, will Lars Nyberg. Other members 
of the Executive Board may make different assessments of the direction of monetary policy.  
However, if inflation turns out to be higher than we estimated in the Monetary Policy Report, 
the Riksbank may need to increase the repo rate faster than indicated in the repo-rate path. 
It is then quite possible that it will be raised to 4 per cent already next year. 
Conclusion 
My  overall  assessment  is  that  monetary  policy  has  worked  well  during  the  more  than  five 
years  I  have  been  a  member  of  the  Riksbank’s  Executive  Board.  The  average  for  CPI 
inflation  in  the  period  2006–2011  is  1.8  per  cent  with  the  current  forecast  for  inflation  this 
year. It is estimated that the repo rate will on average be somewhat lower in 2011 than it was 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in  2006,  which  contributes  to  reducing  the  average  for  CPI  inflation  somewhat  during  this 
period. The average for CPIF inflation during these six years is 2.0 per cent, that is equal to 
the  inflation  target.  The  Riksbank  has  also  helped  to  keep  up  the  level  of  production  and 
employment during these years. 
On the other hand, it is my view, with hindsight, that monetary policy was too expansionary in 
the years preceding the financial crisis. Inflation increased to a level that was tangibly higher 
than the inflation target, resource utilisation was higher than normal and there was a rapid 
expansion of credit. Despite this, the repo rate was lower than normal for most of the period 
leading up to the crisis. A more rapid increase of the repo rate would have been better.  
We did not foresee the financial crisis, but once it hit the Swedish economy with full force in 
September 2008 the Riksbank acted quickly and forcefully. This mainly concerned measures 
to preserve financial stability. However, the expansionary monetary policy conducted by the 
Riksbank also played an important role in reducing the severity of the downturn that followed 
in the wake of the financial crisis. 
Looking  forward,  I  think  that  the  repo  rate  should  be  raised  at  every  meeting  this  year, 
considering the economic development we envisaged at the last monetary policy meeting. If 
inflation becomes higher than we had expected, it may be necessary to raise the repo rate to 
a normal level of around 4 per cent as soon as next year. The average for the repo rate over 
the last 10 years cannot be taken as a starting point for what the average repo rate should be 
in  the  longer  term.  However,  at  the  same  time,  I  am,  of  course,  prepared  to  reassess  my 
view of the direction of monetary policy if the external conditions should change significantly, 
as they did in September 2008.  
There are those who think that monetary policy is too tight. However, with a rate of growth of 
over 5 per cent and a repo rate of 1.50 per cent, I do not think we can say that monetary 
policy  is  tight.  It  is  just  gradually  becoming  slightly  less  expansionary.  There  are  not  four 
hawks and two doves on the Executive Board at present, only six doves. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
   14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
    16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
    18 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  19
    20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  21
  22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
