Sanusi Lamido Sanusi: Global financial meltdown and the reforms in the 
Nigerian banking sector 
Speech by Mr Sanusi Lamido Sanusi, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria, at a Public 
Lecture delivered at the Convocation Square, Abubakar Tafawa Balewa University, Bauchi, 
10 December 2010. 
 Protocol 
1. 
Distinguish Ladies and Gentlemen, let me begin by thanking the organizers for honouring me 
with this invitation. First of all, I must thank the Vice-Chancellor, the Senate and Council of 
the Abubakar Tafawa Balewa University (ATBU) for this wonderful privilege and for inviting 
me  to  give  this  lecture  titled  “Global  Financial  Meltdown  and  Reforms  in  the  Nigerian 
Banking Sector”. I am aware that the highly regarded ATBU Public Lecture Series focuses 
on  developments  on  topical  issues  in  our  nation.  Therefore,  my  invitation  to  this  highly 
regarded event in the ancient city of Bauchi, and the hometown of our great Prime Minister, 
late Alhaji Abubakar Tafawa Balewa, is greatly appreciated. 
As the International Monetary Fund, IMF observed, the extent and severity of the crisis that 
began with the bursting of the housing bubble in the United States in August 2007 reflects 
the  confluence  of  myriad  of  factors  some  of  which  are  familiar  from  previous  crises,  while 
others  are  new.  As  in  previous  times  of  financial  turmoil,  the  pre-crisis  period  was 
characterized  by  (i)  surging  asset  prices  that  proved  unsustainable;  (ii)  a  prolonged  credit 
expansion  leading  to  accumulation  of  debt;  (iii)  the  emergence  of  new  types  of  synthetic 
financial  instruments;  and  (iv)  regulatory  failure.  This  time  around  the  rapid  expansion  of 
securitization  (not  itself  a  new  phenomenon),  which  changed  incentives  for  lenders  and 
lowered credit standards caused the crisis. Systems became fragile because balance sheets 
became  increasingly  complex  (further  complicated  by  increased  use  of  off-balance-sheet 
instruments).  Financial  market  players  were  highly  leveraged  and  relied  on  wholesale 
funding  and  external  risk  assessments.  Cross-border  spillovers  intensified  after  the  crisis 
started  because  financial  institutions  and  markets  across  borders  were  closely  linked  and 
risks highly correlated. 
No doubt, the world is inextricably linked by globalization. Thus, the economic and financial 
crisis, which started in the United States, destabilized markets and economies (developed, 
developing  and  underdeveloped)  around  the  globe  and,  has  continued  to  dominate 
discussions  on  the  global  economy.  These  days  one  would  hardly  watch  the  television  or 
browse  through  national  and  international  newspapers,  magazines  and  journals  without 
stumbling  upon  headline  news  of  how  political  leaders  are  scrambling  for  strategies  to 
mitigate the impact of the financial crisis on the domestic and global economy. 
As  rightly  pointed  out  in  several  quarters,  the  global  financial  crisis  has  been  a  major 
constraint  to  growth  in  most  countries,  a  situation  that  has  been  aggravated  by  banking 
system crisis. The theme of this lecture is, therefore, very pertinent as it provides opportunity 
for the academia, researchers and policy makers to explore alternative policy and practical 
steps that can be taken to stem the tide of recession, especially in developing countries like 
Nigeria. 
Carl  Menger  in  his  1871  seminal  work  on  economic  principles  opined  that  “All  things  are 
subject  to  the  law  of  cause  and  effect”.  It  is  imperative  to  argue  here  that,  there  is  no 
exception to this great principle in the light of the origin and cause(s) of the global financial 
crisis  and  its  consequences.  As  a  corollary,  we  live  today,  in  an  era  in  which  economic 
liberalism  and  small  governments  is  so  much  propagated,  and  in  which,  it  is  generally 
expected  that  self  regulation  of  markets  is  the  best  way  of  promoting  competition, 
productivity, efficiency and growth. An unarguable guide for lovers of freedom and adventure 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
is  the  fact  that  “freedom  has  responsibility”.  While  the  freedom  to  innovate  has  led  to  the 
rapid  development  of  the  financial  market  in  major  industrialized  countries  and  emerging 
markets,  it  has  become  clear  that  there  is  an  inherent  danger  in  the  manner  the  markets 
were  developing  without  proper  supervision  and  moderation.  Innovation  has  worked  in  the 
financial markets and has contributed significantly to the process made possible by laissez 
faire. However, the same innovation that deepened the financial markets also accentuated 
predatory, unsecured and irresponsible lending behaviour among financial institutions thus, 
exacerbating the global meltdown. 
The  focus  of  this  lecture  is  on  the  Nigerian  experience.  I  believe  that  my  audience  at  this 
lecture  today  will  share  some  perspectives  on  the  subject,  drawing  from  their  individual 
experiences.  The  critical  challenge  that  Nigeria  faces  today  as  a  nation  is  how  to  create 
some  irreducible  minimum  standards  of  financial  system  stability  that  will  promote  strong 
financial  institutions  and  the  emergence  of  budding  banking  system,  and  hence  ensure 
sustained growth and development in Nigeria and indeed in the rest of Africa. 
The lecture is intended to stimulate discussions, and enable policy makers to come up with 
ways of identifying specific institutional arrangements and practical mechanisms that would 
expand financial services to economic agents in Nigeria. The focus is on developing, over 
time, an efficient and sustainable banking sector for economic activities to thrive. The vision 
is  for  a  system  that  integrates  the  domestic,  foreign,  short  and  long  term  sources,  where 
banks  can  exploit  each  others’  comparative  advantages  in  cost-effective  financial  services 
delivery.  
Global financial meltdown: nature and origin 
2. 
Let  me  start  with  a  discussion  of  the  nature  and  origin  of  the  global financial  meltdown  or 
crisis. The term financial meltdown defines moments when financial networks and markets 
suddenly  become  markedly  unstable  or  strained  to  the  point  where  it  may  collapse.  It 
features  sudden  change  in  expectations,  speculative  bubbles,  falling  prices  and  frequent 
bankruptcies. The literature is replete with what constitute a crisis or financial meltdown, but 
as related to the issues in discourse Eichengreen and Portes (1987) have defined crisis “as a 
sharp change in asset prices that leads to distress among financial markets participants.” As 
Eichengreen  (2004)  noted,  it  is  not  very  “clear  where  to  draw  the  line  between  sharp  and 
moderate  price  changes  or  how  to  distinguish  severe  financial  distress  from  financial 
pressure.” Commentaries on the origin of the crisis noted myriad causes including excessive 
and corrupt practices of “sub prime mortgage lending” (that led to high mortgage default and 
delinquency rates in the United States), massive funding of the “war on terrorism” and the 
erroneous  belief  that  “free  market”  principle  is  perfect,  fair  and  efficient  (The  New  York 
Times, November 20, 2008). It is to be noted that because it was global, its consequences 
affected national, regional and global markets and economies. 
The  financial  instability  and  panics  caused  in  part  by  the  sub-prime  mortgage  lending 
difficulties  and  consequent  failure  of  the  investment  banking  industry  in  the  United  States, 
notably Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley and JP Morgan-Chase, as well as 
government-backed mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are widely recognized to 
be  at  the  root  of  the  current  global  financial  meltdown.  Most  commentators  agree  that  the 
origin of the sub-prime crises is due to a constellation of factors notably: 
(i) 
Low real interest rates in the US which was maintained for a long-time prior to the 
crises thereby encouraging accommodating monetary policy; 
Extreme confidence about the continued rise in housing prices and low volatility in 
the  US  housing  market.  Between  1996  and  2005,  US  housing  prices  nationwide 
went up about 90 per cent. They went up 60 per cent between 2000 and 2005, and 
in the 30 year run-up to the crisis, rarely did housing prices fall. 
(ii) 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
(iii) 
(iv) 
A shift in mortgage lending toward the less creditworthy, marginal borrowers, or sub-
prime  borrowers  who  do  not  qualify  for  prime  mortgage.  Also,  in  the  sub-prime 
market, more than half of the loans were made by independent mortgage brokers 
who were not supervised at the federal level, unlike banks and thrift institutions. 
Incentive problems associated with the securitization model for the mortgage loans 
into  mortgage  backed  securities.  There  were  also  incentive  problems  for  the  so-
called  “independent”  credit  rating  agencies,  who  were  equally  heavily  involved  in 
developing the structured product they rated. 
increased  when 
losses  dramatically 
the  contagion  spread 
The sub-prime crises actually broke out in 2007; however its effect was not dramatic then 
due to write-down of losses by the affected investment banks thereby eroding their capital. 
The  realized 
to  other 
counterparties such as insurance companies, hedge funds, finance companies, and mutual 
and pension funds that invested heavily in the structured products. The contagion became 
globalized  because  the  investors  were  not  only  US  companies.  European  banks,  and 
emerging market institutions, in particular, bought just about as many as US banks, which led 
to contagion around the globe. 
Perhaps,  a  brief  synopsis  of  the  stages  of  the  global  financial  meltdown  would  suffice  in 
explaining the origin of the global meltdown within an appropriate context. Historically, there 
have been four major crises. These are The Great Depression, the crash of 1987, the crisis 
of the 1990s and the 1987 Asian Financial Crisis. There was also the dot com crisis which 
was  a  fall  out  of  the  crises  of  the  1990s.  In  August  2007,  there  were  reported  cases  of 
liquidity constraints as financial institutions faced difficulties raising funds in the United States 
so  much  so  that,  by  March  2008,  there  was  an  unprecedented  credit  contraction  or  credit 
crunch as financial institutions tightened credit in the US. During this time, there were wide 
spread  cases  of  defaults  in  many  markets  which  by  July  2008  had  spread  to  other 
economies. By the last quarter of 2008, the US and European countries officially declared 
that they were in economic recession. Consequently, the magnitude of distortions to national 
economies became unprecedented in what was later referred to as the worst economic crisis 
in human history. 
Thus, from 2002 to early 2007, the decline in volatility in the global economy and financial 
markets was reflected in lower measures of market risk, which encouraged firms to increase 
their  risk-taking.  However,  in  September  2008,  the  economic  downturn  particularly  in  the 
United  States  and  a  number  of  industrialized  economies  signaled  the  beginning  of  a 
recession triggered by the credit crunch that resulted from the crisis. 
In  Nigeria,  like  in  many  developing  countries  particularly  in  Africa,  the  initial  impact  of  the 
crisis (the first round effect) was not felt because Nigeria was not a major player in the global 
economy. The banking system was less integrated with the global financial market, and the 
sound macroeconomic policies adopted by the country also helped to cushion the effect of 
the  crisis.  In  addition,  the  banking  system  operated  with  simple  financial  products  but  had 
strong  capitalization  as  a  result  of  the  recapitalization  exercise  of  2005.  However,  as  the 
recession in advanced countries deepened, Nigeria became affected with consequences for 
the economy as a whole and the financial sector in particular. 
3. 
Impact of the global financial meltdown on Nigeria 
Impact on the Nigerian economy 
3.1 
It is by now very clear that Nigeria was not insulated from the crisis, especially the second 
round  effect.  The  crisis  which  manifested  itself  globally  in  the  form  of  liquidity  and  credit 
crunch, breakdown of confidence in the banking system, de-leveraging and banks inability to 
improve capital adequacy, weak consumer demand, and fall in global output, affected Nigeria 
through both the financial and real (trade, remittances and aid) channels. The undiversified 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
nature of the Nigerian economy and the high dependence on exports of crude oil as well as 
foreign capital inflows compounded the impact of the external shock arising from the crisis. In 
specific  terms,  Nigeria  experienced  low  demand  for  its  oil  export  due  to  recession  in  the 
economies  of  her  major  trading  partners.  The  Nigeria’s  Bonny  Light  Crude  Oil  Spot  Price 
FOB  which  was  $95.16  per  barrel  in  January  2008  rose  to  $146.15  in  July  2008  before 
declining to $76.24 per barrel by October 17 2008. Thus, within four months, it had lost 50% 
of its peak price. This, coupled with the collapse in the international price of oil, led to severe 
decline  in  foreign  exchange  receipts  and  consequently,  government  revenue  contraction. 
The  low  accretion  to  foreign  exchange  reserves  and  demand  pressure  in  the  foreign 
exchange  market  led  to  volatility  and  substantial  depreciation  of  the  naira  exchange  rate. 
Government  resorted  to  Excess  Crude  Account  drawdown  and  domestic  borrowing  to 
finance its activities. Within the period, there was substantial decline in foreign capital inflows 
(foreign  direct  investment,  FDIs;  portfolio  investment,  and  remittances  from  Nigerians  in 
Diaspora) just as foreign trade finance reduced significantly for some banks while for others 
credit lines literally dried-up. It is perhaps in the capital market that the greatest impact was 
felt.  The  prolonged  downturn  in  the  capital  market  induced  by  significant  divestment  by 
foreign investors and compounded by lingering liquidity tightness, waning public confidence, 
and  panic  selling  by  domestic  investors  lead  to  significant  losses  by  investors.  The  stock 
market which remained bullish between December 2005 and March 2008, suddenly became 
bearish in April 2008 and has remained nearly so since then with only marginal recovery. At 
the  height  of  the  bull  run  in  early  March  11,  2008,  equity  market  capitalization  hit 
N12.64 trillion  while  the  Nigerian  Stock  Exchange  All  Share  Index  (ASI)  which  rose  by 
37.8 per  cent  in  2006  and  1.01  per  cent  in  2005  gained  a  record  74.73  per  cent  in  2007. 
Between 31st December 2007 and the peak of the bull run in early March 2008, the market 
gained 14.45 per cent. By year end 2008, the NSE All Share Index which gained 74.73 per 
cent  the  previous  year,  had  declined  by  45.8  per  cent  while  equity  market  capitalization 
declined by 32.4 per cent from N10.3 trillion at year-end 2008 to N6.96 trillion at the close of 
2008. Thus, between 2007 and 2008 the ASI declined by 42.5 per cent compared to 33.8 per 
cent  decline  between  2008  and  2009.  The  corresponding  figures  for  market  capitalization 
were 27.5 and 28.3 per cent, respectively. The capital market downturn also had negative 
impact on the banks balance sheet through increased provisioning for bad debts and lower 
profitability. 
In spite of the debilitating impact of the crisis, Nigeria’s growth trajectory was not significantly 
impaired. The real Gross domestic Product (GDP) growth rate which averaged 6.29 per cent 
between  2004  and  2007  declined  marginally  to  5.99  per  cent  in  2008  rising  thereafter  to 
6.9 per  cent  in  2009.  This  is  often  attributed  to  the  impressive  performance  of  the  non-oil 
sector, particularly, agriculture and the continuous implementation of sound macroeconomic 
policies.  The  external  reserves  was,  however,  still  able  to  support  at  least  15  months  of 
imports.  
Impact on the banking sector 
3.2 
Recall that in 2004, the Central Bank of Nigeria embarked on banking sector reform (Bank 
Consolidation)  which  sought,  among  other  things,  to  strengthen  the  banking  system  and 
improve  the  operational  efficiency  of  the  Nigerian  banks.  At  that  time,  the  Nigerian  banks 
were generally weak and inefficient. CBN surveillance report as at end-March 2004 indicated 
that  62  banks  out  of  89  were  classified  as  sound/  satisfactory  and  14  as  marginal.  The 
number of unsound banks had risen from 9 as at end-December 2003 to 11 in May 2004. 
There  was  serious  over-dependence  on  public  sector  funds  and  CBN  credits  as  well  as 
income  from  foreign  exchange  trading  on  the  part  of  the  banks.  Besides  being  grossly 
undercapitalized,  the  banking  industry  was  characterized  by  several  weaknesses  including 
poor corporate governance, poor asset quality, inaccurate reporting and non-compliance with 
regulatory requirements, falling ethics and de-marketing of other banks in the industry, gross 
insider abuses resulting in huge non-performing insider related credits, oligopolistic structure 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
with 10 of the 89 banks controlling more than 50 per cent of the industry assets and liabilities, 
lack of capacity to support the real sector of the economy, and lack of competition by banks 
in savings mobilization to boost the level of deposits. The situation was such that weak banks 
were paying higher interest rates in a bid to attract more deposits. As at end-May 2004 banks 
indebtedness  to  the  CBN  was  about  N71.36  billion.  The  bank  consolidation  exercise  was 
meant to address these weakness through recapitalization of banks with minimum paid-up 
capital of N25 billion, ensuring minimal reliance on public sector for funds, adoption of risk 
focused  and  rule-based  regulatory  framework;  adoption  of  zero  tolerance  in  regulatory 
framework  in  data/information  rendition/reporting  and  infractions;  stricter  enforcement  of 
corporate governance principles for banking; expeditious process for rendition of returns by 
banks and other financial institutions through e-FASS; revision and updating of relevant laws 
for effective corporate governance; ensuring greater transparency and accountability in the 
implementation  of  banking  laws  and  regulation;  and  the  establishment  of  an  asset 
management company as an important element of distress resolution. 
There is no doubt that the consolidation exercise had some positive impacts on the banking 
sector. The banking system was transformed from 89 banks to 25 through regulatory merger 
and  acquisition  and  latter  to  24  through  market-induced  merger  and  acquisition.  Bank 
branches grew from 2,900 in 2005 to almost 5,500 in mid-2009. Besides deepening of the 
capital market, the banks were positioned to actively participate in a wider range of activities, 
including financing of infrastructure and the oil sector. 
However, while the consolidation exercise lasted, certain developments in the economy and 
within  the  banking  system  itself  put  the  banking  sector  at  serious  risk.  Between  2004  and 
2008, Nigeria enjoyed unprecedented increase in oil price which resulted in huge inflow of 
foreign  exchange  and  robust  economic  growth.  This,  coupled  with  appreciable  level  of 
foreign  direct  investment  inflows,  resulted  in  huge  liquidity  in  the  economy  which  the  real 
sector  of  the  economy  could  not  absorb.  The  excess  liquidity  found  its  way  into  the  stock 
market  as  shown  in  the  unprecedented  rally  in  the  stock  prices  on  the  Nigerian  Stock 
Exchange between 2006 and March 2008. The excess liquidity also allowed banks to raise 
capital.  Fresh  capital  raised  between  2006  and  first  quarter  of  2008  amounted  to 
N1,603 billion. The increase in capital supported banks’ balance sheet growth with banking 
sector assets as percentage of GDP increasing rapidly to 60 per cent from about 30 per cent 
in 2004. With significant capital and greater liquidity, banks were increasingly under pressure 
to create risk asset amidst limited product innovation and diversification. This, coupled with 
poor risk management practices, ultimately led to a concentration of assets in certain areas, 
in particular margin lending and oil trading/marketing. As at end-December 2008, banks’ total 
exposure to oil industry stood at over N754.0 billion, representing over 10.0 per cent of the 
industry total and over 27.0 per cent of the shareholders’ funds. 
Thus, in mid-2008 when the global financial and economic crisis set in, the domestic financial 
system was already engulfed by several interdependent factors that led to the re-emergence 
of  an  extremely  fragile  financial  system  similar  to  pre-consolidation  era.  These  factors 
included  macroeconomic  instability  caused  by  large  and  sudden  capital  inflows,  major 
failures  in  corporate  governance  at  banks,  lack  of  investor  and  consumer  sophistication, 
inadequate  disclosure  and  transparency  about  financial  position  of  banks,  critical  gaps  in 
regulatory  framework  and  regulations,  uneven  supervision  and  enforcement,  unstructured 
governance  and  management  processes  at  the  CBN/weaknesses  within  the  CBN,  and 
weaknesses in the business environment. 
It is clear, therefore, that when the global crisis eventually hit Nigeria, the banking sector was 
illequipped to weather the storm in spite of recapitalization. As we are all aware, the financial 
crisis had an adverse effect on both the oil and gas sector and the capital market where the 
Nigerian banks were exposed to the tune of N1.6 trillion as at December 2008. The result 
was a sharp deterioration in the quality of banks’ assets which immediately led to concerns 
over banks’ liquidity. In deed, the Nigerian banking sector was thrown into severe crisis as 
many of the banks became distressed. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Remedial measures to mitigate the impact on the banking sector 
3.3 
The initial diagnosis of the distress in the banking system amplified by the global financial 
crisis as a liquidity problem led to the introduction of several measures by the CBN between 
2008  and  2009.  These  measures  included,  among  others,  the  reduction  in  the  Monetary 
Policy  Rate  (MPR),  cash  reserve  ratio  (CRR)  and  liquidity  Ratio  (LR).  The  MPR  was 
gradually reduced from 10.25 per cent to 6 per cent to its present level between September 
18, 2008 and July 7, 2009 and subsequently raised to 6.25 per cent on September 21, 2010. 
Similarly, the cash reserve ratio was reduced from 4.0 per cent to 2.0 per cent and further to 
1.0 per cent while the liquidity ratio was progressively reduced from 40 per cent to 25 per 
cent. The CBN also issued directive to banks to restructure their margin loans up to 2009, 
and expanded its discount window to allow additional instruments as well as allow banks to 
borrow up to 360 days (currently suspended) in addition to stoppage of liquidity mopping-up. 
Greater emphasis was placed on enforcement of the CBN Code of Corporate Governance to 
promote transparency and accountability in banks as well as the review of contingency plan 
for systemic distress in banks. 
These measures did not fully resolve the problems as the system remained fragile. It was 
discovered that nine banks were the main users of the Expanded Discount Window (EDW) 
over a nine-month period ending June 2009. Accordingly, when the CBN eventually closed 
the EDW in July 2009, and in its place, guaranteed interbank placements, it was observed 
that  these  nine  banks  were  the  main  net-takers  under  the  guarantee  arrangement.  At  this 
point it was clear that the issue was far beyond the liquidity problem and if drastic actions 
were not taken, the financial system could collapse. 
4. 
Current banking sector reforms 
Diagnosis and initial stabilization steps 
4.1 
Given  the  precarious  state  of  the  Nigerian  banks,  the  CBN  in  June  2009,  took  a  three 
pronged approach to assess the financial condition of the 24 banks. The first was the special 
examination  exercise  jointly  conducted  by  the  CBN  and  the  Nigerian  Deposit  Insurance 
Corporation  (NDIC).  This  exercise  highlighted  inadequacies  in  capital  asset  ratios  and 
liquidity  ratios  as  well  as  weaknesses  in  corporate  governance  and  risk  management 
practices in 9 banks. These banks were found to be in a grave situation as a result of capital, 
liquidity and corporate governance concerns. They failed to meet the minimum 10 per cent 
capital adequacy ratio and 25 per cent minimum liquidity ratio. Apart from accumulating high 
non-performing loans, these banks were seriously exposed to the oil and gas sector as well 
as the capital markets. Poor risk management practices in the form of absence of necessary 
controls measures were prevalent as the board and management of the banks had failed to 
observe established controls. The remaining14 banks were found to be in a sound financial 
state and did not require the CBN to take any action.  
The  second  approach  was  to  carry  out  diagnostic  audit  through  independent  consultants. 
The report of the audit exercise revealed greater magnitude of weak financial condition of the 
nine banks. All of them were “technically” insolvent with significant negative asset value. It 
also exposed several illegal activities that had been taking place in five of the affected banks. 
It  was  against  this  background  that  the  CBN  moved  decisively  to  strengthen  the  industry, 
protect depositors and creditors, restore public confidence and safeguard the integrity of the 
Nigerian  banking  industry.  The  initial  measures/initiative  taken  by  the  CBN  in  conjunction 
with NDIC and the Federal Ministry of Finance (MOF) included injection of N620 billion into 
the  nine  banks;  the  replacement  of  the  chief  executive  /executive  directors  of  eight  of  the 
nine  banks  with  competent  managers  with  experience  and  integrity;  reaffirmation  of  the 
guarantee  of  the  local  interbank  market  to  ensure  continued  liquidity  for  all  banks;  and 
guaranteeing of foreign creditors and correspondent banks’ credit lines to restore confidence 
and maintain important correspondent banking relationships. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
When the new management of the banks took office, it became necessary to also carry out 
further detailed and independent assessment of the financial conditions of the banks. Thus, 
the third approach was to carry out management account audit of the affected banks by their 
new  management.  The  outcome  was  very  much  in  line  with  that  of  the  audit  report. 
Consequently, the management took numerous actions under the CBN guidance to ensure 
that the banks operated effectively with particular emphasis on improving transparency and 
operations. To improve operations, the new management took steps to: (i) improve reporting 
infrastructure, 
increase 
transparency  and  disclosure;  (iii)  ensure  effective  and  continuous  communication  with  all 
stakeholders;  (iv)  ensure  weekly  reporting  between  the  MDs  and  the  CBN  on  financial 
performance, loan recoveries, and; (v) immediate report of any material developments to the 
CBN. Measures taken to improve operations included continued focus on loan recovery to 
improve NPL ratios; reducing cost to income ratio; avoiding unnecessary costs; focus on de-
risking and de-leveraging the balance sheet and liquidity management. 
There is no doubt that these initiatives enabled the nine banks to continue normal business 
operations and prevented a total collapse of the banking sector. 
internal  governance  and  risk  management  procedures;  (ii) 
Long term reforms measures 
4.2 
The focus of the Central Bank of Nigeria is first of all to ensure that there is financial sector 
stability  and,  secondly,  that  the  financial  system  assists  in  growing  the  real  sector  of  the 
economy. It is important to note that any economy that cannot create jobs on a continuous 
basis, reduce poverty, and guarantee its citizens functional and qualitative education as well 
as  world  class  infrastructural  facilities  is  not  only  unsustainable  but  would  remain  globally 
uncompetitive. Attainment of this fit goes beyond short term palliative measures. It requires a 
strategic  medium  to  long  term  measures.  This  explains  why  the  focus  of  the  recent  CBN 
reforms  is  in  the  following  four  areas  (pillars)  namely:  enhancing  the  quality  of  banks, 
establishment of financial stability, enabling healthy financial sector evolution, and ensuring 
that the financial sector contributes to the real economy. A brief discussion of each of these 
pillars is very critical to an understanding of where we are going. 
Enhancing the quality of banks 
4.2.1 
This  consists  of  a  five  part  programme  to  enhance  the  operations  and  quality  of  banks  in 
Nigeria.  These  are  industry  remedial  programmes  to  fix  the  key  causes  of  the  crisis, 
implementation  of  riskbased  supervision  (RBS),  reforms  to  regulations  and  regulatory 
framework, enhanced provisions for consumer protection, and internal transformation of the 
CBN. 
The  industry  remedial  programmes  include  a  set  of  initiatives  to  fix  the  key  causes  of  the 
crisis, namely, data quality, enforcement, governance, risk management and financial crime. 
These  initiatives  are  structured  in  such  a  manner  that  the  banks  do  most  of  the  work  to 
entrench new behaviours in the industry, with the CBN playing a cross-industry management 
role.  The  focus  is  to  ensure  that  governance  best  practices  are  embedded  in  the  industry 
including  the  CBN  as  well  as  ensuring  that  risk-based  supervision  (RBS)  principles, 
methodology and processes are established across the CBN and NDIC. Under the RBS, the 
intention is to establish a programme management structure within the CBN to ensure that 
there is a high level of communication with the industry, implementation quality is measured 
and  examiners  acquire  the  necessary  skills.  A  monitoring  mechanism  to  measure  the 
programme’s  impact  and  ensure  a  high  level  of  responsiveness  to  issues  raised  by  the 
industry will also be established. 
The  regulation  and  regulatory  framework  reform  programme  involves  systematic  review  of 
regulations  and  guidelines  around  the  key  causes  of  the  crisis  by  industry  regulators; 
harmonization and raising to world-class standards of the supervision processes, technology 
and  people  within  the  various  financial  regulators;  and  establishment  of  a  centre  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
international 
(IFRS)  and  N-GAAP+ 
financial  Reporting  Standard 
for 
competence 
implementation.  
In the area of consumer protection, the aim is to ensure that consumers receive appropriate 
protection with the CBN acting as the consumer’s advocate, setting standards of customer 
service for the industry and ensuring that customers are treated fairly in all their dealings with 
the  industry.  Already,  there  is  a  Consumer  Protection  Unit  in  the  newly  created  Financial 
Policy and Regulation Department of the Bank. This Unit will work with supervisors to ensure 
that appropriate rules and regulations are enforced by the banks. 
Under  the  reform,  the  CBN  will  be  transformed  to  ensure  good  corporate  governance, 
stronger information management system, people development, and enhanced disclosure to 
levels expected in major investor countries such as the United States, the United Kingdom, 
South Africa, China and India. 
Establishing financial stability 
4.2.2 
The  main  thrust  of  this  pillar  is  for  the  CBN  to  provide  leadership  in  some  areas  and 
championing some causes. The key features of this pillar centre around strengthening the 
Financial  Stability  Committee  within  the  CBN,  establishment  of  macro-prudential  rules, 
development  of  directional  economic  policy  and  counter-cyclical  fiscal  policies  by  the 
government and further development of capital markets as alternative to bank funding. The 
creation of a new macro-prudential framework designed to ensure that monetary policy is not 
only shaped by systemic risk trends but also consistent with the expanded goals for product 
and  asset  stability  is  a  major  component  of  this  pillar.  This  will  be  complemented  by  the 
establishment  of  the  Financial  Stability  Committee  (FSC)  which  will  work  together  with  the 
Monetary  Policy  Committee  in  achieving  these  objectives. It  is  the  intention  of  the  CBN  to 
champion the development of the capital market through the improvement of its depth and 
accessibility  as  an  alternative  to  bank  funding  as  well  as  encourage  implementation  of 
directional  economic  policy,  particularly  counter-cyclical  fiscal  policies,  that  will  reduce  oil-
related  volatility  in  the  system.  It  is  time  to  make  better  use  of  our  oil  endowment  by 
harnessing it for strategic investment and also ensure that lending and investment get to the 
real economy, especially the priority sectors, instead of being used to inflate financial asset 
bubbles. 
Enabling healthy financial sector evolution 
4.2.3 
The  focus  here  is  on  ensuring  the  emergence  of  a  competitive  banking  industry  structure; 
provision  of  the  required  infrastructure  for  financial  system  such  as  the  credit  bureau  and 
registrars;  improvement  in  the  cost  structure  for  banks  through  cost  control  and  business 
process outsourcing; reliable and secure payments system; reduction of the informal sector 
and greater financial inclusion. Foreign bank participation would be encouraged in order to 
improve  and  strengthen  the  financial  system  provided  such  entry  does  not  affect  the 
development  of  the  local  banking  sector.  Market-based  merger  and  acquisitions  activities 
that  would  create  stronger  banks  would  be  supported  while  other  banks  that  would  drive 
regional economic development will be licensed. In the area of infrastructure provision, three 
private  credit  bureaux  (XDS  Solutions,  CRC  Limited  and  CR  Services  Limited)  have  been 
licensed  while  the  CBN  would  work  with  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  (SEC) 
towards the creation of an acceptable number of Registrars for all securities in the country. 
Central to the reform is the need to check the excessive costs in the banking system which is 
attributable, in the main, to infrastructure cost, high salaries/emoluments for executives and 
poor operational efficiencies. It is the intention of the CBN to encourage the development of 
electronic  channels  to  drive  down  industry  cost  structure  while  working  with  the  banks  to 
improve on the quality of service delivery in order to improve customer confidence. 
Nigeria presently has a large informal sector which has been estimated by the World Bank to 
constitute about 57.9 per cent of Nigeria’s Gross National Product (GNP). This is higher than 
what  obtains  in  Brazil,  Ghana,  Turkey,  Malaysia  and  South  Africa.  Developing  a  financial 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
system that will take care of this large segment of the economy is of utmost necessity. Thus, 
enhanced  financial  inclusion  strategy  would  result  in  more  accurate  measurement  of 
economic outputs, increase in tax base and tax revenue, more effective policy development 
and  more  efficient  use  of  financial  infrastructure.  All  these  will  in  turn  improve  policy 
efficiency and help in poverty reduction. 
Central to healthy financial sector evolution is the establishment of the Asset Management 
Corporation of Nigeria (AMCON) as part of a broad banking sector crisis resolution strategy. 
The  AMCON  Act  2010  was  signed  into  law  on  July  19,  2010.  When  operational,  AMCON 
would serve as a vehicle to free the banks from the weight of their non-performing assets 
and accelerate the process of financial revitalization of the banking sector. Besides, the CBN 
is  currently  reviewing  the  basic  one-size-fits-all  model  of  banking  that  has  emerged  since 
consolidation.  In  addition  to  reviewing  the  universal  banking  model,  we  consider  it 
appropriate to  introduce  greater  diversity  in  bank  mandates.  In  the  near-term,  it  should  be 
possible to have international, national, regional, mono-line and specialised banks such as 
Islamic  banks  in  the  country.  Already  the  guidelines  for  specialized  institution  have  been 
fixed  as  follows:  non-interest  bank  (regional),  N5billion,  non  interest  bank  (National), 
N10 billion, and primary mortgage institutions, N5 billion. The commercial banks have also 
been restructured into regional, national, and international banks with paid-up share capital 
of N10 billion, N 25 billion, and N 50 billion, respectively. 
Ensuring the financial sector contributes to the real economy 
4.2.4 
The last and final pillar of the reform blue print is ensuring that the financial sector contributes 
to  the  real  economy.  Rapid  financialisation  in  Nigeria  did  not  benefit  the  real  economy  as 
much as had been anticipated. Development financial institutions set up for specific purposes 
such  as  housing  finance,  trade  finance  and  urban  development  have  not  fulfilled  their 
mandates. Many successful emerging markets have witnessed proactive government actions 
to  ensure  that  the  financial  sector  contribute  to  the  real  economy.  Nigeria  can  learn  from 
countries  with  successful  track  records  in  creating  financial  accommodation  for  economic 
growth  through  initiatives  such  as  development  finance,  foreign  direct  investment,  venture 
capital  and  public-private  partnerships.  In  this  regard,  the  CBN  through  the  reforms  shall 
(i) evaluate  on  continuous  basis,  the  effectiveness  of  existing  development  finance 
institutions and initiatives in agriculture, manufacturing, and import-export credits, (ii) take a 
public lead in encouraging the examination of critical issues for economic development, such 
as  the  impact  of  infrastructure  e.g.  power,  port  and  railway,  (iii)  lead  further  studies  on 
potentials  of  venture  capital  and  private-public  partnership  initiatives  in  Nigeria,  and 
(iv) cooperate  with  State  governments  in  running  pilot  programmes  that  are  aimed  at 
directing the financial sector’s contribution to the State’s socio-economic development. 
So  far,  the  CBN  has  taken  concrete  measures  to  finance  the  real  sector  of  the  economy. 
Some of these measures include: 
N500  Billion  Critical  Infrastructure  Fund:  The  Infrastructure  Intervention  Fund 
(a) 
was  introduced  in  April  2010  by  the  CBN  to  provide  long-term  support  to  finance  critical 
infrastructure projects. The Fund is a 15-year debenture investment in the Bank of Industry 
(BOI) for on-lending to all eligible DMBs and Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) at 1%. 
These DMBs and DFIs will in turn lend to promoters of the projects at a maximum of 7.0%, 
N200 Billion Refinancing/Restructuring of SME/Manufacturing Fund: Out of the 
(b) 
N500  billion  Critical  Infrastructure  Fund  approved,  N200  billion  was  set  aside  for 
refinancing/restructuring of SME/Manufacturing Fund in April 2010 to enable banks refinance 
and restructure their existing loan portfolio to SMEs and manufacturing. The 15-year facility 
has a 3- year moratorium with loan amounts ranging from N5 million (minimum) to N1 billion 
(maximum) to single obligor at an interest rate of 7.0 per cent annually repayable quarterly. 
On July 28, 2010, the N130 billion programme for refinancing and restructuring of loans to 
SMEs  and  manufacturing  sector  was  launched.  Already,  317  beneficiaries  have  been 
screened for the disbursement of the money. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
N300  billion  for  long  term  funding  of  Power  and  Aviation.  The  balance  of 
(c) 
N300 billion  was  also  approved  to  provide  long  term  funding  Power  (N250  billion)  and 
Aviation Industry (N50 billion). 
The journey so far 
4.3 
In the last seventeen months, the implementation of the various aspects of the reforms has 
been vigorously pursued. Far reaching measures and initiatives have been put in place. New 
prudential guidelines were issued in May 2010. The AMCON Act has been signed into law 
and the Board inaugurated. These and several other measures have positively impacted on 
the banking sector. In spite of several challenges, it is gratifying to note that no single bank in 
Nigeria  has  collapsed  and  no  depositor  has  lost  his/her  money  as  a  result  of  the  banking 
sector crisis. The banking system has been stabilized and the nine most affected banks have 
continued  normal  operation  while  modalities  for  injecting  fresh  capital  into  them  either  by 
shareholders or through acquisition and merger arrangements are being finalized. 
To  a  large  extent  the  reforms  have  succeeded  in  returning  macroeconomic  and  financial 
system stability. Overall output in 2010 is expected to be higher than in 2009. Projections by 
the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS), showed that real GDP in 2010 will grow by 7.85 per 
cent compared to 6.66 per cent in 2009. The growth rate appears robust but there is need to 
ensure it translates into job creation and poverty reduction. 
Between  2009  and  2010,  the  volatility  in  inflation  has  moderated  significantly.  Headline 
inflation  declined  steadily  from  15.1  per  cent  in  end-2008  to  10.4  per  cent  in  September, 
2009, rising thereafter to 15.6 per cent in February, 2010. Since then, it has maintained a 
downward trend to 13.4 per cent in October, 2010. Food inflation rose from 18 per cent at 
end-2008  to  20  per  cent  in  February,  2009  before  declining  to  14.1  per  cent  in  October, 
2010. It is only non-food (core) inflation that has increased to 13.2 per cent in October, 2010, 
having  declined  from  10.4  per  cent  in  end-December  2008  to  7.4  per  cent  in  September, 
2009. 
Inter-bank rate and other key money market rates have moderated significantly compared to 
the  pre-reform  period.  Weighted  average  inter-bank  call  rate  and  other  key  money  market 
rates fell to below the end-December 2008 level by end-August 2009 after the sharp increase 
between  January  and  July  2009.  As  at  28  July  2010,  the  inter-bank  rate  had  fallen  to 
1.12 per cent while the Open Buy-Back (OBB) rate stood at 1.10 per cent. In response to the 
increase in MPR of September 21, 2010, both the Inter-bank call rate and OBB have trended 
upward averaging 10.56 and 8.23 per cent, respectively by November 15, 2010. In spite of 
the fluctuation in money market rates, the lending rates have remained consistently high. The 
prime  lending  rate  stood  at  between  18  and  19  per  cent  while  the  maximum  lending  rate 
hovered between 22.56 and 23.91 per cent over March 2009 and May 2010. The average 
prime  lending  rate  remained  at  16.66  per  cent  in  both  October  and  September  2010, 
declining from 16.89 per cent in August 2010. The average maximum lending rate, however, 
declined  to  21.85  per  cent  in  October  2010  from  22.20  per  cent  in  September  2010  and 
22.31  per  cent  in  August  2010.  The  weighted  average  savings  rate  equally  declined 
marginally  to  1.48  per  cent  in  October,  2010  from  1.49  per  cent  in  September,  2010  and 
1.41 per cent in August, 2010 while the consolidated deposit rate increased to 2.31 per cent 
in October 2010, up from 2.07 per cent in September and 2.27 per cent in August 2010. The 
spread  between  the  average  maximum  lending  rate  and  the  consolidated  deposit  rate, 
however,  narrowed  to  19.54  per  cent  in  October,  2010  from  20.14  per  cent  in  September 
2010, and 20.04 per cent in August 2010. 
The exchange rate has stabilized. The high exchange rate volatility noticed before July 2009 
has  disappeared.  For  a  long  time  now  the  exchange  rate  has  remained  at  between 
N148/N152 per US$ compared with up to N180 per US$ between March and May 2009. 
The  confidence  in  the  financial  system  is  gradually  being  restored.  External  exposure  to 
Nigerian  banks  has  improved  considerably.  EXIM  Bank  exposure  to  Nigerian  banks 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
increased from US$403 million to US$1 billion. European Investment Bank has increased its 
exposure  to  Nigerian  banks  by  an  additional  US$150  million.  The  International  Finance 
Corporation  (IFC)  has  also  increased  its  exposure  to  Nigerian  banks.  Recently,  it  has 
announced its intention to inject US$300 million credit into two Nigerian banks. This consists 
of US$200 million long-term funding to GTbank and US$100 million convertible sub-debt and 
senior loans to First Bank. 
The  capital  market  has  also  witnessed  some  stability.  The  sharp  drop  in  both  market 
capitalization  and  the  NSE  ASI  noticed  between  February  2008  and  April  2009  has  been 
reversed. As at July 28, 2010 market capitalization (MC) stood at N 6.33 trillion while ASI 
was 25,889.98. By November 15, 2010, the ASI had declined marginally to 25,301.34 while 
MC increased to N8.08 trillion. Gross inflows of Foreign Direct Investment (FDI) are expected 
to improve in 2010 as first quarter 2010 inflows stood at N84.78 billion compared to fourth 
quarter  2009  inflow  of  N102.42billion.  Inflows  are  toward  share  equities,  banking, 
telecommunication, manufacturing and oil and gas sectors. 
Monetary  and  credit  aggregates  have,  however,  underperformed  consistently  falling  below 
their long term trends. The decline in broad money (M2) growth witnessed up to July 2009 
was  reversed  and  except  in  January  and  May  2010,  the  growth  rate  has  been  positive. 
M2 grew by 4.25 per cent in October 2010 which when annualized represented a growth of 
5.10 per cent. Net credit to the economy grew substantially since June 2009 although it has 
moderated since January 2010. In October 2010, aggregate credit grew by 19.69 per cent 
which annualizes to 23.63 per cent. Credit to the private sector which grew since July 2009, 
and declined between January and August, 2010. Since then, it has been rising. By October 
2010, credit to private sector, core private sector, and government grew by 3.86, 3.07 and 
64.02  per  cent,  respectively,  on  annualized  basis.  It  should,  however,  be  noted  that  the 
decline  in  monetary  aggregates  is  not  peculiar  to  Nigeria  as  other  countries  faced  similar 
outcomes due to the global financial crisis. 
The good news is that the banking system has resumed lending. New credit to the economy 
increased  from  N145,459  million  in  April  2010  to  N173,  807  million  in  May  2010, 
N345,998 million in June, 2010 representing increases of 19.49 per cent and 99.1 per cent 
respectively. It however, declined to N322, 275 million in October, 2010, representing decline 
of  6.85  per  cent.  Credit  by  non-intervened  banks  rose  from  N127,270  in  April  2010  to 
N145,885 million in May 2010, and N218,904 million in October 2010, representing increases 
of  14.63  per  cent  and  50.1  per  cent,  respectively.  Similarly,  the  intervened  banks  credit 
increased  from  N18,189  million  to  N27,922  million  and  N43,371million,  also  representing 
53.51 per cent and 55.33 per cent, respectively. The bulk of the credit went to Oil and Gas, 
Manufacturing,  and  Transportation  and  Storage.  Furthermore,  the  stress  test  conducted 
recently on the twenty four banks has shown that the financial soundness of the banks (both 
intervened and non-intervened) has improved significantly compared to the crisis period. 
It is also gratifying to note that of the N500 billion approved for power and aviation sectors as 
well  as  for  the  refinancing/restructuring  of  manufacturer’s  portfolios  with  the  DMBs,  about 
N199  billion  had  been  paid  to  the  Bank  of  Industry  (BOI)  for  disbursement  towards  the 
refinancing/restructuring of manufacturers’ exposures to the DMBs. Also, of the other liquidity 
injections  approved  by  the  CBN,  N80.701  billion  had  already  been  disbursed  under  the 
Commercial Agricultural Credit Scheme (CACS), while N368.84 million had been paid by the 
Bank  as  its  6.0  per  cent  interest  rebate  obligation  on  35  large  scale  agricultural  projects 
under the Agricultural Credit Support Scheme. 
Reform challenges 
5. 
In  spite  of  the  achievements  so  far,  a  number  of  challenges  have  remained.  Indeed, 
economic growth has been robust, but a major challenge is how to sustain and translate this 
into new employment opportunities. The link between the major growth drivers, particularly 
agriculture  and  manufacturing,  continue  to  be  weak.  Hence,  the  manufacturing  sector 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
remains an insignificant contributor to growth. There is, therefore, urgent need to address all 
binding  constraints  to  growth.  As  you  all  are  aware,  inadequate  or  absence  of  basic 
economic  and  social  infrastructure  remains  a  major  binding  constraint  on  Nigeria’s  growth 
and development. There is therefore, an urgent need to fast-track the proposed reforms in 
some key sectors of the economy, notably power and oil/gas sectors, to attract the much-
needed investment and reduce the huge import bills on refined petroleum products. There is 
absolutely no reason why our refineries should not be functional. There is also the need to 
deepen  the  deregulation  process  in  the  electricity  and  transport  sector  to  attract  private 
investment.  The  allocation  of  responsibility  for  infrastructure  development  among  different 
levels of government need to be reviewed. 
Resumption of credit to key productive sectors of the economy is key because of the obvious 
medium-to-long  term  implications  for  the  real  economy.  This  requires  adequate  regulatory 
interventions  to  develop  all  sectors  of  the  credit  market  from  microfinance  to  larger 
corporations.  While  acceleration  of  credit  market  reform  such  as  dispute  resolution 
mechanism, credit bureau regulation, and leasing laws are very critical, adequate attention 
must also be given to development of public-private partnership framework, legal framework 
for rental markets, etc. A major challenge also lies in reducing the high lending interest rate 
in the face of low money market rates. 
Growing banking system liquidity is still desirable and, hence, the need to quickly bring the 
banking system reforms to closure. There is urgent need to inject fresh funds into the banks 
affected by regulatory actions in addition to the removal of the “toxic assets”. This is where 
AMCON is very critical. 
A  major  challenge  remains  how  to  strike  an  appropriate  balance  between  monetary,  fiscal 
and  other  policies.  There  is  s  a  limit  to  what  monetary  policy  can  do  to  deliver  economic 
growth.  Other  complementary  policies  must  be  in  place.  Banking  sector  reforms  is  a 
necessary  but  not  a  sufficient  condition 
for  economic  growth  and  development. 
Complementary reforms in other areas of the economy, particularly in agriculture (in addition 
to  energy  sector  mentioned  above)  to  curb  high  import  bills  on  food  (rice)  and  reduce 
demand pressure in the foreign exchange market, are absolutely necessary. 
Equally  important  is  the  rising  government  expenditure  and  borrowings  with  the  possible 
crowding  out  effects  on  the  private  sector.  This  brings  to  the  fore  the  need  to  eliminate 
unnecessary subsidies that add to government expenditure and debt. 
Conclusion 
6. 
Distinguished audience, let me reiterate the fact that a sound, efficient and stable financial 
system is very critical to the development of an economy. The global financial crisis and the 
post  consolidation  weakness  in  the  Nigerian  financial  system,  occasioned  by  illegal  and 
criminal activities in some of the Nigerian Banks have given rise to a fragile financial system 
which the CBN has tried to fix in the last seventeen months. The result so far has been quite 
encouraging. We shall remain focused and committed to this cause. Our goal is to bequeath 
to this country a stable financial system that will oil the wheels of economic development on 
a sustainable basis. We count on your support for this noble cause. 
Thank you for listening. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
References 
Eichengreen, B and R. Porter (1987) “The Anatomy of Financial Crises” in Richard Portes 
and  Alexander  Swoboda,  eds.  Threats  to  International  Financial  Stability  Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge 1987, pp. 10–58. 
Eichengreen, Barry (2004). “Global Imbalances and the Lessons of Bretton Woods,” NBER 
Working Papers 10497, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
