Paul Fisher: Tail risks and contract design from a financial stability 
perspective 
Speech by Mr Paul Fisher, Executive Director for Markets of the Bank of England, at Clare 
College, Cambridge, 1 September 2011. 
 The paper is co-authored with Patrik Edsparr, Visiting Fellow, Bank of England. 
The authors would like to thank Ravi Mattu (PIMCO, Newport Beach), Morten Hviid (UEA) and colleagues at the 
Bank of England for their comments on a draft of this paper. The views represented in this paper are those of the 
authors  and  should  not  be  taken  as  the  policy  of  the  Bank  of  England  or  to  represent  the  views  of  any  other 
person at the Bank. 
The wider theme of this conference is about what we have learned from the recent crisis. 
There have been many lessons. Some are not new but just a re-learning of old lore: “banks 
need to hold adequate capital”; “real-estate prices can fall dramatically”; “financial institutions 
need  to  avoid  excessive  risk  taking”.  The  authorities  are  pursuing  a  long  list  of  regulatory 
initiatives  to  address  the  externalities  arising  from  risks  in  banks  and  markets,  including 
Dodd-Frank in the US, the European Market Infrastructure Regulation (EMIR) in Europe, the 
Independent  Commission  on  Banking  (ICB)  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  various  Basel 
capital and liquidity rules internationally. And the Financial Stability Board has taken on a role 
in co-ordinating much of the other international effort. Academic research also has a large 
part to play in this process, in both identifying the issues and proposing or evaluating policy 
responses. 
A lot of discussion is taking place around disentangling different forms of complexity in the 
market place. For example, regulators are promoting more transparency around funding and 
legal entity structure within complex financial institutions. And there is also a growing body of 
work  that  is  exploring  clearing  houses  and  exchanges  as  important  structural  vehicles  to 
mitigate the increased inter-connectedness driven by the growth of derivatives1. 
The  approach  taken  in  this  paper  is  to  look  at  some  of  the  details  of  how  risk-taking  is 
executed  and  the  underlying  market  structures.  These  micro-foundations  can  have  a 
profound impact on systemic stability beyond the normal consideration of formal regulations. 
In  particular,  we  focus  on  one  aspect  of  market  structure:  contracts  where,  because  of  a 
failure to take into account how the financial system as a whole operates, the true value of 
the  contract  is  different  from  what  it  was  intended  to  be  –  by  at  least  one  of  the 
counterparties who struck the contract. This can arise either because in states of the world in 
which  a  particular  contract  is  designed  to  have  value  there  is  high  correlation  with  other 
events or where, in that state of the world, full adherence to the legal structure would cause 
large unintended consequences in terms of signalling or reputational damage. 
Tail risks with counterparty risk correlation 
The  first  category  of  contracts  falls  under  the  broad  headline  of  “wrong-way”  risk  in  tail 
events, and is purely statistical in nature. The particular issue is focussed on contracts that 
can be perceived of as  providing insurance yet, in a stress scenario, when the contract is 
sufficiently in the money to be worth calling, there is a significant conditional probability that 
the insurance provider is no longer in business to pay out. In what follows, we look how such 
problems arise using practical examples and consider what lessons should be drawn. 
                                                 
1  For  example,  the  Squam  Lake  Working  Group  on  Financial  Regulation,  July  2009,  “Credit  Default  Swaps, 
Clearinghouses, and Exchanges”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
When investor “A” decides to buy protection from bank “B” on exposure to a third company 
“X,” she may or may not explicitly take into account that in the event of default by X, B may in 
fact also be in trouble. Whether or not she does so would depend on the reason for the trade. 
If  A  wants  default  protection  then  that  default  correlation  certainly  should  be  taken  into 
account2.  But  if,  for  example,  the  goal  is  just  to  reduce  the  price  volatility  of  holdings  of  a 
certain corporate bond issued by X, this default correlation may not be seen as that relevant. 
As  a  practical  example,  take  the  case  of  a  pension  fund  managing  its  corporate  bond 
portfolio. Suppose the pension fund owns a large amount of a particular corporate bond and 
wants to reduce this holding, but the liquidity for outright sales is limited. The fund may take a 
view that it will have less price impact by gradually selling the bond in the cash market over a 
period  of  a  few  months  but,  at  the  same  time,  it  would  prefer  to  take  off  the  market  risk 
immediately. If that is the case, the fund may take out a standardised CDS (Credit Default 
Swap) contract with a bank, probably written on a basket of corporate bonds issued by the 
same corporate. There would be basis risk from any mismatch in the bonds, so the CDS is 
not an exact hedge, but in most scenarios, holding the bond and the CDS contract together 
will  ensure  a  substantial  reduction  in  the  net  value  of  the  market  position,  compared  with 
holding the bond alone. The fund could then unwind the CDS contract simultaneously with 
slowly selling the cash bond. In short, the superior liquidity of the more homogenous CDS 
market  (which  benefits  from  relatively  elastic  gross  supply)  enables  the  pension  fund  to 
reduce the execution costs of its portfolio management whilst not sacrificing its nimbleness in 
terms of market risk management. 
In this example, the strategy seems reasonable. The probability that the corporate defaults in 
the few months the strategy takes to execute is probably pretty low, and the joint probability 
of  the  corporate  and  bank  defaulting  is  even  less.  In  essence,  the  CDS  protection  is  not 
really being used to insure against default but to reduce market price volatility. 
Let us now turn to a second example of a bank hedging its corporate lending. Banks lend 
to a broad range of companies. In many cases they would be expected to hold these loans 
on their books until maturity (as opposed to selling them off to other investors). In order to 
reduce its measured outstanding credit risk, a bank may choose to purchase off-setting CDS 
protection, probably on a portfolio of loans. By so doing, the bank can make greater use of its 
internal  credit  risk  limits  and  may  get  regulatory  capital  relief.  In  most  cases,  another 
leveraged market participant (bank or hedge fund) would write the CDS. (In some cases the 
insurance  provider  may  be  an  unlevered  institution,  for  which  most  of  the  concerns  below 
would be reduced.) 
In the first example, the pension fund was concerned about short-term price swings. In this 
second example, the bank should be concerned to protect itself against clusters of defaults. 
But if the risk management of the ensuing portfolio of loans and CDS is not done with serious 
attention paid to the joint risk profile of the corporate borrowers and the providers of the CDS 
protection,  the  true  net  risk  position  might  be  worse  than  it  appears.  That  could  fool 
regulators  as  well  as  the  bank’s  own  risk  management  function.  Any  risk  management 
framework that is driven by the correlation structure of short-term moves alone would most 
likely be proven too rosy in the event of clusters of defaults. The issue is that the correlation 
structure locally may be very different than that in the tail of the distribution. Of course, there 
                                                 
2  When  the  Bank  of  England  takes  collateral,  it  is  solely  to  guard  against  the  risk  of  default  and  so  all 
correlations  in  that  state  of  the  world  are  relevant  to  what  collateral  is  taken  and  the  haircuts  applied.  See 
Breeden  and  Whisker,  2010,  “Collateral  risk  management  at  the  Bank  of  England”,  Quarterly  Bulletin,  Q2, 
pp 94–103. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
are many practical problems in analyzing what could happen statistically in the tails, since 
these scenarios are, by definition, rare and the pay-offs may be non-linear3. 
Taking  this  second  example  a  little  further,  assume  that  most  big  banks  follow  similar 
strategies. Most banks will then end up with a more diversified credit portfolio than if each 
bank  was  only  holding  the  loans  it  originated  itself,  but  they  may  also  end  up  with  similar 
portfolios of risk. In such a scenario, the system can easily absorb small shocks, but because 
of the diversification, a really big shock may threaten to bring down all of them instead of just 
the  ones  that  happened  to  have  originated  the  most  problematic  loans.  In  a  very  inter-
connected financial system, it can be almost self-fulfilling that when the market starts to think 
some of the banks are in trouble, in fact all of them are4. 
A third example in this section is the dynamic hedging strategy of a bank’s credit risk arising 
from its derivatives portfolio (Credit/Counterparty Valuation Adjustment: CVA hedging). 
This normally refers to the credit risk of a counterparty that is not directly offset by some form 
of collateral5. Suppose a corporate has issued a fixed rate bond because investor preference 
makes  that  the  best  value,  but  really  it  wants  to  have  a  floating  rate  liability.  A  bank  will 
accommodate this by providing an interest rate swap. If interest rates go up, that swap may 
generate a net value owing to the bank. Receiving that value depends on the corporate not 
defaulting and so the bank will have a credit exposure to the corporate. But the corporate 
cannot be expected to post collateral – it will just regard its debt as having been converted to 
floating rate (and typically it won’t hold any collateral it could post anyway). A bank that is 
active in these interest rate swaps will end up with a large number of such mark-to-market 
exposures. Collectively, the resulting exposures constitute a credit portfolio which changes 
with the mark-to-market values of the underlying derivatives contracts. To manage the credit 
risks  embedded  in  this  so-called  CVA  portfolio,  most  banks  will  hedge  dynamically  in  the 
CDS market. This is usually a very effective risk management technique during periods when 
CDS  markets  function  normally.  But  it  is  worth  emphasizing  that  the  embedded  “jump  to 
default” risks in credit products, coupled with liquidity issues during times of extreme stress, 
can make it very difficult to execute a dynamic hedging strategy in stressed conditions. 
In  addition, and  as  already  noted,  CVA  hedging  is  likely  to  be  undertaken  by  buying  CDS 
from another bank or a hedge fund. In this example we have tail-risk correlation not just with 
corporate and counterparty risk but with CDS market liquidity. If proper consideration to the 
correlation structure is not applied, the danger is clearly that the realized outcome in extreme 
scenarios  would  look  very  different  from  what  was  expected  by  senior  management, 
regulators, etc., based on local analysis. 
A  fourth  example  from  the  recent  crisis  was  the  “super  senior”  credit  exposure  from 
pools of US mortgage loans reinsured with monoline insurance companies (MBIA, FGIC, 
AMBAC, etc) or other insurers such as AIG. Banks and other originators of leveraged credit 
risk (either in cash form of CDOs or CLOs, or in its synthetic forms) needed to warehouse 
excess  “super  senior”  tranches,  which  were  considered  virtually  risk  free,  to  support  the 
origination  business.  After  the  volatility  experienced  in  2005,  banks  started  to  worry  about 
controlling the mark-to-market volatility, even though the fundamental risk initially continued 
to be considered negligible. The idea came to lay off a significant portion of this negligible 
economic  risk  to  reduce  the  short  and  medium  term  price  volatility.  Similar  risk  reduction 
processed  largely  worked  for  traditional  corporate  credit  risk,  but  proved  disastrous  in  the 
                                                 
3  See  Haldane  and  Webber,  July  2008,  “Risk  reallocation”,  Risk,  for  a  wider  discussion  of  the  problems  in 
pricing  tail  risk  and  Shleifer,  Gennaioli,  Vishny,  2011,  “Neglected  Risks,  Financial  Innovation  and  Financial 
Fragility”, Journal of Financial Economics for the possible consequences. 
4  See, for example, Haldane, April 2009, “Re-thinking the Financial Network”, speech delivered at the Financial 
Student Association, Amsterdam, for a discussion on the inter-connectedness of the financial system. 
5  See the Quarterly Bulletin, 2010 Q2, Vol 50, p 81. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
case of super-senior risk backed by US sub-prime mortgages. Insurance by the monolines 
proved  practically  worthless  as  they  successively  failed.  And  reinsurance  with  AIG  would 
have proved worthless if AIG had not been rescued by the US Government. The problems 
affected other securities in unexpected ways – at one point, US municipal debt wrapped by 
monolines was trading at a discount to the same debt without the wrap. 
Once  a  default  event  has  occurred,  the  correlation  problems  with  such  contracts  become 
obvious.  The  question  is  why  they  are  not  apparent  ex  ante.  The  normal  motivation  for 
insurance  is  risk  aversion  to  large  losses  arising  through  tail  events.  If  such  an  insurance 
contract is worth having, one must be able to envision the tail event happening and what the 
circumstances might be. Why was it so hard to anticipate what would happen if there were 
losses on large numbers of bonds insured by monoline insurers which had relatively small 
amounts of capital? 
One  reason  why  such  risks  may  not  be  appreciated  ex  ante  is  over-reliance  on  local  risk 
measures  such  as  VaR  (Value  at  Risk)  or  other  historical  average  correlations,  and  not 
enough on severe stress tests over different horizons. For example, in the United States it 
was  widely  believed  that  house  prices  would  not  fall  significantly  nationally  (it  had  never 
happened after the Great depression in the 1930s). We assert that, if one had stressed bank 
capital in the US with the explicit assumption that national residential real estate prices could 
go down 30 to 40%, and in some local markets more, most of the losses for US banks could 
have been correctly predicted (at least if the complexities of structured credit products were 
properly assessed6). The collapse of functioning inter-bank money markets and other “run-
on-the-bank” phenomena obviously added further costs, but the first-order effect was caused 
by residential house prices falling. The key, however, was to correctly predict what that kind 
of price drop would do to other market participants, and market structures, as well as to the 
individual  firm.  Extreme  stress  tests  have  served  a  crucial  purpose  after  the  crisis  to 
re-establish  confidence  in  banks,  and  might  usefully  play  a  wider  role  in  more  aspects  of 
on-going bank oversight. 
An additional concern is that many of the transactions suffering from this risk may have been 
entered  into  for  portfolio  management  reasons  (such  as  the  pension  fund  example)  or 
regulatory  capital  relief  and  other  “window  dressing”  purposes  rather  than  genuinely  to 
protect  against  default.  Net  exposure  numbers  quoted  on  earnings  calls,  or  stress  losses 
reported to regulators, can all be made to look more palatable if the insurance is apparently 
in place, while the true risks in the event of default may not have changed much. 
These  issues  raise  general  questions  for  market  structure  with  tradeoffs  that  are  far  from 
trivial.  Is  it  beneficial  for,  say,  banks  to  lay  off  sovereign  risk  with  other  banks  and  other 
leveraged financial institutions such as hedge funds, or does the ensuing web of contingent 
exposures across leveraged institutions increase the systemic risks? It seems that many of 
these  arrangements  increase  diversification  in  the  case  of  small  and  medium  size  stress 
scenarios, but may actually exacerbate the systemic implications in the case of very large 
shocks7.  These  arrangements  also  highlight  the  delicacy  of  the  appropriate  regulatory 
structure.  In  many  instances,  subject  to  sufficient  diversification,  these  tail  risks  might  be 
better  borne  by  so-called  “real  money”  investors,  i.e.  insurance  companies,  pension  funds 
and  traditional  long-only  bond  and  equity  funds,  as  these  investor  categories  operate  with 
little  or  no  leverage.  In  case  of  massive  shocks,  these  investors  could  be  better  suited  to 
absorb the losses, as there is limited leverage to trigger further spillovers through defaults or 
                                                 
6  This  caveat  might  seem  an  important  element  of  hindsight.  But  one  reason  why  the  complexities  were  not 
addressed was the assumption – based on local correlations – that the fundamental risk was negligible. 
7  A general idea explored by Viral Acharya, 2009, “A Theory of Systemic Risk and Design of Prudential Bank 
Regulation”, Journal of Financial Stability, 5(3), in a somewhat different context. See Also Haldane, 2009, Op 
Cit and Nier, Yang, Yorulmazer and Alentorn, 2008, “Network models and financial stability”, Bank of England 
Working Paper No 346. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
panic  driven  asset  sales.  Many  of  these  investor  groups  are,  however,  subject  to  an 
extensive regulatory framework, making them unable to hold such risks in their portfolios, in 
many cases even as a very small fraction of total assets. There is a potentially difficult trade-
off  here  between  public  policy  objectives  of  appropriate  investor  protection  and  systemic 
stability  considerations.  That  probably  deserves  to  be  debated  more  fully.  It  is  clear, 
however,  that  highly  leveraged  institutions  such  as  banks  and  hedge  funds  are  not  really 
suited to be the ultimate repositories of extreme tail risk8. 
What does all of the above tell us? The answer may seem trivial ex post but if these issues 
had  been  highlighted  and  subjected  to  more  transparency,  we  believe  that  the  ultimate 
outcome probably could have been different. A lot of the surprise seemed to come from the 
fact that virtually all risk management had been done within a “local” framework, rather than 
genuinely  extreme  stress  tests.  If  regulators,  rating  agencies  or,  for  that  matter,  bond  and 
equity  investors  had  demanded  analysis  based  on  extreme  stress  tests,  many  of  the 
repercussions in the system could have been identified. The main point is that a stress test 
has  to  be  internally  consistent.  As  an  example,  if  you  stress  test  a  30–40%  fall  in  US 
residential real estate prices and that shows your institution would be in trouble, you need to 
make consistent assumptions about the deteriorating credit conditions of your counterparties, 
anyone that provides reinsurance and general market conditions. 
At some level, there is always a stress scenario that forces bankruptcy. Perhaps the greatest 
sin in the years preceding the financial crisis was blatantly ignoring what really would happen 
if  the  “unthinkable”  drop  in  US  house  prices  actually  happened9.  Some  major  institutions 
seemed  to  have  had  no  grasp  of  how  risky  their  exposures  really  were,  despite  spending 
millions on risk management and while being inspected by regulators on an ongoing basis. 
By  addressing  these  issues,  the  stress  tests  implemented  by  the  Federal  Reserve  in  the 
United States, and by the European Banking Authority in  Europe, could play a key role in 
re-establishing confidence in the banking system. 
Reputational risks in tail events 
The  second  category  of  contracts  we  want  to  examine  can  be  put  into  more  of  a  game 
theoretic framework, where the perceived pay-off in the tail event is offset by “unforeseen” 
costs. In this section, we are focusing on behaviour that, at first glance, may seem irrational, 
but is best understood as being driven by classic time inconsistency. In particular a market 
participant  may  voluntarily  choose  not  to  enforce  a  contract  that  is  “in  the  money”,  if  the 
reputational  repercussions  are  perceived  to  cause  more  damage  than  whatever  could  be 
gained financially by enforcement. 
During  the  crisis,  banks  moved  a  significant  amount  of  their  mortgage-based  assets  off-
balance sheet into Structured Investment Vehicles (“SIVs”). Most of the funding for these 
SIVs came from publicly sold asset-backed commercial paper (“ABCP”) and other medium-
term notes (“MTN”). There was a small amount of equity in the form of a junior “capital note,” 
which  split  the  excess  return  with  the  asset  manager.  From  their  invention  by  Citigroup  in 
1988 and until the crisis, there was sufficient spread between the assets and the funding to 
generate a reasonable return to attract investors to buy the capital notes. In addition, there 
was typically a partial liquidity back-stop facility provided by the originating bank. When all 
the capital notes had been sold, there was no economic risk retained by the originating bank 
except the back-stop facility, and only a management fee continued to accrue to the asset 
manager (typically, the originating bank). 
                                                 
8  Nor, of course, should the public sector be expected to socialise losses from tail events! 
9  Since the crisis, many firms are now considering the previously unthinkable eg the sustainability of sovereign 
debt, liquidity in core markets etc. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
When the crisis hit in autumn 2007, one of the first casualties was the closure of the ABCP 
markets and funding for the SIVs dried up. Beyond the liquidity lines, banks generally had 
very limited legal obligations to the SIVs (eg for credit losses on the assets) but most decided 
to accept responsibility for the assets and absorbed them back on balance sheet or at least 
fund them directly. This was obviously done for reputational reasons and was viewed as less 
costly to the franchise than walking away. 
Part of the explanation for banks’ behaviour was that these structures were not necessarily 
designed to be profit centres, but rather to enhance capital efficiency for the bank. There was 
essentially  a  massive  maturity  mismatch  between  the  banks’  underlying  assets  and  their 
funding.  And  the  SIV  structure  effectively  enabled  the  bank  to  isolate  that  mismatch  and 
hence support its other businesses with the embedded lending in the assets that were being 
put into the SIVs. 
The perception was that the quality of the underlying assets was so good that the risk of a 
real loss (as opposed to some shorter-term mark-to-market fluctuations) was negligible, and 
that the returns accruing to the capital note holders and the asset manager were largely due 
to the funding arbitrage. Another way of explaining it would be that, because of the difference 
in liquidity, the “buffers” in the structure, the capital notes and the liquidity back-stop provider 
were effectively earning a risk premium for absorbing this liquidity mismatch between assets 
and liabilities. This view of the world made most of the capital note holders believe that the 
risk of any loss was very limited. 
We now know all of that changed when sub-prime mortgage assets had become a significant 
portion of the assets in a typical SIV. The US housing market had started to slide and the lax 
underwriting standards started to show their impact on recovery rates. Suddenly, investors in 
the ABCP market came to realize that the risk of actual loss was very real and that a game of 
“musical chairs” was unfolding in the roll-over process of the short-term debt. At this juncture, 
one would think that the optimal economic behaviour for the banks with outstanding SIVs, 
would be to let the SIVs unwind according to the legal construct in place, rather than accept 
responsibility.  In  fact,  all  the  banks  except  one  decided  to  collapse  the  structures  and 
repurchase the securities10. 
From an investor protection standpoint, one may have drawn a sigh of relief, as any potential 
issues  about  misrepresented  risk  profile  disappeared,  but  from  a  financial  stability 
perspective, it was obviously disturbing. In a short space of time, billions of assets showed 
up on already over-extended bank balance sheets. 
One  may  think  it  somewhat  surprising  that  (almost)  all  the  banks  decided  to  absorb  their 
SIVs, especially since it must have seemed likely that the SIV structure would not come back 
any time quickly as a viable funding structure. We believe that the main reason for doing this 
was that not doing so would have sent a distress signal to the market. In other words, if a 
bank chose not to absorb this problem, the perception would be that they simply could not 
afford to do it, thus telling the market that they were in even worse shape than previously 
feared. There may also have been an element of “repeat game”. If one lets one’s investors 
take the pain, then they may not return for future transactions. 
It seems plausible that if the SIV crisis had transpired during a time when most other markets 
had  remained  functioning,  the  decision  making  process  might  have  been  very  different. 
“Signalling” is at its most powerful when the level of uncertainty in the system is highest.11  
                                                 
10  The one notable exception was Standard Chartered, which let its “Whistlejacket” SIV unwind. 
11  The issues arising from ABCP conduits were similar, although the structures were slightly different. The key 
difference  from  SIVs  was  that  the  underlying  assets  were  largely  purchased  from  third-parties  and  not 
necessarily in securities form. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We now want to turn to an example of a structure that did at least partially survive the crisis: 
UK RMBS master trusts. These are versatile structures that allow an issuer to transform a 
portfolio  of  assets  into  a  very  different  investment  product.  In  principle,  the  master  trust 
purchases mortgages from the bank and issues tailored bullet-maturity securities. The assets 
and the liabilities can be very different, e.g. the demand for the securities may be stronger in 
US dollars than in sterling, so an FX swap converts the cash-flows into dollars. Or most of 
the  mortgages  may  be  floating  rate,  whereas  investor  demand  is  stronger  for  fixed-rate 
product,  and  an  interest  rate  swap(s)  converts  the  cash  flows  accordingly.  Mortgages 
typically  pay  down  somewhat  randomly  and  relatively  quickly,  whereas  investors  prefer 
straight-bullet  maturities.  The  master  trust  can  accommodate  this  by  allowing  on-going 
reinvestments of the pay downs and conversely allowing the trust to put assets back to the 
bank  if  the  cash-flows  are  not  sufficient  to  make  a  particular  principal  repayment.  The 
downside is clearly that the on-going linkages between the issuer and the trust remain very 
strong, and it is thus hard to identify where economic risks ultimately reside. 
RMBS master trust securitisations are designed to be called on their bullet maturity date and 
that is how they were priced and traded. In one case that didn’t happen: in November 2008 it 
was announced that the £40bn “Granite” master trust had failed a non-asset trigger12 which 
meant  that  Northern  Rock  would  no  longer  provide  new  mortgages  to  the  structure  and  it 
went  into  pass-through  mode  (early  amortisation).  Instead  of  owning  bullet  securities,  the 
investors  ended  up  holding  potentially  long-dated  pass-through  notes.  Trading  in  the 
securities effectively ceased and, because of the maturity extension, the securities issued by 
“Granite” fell precipitously in price – even though there had been no material credit losses. 
The subordinated securities would only be paid off after enough cash had come in to first pay 
off the senior bonds. As Northern Rock had already been nationalised, the dynamic around 
the  decision  to  run-off  “Granite”  was  obviously  quite  different  from  what  other  banks  were 
grappling with at the time. This event clearly “burnt” a number of investors, many of whom 
have  indicated  that  they  will  not  return  to  purchase  any  master  trust  structure  in  future.  In 
pure economic terms, it might have paid other banks also to not call RMBS when funding 
pressures  were  at  their  highest.  But  this  would  have  destroyed  the  market  and  damaged 
relations with investors, possibly beyond repair. 
Another example is the existence of break clauses in derivatives contracts. These clauses 
enable  either  counterparty  to  a  derivatives  trade  to  call  for  cash  settlement  of  the  
mark-to-market of their contract at a particular future date. The main reason for this “break 
clause” is that it reduces the contingent credit exposure. Think in terms of a simple fixed-for-
floating swap for 10 years. (This transaction could be to convert a company’s fixed-rate bond 
issue  into a  floating-rate  liability  for  example.)  The  bank  pays  a  fixed  rate  in  exchange  for 
receiving a floating rate (say, LIBOR) from the corporate that issued the bond. If no break 
clause exists, the bank’s credit department would price the contingent credit exposure to the 
corporate over the full life of the contract. This could be very high: a substantial rise in short-
term interest rates would make the bank effectively owed a significant amount of money by 
the corporate. The bank needs to factor in that with this “gain,” there is an associated risk of 
default of the corporate. In reality, one can think of all these contingent credit exposures as 
the  modern  derivatives  book’s  “loan  portfolio”.  It  is  equivalent  to  a  traditional  loan  book, 
except  that  it  dynamically  changes  in  line  with  market  prices.  The  credit  risk  is  obviously 
bigger when the creditworthiness of a company is lower and when the maturity is longer. 
The bank’s credit department will therefore calculate a credit spread that it will charge on top 
of the “risk free” swap level (that would be charged between financial institutions that fully 
collateralize any mark-to-market swings). For a longer-dated swap, this charge may be very 
                                                 
12  After  the  “current  seller  share”  had  fallen  below  its  minimum  on  two  successive  distribution  dates  –  the 
company’s own investment in the vehicle had not been maintained at a high enough level. See also Northern 
Rock’s 2008 Annual Report and accounts P25/6. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
large.  Introducing  a  break  clause  allowing  either  counterparty  to  terminate  the  contract 
effectively shortens the maturity of the swap, since the bank (or the company, in case it is 
owed money and the bank’s credit appears more shaky) can demand payment at that time. 
In reality, most corporates do not expect such a break clause ever to be exercised. 
The  concern  would  be  that,  if  the  corporate  expects  the  bank  to  ignore  the  break  clause 
regardless of the circumstances, exercising the clause would be a surprise for which the firm 
may not have put appropriate contingencies in place – perhaps even making default more 
likely. Or that the market may start to interpret the enforcement of “break clauses” as a sign 
of  weakness  on  the  bank’s  part.  In  other  words,  such  behaviour  could  be  seen  as  so 
antagonizing to customers that a bank would only do it if it is absolutely desperate. Yet if the 
bank  cannot  in  fact  enforce  the  break  clause,  its  credit  pricing  and  risk  management  has 
been faulty. 
Another  example,  comprising  elements  of  the  break  clause  and  the  SIV  problem,  is  the 
behaviour of managers of money market funds when faced with the prospect of “breaking 
the buck”. 
A money market fund calculates its net asset value (NAV) on a daily basis. The NAV is its 
price per share, which reflects the total value of the fund’s investment holdings. Traditional 
money market funds seek to maintain a constant NAV (CNAV funds) ie they invest with the 
explicit goal of maintaining a stable NAV of $1.00 per share. Investors like this because it 
avoids any market price fluctuations in their investments. 
A CNAV money market fund is said to “break the buck” when its NAV falls below $1.00 per 
share (or the equivalent in a fund’s respective currency). This is a rare event. Prior to the 
crisis,  it  had  not  happened  to  a  US  money  market  fund  since  the  Community  Bankers 
US Government  Fund  broke  the  buck  in  199413.  The  conventional  perception  was that  the 
principal should be “safe”. When money funds came under pressure during the crisis, more 
than 60 asset managers (among others, Wachovia and Legg Mason) unilaterally made up 
more than $12 billion of losses14. 
On 16 September 2008, the Prime Reserve Fund, the oldest U.S. money market fund, wrote 
off 3 cents of losses on Lehman Brothers. Not being able to make up the losses, the fund 
was  left  with  a  NAV  of  $0.97,  triggering  a  “run”  in  the  money  markets.  On  19  September 
2008,  the  U.S.  Treasury  announced  the  establishment  of  a  temporary  one-year  guarantee 
program to protect investors in money market funds. The funds that were eligible had to pay 
a fee to participate in the program, and any fund that had already “broke the buck” could not 
participate. 
This  example  raises  several  interesting  issues.  In  keeping  with  previous  examples,  it 
illustrates the extreme non-contractual lengths some of the asset managers were willing to 
go to in order to protect their reputations. It also shows how the equivalent of a “bank run” 
can happen in the shadow banking system. And it shows the potential importance of public 
sector support – another complicating factor that makes the true risks in a tail event difficult 
to assess. 
As a final example in this section, we have Deutsche Bank’s decision in December 2008 not 
to call a lower tier 2 subordinated debt issue (a €1bn 2004/2014 bond with a call date of 
Jan 16 2009), despite the fact that it was customary for banks to call such bonds at the first 
possible date. The reason that this is interesting is that it was actually economically rational 
                                                 
13  In  Japan,  money  market  funds  lost  much  of  their  appeal  after  principal  losses  due  to  Enron-related 
investments, and investors largely returned to bank deposits. 
14  See  Brewster  and  Chung,  17  September  2008,  “Fear  of  money  market  funds  ‘breaking  the  buck’ ”,  The 
Financial  Times,  and  Moody’s  Investor  Service,  August  9.2010,  “Sponsor  Support  Key  to  Money  Market 
Funds”. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
in isolation for Deutsche Bank not to call, and it was fully within its right not to do so, but still, 
investors became infuriated and the consequent short-term adverse reaction almost certainly 
cost  Deutsche  and  its  shareholders  a  multiple  of  the  gain  it  received  from  not  calling  the 
bond.  Despite  that  initial  investor  reaction,  however,  Deutsche  was  able  to  keep  market 
access and to successfully issue further capital instruments in the months thereafter. 
The  theme  we  have  encountered  in  these  examples  is  that  many  of  the  decisions  taken 
during times of extreme pressure seem to be affected by (apparent) considerations outside 
of the immediate financial contract – at least, rejecting options which were perceived to be 
acceptable  when  the  original  contract  was  struck.  Or  that  the  financial  consequences  of 
particular  decisions  were  more  adverse  for  the  decision  maker  (or  more  generally  the 
markets) than anticipated. In that sense they are classic examples of time inconsistency. We 
have tried to illustrate how acting narrowly rationally when it is perceived to be outside the 
realm of “what is normally done”, can carry massive risks. The problem that this creates is 
that  when  we  are  dealing  with  tail  events  and  disaster  insurance,  it  is  hard  to  determine 
ex ante  what  such  insurance  contracts  (or  options  delivering  insurance)  are  worth.  How 
should  investors  and  regulators  evaluate  these  contracts?  If  the  reputation  and  signalling 
implications of exercising are too damaging in case of extreme stress, it would be naive to 
attribute  full  value  to  them  when  determining  the  risk  profile  and  hence  the  appropriate 
capital buffer. It is also worrying from a financial stability perspective if these considerations 
force possible systemic implications to be more extreme rather than less. 
Stress tests and contract design considerations 
So what have we learned? The first set of examples above highlighted the need to critically 
evaluate  contingent  exposures:  without  true  stress  correlations,  tail  events  will  not  be 
captured properly. We believe more emphasis should be put on this by investors, analysts 
and regulators alike. 
Inevitably  that  means  severe  stress  tests  involving  “jump  to  default”  risk  and  the  need  to 
consider counterparty and market liquidity risks, not just issuer risks in these circumstances. 
Some  banks  have  told  us  that  they  think  they  should  not  be  required  to  hold  capital  and 
liquidity  to  deal  with  such  extreme  tail  events  –  leaving  the  public  sector  to  be  the  capital 
provider of last resort. But that leads directly to moral hazard and excessive risk-taking. Tail 
events seem to happen far more often than people assume15 and if the risks were properly 
acknowledged at the outset, many structures would be avoided or risks re-structured so as to 
limit losses in the event of tail risks. That has obvious implications for financial stability. 
A crucial component of this analysis is the proper design of stress tests. Obviously, scenarios 
have to be rather draconian in order to serve the purpose of challenging the “unthinkable”, 
but at the same time there are difficult decisions to be made, for example, in deciding how 
much bank capital (contingent or not) banks should hold – and what the probability is of it 
being wiped out. We believe that it is better to have a collection of ex ante determined stress 
scenarios  that  illustrate  banks’  potential  weaknesses  publicly,  even  if  the  actual  regulatory 
capital is not sufficient in all those scenarios. In other words, stress tests should not always 
be a check list “pass” or “fail” (after all, to make a bank fail or pass a stress test is just a 
question of scaling the test). Comparable, tail event stress tests could be an important piece 
in the information set that investors and regulators analyse to determine the relative value 
and risk profile of the institution. 
The  second  set  of  examples  above  illustrated  that  contract  design  features  which  are 
exclusively relevant in the extreme tails are perhaps best avoided. The reason is simply that 
such features, which do not seem to matter in most states of the world, end up being treated 
                                                 
15  How many “once-in-a-lifetime” events happen to us every year? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
as if they will never matter. In other words, market participants need to make sure that an 
exercise of an option is seen as just that, a normal exercise of an option. No more and no 
less. Sophisticated market participants should not be genuinely surprised (or feign surprise) 
by another market participant trying to optimise its behaviour consistent with a contract. The 
implications  of  a  contract  should  be  clear  and  the  structures  should  be  as  transparent  as 
possible. 
As the debate about adequate capital levels for banks rages on, we feel that it is important to 
keep  these  lessons  in  mind.  Whatever  is  decided  in  terms  of  capital  requirements,  the 
numbers should be calculated with tail event analysis in mind. 
A new example: contingent capital securities 
One present issue is that, given banks will need to hold much more capital in future, how 
could  that  best  be  achieved?  Some  have  called  for  very  high  levels  of  equity  capital  in 
banks16; others have been focusing on requirements to raise new equity before it is too late, 
e.g. mandatory rights issues17. We find contingent capital securities – so-called “co-co’s” – to 
be a potentially attractive proposition for a number of reasons. 
One has to evaluate contingent capital on how it would perform in a crisis. First, the funding 
for  extra  capital  is  already  in  place.  In  other  words,  no  one  has  to  scramble  to  execute  a 
contingency  plan,  or  convince  someone  to  come  up  with  new  cash  in  a  difficult  situation. 
Obviously,  conversion  is  consistent  with  a  bank  being  under  stress,  but  if  conversion  was 
always automatic, not discretionary, that could help to avoid signalling even wider problems. 
Second,  and  related  to  the  examples  in  this  paper,  because  the  contingent  conversion 
feature is explicit, no investor should be able to say that “equity conversion” could never have 
been anticipated. As new mechanisms are being explored, we believe that it is crucial that 
investors correctly assess and price the probability of conversion into common equity. 
Third, sufficient level of contingent capital should enable a well-run bank to still operate with 
significant leverage and thus earn a healthy return. In the more extreme suggestions for the 
amount  of  contingent  capital,  one  would  very  substantially  change  the  return  profile  of 
common equity for banks, perhaps creating an entirely new investor category. 
There  are  two  lessons  from  this  paper  which  should  be  applied  to  contingent  capital 
instruments.  First  it  has  been  suggested  to  us  by  market  contacts  that  the  trigger  point  in 
existing  contingent  instruments  is  such  that  many  investors  have  bought  them  on  the 
assumption that these contingent capital securities never will be called (or worse, that there 
will be official support before that point). If that were to be the foundation for this market, we 
believe  that  the  very  purpose  of  contingent  capital  may  be  subverted,  creating  a  risk  to 
financial stability in a crisis situation. The whole point of contingent capital securities should 
be  that  the  recapitalisation  is  triggered  without  any  grand  repercussions,  making  it  easier 
than raising fresh capital in the market. If triggering the conversion were to cause the sort of 
damage reported in our examples above, then the market could be severely disrupted just 
when it was most needed. The contract design must therefore reflect a need for the trigger to 
be as smooth as possible. 
One potential mitigant would be to have a range of trigger levels, so no single level becomes 
a focal point for indicating severe distress. It would be helpful if actual conversions happened 
reasonably  frequently  and  not  only  in  a  rare  crisis,  demystifying  the  whole  process.  One 
                                                 
16  Admati, DeMarzo, Hellwig and Pfleiderer, 2010, “Fallacies, Irrelevant Facts, and Myths in the Discussion of 
Capital Regulation:  Why Bank Equity is Not Expensive,” Stanford GSB research Paper 2065. 
17  Duffie,  2010,  “Contractual  Methods  for  Out-of-Court  Restructuring  of  Systemically  Important  Financial 
Institutions”, in Ending Government Bailouts as We Know Them, Scott and Taylor (eds). Hoover Press. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
would also need to make sure that the maturity profile was such that no dominant amount of 
contingent capital was rolled at any one point in time. There could be an on-going process of 
monitoring,  rather  than  particular  trigger  dates  that  may  cause  a  focus  for  a  “run”  during 
times of stress. 
Stress tests could also be one of the tools to force conversion of contingent capital securities 
by bank regulators. In addition to the accounting based capital trigger, capital requirements 
could  be  expressed  in  terms  of  what  scenarios  a  bank  has  to  be  able  to  withstand,  with 
capital securities triggered when the existing common equity is not sufficient. 
One argument that has been raised against contingent capital, has been the lack of a natural 
investor base, reflecting market segmentation between “credit”, “rates” and “equity” investors. 
We believe strongly that market segmentation is an inefficiency which should not be taken as 
a  given;  there  are  already  regular  convertible  debt  securities  with  an  investor  base.  New 
market segments can be created if the risk-return trade-off is appropriate. The new issues 
(Credit  Suisse  and  Rabobank),  have  so  far  been  very  well  received  and  we  are  aware  of 
plans for funds being created to invest in these instruments. We see every reason to believe 
that  new  vehicles  for  owning  contingent  capital  instruments  can  be  created  and  existing 
mandates modified to allow them, as long as the market sees these securities as an asset 
class that will stay and reach critical scale, and subject to the normal market discipline of risk 
and return. 
This plays into a second lesson from the crisis. It is obviously crucial from a financial stability 
standpoint that contingent capital securities do not end up largely in the hands of other highly 
leveraged  financial  institutions,  where  losses  could  cause  further  spill-overs  and  thus 
generate  financial  instability.  We  believe  that  regulators  could  play  a  constructive  role  in 
allowing a broad range of “real money” investors to own sensible amounts of this systemic 
risk. 
Conclusion 
In  this  paper,  we  have  given  a  number  of  examples  taken  from  the  financial  crisis,  where 
financial  contracts  undertaken  for  hedging  purposes,  or  with  optional  features  designed  to 
protect the issuer or the investor, have not had the value expected at precisely the time when 
they needed to. These now look like classic time inconsistency problems coupled with partial 
equilibrium  analysis.  To  avoid  these  pitfalls,  a  more  extensive  use  of  extreme  and  holistic 
stress tests could be used to assess individual counterparties as well as systemic risks. It 
would  also  be  worthwhile  to  debate  further  where  these  tail  risks  should  be  held,  as 
leveraged  financial  institutions  pose  larger  systemic  risks  than  more  traditional  unlevered 
investor categories. Such considerations need to be carefully weighed against other investor 
protection  concerns.  We  believe  that  a  properly  designed  stress  testing  framework  could 
provide  a  basis  for  a  balanced  discussion  around  future  risk  concentrations  and  systemic 
vulnerabilities. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
