Øystein Olsen: The conduct of monetary policy 
Introductory  statement  by  Mr  Øystein  Olsen,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of 
Norway), at the hearing before the Standing Committee on Finance and Economic Affairs of 
the Storting (Norwegian parliament), Oslo, 20 May 2011. 
Please note that the text below may differ from the actual presentation. The statement is based on Norges Bank’s 
Annual Report for 2010, Monetary Policy Report 1/11 and the Executive Board’s assessments in the period to the 
monetary policy meeting on 12 May. 
 I would like to thank the Chairman of the Committee and also thank the Committee for this 
opportunity  to  report  on  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  connection  with  the  Storting’s 
deliberations  on  the  Government’s  Financial  Market  Report.  My  statement  here  today  is 
based on the Bank’s Annual Report, but also on the Executive Board’s assessments for the 
period to the most recent monetary policy meeting and new information. I also refer to this 
year’s  report  from  Norges  Bank  Watch,  a  group  of  experts  that  evaluates  Norges  Bank’s 
conduct of monetary policy. 
Activity in the Norwegian economy has gained a firm footing 
1. 
The  global  financial  crisis  that  unfolded  in  2008  gave  rise  to  the  most  severe  economic 
downturn of our time. There was a dramatic decline in international trade, and in the following 
year world GDP decreased for the first time in generations. 
Although global economic growth has recovered, the outlook remains uncertain. For a long 
time we have observed the increasing prominence of China and other emerging economies 
in the global economy. These countries also weathered the crisis well and have helped to 
restart economic growth in several western countries. However, the global trade imbalances 
that accumulated prior to the financial crisis are still present. Several countries must sharply 
reduce  public  expenditure  to  bring  rapidly  rising  government  debt  under  control.  This  may 
have  a  dampening  impact  on  growth  ahead.  High  commodity  prices  could  also  depress 
activity. 
Chart: Consumer prices 
Strong growth in demand for energy and commodities from emerging economies has led to a 
marked rise in the price of oil, grain and other commodities. In addition, unrest in North Africa 
and  the  Middle  East has  fuelled  uncertainty  concerning  the  supply  of oil  ahead.  Food  and 
energy represent a large share of consumption in many countries and inflation has therefore 
picked up. Nevertheless, in most advanced economies long-term inflation expectations are 
relatively stable and consumer price inflation is being dampened by low capacity utilisation 
and high unemployment. 
Chart: Actual and expected key rates 
Key rates are near zero in many countries. Through 2010 interest rate expectations in other 
countries fell, but have picked up in 2011. The ECB and Sveriges Riksbank recently raised 
their  key  rates.  Rising  inflation  has  led  to  monetary  policy  tightening  in  several  emerging 
economies. 
Chart: Output 
Activity in the Norwegian economy has gained a firm footing. Capacity utilisation appears to 
be close to a normal level. According to preliminary national accounts figures, mainland GDP 
grew  by  2.2%  from  2009  to  2010.  Norges  Bank’s  regional  network  contacts  expect  solid 
growth  to  continue  in  the  coming  quarters.  Unemployment  is  low.  There  are  prospects  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
fairly strong growth in the Norwegian economy ahead, driven by solid income growth and an 
increasing population. 
Chart: Population growth 
In 2010, the population grew by 1.3 per cent. With the exception of 2008, this is the highest 
rate of population growth since 1920. A high birth rate has contributed, but strong population 
growth  primarily  reflects  high  inward  migration.  This  is  boosting  demand  for  goods  and 
services,  including  housing.  Nonetheless,  it  is  likely  that  a  high  proportion  of  labour 
immigration  will  enable  the  economy  to  grow  faster  without  fuelling  price  and  wage 
pressures, even though bottlenecks may arise in some areas. 
Chart: Consumer prices 2010/11 
The rise in consumer prices slowed through 2010, and in recent months inflation has been 
fairly  low.  Inflation  has  varied  from  month  to  month  as  a  result  of  wide  fluctuations  in 
electricity prices. Overall CPI inflation rose by 2.5 per cent in 2010. If we exclude fluctuations 
in energy prices, the rise in prices has been low. In 2010, CPIXE inflation was 1.7 per cent. 
Chart: Interest rate forecasts 
Norges Bank raised its key policy rate to 2 per cent in May 2010. Through 2010 the Bank’s 
interest rate forecast was adjusted down, and further increases were deferred. Prospects for 
lower  inflation,  a  weaker  growth  outlook  and  lower  interest  rates  abroad  were  underlying 
factors. In the course of spring 2011, it has become clear that the upturn in the Norwegian 
economy has gained a firm footing. There is a rising shortage of labour and cost inflation is 
picking  up.  The  subdued  rise  in  import  prices,  combined  with  the  krone  appreciation,  has 
resulted  in  a  slower  rise  in  prices  for  imported  consumer  goods.  With  the  Norwegian 
economy’s current solid pace of growth, inflation is nonetheless expected to pick up further 
ahead. At our meeting on12 May, we decided to raise the key policy rate by 0.25 percentage 
points  to  2.25%  to  take  into  account  the  consideration  of  stabilising  inflation  and  activity 
further ahead. 
Chart: Krone exchange rate – I-44 
The krone is strong, reflecting favourable prospects for the Norwegian economy and high oil 
prices.  When  oil  market  conditions  normalise,  some  of  the  krone  appreciation  can  be 
expected to be reversed. Norges Bank does not operate with a target for the krone exchange 
rate, and the krone shows fairly wide fluctuations. With high growth in demand for goods and 
services and rising price and cost inflation, there is also a risk of a further appreciation of the 
krone. A strong krone dampens inflation through a subdued rise in prices for imported goods 
and services. Persistent low inflation could curb the rise in the key policy rate. 
Chart: Price and cost levels relative to trading partners 
Price  and  cost  levels  in  Norway  relative  to  trading  partners  have  weakened  Norway’s 
competitive position in recent years. So far this has not been an obstacle to solid growth and 
near-normal capacity utilisation in the Norwegian economy, partly as a result of high prices 
for many of our exports. Nevertheless, we should bear in mind that a high cost level makes 
us vulnerable, particularly in the event of any renewed downturn in the global economy. 
Chart: Oil price (Brent Blend) 
The  Norwegian  economy  emerged  quickly  and  fairly  painlessly  from  the  global  economic 
downturn partly owing to high prices for oil and other commodities. Norway’s terms of trade 
have improved further. High commodity prices and strong growth in emerging economies are 
an  advantage  for  both  commodity-based  industries  and  high-technology  export  firms. 
Norwegian  exports  are  increasing.  Unemployment  is  slightly  lower  than  expected  and  it 
appears  that  wage  growth  in  2011  will  be  somewhat  higher  than  envisaged  in  the  March 
Monetary Policy Report. Norway has been fortunate, but effective systems for managing high 
revenues have probably also played a role. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A decade of inflation targeting 
2. 
Chart: Inflation 
A decade has passed since the inflation targeting regime was introduced. Inflation has varied 
in  this  period,  although  less  so  than  previously,  and  has  generally  been  close  to  target. 
Inflation expectations now seem to be firmly anchored. This shows that monetary policy has 
been  effective.  At  the  same  time,  over  these  ten  years,  we  have  gained  insight  into  the 
functioning of the Norwegian economy under an inflation targeting regime. Inflation targeting 
is  flexible,  i.e.  when  setting  the  key  policy  rate,  weight  is  also  given  to  stabilising 
developments in output and employment. 
For  monetary  policy  to  contribute  to  stabilising  developments  in  output  and  employment, 
there must be confidence that the inflation target will be reached. Inflation will not be at target 
at all times, but if there is confidence in monetary policy, expected inflation will be close to 
the inflation target over time, which in itself contributes to stabilising inflation. 
Norges Bank’s communication of monetary policy aims to stabilise inflation expectations by 
giving  the  reasons  for  and  explaining  interest  rate  setting.  By  publishing  its  interest  rate 
forecasts  and  monetary  policy  strategy,  Norges  Bank  has  made  it  easier  for  others  to 
understand  and  evaluate  monetary  policy.  It  is  my  objective  to  continue  and  enhance  the 
Bank’s  analysis  and  communication.  Since  March  of  this  year  our  monetary  policy  reports 
have included a summary of the Executive Board’s discussion of monetary policy prior to the 
reports. 
Chart: Surplus liquidity in the banking system 
To  be  effective,  the  key  policy  rate  must  have  an  impact  on  market  rates.  Norges  Bank 
supplies  liquidity  to  banks  to  bring  short-term  money  market  rates  down  closer  to  the  key 
policy rate. Surplus liquidity in the banking system is kept as sight deposits at Norges Bank. 
The redistribution of interbank liquidity does not function adequately. In 2010 Norges Bank 
had to maintain high liquidity in the banking system to keep short-term money market rates 
close  to  the  key  policy  rate.  To  dampen  demand  for  central  bank  liquidity  and  promote 
increased activity in the money market, Norges Bank’s Executive Board approved changes in 
the system for managing liquidity in the banking system in December 2010. Under the new 
regulation, only a certain amount of banks’ deposits – a quota – will bear interest at the key 
policy  rate.  Deposits  in  excess  of  this  quota  will  bear  a  lower  interest  rate.  This  will  give 
banks  a  stronger  financial  incentive  to  redistribute  liquidity  among  themselves,  making  the 
Norwegian  money  market  function  more  effectively.  The  new  system  is  expected  to  take 
effect from 3 October of this year. 
From financial crisis to debt crisis 
3. 
Chart: General government gross debt 
The experience of recent years has shown the costs of financial instability in many countries. 
Global economic growth has recovered, but the effects of the financial crisis are still visible 
and will be so for some time ahead. 
Financial crises tend to be followed by debt crises. Fiscal policy was used actively in most 
countries to dampen the effects of the financial crisis. The mistakes of the 1930s were not to 
be  repeated.  But  as  a  result,  weak  public  balances  became  even  weaker.  On  top  of  this, 
some countries provided substantial government funding to banks. Government debt quickly 
mounted. 
The situation came to a head in several euro area countries, initially in Greece, which had 
allowed deficits to creep up during the growth period. In the next round, Ireland and Portugal 
also came under pressure. They have had to rely on loans from the EU and the IMF with 
attendant economic programmes to stabilise and then reduce government debt. Government 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
bond  yields  in  these  countries  have  continued  to  rise.  Particularly  with  regard  to  Greece, 
there is renewed focus on the capacity to manage large fiscal deficits and rising government 
debt. 
Norway differs substantially from countries with high public debt. With ample state coffers, 
the  Norwegian  economy  was  to  a  considerable  extent  insulated  from  the  effects  of  the 
financial  crisis  in  2008  and  2009.  Norway  has  had  room  for  manoeuvre  because  solid 
government  finances  secure  credibility  and  because  inflation  expectations  are  firmly 
anchored. The oil fund mechanism curbs the effects of oil price fluctuations on the economy. 
The  Norwegian  economy  has  enjoyed  the  benefits  of  a  disciplined  fiscal  policy.  The  fiscal 
rule has functioned effectively. 
Chart: Household debt 
There is one area in which Norway differs from other countries in a manner we perhaps do 
not like: Norwegian households are among the most heavily indebted in Europe. 
Household debt growth in Norway has edged down, but the level of debt shows no sign of 
falling. There is reason to keep a close eye on developments in these areas. 
Chart: Level of debt high for many households 
Direct losses associated with loans to households are seldom large in Norway. Even during 
the banking crisis 20 years ago, losses were limited. However, historically low losses are no 
guarantee of low losses in the future. 
A mutually reinforcing dynamic of rising debt and increasing property prices characterises the 
run-up  to  financial  crises.  Higher  property  prices  lead  to  higher  collateral  values  for  loans. 
With easier access to credit, purchasing power increases. 
The household debt burden is now higher than prior to the banking crisis. The increase has 
been highest for middle and lower income groups (deciles). The number of households with 
a  very  high  debt  burden  is  also  far  higher.  The  number  is  sufficiently  high  to  engender 
negative  spillover  effects  in  the  economy  in  the  event  of  an  abrupt  change  in  household 
behaviour. 
Such spillover effects may in their turn affect bank losses, which is the main reason that the 
work  on  financial  stability  places  particular  emphasis  on  developments  in  the  household 
sector. 
While monetary policy and fiscal policy have been anchored within a long-term, operational 
framework  over  the  past  ten  years,  there  has  been  no  comparable,  coherent  regulatory 
system for financial markets. Requirements are currently imposed on individual banks, but 
without adequate regard to overall risk in the financial system. This became clear during the 
financial crisis. 
New regulations are underway. The new Basel III framework aims to establish a long-term 
framework  for  financial  market  regulation  that  lays  the  basis  for  a  robust  financial  system. 
The  new  regulatory  framework  will  make  it  more  costly  for  banks  to  expand  rapidly. 
Moreover,  the  new  framework  includes  macro-prudential  measures  that  can  be  triggered 
when necessary. Basel III includes a countercyclical capital buffer that requires banks to set 
aside  more  capital  against  their  loans.  This  will  increase  their  capacity  to  absorb  future 
losses,  which  to  some  extent  can  also  dampen  credit  growth  during  an  upturn.  In  today’s 
situation  in  Norway,  with  elevated  debt  burdens  and  high  and  rising  house  prices,  a 
countercyclical capital buffer would have been a useful instrument. 
Chart: Inflation 
The interest rate affects general economic developments, including the housing market and 
other  conditions  that  have  implications  for  financial  stability.  Experience  indicates  that 
monetary  policy  alone  cannot  ensure  stable  economic  developments.  The  objective  of 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
monetary policy is low and stable inflation, and we only have one instrument – the key policy 
rate. There are limits to the number of considerations the interest rate can bear. We therefore 
need more targeted instruments to dampen the build-up of risk in the financial system. The 
interest  rate  also  has  effects  on  other  asset  prices,  such  as  the  krone  exchange  rate.  A 
monetary policy that aims at bringing down the value of domestic assets can easily push the 
value of the krone in the opposite direction. 
In interest rate setting we can never lose sight of the primary objective of monetary policy, 
which is low and stable inflation. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
    6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
   8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
    10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
   11
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
