Deepak Mohanty: Economic and financial developments in the north-
eastern states 
Speech by Mr Deepak Mohanty, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at Gauhati 
University, Guwahati, 24 March 2011. 
 The assistance provided by Dr. P.K. Nayak is acknowledged. 
I thank Gauhati University for inviting me to address this distinguished gathering. The North-
Eastern States (NES)1, also known as land of seven sisters, are very richly endowed. The 
North-Eastern region covers 5.5 per cent of the total geographical area of the country and 
accounts for 3.9 per cent of the national population and 2.7 per cent of all-India net domestic 
product  (NDP).  The  lushness  of  its  landscape,  geographical  and  ecological  diversity  and 
range of communities residing make NES one of the most ethnically and linguistically diverse 
regions in Asia. Each state in the region has its own distinct culture and tradition. I am indeed 
very delighted to be here amidst you this morning. 
A  well-functioning  financial  system  is  the  key  to  sustainable  economic  development  of  a 
country. Although the Reserve Bank has been actively engaged in the development of the 
financial sector in the country for a long time, it has stepped up its efforts in recent years to 
enhance the penetration of the formal financial sector and promote financial inclusion with a 
view  to  improving  the  well-being  of  our  society.  Given  the  special  difficulties  faced  by  the 
North-Eastern  region,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  been  undertaking  special  initiatives  for 
extending the outreach of banking facilities in the region. Against this background, I propose 
to briefly delineate the economic and financial structure of the region. I shall then highlight 
various  financial  inclusion  initiatives  taken  by  the  Reserve  Bank,  especially  for  NES.  In 
conclusion, I shall present some thoughts on policy challenges that lie ahead. 
Macroeconomic trends 
Let me begin with some macroeconomic trends. The last decade was characterised by high 
economic  growth  at  the  all-India  level.  Where  do  NES  stand  in  this  process?  They 
contributed  in  varying  degrees  to  this  uptick  in  growth.  The  data  on  net  state  domestic 
product (NSDP) is available on a comparable basis up to 2007–08. Over the 8-year period, 
2001–08, the weighted average NSDP growth in NES was lower at 5.2 per cent as compared 
with 7.1 per cent at the all-India level. There were, however, significant inter-state variations 
within NES with the growth performances of three states, viz., Nagaland, Arunachal Pradesh 
and Tripura being better than the all-India average (Table 1). The low growth in Assam and 
Manipur  was  mainly  due  to  the  poor  performance  of  agriculture  and  industry.  While  the 
growth rate in agriculture has been particularly low in Assam and Mizoram, the growth rate of 
agriculture in Nagaland was high. An important lesson from this is that if the states replicate 
the best sectoral growth pattern within the region, growth in NES could easily surpass the all-
India level. 
Sectoral analysis reveals that the economic structure of the NES more or less mirrors that of 
the  Indian  economy  as  a  whole  with  the  services  sector  dominating  the  economic  activity. 
However, the share of industry in GDP was half of that of the Indian economy as a whole 
(Table 2). The need, therefore, is to place a greater emphasis on promoting the growth of the 
industrial sector in the region. 
                                                 
1   North-Eastern  States  comprise  Arunachal  Pradesh,  Assam,  Manipur,  Meghalaya,  Mizoram,  Nagaland  and 
Tripura. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
  Notwithstanding significant differences in growth rates, the growth in per capita real income 
during the period 2000–01 to 2007–08 in NES was almost twice as the all-India level, with 
significant inter-state differences (Table 3). 
2 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
Income distribution in NES has been more equitable than the all-India level as reflected in 
the much lower Gini coefficient of the per capita income in NES as compared with the all-
India level (Table 4). 
 Fiscal trends 
Following a move towards rule-based fiscal consolidation at the Centre in the early 2000s, 
many  fiscal  reform  measures  were  also  undertaken  by  the  states,  including  NES. 
Consequently, NES began to improve their revenue accounts in 2003–04 when most of the 
states achieved revenue surplus. By 2005–06, all NES had achieved revenue surplus which 
persisted  till  2008–09.  Improvement  was  mainly  on  account  of  growth  in  revenue  receipts 
outstripping  growth  in  revenue  expenditure.  It  may  be  noted  that  within  revenue  receipts, 
current  transfers  from  the  Centre  in  the  form  of  grants  and  tax  devolution  were  the  key 
components behind the correction in revenue account achieved by most of the NES. During 
2004–09, current transfers accounted for over 80 per cent of total collection, while NES’ own 
efforts towards better revenue collections contributed to a limited extent. Consequently, the 
consolidated GFD-GSDP ratio of NES declined significantly during 2005–09 (Table 5). 
 
 
State finances witnessed considerable deterioration in 2009–10 as is evident from key deficit 
indicators. Even though there was a moderate impact on States’ own tax revenue and tax 
devolution  from  the  Centre  (as  ratio  to  GSDP)  due  to  overall  macroeconomic  slowdown 
observed in the Indian economy in 2009–10, revenue expenditure increased due to higher 
administrative  expenditures  arising  out  of  revised  pay  structure.  However,  capital  outlays 
also increased with a greater focus on transport, water supply and sanitation, irrigation and 
flood control, education, sports, art and culture. The fiscal consolidation process, however, 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
was resumed by NES in their 2010–11 budgets. It is important for NES to improve the quality 
of  their  expenditure  with  greater  emphasis  on  capital  expenditure  for  sustaining  the  fiscal 
consolidation process. There is also a need for NES to improve their own tax revenue. 
Financial indicators 
The formal financial system in India is dominated by banks. NES, however, lag behind other 
parts  of  India  in  terms  of  development  of  banking.  This  is  evident  from  the  low  banking 
penetration  (higher  average  population  per  branch)  in  NES  as  compared  with  the  all-India 
average,  though  there were  significant  variations  across states  in  the region  with Mizoram 
and  Meghalaya  having  much  better  ratios.  The  credit-deposit  (C-D)  ratio  in  NES  is  much 
lower at 34 per cent at the end of March 2010 than that of 73 per cent at the all-India level 
(Table 6). Even as credit expanded at a faster pace than deposits in the last decade, the gap 
remained very wide. 
 
  
The credit penetration, as measured by the ratio of bank credit to the NSDP, in NES also 
remained significantly lower than the all-India level (Chart 1). 
This  raises  the  question  as  to  whether  low  credit  penetration  in  NES  was  due  to  lack  of 
absorptive capacity in the region. However, this does not seem to be the case as non-formal 
sources of finance in the region dominate the financing activity in the rural sector. As per the 
59th round of National Sample Survey (NSS) data on indebtedness of farmer household in 
NES,  45  per  cent  of  the  finance  availed  of  by  the  farmers  was  from  the  formal  financial 
sector, while the remaining 55 per cent was from the non-formal sector. This was significantly 
higher than the all-India level with the share of the informal sector at 42 per cent (Chart 2). 
This  shows  that  there  is  absorptive  capacity  and  that  there  is  considerable  scope  for 
improving banking penetration in NES. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   5
Financial inclusion measures 
Financial inclusion is important for bringing the poor and under-privileged sections of society 
within the banking fold and thereby generating and sustaining equitable growth. Let me now 
turn to the various measures initiated by the Reserve Bank for promoting financial inclusion. 
First, the Reserve Bank for long has instituted a mechanism called “priority sector lending” 
through  which  credit  is  channelled  to  certain  preferred  sectors,  which,  inter  alia,  include 
small-scale industry, small businesses and agriculture. In the post-reform period, the priority 
sector  has  been  expanded  to  include  advances  to  retail  trade,  educational  loans,  micro-
finance and low-cost housing. This has helped in furthering the cause of financial inclusion. 
Second, the Union Finance Minister announced in the Budget 2010–11 that every village in 
the country with over 2000 population must have access to banking services by March 2012. 
In order to operationalise this process, commercial banks have prepared financial inclusion 
plans which have been submitted to the Reserve Bank. As brick-and-mortar branches will not 
be viable in very small centres, the approach is to meet this challenge through the business 
correspondent (BC) model and by leveraging communication technology. Under this model, 
banks  appoint  agents  who  provide  basic  banking  services  at  the  door-step  of  a  client  on 
behalf of banks. 
Third, the Reserve Bank has asked banks to open no-frills accounts. These accounts have 
no or very low minimum balance requirement and have provisions for small loans by way of 
overdrafts. This is a very convenient account for small depositors, especially in rural areas. 
Fourth, a major impediment for a common person to open bank account is the “Know Your 
Customer” (KYC) norm. The norm has been relaxed for small accounts, viz., deposits up to 
Rs.50,000 and credit up to Rs.1 lakh. A simple introduction by an existing account holder in a 
bank  should  be  adequate  to  open  an  account.  In  this  regard,  Aadhar,  the  Unique 
Identification  Number  (UID)  Project  of  the  Central  Government,  which  aims  at  providing  a 
unique ID number for everyone in the country, will help the poor to establish their identity to 
meet the banks’ KYC norms. 
Fifth, farmers can get credit from banks conveniently through Kisan Credit Cards (KCCs) and 
General Purpose Credit Cards (GCCs). 
Sixth, while several banking facilities are available, a common person may not be aware of 
them. Hence, financial literacy becomes critically important. Accordingly, the Reserve Bank 
has  initiated  a  “Project  Financial  Literacy”  with  the  objective  of  disseminating  information 
regarding  the  central  bank  and  general  banking  concepts  to  various  target  groups.  Our 
“Financial Education” website link offers basics of banking, finance and central banking for 
children of all ages. Our website is also available in 13 languages, including Assamese. 
Finally,  there  is  also  a  learning  process  for  the  Reserve  Bank.  We  recognise  that  being 
responsible  for  banking,  we  must  be  sensitive  to  the  needs  of  a  common  person. 
Accordingly,  our  Governor,  Dr.  Subbarao  initiated  the  outreach  programme  last  year  as  a 
part  of  our  Platinum  Jubilee  celebrations.  Under  the  outreach  programme,  the  top 
management of the Reserve Bank visits at least one village in every state and union territory 
with state government officials and commercial banks to give focused attention on financial 
inclusion.  This  has  been  highly  enriching  experience  for  us  to  understand  the  ground 
realities. Accordingly, we have decided to continue these programmes. I am glad to indicate 
that we have already conducted outreach camps in Assam and Arunachal Pradesh. During 
my current visit, outreach camps have been organised in Manipur, Nagaland and Tripura. 
Special financial inclusion measures for NES 
While financial inclusion measures are expected to improve the banking facilities in general 
throughout  the  country,  including  NES,  I  would  also  like  to  highlight  some  of  the  special 
financial inclusion measures initiated for NES. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
First,  in  December  2009,  the  Reserve  Bank  relaxed  the  branch  authorisation  policy  and 
permitted  domestic  scheduled  commercial  banks  (other  than  RRBs)   to  open  branches  in 
rural,  semi-urban  and  urban  centres  in  NES  and  Sikkim  without  having  the  need  to  take 
permission from the Reserve Bank in each case, subject to reporting. 
Second, to improve banking penetration in the NES, the Reserve Bank requested the state 
governments and banks to identify centres where there is a need for setting up either full-
fledged  branches  or  those  offering  forex  facilities,  handling  government  business  or  for 
meeting currency requirements. We have also offered to fund the capital and running costs 
for  five  years  provided  the  state  government  concerned  is  willing  to  make  available  the 
premises and put in place appropriate security arrangements. Meghalaya was the first State 
to  take  advantage  of  this  facility:  eight  centres  were  allotted  to  three  public  sector  banks, 
following a bidding process in the state. However, the progress towards opening branches 
has been slow because of lack of proper infrastructure in the identified centres. In Tripura, 
five  centres  were  allocated  to  Tripura  Gramin  Bank  in  December  2010.  I  understand  that 
branches  are  expected  to  open  shortly  in  two  of  these  centres.  Similarly,  the  work  for 
identification of centres for opening up branches has been completed for Arunachal Pradesh, 
Nagaland and Manipur. 
Policy challenges 
Let  me  now  turn  to  broader  macroeconomic  policy  challenges.  Development  of  NES  has 
been high on the agenda of the Central and the respective state governments. Recognising 
the  special  requirements  of  the  region  and  the  need  for  significant  levels  of  government 
investment,  NES  have  been  recognised  as  Special  Category  States  and  Central  Plan 
assistance to these states is significant. As I indicated, the Reserve Bank has also initiated 
special measures for spread of banking and promotion of financial inclusion. Nevertheless, to 
accelerate the pace of growth in NES, I may highlight a few challenges that lie ahead. 
First, weak market linkages are a major constraint in the development of the region. For this 
reason, urgent attention needs to be paid to developing roads, air links, telecommunications 
and other components of transport and communications. Investment in infrastructure could 
be scaled up through the Public-Private Partnership model. 
Second,  initiatives  need  to  be  taken  to  promote  sustainable  industrial  development 
compatible  with  the  unique  bio-diversity  of  the  region.  Agro-based  industries,  food 
processing,  wood  products,  traditional  textiles  and  light  manufacturing  industries  can  be 
encouraged to come up in the region. 
Third,  there  is  a  need  to  increase  agricultural  productivity  and  promote  diversification  into 
horticulture  and  floriculture  for  which  the  agro-climatic  conditions  in  the  region  are  well- 
suited. 
Fourth, a sustainable growth paradigm will not only help further acceleration in growth but will 
also improve fiscal sustainability by helping to lower the debt-GSDP ratio. 
Fifth,  the  high  level  of  literacy  and  human  development  levels  coupled  with  bio-diversity 
provides ample opportunity for development of tourism and exports. 
Sixth, a deterrent for bank lending is the high level of non-performing assets (NPAs) in the 
region. This has been, in part, due to unviability of some of the activities financed by banks 
and lack of adequate engagement with the borrowers. There is, therefore, a need to improve 
credit culture in which financial education could play a vital role. In addition, banks will have 
to augment the staff strength in their branches with an emphasis on staff with knowledge of 
local customs and practices. Given the preponderance of community-based society in NES, 
group  lending  could  be  a  successful  mode  of  credit  delivery.  Hence,  there  is  a  need  for 
promotion  of  self-help  groups  (SHGs)  with  greater  linkage  with  banks.  In  this  regard, 
NABARD has an important role to play, not only in promotion of SHGs, but also in capacity 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
building, along with SIDBI and concerned state government agencies. Another area where 
there  is  substantial  scope  for  expansion  is  low-cost  housing.  Expansion  of  housing  loan 
remains poor as mortgages cannot be created in many parts of NES. However, banks can 
explore innovative structures for housing loans with a greater emphasis on group lending. 
Seventh,  in  any  plan  for  financial  sector  development,  the  physical  presence  of  a  bank 
branch is important. But the topography of the region, the dispersal of population, transport 
bottlenecks and law and order conditions in some areas inhibit branch expansion other than 
in certain commercial centres. Hence, all the stake-holders – banks, state governments and 
the Reserve Bank – need to work in close co-ordination for increasing banking penetration 
and promoting financial inclusion in the region. 
Conclusion 
To  conclude,  the  North-Eastern  Region  has  immense  potential.  The  need,  therefore,  is  to 
identify  the  opportunities  and  recognise  the  challenges  to  work  towards  a  sustainable  and 
inclusive growth of the region with greater penetration of the formal financial sector. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
