Ravi Menon: A new financial landscape – rebalancing on three fronts 
Opening  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  Inaugural  Sim  Kee  Boon  Institute  Annual  Conference  on  Financial 
Economics, Singapore, 5 May 2011. 
 Introduction 
Professor De Meyer, distinguished speakers, ladies and gentlemen, good morning. 
1. 
The  crisis  of  2008–2009  has  triggered  a  fundamental  shift  in  the  global  financial 
landscape. A new balance is emerging, as market participants and financial authorities learn 
the  lessons  of  the  crisis  and  revisit  existing  paradigms.  While  the  contours  of  this  new 
landscape are still forming, a significant rebalancing is taking place along three dimensions 
on the regulatory front: 
2. 
3. 
prudential supervision. 
4. 
international standards with domestic discretion. 
First, there is a redefinition of the respective roles of the market and regulation. 
Second,  there  is  increasing  attention  on  realigning  macroeconomic  stability  and 
Third, as regulatory reform efforts gather pace, there is a growing need to reconcile 
Redefining the role of markets and regulation 
5. 
Let  me  begin  with  the  relationship  between  markets  and  regulation.  Stability  is 
fundamental to a well-functioning financial system. But this stability does not occur naturally. 
The  idea  that  self-regulation  and  market  discipline  are  sufficient  to  ensure  stable  financial 
systems  has  come  under  heavy  fire  in  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis.  Financial  markets  differ 
from other markets in two important ways. 
First,  financial  markets  do  not  always  self-correct.  In  fact,  their  propensity  for 
6. 
leverage makes them prone to volatility and excess. The recent crisis has revealed how the 
real  world  deviates  significantly  from  the  assumption  of  perfect  markets:  information  is 
asymmetrical,  risk  can  be  mispriced  for  sustained  periods,  and  economic  decisions  are 
frequently guided by complex behavioural considerations rather than rational calculations. 
7. 
Second, the cost of failure in financial systems is much higher than in other markets. 
The  risk  of  destructive  transmission  is  far  greater  with  financial  networks  spanning  many 
segments  of  the  real  economy.  When  companies  fail,  capital  is  reallocated  to  more 
productive uses in a process of creative destruction. In contrast, when financial institutions 
fail, capital is destroyed in a process that can feed on itself and lead to systemic instability.  
8. 
Robert  Shiller  from  Yale  University,  one  of  the  few  economists  who  predicted  the 
crisis,  argues  that  “we  have  to  distance  ourselves  from  the  presumption  that  financial 
markets always work well and that price changes always reflect genuine information”. It is 
this  misguided  belief  that  prices  always  reflect  fundamentals,  that  leads  to  asset  bubbles. 
Government  regulation  is  therefore  imperative.  Effective  regulation  and  supervision  of  the 
financial sector is necessary to promote prudent behaviour and sound risk management and 
minimise the risk of financial shocks. 
9. 
But we should guard against drawing the wrong lesson from the crisis: it is not about 
more regulation and less markets. The new financial landscape paradoxically requires both – 
better regulation but also better functioning markets.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Market  competition  remains  the  best  way  to  promote  innovation  and  create 
10. 
prosperity.  Regulation  must  not  stifle  markets  but  seek  to  make  them  work  better.  In  the 
financial sector, this means a judicious mix of rules and incentives for stronger capitalisation, 
more  effective  risk  management,  better  transparency,  and  sharper  market  discipline.  This 
has  been  central  to  the  approach  taken  by  the  Monetary  Authority  of  Singapore  –  never 
hesitating to impose high standards of prudence and financial discipline but always careful to 
do so in a manner that does not undermine enterprise and innovation. 
11. 
Financial  innovation  –  especially  in  derivative  products  –  has  been  blamed  as  a 
cause  of  the  crisis.  This  is  not  quite  correct.  Innovation  has  been  a  feature  of  finance  for 
decades.  The  crisis  was  caused  fundamentally  by  failures  in  macroeconomic  policies  and 
financial supervision. Monetary policy was too easy for too long in too many countries. This 
led  to  low  interest  rates  and  lax  lending  standards  that  precipitated  unsustainable  housing 
booms, mainly in the United States but also in other countries. Financial supervision failed to 
detect and correct the build-up of leverage in the system, especially in the shadow banking 
sector. Complex financial products obscured the risks in sub-prime lending and transmitted 
these risks across the financial sector. As Edwin Truman from the Petersen Institute puts it, 
“Financial engineering contributed to the market dynamics once the crisis got underway, but 
it was not ‘the cause’ of the crisis.” 
12. 
Regulation  should  therefore  not  restrict  financial  innovation  but  seek  to  create 
conditions  in  the  market  that  promote  effective  risk  management.  Regulation  and  markets 
need  to  work  hand  in  hand.  Take  the  example  of  securitisation,  which  has  been  much 
maligned since the crisis. Let’s look at the good, the bad, and the ugly of securitisation. The 
good is that securitisation is a useful means of mitigating and diversifying credit risk through 
capital market intermediation. The bad is that securitised products became so complex that 
the inherent risks were obscured when bad loans were passed on to unknowing investors. 
And  it  became  ugly  when  these  “toxic  assets”  blew  up  in  the  balance  sheets  of  financial 
institutions across the spectrum, triggering a crisis of systemic proportions. 
13. 
The  solution  is  not  to  restrict  securitisation.  Rather,  regulation  must  seek  to  help 
correct the imperfections in the securitisation market. International securities regulators have 
therefore  recommended  improvements  in  disclosure  standards  to  allow  investors  to 
understand the risks of these products better. To enhance market discipline, it has also been 
proposed that originators retain a portion of each issue to keep some “skin in the game”, to 
align  their  incentives  with  those  of  investors.  Finally,  additional  capital  may  be  needed  to 
cover residual risks. 
14. 
The  stability  of  the  financial  system  is  not  the  responsibility  of  regulators  alone. 
Regulators can provide the traffic lights and signposts on the road to reform, but road safety 
ultimately depends on the drivers on the road, the industry players. The management of risk 
must not take a back seat to the drive for increased profits. 
Realigning macroeconomic stability and prudential supervision 
The second realignment that is taking place is based on the post-crisis realisation 
15. 
that  financial  stability  cannot  be  secured  solely  through  a  combination  of  macroeconomic 
policies  aimed  at  price  stability  and  microprudential  supervision  aimed  at  the  safety  and 
soundness of individual financial institutions.  
16. 
Price stability is not sufficient to achieve financial stability. Sharp increases in asset 
prices, even in a climate of relatively low consumer price inflation, have typically led to credit 
booms and risky behaviour that eventually undermined financial stability. Likewise, prudential 
rules to ensure the safety of individual banks have not been sufficient to keep the banking 
system  as  a  whole  safe.  Inter-linkages  and  common  exposures  across  institutions  can 
multiply aggregate risks and destabilise the system. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
its  own 
Singapore  has  been  experimenting,  since  1996,  with 
Hence the resurgence of interest in what is called the macroprudential dimension – 
17. 
policies  and  tools  aimed  at  containing  risks  in  the  financial  system  as  a  whole.  However, 
macroprudential policies are still at an experimental stage. Different countries have adopted 
different  measures  in  the  name  of  sustaining  systemic  stability,  ranging  from  limits  on 
aggregate  credit  and  caps  on  debt-to-income  ratios  to  taxes  on  asset  market  transactions 
and controls on capital inflows.  
18. 
toolkit  of 
macroprudential measures to tame excesses in the housing market. While we do not as yet 
have a completely coherent policy framework, the main outlines of Singapore’s approach are 
becoming clearer. It includes a suite of tools ranging from prudential instruments like loan-to-
value ratios and fiscal measures like stamp duties on property transactions, to supply-side 
and other administrative measures. Singapore does not target asset prices but keeps a close 
watch on asset price movements, looking for signs of speculative froth, excessive leverage, 
or concentration risks. 
19. 
Systemic  stability  is  also  a  shared  responsibility.  It  requires  coordinated  efforts 
across different government regulators and agencies. MAS is fortunate in this regard. As an 
integrated regulator which supervises the banking and insurance industries, as well as the 
capital markets, MAS is well placed to take a comprehensive view of risks within the financial 
system as a whole. As a central bank responsible for macroeconomic stability, MAS is also 
able to monitor and understand the effects of monetary and liquidity conditions on systemic 
risks. And MAS works closely with other government entities on issues such as system-wide 
safety nets – such as the deposit guarantees of 2009 and 2010 – taking a comprehensive 
whole-of-government approach. 
is 
The 
in  regulatory  reforms 
third  dimension  of  rebalancing 
interconnected  world.  But  we  did  not  know 
Reconciling international standards and domestic discretion 
20. 
that  between 
international standards and domestic discretion. We have known for some time that we live 
in  a  globalised, 
the  extent  of  our 
interconnectedness until the crisis hit home. Cross-border bank lending is more than 40 per 
cent  of  world  GDP.  Global  finance  is  really  a  vast  and  complex  network  of  connections. 
Financial shocks are transmitted through this network with speed and virulence. Regulators 
used to worry about institutions that were “too big to fail”; now, they worry about institutions 
that are “too connected to fail”. Size matters ; but connectivity matters more.  
21. 
This high degree of interdependence means that governments in major economies 
can no longer act in isolation. Regulatory policies must be globally consistent to minimise the 
risk of arbitrage. Supervisory actions must be internationally coordinated to maximise their 
effectiveness. 
22. 
Yet, regulation and supervision is essentially a national prerogative, that must cater 
to  the  domestic  context  and  circumstances  to  be  effective.  Recognising  this  tension, 
international policymakers have focused on reaching consensus on international standards 
that  serve  as  a  minimum  benchmark,  while  allowing  countries  the  freedom  to  choose 
appropriate  regulatory  tools  to  fit  individual  circumstances.  A  uniform,  one-size-fits-all 
international regulatory regime will not work. 
23. 
The most striking application of this principle is in the approach being taken for the 
regulation  of  global  systemically 
institutions,  or  G-SIFIs.  These 
institutions, because of their size, complexity, cross-border nature, and interconnectedness, 
would cause significant disruption to the global financial system and economic activity, if they 
failed  in  a  disorderly  manner.  There  is  thus  a  need  for  global  supervisory  cooperation,  in 
order  to  identify  the  key  points  of  failure  within  such  institutions.  The  Financial  Stability 
Board,  together  with  other  international  standard  setting  bodies,  is  rethinking  its  approach 
towards the monitoring, sharing, and mitigation of systemic risks posed by G-SIFIs. 
important 
financial 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
A number of the proposals being considered are international in nature, like those 
24. 
improving supervisory cooperation between regulators, and requiring higher loss absorbency 
capacity  for  G-SIFIs.  However,  primary  responsibility  for  these  G-SIFIs  lies  with  national 
regulators,  who  must  retain  discretion  over  the  specific  supervisory  stance  to  take  with 
respect to these institutions. 
Conclusion 
25. 
Let me conclude. This is a fertile time for the study of finance and risk. The financial 
landscape  is  undergoing  dramatic  change.  The  three  dimensions  of  rebalancing  that  I 
outlined  are  still  being  played  out,  with  many  unanswered  questions.  What  should  be  the 
balance between markets and regulation? What is the optimal level of capital in the banking 
system?  How  can  we  minimise  the  risk  of  liquidity  shortfalls?  Should  trading  activities  be 
separated from commercial banking? How should incentives be structured to promote sound 
risk management? Can  financial innovation help to reduce financial risks? What do we do 
with  financial  institutions  that  are  both  too  big  to  fail  and  too  big  to  save?  How  should 
macroprudential policies be designed? 
26. 
The Sim Kee Boon Institute can play a key role in advancing our understanding of 
these issues and providing thought leadership. The Institute has already published a number 
of  interesting  papers  on  topics  ranging  from  securitisation  to  the  effects  of  poison  pills  on 
corporate governance. I look forward to more insights from the Institute in the years ahead. 
We  can  expect  nothing  less  from  an  Institute  named  after  one  of  the  pioneers  of  the 
Singapore Civil Service. Sim Kee Boon helped to chart Singapore’s economic development 
through  the  turbulent  1970s,  when  stagflation  and  oil  price  shocks  shook  the  world’s 
economies. We are living in even more interesting times today. 
27. 
fruitful discussions.  
Thank you. 
The Institute has gathered an impressive collection of talent here today. I wish you 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
