Patrick Honohan: Good times and bad for a globalised economy – 
macroeconomic policy lessons from Ireland 
Address  by  Mr  Patrick  Honohan,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Ireland,  to  The  Gilman 
Rutihinda Memorial Lecture, Bank of Tanzania, Dar es Salaam, 12 August 2011. 
 The  lecture  draws  freely  on  the  output  of  the  Research  Project  “Turning  Globalisation  to  National  Advantage: 
Economic  Policy  Lessons  from  Ireland’s  Experience”,  part-funded  by  the  Irish  Council  for  the  Humanities  and 
Social Scientists and led by Profs Frank Barry, John FitzGerald and Iulia Siedschlag and the author. Thanks to 
Eddie  Casey,  Peter  Dunne,  Suzanne  Linehan,  Yvonne  McCarthy,  Kieran  McQuinn  and  Gerard  O’Reilly  for 
assistance and comments. 
The global crisis has left no part of the world unaffected. Tanzania may have weathered the 
crisis  better  than  many,  but  even  here  an  externally-driven  credit  crunch  resulted  in  a 
temporary growth set-back in the period 2008–9. Market turbulence has increased again, but 
I  do  not  want  to  discuss  those  very  current  matters  today.  After  all,  it  is  not  only  the 
immediate  and  direct  impact  that  needs  to  be  considered  Arguably  more  important  is  to 
reflect on the lessons that are to be learnt in terms of how a relatively small economy should 
be  positioned  in  regard  to  global  trade  and  finance  in  order  to  survive  well  from  that 
experience. In order to learn those lessons, there is no more instructive example than that of 
Ireland, albeit a country in a very different state of development to that of Tanzania.  
After all, Ireland is one of the most globalized economies in the world, and it consolidated this 
position in the period 1986–2007, during which aggregate living standards rapidly converged 
to those of  the world’s leading economies. During that apparently highly successful period  
– dubbed the “Celtic Tiger” commentators – ambitious countries at lower levels of per capita 
income,  such  as  Tanzania,  began  more  and  more  to  look  to  Ireland  as  a  potential  model 
against which to evaluate their own growth strategies.  
But  Ireland’s  navigation  through  the  hazards  of  the  emergent  global  economy  hit  severe 
shoals in 2007–8, since when an acute economic contraction has seen per capita GNP fall  
–  faster  than  almost  anywhere  else  –  back  to  the  levels  of  2000,  a  return  to  high  net 
emigration  reflecting  job  losses  and  high  unemployment,  and  a  loss  of  access  to  financial 
market access reflecting international financial market concern at the extent of bank losses 
and the sustained jump also in other government borrowing.  
In  the  end,  while  Ireland’s  engagement  with  globalization  over  the  past  quarter  century 
cannot be counted a failure, its earlier characterization as a success must now be at least 
very heavily qualified. What then are the macroeconomic policy lessons for countries whose 
growth ambitions have also been based on a embracing globalization?  
In  this  lecture,  I  will  suggest  that  policymakers  in  small  open  economies  need  to  be 
especially alert to the fact that globalization can act to accentuate, accelerate and prolong 
macroeconomic trends both in the upswing and the downturn. It’s as if globalization acts as a 
turbocharger for the small open economy.  
Just when things seem to be going very well in many dimensions, you can get into trouble 
very quickly and at a time when some of the conventional warning indicators are not flashing. 
Rapid and quite protracted growth spurts are possible, based not only on expanding exports 
to the vast global market for goods and services, but also on the availability from neighboring 
countries or further afield of additional factors of production, whether material inputs, labour 
or capital.  
I  will  illustrate  the  turbocharging  phenomenon  drawing  on  the  experience  of  Ireland  in  the 
past two cycles, in both of which serious policy errors were made, allowing an unsustainable 
boom to get out of hand. Recovery from the first cycle (in the 1980s) was at first slow, but 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
then accelerated at an astonishing pace which sowed the seeds of the construction bubble of 
the  2000s  from  the  aftermath  of  which  the  economy  is  only  now  consolidating  the  early 
recovery  phase.  The  lessons  are  clear:  macroeconomic  policy  in  the  globalized  economy 
needs  to  be  even  more  alert  to  the  dangers  of  an  unsustainable  turbocharged  boom. 
However enjoyable it is while it is in process, the bust – potentially also turbocharged – is 
even more painful.  
I will also touch on another, not unrelated, globalization-related theme, likely to be even more 
relevant  to  Tanzania,  namely  the  tendency  for  globalized  economies  to  be  structurally 
incomplete or “hollowed-out” both in productive capacity (concentration on a limited range of 
economic  sectors1)  and  in  the  repertoire  of  macro-fiscal  and  prudential  policy  tools  (as 
reliance is increasingly placed on (i) external markets for components or factors of production 
and on (ii) external institutions and analyses for the design and in some cases delivery of 
policy.) This tendency can feed the turbocharger and restrict the capacity for policy response 
to emerging problems.  
International aspects of the fiscal crisis and recovery of the 1980s 
1. 
In trade, migration and finance, Ireland had of course been an exceptionally open economy 
for a very long time. The large migration flows, especially to the UK and the New World, and 
the currency and banking links go back to the early 19th Century at least, with scarcely any 
overall interruption. Irish banks parked their excess resources in the London money market 
right up to the 1960s – a pattern familiar to many African countries today. 
Nor is the current crisis the first (O Grada, 2011) – indeed the potentially turbocharged nature 
of the globalized economy is well-illustrated by the rapid recovery from the previous severe 
crisis of less than a generation ago, whose onset coincided with the decoupling – for the first 
time since just after the Napoleonic Wars – of Ireland’s currency from sterling.  
The earlier of the two macroeconomic cycles we look at happened at a point where global 
capital markets were still just beginning to move into the high gear that we see today. We 
may think of this as Turbocharger Mark 1. It allowed the Irish Government to access foreign 
capital to some extent without much by way of credit risk premium, but the fear of a sudden 
stop of this capital flow brought expansion to an end and resulted in a painful and protracted 
recession through the 1980s. 
That  crisis  had  its  origin  in  the  turbulent  macroeconomic  years  of  the  1970s  which 
themselves saw Ireland make several severe demand management errors which stifled its 
capacity to benefit fully from the opportunities offered by EU (EC) membership from 1973. 
New opportunities there were, and especially the higher prices for agricultural produce under 
the  Common  Agricultural  Policy.  But  that  was  not  all:  EU  membership  became  a  major 
channel for transmitting globalization to Ireland.  
But  the  expansionist  fiscal  response  to  the  stagnation  of  the  1970s  created  a  huge  and 
spiralling Government and balance of payment deficit which proved difficult to reverse in the 
early 1980s. By this stage, membership of the ERM of the European Monetary System had 
broken  the  currency  link  with  sterling,  and  the  Irish  pound  was  prone  to  being  realigned 
against the stronger ERM currencies – something that happened about once a year for the 
first 8 years of the system.  
It  is  interesting  therefore  to  contemplate  how  international  factors  influenced  the  fiscal 
correction  of  the  1980s.  Although  exchange  controls  still  existed  and  indeed  had  been 
                                                 
1  As  with  many  African  countries,  the  tendency  for  comparative  advantage  in  trade  to  lead  to  heavy 
concentration in exports on just a few commodities is a familiar one to Tanzania – think of gold now, cashew 
even more so in times gone by, pyrethrum at a certain moment – and memorably, the vision of some of a vast 
groundnut industry many decades ago. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
applied with respect to the UK for the first time in anticipation of ERM membership and the 
end  of  the  sterling  link,  the  borrowing  needs  of  Government  began  to  exceed  domestic 
financing  capacity  (as  reflected  also  in  the  swelling  current  account  balance  of  payments 
deficit Figure 1). With the domestic market being perceived as almost tapped out – with Irish 
pound denominated debt having reached 60 per cent of GNP in 1979 – incremental debt in 
the early 1980s was increasingly borrowed from abroad to the point where foreign currency 
debt rapidly approached 50 per cent of GNP (Figure 2). Holdings by non-residents of Irish 
pound-denominated  government  paper  also  grew  after  the  devaluation  of  1986,  reaching 
16 per cent of GNP by the end of the decade. By this stage, international market conditions 
and the attitude of international investors to the Irish sovereign as well as to the prospects for 
the Irish pound were central influences on interest rates and borrowing conditions. 
 Soaring Irish pound interest rates in the early 1980s reflected each of these uncertainties. 
Irish  pound  interbank  interest  rates  (three-months  maturity)  returned  on  average  2½ 
percentage points over corresponding German rates in the last ten years of the narrow bank 
ERM  before  the  ERM  crisis.  Credit  risk  at  such  maturities  was  arguably  very  low  in  those 
years, so that most if not all could be accounted for by devaluation risk. For yields at longer-
term the gap was even higher – a regression approach suggests a spread of about 6–7% in 
the mid-1980s (Figure 3): but the influence of credit risk over the longer term would not be 
negligible. Interestingly, in those days interest rate spreads reflected devaluation risks more 
than credit risks.2  
                                                 
2  Unfortunately,  the  data  that  exists  –  which  is  not  fully  comprehensive  or  exactly  comparable  as  between 
country issuers – does not yield very tight estimates of default risk insofar as, for example, the spreads on DM 
and Swiss franc-denominated debt for comparable maturities are rather different. Still, with yield spreads at 
issue over Swiss franc long-term bonds varying from about 2¼ per cent in 1983 to about 1¼ per cent by 1986, 
and  lower  spreads  relative  to  German  bonds,  the  data  shown  in  Figure  3  suggest  that  the  bulk  of  the  raw 
spread perhaps as much as 5–6% relative to German bonds – should be thought of as a credit/default spread, 
the remainder being devaluation risk. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
The  figure  shows  two  sets  of  data,  shown  with  triangles  and  squares  respectively.  The 
triangles can be thought of as measuring credit risk; it is the spread of primary market yield 
on  Irish  Government  DEM  and  CHF  foreign  currency  denominated  bonds  over  similar-
maturity  Sovereign  bonds  of  Germany  and  Switzerland  respectively  (but  terms  and 
conditions of the debt of different issuers may not be fully comparable – possibly explaining 
the negative data points). The squares can be thought of as combining credit and currency 
risk;  it  is  the  secondary  market  spread  on  Irish  pound  Sovereign  debt  over  German  and 
Swiss  Sovereign  issues  of  similar  maturity.  The  regression  lines  link  these  spreads  to 
currency  dummies,  liquidity  (size  of  issue)  and  date  (linear  time  trend).  (Source:  Peter 
Dunne, unpublished note). 
   4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Nevertheless, that the country was “living beyond its means” was universally acknowledged. 
With the surge in global interest rates following the Volcker anti-inflation policy initiatives of 
1979–80, and the subsequent surge in the spread of Irish interest rates above those abroad, 
the interest cost of servicing the growing debt provided useful dramatizations of the problem 
(cf. Figure 4 showing the share of income tax revenue going simply to pay the national debt 
interest.)  Turbocharger  Mark  1  had  reached  its  limit  and  the  tough  process  of  fiscal  and 
competitiveness adjustment had to be ground out. 
 Ireland would have done well to resist the temptations of offered foreign loans on the scale 
offered, and adhered to conventional rules of thumb for sustainable fiscal policy. By establish 
a  pattern  of  spending  that  required  external  financing  on  a  scale  that  would  inevitably 
become  unsustainable,  macro  policy  generated  almost  a  decade  of  high  unemployment, 
emigration and rising tax rates.  
Descriptions of the Irish fiscal correction often give credit to the adoption of the Maastricht 
treaty’s deficit and debt criteria for entry into the euro. But this is wrong. Those criteria were 
designed and developed too late to have been decisive in this regard. As shown in Figures 1 
and 5, the fiscal indicators had come back onto a clearly convergent path long before these 
externally-imposed constraints had been adopted in 1992. Even if they may, however, have 
continued to provide a new quantitative reference point for fiscal discipline, they were so far 
exceeded  in  the  subsequent  run-up  to  euro  entry  as  to  make  this  point  of  negligible 
significance. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
4  General  Government  measures  include  local  authorities,  non-commercial  state  sponsored 
bodies, the National Pensions Reserve Fund (NPRF) and the Social Insurance Fund, whereas 
the  Exchequer  Balance  only  includes  Central  Government  transactions.  The  General 
Government  measure  also  includes  elements  of  accrual  accounting  while  the  Exchequer 
Balance is a cash-based measure. 
 The Irish economy’s golden age: meeting global demand in the 1990s  
2. 
The near miraculous turnaround of the Irish fiscal and growth environment in the late 1980s 
has been the subject of a considerable amount of research.3 From the present perspective, 
what is clear is that it depended heavily on Ireland’s globalized status. Without the potential 
and actual surge in exports and export-oriented investment, the turbocharged surge of trend-
following foreign investment in Irish government paper driving down long-term interest rates 
and the easy availability of labour not only from the pool of the unemployed but from the pool 
of  returnees  and  other  potential  migrants  from  abroad,  the  Irish  economy  could  not  have 
moved  into  the  Celtic  Tiger  phase  with  barely  a  hesitation  related  to  the  1992–3  ERM 
currency crisis.  
In  retrospect  the  mid  1990s  can  be  seen  as  a  macroeconomic  “Golden  Age”  for  Ireland 
(Honohan and Walsh, 2002). Yet it must not be thought of as an era to which the economy 
could  even  expect  to  return,  or  even  to  have  sustained.  This  was  Turbocharging  2.0.  The 
rapid growth rates represented a catch-up as the economy finally approached the production 
frontier by achieving essentially full employment (and with the traditional farming sector no 
                                                 
3  Among  others  being  the  battleground  of  debates  about  the  possibility  of  an  expansionary  fiscal  contraction 
(see Barry and Devereux (1995), Bradley and Whelan (1997), Giavazzi and Pagano (1990), Honohan (1992) 
and McAleese (1990). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
longer quantitatively significant). The important continuing role played by inward FDI in this 
period confirms the ability of the globalization links of the economy to generate a powerful 
turbocharging  effect.  Indeed,  the  FDI  boom  helped  suck  in  migrants  from  non-traditional 
sources for the first time, with the share of non-nationals in the total population eventually 
reaching a relatively high 13.8% by 2007 – from a position where Ireland had had one of the 
mo re ethnically homogeneous societies in Europe (Figure 6). 
 
  
The heavy reliance in this period on inward FDI provides some evidence of the monocultural 
tendencies of the globalized economy. The sectors contributing by far the largest part of the 
growing  exports  and  manufacturing  output  were  highly  concentrated  in  a  small  number  of 
SITC  codes  corresponding  to  subsectors  of  pharmaceuticals  and  IT  assembly  and  others 
well positioned to take advantage of the special tax environment. This concentration had the 
potential  to  create  concentration  risks,  though  these  do  not  seem  to  have  materialized  to 
date.4  
Such  was  the  success  of  the  Irish  economy  in  this  period  of  the  1990s  that  the  former 
currency  weakness  which  had  characterized  the  Irish  pound  in  its  first  14  years  of 
independence  vanished.  Instead,  despite  the  +/–15%  margins  adopted  against  other  ERM 
countries and despite the absence of any explicit or implicit indication of a policy stance, the 
Irish pound displayed a degree of nominal and real average exchange rate stability during 
the  1993–99  period,  with  a  small  appreciation  against  the  DM  in  preparation  for  euro 
membership in 1998. In contrast to the later period, and to many other country experiences 
of  rapid  growth,  currency  fluctuations  for  the  Irish  pound  did  not  generate  a  loss  of 
competitiveness in this period.  
                                                 
4  The Dublin International Financial Services Centre represented another subsector which, thanks to energetic 
promotion  and  the  considerable  profits  tax  sensitivity  of  relevant  parts  of  the  internationally  traded  financial 
services centre, began to make a noteworthy contribution to tax revenue and employment (Honohan, 2006). 
European union and euro area membership of course considerably turbocharged this sector, of course, giving 
it a growth potential that would simply not have been otherwise available. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
By the late 1990s, though, the economy began to slip out of balance, in a way which was 
largely home-grown, though some foreign shock factors did continue. Fiscal policy became 
rather  more  procyclical;  the  dependence  on  volatile  or  insecure  taxes  increased,  as 
centralized  wage  settlements  continued  to  be  bought  by  income  tax  concessions.  The 
external shock of euro membership lowered nominal and real interest rates by removing the 
exchange  risk  premium  which  had  persisted  since  the  early  1980s  –  albeit  on  a  reduced 
scale.  The  sense  that  lower  interest  rates  could  be  projected  for  the  indefinite  future 
rationalized a willingness to pay more for one’s home. The seeds of the property bubble had 
been sown. 
The economy over-inflated by foreign credit 2000–2007 
3. 
As  Ireland  joined  the  monetary  union  in  1999,  its  status  among  the  most  globalized 
economies  in  the  world  was  confirmed.  In  the  following  years,  its  finances  would  be 
submerged  in  those  of  the  euro  area  –  with  international  flows  often  not  even  being 
separately measured and assessed as attention focussed on the euro area as a whole. The 
idea that much of macro policy had been largely outsourced to the European Central Bank 
took  hold  in  policy  circles.  A  sizable  fragmentation  of  policy  thereby  occurred:  domestic 
policymakers  no  longer  took  full  ownership  of  macro  issues.  Finance  Minister  McCreevy’s 
stated views about fiscal policy (“when I have it I spend it”) disavowed any stabilization role 
for fiscal policy.5  
Interest rates were now fully imported from the rest of the euro area (as had been the case 
with sterling before 1979). After years of relatively high nominal and real interest rates, the 
new regime lowered the cost and enhanced the availability of credit to Irish borrowers. Not 
surprisingly,  the  change  resulted  in  an  expansion  of  the  most  credit-dependent  sector, 
house-building and property development.  
The story of the property price and construction boom that ensued (it began around 1997 in 
anticipation of the monetary changes) has been often told (cf. for example Honohan, 2009; 
Whelan, 2011). Here it is most relevant to emphasize the globalization dimension. Not only 
did Ireland import a huge volume of funds through the banking system, but it also imported a 
newly  relaxed  approach  to  the  prudential  supervision  of  mortgage  lending.  The  scale  to 
which the Irish credit bubble eventually grew was also certainly facilitated by the absence of 
exchange rate risk. Together with another key element of globalization: the absence of any 
fear of exchange controls, this ensured the fuel for a turbocharged monocultural expansion of 
the  Irish  economy  (call  it  Turbocharger  3.0)  at  a  time  when  its  previous,  somewhat  more 
broadly-based and certainly more sustainable, export driven growth was naturally slowing.  
The result was a world-beating construction and property price bubble – barely interrupted by 
the global downturn of 2001–2 (see Figure 7). Economic growth became dominated by the 
new  monoculture  of  construction,  growing  as  it  did  to  employ  directly  in  construction  over 
13 per cent of those at work. 
                                                 
5  However,  the  1999  establishment  of  the  National  Pension  Reserve  Fund  as  a  way  of  institutionalizing  the 
need for countercyclical fiscal restraint shows implied that fiscal policy had not become entirely rudderless. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
Although Ireland could expect to import medium term inflation rates in line with the rest of the 
euro area, the external weakness of the euro in its early years, combined with the booming 
national economy meant that inflation in Ireland soared to an annual rate as high as 7 per 
cent briefly. Once again, the outsourcing of anti-inflation policy meant that such an outturn 
did not result in an aggressive domestic policy response, and in 2004 the EU Commission 
launched  an  excessive  deficit  procedure  against  Ireland,  reflecting  the  fact  that  budgetary 
policy had even relaxed in the face of booming domestic demand conditions. 
The current account of the balance of payments remained surprisingly moderate during the 
boom. This reflected in part the continued strong export performance of the remainder of the 
economy, and the fact that a large segment of the funds borrowed from abroad by the banks 
was  ploughed  back  into  foreign  property  investment  by  the  banks’  borrowers,  large  and 
small.  
Without  the  construction  boom  fuelled  by  credit  sourced  from  abroad  by  the  banks,  the 
economy would doubtless have grown more slowly in the 2000s. But the underperformance 
after  2007  more  than  offsets  the  gains  of  the  property  bubble-driven  growth.  The  2008–9 
recession would have been less severe, and the recovery from 2010 would not have been 
weighed down by the overhang of indebtedness.  
The post-Lehmans global contraction certainly provided a dramatic illustration of exposure to 
external shocks. By that time, however, the globalization turbocharger was already working 
in reverse as Anglo and other banks struggled to refinance their foreign borrowings. Indeed, 
a partial decoupling of the globalized economy was under way as money markets began to 
fragment and the limitations of the monetary integration in Europe became evident. 
Concluding remarks 
4. 
Ireland’s increasing globalization in the 1980s and 1990s both helped lift the economy from 
decades of under-performance and demonstrated its new ability to generate full employment 
and  compete  effectively  at  the  production  frontier.  One  aspect  of  this  was  the  intimate 
engagement  with  the  European  Union  since  membership  in  1973  had  helped  enrich 
administrative and political capacity as well as resulting in a vital flow of development funding 
through the structural funds especially from the late-1980s to the end of the millennium. By 
then  the  wider  forces  of  globalization  had  begun  to  act  as  a  kind  of  turbo-charger  for  the 
economy,  amplifying  the  competitive,  export-led  growth  period  and  the  subsequent 
residential construction and property price boom. This helped achieve rapid living standards 
convergence through the attainment of full employment, but also fuelled an overshoot which 
could not be managed down given the debt vulnerabilities which had accumulated and which 
proved unsustainable through the global crisis.  
International  convergence  of  economic  and  regulatory  policies  towards  liberalization  and 
light-touch, unfortunately embraced also by Ireland (Honohan et al., 2011), and ridiculously 
easy  availability  of  credit  from  abroad  (eventually  helped by  the  removal  of  exchange  rate 
risk across the euro area) were key factors in the international environment that masked the 
vulnerabilities associated with the emergence of evident imbalances in the trend towards a 
construction  monoculture:  extreme  house  price  inflation,  a  skewed  revenue  base  for  the 
Government accounts and a seemingly inexorable erosion of wage competitiveness.  
A score-card on the role of globalization in the latest downturn shows a more mixed picture. 
Despite the fact that international trade was badly hit worldwide in the macro-shock of late 
2008, Irish exports held up well and provided a stabilizing force in the evolution of aggregate 
demand both in that downturn and in the subsequent couple of years. The severe contraction 
in the numbers at work was somewhat mitigated by the continued availability of jobs abroad, 
both for recent immigrants who wished to return to their place of origin and others who sadly 
resumed the historical pattern of seeking employment opportunities abroad when few were 
available at home.  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  eurosystem  has  also  picked  up  the  pieces  on  the  downside:  stepping-in  to  fund  the 
liquidity deficit as the excessive bank borrowings from the global financial system drained out 
when  markets  lost  confidence  in  the  Irish  Government’s  capacity  to  both  bring  its  regular 
deficit under control and pay for the mounting losses of the banking system.  
Globalization  is  a  powerful  transmitter  of  economic  conditions  and  know-how,  facilitating 
convergence of living standards. It can also act as a buffer against specific national shocks. 
But,  amplified  by  globalization,  the  danger  of  the  anonymous  market  overshooting  is 
considerable.  National  governments  can  be  powerless  against  consequences  of  such 
overshooting.  Greater  explicit  mechanisms  of  external  discipline  and  co-insurance  at  the 
supranational level can help cope with these risks. For Ireland, the European Union already 
goes  some  distance  in  this  direction,  but  more  is  needed.  Regional  initiatives  in  Africa, 
including the NEPAD of the African Union and the East African Community are presumably 
best positioned to perform this function in relation to Tanzania.  
Like  Ireland,  Tanzania  too  has  the  potential  to  reap  the  macroeconomic  advantages  of 
globalization  to  speed  convergence  towards  better  living  standards  and  poverty  reduction. 
But policymakers will want to be on their guard against the risks of being turbocharged into 
unsustainable spending patterns. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
