Jean Boivin: The “Great” Recession in Canada – perception vs reality 
Remarks  by  Mr  Jean  Boivin,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  Montreal 
Chartered Financial Analyst (CFA) Society, Montreal, 28 March 2011. 
 Introduction 
I am very pleased to be able to deliver this speech today to the Montréal CFA Society – my 
first speech in Quebec as a Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada. As active stakeholders 
in the Quebec and Canadian economies, you are at the centre of the economic life of the 
country. Thus, I don’t have to tell you that the past few years have been challenging. 
Barely three years ago, the financial crisis was a source of major concern worldwide. This 
unprecedented event had serious and costly repercussions, which we continue to feel today.  
In  the  aftermath  of  the  crisis,  the  global  economy  entered  a  recession  that  we  can  rightly 
characterize as “great.” Economic activity in the G-7 countries dropped by more than 5 per 
cent.  According  to  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF),  the  number  of  unemployed 
persons  around  the  world  jumped  by  more  than  30  million,  most  of  them  from  advanced 
economies.1 This is a striking figure, especially when we think of it as almost equal to the 
entire population of Canada.  
The Canadian economy was not spared: It still faces major difficulties, and significant risks 
remain  on  the  road  ahead.  Yet,  it  is  also  true that  the  country’s  economic  prospects  have 
improved  since  the crisis,  as  we  see  in  Montréal,  which  has  enjoyed the  strongest  growth 
among  Canadian  urban  centres.  In  fact,  coming  out  of  the  recession,  Canada  is  a  leader 
among  the  G-7  countries.  Employment  and  economic  activity  have  surpassed  their  pre-
recession levels. In light of the progress we have made, we can now ask: What was the real 
extent of this recession? What are the lessons to be learned, and what are the implications 
for the future?  
The purpose of my speech today is to reflect on events that are still fresh in our minds. Let us 
remember, however, that the answers to these questions will become clearer over time, as 
new data and analysis become available.2 
The recession: first impressions 
At first glance, the answers seem simple. After all, a recession is defined as a generalized 
and  sustained  decrease  of  economic  activity,  of  which  the  broadest  measure  available  is 
GDP. It would then appear that our task is simply to measure the extent of the decrease in 
GDP during the most recent recession and then to compare this decrease with other, similar 
episodes in Canada, or elsewhere. Child’s play, you might think. 
This could be the first approach that our descendants – future economists, yet to be born, 
with no inkling of what we just lived through – would take: to study and compare economic 
cycles  in  Canada.  Examining  the  economy  from  this  angle,  they  would  observe  that  the 
recession  of  2007–09  did  not  seem  to  be  any  more  serious  than  previous  recessions  in 
Canada and that, in fact, it was much shorter (Chart 1). The behaviour of employment would 
                                                 
1   M. Dao et P. Loungani (2010), “The Human Cost of Recessions: Assessing It, Reducing It,” IMF Staff Position 
Note No. SPN/10/17, International Monetary Fund, 11 November. 
2   With  the  publication  of  the  national  accounts  for  the  first  quarter  of  2011,  scheduled  for  30  May,  Statistics 
Canada will begin a historical review of the past four years. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
seem  to  confirm  such  a  diagnosis:  employment  losses  were  much  less  serious  and, 
compared  with  other  recessions  of  the  past  30  years,  jobs  were  regained  much  sooner 
(Chart 2) 
But  any  diagnosis  based  on  a  narrow,  mechanistic  reading  of  statistical  measures  of 
economic activity could prove to be false, or at the very least, incomplete. If our descendants 
were open-minded enough, they might be led to examine  some of the headlines from this 
time: 
« L’Économie canadienne paralysée », La Presse, le 31 mai 2008 
“A Financial Drama with No Final Act in Sight,” New York Times, 14 September 2008 
« Nous sommes au milieu d’une crise grave », Le Droit, le 25 septembre 2008 
“It Couldn’t Get Worse, But It Did,” New York Times, 12 October 2008 
« L’économie canadienne s’atrophie encore », La Presse Affaires, le 2 mars 2009 
« Nous étions au bord de la catastrophe,» Le Devoir, le 18 juillet 2009 
On the basis of their preliminary diagnosis, our descendants might wonder what all the fuss 
was about. 
Let  us  hope,  however,  that  curiosity  spurs  these  future  economists  on  to  further  inquiry. 
Behind  this  first  impression  hides  a  much  more  complex  reality.  Canada’s  economy 
weathered a very violent storm, but thanks to wise precautions and appropriate navigation, it 
arrived safely in port, damaged perhaps, but still afloat.  
The global economy on the edge of the precipice 
But we cannot judge the severity of the storm on the basis of a safe arrival. Let’s go back to 
the autumn of 2008. Ministers of finance and central bank governors from around the world 
meet in Washington. The tension and anger in the air are palpable. After the credit bubble 
burst in August 2007, the financial crisis spread like wildfire. The liquidity crisis turned into a 
solvency crisis. In September 2008, the crisis worsened, and its effects were felt throughout 
the entire American financial system, triggering a series of events at breathtaking speed. In 
very short order, we witnessed the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers and the nationalization of 
Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac.3  The  contagion  then  spread  to  Europe,  where  key  British, 
German and Belgian banks were either nationalized or needed major bailouts. Stock markets 
registered their greatest drops in more than 75 years.  
The spectre of the Great Depression of the 1930s hovered on the horizon, reminding us that 
recessions  following  financial  crises  are  usually  longer  and  more  difficult  than  others  and 
leave behind indelible scars.4  
Implications for Canada 
Although Canada was not at the epicentre of the crisis, the contagion can spread through a 
number  of  transmission  channels.  The  financial  crisis  was  clearly  leading  to  a  massive 
                                                 
3   Officially, the Federal National Mortgage Association and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation. 
4  
In the decade following a financial crisis, growth of annual GDP is usually one percentage point lower, while 
the unemployment rate is  generally five  percentage points higher. See C. Reinhart and V. Reinhart (2010), 
“After  the  Fall,”  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  Working  Paper  No.  16334.  In  a  recent  study 
conducted with its international partners, the Bank estimated that the costs of a financial crisis for an economy 
represent  about  63  per  cent  of  GDP.  See  Strengthening  International  Capital  and  Liquidity  Standards:  A 
Macroeconomic Impact Assessment for Canada (Bank of Canada, 2010). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
slowdown  of  global  economic  activity,  with  a  direct  impact  on  foreign  trade.  Since  three-
quarters of our exports are destined for markets in the United States, experience taught us 
that when the United States sneezes, Canada catches a cold (Chart 3).  
Further,  with  the  increasing  integration  of  the  global  economy,  the  fates  of  national 
economies are much more closely interrelated, even more than might be expected based on 
the scale of our international trade.5 A global financial crisis, therefore, can affect Canada not 
only through international trade, but also by weakening financial markets, shaking consumer 
and  business  confidence,  and  postponing  capital  investments,  in  light  of  the  high  level  of 
uncertainty.6 
Phase one: sudden slowdown  
For  all  these  reasons,  the  financial  crisis  was  expected  to  have  a  significant  impact  in 
Canada, and for the first phase of the cycle, this was certainly the case. 
During the last recession, GDP declined by 3.3 per cent over three quarters. In contrast, over 
the same period of time in the 1980s and the 1990s, it fell by 2.2 per cent and 1.9 per cent, 
respectively 
A  prominent  feature  of  the  recent  recession  was  the  spectacular  drop  in  exports.  Exports 
were  harder  hit  than  in  any  previous  recession,  decreasing  by  16  per  cent  over  three 
quarters, while the most significant drop during the recessions of the 1980s and 1990s was 
only 8 per cent (Chart 4). 
Investments were equally hard hit by the recession. There was a 22 per cent downturn in 
investments over just three quarters (Chart 5). Nothing like this has ever been seen. It took 
two years during the 1980s recession, and three years during the 1990s recession, before a 
downturn of comparable magnitude was recorded. This recent decline in investment is partly 
due to the exceptionally high levels of uncertainty haunting the global economy. 
In sum, the recent recession was different from previous ones, owing to a more pronounced 
slowdown  triggered  by  unusually  steep  drops  in  exports  and  investment.  During  its  initial 
phase,  the  effects  of  the  crisis  in  Canada  –  albeit  to  a  somewhat  lesser  degree  –  were 
comparable  to  those  in  the  United  States  and  showed  real  signs  of  becoming  a  “Great 
Recession” (Chart 6). 
Phase two: rapid recovery 
Despite  the  rapid  slowdown,  the  recovery  was  faster  than  those  that  followed  previous 
recessions. Why? 
Neither exports nor investments can provide the answer. While GDP has recovered to pre-
recession  levels,  business  investment  and  exports  have  only  recovered  45  per  cent  and 
67 per cent, respectively, of the losses incurred during the recession. 
                                                 
5   Empirical studies show that the links between countries are particularly tight when countries simultaneously 
sustain the same shock. See, for example, J. Boivin and M. Giannoni, “Global Forces and Monetary Policy 
Effectiveness,”  in  International  Dimensions  of  Monetary  Policy,  J.  Gali  and  M.  Gertler  (eds.)  (Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press, 2008). 
6   Recent research at the Bank of Canada has empirically demonstrated that the financial channel plays a key 
role  in  the  transmission  of  shocks  originating  from  the  United  States.  See  K.  Beaton  and  B.  Desroches, 
“Financial  Spillovers  Across  Countries:  The  Case  of  Canada  and  the  United  States,”  Bank  of  Canada 
Discussion Paper No. 2011–1 (2011); and K. Beaton, R. Lalonde and S. Snudden, “The Propagation of U.S. 
Shocks  to  Canada:  Understanding  the  Role  of  Real-Financial  Linkages,”  Bank  of  Canada  Working  Paper 
No. 2010–40 (2010). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
If  the  recovery  was  speedier,  despite  weaker  contributions  from  investment  and  exports, 
support  for the  recovery  must  have  come  from  household  and  government  spending.  This 
was indeed the case. Household spending declined by only 2 per cent between 2009 and 
2010,  compared  with  6  per  cent  during  the  previous  two  recessions.  The  contribution  of 
government spending to growth was more than one percentage point in each year. 
The  greater  strength  of  household and  government  spending  reflects Canada’s  favourable 
position at the outset of the recession. Major adjustments had been made to the structure of 
the Canadian economy. Business and household balance sheets were relatively sound, and 
the  banking  system  was  robust,  managed  prudently,  and  sufficiently  capitalized.  Canada’s 
monetary  policy  framework  had  been  effective  and  was  credible.  The  fiscal  situation  was 
favourable,  and  the  social  safety  net  and  regulatory  framework  were  effective.  As  well, 
household  spending  was  boosted  by  the  prosperity  arising  from  strong  demand  for  our 
natural resources and by improved terms of trade.  
This favourable position gave Canada the flexibility it needed to respond strongly to the crisis 
without  compromising  the  credibility  of  our  public  policy  frameworks.  Thanks  to  the 
expansionary monetary  and fiscal measures adopted  in concert with other G-20 countries, 
Canada  was  able  to  support  domestic  demand  which  contributed  significantly  to  the 
economic recovery.  
Important lingering issues  
In Canada, then, we had room to manoeuvre to help us effectively absorb the aftershocks of 
the global economic crisis. It is essential to maintain this buffer in light of the elevated risks 
that still exist worldwide and the structural issues that persist in the Canadian economy, even 
after the recession. The standard of living that we will be able to sustain in the medium term 
will depend, in fact, on our ability to address these issues. 
Allow  me  to  address  three  of  these  issues:  household  indebtedness,  international 
competitiveness and, more importantly, our productivity.  
Household indebtedness  
Let us start with household debt. Since the beginning of the recovery, household credit has 
increased at twice the rate of personal disposable income. In the autumn of 2010, Canadian 
household  debt  climbed  to  an  unprecedented  level  of  147  per  cent  of  disposable  income 
(Chart 7).  
The  relatively  healthy  financial  condition  of  Canadian  households  at  the  beginning  of  the 
“Great” Recession helped the Canadian economy to better withstand the initial shocks of the 
crisis. However, going forward, it is essential to maintain the necessary room to manoeuvre 
to  keep  household  spending  on  a  viable  path.  This  leads  us  to  believe  that  the  rate  of 
household spending will more closely correspond to future earnings, and certain signs to that 
effect have already been observed. 
Canada’s international competitiveness 
The second issue is our ability to compete internationally. The slow recovery of exports is 
due  in  part to  the  sluggishness  of global  economic  activity.  It  is  also due  to  the continued 
erosion of Canadian business competitiveness over the past ten years. This erosion can be 
attributed  to  the  appreciation  of  the  Canadian  dollar  and  Canada’s  poor  productivity 
performance. Thus, Canadian exporters are seeing their market shares for a wide range of 
goods  drop  in  the  U.S.  market  –  by  far  the  most  important  market  for  Canada  –  while 
exporters in other countries, such as China and Mexico, are gaining ground (Chart 8). 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As  global  economic  growth  continues  to  take  root,  we  are  seeing  early  evidence  of  a 
recovery  in  net  exports.  But,  at  this  point,  exports  are  still  weak  when  compared  with 
previous  recessions.  And  in  a  world  of  growing  international  competition,  we  should  not 
assume that the forces causing the erosion of competitiveness through the previous decade 
will simply fade away because of a global recovery.  
This situation highlights the need to diversify our export markets and increase our ability to 
compete, not only with American producers, but also with other foreign exporters. 
Productivity and investment 
This brings us to the third issue. As I just discussed, international competitiveness is based 
on our ingenuity, the efficiency with which we produce, or, for short, productivity. But beyond 
its  influence  on  international  competitiveness,  productivity  is  a  fundamental  determinant  of 
our economic well-being. To improve productivity, we need investment. 
The  slow  recovery  of  investment  in  this  cycle  is  particularly  surprising  in  light  of  relatively 
favourable financial conditions: interest rates remain low, and the exchange rate facilitates 
imports of machinery and equipment.  
The elevated level of uncertainty experienced during the recession, especially from a global 
perspective,  was  a  major  hindrance  to  business  investment.  This  uncertainty  was  not 
confined to our borders: the link between uncertainty and business investment was clearly 
evident in the economies of the United States, Germany and the United Kingdom.7  
Yet  heightened  uncertainty  is  only  part  of  the  explanation.  Although  the  recession  in  the 
United  States  was  more  serious  and  Americans  faced  at  least  the  same  degree  of  global 
uncertainty as we experienced in Canada, Canadian business investment in machinery and 
equipment lags behind that of the United States (Chart 9). In 2009, Canadian workers had 
access,  on  average,  to  approximately  half  the  capital  expenditures  in  machinery  and 
equipment and information and communication technologies (ICT) of those available to their 
American  counterparts.  This  is  not  a  new  phenomenon.  In  fact,  between  1987  and  2009, 
Canadian  investment  in  machinery  and  equipment  and  ICT  per  worker  represented,  on 
average, 77 per cent and 59 per cent, respectively, of similar American investments.  
It is true that business investment started to recover at the end of 2009. Yet much progress 
remains  to  be  made:  less  than  half  of  the  extraordinary  drop  in  investments  of  the  last 
recession  have  been  recovered.  With  the  increasing  globalization  of  markets  and  the 
demographic  challenges  we  face,  maintaining  our  standard  of  living  will  require  improved 
productivity. We must continue to innovate and to invest in promising projects.  
Conclusion: perception vs. reality  
We are fond of repeating the old adage: “An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure.” 
Recent experience expands the notion and shows that good prevention measures can also 
make the cure more effective. Before the Great Recession, Canada was able to protect itself 
by ensuring that it had room to manoeuvre to absorb the shocks of the crisis. The lessons we 
learned  from  the  past were  reflected  in  the  adoption  of sound  public  policy  frameworks.  A 
                                                 
7   See  R.  Bachmann,  S.  Elstner  and  E.  Sims,  “Uncertainty  and  Economic  Activity:  Evidence  from  Business 
Survey  Data,”  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  Working  Paper  No.  16143  (2010);  N.  Bloom,  “The 
Impact of Uncertainty Shocks,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 13385 (2007); and 
N. Bloom, J. Van Reenen and S. Bond, “Uncertainty and Investment Dynamics,” National Bureau of Economic 
Research  Working  Paper  No.  12383  (2006).  Many  older  studies  on  this  issue  are  also  available.  See,  for 
example, B. S. Bernanke (1983), “Irreversibility, Uncertainty, and Cyclical Investment,” The Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 98 (1): 85–106. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
solid position, combined with the relatively healthy state of Canadian households, gave us 
the flexibility to withstand the worst effects of the global shock.  
Future  economists  studying  the  2007–09  recession  in  Canada  may  find  it  difficult  to  go 
beyond their first impressions and assess its true impact. Some will undoubtedly surmise that 
the economic activity of this time did indeed reflect, not only the extent of the shock, but also 
our ability to absorb it. The storm we weathered was a major one. We should not forget that it 
could have struck at a time when we were more vulnerable and less flexible. Things could 
have unfolded very differently, with disastrous results.  
It  is  some  comfort  to  know  that,  collectively,  we  were  able  to  limit  the  damage.  We  must 
proceed with the strategy that has served us so well: continue to learn from our experiences 
to ensure better prevention and, when necessary, a better cure. For this, we must strive to 
deal with the issues that confront us with strength and determination.  
Thank you.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  7
 8 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
 10 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
