Brian Wynter: The year ahead – the view from the bank 
Address by Mr Brian Wynter, Governor of the Bank of Jamaica, to the American Chamber of 
Commerce (AMCHAM) Forum, Kingston, 25 March 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen: 
For  as  long  as  most  of  us  can  remember,  Jamaica  has  been  hamstrung  by  persistent 
macroeconomic  problems.  They  are  well-known  but  they  bear  repetition:  low  GDP  growth, 
adverse  fiscal  and  debt  dynamics  and  the  related  unsustainable  imbalances.  These 
problems were exacerbated by the global economic and financial crises which commenced 
in 2008. In order to break this cycle, the country took some bold steps in 2010 which have so 
far resulted in successes in key performance indicators.  
In  January  2010,  the  Government  successfully  negotiated  the  Jamaica  Debt  Exchange 
(“JDX”) with local investors resulting in an astonishing rate of participation. This paved the 
way for the signing of a Stand-by Arrangement with the International Monetary Fund (“IMF-
SBA”) which entailed Jamaica giving a commitment to an economic path and a set of reforms 
that would establish and maintain the fundamentals that are conducive to sustainable growth 
and  development.  The  key  objectives  of  the  resulting  medium-term  programme  are  to  set 
Jamaica’s  debt  to  GDP  ratio  on  a  downward  trajectory,  entrench  fiscal  discipline  and 
accountability and raise the growth rate of real GDP. In this context, monetary policy is aimed 
at bringing inflation down to mid-single digit levels and maintaining it there for the medium-
term in the context of a flexible exchange rate.  
These  commitments  enabled  the  Government  to  access  unprecedented  levels  of  funding 
from the  multilateral financial institutions. A combined total of US$2.4  billion, amounting to 
about 20 per cent of GDP, is expected to be received by Jamaica over the programme’s two-
year period to provide budgetary support and meet balance of payments needs. 
So, what is the progress to date? Well, so far we have seen the materialisation of a number 
of the goals envisioned by the medium-term programme.  
It was envisioned that the fiscal policy strategy and the resulting stable medium-term outlook 
would  create  the  conditions  for  substantial  and  sustained  reductions  in  interest  rates.  This 
would  be  achieved  by  consolidating  public  finances  which  would  set  the  stage  for  lower 
deficits and progressively lower financing needs.  
And, indeed, this has been the result. 
For  fiscal  year  2011/12,  we  are  expecting  that  the  process  of  fiscal  consolidation  will 
continue. The Government has shown its commitment to this process by continuing to adjust 
expenditure  where  the  revenues  fall  below  budget.  Additionally,  the  Government  has 
demonstrated its commitment to fiscal transformation with the commencement of the phased 
implementation  of  the  Central  Treasury  Management  System,  which  will  result  in  more 
efficient management of public sector finances.  
The process to divest the Government of public bodies that are a drag on the budget has 
achieved major milestones and is continuing. With these developments, there is going to be 
a continuing decline in the fiscal deficit and the debt ratios. Lower demand for financing from 
the domestic market by the Government will continue to result in more and more resources 
being available for private sector credit.  
Repeated  success  in  meeting  the  quantitative  targets  under  the  IMF-SBA  has  led  to 
increasing  confidence  about  the  prospects  for  the  economy.  We  saw  this  in  the  strong 
preference for Jamaica Dollar assets during the fiscal year and the steady appreciation in the 
exchange  rate.  The  Bank  ended  2010  with  strong  net  international  reserves  (“NIR”)  of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
US$2.17 billion, an increase of US$442.1 million for the year. Gross international reserves, at 
US$2.98 billion, represented 23.7 weeks of projected goods and services imports. 
In the context of the relatively stable market conditions during the year, the Bank lowered the 
interest rate on its 30-day certificate of deposit by 375 basis points to 6.75 per cent by end-
February 2011. In addition, the Bank increased the pool of loanable funds in the system by 
reducing  the  cash  reserve  requirement  for  both  Jamaica  Dollar  and  foreign  currency 
deposits.  Market-determined  interest  rates  also  trended  down  during  the  year  at  a  faster 
pace than the Central Bank’s policy rate.  
Despite  emerging  challenges  from  rising  international  commodity  prices,  headline  inflation 
continued  its  progress  towards  the  achievement  of  the  target  for  the  fiscal  year  of  7.5  to 
9.5 per  cent.  STATIN  released  its  inflation  report  for  February  ten  days  ago  although  this 
may come as a surprise to you as the news media appear to have concluded that the results 
in the report are not sufficiently newsworthy to be reported in a timely manner. Interestingly, I 
read a statement in one of today’s newspapers that food prices rose by 25 per cent last year 
in an environment where the minimum wage is J$4,500 per week. Well, not exactly. In the 
same inflation report for February that was released by STATIN ten days ago, prices in the 
Food  category  recorded  an  increase  of  7.8  per  cent  for  the  12-month  period  ending  in 
February 2011.  
Headline inflation for the month of February was minus 0.4 per cent. With January’s decline 
of 0.2 per cent, inflation for the 11 months of the fiscal year-to-date is 6.7 per cent. It is now 
quite clear that the target for fiscal year 2010/11 is likely to be comfortably achieved. 
At the same time, there was a weaker than projected performance of the economy in terms 
of GDP growth last year. This came in the context of adverse local and international weather 
conditions (Tropical Storm Nicole, ash clouds in Europe) and the temporary fall-out that the 
economy experienced, particularly the tourism sector, from the disturbance in West Kingston 
in May. 
However, looking forward to the next 12 months, it is expected that with lower interest rates 
and  an  abundance  of  credit  resources  there  will  be  an  increase  in  investments  in  the 
productive  sectors  of  the  economy.  In  this  regard,  the  Central  Bank  is  projecting  gradual 
recovery  in  the  coming  fiscal  year with  GDP  growth  expected  to  be  in  the  range  of  1.0  to 
2.0 per  cent.  The  initiatives  being  spearheaded  by  the  Planning  Institute  of  Jamaica  to 
identify and synchronize high impact projects that enhance inner city communities, improve 
the  economic  infrastructure  and  protect  the  environment  should  result  in  a  further 
acceleration of growth as they come on stream.  
Ladies and gentlemen, interest rates in the money  market are now at  the lowest we have 
seen in several decades. This is not a phenomenon to pass over lightly. It has no doubt been 
brought about in part by the confidence exhibited by the multilateral financial institutions in 
Jamaica’s  economic  programme,  a  confidence  that  has  been  affirmed  by  the  credit  rating 
agencies. Of greater significance, confidence in the country’s economic prospects has been 
demonstrated by the willingness of local investors to accept lower and lower rates on their 
investments.  Foreign  investors  have  also  shared  this  optimism  by  their  overwhelming 
participation in the global bond that was offered in February. 
With  the  policies  that  were  undertaken  in  2010,  Jamaica  is  being  set  firmly  on  a  path  for 
sustainable growth and development. The on-going reforms in the financial sector will further 
increase its stability and soundness. Stable financial markets will reassure investors about 
the safety of their investments. Ladies and gentlemen, fiscal year 2011/12 is set to be a year 
of accelerated progress and I urge you to be a part of the change.  
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
