Philip Lowe: Changing relative prices and the structure of the Australian 
economy 
Address  by  Mr  Philip  Lowe,  Assistant  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  the 
Australian Industry Group 11th Annual Economic Forum, Sydney, 9 March 2011. 
 Thank  you  for  the  invitation  to  speak  again  at  the  Australian  Industry  Group’s  Annual 
Economic Forum. Over many years, Ai Group and its members have provided the Reserve 
Bank of Australia with valuable insight into the issues affecting firms and so it is a pleasure to 
be here this morning.  
The topic I would like to talk about is structural change in the Australian economy. For the 
Reserve Bank, understanding the various shifts that are going on in the industrial structure of 
the  country  is  important.  It  is  also  obviously  important  for  the  firms  that  are  living  through 
these changes and having to respond to them on a daily basis.  
I would like to focus on two aspects of the changes that are taking place.  
The first is the movement in relative prices that is occurring within the economy. The most 
obvious relative price that has shifted – and the one we have spoken most about – is the 
price  of  Australia’s  exports  relative  to  the  price  of  our  imports  –  what  economists  call  the 
“terms of trade”. With commodity prices having increased very substantially since the early 
2000s,  Australia’s  terms  of  trade  are  currently  around  their  highest  level  on  record  and 
around 90 per cent above their average level for the 1990s (Graph 1). But there are many 
other relative prices that are changing as well and I would like to touch on some of these this 
morning.  
Graph 1  
The  second,  and  obviously  related,  issue  is  how  these  changes  in  relative  prices  are 
affecting the current structure of the economy, and in particular how labour and capital are 
being allocated across different industries.  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Changing relative prices  
There are three broad sets of relative prices that I would like to draw your attention to:  
the price of manufactured goods relative to the price of other goods and services;  
 
the price of investment goods relative to output prices; and  
 
 
the price of labour relative to both the price of output and the price of consumption.  
Each of these sets of relative prices has been undergoing quite large changes over recent 
times,  with  these  changes  reflecting  the  combined  effects  of  high global  commodity  prices 
and the associated high level of the exchange rate.  
In terms of manufactured goods, it has been common worldwide for their prices to fall over 
time  relative  to  the  price  of  services.  This  is  the  result  of  faster  growth  in  productivity  in 
manufacturing  than  in  services,  as  well  as  globalisation.  This  long-term  trend  is  clearly 
evident  in  the  Australian  data,  but  over  recent  years,  as  the  Australian  dollar  has 
appreciated, the decline in the relative retail price of manufactured goods1 – many of which 
are  imported  –  has  been  particularly  pronounced  (Graph  2).  Indeed,  over  2010,  the 
difference in the CPI inflation rate for manufactured goods and the CPI inflation rate for other 
goods and services was larger than it has been at any time over the past two decades.  
Graph 2  
  Not  unexpectedly,  this  decline  in  the  relative  price  of  manufactured  goods  has  caught  the 
attention of the household sector. In consumer surveys, the number of people that say now is 
a  good  time  to  buy  major  household  items  is  around  its  highest  level  in  more  than  two 
decades  (Graph  3).  But  interestingly,  households  do  not  appear  to  have  responded 
particularly  strongly  to  this  fall  in  both  the  absolute  and  the  relative  price  of  manufactured 
goods,  with  retail  spending  having  been  quite  subdued  recently.  Many  households  have 
                                                 
1   “Manufactured  goods”  here  refers  to  clothing,  footwear,  furniture  &  floor  coverings,  motor  vehicles,  audio, 
visual and computing and similar items. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
preferred to use the growth in their incomes to increase their savings rather than to buy more 
manufactured goods at lower prices. As the Bank has discussed on a number of occasions 
recently, whether or not this continues will have a significant bearing on how the economy 
evolves over the next year or so.  
Graph 3  
  The current large change in relative prices is also making it more difficult for households to 
assess  the  rate  of  overall  inflation.  This  is  because  when  relative  consumer  prices  are 
moving a lot, the perceived inflation rate depends more than usual on the particular bundle of 
goods and services that one buys. Over the past year, people whose purchases are more 
tilted  towards  goods  will  have  experienced  a  lower  rate  of  inflation  than  those  whose 
purchases are tilted towards services and utilities. But, importantly, for the community as a 
whole, consumer prices have increased by 2.7 per cent over the past year, consistent with 
the medium-term inflation target.  
The second relative price that I mentioned is the price of investment goods relative to the 
price of output. When the price of machinery and equipment is cyclically low relative to the 
price of goods and services produced using those investment goods, investment tends to be 
high. And indeed this is what we have seen over the past 10 years in Australia.  
As  with  the  price  of  manufactured  consumer  goods,  there  is  a  clear  downward  trend  over 
time  in  the  relative  price  of  machinery  and  equipment  (Graph  4).  This  is  largely,  but  not 
solely, driven by technology improvements lowering the price of computing power. But again, 
just  as  is  the  case  for  consumer  goods,  the  decline in  the relative  price  of  machinery  and 
equipment has been unusually large over the past decade. The exchange rate has obviously 
played  an  important  role  here  as  well.  And  the  lower  prices  for  investment  goods  have 
helped make investment more attractive in a number of areas of the Australian economy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Graph 4  
   
The third set of relative prices that I would like to talk about are those that relate to the price 
of labour. For workers, what matters is the wage that is received relative to the price of the 
goods  and  services  that  they  purchase  –  the  so-called  real  consumption  wage.  For  firms, 
what matters is the wage they pay, relative to the price of the goods and services that they 
sell – the so-called real product wage. Normally, at least at the aggregate level, these two 
are  pretty  similar,  since  there  is  a  close  correspondence  between  the  goods  and  services 
that people buy and the goods and services that firms produce.  
Over recent years, however, this correspondence has broken down as the improvement in 
the terms of trade has increased the price at which aggregate output is sold relative to the 
price of consumption (Graph 5). Since 2000, the economy-wide real consumption wage has 
increased by around 25 per cent, which represents a substantial increase in the purchasing 
power of the average wage. In contrast, over the same period, the aggregate real producer 
wage has increased by only around 10 per cent. This relatively modest increase in the cost 
of hiring labour relative to the price at which aggregate output is sold has helped underpin 
strong  employment  growth.  It  has  also  contributed  to  an  increase  in  the  aggregate  profit 
share  of  national  output,  which  is  currently  around  its  highest  level  in  the  past  50  years 
(Graph 6). The relatively modest growth in the aggregate producer wage is also consistent 
with the slowing in aggregate labour productivity growth, as firms have been willing to hire 
more labour than would otherwise have been the case.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Graph 5  
 Graph 6  
  While  this  aggregate  picture  is  pretty  clear,  it  hides  very  significant  differences  across 
industries  (Graph  7).  These  differences  largely  arise  because  of  differences  in  productivity 
growth across industries as well as movements in world prices. In industries with relatively 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
fast productivity growth, real product wages tend to rise over time, as the productivity growth 
puts downward pressures on prices relative to wages. This is evident in the increase in real 
product  wages  in  the  manufacturing  sector.  In  contrast,  in  many  service  industries,  real 
product wages have moved broadly sideways. In these industries, labour is the main input 
and measured productivity growth has been slower, so output prices and labour costs have 
tended  to  move  broadly  in  line  with  one  another  over  the  past  decade.  It  is  in  the  mining 
sector where real product wages have fallen very significantly. While wage growth in mining 
has been above average for a number of years, the increase in commodity prices has been 
much  larger  due  to  development  in  world  markets.  The  result  has  been  a  substantial 
reduction in wages relative to prices for the mining sector.  
Graph 7  
The overall picture emerging from the various relative prices that I have talked about is one 
of significant change. And when relative prices change, the allocation of resources within the 
economy also changes. And it is to this issue that I would now like to turn.  
  Structural change 
Before looking at recent developments, it is useful to take a slightly longer-term perspective. 
In  an  article  published  in  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Bulletin  in  September  last  year,  two  of  my 
colleagues  looked  at  the  current  pace  of  structural  change  in  the  Australian  economy 
compared with that in the past.2 Their conclusion was that, with one notable exception, the 
rate of structural change is not especially high at present, although it is above average.  
                                                 
2   See  Connolly  and  Lewis  (2010),  “Structural  Change  in  the  Australian  Economy”,  RBA  Bulletin,  September, 
pp 1–5. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
One reason that they draw this conclusion can be seen in a long-run graph of employment 
shares by industry (Graph 8). In the middle decades of the twentieth century there was a lot 
of  structural  change  as  the  share  of  the  workforce  that  was  employed  in  the  agricultural 
sector declined as more capital-intensive farming techniques became widespread. And then 
in the decades following the 1960s, as average incomes rose and tariff barriers came down, 
there  was  a  very  marked  shift  to  employment  in  the  services  sector  and  away  from 
manufacturing.  Looking  at  this  long-run  record,  it  is  obvious  that  structural  change  is 
something that is occurring all the time and, at least in terms of the labour market, the current 
rate of change is not unusual. A similar conclusion is reached when we look at changes in 
the composition of real output.  
Graph 8  
   
The  notable  exception  to  this  general  picture  however  is  the  very  large  change  in  the 
composition  of  investment  in  the  economy.  Over  the  past  year,  investment  in  the  mining 
sector has accounted for almost 20 per cent of total investment in Australia (including both 
the  private  and  public  sectors),  which  is  much  higher  than  the  average  of  earlier  decades 
(Graph 9).  
Looking forward, the latest data from the Australian Bureau of Statistics on firms’ investment 
plans  suggest  that  further  very  large  increases  in  mining  investment  are  in  prospect 
(Graph 10).  Taken  literally,  these  data  imply  an  increase  in  investment  spending  in  the 
mining sector of over 50 per cent in 2011/12, from an already elevated level. The projected 
increases are particularly large in the gas and the iron ore sectors. If they were to occur, it 
would  mean  that  the  mining  sector  would  account  for  over  one  quarter  of  all  investment 
spending in Australia next financial year. This would be a remarkable change over a short 
period of time. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Graph 9  
 Graph 10  
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 8 
 The high price of resources is also leading to very strong employment growth in the mining 
sector, with total employment in the sector up by around 20 per cent in 2010. But while this is 
very fast growth, it is important to remember that the sector still only directly accounts for less 
than 2 per cent of the overall workforce in Australia.  
The main effects on employment of the resources boom are being felt elsewhere, particularly 
in  the  services  sector  where  the  vast  bulk  of  Australians  work.  These  indirect  effects  on 
employment  from  the  resources  boom  arise  through  two  main  channels:  one  operating 
through a demand effect as investment ramps up, and the other through an income effect.  
In  terms  of  demand,  the  improved  outlook  for  resource-sector  investment  has  increased 
demand  for  a  whole  range  of  ancillary  professional  services.  These  include  engineers, 
project managers, equipment lessors, lawyers, accountants, recruiters and IT specialists. As 
a result, employment in a number of these business services has grown strongly over recent 
years (Graph 11). In terms of the income effect, the higher prices we are receiving for our 
exports has delivered a tangible increase in national income. Over time, a substantial part of 
this will get spent. Right at the moment, spending on goods is relatively subdued, but with the 
population and aggregate incomes growing strongly, the demand for a range of services by 
households has also been growing strongly. As a result, employment growth in these areas 
has been robust.  
Graph 11  
  
In contrast to this relatively positive picture in a number of industries, the changes in relative 
prices that are occurring are contributing to subdued conditions in some other industries.  
One very clear example is domestic tourism. Since the mid 2000s, the total number of nights 
that Australians spend away from home in Australia has fallen by around 12 per cent, despite 
the population increasing by 10 per cent. The high value of the Australian dollar has lowered 
the relative price of overseas travel and Australians have responded by travelling abroad in 
ever  increasing  numbers.  Conversely,  as  Australia  has  become  a  more  expensive 
destination,  growth  in  overseas  arrivals  has  slowed  noticeably  (Graph  12).  Given  these 
trends, it is not surprising that the tourist industry’s share of total employment has fallen over 
the past decade.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Graph 12  
  Another  area  where  the  effects  of  the  changes  in  relative  prices  are  apparent  is  in  the 
composition  of  Australia’s  exports  (Graph  13).  During  the  1990s,  exports  of  manufactured 
goods  and  services  grew  strongly,  at  an  annual  rate  of  around  10 per cent.  Growth  then 
slowed  in  the  early  2000s  and  it  has  been  particularly  weak  over  recent  years.  This 
weakness has been quite broad based, with exports of machinery and equipment, beverages 
and transport services all falling over the past three years. While there are a range of factors 
that account for this, an important one is the higher exchange rate which has increased the 
price of domestically produced goods relative to world prices. As a result, in a number of the 
affected  sectors,  employment  growth  has  been  relatively  slow.  Conditions  have  also  been 
subdued  recently  in  the  retail  and  wholesale  sectors,  largely  reflecting  consumers’  more 
cautious approach to spending.  
Graph 13  
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 These various shifts in the economy are occurring at a time where there is little overall spare 
capacity. This is quite different to the situation prevailing over most of the past 40 years. At 
times  when  there  is  a  lot  of  spare  capacity,  all  sectors  can  grow  quite  quickly  without  the 
overall  economy  butting  up  against  capacity  constraints.  But  this  is  not  the  situation  we 
currently find ourselves in. Our favourable starting point means that faster-than-trend growth 
in some parts of the economy will inevitably be associated with slower-than-trend growth in 
other parts of the economy. And the movement in relative prices will be one of the factors 
that help determine which sectors grow more quickly than average, and which sectors grow 
more slowly than average.  
The  challenge  we  face  is  how  best  to  accommodate  these  changes,  and  to  capture  the 
considerable benefits that they can bring, while minimizing the costs that can arise when the 
structure of the economy is changing. This is no easy task. But it is surely a better challenge 
to  face  than  those  confronting  most  other  advanced  economies.  The  most  important 
contribution the Reserve Bank can make to this task is to keep inflation low and stable, so 
that firms can respond to the shift in relative prices without their decisions being distorted by 
concerns about inflation in the general level of prices. The inflation targeting regime that we 
have had for nearly two decades provides the right framework to do this.  
Finally, in thinking about the implications of the recent changes in relative prices an important 
consideration is how persistent they are likely to be. There would seem to be little benefit in 
changing the structure of the economy to reflect the new relative prices, only for the old set of 
relative  prices  to  reassert  themselves  quite  quickly.  As  the  Governor  noted  in  a  speech  a 
couple of weeks ago, we cannot be sure how long the current boom in the terms of trade will 
last. However, given that it is being driven by structural changes in the global economy, it is 
likely that commodity prices will be above their average over recent decades for some time 
yet. If this is the case, Australia will do very well. History, however, does suggest caution and 
we cannot be sure what the future will hold. The best way of dealing with this uncertainty is to 
make sure that the economy retains its flexibility to deal with whatever set of relative prices 
the global economy delivers us.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
