Philipp Hildebrand: The Swiss National Bank and the financial crisis 
Summary  of  a  speech  by  Mr  Philipp  Hildebrand,  Chairman  of  the  Governing  Board  of  the 
Swiss National Bank, at the Club of Rome Forum, Zurich, 20 January 2011. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website. 
 Since  August  2007,  central  banks  have  been  continually  at  work,  fighting  the  crisis.  They 
have had to stabilise the financial system and limit the extent of the economic downturn. 
In many countries, the repercussions of the financial crisis are reflected in both government 
finances  and  central  bank  balance  sheets.  In  Switzerland,  these  repercussions  –  i.e.  the 
costs  of  the  financial  crisis  –  have  had  relatively  little  impact  on  the  budgets  of  either  the 
Confederation or the cantons. The costs are mainly to be found in the SNB’s balance sheet, 
at the moment largely in the form of risks.  
The  SNB  balance  sheet  has  significantly  lengthened,  particularly  as  a  result  of  foreign 
currency  purchases.  Inevitably,  the  large  holdings  of  currency  investments  means  greater 
risk. As the SNB announced on 14 January 2011, it is expecting a substantial loss for the 
year  2010.  This  is  mainly  attributable  to  exchange  rate  losses  on  foreign  currency 
investments.  
In view of these losses, it is very tempting to argue that the SNB should not have purchased 
any foreign exchange. However, the purpose of the SNB is not to make a profit. The decision 
on  whether  monetary  policy  measures  in  the  form  of  foreign  currency  purchases  are 
necessary  is  based  on  an  evaluation  of  the  threat  of  deflation  and  the  monetary  policy 
expansion  needed  in  order  to  counter  this.  Monetary  policy  inaction  during  the  dramatic 
phases of 2009 and 2010 was not an option. 
The primacy of monetary policy applies, and the top priority of monetary policy is to ensure 
price  stability.  The  SNB’s  legal  mandate  is  explicit  in  this  regard.  This  is  the  contribution 
which the SNB can and must make to economic prosperity in this country. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
