DeLisle Worrell: The search for practical economics 
Remarks  by  Dr  DeLisle  Worrell,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Barbados,  at  the 
International  Monetary  Fund–Central  Bank  of  Barbados–University  of  the  West  Indies 
(IMF-CBB-UWI) conference, Bridgetown, 27 January 2011. 
 I begin this morning with a quote from Eric D. Beinhocker of the McKinsey Global Institute, 
London, from his 2007 book The Origin of Wealth: “As I write this, the field of economics is 
going through its most profound change in over a hundred years. I believe that this change 
represents  a  major  shift  in  the  intellectual  currents  of  the  world  that  will  have  substantial 
effects on our lives and the lives of generations to come. …just as biology became a true 
science in the twentieth century, so too will economics come into its own as a science in the 
twenty first century”.1 I am not as confident as is Beinhocker that change has begun to take 
root; I scan working papers from all the leading economic research institutes and university 
departments daily, and they are all comfortably situated in a conventional idiom of economic 
analysis. However, I do share his conviction that a change that goes to the foundations of our 
discipline appears to be needed, if economists are to have useful advice for policy makers 
about improving the performance of modern economies. The longer I stay in this business, 
the more I am disappointed by the disconnect between what economic analysis would seem 
to suggest, and what is practical and makes sense.2 
Clearly a conference such as the one we begin today cannot address the fundamentals of 
our discipline, but I believe it offers an opportunity which should not be missed, to explore 
needed changes in our approach to economic analysis. No doubt the revolution in economic 
thinking will come upon us, when and from what quarter we cannot tell; but in the meanwhile 
there  is  much  that  we  can  do,  as  economists,  to  improve  our  practices,  approaches  and 
techniques,  so  that  we  are  able  to  offer  usable  advice  on  economic  policy.  I  offer  an 
illustration  in  this  short  address,  of  what  might  be  called  “Practical  economics”,  meaning 
analysis that enlightens the decisions policy makers have to make. 
Let  me  begin  with  an  example  of  conventional  monetary  policy  analysis  and  advice  in 
Caribbean.  Conventional  economics,  reflected  for  example  in  the  IMF  Occasional  Paper 
“Monetary policy implementation at different stages of market development”,3 recommends 
that monetary policy is the tool that should be used to target inflation. How does that work in 
practice?  Say  the  inflation  forecast  is  8  percent,  and  that  policy  makers,  considering  this 
unacceptably  high,  choose  an  inflation  target  of  5  percent  maximum.  Conventional 
economics  would  recommend  that  the  central  bank  buy  treasury  bills,  with  an  expectation 
that  the  interest  rate  yield  curve  will  rise  over  its  entire  range,  the  supply  of  money  will 
decline, aggregate expenditure will contract, and therefore expected inflation will fall. 
In  practice  the  central  banker  needs  more  precise  information.  What  quantity  of  additional 
treasury  bills  should  the  central  bank  buy,  to  reduce  inflation  by  3  percentage  points?  To 
provide the answer, at a minimum, we need to know: 
1.  
How banks will react to the central bank’s purchase of additional T-bills. How much 
excess liquidity do they have? Would it be profitable for them to source additional 
liquidity  abroad,  as  domestic  interest  rates  rise?  Should  they  do  so,  would  the 
                                                 
1   Beinhocker,  Eric  D.  The  Origin  of  Wealth:  the  Radical  Remaking  of  Economics  and  What  it  Means  for 
Business and Society, Harvard Business School Press, 2006, 2007. 
2   See  my  address  to  the  Barbados  Economics  Society,  “What’s  wrong  with  economics”,  June  30,  2010, 
www.centralbank.org.bb. 
IMF, “Monetary policy implementation at different stages of market development”, October 2004, www.imf.org. 
3  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
2.  
3. 
4.  
5.  
exchange  rate  tend  to  appreciate?  Would  banks  be  inclined  to  change  domestic 
deposit or loan rates? 
Whether,  when  and  how  will  interest  rates  rise?  Will  rates  rise  all  along  the  yield 
curve?  What  lag  can  be  expected?  Will  rates  increase  on  both  sides  of  banks’ 
balance sheets? Will the spread narrow, widen or stay the same? 
If the T-bill purchases do result in interest rate increases, by how much will banks 
adjust their holdings of cash and liquid items? 
Will there be any adjustment in loans, and if so, how large an adjustment? 
Will there be any cut in aggregate expenditure, as a result either of an increase in 
loan rates (if they increase) or a reduction in loan supply (if there is a reduction)? If 
so, what is the elasticity of response? 
Unfortunately, we can seldom offer a definitive answer to these questions. As a result, the 
analysis  of  monetary  policy  in  central  bank  reports,  and  in  the  economic  media,  seems 
curiously incomplete. They describe what has been done with interest rates and open market 
operations, and what, if anything, has happened to bank liquidity, but they never bring the 
story to a conclusion, to say what effect policy actions have had on output or inflation, even 
in the broadest terms. We simply do not have the information we would need to make such 
an assessment. 
Does that mean we are in a hopeless situation, and that we can do nothing to stabilise the 
economies  of  small  open  economies?  I  do  not  think  so.  However,  the  search  for  practical 
advice,  advice  that  a  policy  maker  can  actually  put  into  practice  and  measure  its  impact, 
takes  us  beyond  conventional  economics.  To  begin  with,  the  policy  objective  of  choice 
should  be  economic  stabilisation,  not  inflation  control.  Policy  makers  need  to  choose  as 
target  a  variable  over  which  they  can  have  some  control.  We  cannot  target  inflation  at 
5 percent  if  80  percent  of  that  inflation  is  imported  from  abroad,  and  import  prices  rise 
10 percent. Whatever our policy, domestic prices are going to rise at least 8 percent. A more 
useful  objective,  in  the  open  economy,  is  to  stabilise  external  payments  and  receipts,  and 
maintain a level of foreign exchange reserves which market agents find to be adequate. That 
creates a stable environment for business and investment planning, and is therefore the best 
platform for sustained economic growth. As a result, this is an objective which resonates with 
the  companies  and  households  whose  collective  decisions  will  result  in  the  outcome  of 
whatever policy is chosen. Practical policy requires us to start with this objective, and to find 
the economic policies that may be employed to achieve it. 
What might these policies be? 
First, are there any policies that might significantly increase foreign exchange earnings in the 
near term? The answer is, not really. The only way to increase foreign currency inflows in the 
short run is by borrowing, attracting foreign direct investment, or selling assets to foreigners. 
Each of these implies higher commitments of foreign payments in the future, which means 
that  the  limits  on  capital  inflows  are  first,  the  supply  of  foreign  finance  and  secondly,  the 
capacity for future debt service. 
The policy maker’s challenge then boils down to this: how can expenditures on imports and 
other foreign currency spending be brought down to the level of available foreign currency 
inflows?  In  economies  like  the  US  or  Brazil,  which  produce  practically  everything 
domestically,  it  may  be  possible  to  persuade  consumers  to  switch  from  imported  to 
domestically produced items by depreciating the exchange rate or imposing a tariff. In the 
Caribbean, that option is not available, because we produce only a handful of consumption 
items  competitively,  and  most  of  those  would  become  more  expensive  with  currency 
depreciation,  because  of  their  import  content.  The  Caribbean  policy  maker  has  only  one 
option  for  reducing  spending  on  foreign  exchange,  and  that  is  to  reduce  spending  on 
everything.  To  stabilise  these  small  open  economies  one  has  to  cut  expenditure  in  the 
aggregate. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The tools available to reduce aggregate spending are all fiscal, and what is needed, in the 
end,  is  a  reduction  in  the  fiscal  deficit.  Most  of  us,  even  those  who  remain  wedded  to 
conventional  economic  analysis,  will  be  in  sympathy  with  this  conclusion.  However,  the 
conventional  story,  with  its  armoury  of  money  supplies,  excess  liquidity,  real  effective 
exchange rates, core and headline inflation, etc, obscures the fundamental link between the 
fiscal deficit, external balances and foreign reserve adequacy. That linkage is what makes for 
the  success  of  stabilisation  policy.  It  may  be  employed  to  estimate  the  amount  of  fiscal 
adjustment needed for economic stabilisation, and equally importantly, to track the success 
of the fiscal adjustment measures, as they are reflected in the evolution of foreign exchange 
reserves. 
May I therefore take this opportunity to appeal for a practical approach to economics, one 
that 
1.  
Is based on careful measurement and observation of actual economic transactions 
and behaviour, even if that means we must rethink our prior notions; 
Uses a variety of methodological approaches in the effort to understand better how 
our economies work; 
Is sufficiently easy to understand and explain to economic agents whose decisions 
ultimately determine the success of policy; 
Provides useable guidance about the magnitude of the policy adjustment that may 
be necessary. 
2.  
3.  
4.  
In a paper on fiscal sustainability that my colleagues Anton Belgrave, Jason LaCorbiniere, 
Denisa Applewhaite and I will present at this conference, we provide an example economic 
analysis which we believe is practical in this sense. In the panel discussion tomorrow I hope 
we can explore this question more fully.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
