Mark Carney: Summary of the latest Monetary Policy Report 
Opening  statement  by  Mr  Mark  Carney,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  press 
conference following the release of the Monetary Policy Report, Ottawa, 13 April 2011. 
 Good morning. Tiff and I are pleased to be here with you today to discuss the April Monetary 
Policy Report, which the Bank published this morning.  
 
As  anticipated  in  January,  the  global  economic  recovery  is  becoming  more  firmly 
entrenched and is expected to continue at a steady pace.  
In the United States, growth is solidifying, although consolidation of household and, 
ultimately, government balance sheets will limit the pace of the expansion.  
European  growth  has  strengthened,  despite  ongoing  sovereign  debt  and  banking 
challenges in the periphery. The disasters that struck Japan in March will severely 
affect its economic activity in the first half of this year. The resulting disruptions to 
global supply chains are projected to reduce the growth in the Canadian economy in 
this  quarter  by  about  half  of  a  percentage  point,  with  that  lost  activity  likely  to  be 
recovered in subsequent quarters.  
Robust demand from emerging-market economies is driving the underlying strength 
in commodity prices, which is being further reinforced by supply shocks arising from 
recent geopolitical events. These price increases, combined with persistent excess 
demand  conditions  in  major  EMEs,  are  contributing  to  broader  global  inflationary 
pressures.  Despite  the  significant  challenges  that  weigh  on  the  global  outlook, 
financial conditions remain very stimulative and investors have become noticeably 
less risk averse.  
In  Canada,  recent  economic  activity  has  been  stronger  than  anticipated,  although 
the  profile  is  largely  consistent  with  the  underlying  dynamics  outlined  in  January. 
Aggregate demand is rebalancing toward business investment and net exports, and 
away from government and household expenditures.  
As in January, the Bank expects business investment to continue to rise rapidly and 
the  growth  of  consumer  spending  to  evolve  broadly  in  line  with  that  of  personal 
disposable income, although higher terms of trade and wealth are likely to support a 
slightly stronger profile for household expenditures than previously projected.  
In contrast, the improvement in net exports is expected to be further restrained by 
ongoing  competitiveness  challenges,  including  headwinds  from  the  persistent 
strength in the Canadian dollar.  
Overall, the Bank projects that the economy will expand by 2.9 per cent in 2011 and 
2.6 per cent in 2012. Growth in 2013 is expected to equal that of potential output, at 
2.1 per cent. The Bank expects that the economy will return to capacity in the middle 
of 2012, two quarters earlier than had been projected in January.  
While underlying inflation is subdued, a number of temporary factors will boost total 
CPI  inflation  to  around  3  per  cent  in  the  second  quarter  of  2011  before  total  CPI 
inflation converges to the 2 per cent target by the middle of 2012. This short-term 
volatility  reflects  the  impact  of  recent  sharp  increases  in  energy  prices  and  the 
ongoing boost from changes in provincial indirect taxes.  
Core inflation has fallen further in recent months, in part due to temporary factors. It 
is expected to rise gradually to 2 per cent by the middle of 2012 as excess supply in 
         BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
    the  economy  is  slowly  absorbed,  labour  compensation  growth  stays  modest, 
productivity recovers, and inflation expectations remain well-anchored.  
The persistent strength of the Canadian dollar could create even greater headwinds 
for  the  Canadian  economy,  putting  additional  downward  pressure  on  inflation 
through weaker-than-expected net exports and larger declines in import prices.  
An  additional  downside  risk  to  inflation  in  Canada  relates  to  household  spending, 
which  could  be  weaker  than  projected,  given  high  household  debt  levels.  On  the 
upside, commodity prices and global inflation could rise faster than anticipated and 
there could be stronger-than-expected momentum in household expenditures.  
Overall,  the  Bank  judges  the  risks  to  the  Canadian  inflation  outlook  are  roughly 
balanced over the projection horizon.  
Reflecting all of these factors, the Bank decided yesterday to maintain the target for 
the  overnight  rate  at  1  per  cent.  This  leaves  considerable  monetary  stimulus  in 
place, consistent with achieving the 2 per cent inflation target in an environment of 
material excess supply in Canada. Any further reduction in monetary policy stimulus 
would need to be carefully considered.  
With that, Tiff and I would be pleased to take your questions. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
