Dejan Šoškić: Financial literacy and financial stability 
Keynote speech by Mr Dejan Šoškić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, at the Bank of 
Albania 9th International Conference “Building our future through financial literacy”, Tirana, 
15 September 2011. 
 Honorable Governor Fullani, Excellencies, distinguished participants and guests, 
It  is  my  great  pleasure  to  greet  you  all  at  the  9th  International  Conference  on  Financial 
Literacy, here in Albania, on behalf of the National Bank of Serbia. I would like to thank our 
host for giving me the opportunity to be the keynote speaker on such an important issue, not 
only for the region of Southeast Europe but worldwide. 
Although  financial  literacy  has  been  a  concern  and  policy  priority  for  some  years  now  in 
many  countries,  it  was  the  financial  crisis  that  additionally  propelled  the  issue  into  the 
limelight. With the rapid credit expansion experienced throughout the global financial system 
and  to  a  certain  extent  in  Southeast  Europe  (SEE)  over  the  past  decade,  it  is  hardly 
surprising that the importance of financial literacy has become exposed and painfully vivid. 
The  increased  availability  and  complexity  of  financial  products  have  highlighted  the 
worryingly low levels of financial literacy of the general public. In order to provide efficient, 
stable and sound financial markets that offer quality financial services, we have to offer and 
ensure  financial  education  for  all  financial  market  participants  on  various  levels  and  in 
various points in their personal and professional development. 
It is not by chance that teaching experts know that by learning early we know better, and that 
by knowing deeper we know forever. 
Financial  literacy  is  the  ability  to  understand  finance.  More  specifically,  it  refers  to  the 
acquired  financial  skills  and  knowledge  that  allow  us  to  make  informed  and  effective 
decisions  through  our  understanding  of  finance.  Such  an  approach  extends  this  concept 
beyond  households  and  corporates  to  existing  and  potential  investors.  Although  the 
expanding financial crisis does not stem from a single cause, the role of financial literacy, or 
rather  lack  of  it,  has  been  evident.  Yes,  the  crisis  was  to  a  large  extent  caused  by  the 
combination of the risky and less than proper actions and decisions by various stakeholders; 
including financial institutions, experts and sometimes regulators who unquestionably carry 
most  of  the  responsibility.  But  the  lack  of  understanding  of  households  on  financial  issues 
and,  in  particular,  on  credit  and  investment,  has  also  played  a  major  role.  As  a  result, 
individuals have accepted (sometimes unknowingly) to support more financial risks than they 
could afford. 
That is precisely why it is never too early to start learning basic concepts in finance and why 
it  is  never  too  late  to  revisit  the  fundamentals  and  increase  and  deepen  the  body  of 
knowledge in finance.  
We should never neglect the importance of basic individual level of understanding financial 
issues, knowledge on how to appropriately manage one’s budget and personal/households’ 
wealth. This is important in the short and medium but especially in the long term, and has 
become an essential asset for financial stability. 
Greed needs to be contained by understanding.  
Financial industry professionals need to be aware of the risks the products carry and be able 
to  explain  their  services  to  the  customers.  Financial  literacy  is  being  increasingly 
acknowledged  as  an  important  pillar  of  a  sound  financial  regulatory  and  supervisory 
framework on the global scene and a critical component of economic and financial stability 
and development. Additionally, in order for the financial products on offer to be fully utilized 
and sustainably increase the wealth of a society it is essential that both professionals in the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
industry and consumers (corporate and households) have full knowledge and understanding 
about financial products they consume and potential risks they can be submitted to. 
Basic  financial  literacy  is  a  key  component  of  rational  decision  making  in  finance.  The 
fundamental concepts need to be widely understood, like: time value of money, flexibility of 
annuities payments design, importance of maturity in calculating the overall cost of credit… 
to  name  just  a  few.  In  addition,  it  is  important  to  have  clear  understanding  of  a  bit  more 
complex matters, like: flexible and fixed interest rates and the importance of interest rate risk, 
what an FX clause means for an unhedged borrower and what the importance of FX risk is, 
what EURIBOR/LIBOR and other reference rates are and how they can move through time… 
again to name just a few. If we provide wide understanding of these concepts and combine 
them  with  legislation  on  consumer  protection  of  financial  products,  we  have  done  a  lot  in 
preventing  future  excessive  credit  growth,  potential  asset  price  bubbles  and  undesirable 
movement in nonperforming loans. And this is in the interest not just to the regulators and 
consumers  of  financial  products,  but  to  the  banking  industry  and  sustainable  economic 
growth of our economies. 
It  is  also  important  to  underline  that  financial  literacy  can  support  the  overall  efforts  to 
decrease tax evasion and legalize most of the economic activities in the country. This is an 
important issue not just for the SEE countries but elsewhere as well, especially in the context 
of increasing budget deficits and diminishing growth rates in many countries.  
 What is sometimes forgotten in SEE is that a solid basis for loan qualification is and should 
be  exclusively  past  and  expected  fully  declared  net-income  both  for  companies  and  for 
individuals.  This  can  be  vital  information  for  loan  approval  and  interest  rate  pricing.  By 
increasing  financial  literacy  of  potential  financial  products  consumers  in  this  area,  we  can 
significantly influence the decrease of so called “gray economy” with a positive impact on tax 
collection, budget deficit and accuracy of economic data in the system, and therefore, future 
efficiency  of  economic  policies.  That  is  why  it  is  very  important  in  this  respect  as  well,  to 
increase  financial  literacy  so  as  to  make  people  fully  understand  and  realize  that  fully 
declared  and  legal  cash-flow  is  a  primary  prerequisite  for  individuals  and  companies  to 
successfully qualify for banking loans. 
Another, similar aspect is making people fully understand the role and significance of credit 
bureaus.  By  obtaining  information  from  credit  bureaus  on  total  borrowing  and  bill  paying 
habits for corporate and individuals, lenders can obviously better assess credit worthiness of 
a potential borrower. This can in turn influence the decision to lend or not to lend, and can 
affect  the  interest  rate  and  other  terms  of  a  loan.  Consumers  must  be  aware  that  interest 
rates are not the same for everyone, and are, as a rule, determined by risk-based pricing. 
Obviously, highly leveraged consumers with poor credit repayment histories will pay a higher 
annual interest rate than consumers with lower overall debt and good payment habits. Full 
awareness of these simple rules in finance and maintenance of good credit profile in a credit 
bureau can potentially decrease the overall leverage in the economy, keep the NPLs under 
control, help avoid the creation of asset bubbles and avoid unnecessary overdue payments 
court procedures. Again, financial literacy in this domain can protect both the lenders and the 
consumers, avoiding unnecessary shocks to the financial systems as a whole. 
Closely  related  is  understanding  the  importance  of  full  legalization  and  registration  of  real 
estate  properties  as  a  common  collateral  for  mortgage  lending.  Again,  this  is  an  area  that 
should  be  very  important  for  financial  literacy  and  education  providers.  The  task  is 
particularly  vital  in  SEE  and  other  transition  and  post-transition  countries  where  public 
awareness of the importance of registering real estate is not so developed in comparison to 
the rest of Europe and developed world economies. 
Lack  of  understanding  and  the  significance  of  real-estate  registration,  can  have  serious 
economic  repercussions;  most  importantly,  the  inability  to  guarantee  any  obligations  with 
one’s property. This would pose a particular problem for enterprises as loans are, in most 
cases, one of the most crucial sources of financing. The existence of a means of guarantee 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
would put the enterprises into a better negotiating position, when considering credit contract 
conditions, as they can offer concrete collateral. In circumstances where there are no means 
or  possibilities  of  land  registration,  or  a  way  for  creditors  to  register  their  mortgage  rights, 
credit becomes a very risky transaction in which the lender claims much higher interest rates 
if  he  decides  to  lend  at  all.  Developed  land  registry  systems  should  provide  for  “cheaper” 
credit for enterprises and consumers. Real estate registration also has consequences with 
regards  to  financial  reporting.  If  one  enterprise  has  registered  real  estate  property,  its 
balance sheet will improve and so will their chances to provide adequate financing. From a 
historical perspective, it was not by chance that successful empires throughout history often 
had  well-developed  land  registry  systems.  A  sophisticated  land  registry  system  improves 
legal security of property rights and thus improves the basis for finance and market economy. 
If we consider the relevant publications that take into account assessments of the South-East 
European  region,  we  can  see  that  one  of  the  most  exploited  subjects  lately  has  been  the 
region’s exposure to foreign currency lending. As interest rate differentials across currencies 
during  the  last  decade  have  been  considerable,  and  the  region  is  mostly  export-oriented 
towards the Euro zone, it may appear that efforts of market participants’ education on such 
issues as risks linked to currency mismatch and existence of hedging instruments are long 
overdue. This is especially important for the corporate and small business sectors that have 
the  ability  to  access  a  wide  range  of  instruments  (such  as  futures,  forwards,  options  and 
swap contracts) that may serve as protective tools, especially during these turbulent times 
with  rapid  changes  in  international  markets.  Furthermore,  our  corporate  sector  needs  to 
know that FX hedging instruments serve to insure oneself against exchange rate volatility in 
either direction. Just as importers may use forwards to buy foreign exchange, exporters may 
use them to buy their own currency. Indirect consequences have given us a signal that these 
efforts need to be focused towards banking sector as well. Although with the introduction of 
Basel  II  we  should  be  aware  that  sometimes  it  can  be  pro-cyclical  and  short-sighted.  The 
harm  to  financial  stability  of  the  systems  that  may  arise  from  such  behaviour  of  market 
participants  especially  during  “downturn”  phases  of  the  business  cycle,  if  not  properly 
communicated  and  managed,  may  instigate  systemic  risk  that  could  to  a  certain  extent 
potentially backfire on financial institutions. 
Even  if  we  look  at  the  United  States,  we  can  say  that  the  sub-prime  mortgage  crisis  was 
primarily  the  result  of  poor  risk  management  and  misled  selling  practices  by  lenders  and 
financial  institutions,  in  a  context  of  real  estate  overvaluation  and  lax  monetary  policy  and 
regulatory  oversight  in  the  financial  sector.  However,  the  development  of  a  speculative 
bubble and its subsequent shattering happened also due to the reckless financial behaviour 
of  households,  including  the  most  vulnerable  ones  who  contracted  mortgages  they  should 
not  have  subscribed  to,  considering  their  financial  circumstances.  In  fact,  individuals  were 
often  not  aware  of  the  risks  they  were  exposed  to  and  did  not  understand  the  terms  and 
conditions of the mortgages they purchased, which often resulted in significant increases in 
their monthly payments over time. They either relied on the limited and incomplete financial 
advice from relatives or sometimes less than honest lenders in the form of mortgage brokers, 
or even sheepishly followed the less than responsible behaviour of others. In this respect, 
higher  levels  of  understanding  of  financial  products  may  have  helped  these  individuals 
consider more accurately the risks and conditions of the credit products they were buying. 
Additionally, this process was further emphasized by the loosened and remote link between 
households  and  banks,  or  poorly  regulated  financial  institutions.  Concerned  financial 
providers  did  not  price  appropriately  and  assess  the  risks  of  default,  partly  owing  to  the 
possibility of transferring this risk to other institutions through various types of securitization: 
mortgage  backed  securities,  collateralized  debt  obligations  and  other  kinds  of  securitized 
products.  
Credit  rating  agencies  played  an  important  role  at  various  stages  in  the  sub-prime  crisis. 
They  have  been  highly  criticized  for  understating  the  risk  involved  with  new,  complex 
securities that fuelled the United States housing bubble such as mortgage-backed securities 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
(MBS)  and  collateralized  debt  obligations  (CDO).The  Financial  Crisis  Inquiry  Commission 
reported  in  January  2011  that:  "The  three  credit  rating  agencies  were  key  enablers  of  the 
financial meltdown.” The mortgage-related securities at the heart of the crisis could not have 
been marketed and sold without their seal of approval. Investors relied on them, often blindly. 
In  some  cases,  they  were  obligated  to  use  them,  and  regulatory  capital  standards  were 
hinged  on  them.  This  crisis  could  not  have  happened  without  the  rating  agencies.  Their 
ratings helped the market soar and their downgrades through 2007 and 2008 wreaked havoc 
across markets and firms. 
Only if there was a wide-spread understanding that credit rating is just a professional opinion 
which can be, and sometimes is, wrong! 
Learning from the bad experiences of the large-scale crisis, our main job as central banks 
and  educators  will  be  to  explain  to  the  investors  that  the  primary  role  of  the  credit  rating 
agencies  is  to  give  an  opinion  and  direction  on  the  creditworthiness  of  a  debt  issued  or 
issuer.  The  rating  does  not  provide  complete  guidance  on  other  aspects  essential  for 
investment decisions, such as market liquidity or price volatility. Accordingly, as we are all 
aware, bonds with the same rating may have very different market prices. Despite this fact, 
and even though each rating agency has its own rating methodologies and scales, market 
participants  have  often  treated  similarly  rated  securities  as  generally  the  same.  Our  job  is 
also to underline the responsibility of the investors in estimating the risk exposure of the debt 
issue.  Furthermore,  we  should  direct  and  highlight  to  the  professional  investors  the 
importance of developing their own risk management function, not solely taking into account 
the opinion of the rating agency, but going deeper and fully understanding underlying assets 
and risks. 
Long periods of rapid economic growth worldwide resulted in the narrowing of focus towards 
high financial gains – circumstances which gave the potential to constantly create new types 
of hybrid financial instruments that majority of the market did not fully understand – in some 
cases, not even the sophisticated financial analysts and not even the regulators themselves. 
More importantly, the instruments were sometimes not completely and clearly understood by 
the institutions that we have all looked to for proper interpretation – the rating agencies. The 
primary lesson of this crisis is that we can no longer rely on other market participants, and we 
must both individually and on national level invest significantly in financial education. In an 
increasingly globalized world, the possibility for localized problem solving becomes more and 
more difficult and we must put additional effort on taking pre-emptive action in the future. The 
experience has taught us that efficiency and effectiveness of measures that are justified by 
future  possible  outcomes  is  only  productive  when  communicated  with  well-informed  and 
properly educated market participants. 
Financial  institutions  should  have  a  responsibility  to  provide  clients  with  information  that 
clearly and accurately represents the terms and conditions associated with the products they 
offer. For example, effective interest rate (EIR) should allow consumers of financial services 
to find out the actual cost of a financial product. On macroeconomic level effective interest 
rate is important to provide efficient allocation of money and capital. The task of a loan officer 
has  to  be  to  explain  to  the  consumer  that  EIR  includes  all  the  credit  payments  and  costs 
payable by the financial services consumer (e.g. interest, fees, taxes) and/or benefits to be 
received  by  the  consumer  (interest  and  other  unconditional  benefits)  and  costs  relating  to 
ancillary  services  which  are  prerequisite  for  the  use  of  financial  service  or  for  its  use  in  a 
specific  manner  (e.g.  costs  of  life  assurance,  property  and  personal  insurance).  Thus, 
financial  education  can  serve  to  augment  and  strengthen  consumer  protection  but  also  to 
enable more effective allocation of money and capital on macroeconomic level. Financially 
educated consumers are in a better position to protect themselves on their own and to report 
possible  misconducts  by  financial  institutions  to  the  authorities.  Consumer  protection  and 
financial  education  share  many  of  the  same  goals  but  each  takes  a  somewhat  different 
approach.  Both  financial  education  and  consumer  protection  have  as  aims  to  ensure  the 
well-being of consumers and to shield them from misconduct. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The National Bank of Serbia has been addressing the need to expand activities in the field of 
financial education and financial consumer protection since 2005. At the beginning of 2011 
the NBS introduced the Law on Financial Consumers Protection. This Law is prescribed not 
only  in  line  with  EU  Directive  48/2008  relating  to  Consumer  Credit,  but  includes  a  wider 
range of financial products, because our intention was to cover all kind of banking services: 
loans including mortgages, deposits, accounts, debit and credit cards etc. The purpose was 
to ensure maximum protection of financial consumers in Serbia. 
The NBS has been actively promoting consumer education and financial literacy training and 
programmes over the years. We are now in the process of introducing a Financial Education 
Strategy of the NBS (2011–2015) not only in order to improve our activities in this field, but 
also to provide a more adequate way for our citizens, entrepreneurs, farmers, schoolchildren, 
and students to obtain information that are of significance for them both currently and in the 
future. Bearing in mind that consumer protection has a reactive function – the actual problem 
has already taken place when the consumer is asking for help – we are aiming to place the 
main emphasis on financial education, especially of schoolchildren, with the aim of having a 
financially literate population in 5, 10 or 15 years. Our overall aim however remains the need 
for all the participants in the financial market to be financially literate. We intend to initiate the 
creation  of  a  National  Strategy  for  Financial  Education  as  a  necessary  complement  to  a 
sound  financial  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework.  In  doing  so,  we  should  favour  and 
promote  the  establishment  of  coordinated  public-private  partnerships.  All  stakeholders 
should  be  encouraged  to  consider  and  implement  international  principles,  guidelines  and 
good  practices  developed  by  the  OECD  and  the  International  Network  for  Financial 
Education (INFE) in the financial education field. 
It is not possible to overestimate the importance of financial literacy and financial education. 
Literacy and education are the essence of building confidence. Without confidence there is 
no  financial  stability.  Persistence,  systematical  and  inclusive  approach,  innovative,  user-
friendly and technologically advanced methods used – all of these should be the properties 
of a far-reaching, effective and long run effort in financial literacy and education. As some 
wise people rightfully noted: it might be costly but undoubtedly priceless.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
