Lars E O Svensson: For a better monetary policy – focus on inflation and 
unemployment 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  E  O  Svensson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  Luleå 
University of Technology, Luleå, 8 March 2011. 
 The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily shared by the other members of the Executive 
Board  of  the  Riksbank  or  the  Riksbank’s  staff.  I  would  like  to  thank  Joanna  Gerwin,  Karolina  Ekholm,  Pernilla 
Meyersson,  Marianne  Nessén,  Lars  Nyberg,  Stefan  Palmqvist,  Cecilia  Roos-Isaksson,  Ulf  Söderström  and 
Staffan Viotti for our discussions and their views. Hanna Armelius, Hans Dellmo, Lina Majtorp and Pernilla Wasén 
have contributed to this speech. 
Sweden’s economy has grown dramatically following a severe downturn (Figure 1). GDP is 
now more or less back to the level it was at three years ago (Figure 2). Since the summer of 
2010, the majority on the Executive Board of the Riksbank has tightened monetary policy by 
raising the repo rate. According to the Riksbank’s forecasts for the years ahead, CPI inflation 
will be higher than the target of 2 per cent over the next few years (Figure 3). However, the 
fact  that  CPI  inflation  is  higher  than  the  target  is  due  to  the  Riksbank’s  own  repo-rate 
increases. If we instead measure inflation using the CPIF index, which adjusts for the effects 
of these repo-rate increases, the forecast is on average lower than 2 per cent. The rate of 
unemployment will also continue to be high in the years ahead (Figure 4). Is increasing the 
repo rate and tightening monetary policy therefore the right thing to do? It means that CPIF 
inflation will be lower and further from the target and that unemployment will continue to be 
unnecessarily  high  compared  to  what  it  would  be  with  a  lower  repo  rate  and  a  more 
expansionary monetary policy. 
In  this  speech  I  would  like  to  talk  about  three  subjects.  The  first  is  that  in  my  opinion  the 
existing  framework  for  monetary  policy  could  be  improved  if  monetary  policy  consistently 
focused on stabilising inflation measured in terms of the CPIF at around 2 per cent and on 
stabilising  unemployment  around  a  sustainable  rate.  This  would  make  monetary  policy 
simpler, clearer and more robust. In line with this I have entered a reservation in favour of a 
lower repo-rate path and a more expansionary monetary policy as this would lead to CPIF 
inflation increasing and coming closer to the target and to unemployment falling towards a 
sustainable rate. 
Second, I believe that it is important that the Riksbank’s decisions and communication in the 
future  do  not  give  the  impression  that  monetary  policy  is  focused  on  anything  other  than 
inflation and resource utilisation. There has been an intensive discussion in the media and in 
market newsletters about a new focus for monetary policy, for example on stabilizing house 
prices and limiting household indebtedness. And when, in the choice between two repo-rate 
paths,  the  majority  of  the  members  of  the  Executive  Board  choose  a  path  that  provides 
poorer target attainment for both inflation and resource utilisation, this may undeniably give 
the impression that monetary policy has more targets than inflation and resource utilisation.1 
If, in addition, repo-rate increases are justified with reference to factors such as high growth, 
house  prices,  household  indebtedness,  the  low  level  of  interest  rates,  possible  financial 
imbalances in the future and so on, there is a risk that this impression will be strengthened. If 
so, monetary policy will become unclear.  
                                                 
1   At  the  monetary  policy  meeting  in  June  2010,  the  repo  rate  was  increased  despite  the  fact  that  the  CPIF 
forecast  was  below  2  per  cent  and  the  forecasts  for  all  the  measures  of  resource  utilisation  were  below  a 
normal level. An unchanged repo rate would have entailed a CPIF forecast closer to the target and forecasts 
for resource utilisation closer to a normal level. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Third, I would like to explain in more detail why I entered a reservation at the latest monetary 
policy meeting and how I arrived at a significantly lower repo-rate path than the path in the 
main scenario. 
The Riksbank conducts flexible inflation targeting – but what does this mean in 
practice? 
In the Riksbank document Monetary policy in Sweden (2010) and in the introduction to every 
Monetary Policy Report it says that the Riksbank “in addition to stabilising inflation around 
the inflation target, also strives to stabilise production and employment around sustainable 
paths. The Riksbank therefore conducts what is generally referred to as a policy of flexible 
inflation  targeting”.  We  also  usually  express  this  by  saying  that  monetary  policy  should 
stabilise inflation around the inflation target and stabilise resource utilisation around a normal 
level. The question then is which measures of the two target variables, inflation and resource 
utilisation,  we  should  use.  Although  the  inflation  target  is  expressed  in  terms  of  the  CPI,  I 
believe that the most appropriate operational measure of inflation is the CPIF. I also believe 
that the most appropriate measure of resource utilisation is the unemployment gap; that is 
the gap between the actual rate of unemployment and the sustainable rate of unemployment. 
Let me explain why I think that the existing framework for monetary policy could be improved 
with these specifications. 
The CPIF is the most appropriate operational measure of inflation 
The Riksbank’s inflation target is expressed in terms of the rate of change in the Consumer 
Price Index, the CPI. This has advantages as it is measured often and is seldom revised. It 
also means something to consumers as it corresponds to the price of an average basket of 
consumer  goods.  The  CPI  is  also  the  measure  of  inflation  that  is  most  well-known  to  the 
general public. However, the CPI also has a well-known disadvantage, which in my opinion 
makes  it  less  appropriate  as  a  direct,  operational  target  for  monetary  policy.  This 
disadvantage is that the CPI is directly affected by interest rate changes through their impact 
on housing costs. This short-term effect also has the reverse sign to the medium-term effect. 
This  means  that  the  Riksbank’s  own  repo  rate  increases  contribute  to  an  increase  in  CPI 
inflation  in  the  short  term  but  reduce  it  in  the  slightly  longer  term.  The  major  interest  rate 
changes during the crisis have led to considerable fluctuations in the CPI. I believe on the 
whole  that  it  is  better  to  consistently  use  the  CPIF  as  an  operational  target  for  monetary 
policy and disregard the direct effects of interest rate changes on the CPI when assessing 
whether monetary policy is well-balanced. By stabilising the CPIF around 2 per cent, the CPI 
will be stabilised around the target in the slightly longer term. It would then be important to 
consistently use the CPIF to rank various monetary policy alternatives and not change back 
and forth between the CPIF and the CPI. If we sometimes refer to the CPIF and sometimes 
to the CPI, monetary policy will become unclear. 
The unemployment gap is the most appropriate measure of resource utilisation 
There  are  many  ways  of  measuring  resource  utilisation,  for  example  the  output  gap,  the 
hours-worked gap, the employment gap, capacity utilisation or the Riksbank’s RU indicator. 
As there are so many ways of measuring resource utilisation one might think that it would be 
appropriate to take a broad approach and make an “overall assessment” based on a large 
number of indicators when making decisions about monetary policy. It is, however, generally 
accepted  that  an  inflation  targeting  policy  in  which  target  attainment  is  measured  using  a 
large number of different measures of inflation does not work very well. It is often possible to 
find a measure of inflation that is reasonably close to the target and almost any monetary 
policy can be justified with the help of a clever choice of index. Therefore, if the target and 
target attainment are to mean anything, one measure of inflation must primarily be used. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Similarly, I also believe that it does not work well to use a large number of different measures 
of resource utilisation. It is also often possible to find at least one measure that comes fairly 
close to normal resource utilisation and almost any monetary policy can be justified with the 
help of a clever choice of the measure of resource utilisation. This problem is in fact worse 
for resource utilisation than for inflation. This is because measures of resource utilisation also 
require us to make an assessment of the normal level for the measure concerned. For the 
output gap and the hours gap it is a case of determining the level and forecast for potential 
GDP  and  potential  hours  worked.  This  can  be  done  using  several  different  methods  and 
assumptions.  These  are  far  from  transparent  and  leave  a  lot  of  scope  for  arbitrary 
judgements. A particular monetary policy can therefore be justified by making a clever choice 
of  both  measures  and  the  normal  levels  used.  This  is  why  we  should  mainly  stick  to  one 
measure. 
Let  me  illustrate  the  problem  of  estimating  potential  GDP  by  comparing  the  Riksbank’s 
estimate  and  forecast  for  Sweden’s  potential  GDP  with  the  estimate  and  forecast  for  the 
United  States’  potential  GDP  produced  by  the  Congressional  Budget  Office  (CBO). 
According to the CBO’s estimate and forecast, potential output in the United States largely 
follows the previous trend for the United States’ GDP (Figure 5).2 The output gap between 
the United States’ GDP and potential GDP is therefore large and negative for several years 
ahead.3  According  to  the  Riksbank’s  estimate  and  forecast  in  February  2011,  Sweden’s 
potential GDP is on the other hand curving downwards and is below the previous trend for 
Sweden’s GDP. Sweden’s output gap is therefore closing rapidly according to the Riksbank’s 
forecast. 
How  can  the  estimates  and  forecasts  for  potential  GDP  in  the  United  States  and  Sweden 
differ so greatly while the level now and forecasts for actual GDP are rather similar? Why 
should the development of Sweden’s potential GDP be much worse than that of the United 
States?  The  United  States  has  been  subjected  to  structural  shocks  in  the  housing, 
construction  and  finance  sectors  and  has  major  structural  problems  in  these  sectors.  The 
United  States  also  has  substantial  structural  current  account  and  budget  deficits.  Sweden 
has been exposed to a major demand shock with a collapse of exports and a loss of demand 
in the export sector. Exports are now recovering again. Sweden does not appear to have any 
structural problems in the finance sector, or in any other sector, and has no structural budget 
or current account deficits. This being the case, I think one could claim that the development 
of Sweden’s potential GDP should in fact be better than that of the United States, not worse. 
The difference in potential GDP underlines the difficulties and the element of arbitrariness in 
these calculations. 
Figure  6  compares  the  Riksbank’s  estimates  and  forecasts  for  potential  GDP  from  two 
different points in time, namely September 2008 shortly before the investment bank Lehman 
Brothers  went  bankrupt  and  February  2011.  The  September  2008  forecast  for  Sweden’s 
potential GDP is rather similar to the CBO’s latest forecast for potential GDP in the United 
States in Figure 5. We can see in Figure 6 that the February 2011 assessment of potential 
GDP in the longer term is approximately 4 per cent below the corresponding assessment in 
September 2008. Why should a pure demand shock in the absence of structural problems 
lead to such a significantly lower potential GDP in the longer term? 
My  conclusion  from  this  discussion  of  Figures  5  and  6  is  that  the  estimate  of  Sweden’s 
potential  GDP  is  not  reliable  and  that  the  output  gap  is  thus  not  a  reliable  indicator  of 
resource utilisation. 
                                                 
2   The Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco has a forecast for the potential GDP of the United States that is 
very similar to the CBO’s forecast, see Rudebusch (2011). 
3   The  figure  shows  the  Riksbank’s  forecast  for  the  United  States’  GDP,  but  it  is  very  similar  to  the  CBO’s 
forecast for the United States GDP. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
I believe instead that the unemployment gap is the most appropriate measure of resource 
utilisation. There are several reasons for this. Unemployment is measured often and is not 
revised. GDP on the other hand is measured less often and is highly uncertain, and major 
revisions  are  made.  Unemployment  is  also  directly  related  to  welfare  –  one  of  the  worst 
things that can happen to a household is that one of the members of the household loses his 
or her job. Unemployment is also the indicator of resource utilisation that is best known and 
easiest for the public to understand. The preparatory works for the Sveriges Riksbank Act 
state that the Riksbank should support the objectives of general economic policy. One of the 
main  objectives  of  economy  policy  in  Sweden  is  to  limit  unemployment,  for  example  by 
improving the functioning of the labour market and increasing the incentives to look for work.  
The difficult thing about using the unemployment gap as an indicator of resource utilisation is 
to determine the sustainable rate of unemployment. However, this is not more difficult, in fact 
it is probably easier, than determining potential output and potential hours worked. On closer 
inspection, it can be seen that the sustainable rate of unemployment has several advantages 
compared to other measures of normal resource utilisation. 
The  sustainable  rate  of  unemployment  can  be  expressed  as  a  stable  percentage  –  for 
example  5.5  or  6  per  cent.  It  changes  slowly  and  lies  within  a  limited  range.  Estimating 
potential GDP is, in comparison, like shooting at a moving target. It grows over time, and in 
the view of many, can be seen as a random process, similar to a so-called random walk with 
drift.  The  sustainable  rate  of  unemployment  can  be  determined  using  several  different 
methods – structural search models similar to those developed by the Nobel prize-winners 
Diamond,  Mortensen  and  Pissarides,  so-called  UC-models,  DSGE  models  and  NAIRU 
estimates.  The  results  of  these  different  estimation  methods  can  be  compared  and  their 
robustness and reliability assessed. We can then calculate the average of the estimates and 
weight  this  with  the  assessed  reliability  of  the  various  estimates.  When  estimating  the 
sustainable  rate  of  unemployment  it  is  also  important  to  include  the  assessed  effects  of 
labour-market reforms (Forslund 2008). 
Assessments  of  the  sustainable  rate  of  unemployment  can  be  made  and  discussed  in  an 
open debate within and outside the central bank, with internal and external economists who 
are  specialists  in  the  field  of  labour  market  research  using  micro  and  macro  methods.  A 
major advantage in this context is that Sweden has a tradition of outstanding labour market 
research at universities and research and evaluation institutes. 
It will also be simple and transparent to perform sensitivity analyses in the form of various 
assumptions  about  the  sustainable  rate  of  unemployment.  If  different  members  of  the 
Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank  make  different  assessments  of  the  sustainable  rate  of 
unemployment, they can simply and clearly explain how this affects their decisions. 
It is of course inappropriate for the central bank itself to calculate the price index that is used 
to assess the attainment of the inflation target, and it is a major advantage if this index is 
calculated  by  another,  independent  organisation  or  authority,  like  Statistics  Sweden  in 
Sweden’s  case.  For  the  same  reason,  it  is  inappropriate  for  the  central  bank  to  have  a 
monopoly  on  calculating  the  normal  level  for  the  measure  of  resource  utilisation  used  to 
evaluate target attainment. In practice it is impossible for outsiders (and most people at the 
Riksbank,  including  the  members  of  the  Executive  Board)  to  verify  and  assess  the 
calculations of potential production and hours worked that are performed. It is very difficult to 
determine whether the measures are reasonable and reliable. Compared to other measures 
of  resource  utilisation,  the  unemployment  gap  offers  the  best  possibility  for  external  and 
internal verification and assessment of the assumptions about, and the calculations of, the 
sustainable rate of unemployment. 
One may ask, however, whether the independence of the Riksbank would be put at risk if 
external parties were involved in determining the right sustainable rate of unemployment. Nor 
would I go so far as to propose that another authority should decide on the appropriate rate 
of sustainable unemployment. I do, on the other hand, think that it would be a good thing if 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the  Riksbank’s  estimate  of  the  sustainable  rate  of  unemployment  could  be  debated  freely 
and assessed by external analysts, evaluators and authorities. This is in practice not possible 
with the other measures of resource utilisation. 
The fact that the Riksbank tries to stabilise both inflation and unemployment does not mean 
that it disregards the fact that the inflation target takes precedence. As inflation is stabilised 
around  the  inflation  target,  inflation  will  on  average  be  equal  to  the  target.  The  Riksbank 
fulfils in this way its mandate to maintain price stability at the same time as it can be said to 
be supporting the objectives of general economic policy through its endeavours to stabilise 
unemployment around a sustainable rate. 
The mean squared gap: a measure of stability 
A  well-balanced  monetary  policy  normally  thus  entails  achieving  a  balance  between  the 
stabilisation of inflation and the stabilisation of resource utilisation. But what is meant by a 
lesser  or  greater  stability  of  inflation  and  resource  utilisation?  Determining  this  requires  a 
quantitative measure of stability, the mean squared gap. The mean squared gap for inflation 
measures  how  much  the  inflation  forecast  deviates  from  the  inflation  target.  The  mean 
squared  gap  for  unemployment  measures  how  much  the  rate  of  unemployment  deviates 
from the sustainable rate. A smaller mean squared gap entails better stability. 
Panel b in Figure 7 shows the mean squared gaps from the latest monetary policy decision. 
They are calculated by taking a mean value of the sum of all the squared deviations for the 
respective  target  variables  and  calculating  the  size  of  them.  The  closer  to  zero  the  mean 
squared  gap  is,  the  better  the  stabilisation  of  the  respective  target  variables;  that  is,  the 
better the target attainment. 
Normally, it should be the case that it is not possible to stabilise one of the target variables 
better  without  stabilising  the  other  variable  less  well.  Otherwise,  monetary  policy  is  not 
“effective”. Which interest-rate path is chosen then depends on the relative importance one 
attaches  to  stabilising  the  respective  variables.  Different  members  of  the  Executive  Board 
may  attach  different  levels  of  importance  to  the  two  variables  and  thus  advocate  different 
repo-rate  paths.  The  point  of  the  mean  squared  gaps  is  that  they  give  us  clarity  and 
transparency regarding the various monetary policy alternatives.4 
The mean squared gap takes into account target attainment throughout the forecast period 
and not just target attainment at a certain horizon, for example 8 or 12 quarters. This is an 
advantage. This is reasonable as focusing on target attainment at a certain horizon leads to 
a classic time-consistency problem which means that monetary policy is not consistent over 
time.5 
Monetary policy must not become unclear 
Many analysts seem to believe that, in practice, Riksbank monetary policy now focuses on 
more things than just stabilising inflation and resource utilisation. It is also undeniable that 
other factors have been referred to in our press releases and minutes, for example growth, 
housing prices, household indebtedness, financial imbalances and interest rate levels. In the 
media  and  market  newsletters,  there  has  been  a  keen  discussion  of  a  new  focus  for 
                                                 
4   For a more detailed description of the mean squared gap see Svensson (2010a, d). 
5   This is a time-consistency problem that has been discussed in a classic article by Strotz (1955–56). It differs 
from  the  time-consistency  problem  discussed  by  Kydland  and  Prescott  (1977)  and  by  Barro  and  Gordon 
(1983). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
monetary  policy  on  factors  other  than  inflation  and  resource  utilisation.6  In  several  cases, 
repo rate increases have been applauded with reference to the fact that they would help to 
stabilise house prices and indebtedness.  
What I am objecting to here is not that the forecasts are adjusted with assessments that take 
into account factors that affect the forecasts but are not captured in the usual models. On the 
contrary, I have always advocated such an approach and have even discussed how this can 
be done more systematically in a number of research papers.7 I think that it is quite correct to 
take into account house prices, indebtedness, imbalances and so on to the extent that they 
affect  the  forecasts  for  inflation  and  the  real  economy.  All  information  that  affects  the 
forecasts is relevant. The problem arises when one allows these factors to undermine target 
attainment  for  inflation  and  resource  utilisation.  In  practice,  this  gives  them  the  status  of 
separate  targets  for  monetary  policy.  This  makes  monetary  policy  unclear  and  hard  to 
understand. Moreover, as I see it, the Sveriges Riksbank Act and its preparatory works do 
not  provide  scope  for  any  other  targets  for  monetary  policy  than  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation.8 I believe that it is important that the Riksbank’s decisions and communication in 
the future do not give the impression that monetary policy is focused on anything other than 
inflation and resource utilisation. 
In their 2006 evaluation of Swedish monetary policy in the period 1995–2005, Giavazzi and 
Mishkin (2006) also say that the Riksbank’s statements on housing prices led many people 
to  perceive  the  Riksbank’s  message  as  confusing,  which  made  things  unclear  and 
undermined confidence in monetary policy.9, 10 
Growth has certainly been high over the last 12 months, so isn’t this a reason for tightening 
monetary  policy?  Here  it  is  important  to  remember  that  monetary  policy  does  not  aim  to 
stabilise growth. It aims to stabilise inflation and resource utilisation. The impact of increased 
growth on monetary policy depends on the impact of this growth on the forecasts for inflation 
and resource utilisation. Whether high growth indicates higher or lower resource utilisation 
depends on the reasons for the higher growth. In this respect there is no difference between 
growth  and  other  indicators  of  the  state  of  the  economy.  The  extent  to  which  they  affect 
monetary policy depends solely on how they affect the forecasts for inflation and resource 
utilisation. 
If monetary policy is well-balanced in the initial position – a strong assumption – and growth 
shifts both the inflation forecast and the resource-utilisation forecast upwards, then increased 
growth  is  a reason  for  tightening  monetary  policy.  However,  if  monetary  policy  is not  well-
                                                 
6   See for example Dagens Industri (2011), Eklund and Svensson (2010), Financial Times (2011a, b) and Frisén 
(2010). 
7   See Svensson (2005) and Svensson and Tetlow (2005). 
8   One possible exception may be if the repo-rate path were to pose a threat to financial stability and there were 
no other means that could be used to tackle the problem. See the discussion in Svensson (2010b, c). 
9   See Giavazzi and Mishkin (2006) and Mishkin (2010). 
10   I also believe that the policy rate is an inappropriate instrument for handling problems relating to rising housing 
prices  and indebtedness. There  are  several other, more  appropriate  instruments, for example loan-to-value 
ceilings, limiting tax deductions for mortgages, property taxes and so on. Extensive research has also shown 
that the costs to the real economy will be unreasonably high if one attempts to reduce housing prices with the 
help of the policy rate. In addition, there are no signs that Swedish housing prices constitute a bubble, that is 
that they are incompatible with fundamental factors such as high demand and low supply as a result of limited 
construction. It can also be demonstrated that the current level of indebtedness is not a problem in relation to 
the household’s ability to service their debts and to their assets. For a more detailed discussion, see Svensson 
(2010b, c). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
balanced  in  the  initial  position,  for  example  if  it  appears  that  both  inflation  and  resource 
utilisation will be too low, then increased growth is not a reason to tighten monetary policy.11 
Growth can lead to bottlenecks and a shortage of labour in some sectors. Are these reasons 
for  increasing  the  repo  rate?  Yes,  but  only  if  they  increase  the  inflation  forecast. 
Circumstances such as bottlenecks and shortages are important when it comes to assessing 
the  effects  on  wages  and  inflationary  pressures,  and  to  forecasting  wages  and  inflation. 
However,  it  is  important  to  distinguish  between  the  role  of  resource  utilisation  as  a  target 
variable and its role as an indicator of inflationary pressures. With regard to its role as target 
variable, it is the unemployment gap between the rate of unemployment and the sustainable 
rate that is relevant. But with regard to its role as an indicator of inflationary pressures and as 
a  basis  for  forecasts  for  wages  and  inflation,  various  short-term  situations,  shortages  and 
bottlenecks  may  be  significant,  but  will  not  normally  affect  the  sustainable  rate  of 
unemployment. One way of expressing this is to say that the unemployment gap in relation to 
the sustainable rate of unemployment is a target variable, but that the gap in relation to the 
short-term  equilibrium  rate  of  unemployment  may  be  an  indicator  of  inflationary  pressures 
that is important in forecasting the inflation gap, the other target variable. 
The most recent decision 
The reason I chose to enter a reservation against the repo-rate path chosen by the majority 
at  the  latest  monetary  policy  meeting  is  that,  in  my  opinion,  it  does  not  represent  a  well-
balanced monetary policy. This is because the repo-rate path adopted by the majority entails 
a CPIF forecast under the target and an unemployment forecast higher than a reasonable 
sustainable rate throughout almost the entire forecast period. I believe that target attainment 
can be improved for both inflation and unemployment with a lower repo-rate path. 
The repo-rate path chosen by the majority does not meet the well-known necessary but not 
sufficient condition for a well-balanced monetary policy formulated by the Deputy Governor of 
the Norwegian central bank Jan Qvigstad (2005). Applied to inflation and unemployment, this 
condition  means  that  the  inflation  gap  (the  difference  between  inflation  and  the  inflation 
target)  and  the  unemployment  gap  should  have  the  same  sign.  As  the  inflation  gap  is 
negative and the unemployment gap is positive for the majority’s repo-rate path for most of 
the forecast interval, this condition is not met. With a lower repo-rate path, on the other hand, 
the gap for both would be reduced and target attainment for both inflation and unemployment 
would thus increase.  
The fact that monetary policy is not well-balanced for the majority’s repo-rate path is clearly 
demonstrated if one uses mean square gaps to measure target attainment as in Figures 7 
and 8. Figure 7 shows the forecasts for the CPIF and unemployment that are compatible with 
the  main  scenario’s  repo-rate  path  and  the  higher  and  lower  repo-rate  paths  published  in 
Chapter 2 of the Monetary Policy Report in February. Panel b shows that the repo-rate path 
of the main scenario does not meet the Qvigstad condition. Neither is it effective, as a lower 
repo-rate path stabilises both inflation and unemployment better. Figure 8 shows the main 
scenario’s  repo-rate  path  and  the  lower  path  that  Karolina  Ekholm  and  I  advocated  at  the 
meeting. The forecasts for inflation and unemployment are calculated under an assumption 
                                                 
11   At the monetary policy meeting in September 2010 I criticised “the revisionist argument”, that is that monetary 
policy is governed by revisions of the assessment of the state of the economy. This implies that the previous 
monetary policy decision and the previous repo-rate path have been accepted without criticism and that the 
repo-rate  path  has  then  been  shifted  upward  or  downward  depending  on  whether  the  development  of  the 
economy and inflation have been above or below expectations. No monetary policy decision is perfect. Each 
decision  includes  greater  or  smaller  errors.  Allowing  revisions  to  govern  means  allowing  new  errors  to  be 
added to the existing ones. In my view, the previous repo-rate path should not be unreservedly taken as the 
starting point. Every monetary policy decision should stand on its own two feet and not lean on the previous 
decision. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
that  we  believe  to  be  more  realistic  and  more  compatible  with  how  the  exchange  rate  is 
determined. This assumption is that foreign exchange rates will develop in line with prevailing 
market  rates  (more  specifically  in  line  with  the  paths  indicated  by  foreign  implied  forward 
rates). We can see in panel b that the lower repo-rate path leads to a better stabilisation of 
both inflation and unemployment.  
The mean squared gaps in Figures 7 and 8 are calculated assuming a sustainable rate of 
unemployment of 5.5 per cent. This is currently my best assessment of the sustainable rate 
of unemployment in Sweden after having read a number of papers on the subject and having 
discussed the issue with several specialists in the field of labour market economics.12 The 
lower repo-rate path is also better if one assumes a level of 6 per cent.13 
At a press meeting on 3 March, the Minister of Finance, Anders Borg, announced that the 
Ministry’s assessment of the equilibrium rate of unemployment has been revised downwards 
from  6  per  cent  to  approximately  5  per  cent  by  2015.14  The  Ministry  of  Finance  plans  to 
publish its calculations in a ministry memorandum in connection with the spring budget bill 
2011. 
One  could  perhaps  object  that  it  is  not  certain  that  the  lower  repo-rate  path  in  panel  a  of 
Figure 8 is necessarily the best repo-rate path. It does, however, appear to fulfil the Qvigstad 
condition in that the inflation gap in panel c is mainly positive and the unemployment gap in 
panel d is also positive (for the entire forecast period if the sustainable rate of unemployment 
is 5.5 per cent and for most of the forecast period if it is 6 per cent). One can show that an 
even  lower  repo-rate  path  leads  to  a  lower  mean  squared gap  for  unemployment  but  to a 
higher  mean  squared  gap  for  inflation.  It  is  thus  no  easy  matter  to  stabilise  both  better. 
However,  a  somewhat  different  profile  for  the  low  repo-rate  path  may  perhaps  provide  a 
better result. It is possible that reasonable weights for the stability of inflation and resource 
utilisation  justify  higher  inflation  and  lower  unemployment.  Due  to  the  limited  resources 
available  it  has  not  been  possible  to  investigate  these  factors  prior  to  the  monetary  policy 
decision. In my opinion, however, one should not engage in too much fine-tuning. The best 
should not become the enemy of the good. The important thing here is that the lower repo-
rate path clearly leads to a better target attainment than the path in the main scenario. 
The  path  that  Karolina  Ekholm  and  I  advocated  at  the  meeting  in  February  is  somewhat 
higher than the path we advocated at the meeting in December. The main reason for this is 
that foreign interest rates shifted upwards between December and February. It is natural that 
the repo-rate shifts along with foreign interest rates to some extent to limit the effects on the 
exchange rate. I discussed the role of foreign interest rates for monetary policy in more detail 
in the speech I gave in November 2010 (Svensson 2010b). 
Summary 
To  summarise,  the  arguments  I  have  presented  today  are  thus  based  on  the  document 
Monetary  policy  in  Sweden,  which  stipulates  that  the  Riksbank  should  pursue  flexible 
inflation targeting in which monetary policy focuses on stabilising inflation around the target 
and  resource  utilisation  around  a  normal  level.  I  believe  that  the  existing  framework  for 
                                                 
12   See for example Forslund (2008). 
13   It may appear to be a problem that the lower repo-rate path gives a level of CPIF inflation of around 2.5 per 
cent  at  the  end  of  the  forecast  period.  The  CPIF  forecasts  in  these  simulations  in  the  Riksbank’s  model 
Ramses have, however, been calculated under a standard assumption of a sustainable rate of unemployment 
of approximately 6.5 per cent, which I believe is too high. A lower sustainable unemployment rate gives lower 
inflationary pressures at the end of the forecast period and shifts down the CPIF forecasts somewhat, which 
would increase the advantage of the lower repo-rate path. 
14   Ministry of Finance (2011). 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
monetary policy can be improved by making the operational measures of inflation, resource 
utilisation  and  their  stability  more  precise.  For  several  reasons,  I  think  that  only  one 
operational  measure  of  inflation  and  only  one  operational  measure  of  resource  utilisation 
should be used. The inflation target is formulated in terms of the CPI, but I believe that the 
most  appropriate  operational  measure  of  inflation  is  the  CPIF.  This  would  entail  the 
stabilisation of the CPI in the slightly longer term. I also believe that the unemployment gap 
between the actual rate of unemployment and the sustainable rate of unemployment is the 
most appropriate measure of resource utilisation. Moreover, I believe that the mean squared 
gap is the most appropriate measure of the stability of inflation and resource utilisation. 
In my opinion, making the monetary policy framework more specific in this way would make 
monetary  policy,  simpler,  clearer  and  more  robust.  The  preparations  before  each  policy 
meeting could focus on calculating forecasts of CPIF inflation and unemployment for different 
repo-rate  paths.  These  forecasts,  together  with  an  assessment  of  the  sustainable  rate  of 
unemployment,  would  summarise  all  the  information  the  members  of  the  Executive  Board 
would need to make their decisions and choose between the various repo-rate paths. The 
decisions  would  be  easy  to  explain  and  the  explanations  would  be  clear.  This  would  also 
make  it  easy  to  evaluate  monetary  policy.  It  would  become  more  robust  because  all  the 
information  and  all  the  assessments  that  affect  the  forecasts  and  the  sustainable  rate  of 
unemployment could be incorporated into the decision-making process in a systematic way. 
In order to avoid monetary policy being unclear in the future, I believe that the Riksbank’s 
decisions and communication should not give the impression that monetary policy has any 
objectives other than stabilising inflation and resource utilisation. 
On this basis, I entered a reservation at the latest monetary policy meeting and advocated 
leaving the repo rate unchanged and then a lower repo-rate path than the path in the main 
scenario, as such a lower path would better stabilise inflation measured in terms of the CPIF 
and resource utilisation measured in terms of the unemployment gap. 
References 
Barro,  Robert  J.,  and  David  B.  Gordon  (1983),  “A  positive  theory  of  monetary  policy  in  a 
natural rate model”, Journal of Political Economy 91, 589–610. 
Dagens Industri (2011), “Nu ökar pressen på Riksbanken – bubbelfrågan splittrar cheferna” 
(“Pressure on the Riksbank increases – the bubble issue divides the Board”), 2011-02-04. 
Eklund, Klas, and Lars E.O. Svensson (2010), “Duellen: Räntehöjning – nu eller avvakta?” 
(“The  duel:  Rate  increase  –  now  or  later?”),  Stock  Magazine,  3/2010,  Unga  Aktiesparare, 
September 2010. 
Financial Times (2011a), “Lex: Nordea”, 2011-02-07. 
Financial Times (2011b), “Lex: Stockholm Syndrome”, 2011-01-31. 
Ministery of Finance (2011), “Ny prognos visar på högre tillväxt och lägre arbetslöshet” (“New 
forecast shows higher growth and lower unemployment”), Press release 2011-03-03. 
Forslund, Anders (2008), “Den svenska jämviktsarbetslösheten – en översikt” (“The Swedish 
equilibrium unemployment rate – an overview”), Report to the Swedish Fiscal Policy Council, 
2008/4, www.finanspolitiskaradet.se. 
Frisén, Håkan (2010), “Ingves ändrar den penningpolitiska spelplanen” (“Ingves changes the 
monetary policy game”), Veckans tanke, 2010-05-27, SEB. 
Giavazzi,  Francesco,  and  Frederic  S.  Mishkin  (2006),  An  Evaluation  of  Swedish  Monetary 
Policy between 1995 and 2005, Riksdagstryckeriet 2006/07:RFR1. 
Kydland,  Finn  E.,  and  Eward  C.  Prescott  (1977),  “Rules  rather  than  discretion:  The 
inconsistency of optimal Plans”, Journal of Political Economy 85, 473–491. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2010),  “Monetary  policy  strategy:  lessons  from  the  crisis”  Paper 
presented at the ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt, 2010-11-18 – 2010-11-19. 
Qvigstad,  Jan  (2005),  “When  does  an  interest  rate  path  “look  good”?  Criteria  for  an 
appropriate future interest rate path – A practician’s approach”, Staff Memo 2005/6, Norges 
Bank. 
Rudebusch, Glenn (2011), “Fed Views”, February 10, 2010, Federal Reserve bank  of San 
Francisco. 
Strotz, R.H. (1955–56), “Myopia and inconsistency in dynamic utility maximization”, Review 
of Economic Studies 23, 165–180.  
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2005),  “Monetary  Policy  with  Judgment:  Forecast  Targeting”, 
International Journal of Central Banking 1(1), 1–54  
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2010a), “Inflation Targeting”, published in Friedman, Benjamin M., and 
Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, Volume 3, Elsevier. 
Svensson, Lars E. O. (2010b) “Some problems with Swedish monetary policy and possible 
solutions” speech held in Stockholm, 2010-11-24.  
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2010c),  “Monetary  policy  after  the  financial  crisis”,  speech  held  in 
Tokyo, 2010-09-17. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2010d),  “Why  a  lower  repo-rate  path?",  speech  held  at  Umeå 
University, 2010-02-24. 
Svensson, Lars E.O., and Robert J. Tetlow (2005), “Optimal Policy Projections”, International 
Journal of Central Banking 1(3), 177–207 
Sveriges Riksbank, (2010), Monetary policy in Sweden. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2011a), Monetary Policy Report: February 2011. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2011b), “Minutes of the monetary policy meeting”, no. 1, 2011-02-14. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  11
 12 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  13
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 