Andreas Dombret: Sino-German Financial Stability Forum – concluding 
remarks 
Concluding  remarks  by  Dr  Andreas  Dombret,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the  Sino-German  High  Level  Workshop,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
11 July 2011. 
 The dynamic of contagions and market dynamics,  
the spillovers into the real economy and  
the vulnerability of countries.  
Dear Mr YI Gang, dear guests, after a long day of intensive discussion, concluding remarks 
should be short. So let me only briefly point to some consensus and challenges ahead.  
Despite  different  stages  of  development  of  both  countries,  the  discussion  at  the  workshop 
has shown a broad consensus on the importance of price stability as the primary objective of 
monetary policy, that fiscal stability is not only a prerequisite for a balanced and sustained 
economic growth but also for national and global financial stability and that a sound and a 
stable banking system is the first line of defense against financial crisis.  
But  the  discussion  has  also  highlighted  and  underlined  important  challenges  ahead.  I  will 
briefly go through some of these challenges and structure my further remarks by the main 
surprises during the financial crisis:  
 
 
 
Turning  to  the  first  point,  the  financial  crisis  has  shown  an  unexpected  strong  and  fast 
transmission  of  the  US  sectoral  financial  shock  around  the  globe.  Despite  the  fact  that 
significant  progress  has  been  achieved  to  measure  and  identify  risk  exposures  of  globally 
acting banks and the shadow banking system, for example, by enhanced network analysis, 
important  challenges  remain.  Beyond  an  intensified  monitoring  of  these  risk  exposures  on 
this  more  microprudential  level,  global  monitoring  of  capital  flows  and  changing  financial 
transmission  channels  of  external  shocks  have  to  be  enhanced.  Moreover,  we  should  not 
only focus our monitoring on the ups and downs of exchange rates, interest rates and CDS, 
but  even  more  on  the  underlying  reasons  for  these  movements.  Therefore,  an  extended 
monitoring should also have a close eye on the significant structural changes of the financial 
markets and systems, which build the most important base for different response patterns to 
financial crises across time and countries.  
In  my  view,  it  might  also  be  fruitful  to  intensify  the  discussion  about  an  appropriate 
assignment  of  roles  in  this  regard  on  a  global,  regional  and  national  level.  There  are  no 
doubts that the IMF has a significant comparative advantage on the global level, due to its 
broad country coverage. The IMF should use this potential in an intensified bottom-up and 
top-down  approach  in  collecting  relevant  data  and  information  and  using  this  kind  of 
information  for  enhanced  in-depth  analysis  –  in  close  cooperation  with  the  BIS.  The 
European  Systemic  Risk  Board  and  the  Asian+3  Macroeconomic  Research  Office  with  a 
Chinese official as a first head of this office will play a significant role on the regional level. 
And  of  course,  the  national  monitoring  and  assessment  of  risks  by  the  People’s  Bank  of 
China  and  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  in  their  own  countries  remain  the  first  and  most 
important pool of information on financial stability.  
This broad variety of institutions in evaluating financial stability raises the question, whether 
and to what extent there is a necessity for international cooperation in the communication of 
these  assessments.  Two  different  aspects  have  to  be  balanced  in  future  discussions: 
Conflicting  views  and  comments  could  confuse  markets  more  than  contribute  to  its 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
stabilization.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  important  to  guarantee  independent  analysis  and 
communication in financial stability.  
The second challenge I would like to highlight, is the unexpected strength of spillovers into 
the real economy around the globe. Nearly all international financial institutions and national 
research institutes underestimated the dampening effects of the financial crisis on the real 
economy. I support all efforts which are focused on a better capturing of financial structural 
changes in macroeconomic models. Some commentators are rightly pointing to the fact that 
textbooks  and  models  are  lagging  behind  reality.  But  it  appears  that  the  distance  has 
become too large. 
Moreover,  in  further  developing  macro-stress  tests  we  currently  need  to  incorporate  these 
financial changes. Only some years ago, macro-stress tests were pre-dominantly focused on 
real shocks and its impacts on the stability of the banking system, while now most shocks 
have been stemming from the financial sector.  
My third brief remark is focused on the unexpected and high vulnerability of countries. This 
has been also true for those countries with a stable and sound macroeconomic framework. If 
macrostability  is  an  important  necessary  condition,  but  not  sufficient  to  weather  the  initial 
financial shock, what then should be the appropriate response to this experience? How could 
we enhance the protection against these shocks? This is still a quite open question.  
In  my  view,  we  should  put  our  focus  more  on  effective  prevention  than  on  building  safety 
nets, which is more an element of crisis management than of prevention and could enhance 
excessive  risk  taking  and  moral  hazard.  The  more  the  risks  of  individual  decisions  in  the 
financial sector are backed by the state or global safety nets, the higher is the probability of a 
misallocation  of  financial  resources  by  individual  investors.  We  need  just  the  opposite,  a 
greater sensitivity of the individual manager to financial risks, to bring financial markets back 
to  its  important  role  of  being  an  efficient  judge  and  jury  of  misguided  macropolicy.  Since 
political  mechanisms  failed  to  be  this  kind  of  an  effective  mechanism  of  sanctions  –  the 
Stability and Growth Pact is only one example – then it is even more important to strengthen 
market disciplining forces. 
Again,  what  we  need  first  are  in-depth  analysis  on  the  underlying  reasons  of  significantly 
changing  transmission  mechanism  which  effect  even  countries  with  sound  and  stable 
macroeconomic  frameworks.  The  IMF  in  close  cooperation  with  other  relevant  financial 
institutions can play an important role also in this regard. The so called “Issing Committee”  
–  advising  the  German  Government  on  financial  stability  issues  –  has  pointed  to  the 
necessity to build up a global risk map, which would be an important element of an extended 
global monitoring by the IMF and other relevant institutions. Professor Issing, former member 
of the executive board of the European Central Bank is heading this Committee and we feel 
much  honored  that  he  has  accepted  our  invitation  to  present  an  overview  of  the 
recommendations of this Committee this evening.  
But let me first hand over to Mr YI Gang and his concluding remarks with the perspective of 
the People’s Bank of China. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
