Louis Kasekende: Stronger rules foster growth, stability 
Keynote address by Dr Louis Kasekende, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the 
official opening of the Banking, Finance and Insurance Expo 2011, Kampala, 15 April 2011. 
 Uganda’s  banking  industry  has  experienced  significant  transformation  over  the  past  three 
years, with rapid growth in the number of service outlets for various categories of financial 
services. Branches of commercial banks, credit institutions and microfinance deposit-taking 
institutions  have  increased  from  194  in  2007  to  397  in  2010.  Similarly,  the  number  of 
Automatic Teller Machines has risen from 262 in 2007 to 598 by December 2010.  
In  addition,  numerous  financial  products  and  customized  services  have  been  rolled-out  by 
financial institutions in response to the ever-changing tastes of the clientele. These include 
electronic  banking  services,  faster  methods  of  money  transfers,  mobile  banking,  transfer 
services, and flexible banking hours to suit different categories of customers.  
The Deputy Governor said that the Central Bank is cognizant of the inter-linkages between 
the various sectors of the financial system because instability in one sector could eventually 
spill over into other sectors and spark off system-wide crisis. He urged regulatory agencies to 
draw lessons from the financial crisis that rocked the western world and spilled over to the 
developing economies. Each sector must be effectively regulated in order to foster system-
wide soundness and stability and mitigate attendant risks.  
“To  this  end,  Bank  of  Uganda  has  signed  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding  with  Capital 
Market Authorities and Uganda Insurance Commission in order to foster formal exchange of 
information for regulatory purposes.  
“Bank  of  Uganda  has  also  set  up  a  Financial  Stability  Department  and  Financial  Sector 
Surveillance Committee to look at the macro-linkages,” he said.  
Uganda’s financial system comprises formal, semiformal and informal institutions. The formal 
institutions  include  banks,  Microfinance  Deposit-taking  institutions,  Credit  Institutions, 
Insurance companies, Development Banks, Pension Funds and Capital Markets. The semi 
informal  institutions  include  SACCOS  and  other  Microfinance  institutions,  whereas  the 
informal ones are mostly village savings and loans associations. Formal institutions are less 
prominent in rural areas than urban areas and they only serve 14% of the rural population. 
Informal  institutions  play  an  important  role  in  the  rural  service  provisions  and  serve 
approximately 12% of the rural population. These numbers indicate that Uganda’s financial 
system is still quite shallow.  
Most Ugandans (62%) have no access to financial services. The number of the population 
holding  accounts  in  banks  is  four  million  or  33%  of  the  12  million  who  are  bankable.  The 
savings  to  GDP  ratio  is  still  low  at  16%.  In  addition,  financial  intermediation  is  poor  as 
indicated  by  the  stock  of  private  sector  credit  of  11.8%  of  GDP.  These  numbers  do  not 
compare favourably with Kenya and Tanzania.  
There are about 22 Insurance Companies, 26 Insurance Brokerage Firms and eight Loss-
Assessors  operating  in  the  country.  The  insurance  industry  just  like  the  banking  industry, 
remains largely underdeveloped. The products offered by these companies are limited to life 
and  nonlife  insurance  products.  In  spite  of  the  fact  that  agriculture  is  the  backbone  of  the 
economy,  Uganda  lacks  agricultural  insurance,  weather  indexing  of  agricultural  production 
and micro insurance for low income groups. The lack of a system of crop finance is a major 
barrier to lending to small farmers.  
“The  insurance  sector  must  therefore  take  a  closer  look  at  developing  new  insurance 
products  that  suit  their  clients,  train  their  personnel,  increase  distribution  channels  and 
enhance marketing,” Dr. Kasekende said.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Banking, Finance and Insurance sectors are the life-blood for growth and development of the 
financial  system  and  the  entire  economy.  Hence  the  key  sectors  of  the  financial  system 
deserve priority attention by government as they are instrumental in the process of savings 
mobilization  and  capital  accumulation,  key  ingredients  in  the  growth  and  development 
process of the economy.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
