George A Provopoulos: Economic policies, institutions, and the political-
social environment that can increase and sustain potential growth 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  George  A  Provopoulos,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Greece,  at  the 
Bank of Greece - University of Oxford (South East European Studies at Oxford, SEESOX) 
conference, Athens, 11 February 2011. 
 fiscal 
to  a  widening  of 
imbalances.  These 
I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  the  Bank  of  Greece.  This  occasion  marks  the  second 
conference  on  South  East  Europe  jointly  organised  by  the  Bank  of  Greece  and  Oxford 
University.  The  first  conference,  held  in  October  2009,  dealt  with  the  effects  of  the  global 
financial crisis on this region and the policy challenges in the light of the crisis. The focus of 
this  conference  is  different.  It  is  on  the  longer-term  growth  potential  of  the  region. 
Specifically, the conference will deal with the economic policies, institutions, and the political-
social environment that can both increase and sustain potential growth. We are fortunate to 
have  with  us  a  number  of  experts  from  the  central-banking,  academic  and  commercial-
banking communities. They will share with us their views about the growth potential of the 
region and the policies that can help achieve that potential. 
The global crisis, which halted more than a decade of sustained growth in most countries of 
the region, has demonstrated that economic convergence in Europe is neither an inevitable 
nor an automatic process. Prior to the crisis, most of South East Europe was characterized 
by  relatively  high  growth,  based  mainly  on  consumption  spending,  private  and  public.  The 
increased consumption expenditure typically reflected rapid growth in domestic credit, to a 
significant  extent  financed  through  foreign-capital  inflows.  Rising  public  spending  often 
contributed 
imbalances  had  adverse 
consequences.  Among  other  things,  they  added  to  domestic  price  pressures,  reduced 
competitiveness,  and, along  with  rising  private  consumption,  contributed  to  higher  external 
deficits.  In  some  countries,  inflation  surged  to  double-digit  levels,  wage  increases  far 
exceeded gains in labour productivity, and there were excessive increases in asset prices, 
especially  the  price  of  housing.  These  external  imbalances  left  the  economies  concerned 
extremely vulnerable to an external shock. That shock came in the form of an eruption of a 
crisis in the US subprime mortgage market in August 2007.  
In its early stages, the crisis was confined to advanced economies. Local and foreign banks 
in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  held  only  negligible  amounts  of  so-called  toxic  assets. 
However,  as  access  to  international  capital  markets  was  impaired,  countries  in  this  region 
most  in  need  of  external  financing  experienced  large  declines  in  output.  A  number  of 
economies in Central and Eastern Europe were only moderately affected. Output contraction, 
however,  was  especially  severe  in  the  Baltics  and,  to  a  somewhat  lesser  extent,  in  South 
Eastern  Europe.  This  circumstance  suggests  that  countries  with  the  more  serious 
imbalances and vulnerabilities were most at risk from external financial shocks. The lesson 
from this recent experience is that convergence efforts should be accompanied by stability-
oriented policies that contain the build-up of imbalances, both domestic and external. 
Policy efforts at the national and international levels helped contain the impact of the crisis on 
economic activity. The prevailing exchange-rate regimes were successfully defended and the 
domestic  banking  sectors  showed  considerable  resilience.  In  many  instances,  fiscal  and 
monetary policies were tightened. In some cases the tightening occurred within the context of 
programs supported by the IMF and the EU. As a result, financial conditions have stabilized 
and there are now clear signs of a recovery in economic activity in most countries in Central 
and Eastern Europe.  
Nevertheless,  the  global  crisis  has  entailed  large  costs  for  the  region.  There  has  been  a 
sharp decline in economic activity and unemployment has risen sharply in many countries. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Moreover,  the  ongoing  de-leveraging  process,  that  is  the  need  to  repair  household  and 
corporate  balance  sheets,  tighter  bank-credit  standards,  as  well  as  rising  long-term 
unemployment,  could  slow  the  pace  of  economic  recovery  in  many  SEE  countries.  The 
South East Europe economies, like most other economies in Central and Eastern Europe, 
will  likely  experience  reduced  capital  inflows,  because  investors  have  become  more  risk-
averse.  Consequently,  foreign  investment  may  decline  compared  with  pre-crisis  levels, 
leading to lower economic growth compared with the growth rates experienced in the years 
leading up to the crisis.  
In  light  of  the  above,  there  will  be  a  need  to  formulate  and  implement  economic  policies 
geared  toward  developing  alternative  sources  of  growth  –  policies  that  will  render  the 
economies less vulnerable to external shocks and that will allow them to better navigate their 
way  through  shocks  should  they  occur.  One  such  source  of  growth  concerns  the  traded-
goods sector. Growth based increasingly on exports will help avoid the boom-bust cycle and 
asset-price bubbles that have in the past been associated with non-FDI capital inflows. Such 
a growth will prove more sustainable. A more-diversified export base will also help protect 
the  economies  concerned  from  sector-specific  shocks,  while  providing  an  important 
mechanism for limiting the build-up of external debt. 
Fiscal  consolidation  will  be  an  essential  element  for  securing  high  growth,  by  crowding-in 
private  investment  and  making  room  for  much  needed  infrastructure  investment.  Such 
consolidation  will  need  to  be  accompanied  by  improvements  in  the  effectiveness  and 
efficiency  of  public  spending  as  well  as  of  the  tax  system  and  its  administration.  We  look 
forward  to  a  discussion  of  issues  related  to  fiscal  consolidation  and  macroeconomic 
adjustment in Session I of the Conference, which will be chaired by Mr. Yannis Costopoulos, 
Chairman of Alpha Bank.  
The  desirability  of  establishing  a  more-diversified  export-based  growth  in  the  region 
highlights  the  importance  of  improving  competitiveness.  In  this  regard,  policies  that 
encourage  greater  flexibility  in  the  labour  market,  competitive  product  markets,  and  an 
improved business environment will be critical. Issues addressing the necessary policies will 
be discussed in Session II of the Conference, which will be chaired by Mr. George Tavlas, 
Director General at the Bank of Greece.  
Policies of stabilization and reform cannot be effectively implemented without public support. 
In  a  period of  falling incomes  and  rising  unemployment,  achieving  that  support  may  prove 
challenging. It is especially important to try to ensure that the reforms are perceived by the 
public  to  be  fair  and  effective,  so  that  the  short-term  sacrifices  are  considered  worthwhile. 
Issues related to the building of social and political support for reforms in South East Europe 
will  be  addressed  in  Session  III  of  the  Conference,  which  will  be  chaired  by  Mr.  Thanos 
Veremis, Professor at the University of Athens.  
With reference to the financial sector in South East Europe, the presence of foreign banks in 
the region has increased both the efficiency of financial intermediation and the availability of 
credit  to  the  real  economy.  Yet,  it  has  been  argued  that,  in  some  cases,  financial  stress 
originating in EU parent banks may have been transmitted to the Central and Eastern Europe 
region in the early stages of the crisis. It has also been argued that euro area-based parent 
banks helped fuel credit booms in the region and encouraged the use of unhedged foreign-
currency  borrowing.  After  the  crisis  erupted,  the  “Vienna  Initiative”  responded  to  those 
criticisms.  The  Initiative  promoted  a  dialogue  among  parent  banks,  home  and  host 
supervisors, and governments under the umbrella of the IMF, the EBRD and the EU. It made 
the  countries  in  the  region  less  vulnerable  to  shocks  caused  by  sudden  stops  in  capital 
inflows by committing parent banks to maintain their exposure to these countries. However, a 
number of challenges lie ahead, including the financial stability risks stemming form lending 
in foreign currencies and the substantial build-up of currency mismatches in private sector 
balance sheets.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Moreover, the Basel III framework, which has recently been released, sets stricter capital and 
liquidity  rules  than  those  that  presently  exist.  The  new  rules  will  encourage  banks  to  rely 
more  on  deposit-taking,  thereby  rendering  the  banking  industry  of  the  region  more  stable. 
However, the new rules may also lead to slower credit growth, since commercial banks may 
have  to  tighten  their  lending  practices.  The  Basel  III  framework  may,  therefore,  affect  the 
dynamics  of  the  macroeconomy  as  well  as  the  channels  of  credit  that  support  economic 
activity. Issues related to the role of the banking system in the region will be addressed by 
fellow Central Bank Governors in Session IV of the Conference, which I will be honored to 
chair.  
Before concluding, I would like to touch briefly on the role of the ECB and the Eurosystem in 
the crisis. The Governing Council of the ECB has moved quickly and forcibly to adapt the 
ECB’s tools of monetary policy to the challenges of the crisis, most importantly by protecting 
euro area banks against liquidity shortfalls. We provided liquidity in unlimited volumes and 
with longer maturities to banks at an early stage. In parallel, we reduced the interest rate at 
which the banks can borrow from the Eurosystem to a historical low of 1%. We also launched 
a programme to purchase euro-denominated “covered” bonds issued in the euro area. As a 
result,  concerns  that  a  credit  crunch  might  emerge  have  not  been  realised.  Moreover, 
confronted  with  a  serious  malfunctioning  of  the  market  for  sovereign  debt  last  spring,  the 
Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  intervened  in  that  market.  This  intervention  was  meant  to 
ensure a smoother transmission of monetary policy in all euro-area economies.  
It is now a great pleasure for me to welcome our keynote speaker, Mr. Erik Berglöf, Chief 
Economist of the EBRD.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
