Mario Draghi: Tension and new alliances – the currency wars 
Speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  Chairman  of  the  Financial 
Stability  Board,  at  the  “Les  Rencontres  Économiques  d’Aix-en-Provence”,  Session  2, 
“Tension and new alliances – the currency wars”, Aix-en-Provence, 8–10 July 2011. 
 Introduction 
The  concept  of  “currency  war”,  coined  by  Brazil’s  Finance  Minister  Guido  Mantega  in 
September 2010, is indicative of the tensions that pervade the international landscape at the 
current juncture. Indeed, in the past months, a number of countries have engaged in direct 
interventions in the foreign exchange markets or adopted some forms of capital controls.  
Let me offer a few thoughts on these issues. 
If  we  look  back  at  the  developments  in  the  international  monetary  system  over  the  past 
30 years, we see that among advanced economies the era of competitive devaluations has 
come to an end. By the end of the 1990s, a large body of research had emerged pointing out 
the  conflict  between  intervention  in  foreign  exchange  markets  and  the  commitment  of 
monetary policy to price stability. In the United States, the doubts about the effectiveness of 
sterilized interventions prompted their abandonment some  time after the Mexican crisis. In 
Europe,  the  adoption  of  a  single  currency  put  an  end  to  the  realignments  that  had 
characterized first the “Snake” and then the first two stages of the European Monetary Union. 
Currency interventions in these economies are now made only in case of excessively rapid 
and  large  fluctuations.  In  the  years  from  1981  to  1997  the  Federal  Reserve  intervened 
453 times, more than 30 interventions per year on average. In the last 12 years, in contrast, it 
has  intervened  only  twice,  on  September  2000,  when  the  euro  had  reached  a  record  low 
against  the  dollar,  and  on  18  March  this  year,  in  the  aftermath  of  the  earthquake  that  hit 
Japan. The European Central Bank has intervened only four additional times, in September 
and  November  2000.  Japan  has  been  somewhat  more  reluctant  to  abandon  currency 
interventions, because of the continuing upward pressures on the yen in the face of a troubled 
slow-growing economy. Yet, after 2004, it has intervened only twice, on September 2010 and 
this year in the days following the earthquake.  
The determination of exchange rates between the dollar, the euro and the yen has been thus 
left entirely to market forces. Fluctuations have been large: over the past 20 years the ratio 
between the minimum and the maximum value of the dollar-euro and dollar yen exchange 
rates was almost 2:1. But the large size and the high level of economic development of these 
economies make them resilient to currency fluctuations, as the exchange of goods, services, 
and financial assets mostly occurs within each area, while the presence of deep forward and 
futures markets facilitates currency hedging.  
This situation contrasts with that prevailing in emerging economies, where policy measures 
to managing the exchange rate have been the norm. The desire to limit the effects of large 
swings in exchange rates on the real economy, and the difficulty of insuring against them, 
were certainly an important reason. But there are other reasons as well. Perhaps the most 
important is that managing exchange rates allowed countries to pursue a strategy of export-
led growth. Moreover, especially after the Asian financial crisis, the wish of building up large 
precautionary reserves has played an important role. These policies, as we know, favored 
the building up of the large imbalances between surplus and deficit countries, which provided 
the economic precondition for the international crisis. 
In  the  aftermath  of  the  global  crisis  timely  and  internationally  coordinated  policies  were 
fundamental  to  avoid  a  new  Great  Depression.  Crucially,  and  in  sharp  contrast  with  the 
experience of the 1930’s, there was no large-scale recourse to protectionism or to competitive 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
devaluations. To be sure, an underlying demand for protectionist measures has never been 
muted,  as  globalization  represents  a  threat  for  monopolistic  rents,  and  inevitably  increased 
with  the  crisis.  Not  surprisingly,  during  the  crisis,  17  of  the  G20  countries  introduced 
protectionist  measures,  despite  the  pledge  to  avoid  them  signed  in  November  2008  by  the 
G20  leaders.  However,  most  of  them  were  very  narrow  in  scope  and  their  impact  on  the 
volume of international trade has been negligible. 
Fundamentally, countries are now more aware that they are interdependent through supply 
chains and imported inputs. Moreover, as it often is the case, many protectionist measures, 
including  the  so-called  “Buy  America”  provision,  appear  to  have  been  circumvented. 
Furthermore,  WTO  agreements  now  provide  greater  legal  stability  for  trade  relations.  The 
quick recovery of international trade following the end of the Great Recession owes a lot to 
the fact that the world has avoided currency and commercial wars.  
The current situation 
Overall,  a  cooperative  environment  prevailed.  Overtime,  however,  with  the  recovery  taking 
ground the situation has somewhat changed. Today the danger that an uncooperative game 
could  gradually  gain  ground  is  much  more  material  than  only  a  couple  of  years  ago.  A 
number of features of the present global conditions are behind this risk. 
First,  the  recovery  is  very  uneven.  This  implies  that  domestic  economic  policies  are 
confronting  very  different  conditions  at  home  and  are  thus  moved  by  different,  not 
necessarily consistent, objectives. With the notable exception of Germany, economic growth 
remains feeble in the advanced countries, too slow to help redress seriously weakened fiscal 
balances and unemployment rates. Expansionary policies have exhausted their margins of 
maneuver. The need to end the exceptional support to the economies provided by fiscal and 
monetary  policies  in  the  last  three  years  is  undisputed.  Absent  action,  debt  sustainability 
problems and higher global long term interest rates are a certainty.  
In  emerging  economies,  there  are  instead  signs  of  overheating,  with  rising  inflation  and 
strong  credit  creation.  Some  monetary  policy  tightening  has  taken  place  but  real  interest 
rates  remain  very  low  or  even  negative  in  many  countries.  Capital  inflows  are  for  many 
countries back at the high pre-crisis pushed by global monetary and financial conditions that 
remain  very  accommodating.  Monetary  authorities  are  refrained  from  increasing  interest 
rates  further  by  the  fear  of  spurring  larger  inflows.  As  a  consequence  capital  controls  and 
other  prudential  measures  are  used,  which  may  provide  relief  in  the  short  term  but  also 
generate distortions over longer periods.  
Second,  the  recent  experience  has  confirmed  that  the  world  has  become  multi-polar,  with 
emerging markets representing a new pole of autonomous growth. However, we have not yet 
moved to a multi-polar monetary system. One important reason is that countries are at very 
different  stages  of  financial  development.  The  demand  for  advanced  economy  assets 
remains very strong and the dollar is still at the center of the system. Strong capital flows to 
emerging economies are natural and even desirable as these economies offer the highest 
perspective returns, but in many countries they continue to be exceeded by capital outflows 
into advanced-economy debt, especially into the US. 
Third,  macroeconomic  imbalances  are  increasing  again  after  a  temporary  retrenchment 
during  the  crisis  mainly  due  to  a  depressed  demand  in  deficit  countries.  They  reflect  a 
continuation  of  the  unbalanced  pattern  of  savings  across  the  globe  and  make  the 
international  landscape  much  more  vulnerable  to  the  risks  of  sudden  reversal  in  market 
sentiment and risk appetite and/or changes in the interest rate cycle. 
This  situation  of  the  international  monetary  system  is  bound  to  generate  suboptimal 
outcomes and, especially, risks to the global financial stability. The existence of one major 
reserve currency can make exchange rate fluctuations more abrupt; at the same time it limits 
the  scope  for  markets  to  discipline macroeconomic  policies  in  advanced  deficit  economies 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
(especially the US). Thus far only limited realignment of exchange rates in emerging market 
economies  with  large  surpluses  took  place.  The  pegging  of  exchange  rates  to  the  dollar 
affects  the  exchange  rate  of  third  countries  away  from  fundamentals.  In  emerging  market 
economies with flexible exchange rates and open capital accounts, large capital inflows have 
pushed up their exchange rates, in some cases into overvaluation territory (for example, in 
Latin  America).  The  insufficient  adjustment  of  exchange  rates  and  of  macroeconomic 
imbalances  may  lead  to  disorderly  policy  reactions  and  encourage  beggar-thy-neighbor 
policies. 
The way forward 
The priority for the international community is to avoid that current disequilibria degenerate in 
a disorderly adjustment. We need determined action in a number of fields. 
First  and  foremost,  a  rebalancing  of  global  demand  is  key  for  a  sustainable  recovery. 
Advanced economies need to tackle the debt problem: fiscal consolidation and reduction of 
leverage in the private sector, must be accompanied by structural reforms aimed at spurring 
potential  growth.  In  large  fast-growing  emerging  markets,  especially  in  China,  excessive 
saving  should  be curbed;  this  implies  a  gradual  shift  away  from  a  purely  export-led  model 
that must be supported by a correct set of policies, including introducing social safety nets in 
order  to  facilitate  the  reallocation  of  workers  across  sectors  and  reduce  precautionary 
savings.  More  currency  flexibility  can  support  the  rebalancing  of  demand.  In  large  surplus 
emerging economy, most notably in China, allowing the currency to appreciate gradually by 
not  reinvesting  surplus  funds  into  advanced  economies’  assets  would  also  help  to  reduce 
inflationary pressures.  
Second,  a  more  sustainable  pattern  of  global  demand  can  be  reached  only  by  reinforcing 
international cooperation and multilateral surveillance. An important step in this direction was 
made  at  the  2009  Pittsburgh  Summit,  where  the  G20  pledged  to  work  together  to  set  the 
world economy on a path of strong and sustainable growth. The G20 “Framework for Strong, 
Sustainable, and Balanced Growth” and the “mutual assessment process” (MAP), are crucial 
to identify common objectives and the required actions to reduce imbalances. It is indeed a 
demanding task as the Seoul Summit last year and the current process within the G20 this 
year have shown. 
Third,  even  in  the  most  favorable  scenario  a  rebalancing  of  global  demand  will  take  time: 
macroeconomic  imbalances  and  the  associated  large  capital  flows  across  major  economic 
areas will continue for some time. They must be financed in an orderly manner. The reform 
of  the  global  financial  system  remains  essential  to  be  able  to  rely  on  a  more  solid  and 
efficient financial sector than we had in the past.  
Fourth,  while  the  credibility  of  the  WTO  rule-based  system  has  survived  the  recent  global 
recession, current agreements still leave too many domestic markets (particularly in services) 
effectively insulated from the beneficial pressures of foreign competition. It must be avoided 
that  the  delay  of  a  successful  conclusion  of  the  current  round  of  multilateral  trade 
liberalization  –  the  Doha  Round  –  leaves  a  hole  that  would  be  probably  filled  in  by  less 
efficient and less equitable bilateral trade agreements. 
Concluding,  I  do  not  think  there  is  an  explicit  currency  war,  but  the  risk  of  diverging  and 
uncoordinated national policies, focused exclusively on an internal dimension and short term 
objectives, is becoming more worrying. We must make our policies more global, more aware 
of  the  need  of  taking  into  account  the  impact  they  have  on  each  other.  The  international 
community has shown to be able to work together to avoid a collapse of the global economy. 
Now  it  has  to  prove  that  it  is  able  to  do  the  same  even  at  a  time  when  the  emergency  is 
behind us, but we are still confronting very serious challenges. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
