Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The Triffin dilemma revisited 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  Conference  on  the  International  Monetary  System:  sustainability  and  reform 
proposals,  marking  the  100th  anniversary  of  Robert  Triffin  (1911–1993),  at  the  Triffin 
International Foundation, Brussels, 3 October 2011. 
 I  wish  to  thank  Ettore  Dorrucci  for  his  contribution  to  this  speech.  I  remain  solely  responsible  for  the  opinions 
contained herein. 
Introduction 
The intellectual heritage of Robert Triffin begins with the relevance of his “dilemma” to our 
days. We still have a situation in which one national currency – the US dollar – serves as the 
main international currency. It remains at the heart of the international monetary and financial 
system (or IMS). And we still have a fundamental tension between the currency demands of 
rapidly  growing  economies,  the  domestic  policy  incentives  of  reserve  issuing/holding 
countries, and global economic and financial stability: in Triffin’s words, the system remains 
“highly dependent on individual countries’ decisions”.  
This  tension  –  the  Triffin  dilemma  –  was  linked  to  the  specific  modalities  of  the  gold-
exchange standard in 1960, when his Gold and the dollar crisis was first published. Today 
we are in a much more flexible system, where the demand for global liquidity can be more 
easily accommodated. But even if the mechanics have changed, the dilemma is still valid if 
we capture its essence and formulate it in broader terms, as I will do in the first part of my 
comments today. In second place, I will briefly recall how the dilemma came into being and 
was addressed in Triffin’s times. This will allow me to better identify the main differences and 
similarities compared with our times, which will lead me to conclude that it is indeed correct 
to talk about a “Triffin dilemma revisited”. Finally, I will look ahead and ask whether and how 
it is possible to escape the dilemma today.  
My  main  policy  conclusion  is  that  we  need  a  number  of  incentives  for  the  major  reserve 
issuers  and  holders  so  as  not  to  cause  negative  externalities  for  other  countries,  thereby 
helping to ensure global stability. 
Triffin dilemma: a general formulation 
1. 
Each  international  monetary  and  financial  system  has  to  rely  on  one  or  more  international 
currencies in order to allow economic agents to interact in the global economy by using such 
currencies  as  a  means  of  payment,  a  unit  of  account  or  a  store  of  value.  When  these 
international currencies are also domestic ones, the supply of global liquidity stems from one 
or  more  “core  countries”.  And  when  the  core  countries  operate  as  a  monopoly  or  quasi-
monopoly,  over  time  they  tend  to  take  advantage  of  other  countries’  high  dependence  on 
their  domestic  money.  By  exploiting  this  “exorbitant  privilege”,  the  core  countries  develop 
policy  incentives  to  accommodate  shocks  (e.g.  the  financing  of  a  war)  or  growth  models 
(e.g. based on over-consumption) that can ultimately be sustained only if the rest of the world 
unconditionally demands their own liquid, safe assets. However, when policies become too 
short term-oriented and inward-looking, they tend to produce negative spillovers on the rest 
of the world (e.g. inflationary pressures or an environment with relatively low yields) and over 
the longer run may, if there are no rebalancing measures, prove unsustainable and impair 
the smooth functioning of the IMS.  
For some time (or even a very long time), however, this behaviour does not jeopardise the 
international status of the core currencies. This is not only because there are no alternatives, 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
but also because certain systemic countries in the rest of the world have in the meantime 
developed  incentives  to  increasingly  demand  assets  denominated  in  the  core  currencies. 
Such  countries  in  the  “IMS  periphery”  tend  to  pursue  growth  models  that  match,  with 
opposite sign, those of the core countries and may likewise produce negative externalities: 
think of the current account surpluses and reserve accumulation, which conflicted with the 
IMS  rules  during  Bretton  Woods  times  and  which  contribute  to  excessively  low  yields  and 
trade distortions at the present time.  
Hence  the  tension,  which  can  sooner  or  later  become  a  genuine  dilemma  involving  short-
term domestic policy incentives in the key reserve issuing/holding countries on the one hand, 
and the longer-term stability of a given international monetary and financial system on the 
other.  
Given this general formulation, however, there is no single way to address the tension here. 
And  indeed  many  different  types  of  IMS  have  existed  over  time.  In  Triffin’s  day,  some  set 
stringent rules on the system’s adjustment and on the availability of global liquidity, as I will 
recount  in  a  minute.  Others,  as  at  present,  have  instead  made  it  easier  to  create  global 
liquidity and to finance imbalances while neglecting the system’s longer-term stability – an 
issue which I will discuss later.  
Triffin dilemma in Triffin’s times 
2. 
During  the  Bretton  Woods  system,  the  dollar  was  the  international  currency,  and  the 
international currency was mainly needed as a means of payment and a unit of account to 
purchase foreign goods. Given largely closed capital accounts and underdeveloped financial 
markets, the store of value function was limited, and mainly related to the need to cover any 
temporary  shortage  of  dollars  to  import  goods  from  abroad.  The  other  key  features  of  the 
system were fixed exchange rates vis-à-vis the dollar, the gold convertibility of the dollar, and 
a  mechanism  of  adjustment  of  imbalances  based  on  a  symmetrical  correction  of  domestic 
absorption and relative prices in the relevant countries. However, there was no mechanism 
to  impose  symmetry  in  the  adjustment  process,  and  adjustment  through  exchange  rate 
realignments was possible, although it rarely happened. 
When the Bretton Woods system was launched, in the second half of the 1940s, the huge 
economic gap with the United States made it difficult for other countries to acquire dollars 
without US help. By the end of the 1950s, however, the global shortage of dollars was over, 
thanks  to  rising  dollar-denominated  exports.  This  was  welcomed  since  it  implied  that 
countries no longer needed American assistance to obtain dollars in order to address post-
war economic problems. Yet it was not entirely good news, as Triffin realised. Countries such 
as  Germany  and  Japan  had  indeed  started  accumulating  large  current  account  surpluses 
and, therefore, dollars in the form of rising official reserves. This implied an accumulation of 
US  monetary  liabilities  vis-à-vis  non-residents.  The  problem  was  that  the  supply  of  such 
liabilities by the United States at a fixed exchange rate was elastic to the growing demand, 
but the American commitment to supply gold upon request at an equally fixed price was not.1 
Already by the early 1960s, US monetary liabilities towards non-residents exceeded US gold 
holdings. Hence the dilemma, which in Triffin’s day took the well-known, specific shape: if the 
United States refused to provide other countries with US dollars, trade would stagnate and 
the  world  economy  would  eventually  be  trapped  in  a  deflationary  bias;  but  if  the  United 
States provided an unlimited supply of dollars, the confidence that it would convert them into 
gold would erode confidence in its international currency.2 
                                                 
1  See, for example, Eichengreen 2011. 
2  See Triffin 1960. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  dilemma  could,  however,  be  formulated  in  more  general  terms.  Given  the  BW  rules, 
there were domestic policy incentives in the key reserve-issuing and holding countries not to 
comply with these rules, at the expense of the system’s sustainability. This is mainly because 
using the exchange rate as an alternative rebalancing tool was always a temptation which, 
especially  in  case  of  large  shocks,  offered  a  politically  more  palatable  option  than  lengthy 
and  costly  domestic  adjustment.  At  the  end  of  the  1960s,  the  largest  of  all  shocks  –  the 
Vietnam War – was financed by the United States with expansionary policies that resulted in 
high inflationary pressures and took no account of global monetary stability. As a result, the 
US dollar-denominated reserve assets lost 40% of their purchasing power, thus making the 
creditors  to  the  United  States  increasingly  reluctant  to  finance  the  war  by  accumulating 
reserves denominated in dollars. The system eventually collapsed, as Triffin had predicted: 
faced with the dilemma, the system’s core country preferred not to maintain its commitment 
to keep the value of the dollar in terms of gold, but rather to pursue its internal needs while 
providing the other countries (which were not adjusting either) with its reserve currency. 
The dilemma today: What has changed? What is still valid? 
3. 
What has changed since Triffin’s times? Well, the way in which the IMS works and thus the 
modalities  through  which  the  dilemma  operates  have  changed  considerably;  but  the 
fundamental  tension  between  short-term  domestic  policy  incentives  and  the  stability  of  the 
IMS has not. Hence the Triffin dilemma is, in its essence, still alive and well. 
What has changed? 
3.1 
There have been three major changes. 
First, we have learned that the BW rules were too stringent. Over the past 40 years, a new 
informal IMS has been developing which has turned out to be much more elastic in nature 
than the previous ones. The dollar no longer needs to be “as good as gold”; exchange rate 
adjustment  has  become  an  important  element  in  the  rebalancing  toolkit;  and  the  IMS  has 
been  adapting  to  the  different  economic  conditions  and  policy  preferences  of  individual 
countries. In particular, the exchange rates of all advanced economies and some emerging 
economies  are  now  freely  floating,  whereas  a  new  dollar  area  encompassing  systemically 
relevant creditors has emerged, thus making the IMS an hybrid floating/fixed system.  
Second, a new globally important currency, the euro, has appeared on the stage. This has 
had important consequences, but has not meant a shift to a genuine duopoly in the supply of 
international currencies. While the euro has become a credible alternative to the dollar, this 
has had little impact on the dollar’s centrality in the IMS. In particular, the exorbitant privilege 
remains  largely  the  dollar’s  attribute.  To  be  sure,  it  is  undeniable  that  the  very  low  yield 
spreads  associated,  until  approximately  2008,  with  the  debt  of  certain  European  countries 
were mainly a by-product of the “privilege” of being part of the euro area. And it is also true 
that this was one of the factors that contributed to underestimating the crucial importance of 
fiscal discipline and competitiveness in the monetary union. But it is equally accurate that the 
idiosyncratic negative shocks stemming from such euro area countries in the past two years 
have led to a major re-pricing of their sovereign risk. This is opposite of what has happened 
on the occasion of similar negative shocks originating from the United States. The current 
stability  of  the  exchange  rate  of  the  euro  is  more  attributable  to  the  overall  good 
fundamentals of the whole euro area than to any exorbitant privilege. 
But the third and most significant change, from a Triffin perspective, is the following: there is 
no longer a fundamental global liquidity3 shortage that is intrinsic to the very functioning of 
                                                 
3  Borio and Zhu (2008) insightfully define liquidity is “the ease with which perceptions of value can be turned 
into purchasing power”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the system. The accumulation of global external imbalances in today’s world should not be 
seen as a necessary precondition for the provision of global liquidity and the expansion of 
world trade. Let me explain. 
Today,  the  United  States  and  the  euro  area  are  not  obliged  to  run  rising  current  account 
deficits to meet the demand for dollars or euros.4 This is for two main, interlinked reasons. 
First,  well-functioning,  more  liquid  and  deeply  integrated  global  financial  markets  enable 
reserve-issuing  countries  to  provide  the  rest  of  the  world  with  safe  and  liquid  financial 
liabilities while investing a corresponding amount in a wide range of financial assets abroad. 
The euro has indeed become an important international currency since its inception and the 
euro area has been running a balanced current account. In a world where there is no longer 
a  one-to-one  link  between  current  accounts,  i.e.  net  capital  flows  and  global  liquidity,  a 
proper understanding of global liquidity also needs to include gross capital flows.  
Second,  under  BW  global  liquidity  and  official  liquidity5  were  basically  the  same  thing,  but 
today the “ease of financing” at global level also crucially depends on private liquidity directly 
provided by financial institutions, for instance through interbank lending or market making in 
securities markets. Given the endogenous character of such private liquidity, global official 
and private liquidity have to be assessed together for a proper evaluation of global liquidity 
conditions at some point in time, and there is no endemic shortage of global liquidity, as the 
empirical  evidence  confirms.  This  is  not  to  deny  that  temporary  shortages  can  occur,  as 
happened after the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers in September 2008. But such shortages 
are a by-product of shocks and boom-bust cycles, not an intrinsic feature of the IMS, and can 
be tackled with an appropriate global financial safety net. 
What is still valid? 
3.2 
First, there remain factors that create Triffin-dilemma-like pressures on the IMS. In particular, 
the  official  sector  of  several  emerging  market  economies  (EMEs)  still  consistently  adds  its 
own demand for safe US assets to the market-based private demand for US dollars. Even 
when a shock originates from the United States, sizeable and persistent official capital flows 
to  that  country  seek  out  the  dollar as  a  safe  store  of  value  and  a  precautionary  source  of 
liquidity. As a result, total net capital stemming from EMEs taken as a whole flows uphill to 
advanced  economies  (the  Lucas  paradox),  even  though  private  capital  continues  to  flow 
downhill, as the theory would predict. This would not be a problem if it did not increase the 
fragility  of  the  US  financial  system  by  pushing  down  risk  premia  and  real  interest  rates, 
thereby boosting financial innovation and encouraging upswings in the degree of leverage.6 
But it does increase that fragility.  
                                                 
4 
It should be noted that in BW times the United States had managed to keep a sustainable current account 
position. The U.S. current account indeed recorded surpluses (though declining ones after the onset of the 
Vietnam  war)  or,  at  most,  minor  deficits  over  the  whole  BW  period.  On  the  capital  account  side,  this  was 
mirrored by large long-term capital outflows from the United States, especially foreign direct investment (FDI) 
by American multinationals, which were financed with short-term capital inflows in the form of bank deposits 
and  Treasury  bills  and  bonds.  The  United  States  was,  therefore,  acting  as  “banker  of  the  world”,  and  the 
accumulation  of  U.S.  net  long-term  foreign  assets  was  reassuring  foreign  investors  (Eichengreen  2011). 
However, assuming that capital flow restrictions and underdeveloped financial markets elsewhere in the world 
would have persisted, the country would likely have soon reached a limit in its ability to engage in maturity 
transformation in the capital account. Triffin’s prediction that the core country would have had to eventually run 
increasing current account deficits to allow for world trade expansion was, therefore, basically right under the 
BW rules. 
5  Official liquidity can be defined as the amount of funds that is unconditionally available to settle claims through 
monetary  authorities,  mainly  consisting  of  central  bank  money  in  reserve  currencies  and  foreign  exchange 
reserves. 
6  See, for example, Caballero 2009 and Caballero and Krishnamurthy 2009. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Three core drivers of reserve accumulation can be identified, in particular:  
1. 
A  few  surplus  EMEs  buy  dollars  as  a  by-product  of  a  strategy  aiming  to 
systematically keep their real effective exchange rate undervalued;  
Other EMEs with largely open capital accounts, which are exposed to capital flow 
volatility,  purchase  dollars  to  build  up  precautionary  reserves  in  the  event  of  a 
reversal of capital inflows;  
The  commodity  exporters  recycle  their  current  account  surpluses  into  safe  dollar-
denominated assets. 
2. 
3. 
As  in  Triffin’s  day,  however,  this  cuts  both  ways.  The  demand  for  safe  assets  feeds  that 
exorbitant  privilege  enjoyed  by  the  United  States.  This  contributes  to  a  weakening  of 
US policy discipline as the country tends to excessively rely on easy credit in normal times 
and very expansionary macroeconomic policies in times of crisis. The outcome is excessive 
US indebtedness. The corporate sector was in debt prior to the burst of the dot-com bubble 
in 2001; so were the household and financial sectors before the eruption of the sub-prime 
crisis in 2007–08; and the official sector is in debt today.  
This leads me to the second valid element of the Triffin dilemma. The IMS is not in a better 
situation  today.  The  quandary  under  the  BW  system  –  the  lack  of  a  credible  anchor  for 
international monetary and financial stability – continues to exist. Key issuers and holders of 
reserve currencies pursue domestic objectives independently of what would best serve the 
global  system  and  even  their  longer-run  interest.  To  the  extent  that  these  policies  pay 
insufficient  attention 
longer-term 
macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  concerns,  they  tend  to  produce  unsustainable 
imbalances and fuel vulnerability in the global financial system. In particular, a large body of 
literature supports the view that a worldwide glut of both liquidity and planned savings over 
investment  –  stemming  from,  respectively,  reserve-issuing  and  reserve-  accumulating 
economies – was a key driver of the hazardous environment at the root of the global financial 
and economic crisis which broke out in summer 2007.7 
All in all, as in Triffin’s time, there is no a credible mechanism for symmetric adjustment of 
imbalances  at  work  today,  even  though  we  now  have  more  flexible  exchange  rates,  more 
financial innovation, more capital mobility and more private international liquidity. 
for  other  countries  and 
to  negative  externalities 
Is it possible to escape Triffin?  
4. 
In the event, Triffin was proved right not in the strict sense, but in a broader sense. Short-
sighted policies that support unsustainable growth models not only tend to fuel the booms 
that precede financial crises, but may also, over the longer run, undermine the confidence 
that is the basis for the reserve asset status of one or more national currencies. Even the 
more flexible IMS of today may therefore, in this sense, prove inherently unstable. 
To obtain the missing link between the policy discipline of major reserve issuers and holders 
on the one hand and global stability on the other, we need incentives to prevent them from 
causing  negative  externalities.  And  such  incentives  can  only  stem  from  a  mix  of 
i) internationally  cooperative  policy  actions,  ii)  proper  crisis  responses  and  iii) structural 
developments.  
First,  regarding  international  cooperation,  we  have  seen  significant  progress  in  IMF  and 
regional  multilateral  surveillance,  as  well  as  in  G20  mutual  policy  assessment,  in  the 
aftermath  of  the  crisis.  Countries  have  indeed  been  looking  for  a  platform  to  exert  some 
influence on those policies of partner countries that were producing negative spillovers – be 
                                                 
7  See Dorrucci and McKay 2011 for a review of such literature. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
they fiscal profligacy, lack of financial sector reform, unconstrained reserve accumulation or 
the reintroduction of capital controls. To obtain this platform, countries have at the same time 
to allow their partners a platform to influence their own policies. This is the moment when 
things might start to change.8 
Second,  experience  suggests  that  cooperative  policies,  unfortunately,  are  not  enough,  and 
crises do play a part in producing fundamental changes in the system of policy incentives. For 
instance, it was not until the euro area sovereign debt crisis that EMU’s economic governance 
started to be seriously enhanced – and the list of examples is of course very long.  
Third,  not  only  crises,  but  also  longer-term,  largely  market-driven  structural  developments 
may  eventually  alter  the  system  of  policy  incentives.  One  such  development  could  be, 
according to some, a shift towards a truly multi-polar currency system.9 In such an IMS, it is 
argued, there would be credible alternatives to dollar-denominated investments, which in turn 
would inevitably enhance policy discipline in the United States. Also, a multi-polar currency 
world  would  allow  for  greater  monetary  policy  autonomy  in  EMEs  such  as  China,  which 
would thus be in a position to better address their imbalances and overheating pressures.  
I broadly share the view that a truly multi-polar IMS would imply better policy incentives for 
stability-oriented policies. But how do we get there? And would a multi-polar currency system 
be stable, or would a new hegemon eventually emerge, as the United States did in the past 
century?  To  deal  with  possible  dollar  shortages,  Triffin  preferred  the  issuance  by  a  global 
central  bank  of  a  new  supranational  currency  serving  as  “outside  fiat  money”  and  floating 
against  national  currencies,  which  countries  would  be  obliged  to  accept  in  international 
transactions. Wouldn’t this be the best pattern to follow? 
Conclusion 
These  questions  are  very  relevant  ones,  and  the  responses  to  them  are  far  from 
straightforward. Let me, therefore, conclude by just offering a few final thoughts: 
 
How  do  we  achieve  a  truly  multi-polar  IMS?  The  role  of  further  financial  market 
development, capital account liberalisation and exchange rate flexibility in EMEs is 
often  underestimated  in  this  context.  The  more  progress  EMEs  make  in  this 
direction, the lower their official capital outflows to advanced economies will be. This 
would  progressively  reduce  the  demand  for  safe  debt  instruments  issued  by 
advanced  economies  and  eventually  contribute  to  greater  financial  stability 
worldwide.10 It would also allow a better channelling of domestic credit to investment 
and consumption, which in turn would promote growth driven by domestic demand, 
thereby reducing the incentive to pursue export-led models based on undervalued 
exchange rates. Such a process would probably be, by its very nature, gradual and 
driven by a myriad of autonomous and independent decisions by private and official 
actors.  Hopefully  this  would  make  possible  an  orderly  transition  towards  a  multi-
polar IMS, with the dollar still remaining “first among equals” for a long time. But in 
the meantime, a lot will, of course, depend on the ability of policy-makers to take the 
right decisions.  
Would  a  multi-polar  IMS  be  a  stable  one?  Greater  symmetry  in  financial 
globalisation  would  certainly  go  in  this  direction.  But  would  economic  weight  and 
policy credibility – the other key ingredients for a currency to acquire an international 
status and start enjoying incumbency advantages – also materialise in such a way 
                                                  
8  See, for example, Rajan 2010. 
9  See, for example, Angeloni et al. 2011. 
10  See Bini Smaghi, 2007. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 that there would be a sufficient number of currency competitors around the table? 
Once again, the response is to a significant extent in the hands of today’s policy-
makers. 
Finally, would not a bancor-based IMS, as Keynes was hoping for in the 1940s and 
Triffin  in  the  1960s,  be  the  best  response?  This  type  of  solution  had  very  few 
advocates  in  the  1960s  –  an  attitude  that  has  hardly  changed  50  years  later.  I 
remain  very  sceptical  about  the  bancor  proposal,  and  not  only  because  of  its 
doubtful  feasibility.  Indeed,  some  have  said  that  a  supranational  currency  would 
need to be kept strong in order not to depreciate against the other major existing 
currencies.  Any  weakening  would  undermine  its  attractiveness,  and  hence  its 
function as a reserve asset. However, if the supply of a supranational currency were 
to be restricted, it might fail to meet demand and so fall short of its function.11 
As  you  can  see,  it  is  unclear  even  whether  a  new  supranational  currency  could  solve  the 
dilemma  once  and  for  all,  or  whether  the  dilemma  would  simply  take  on  a  different  form. 
Given  such  uncertainty,  the  Triffin  International  Foundation  may  well  have  to  organise 
another conference in the 22nd century! 
References 
Angeloni,  Bénassy-Quéré,  Carton,  Darvas,  Destais,  Pisani-Ferry,  Sapir  and  Vallée  (2011): 
“Global currencies for tomorrow: A European perspective”, Bruegel Blueprint Series, vol. XIII. 
Bernanke,  B.  (2005),  “The  Global  Saving  Glut  and  the  U.S.  Current  Account  Deficit”, 
Sandridge Lecture delivered to the Virginia Association of Economists, Richmond, 10 March.  
Bini Smaghi, L. (2010b), “Reserve accumulation: the other side of the coin”, speech delivered 
at the 5th High-level EMEAP-Eurosystem Seminar, Sydney, 10 February. 
Bini Smaghi, L. (2007), “Global capital and national monetary policies”, speech delivered at 
the European Economic and Financial Centre, London, 18 January. 
Borio, C. and Zhu, H. (2008): “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: A missing 
link in the transmission mechanism?”, BIS Working Paper No. 268 (December). 
Caballero,  R.  (2009),  “The  ‘Other’  Imbalance  and  the  Financial  Crisis”,  paper  for  the 
Baffi Lecture delivered at the Banca d’Italia, 10 December. 
Caballero,  R.  and  Krishnamurthy,  A.  (2009),  “Global  Imbalances  and  Financial  Fragility”, 
NBER Working Papers, No 14688, National Bureau of Economic Research. 
Dooley, M.P., Folkerts-Landau, D. and Garber, P. (2003), “An essay on the revived Bretton 
Woods System”, NBER Working Papers, No 9971, National Bureau of Economic Research, 
September. 
Dorrucci,  E.  and  McKay,  J.  (2011),  The  International  Monetary  System  after  the  Financial 
Crisis, Occasional Paper Series, No 123, ECB, Frankfurt am Mai, February. 
Eichengreen, B. (2011), Exorbitant Privilege – The Decline of the Dollar and the Future of the 
International Monetary System, Oxford University Press, January. 
Gourinchas,  P.-O.  and  Rey,  H.  (2005),  “From  World  Banker  to  World  Venture  Capitalist: 
US External Adjustment and The Exorbitant Privilege”, CEPR Discussion Papers, No 5220, 
Centre for Economic Policy Research. 
Keynes, J.M. (1944), The Collected Writings, Volume XXV: Activities, 1940–44 – Shaping the 
Post-war World: The Clearing Union, Basingstoke, 1980. 
                                                 
11  See Landau 2009. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Landau, J.-P. (2009), “Some thoughts on the international monetary system”, note presented 
at  the  “G20  Workshop  on  the  Global  Economy  –Causes  of  the  Crisis:  Key  Lessons”, 
Mumbai, 24–26 May. 
Mateos  y  Lago,  I.,  Duttagupta,  R.  and  Goyal,  R.  (2009),  “The  Debate  on  the  International 
Monetary System”, Staff Position Note, No SPN/09/26, IMF, 11 November. 
Mendoza,  E.G.,  Quadrini,  V.  and  Rios-Rull,  J-V.  (2007),  “Financial  Integration,  Financial 
Deepness and Global Imbalances”, NBER Working Papers, No 12909, National Bureau of 
Economic Research, February. 
Padoa-Schioppa,  T.  (2010),  “The  Ghost  of  Bancor:  The  Economic  Crisis  and  Global 
Monetary Disorder”, speech delivered at Louvain-la-Neuve, 25 February.  
Rajan,  R.G.  (2010),  “Fault  Lines  –  How  Hidden  Fractures  Still  Threaten  the  Global 
Economy”, Princeton University Press. 
Triffin, R. (1960): “Gold and the dollar crisis”, Yale University Press, New Haven. 
Warnock,  F.  and  Warnock,  V.  (2007),  “International  capital  flows  and  U.S.  interest  rates”, 
Journal of International Money and Finance. 
Zhou,  X.  (2009),  “Reform  of  the  International  Monetary  System”,  essay  posted  on  the 
website of the People’s Bank of China, 9 April. 
http://www.pbc.gov.cn/english/detail.asp?col=6500&id=178 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
