Yves Mersch: Optimal currency area revisited 
Text  of  the  Pierre  Werner  Lecture  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of 
Luxembourg, at the European Institute, Florence, 26 October 2011. 
 “It is necessary that even those born well after the 1950s and 1960s realize that 
the European Union has not come about by chance, but that it is based on the 
fundamental necessities of life amongst the peoples of Europe.” 1 
Pierre Werner 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  and  privilege  to  talk  here  at  the  European  Institute.  I  thank  in  particular 
Professor  Marcellino  for  this  opportunity  to  share  my  thoughts  on  Optimal  Currency  Areas 
(OCA) in general and the challenges of European Monetary Union (EMU) in particular.  
Some countries in the euro area face a combination of high levels of indebtedness, budget 
deficits  and  weak  or  absent  growth.  Amid  market  attacks  and  the  risk  of  contagion  an 
increasing number of economists have already announced the unavoidable break-up of the 
euro  area.  These  predictions  often  share  an  anti-Euro  sentiment  and  seem  to  be  in 
accordance  with  the  naysayers  who  were  taking  potshots  at  the  Euro  even  before  its 
inception in 1999. But they are wrong – as I intend to prove in the rest of my talk.  
Comparison of two currency areas of similar size 
Since the introduction of the Euro in 1999 the currency area has been regularly compared to 
the US. Although, there are many arguments why such comparisons are difficult, they can 
indeed  yield  useful  insights.  I  will  therefore  start  by  looking  at  the  facts,  comparing  basic 
features,  price  stability,  output  growth,  employment,  heterogeneity  within  the  respective 
currency areas, public finance, private savings and trade in the US and the euro area.  
Basic features 
The US is a fully fledged political federation with 52 states. Over 312 million people live in the 
US.  The  US  economy  is  the  world’s  largest  national  economy,  with  an  estimated  GDP  of 
12 trillion Euros in 2010 at purchasing-power parity, i.e. roughly 20 percent of global Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP). 
The euro area, by comparison, is a community of seventeen sovereign member states which 
have  introduced  the  euro  as  their  common  currency  and  sole  legal  tender.  They  are 
embedded in the 27 nation European Union (EU).  
332  million  live  in  the  countries  of  EMU.  In  2010,  the  euro  area  generated  a  GDP  of 
9.2 trillion  Euros.  The  economy  of  the  euro  area  accounts  for  roughly  15 percent  of  world 
GDP. 
                                                 
1  Pierre Werner, 11 December 1997, on the eve of the Luxembourg European Council [“Il est nécessaire que 
même ceux qui sont nés bien après les années 50 et 60 se rendent compte que l’Union européenne n’est pas 
un  coup  du  hasard,  qu’elle  se  fonde  sur  des  nécessités  fondamentales  de  la  vie  entre  les  peuples  de 
l’Europe.”] 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Price stability 
The primary mandate of the ECB as the central bank of the euro area is to safeguard the 
purchasing  power  of  the  citizens.  Price  stability  in  the  understanding  of  the  ECB  is  an 
inflation rate below but close to 2 percent in the medium term. 
Since its inception almost 13 years ago, the euro area has experienced an unprecedented 
level of price stability: 2.0 percent average annual inflation.  
In  the  US,  during  the  same  period  of  time,  the  annual  inflation  averaged  at  around 
2.5 percent. 
Output growth 
The euro area has logged real per-capita income growth of around 1 percent a year since 
1999, just below the US’s 1.1 percent. International comparisons often look only at headline 
growth figures; overlooking demographic developments. 
Looking closer at the contributing elements in both currency areas some interesting aspects 
are  revealed.  The  standard  growth  accounting  distinguishes  mainly  between  employment 
and labour productivity. Labour productivity itself can be further decomposed into changes in 
labour composition, Information and Communication technologies (ICT) and non-ICT usage 
per hour and (residual) Total Factor Productivity (TFP) growth. TFP accounts for effects in 
total  output  not  caused  by  inputs.  If  all  inputs  are  accounted  for,  TFP  measures  an 
economy’s  long-term  technological  progress.  The  distinction  between  ICT  and  non-ICT 
reflects that the ICT sector is presumably one of the major drivers in growth across the world.  
Comparing  the  contributions  of  labour  productivity  to  growth  between  1995  and  2007,  a 
significant difference becomes apparent: 1.7 for the euro area vs. 2.9 for the US. By adding 
the contribution of hours worked (0.5 vs. 0.6) one gets the growth rate of output (2.2 vs. 3.5). 
The main explanations for this difference are ICT capital services per hour (0.4 in the euro 
area vs. 1.0 in the US) and economy-wide TFP (0.5 vs. 1.1).  
Analyzing  the  sectoral  decomposition  of  TFP  growth,  it  can  be  stated  that  TFP  in  the 
production  of  goods  is  slightly  larger  in  the  euro  area  than  in  the  US.  Rather,  the  higher 
overall TFP growth in the US is driven by stronger TFP growth in services, in particular in 
distributive trade (0.2 vs. 0.5).  
For good order, one should not forget that productivity and technical progress in general and 
in  Services  in  particular  are  subject  to  measurement  difficulties.  TFP  figures  –  being  a 
residual – can only represent a rough metric. Thus, the TFP contribution can be plagued by 
measurement  errors,  erroneous  assumptions  about  market  structure,  or  the  nature  and 
existence  of  the  aggregative  production  function.  The  residual  will  also  be  a  catch-all  of 
neglected  factor  utilization,  factor  quality  improvements  over  time,  statistical  complications 
associated  in  calculating  factor  rewards  (appropriate  tax  and  depreciation  allowance  for 
capital income etc).2 
In a nut shell: the main difference between the measured growth differences in the euro area 
and  the  US  are  attributed  to  the  difficulties  to  assess  differences  in  the  technological 
progress of ICT services. 
                                                 
2   See Trichet, Jean-Claude (2011), Speech at the Jackson Hole Economic Symposium Panel: Setting priorities 
for long-term growth Jackson Hole, U.S.A., 27 August.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Employment 
Having  identified  the  limited  explanatory  power  of  growth  statistics  to  compare  mature 
economies with rather similar per capita growth rates, one might preferably rather look at the 
development  in  labor  markets  to  gain  some  information  about  the  economic  dynamism. 
Between 1999 and 2011, the euro area has created 14 million jobs. During the same period 
of time, 8 million jobs have been created in the US.  
Heterogeneity within the currency area  
Contrary to common belief, the heterogeneity within the euro area is not significantly bigger 
than between US states. Although it is very common to distinguish between the countries of 
the  euro  area  and  focus  on  the  diversity  among  individual member  states,  this  exercise is 
rarely done for the US. In fact, however, the dispersion of many key economic indicators is 
very similar. Let me provide some detail on the heterogeneity within the respective currency 
areas. 
Before  the  crisis,  the  dispersion  of  inflation  in  euro  area  countries  had  remained  broadly 
stable since the late 1990s. The level was similar to the 14 US Metropolitan Statistical Areas. 
During the crisis a temporary increase in inflation dispersion in the euro area was observed. 
This development has been reversed over the past 12 months, however.  
In the same vein, the dispersion of GDP growth is quite similar on either side of the Atlantic. 
Before the crisis the dispersion of growth rates was around 2 percent, in both the euro area 
and  the  US.  Dispersion  increased  somewhat  during  the  crisis  in  both  currency  areas  but 
remained broadly in line with pre-crisis patterns. 
Moreover,  in  both  currency  areas  there  are  comparable  patterns  in  the  dispersion  and 
developments  of  competitiveness.  In  the  US  as  well  as  in  the  euro  area,  regions  can  be 
found with persistently above or below average unit labour cost growth – a good measure of 
competitiveness.  In  the  euro  area,  Greece,  Portugal  and  Ireland,  in  particular,  had 
progressively  lost  competitiveness.  They  are  now  trying  to  catch-up  by  implementing 
adjustment  strategies.  Germany,  by  contrast,  had  lost  competitiveness  in  the  reunification 
process but has managed to regain competitiveness over the same period of time.  
Looking at the most and least competitive states in the US states over the same period of 
time, we see that some states have suffered from large or persistent increases in unit labour 
costs.  Some  still  exceed  the  national  average  by  20  percent.  Other  US  states  have  been 
improving their competitiveness compared to the national average over the past decade.  
Public finance, household savings and trade  
On a consolidated base public finances in the Euro are in a much better shape than in the 
US. The euro area as a whole will run a budget deficit of about 4.5 percent of gross domestic 
product this year. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) expects a US budget shortfall of 
about 10 percent of GDP this year.  
The  UK  government  expects  for  this  fiscal  year  to  meet  its  deficit  target  of  7.9  percent  of 
GDP, down from 9.3 percent of GDP in the previous one ending in April 2011. The budget 
forecasts however are based on the assumption that the economy will grow 1.7 percent in 
2011 – in spite of economists’ recent forecasts of around 1.0 percent. 
According  to  the  IMF  the  aggregate  debt-to-GDP  for  the  euro  area  stands  at  87  percent. 
Figures for the UK are similar. For the US the debt-to-GDP ratio in 2011 is expected to be 
100 percent. In Japan debt-to-GDP exceeds 200 percent. 
As far as private households’ financial positions are concerned the euro area is in the best 
position  of  all  major  currency  areas.  In  2010  gross  savings  as  a  fraction  of  households’ 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
disposable income stood at roughly 14 percent in the euro area, 8.6 percent in the US, and 
5.4 percent in the UK.  
Trade within the euro area and the EU is flourishing as well as the exchange of goods and 
services with the rest of the world. The euro area is the most open major economy in the 
world. In 2011, exports of goods and services from the euro area stood at 22.7 percent of 
GDP compared to 12.6 percent of GDP in the US. 
The current account in the euro area is broadly in balance (-0.4 percent of GDP in 2010). For 
this year the IMF forecasts a current account deficit of 3 percent for the US. 
Optimum currency areas: basic considerations  
The  above  mentioned  figures  are  publicly  available.  They  are  well  known  to  scholars  and 
market participants. Why then, one may ask, are markets still so suspicious against the euro 
area? Why is there a talk of a sovereign debt crisis in the euro area rather than in the US or 
the UK? And why has the epicenter of financial markets turmoil moved from the US to the 
euro area.  
Before  I  try  to  answer  these  questions  in  greater  detail,  let  us  recall  some  of  the  basic 
considerations of optimal currency areas.  
When countries or states participate in a currency union they abolish their nominal exchange 
rate. By doing so they sacrifice a hitherto important means of adjustment vis-à-vis the other 
countries  or  states  participating  in  the  currency  area.  50  years  ago  Nobel  Prize  laureate 
Robert Mundell argued that adjustment to economic shocks has to occur via other channels. 
Mundell and other protagonists of the Optimum Currency Area theory highlighted three major 
channels for adjustment in a monetary union in the absence of internal nominal exchange 
rate flexibility: 
– 
First, price flexibility can help countries or states to overcome economic shocks by 
adjusting wages and reducing relative prices in order to rebuild competitiveness.  
Second, cross-border factor mobility – in particular on labour markets – can foster 
adjustments to shocks as employees from anemic economies move to the healthier 
ones until the former regain competitiveness and growth.  
Third, funds may flow from the more prosperous countries or states to the weaker 
ones via fiscal transfers. 3 
  While the first two adjustments channels clearly help to approach a new equilibrium in the 
aftermath of an asymmetric shock, the third one could only temporarily dampen the burden of 
adjustment and play a stabilizing role. In the long run, however, fiscal transfers would set the 
wrong  incentives  insofar  as  internal  pressure  for  adjustment  would  be  weakened  and  free 
rider  behavior  encouraged.  By  consequence,  in  a  currency  area  it  is  essential  that  the 
participating  members  have  sound  public  finances  beforehand  to  reduce  the  vulnerability 
against asymmetric shocks and the need for temporary financial aid.  
From theory to practice: a currency without a state 
Let me move from the conceptual considerations of the theory of Optimum Currency Area 
back  to  reality.  The  key  challenge  for  a  currency  area  is  how  to  organize  the  incentive 
                                                 
3  Mundell,  Robert  (1961),  “A  Theory  of  Optimum  Currency  Areas”,  American  Economic  Review,  51,  
pp. 657–665. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
structure  and  the  adjustment  channels  of  a  currency  union  which  lacks  the  flexibility  of 
nominal exchange rates.  
Comparing the two major currency areas – the euro area and the US – the major difference 
is  clear:  The  US,  being  a  fully  fledged  sovereign  state  has  a  central  government.  The 
organizations of relevant policies and decisions are to a large extent federal and, therefore, 
uniform at the central level of the federation.  
The  euro  area  by  contrast  is  an  alliance  of  sovereign  countries  with  most  of  the  relevant 
political decisions – including public finance – being taken by national governments.  
There is a risk embedded in the constellation of the euro area: moral hazard can arise when 
fiscal profligacy of one single member state is averaged out by the virtuous behavior of the 
majority of the other countries. Such an incentive structure would be flawed because it could 
lead to unsustainable fiscal policies of individual member states which in turn would generate 
negative spill over effects to the monetary union as a whole.  
The run-up to the single currency 
The intellectual architects of the single currency were aware that the management of a single 
currency in a union of sovereign states would be challenging. Instead of a single government 
effective rules were required to safeguard the credibility of the currency.  
Although the vision of a single European currency is an ancient idea going back as far as to 
the  Roman  Empire,  the  idea  of  a  common  European  currency  in  recent  history  gained 
momentum in the late 1960s. Luxembourg’s Prime Minister Pierre Werner, also Minister of 
Finance,  was  asked  to  steer  a  Committee  mandated  to  design  the  path  to  an  increased 
economic  and  monetary  integration  of  the  six  then  members  of  the  European  Economic 
Community.  That  report,  finished  on  the  8  October  1970,  was  sent  to  the  Ministers  of 
Finance in the first instance, laid down the achievement of Economic and Monetary Union by 
1980. 
The Werner report proposed the inception of an independent institution for fiscal monitoring 
and  coordination.  This  idea  clearly  reflected  that  a  single  monetary  policy  would  need 
support  from  sound  public  finances.  More  concretely,  the  Werner  report  called  for  closer 
economic policy coordination with an agreed framework for national budgetary policies.  
At  the  institutional  level,  it  suggested  a  “centre  of  decision  for  economic  policy”.  This 
coordination  body  for  economic  policies  should  have  been  established  alongside  the 
European system of central banks, i.e. the monetary authority. Both institutions were to be 
independent from the national governments, being politically accountable only to a European 
Parliament.  This  independent  economic  authority  should  have  influenced  the  national 
budgets with a focus on the level and the direction of the balances as well as the financing of 
deficits and the use of surpluses, respectively.  
In the next major attempt to design a single European currency, the Delors report in 1989, 
the insight that sound fiscal policies would be necessary to safeguard the credibility of the 
common  money  was  still  vivid.  That  blueprint  named  after  the  President  of  the  European 
Commission  at  that  time,  Jacques  Delors,  stated  that  “an  Economic  and  Monetary  Union 
could only operate on the basis of mutually consistent and sound behaviour by governments 
and  other  economic  agents  in  all  member  countries.  (…)  Uncoordinated  and  divergent 
national budgetary policies would undermine monetary stability and generate imbalances in 
the real and financial sectors of the community.” 
Almost exactly 20 years ago, the Maastricht Treaty was drafted by the European Council on 
9/10 December 1991 in the Dutch city of Maastricht. It founded the European Union and led 
to  the  creation  of  the  single  European  currency  and  to  provide  a  framework  of  lose  policy 
coordination. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
At the very core of that framework the no-bail-out clause and the Stability and Growth Pact 
(SGP)  were  installed.  The  first  should  have  excluded  free  rider  incentives  and  the  second 
should  have  aligned  national  fiscal  policies  to  prevent  negative  spill  over  effects  to  the 
currency union as a whole.  
The  SGP  was  a  compromise  of  quantifying  fiscal  soundness  without  interfering  with  the 
budgetary and fiscal policies of sovereign states. It aimed to maintain fiscal discipline within 
EMU. Member states adopting the euro had to meet the Maastricht convergence criteria, and 
the SGP should make sure that they continue to observe them. The compromise was also 
characterized by the strong belief that governments would be reactive to market discipline.  
However  there  was  a  lack  of  political  will  to  commit  to  sustained  stability-oriented  fiscal 
policy. The weak commitment was evident when the Stability and Growth Pact was watered 
down under the pressure of France and Germany in 2003. Moreover, the rule book failed to 
consider the possibility of a financial crisis in the euro area leaving an institutional vacuum for 
crisis resolution.  
Painful lessons from the Great Financial Crisis 
The global financial crisis with its consecutive phases has disclosed the weaknesses of that 
institutional set up and the overestimated belief in market discipline. Originally, the financial 
crisis erupted in August 2007with the epicenter at the US subprime mortgages markets. It 
deteriorated dramatically in September 2008 when the US investment bank Lehman Brothers 
collapsed. And it triggered the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area in spring 2010.  
The pre-crisis situation of public finances differed in the various countries of the euro zone, 
sometimes  significantly.  Regardless  of  whether  private  debt  has  been  socialized  or  the 
problem was from the beginning in public finances itself, the outcome was a drastic increase 
in the public debt burden. The financial aid packages for stressed banks and fiscal and social 
stimulus  programs  to  combat  the  recession  disclosed  painfully  the  limits  of  the  financial 
capacity in some countries. 
With hindsight we have to acknowledge that in some countries fiscal profligacy, weaknesses 
in  the  banking  sector  and  deteriorating  competitiveness  have  been  observed.  The 
institutional setup could neither prevent nor resolve a severe crisis of the magnitude that we 
are currently experiencing. Where the instruments and procedures were available, they were 
not implemented, ignored, or watered down.  
Flaws in the Maastricht Treaty 
With today’s knowledge and experience let me highlight just two major weaknesses in the 
Maastricht Treaty: It was based on a flawed economic paradigm and it did not foresee geo-
political developments before and after the introduction of the single currency.  
Overestimation of free markets  
1.  
The spirit of the Stability and Growth Pact was also characterized by a strong belief in the 
power of free markets to discipline governments. This belief reflected the prevailing paradigm 
in economics at that time. But the global financial crisis has undoubtedly marked a turning 
point also in that context.  
The financial crisis has put the legitimacy of absolutely free financial markets into question. 
At the same time, the concept of market economies is challenged in many places, and the 
voices calling for the state are getting louder. The pendulum strikes back.  
There is a clear risk that the well founded desire for improved regulation leads to a too tight 
corset that ultimately might strangulate market dynamics. It would be misleading to assume 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
that partial market or regulatory failure in the past means that the government would always 
provide superior solutions by governments.  
Excessive  faith  in  the  state  as  well  as  a  sprawling  public  sector  lead  in  the  long  run  into 
servitude, as argued by the Austrian economist Friedrich August von Hayek and proved by 
the  communist  movements  of  the  previous  century.  Only  in  the  market  economy,  freedom 
and wealth come together. However, also those err who rely alone on the self-regulation of 
markets.  
The  challenge  is  to  find  the  right  balance  between  market and  state,  to  define  reasonable 
rules set by the state to generate the greatest possible freedom for sustained prosperity to 
the benefit of the society. 
In  less  general  terms  it  is  worth  recalling  how  financial  markets  have  been  assessing  the 
creditworthiness of sovereigns within the euro area. Countries with weaker positions which 
introduced the Euro could refinance themselves roughly at the same cost as the most solvent 
states. Spreads, if existing, were very narrow, even between Greece and Germany. Financial 
markets were irrationally optimistic.  
Today, markets seem to be irrationally pessimistic. Even wealthy states with sound economic 
fundamentals are in trouble to refinance themselves at reasonable conditions. Recently, for 
instance, Italian sovereign funding costs were driven above 5 percent. The UK by contrast 
funds itself at 1.6 per cent – although Italy and the UK are two countries of roughly the same 
size, wealth and income. While the Italian public debt with some 119 percent of GDP is larger 
than that of the UK (80 percent of GDP), the Italian private sector has much stronger balance 
sheets  than  the  UK  private  sector.  This  means  that  the  Italian  government  has  stronger 
private wealth for potential future taxation than the UK. Moreover, the consolidation plans of 
the Italian government are far more ambitious that the British ones. 
Some argue that growth prospects for the UK are more promising as its central bank could 
depreciate its own currency by a very lax monetary policy. By doing so, future growth and tax 
revenues would be boosted. The problem is, however, that the UK economy heavily relies on 
a huge non-exporting service sector (while in Italy manufacturing plays a bigger role), which 
does not profit from a weaker currency. Indeed, exports in the UK have failed to recover in 
spite of the great sterling depreciation. By contrast, since the end of 2007, the British GDP 
has contracted cumulatively by 3.4 per cent. Moreover, depreciation comes at huge costs: 
The weaker sterling has made the UK’s people poorer in real terms through higher inflation. 
In 2007, the average UK citizen was 30 percent richer than the average Italian; now they are 
just 5 percent richer.4  
Geopolitical changes  
2.  
The  Maastricht  Treaty  was  signed  on  7  February  1992  by  the  members  of  the  European 
Community  by  the  six  original  members  of  the  community  –  Belgium,  France,  Italy, 
Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and West Germany – and those six countries who had joined 
the EC later, namely Denmark, Ireland, the UK, Greece, Portugal and Spain.  
Amid  the  various  enlargement  steps  of  the  EU  and  the  euro  area  several  problems  have 
emerged, some of which are interrelated.  
First,  economically,  the  situation  of  those  countries  that  joined  the  EU  later  differed 
sometimes greatly from the original core. That holds particularly true for those countries that 
entered  the  EU  after  the  breakdown  of  the  Berlin  Wall  and  the  communist  bloc.  Laggard 
countries while catching up in their productivities in traded goods’ sectors tend to suffer from 
                                                 
4   See Nielsen, Erik (2011), Italy’s debt a better bet than “triple A” UK, Financial Times, Oct 10th 2011.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
higher  inflation  rates  because  within  the  service  sector  productivity  growth  rates  are 
restricted but wages still catch up (Balassa–Samuelson hypothesis)5. This, of course, poses 
a potential threat to a currency union with the aim of a stable price level. 
Second, an institutional problem is the indirect result of these developments. The intellectual 
architects of the euro area assumed the member states of the currency area were basically 
the same who constituted the European Union. Only one institution on the union level – the 
Commission – would then have been necessary to represent the EU and to be in charge of 
the currency area’s rule book. Today, the EU comprises 27 countries, the euro area only 17. 
However,  with the exception of the field of monetary policy the euro  area still lacks a true 
institution on its own with competencies on the community level. 
A lot has been achieved – responses within the existing Treaty 
The sovereign debt crisis has revealed that the euro area suffered from serious weaknesses 
in  the  fields  of  financial,  fiscal  and  economic  governance  on  the  preventive  side  and  had 
lacked a crisis resolution mechanism.  
But the current crisis has also been recognized as an opportunity to repair the institutional 
shortcomings of the “currency without a state”. Europe has always made its greatest steps 
forward in times of crisis mirroring the words of Jean Monnet: “People may accept change 
when  they  are  faced  with  necessity,  and  only  recognize  necessity  when  a  crisis  is  upon 
them.”  
And indeed, Europe has already undertaken major steps to tackle the identified weaknesses 
within the existing Treaty. 
1. 
In the absence of a nominal exchange rate the alignment of national fiscal policies 
and the prevention of imbalances via rules is a necessary condition to support the 
credibility  of  the  single currency.  The  recent  agreement  reached  by  the  European 
Parliament  and  the  Council  on  the  “Six  Pack”  is  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  The 
Stability and Growth Pact has been strengthened; imbalances and competitiveness 
will be monitored at an earlier stage.  
Since  the  beginning  of  this  year,  the  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  and  the 
European  Supervisory  Authorities  are  operationally.  These  truly  European  bodies 
are  responsible  for  providing  the  incentives  to  avoid  excessive  risk  taking  in  the 
financial  industry  and  to  promote  a  level  playing  field  in  support  of  beneficial 
financial integration within the euro area. 
A  crisis  mechanism  has  been  set  up  and  is  still  being  improved.  Countries  with 
stressed liquidity positions which are subject to market attacks receive financial aid 
from  the  Luxembourg  based  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  (EFSF).  This 
support  should  allow  them  to  return  to  a  sustainable  level  of  debt  and  regain 
competiveness as soon as possible.  
In  order  to  eliminate  any  doubts  on  the  sufficient  fire  power  of  the  EFSF, 
governments of the euro area Member States plan to provide appropriate leveraging 
of the fund. The EFSF will operationally be allowed to intervene in the primary and 
secondary  markets  as  soon  as  possible  to  tackle  fundamentally  unfounded 
distortions  in  the  sovereign  bonds  markets.  These  distortions  hamper  the  smooth 
functioning of the single monetary policy stance. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
                                                 
5   Samuelson,  P.  A.  (1994),  Facets  of  Balassa-Samuelson  Thirty  Years  Later,  Review  of  International 
Economics 2 (3): 201–226. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Within  the  given  framework,  the  implementation  gap  must  be  closed  to  resolve  the 
confidence crisis that the euro area currently faces. Most of the above mentioned proposals 
have been decided already. As soon as possible the new governance rules must be applied 
completely and rigorously.  
Moreover,  as  stated  earlier,  factor  mobility  in  particular  on  labour  markets  is  an  important 
adjustment  mechanism.  Labour  mobility  within  the  euro  area  works  rather  smoothly  at  the 
lower  and  higher  skill  ends.  But  the  high  share  of  closed  public  service  in  Europe,  non-
portability of pension rights, rigid labour laws and cultural differences make labour mobility a 
slow process. Additionally a further improvement of the Single Market – including markets for 
products and services – is important for fast and market-based adjustment in case of shocks.  
… but challenges remain beyond today’s Treaty 
Challenges  remain,  however.  They  refer  to  the  institutional  framework  of  the  euro  area  to 
safeguard the own life of a currency union within a common market to further proceed in the 
direction of an Optimum Currency Area.  
In the medium to long run, we will need an institution that is solely responsible for the euro 
zone.  
Remembering  core  elements  of  the  Werner  Plan,  a  single  monetary  policy  needs  support 
from  sound  public  finances  and  closer  economic  policy  coordination  with  an  agreed 
framework  for  national budgetary  policies.  This  could  be  realized  by either  be  a European 
Commissioner  with  special  authority  or  a  finance  minister  (not  necessarily  with  a  huge 
budget),  as  it  has  been  suggested  by  outgoing  ECB  President  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  or 
another,  ideally  independent  body  that  makes  sure  that  national  policies  do  not  generate 
negative spill over effects which jeopardize the currency union as a whole. But in any case, 
the institutional vacuum that currently exists must be filled. 
I  am  confident  that  Europe  can  also  overcome  these  challenges.  There  can  be  no  doubt, 
however, that current and future steps for further European integration will be accompanied 
by  a  credible  and  stable  Euro  that  deserves  the  faith  of  financial  markets,  international 
investors and – last but not least – the more than 320 million citizens of the euro area. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
