Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: The European debt crisis 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Atlantik-Brücke event, meeting of Regional Group Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, 
17 October 2011. 
 Introduction 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  speak  at  this  Atlantik-Brücke  event.  In  a  world  that  has 
become  so  strongly  interconnected,  the  efforts  of  your  association  to  further  promote 
German-American understanding deserve to be supported and encouraged. 
The topic of my talk today is “The European debt crisis”, but we should not forget that the 
current crisis is a global one. Of course, Europe’s predicament certainly has some special 
features, which are not necessarily easy to understand, especially for outside observers.  
I would like to contribute to a better understanding by considering four main issues tonight. 
The first one concerns the challenges that policy-makers in all advanced economies face in 
addressing the current crisis, in particular as a result of the interaction between the financial 
markets  and  the  democracies  we  live  in.  The  second  issue  relates  to  the  specificities  of 
Europe’s situation, which make the crisis significantly more difficult to handle. Third, I will try 
to explain how these complexities may turn good intentions into bad outcomes. Finally, I will 
look  at  the  main  issues  that  need  to  be  tackled  comprehensively  to  deal  with  the  current 
stage  of  the  crisis  and  will  consider  how  to  address  the  problem  of  limited  public  sector 
resources.  
Challenges for policy-makers 
The roots of the crisis, which is affecting most advanced economies, lie in the accumulation 
of excessive debt – both private and public. The solution is to go back to more sustainable  
– i.e. lower – levels of debts. The key issue is the speed of that adjustment. If, on the one 
hand,  the  de-leveraging  is  too  slow,  the  imbalances  at  the  heart  of  the  crisis  will  be 
protracted,  reforms  delayed  and  the  prospects  for  recovery  will  remain  fragile  –  and  be 
certain to disappoint. But on the other hand, if the adjustment is too quick, it may lead to a 
credit crunch with negative feedback loops on the real economy. Economic history provides 
us with examples of policy mistakes at both ends of this spectrum.  
It is not easy to implement policies which encourage de-leveraging and avoid an excessive 
impact on the economy, particularly in our societies, because those policies have to take into 
account several constraints. I would like to discuss three of them, taking examples from both 
sides of the Atlantic.  
The  first  constraint  is  political.  It  derives  from  the  fact  that  taxpayers  are  not  particularly 
happy  to  shoulder  an  ever  heavier  burden  and  to  find  themselves  having  to  support  the 
banking system or the public finances of other countries, some of which triggered the crisis in 
the  first  place  by  mismanaging  their  investments  or  their  public  finances.  The  taxpayers’ 
unhappiness  is  understandable.  Why  should  they  bail  out  banks  which  accumulated  too 
much risk in their balance sheets before the crisis and proceeded to reward their managers 
handsomely? Why should taxpayers support countries which have lived beyond their means, 
and even cheated on their accounts? Won’t all this money create moral hazard and be an 
incentive  for  similarly  irresponsible  behaviour?  Any  policy-making  institution  which  is 
accountable for its decisions has to be able to answer these questions.  
These issues were the focus of the political debate in the United States at the start of the 
crisis. After the US authorities saved Bear Sterns, in spring 2008, the same question arose: 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
should taxpayers’ money be used to bail out other banks? The US presidential election in 
autumn 2008 encouraged the then US administration to enter the Lehman Brothers’ “crisis 
weekend”  with  the  clear  intention  not  to  take  taxpayers’  money  again.  We  know  what 
happened  then.  Much  more  taxpayers’  money  was  ultimately  required  to  prop  up  the 
financial system after the collapse of Lehman than would have been needed to rescue it. 
This brings me to the second constraint that policy-makers have to work with, which relates 
to the functioning of financial markets. As the Lehman Brothers case showed, when a major 
event  like  the  failure  of  a  systemically  important  bank  happens  at  a  time  of  financial 
turbulence, markets tend to become completely dysfunctional, contagion spreads throughout 
the  financial  system  and  ultimately  the  real  economy  is  severely  affected.  The  current 
sovereign debt crisis in the euro area has shown a similar degree of unpredictability. When a 
small euro area country got into difficulties, others were gradually affected, according to the 
depth of correlation between their domestic markets and financial instruments.  
Contagion is very difficult to anticipate. At the time of the Lehman Brothers collapse, many 
observers, and even policy-makers, thought that market participants had had enough time to 
prepare for such an event. The same applies in Europe, where many analysts still dream that 
an “orderly” restructuring of the public debt can be achieved. The reaction to the agreement 
among euro area leaders on 21 July has proved that reality differs from dreams.  
Contagion  is  also  difficult  to  understand,  especially  for  those  far  away  from  the  immediate 
chain of events, and who are not immediately affected. For instance, it was difficult for many 
US citizens and members of Congress to grasp the impact of the Lehman Brothers’ failure  
– as shown by the initial rejection by Congress of the administration’s proposal to establish 
the  Troubled  Asset  Relief  Program  (TARP).  But  they  understood  its  impact  when  the 
contagion  hit  the  stock  market  and  caused  banks  to  panic.  In  Europe,  the  countries  with 
stronger  fiscal  positions have  also  had  difficulty  understanding  the  potential  disruption  that 
contagion from the crisis – unfolding in the periphery – would have on their own economies.  
The political and market constraints that a policy-maker faces tend to be contradictory. For 
example, the best way to deal with contagion is to act quickly, with enormous firepower – the 
“bazooka”  as  Hank  Paulson  used  to  call  it.  But  it  is  very  difficult  to  secure  a  political 
consensus for having such bazookas, especially if the firepower involves taxpayers’ money. 
It’s  only  possible  if  taxpayers  really  feel  threatened  and  are  convinced  that  the  risk  of  not 
having a bazooka is greater than the risk of having one. They may sense this risk only when 
contagion is widespread, and markets have become extremely tense, but at that point the so-
called  bazooka  may  no  longer  be  sufficient  to  restore  stability.  In  other  words,  the  less 
taxpayers’ money you spend at the start of the contagion, the more taxpayers’ money you 
may ultimately have to spend to avoid serious financial disruption.  
Policy-makers thus face two difficult tasks. They have to weigh the consequences of taking 
certain  actions  against  the  consequences  of  not  taking  them,  and  choose  the  least  worst 
solution.  And,  they  have  to  convince  taxpayers,  and  their  representatives,  that  there  is  an 
even worse solution than the least worst option that they have chosen.  
The third constraint that policy-makers have to take into account nowadays is the scarcity of 
resources available to tackle multi-dimensional problems like those posed by the  crisis. At 
the  outset,  in  autumn  2008,  European  countries  were  able,  for  example,  to  stabilise  the 
situation  by  providing  public  guarantees  to banks.  Ireland was  one  of the  first  countries  to 
make  such  a  commitment.  In  the  US  the  TARP  was  adopted,  with  the  initial  aim  being  to 
purchase distressed assets from banks and thus relieve their balance sheets. As the crisis 
developed, the commitments made to support the financial system led to an overexposure of 
some  sovereigns,  which  took  the  form  of  higher  debts  and  deficits  on  both  sides  of  the 
Atlantic.  Markets  started  testing  the  willingness  of  taxpayers  in  the  various  countries  to 
sustain such an effort.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Some specificities of the euro area 
Given these challenges, which are common to most advanced countries, it may be useful to 
consider some distinctive features which characterise the euro area and may help to explain 
the situation on this side of the Atlantic. I would briefly like to discuss four of them. 
One feature is that monetary and fiscal authorities in the euro area are completely separate. 
Budgets  are  the  responsibility  of  the  respective  countries,  within  European  constraints  
– which proved however to be rather lax – while monetary policy is the responsibility of the 
central  bank.  This  means  not  only  that  monetary  policy  is  targeted  at  the  euro  area  as  a 
whole but also that it cannot be used to finance governments. Euro area governments have 
to  finance  themselves  directly  in  the  market.  This  is  sound  and  robust,  because  it  avoids 
monetary financing and the risk of fiscal problems being solved through monetary financing. 
However,  in  a  crisis,  such  a  constraint  can  become  quite  harsh,  especially  since  the 
Maastricht Treaty did not foresee a situation in which a country would lose market access. 
Markets have perceived this as a fault line and tried to take advantage of it. 
A  second  feature  is  that  in  the  Monetary  Union  the  day-to-day  supervision  remains  in  the 
hands  of  national  supervisors,  as  does  the  crisis  management  for  banks  in  difficulty.  The 
stress tests – last year and this year – have highlighted the heterogeneity that exists across 
countries. Although no systemically important euro area bank has been allowed to fail, and 
solutions  have  been  found  in  all  cases,  the  decentralised  approach  and  lack  of  explicit 
resolution  mechanisms  have  caused  concern  in  the  markets  that  “tail  events”  could  take 
place. 
A  third  characteristic  is  that  the  decision-making  process  needed  to  address  the  specific 
crisis  situation,  notably  the  creation  of  a  safety  net  to  protect  the  system  against  financial 
contagion,  is  extremely  complex.  It  is  based  on  inter-governmental  agreements  which 
basically require all the Member States to agree. While unanimity may be justified when a 
new financial mechanism is created, as is the case with institutions in general, it becomes a 
nightmare  when  it  is  needed  for  each  and  every  decision.  In  international  financial 
institutions, such as the IMF, majority is the rule. Crises cannot be managed by unanimity. 
A fourth difference compared with the US is that society here is on the whole less financially 
sophisticated.  Financial  markets  developments  have  a  less  direct  impact  on  the  lives  of 
ordinary European citizens. This is due to many factors, including the smaller role of stock 
markets in allocating resources, the absence of a single financial centre, and the role of the 
state  in  pension  systems.  As  a  result,  people  are  less  aware  of  the  risks  to  the  financial 
system in periods of tensions and of the need to act swiftly to avoid contagion effects. 
The  four  factors  I  have  just  described  are  particularly  relevant  in  a  situation  in  which  euro 
area members have decided to maintain their national sovereignty in various domains, such 
as taxation and public expenditure. It makes it more difficult for taxpayers to understand why 
they  have  to  help  solve  the  problems  created  by  others,  be  they  the  fiscal  imprudence  of 
other governments or the reckless behaviour of banks in other countries.  
In other words, euro area taxpayers – and their elected representatives – tend to think and 
act locally, while the euro is a continent-wide currency and has acquired a global dimension 
in financial markets. This dichotomy has occasionally led to well-meaning actions that in fact 
have had undesirable consequences. 
Well-meaning actions, undesirable consequences 
When a debtor cannot repay his debts on time, several solutions are possible. They depend 
on the balance of power between creditor and debtor and on the legal regime. In a setting 
where the creditor prevails, he will take the debtor to court and be reimbursed as much as 
possible,  even  through  the  liquidation  of  existing  collateral,  if  necessary.  But  in  a  setting 
where the debtor prevails, he will pay back only part of the debt and the burden will be on the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
creditor  who  made  the  bad  investment  decision  in  the  first  place.  A  pragmatic  solution  is 
probably for the creditor to assess the ability and willingness of the debtor to pay. If the latter 
is solvent and has only a liquidity problem, it will be in the creditor’s own interest to lengthen 
the maturity of the loan and eventually grant the debtor conditions that would enable him to 
repay  the  loan  over  time.  This  pragmatic  solution  is  the  one  followed  internationally  –  in 
particular  by  the  IMF  –  when  countries  get  into  trouble  and  lose  market  access.  It  is  the 
solution which was used for Mexico in 1995, for Korea and other Asian countries in 1997, for 
Brazil in 1998 and in many other  cases. Fund conditionality makes it possible to minimise 
moral hazard, as confirmed by the fact that countries do not relish applying for IMF money.  
In the middle of the crisis, Europe started to think about reinventing the wheel, trying to make 
it easier for debtors – especially states – not to repay their debts and to pin blame on the 
creditors,  especially  banks.  There  are  two  reasons  for  this.  One  is  the  need  to  save 
taxpayers’ money. The other is a desire to punish banks which, for many years, made large 
profits  and  nicely  remunerated  their  managers  even  when  they  made  poor  investment 
decisions. If banks are forced to pay for such decisions, they will learn the lessons for next 
time.  If  you  bail  them  out,  they  will  make  the  same  mistakes  again  and  again.  This  is  the 
basic reasoning. 
The  reasoning  seems  obvious  at  first  sight.  It  is  also  an  easy  political  sell.  In  fact,  it  is 
simplistic and may turn out to produce exactly the opposite result. 
The reinvented wheel is known as private sector involvement, which in essence requires any 
financial assistance that is provided by the public sector to a euro area country to be linked to 
a parallel reduction in the value of the debt held by private creditors. It is the result of the 
Deauville agreement of October 2010, which was subsequently endorsed by the European 
Council in that same month. The ECB has expressed its opposition to this idea on several 
occasions.  This  idea  has  had  a  major  impact  on  financial  markets  because  it  marks  a 
departure – in two ways – from the practice which had guided crisis management since the 
inception  of  the  IMF.  First,  it  explicitly  recognises  the  possibility  of  default  or  debt 
restructuring by a euro area country, while it was previously considered to be an ultima ratio 
solution,  applied  under  exceptional  circumstances  to  relatively  poor  countries  with  limited 
systemic  relevance.  Second,  it  makes  financial  assistance  conditional  on  an  engagement 
with creditors. In contrast, the IMF doctrine requires countries to engage with creditors only if 
the adjustment programme cannot put a country’s debt on a sustainable path. By making PSI 
automatic, the new approach blurs the distinction between solvency and liquidity crises and 
thus makes the former much more likely.  
After lengthy discussions in which the ECB strongly opposed this form of PSI, the reference 
to  its  automatic  use  was  removed,  and  a  reference  was  explicitly  made  to  standard  IMF 
practice. However, some political authorities are continuing to say that banks should pay for 
their mistakes and that haircuts on public debt are needed before public money is provided. 
This  unsettles  financial markets  worldwide.  The  contagion has  spread progressively  to  the 
core of the euro area, as concerns about sovereign risk have risen to levels which are hardly 
justified. Just to quote an example, the credit default swap premia on the sovereign debt of 
Italy and Spain have risen to approximately the same level as those of Egypt and Lebanon. 
The CDS for Germany is now higher than that of the UK and about twice the level of the US.1 
The concept of private sector involvement may please voters, but ends up costing taxpayers 
much more. I would like to give two reasons for that.  
First,  experience  has  shown  that  penalising  banks,  and  even  letting  them  fail,  is  not 
necessarily  the  best  way  to  make  the  financial  markets  work  better  and  assess  risk 
appropriately.  Markets  remain  fundamentally  pro-cyclical,  and  punishing  them  for  past 
                                                 
1  Cut-off date: 14 October 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
mistakes  may  actually  increase  such  pro-cyclicality,  especially  in  the  midst  of  a  financial 
crisis.  The  first  thing  that  financial  institutions  do  when  they  realise  losses  due  to  their 
underpricing of risk is to immediately overprice risk and to de-leverage, which tends to fuel a 
spiral  with  negative  effects  on  the  real  economy.  Although  shareholders  and  managers 
should be the first to account for banks’ failure to assess risk, experience has also shown 
that the upcoming generation of bankers has not necessarily learnt from the mistakes made 
by the previous generation.  
So what is to be done? 
Appropriate regulation and supervision of the financial system is essential in order to protect 
taxpayers.  This  is  why  regulators  and  supervisors  have  to  be  accountable  to  taxpayers.  I 
would  like  to  push  the  argument  even  further,  perhaps  somewhat  provocatively.  Since  the 
regulators  and  supervisors  are  accountable  to  taxpayers,  the  latter  are  ultimately  also 
responsible if their financial system is inappropriately regulated and supervised. Taxpayers 
cannot have their cake and eat it. In other words, they cannot tolerate, or even encourage, 
lax regulation and supervision – which in turn favours bank profitability, benefits the national 
financial centre and ultimately contributes to the state’s coffers – and at the same time refuse 
to contribute when systemic crises occur as a result of an under-regulated system. 
To sum up, the banking system is regulated precisely because of its systemic implications. 
You don’t teach the banking system a lesson by letting it collapse once in a while, but by 
ensuring proper regulation and supervision, even if some people don’t like it. 
Similarly,  you  don’t  make  countries improve  their  fiscal  discipline  by  making  it  possible  for 
them  to  easily  get  away  with  restructuring  their  debts.  This  may  actually  create  a 
disincentive,  i.e.  an  incentive  not  to  adopt  the  corrective  measures  which  are  needed  to 
reform the economy. This is what actually happened in the case of Greece last spring. As 
talks  of  restructuring  spread  from  some  euro  area  capitals,  the  Greek  government  started 
thinking that this could be a nice way to go easy on the adjustment effort and it delayed some 
of the measures agreed in the programme.  
Questioning  the  signature  of  the  sovereign  has  very  negative  effects  on  the  confidence  of 
wholesale and retail investors, both at home and abroad. Since public debt instruments play 
a  key  role  in  domestic  financial  markets  and  are  an  essential  means  of  saving  for  the 
population,  restructuring  has  very  large  wealth  effects,  with  direct  repercussions  on  the 
economy and also on society and on the democratic system. It is no coincidence that nearly 
all  countries  which  have  restructured  their  debt  in  the  past  were  relatively  poor  and  often 
undemocratic.  
As  a  result,  PSI,  when  applied  to  states,  may  end  up  costing  taxpayers  even  more.  In 
particular, additional financial assistance must be provided to a country which restructures its 
debt  in  order  to  avoid  an  abrupt  interruption  in  the  flow  of  credit  and  the  collapse  of  the 
domestic financial system. Such additional assistance may even be as large as the savings 
obtained from the restructuring of private sector credits. The 21 July agreement with Greece, 
for  instance,  which  aimed  at  saving  around  €50  billion  of  debt  held  by  the  private  sector, 
required the disbursement of about €20 billion of extra assistance to recapitalise the Greek 
banking  system  to  avert  its  collapse  and  a  larger  amount  to  enhance  the  credit  rating  of 
Greek bonds to be used as collateral for refinancing with the Eurosystem.  
What’s the solution in this case? 
To prevent countries from getting again into the same difficulties as they experienced prior to 
the  crisis  we  need  tougher  governance,  with  more  stringent  rules  –  not  only  on  fiscal 
discipline but also on banking supervision – automatic sanctions and greater stringency on 
domestic  decision-making  for  countries  which  request  financial  assistance.  The  negative 
experience  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  over  the  last  decade  should  not  undermine 
efforts to further strengthen the system. It is ultimately the responsibility of each government 
to ensure not only that it complies with the rules but also that other governments do likewise. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
If  governments  fail  to  play  this  role  at  European  level,  their  taxpayers  will  bear  the  costs. 
Taxpayers should thus hold their representatives accountable for ensuring that the European 
rules are respected by all. 
Stronger governance may require a Treaty change, in particular with a view to giving more 
power  to  European  authorities  over  the  public  finances  of  a  country  which  asks  for 
assistance.  Indeed,  looking  at  the  current  situation  in  Greece,  it  is  clear  from  its  balance 
sheet – its assets and liabilities – that the country would be solvent if it were willing to sell its 
assets,  or  pledge  them,  to  repay  its  debts.  Its  unwillingness  to  do  so,  for  local  political 
reasons,  and  the  inability  of  the  European  authorities  to  induce  the  country  to  do  so, 
aggravates  the  situation  in  the  financial  markets  and  tests  the  political  resilience  of  the 
creditor countries.  
Political leaders are now realising that monetary union is a political union. They should act 
accordingly, instead of passing on the responsibility to financial markets. 
Towards a comprehensive solution 
We have recently entered a new phase of risk transfer going from sovereign entities to the 
banking  system  and  back  again.  Increased  risk  aversion  has  progressively  spilled  across 
countries.  The  link  between  the  financial  sector  and  sovereigns  has  degenerated  into  a 
series of negative, rather dangerous feedback loops, which ultimately weigh down on overall 
confidence  and  growth,  not  only  in  the  euro  area  but  also  worldwide.  Against  this 
background,  how  can  we  best  avoid  investors  questioning  the  sustainability  of  the  overall 
euro area financial system, as well as the very capability of sovereigns to fully honour their 
obligations?  
Action is required in four main areas. 
First,  the  governance  framework  should  be  strengthened  to  avoid  any  repetition  of  the 
problems which have caused the crisis. The measures adopted recently are a step forward. 
Further  steps  are  needed,  especially  to  reinforce  crisis  management,  which  may  require 
Treaty  changes,  or  a  new  Treaty  among  the  17  current  members  of  the  euro  area.  My 
concern about the current discussions is that while there are several  interesting proposals 
dealing with fiscal policy – aimed in particular at strengthening the Union’s ability to constrain 
the budget of countries requiring assistance – little is being said about financial matters. We 
have seen that the Irish and Spanish problems, for instance, were not caused by budgetary 
problems but by an excessive leverage of the banking system. I believe that we need a more 
tightly integrated regulatory and supervisory structure in the euro area. 
Second,  given  the  crisis  of  confidence  in  the  financial  markets,  backstops  have  to  be 
identified to ensure the stability of the financial system, in particular banks. This means that 
markets – not only supervisors – have to be convinced that banks can withstand a worsening 
of the situation, both in terms of access to liquidity and in terms of absorbing potential losses 
through capital. The provision of liquidity is the responsibility of the central bank. Ten days 
ago we decided to conduct two longer-term refinancing operations with a maturity of about 
one year, at fixed rate with full allotment. We also decided to continue conducting our main 
refinancing  operations  at  fixed  rates  with  full  allotment  against  collateral  at  least  until  
mid-2012. We also launched a new covered bonds purchase programme. However, national 
treasuries are responsible for ensuring that the banking system is adequately capitalised. 
Higher capital is required in particular as a precautionary measure, with a view to reassuring 
the  markets.  However,  given  that  the  markets  are  now  quite  nervous,  we  should  avoid 
promoting  solutions  which  end  up  producing  the  opposite  result,  in  particular  having  a 
permanent excess of capital and entrenching the idea that euro area public bonds are unsafe 
assets.  There  is  also  a  risk  that  if  banks  are  given  too  much  time  to  secure  the  desired 
capital ratio, they will achieve it through a de-leveraging and a reduction of their assets, thus 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
triggering  a  credit  crunch.  What  is  needed  is  a  credible  backstop  for  the  banking  system 
which can be used quickly to absorb potential losses, if they materialise.  
At the current juncture, higher capital in the banking sector could help to reduce the negative 
feedback loop between the sovereigns and the banks, through several channels. With higher 
capital  buffers  banks  would  be  able  to  withstand  larger  external  shocks,  including  those 
stemming  from  the  difficulties  of  the  domestic  or  a  foreign  sovereign.  In  addition,  well-
capitalised banks would have less of a need to de-leverage and to liquidate their exposure to 
sovereign debt. Finally, being less vulnerable to systemic risks would mitigate the perceived 
credit risk of the sovereign itself, and in this way contribute to lowering its financing cost. 
The  third  element  of  the  comprehensive  solution  is  the  backstop  to  the  sovereign  risk  to 
convince markets that liquidity problems affecting the euro area members will not translate 
into  solvency  problems.  The  European  Financial  Stability  Facility  has  been  put  in  place. 
Discussions  are  ongoing  on  how  to  leverage  the  resources.  Various  solutions  are  being 
studied. I won’t go into detail here but will simply say that it is important to realise that the 
size of the backstop has to be proportional to the systemic risk we may face. The political 
authorities,  and  the  taxpayers  to  whom  they  report,  have  to  understand  that  if  this  risk 
materialises, and the euro area fails to provide a convincing answer, all parts of the Union 
will be severely affected, even those who currently seem safe. The impact will even spread 
beyond the euro area, as our G20 partners have repeatedly said. Ensuring the stability of the 
euro  area  is  thus  a  responsibility  which  goes  beyond  our  borders  and  affects  the  global 
economy. 
This leads me to the fourth issue, which is the case of Greece. This in itself would require a 
separate speech. All policy-makers involved, including governments and parliaments, should 
learn  from  the  experience  so  far,  in  particular  the  fact  that  apparently  easy  solutions  for 
taxpayers may turn out to be much more costly. Greece needs an overhaul of its economy, 
and  that  will  take  several  years.  A  long-term  solution  should  be  found,  bringing  about 
sustainable public finances and a stronger economy. The sustainability of the debt should be 
ensured over time, looking not only at the level of the debt at a given point in time but also at 
its  trend  and  interest  burden.  Pressure  should  continue  to  be  exerted  on  the  Greek 
government and parliament to stick with the programme.  
Putting wealth to work 
The challenges mentioned above raise an additional issue which I would like to address now, 
namely the shortage of public funds. For several countries, borrowing money to backstop the 
financial system or to help other countries is unfeasible, given the level of outstanding debt.  
What’s the solution? 
I would like to elaborate on a concept which is often forgotten by analysts, especially those 
who look at the current situation from the perspective of emerging markets’ experiences in 
the past. In most euro area economies the state itself holds a large amount of wealth, some 
of which is marketable. According to OECD statistics, in 2010 government financial assets 
amounted to 33% of GDP in Greece, 43% in Ireland, 34% in Portugal, 26% in Spain, 28% in 
Italy, 37% in France and in Germany.2 Before entering into catastrophic scenarios such as 
those depicted by doomsayers, countries should be able to put their wealth fully to work.  
There  are  various  ways  of  doing  this.  An  obvious  and  often  considered  one  is  the 
privatisation  of  some  of  the  state’s  assets,  and  using  the  proceeds  to  reduce  the  stock  of 
                                                 
2 
It  comprises  currency  and  deposits,  loans,  securities  including  shares,  financial  derivatives,  insurance 
technical reserves and accounts receivable. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
government  debt.  The  disposal  of  government  assets  has  a  neutral  effect  on  the  fiscal 
position. But asset sales can significantly contribute to addressing liquidity problems.  
One of the concerns generally voiced about the sale of public assets is that valuations can 
be depressed and that some markets may have completely dried up. Another concern arises 
from the reluctance to dispose of assets considered to be strategic for the country, given the 
nature of the companies involved (energy, military, telecoms, etc.). 
An alternative way is to leverage the property rights of public assets in such a way that they 
can  be  securitised  and  used  to  provide  protection  for  bondholders  or  to  guarantee  the 
backstop  for  the  financial  sector.  Some  smart  financial  engineering  is  needed,  and  many 
ideas  are  circulating,  based  also  on  existing  experiences.  This  is  a  promising  avenue,  but 
much work needs to be done. Better use of existing assets would enable countries to reduce 
their  reliance  on  additional  borrowing  in  order  to  finance  backstops  that  are  temporary, 
because linked to the very tense situation of the financial markets. It would thus reduce their 
fragility in the transition to a more stable situation, in which public finances are on a better 
footing. 
Conclusions 
Breaking  the  spiral  of  negative  feedback  loops  from  a  crisis-battered  financial  sector  to 
sovereign entities – and then back from governments weakened by the financial crisis to the 
banking system – is crucial to restore confidence in the financial system. Halting that spiral 
requires  a  multi-pronged  strategy  that  simultaneously  addresses  the  fiscal  and  banking 
systems.  
Over the last 18 months European policy-makers have shown that they are able, in the end, 
to take decisions which safeguard the stability of the euro area financial system and defend 
the  prosperity  that  we  have  built  over  the  last  60  years.  But  they  have  done  it  too  slowly, 
under the pressure of the markets, and that has ultimately increased the burden.  
A comprehensive, timely solution is needed now. I am confident that Europe’s leaders will 
find it. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
