Nils Bernstein: Challenges ahead for the Danish economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Danish Bankers Association, Copenhagen, 5 December 2011. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. 
During the autumn, economic activity has dampened in the advanced economies, especially 
in the euro area, and the outlook has been adjusted downwards. But there are considerable 
differences from country to country. Generally, growth remains reasonable in countries with 
sound public finances and external balances, such as Germany and Sweden, while it is low 
in countries with large internal and external imbalances, particularly the debt-ridden countries 
in southern Europe. 
The downward adjustment of growth prospects reflects several factors. Firstly, the European 
sovereign debt crisis has by no means been resolved, in fact it intensified over the summer, 
and  in  the  USA  there  is  great  uncertainty  about  medium-term  fiscal  plans.  Secondly, 
consumer and business confidence has declined in many countries. Households and firms 
continue to consolidate, partly in the light of falling stock indices and housing prices. Thirdly, 
the combination of sustained financial turmoil, lower growth expectations and pressure from 
the financial markets means that several countries have had to speed up fiscal consolidation. 
Viewed in isolation, fiscal policy is procyclical at the moment, which means that it contributes 
to further dampening of growth. On the other hand, more expansionary fiscal policy  would 
push up interest rates. Combined with large government debts this means that tightening is 
the only option. Many countries are now paying the price for their previous slack approach to 
economic  policy.  Among  other  things,  this  is  reflected  in  an  increase  in  unemployment  to 
more than 10 per cent in the euro area and 9 per cent in the USA. In the hardest hit euro 
area member states unemployment now exceeds 20 per cent. Especially young people find it 
difficult to gain a foothold in the labour markets, which favour those who already have a job. 
The  near-term  outlook  is  unusually  uncertain.  Lower  confidence  among  households  and 
firms and in the financial sector often points to a decline in activity. And indeed, the latest 
forecasts from the OECD and the EU predict only a moderate upswing in the USA, while the 
euro area overall is expected to stagnate, with a risk of growth at or below zero. Tackling the 
challenges in the heavily indebted member states is essential to dampening uncertainty and 
paving the way for growth in the euro area. 
And  now  let  me  turn  to  the  Danish  economy.  Growth  was  sound  in  the  2nd  quarter,  but 
according to preliminary data GDP dived in the 3rd quarter, to a level 0.3 per cent lower than 
in the same period of 2010. This reflected not only weak export growth, but also a decline in 
government spending as the public sector sought to balance its finances. The growth pattern 
has  generally  been  very  uneven  in  recent  years,  so  data  for  a  single  quarter  should  be 
interpreted with caution. 
Nevertheless,  the  overall  picture  is  that  the  Danish  economy,  like  the  world  economy,  is 
slowing down. This situation is likely to continue well into 2012, and we do not expect growth 
in Denmark to pick up in earnest before 2013. Our forecast does not operate with a speedy 
resolution of the debt crisis. On the other hand, we do not foresee a total collapse either. In 
technical terms, we assume that Europe will muddle through somehow.  
We should be careful not to paint too gloomy a picture of the Danish economy. Although we 
expect a small rise in unemployment in the near future, the Danish labour market is doing 
relatively  well.  Employment  has  declined  a  little  since  the  beginning  of  2010,  and 
unemployment is only slightly above its structural level. Private consumption is weak, but this 
reflects consolidation rather than lack of funds in the households. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1 
It is satisfactory that the new government is planning to reduce the government deficit to less 
than 3 per cent of GDP in 2013 and to improve the structural balance by 1.5 per cent of GDP 
in  2011–13,  as  the  EU  recommends.  Add  to  this  the  support  for  important  labour  market 
reforms  –  the  partial  phasing-out  of  the  early  retirement  scheme  and  reduction  of  the 
entitlement  period  for  unemployment  benefits.  This  will  contribute  to  increasing  structural 
employment  considerably,  thereby  countering  the  demographically  driven  reduction  of  the 
labour force. 
It is evident that the 2012 Finance Bill does not provide for any improvement of the structural 
government budget balance next year. This makes it even more important to tighten up in 
2013 in order to maintain the fiscal stance. 
Anyone who is interested in current affairs can see that the euro area is in an economic and 
political crisis. For almost two years the arrow has been pointing in the wrong direction. More 
and  more  member  states  are  struggling  with  mounting  debts  and  high  interest  rates.  This 
reflects the market participants’ lack of confidence in these member states’ ability to set their 
own houses in order. Several member states have applied for and received external financial 
assistance  –  on  conditions  that  stretch  social  structures  to  the  limit.  In  Greece  and  Italy, 
democratically  based  governments  have  been  sidelined,  and  Belgium  has  been  without  a 
real government for more than one year – although this is for other reasons. 
But  what  really  gives  cause  for  concern  is  that  the  solutions  negotiated  by  the  heads  of 
government have, so far, not been able to halt an increasingly serious development, despite 
repeated promises to do whatever it takes. Time will show what that is – but the solutions 
agreed on are proving to be difficult to implement.  
It is by no means easy. After all, it is about what and how soon each  member state must 
deliver in return for support from the community. And indeed, is it at all possible to strike a 
balance that will be politically acceptable while also soothing the markets? 
But let us get one thing straight. The necessary economic adjustments will take place, either 
through managed political processes or via relentless market demands if the politicians give 
up. 
Personally I still believe that political solutions will be found. The alternative would be chaos, 
and  the  historic  European  project  would  come  tumbling  down.  The  judgement  of  future 
generations would be too harsh to bear.  
Where does all this leave Denmark? Unfortunately, we cannot do much to stem the negative 
tide from the outside world. A small, open economy such as Denmark’s is severely affected 
when  export  markets  contract  and  fiscal  options  are  limited.  But  thanks  to  relatively  low 
government  debt  and  broad  political  agreement  to  reduce  the  government  deficit  we  have 
managed to weather the worst financial storms so far. In the short term, we cannot simply 
grow our way out of this situation. We can support our export potential through responsible 
economic  policies  combined  with  collective  agreements  to  counter  the  prolonged  loss  of 
competitiveness,  and  we  can  introduce  reforms  that  will  provide  a  sound  basis  for  the 
upswing  which  will  come  at  some  point.  Finally,  we  must  do  our  utmost  to  ensure  that 
interest rates can remain low, as this cushions the weak economy.  
Metaphorically speaking, we must do what small ships do in a gale: we must reef the sails 
and lie hove-to until the wind abates – and in the meantime we can do a little tidying up and 
clear the ship; that is the gentlest solution for the crew, the passengers and the vessel. 
I am fully aware that this is not exactly a heroic approach. But we should bear in mind that 
the situation in Denmark, including the level of unemployment, is better than in most of the 
countries we usually compare ourselves with. So maintaining the current wealth level in the 
face  of  the  crisis  would  be  no  mean  feat.  We  should  not  harbour  unrealistic  ambitions  of 
growth that cannot be achieved in the present circumstances.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
The  sovereign  debt  crisis  leaves  its  mark  in  practically  all  areas,  and the  European  banks 
play a major role in the crisis. In the EU, the largest banks were stress tested in the summer 
of 2011, and in the autumn a capital test was performed of the banks with market valuation of 
government securities. The banks should have a Core Tier 1 ratio of 9 per cent as a buffer 
against the storm. If they do not meet this requirement, they should seek to raise capital and 
retain profits. Ultimately, government capital injections may be required. 
Moreover,  there  is  agreement  in  the  EU  that  it  should  be  possible  for  member  states  to 
decide  to  provide  more  individual  government  guarantees  to  their  banks  on  uniform 
conditions, along the lines of the scheme we have applied in Denmark. 
Indeed, Bank Rescue Package 2 means that there is still heavy government involvement in 
the  Danish  banking  sector  by  way  of  both  government  capital  injections  and  individual 
government-guaranteed bond loans. These measures are temporary and were intended to 
provide  the  necessary  breathing  space  to  adjust  the  capital  base,  sources  of  funding  and 
business models.  
Right now it looks as if the Danish banks will generally be able to stand on their own feet 
when the government guarantees expire. The banking sector is reasonably well capitalised. 
This is what Danmarks Nationalbank’s stress test shows, and it is confirmed by the European 
stress and capital tests.  
All  the  same,  some  banks  still  have  a  weaker  point  of  departure  and  will  find  it  difficult to 
obtain funding when the government-guaranteed loans expire. One reason could be that they 
still hold bad assets, combined with a weak capital base. This is where the Financial Stability 
Company could be relevant. 
In Danmarks Nationalbank’s view, Denmark should not address these specific problems by 
deciding  to  introduce  general  access  to  government  guarantees,  as  provided  for  by  the 
ECOFIN. This will merely extend the life of an unsustainable business model. 
One element of a solution that does not involve new government guarantees is Danmarks 
Nationalbank’s  expansion  of  the  collateral  basis  to  include  banks’  lending  of  good  quality. 
This will provide a last-resort funding opportunity for the banks. At the same time, this lending 
may  be  included  in  the  banks’  liquidity,  even  if  it  has  not  been  pledged  to  Danmarks 
Nationalbank, provided that the requirements are met. In Danmarks Nationalbank’s opinion 
new  government  guarantees  should  not  be  discussed  before  all  existing  possibilities  have 
been exhausted.  
Sector surveys in recent months have indicated that it has become harder for businesses to 
find funding. 
Danmarks Nationalbank’s lending survey also shows that credit policies have been tightened 
a little more lately – both for households and for the corporate sector. Notably, loan approval 
charges have been adjusted. The widening of the interest-rate margin is a natural and – in 
the  current  situation  –  necessary  way  for  the  banks  to  increase  earnings.  Funding  has 
become  harder  to  come  by  and  more  expensive.  The  markets  have  increased  the  capital 
requirements, and the risk of losses has increased.  
Incidentally, it looks as if banks and mortgage banks have increasingly begun to differentiate 
between customer groups on the basis of risk profiles. So there is no doubt that certain firms 
and sectors are finding it harder to obtain loans.  
Total lending by banks and mortgage banks to the corporate sector remains relatively high, 
and it would not be right to speak of a general credit crunch. The recent trend toward further 
tightening should be monitored closely.  
Naturally, banks must perform the necessary credit assessments of projects, but good credit 
assessments are performed individually, not en bloc. I think you need to keep in mind that if 
a general credit crunch arises, this could lead to solutions that are not necessarily in your 
long-term interest. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  touch  upon  a  few  technical  issues.  As  you  know,  Danmarks 
Nationalbank primarily influences the money markets through its short-term monetary-policy 
instruments.  
In the euro area, there have been several signs of tensions in the money markets in recent 
months. The same has been the case in Denmark, where the slightly longer money-market 
interest rates have at times risen due to sluggishness in the exchange of liquidity. 
The money-market interest rates determine the exchange rate of the krone. So, to support 
the  fixed-exchange-rate  policy,  Danmarks  Nationalbank  will  now  supplement  its  monetary-
policy instruments with liquidity-adjusting lending in kroner. This instrument can be used as 
and  when  required.  The  rate  of  interest  and  maturity  of  such  loans  will  reflect  market 
conditions.  Loans  may  be  granted  against  pledging  of  assets  included  in  Danmarks 
Nationalbank’s  collateral  basis,  or  as  FX  swaps  against  foreign  exchange  as  collateral. 
Danmarks  Nationalbank  may  allocate  liquidity  by  auction  or  conduct  bilateral  lending 
transactions with individual counterparties. Such instruments are also used by other central 
banks in their liquidity management. 
The  modalities  of  any  such  loans,  including  maturities  and  allocation  procedure,  will  be 
determined when the loans are offered. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  express  my  appreciation to  the  Danish  Bankers Association  and  its 
members and chairman for our good and fruitful cooperation over the last year. 
Thank you for your attention.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
