Matthew Elderfield: PRISM – risk based supervision in Ireland 
Address by Mr Matthew Elderfield, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of Ireland, to the 
ACCA (the Association of Chartered Certified Accountants), Dublin, 1 December 2011. 
 Introduction 
Good evening ladies and gentlemen. 
I would like to thank ACCA Ireland for inviting me to speak to your members and guests and 
to  compliment  ACCA  on  its  continuing  drive  to  ensure  its  members  are  well  briefed  on 
matters  relating  to  the  accountancy  profession.  It  is  very  encouraging  to  see  such  a  large 
audience  here  this  evening  interested  in  hearing  about  the  Central  Bank’s  new  risk-based 
approach to supervision. 
This  evening  I  will  tell  you  about  PRISM  –  our  name  for  our  new  risk  based  supervisory 
framework. First, I will explain why we have decided to adopt this system of supervision, then 
I will set out how it will work and what it will mean in terms of our interaction with supervised 
firms and, after that, there will be an opportunity for you to ask questions. 
PRISM: why? 
We  can  all  see  for  ourselves  the  very  significant  costs  and  other  consequences  of  past 
financial  and  regulatory  failures  both  domestically  and  internationally.  For  Ireland  it  has 
meant the need for an €85 billion assistance programme from the EU/IMF and difficult cost 
savings,  cutbacks  and  other  measures  to  restructure  the  public  finances.  We  have  had 
multiple credit rating downgrades with their knock-on impacts on the banking sector and the 
International Financial Services Centre. The banking sector has been recapitalised at a cost 
to taxpayers of some €63 billion, the entire domestic banking sector is either in full or partial 
State ownership and is engaged in major deleveraging or, in some cases, wind down. There 
is significant stress on the credit union sector. We have had the failure of one major domestic 
insurance  company,  and  a  major  IFSC  banking  subsidiary  and  significant  reputational 
damage to Ireland, including the IFSC. I could go on at length – but you all know this story 
very well. 
Internationally  we  have  seen  similar  failures  and  in  every  case,  and  certainly  in  Ireland, 
supervisors relied too much on the market and on firms’ directors to ensure that their firms 
had  sound  and  robust  business  models.  In  many  cases,  the  markets  and  boards  failed  to 
deliver  that,  leaving  taxpayers  to  pick  up  the  pieces  because  the  costs  of  a  disorderly 
collapse by a major institution were higher than the cost of bailing out an institution.  
Our  recent  history  proves  that  the  consequences  of  market  failures  can  be  severe.  Many 
hope that reinvigorated financial services regulation can provide at least a partial antidote to 
the adverse consequences of unfettered markets. But it has to be the right sort of regulation. 
Patrick Honohan summarised past problems acutely when he said, “..the style of supervision 
adopted did not generate the most relevant or useful information to anything near the extent 
required.  By  relying  excessively  on  a  regulatory  philosophy  that  emphasises  process  over 
outcomes,  supervisory  practice  focused  on  verifying  governance  and  risk  management 
models rather than attempting an independent assessment of risk, whether on a line-by-line 
or  whole-of-institution  basis.  This  approach  involved  a  degree  of  complacency  about  the 
likely performance of well-governed banks that proved unwarranted.” 
It is in the light of these failings that we have to strengthen supervision. Market failures can 
happen in many different ways and have many different consequences. We cannot avoid all 
failures  but we  can  prioritise  our  supervision  so  as  to  protect  against  the  potential  failures 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
that  would  have  the  most  severe  consequences.  We  believe,  against  the  backdrop  of  the 
problems of both firms and regulators in the recent past, that PRISM offers an important step 
forward  towards  more  challenging  and  outcome  focused  supervision:  that  is  supervision 
where  real  problems  are  identified  earlier  and  where  serious  efforts  are  made  to  mitigate 
them  before  the  problems  morph  into  crises.  It  should  help  us  deploy  our  finite  means  to 
deliver better ends. 
Introducing PRISM 
Over the early part of this year much attention was paid to the bank recapitalisation exercise 
carried out by the Central Bank. That was about resolving past failings and putting our banks 
on  more  stable  footing,  to  ensure  they  were  sufficiently  capitalised  to  deal  with  the 
consequences of the financial and economic crisis. It was about dealing with issues which 
had, in the jargon, crystallised. While that was happening, we were also busy developing a 
system of supervision aimed at providing better protection for the taxpayer and the financial 
system against such significant losses and costs in the future. 
In an ideal world, a financial regulator would identify and deal promptly with issues at major 
firms – issues which had a significant chance of causing losses to taxpayers. In that ideal 
world, the regulator would deal with these issues before they crystallised, that is to say, early 
enough to avoid the losses actually happening. To be able to do this, the regulator needs to 
be forward looking and to build a good understanding of these key firms, the quality of their 
governance and the robustness of their business models. But the world is not ideal and as a 
result  we  must  accept  some  degree  of  failure  in  our  population  of  regulated  entities.  The 
question is – which failures are more tolerable to the Irish public given the resources of the 
Central Bank? 
What I want to explain this evening is how the Central Bank is now building this system of 
supervision  and  how  we  are  changing  the  way  we  supervise  firms  to  ensure  that  we  are 
better equipped to spot problems before they become crises, to allow us to be on the front 
foot more often when dealing with our highest impact firms so that we can intervene early 
and effectively to resolve problems and prevent crises. 
The  reforms  we  are  introducing  centre  on  our  new  risk  based  supervision  framework  
–  PRISM  which  stands  for  the  Probability  Risk  and  Impact  SysteM.  I  will  explain  how  the 
PRISM framework operates in due course but perhaps it is helpful to start by explaining why 
we have chosen to adopt a risk based supervision system. 
Why risk based supervision 
Fundamentally  we  need  risk  based  supervision  because  we  have  to  make  sure  we  deal 
adequately with the main risks to financial stability and consumers posed by our regulated 
financial  firms.  If  we  were  to  simply  divide  our  front  line  supervisors  evenly  between  the 
10,000 plus firms we regulate, we would not be able to do very much proactive work at all 
and we would certainly not have enough resources to understand our major firms well. One 
alternative  would  be  to  recruit  more  supervisors.  So,  let  me  pause  here  for  a  moment  to 
update you on our staff resources at the Central Bank. By the end of the year we hope to be 
near to our increased regulatory staff complement of 714, up from 531 at the end of 2010 
and 385 at the end of 2009. This significant increase in staff numbers together with internal 
restructuring is necessary to ensure we can operate effectively and efficiently. Next year our 
headcount will remain flat – after such growth it now makes sense to pause and consolidate. 
Our benchmarking shows that while we may still be a little behind our peers relative to the 
size  of  our  financial  services  sector,  we  have  closed  much  of  the  gap  and  now  have  a 
reasonable level of resources in light of our current responsibilities. It is also helpful to pause 
at  this  stage  to  see  whether  our  initial  calibration  of  the  resources  required  to  operate  the 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
new  PRISM  supervisory  framework  is  adequate  and  to  focus  our  efforts  on  efficiency  and 
process improvement.  
What does this mean for the supervisory levy on regulated firms? Next year will see the full 
year costs of our new resource levels feed into the levy while intensifying our enforcement 
effort will drive up our legal costs in the short term as we ramp up to take on the big cases. 
But  going  forward,  cost  increases  should  moderate.  And  our  up-front  investment  in 
enforcement has a significant potential return in the form of lower future costs as we hope to 
win back our legal costs and also recoup costs from penalties.  
To  make  good  use  of  our  budget,  we  need  to  target  the  energy  and  expertise  of  our 
supervisors to where they will make the greatest difference. Targeting entails accepting that 
not  all  firms  are  equal,  dividing  them  on  the  basis  of  their  ability  to  have  an  impact  on 
financial  stability  and  the  consumer,  and  then  allocating  scarce  supervisory  resources 
accordingly. It is also about making sure that we assess the real risks which different firms 
present in a consistent manner. It is about making sure that we put our energy into actually 
resolving  unacceptable  risks  rather  than  merely  analysing  firms  to  understand  their 
processes. We need to do these things, and to make sure that we quality assure our output, 
if  we  are  to  be  successful  in  materially  reducing  the  risks  to  financial  stability  and  to  the 
consumer posed by the firms we regulate.  
How are we assessing impact and what is our risk appetite? 
Impact is one of the core building blocks of a risk based system of supervision. You will recall 
that we consulted publicly between December last year and February this year about how we 
should assess the impact of different types of firms. Various individuals, industry bodies and 
firms responded to that consultation with their suggestions. Based on those responses and 
on the views of experts from within the Central Bank, we developed a number of quantitative 
impact metrics. We then combined these metrics together to provide us with an empirically-
driven score for each firm. This score, we believe, approximates to the importance of a firm 
in terms of its ability, were it to experience problems, to adversely affect the Irish economy, 
the public finances and ultimately taxpayers.  
We used these impact scores to divide our firms into four categories – low impact, medium-
low  impact,  medium-high  impact  and  high  impact.  We  are  now  allocating  our  supervisory 
resources on the basis of these impact categorisations. There is also a small sub-set of high 
impact  firms  which  we  call  ultra-high  impact,  principally  the  domestic  banks  and  largest 
insurance firms.  
We  have  different  risk  tolerance  to  failure  for  firms  in  different  impact  categories.  Our  risk 
tolerance  is  highest  for  low  impact  firms  while,  for  obvious  reasons,  we  have  a  very  low 
tolerance to failure in the highest impact firms. We are prepared – no – more than that – we 
expect some low impact firms to fail each year. I will return to the subject of the supervision 
of low impact firms in more detail later. For the moment I want to stress that we require all 
low impact firms to comply with the appropriate prudential and consumer regulations just as 
much as we require our higher impact firms to comply with such regulations – but we accept 
that,  in  any  market  economy,  firms  will  be  created  and  they  will  fail  for  a  whole  variety  of 
reasons. When they fail, we will work to ensure that the rights of customers are appropriately 
protected  according  to  the  law,  supported  by  the  extensive  retail  consumer  protection 
framework  in  Ireland.  We  will  also  work  to  ensure  appropriate  cancellation  of  permissions 
and winding up in accordance with insolvency regulation.  
As you would expect our risk appetite for such failure in our highest impact firms is markedly 
less. We do not expect these firms to fail regularly and, when it appears that it is possible 
they are at risk or may fail, you will find us working pro-actively to mitigate the risks. We will 
work  to  ensure  that,  if  there  is  to  be  failure,  that  it  is  not  disorderly  and  that  there  is  no 
requirement for taxpayer support to preserve financial stability. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
further 
further 
training 
thereby 
to  enhance  specific  skills  – 
How we will implement our risk appetite? 
The first stage in implementing our risk appetite is through investigating and challenging the 
firms we regulate. We are deploying a set of engagement tasks which are designed to help 
us understand the firms better and to put us in a place where we can effectively unearth and 
discuss  the  key  issues  with  a  firms’  leadership  team,  with  a  view  to  achieving  swift  and 
effective mitigation where necessary.  
To make this approach plausible, we have been investing in practical training for supervisors 
to help them conduct high quality qualitative and quantitative evaluations of firms. We have 
also  recruited  a  considerable  number  of  staff  with  deep  industry  knowledge  and  we  will 
continue  to  invest  in  training  all  our  supervisory  teams.  As  supervisors  provide  us  with 
feedback  on  different  aspects  of  different  PRISM  engagement  tasks  we  will  be  able  to 
commission 
improving 
performance.  This  year,  for  example,  we  have  commissioned  focused  business  model 
training for some supervisors, to ensure they  have the requisite skills to evaluate, working 
with our specialist business model analytics team, the strengths and weaknesses of firms’ 
strategies.  
This means that firms can expect their engagements with our supervisors to be demanding. I 
am  asking  our  supervisors  to  ask  firms  difficult  questions,  to  be  sceptical,  to  challenge 
established truths and to not necessarily take the first answer they are given. I wish them to 
be assertive. Assertive does not mean rude or aggressive – it is perfectly possible, indeed it 
is highly desirable, to be both polite and challenging.  
That said, I will support our supervisors in being robust where they need to be robust in the 
face  of  obfuscation  where  this  arises.  But  I  would  hope  many  firms  will  find  their 
conversations  with  our  supervisors  stimulating,  helpful  and  thought  provoking.  We  are  all 
familiar with poor consultants; he or she may tell you what you want to hear as they believe 
that  will  be  how  they  are  engaged  for  further  work.  Our  supervisors  should  not  be 
consultants. They can and should differ with both firm’s management and consultants hired 
by the firm. Their career prospects depend not on being agreeable to a firm but on being able 
and prepared to engage in sometimes unpalatable but always necessary conversations and 
analysis. 
This  challenge  by  supervisors  will  occur  during  the  PRISM  engagement  tasks.  These 
engagement tasks will vary according to the impact category of the firm. High impact firms 
can expect to receive an inspection visit every quarter with each visit having a different focus 
– for example governance, business model, credit risk, operational risk, underwriting risk or 
liquidity  risk.  Some  of  these  inspection  visits  will  be  tailored  to  the  type  of  firm  being 
examined  –  underwriting  risk  is  classically  important  for  an  insurer  whilst  liquidity  risk  is 
invariably important for a bank. 
Medium-high  impact  firms  and  select  medium-low  impact  firms  will  receive  regular  full  risk 
assessments which will look at a full spectrum of risks at a high level with in-depth analysis of 
key problem areas.  
We  will  hold  regular  meetings  with  the  senior  management  and  directors  of  all  high  to 
medium-low impact firms to ensure that we have an up-to-date understanding of where the 
firms are going and what risks they face. 
A key point is that a number of our engagement tasks or tools will be forward looking. We are 
determined  to  avoid  those  unfortunate  accidents  which  tend  to  occur  when  trying  to  drive 
using  only  the  rear  view  mirror.  Stress  tests  explicitly  model  possible  adverse  future 
scenarios  so  that  management  and  regulators  are  aware  of  what  might  happen  to  a  firm 
were  a  plausible  but  severe  macro-economic  scenario  to  become  reality.  Understanding 
business  models  and  strategic  plans  can  help  the  regulator  to  understand  how  the  firm  is 
evolving, what the competitive threats to its key products are and how the firm’s risk profile is 
likely to evolve as the strategy is implemented.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Finally, the focus we are putting on corporate governance is important. The structure of your 
board  and  board  committees  does  not,  of  course,  help  predict  the  future.  But  the  calibre, 
skills  and  experience  of  key  members  of  the  leadership  team  will  provide  us  with  some 
assurance  that  in  this  important  area  skilled  managers  within  the  firm  and  non-executives 
directors are actively digesting issues, challenging one another and continually assessing the 
business model as the firms make key decisions, react to events and plan future growth. 
Judging 
Engaging  with  and  challenging  firms  to  acquire  information  only  gets  you  so  far  as  a 
regulator. Having challenged firms and acquired the data – both quantitative and qualitative – 
the PRISM  application provides the supervisor with a structured way to assess credit risk, 
market  risk,  operational  risk,  insurance  risk,  liquidity  risk,  capital  risk,  governance  risk, 
business model risk, environmental risk and conduct risk. Every supervisor will – assisted by 
general and sector specific guidance – be asked to make structured judgements as to how 
probable it is that a risk at a firm will cause that firm to fail. They will all make judgements 
using the same qualitative risk scale against the same probability risk categories I have just 
listed. Our supervisors will make systematic judgements on different risk categories to build 
up an overall risk profile of the firm. The PRISM system will guide each supervisor but it will 
not tell them the answers.  
The PRISM application contains a lot of quantitative data, drawn from the financial returns 
which regulated firms submit to us. This data is analysed by PRISM to provide supervisors 
with a set of key risk indicators and standardised peer group comparators to help them make 
appropriate  judgements.  The  application  will  even  send  the  supervisor  an  alert  when  new 
data is submitted which appears to indicate that something significant has changed at a firm. 
Nevertheless, the system will merely assist the supervisor – it isn’t a black box. Instead, what 
we have built helps the supervisor work the answer out for him or herself.  
We have built a system which helps, encourages and trusts supervisors to do good-quality 
analysis  of  the  risks  a  firm  faces.  We  have  also  put  in  place  a  number  of  quality  control 
mechanisms internally – to help ensure that we make the right risk judgements.  
First  and  foremost,  we  have  sought  to  achieve  greater  consistency  in  the  approach  of 
supervisors  through  the  use  of  risk  governance  panels.  For  example,  under  the  PRISM 
framework, when a medium-high or medium-low impact firm has been subject to a full risk 
assessment – a comprehensive inspection visit if you prefer that language – the supervisory 
team will return to the Central Bank and use PRISM to write up the findings of their visit and 
to make structured judgements about the risk profile of the firm. They will then present their 
evaluation  and  proposed  next  steps  to  a  risk  governance  panel.  These  panels  consist  of 
senior staff drawn from across the Central Bank. They offer their expertise to the front line 
supervisors, debating, discussing and challenging their findings and bringing wider expertise 
and perspectives to the table. Classically, a high impact firm panel would be chaired by a 
director,  assisted  by  a  risk  advisor,  a  conduct  specialist,  the  supervision  team’s  head  of 
division and an independent head of division as well as senior representatives from the risk 
and financial stability divisions. 
Sometimes an issue will arise outside of the cycle of major engagement tasks for a firm. In 
this instance the supervisor may develop a plan to deal with the risk but, here again, he or 
she  will  need  to  get  sign  off  from  an  appropriately  senior  manager  within  the  supervisory 
division before action is required from the firm. That manager will challenge the supervisor 
and will only let mitigation actions be set for a firm when he or she is content that they are 
sound and appropriate.  
In practice, whilst our quality control mechanisms are becoming well established, there will 
be adjustments on both sides – between regulators and regulated firms – as our regulators 
refine  their  approach.  I’d  welcome  a  little  patience  from  those  we  regulate  when  we  start 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
sharing our judgements with firms as we inform them of the steps we think they should be 
taking to mitigate the risks we judge to be too great. 
Mitigating unacceptable risk 
As  well  as  being  a  tool  to  help  supervisors  form  judgements,  the  PRISM  application  also 
assists the supervisor in formulating and tracking risk mitigation programme actions designed 
to reduce risks at firms to an acceptable level. The system requires the supervisor to set out 
clearly what is the issue which gives rise to the concern. It then requires him or her to set 
down the outcome they wish to see before inviting the supervisor to formulate an action or 
series of actions which are likely to lead to the issue being mitigated in a way which achieves 
the desired outcome. Risk mitigation programme actions are not new but the way in which 
PRISM helps a supervisor to formulate them is designed to ensure that we put the outcomes 
–  the  financial  stability  and  consumer  protection  –  we  seek  on  behalf  of  the  public,  at  the 
forefront of our risk mitigation thinking. 
A further quality control mechanism built into the PRISM framework is giving firms a chance 
to  comment  on  draft  Risk  Mitigation  Programmes.  Once  Risk  Mitigation  Programmes  are 
written using the PRISM application, we plan to share them with firms in draft form, giving 
each  firm  ten  working  days  to  highlight  factual  inaccuracies,  and,  if  it  wishes,  to  propose 
alternative actions to mitigate unacceptable risks.  
Our plans to share drafts and listen to alternative risk mitigation suggestions are conditional 
on industry interacting appropriately. We do not plan to soften our risk mitigation in response 
to feedback from firms that they are too demanding or too difficult. We are introducing the 
sharing of draft Risk Mitigation Programmes on the basis that firms will react to them in an 
intelligent fashion, letting us know promptly when an issue is inaccurate but not seeking to 
deflect us from our desired outcome. The final judgement on what must be done to mitigate 
unacceptable  risks  to  financial  stability  and  the  consumer  will  remain  with  Central  Bank 
supervisors.  
I  believe  in  constructive  dialogue  and  I  believe  in  giving  firms  the  chance  to  say  how  the 
outcomes we seek can be delivered in a better or more efficient way. I also don’t believe that 
we are ever going to get every issue and every action right first time – hence my desire to 
trial this interaction with firms to help us quality assure our risk mitigation programmes. I’d 
urge all firms to use this opportunity wisely. 
I should say, for the record, that we won’t invariably give all firms the opportunity to review 
draft  risk  migration  actions.  We  will,  on  occasion,  simply  send  firms  final  Risk  Mitigation 
Programmes – sometimes matters are urgent and the facts are clear – and we will always 
seek to act with the requisite speed whenever circumstances demand it. 
The risk mitigation programme having passed through our internal quality control procedures 
will be issued in final form to a firm. The PRISM application will then track progress with Risk 
Mitigation  Programme  actions  until  they  are  complete.  It  will  send  the  supervisor  alerts  as 
actions by the firm become due. It will also prompt the supervisor to assess and rerate the 
riskiness of the firm following the completion of the Risk Mitigation programme action. If the 
supervisor judges that the way in which a firm has effected an Risk Mitigation action has not 
resulted in the risk being reduced to an acceptable level, he or she will write a replacement 
Programme,  requiring  further  action  by  the  firm  or,  perhaps,  requiring  a  third  party  or  a 
specialist team from within the Central Bank to take action. Wilful non-compliance with Risk 
Mitigation  Programme  will  be  taken  seriously  with  enforcement  action  being  considered  in 
instances where it is apparent that failure to comply with a Risk Mitigation Programme has 
left a firm in breach of a regulation or law. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Spotting trends and tracking risks 
One advantage of supervisors using an integrated system to challenge firms, judge risk and 
mitigate unacceptable risk is that, over the course of time, the Central Bank will assemble a 
powerful  quantitative  and  qualitative  database  about  the  riskiness  and  behaviour  of  firms. 
The senior leadership of the Central Bank will be able to review management information on 
evolving risks across sectors and sub-sectors, enabling us to consider whether a policy or 
enforcement  response  might  be  appropriate,  alongside  the  firm  centric  work  of  individual 
supervisors.  
We will also be able to track which firms are habitually non-compliant in terms of working with 
us in a timely manner to mitigate key risks and take appropriate action. As a Central Bank we 
have Management Information already but PRISM will offer us a new dimension by cutting 
newly  aggregated  data  in  fresh  ways,  enabling  us  to  monitor  emerging  risks  in  different 
sectors much more easily. 
Clarity and consistency for regulated firms 
As  you’d  expect,  I’ve  focused  for  much  of  this  speech  on  the  benefits  which  PRISM  will 
deliver  in  terms  of  financial  stability  and  consumer  protection  but,  moving  to  risk  based 
supervision offers real benefits for firms, particularly for firms with sound business models. 
Let me explain what I mean: 
Firstly, PRISM creates a common framework for Central Bank supervision of financial firms. 
In doing so it should help us achieve consistent supervisory interaction with equivalent firms. 
Concerns around inconsistency between firms have been raised with me in the past; I hope 
firms and trade bodies will find PRISM helps address those concerns. 
Secondly,  PRISM  will  allow  us  to  see  patterns  across  the  different  sectors  within  financial 
services  much  more  easily,  allowing  senior  management  to  obtain  a  real  time  overview  of 
where supervisors perceive most risks to be. PRISM will allow us to see the sectors in which 
new risks are emerging and to take actions focused on the characteristics of that sector or 
sub-sector. This will materially reduce the likelihood – and I know some in industry perceive 
this  to  be  a  potential  risk  –  that  funds  are  treated  like  insurers  and  insurers  like  domestic 
banks. 
Thirdly, PRISM will be proportionate. It is a firm-centric approach which will mean that the 
actions  are  tailored  to  the  firm  in  question,  with  the  sharing  of  risk  ratings  and  the  risk 
mitigation  programme  giving  each  firm  clarity  around  our  individually  tailored  supervisory 
agenda and depending on the firm’s impact rating to us. 
Of course, none of the above means that firms will necessarily like what we say any more 
than they have done in the recent past. PRISM means that individual firms can expect us to 
be consistently challenging and assertive when we judge there to be risks to financial stability 
and  consumers  which  require  mitigation.  Don’t  be  too  thin  skinned  about  this.  Some  in 
industry  would  doubtless  like  us  to  revert  to  pre-crisis  approaches  to  regulation  but  I’d 
suggest that – rather than railing against what is in fact a new global supervisory approach – 
they work with us to adapt to the new reality. 
Timing 
Shaping  the  way  an  organisation  operates  takes  time.  We  have  already  been  using  some 
aspects of the PRISM framework, such as risk governance panels and an increased focus on 
challenge and risk mitigation for many months. That said, today marks the formal launch of 
our  new  PRISM  framework  for  supervision.  We  switched  on  the  PRISM  application  which 
supports the framework last week and we will be applying it to banks and insurers from now 
onwards. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
We will develop the application further and roll it out to investment firms and credit unions in 
May next year and there will be more development in the later part of next year to ensure 
that  PRISM  can  help  supervisors  undertaking  focused  thematic  inspection  work  across  a 
significant number of firms. We plan for it to evolve as supervisory requirements evolve and 
we  will  be  developing  the  framework  and  application  to,  for  example,  incorporate  key 
Solvency II supervisory activities and metrics at an appropriate juncture. 
Supervising low impact firms 
So far this evening I’ve focused mainly on how PRISM is going to help us supervise the high 
to  medium-low  impact  firms  where  we  have  some  capacity  to  undertake  proactive  work 
focused on individual firms. As I promised at the beginning of this speech, I would now like to 
return to low impact firms, to set out how we are going to deal with these firms going forward. 
I appreciate that it’s all too easy to think they will, in some sense, be neglected. I can assure 
you  they  won’t.  We  are  all  too  aware  that  low  impact  entities  such  as,  for  example,  retail 
intermediaries,  can  also  cause  consumer  detriment  through  overcharging,  mis-selling  and 
poor systems and controls. There will be a different approach to low impact firms but they will 
not fly beneath our radar and will not have an easier time.  
We plan to monitor the financial aspects of these firms through semi-automatic reviews of 
their on-line returns as our technology infrastructure evolves. Our on-line returns programme, 
when  combined  with  PRISM  key  risk  indicators  drawn  from  those  returns  and  PRISM 
reporting functionality, is helping us advance rapidly down the automation route.  
We will box smarter through greater use of technology and make sure that the supervisory 
teams  overseeing  low  impact  firms  are  resourced  to  do  focused  thematic  work,  carefully 
targeted at higher risk areas, taking action when problems are identified. While we won’t be 
doing regular face-to-face meetings with every low impact firm, that doesn’t mean we won’t 
be watching them and that we can’t follow up when we discover wrongdoing. We may, on 
occasion, conduct spot-check inspections of low impact firms. 
We use themed inspections of regulated financial service providers to ensure that firms are 
meeting appropriate standards in terms of market conduct, consumer protection and financial 
crime  controls,  such  anti-money  laundering.  So  far  this  year,  our  Consumer  Protection 
Directorate has carried out some 77 inspections over eight themes, including an inspection 
on  product  design  and  selling,  on  openness  and  transparency  and  on  current  account 
switching. Over the last 18 months, the Central Bank has targeted over a dozen investment 
firms and subjected them to a heightened level of prudential supervision. In some cases, this 
work has been augmented by themed inspections on consumer protection matters. In almost 
all cases, issues were identified requiring outcome focused mitigating actions ranging from 
improved governance arrangements to revocation of authorisation. 
Themed inspections will continue to be an important supervisory tool, and going forward, we 
will publish our intended thematic work plan. A themed inspection focuses on a specific topic 
rather than on a range of topics and is usually carried out on a number of relevant regulated 
firms or on firms that represent a significant proportion of market share – in line with our risk-
based  approach.  Themes  and  firms  for  inspection  are  selected  based  on  our  market 
intelligence  from  a  range  of  sources,  including  issues  noted  during  on-going  supervision, 
complaints received and referrals from the Financial Services Ombudsman. 
Following the themed inspection, we issue an information release and a letter to all firms for 
whom the theme is relevant – regardless of whether they were inspected. This letter sets out 
the issues and concerns identified through the inspection and asks firms to consider these 
findings fully in terms of their own compliance with statutory requirements. Its aim is to raise 
standards of behaviour by giving feedback to the individual firms and the market as a whole. 
Where specific issues have been raised with an inspected firm, these will be included in the 
letter to that firm. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Where  a  themed  inspection  identifies  serious  non-compliance,  the  weakest  firms  we  have 
inspected  will  be  referred  to  our  Enforcement  Directorate.  Our  major  on-going  thematic 
exercise  for  the  next  year  will  be  on  mortgage  arrears.  This  particular  exercise  is  unlike 
anything we have done on themes in the past because it will be on-going and will involve 
reviewing multiple work-streams. 
For  our  supervisory  framework  for  low  impact  firms  to  work,  it  is  important  that  there  are 
strong safety nets in place to protect consumers in the event of the failure of a low impact 
entity  including  the  Deposit  Guarantee  Scheme,  the  Investor  Compensation  Company 
(ICCL),  the  insurance  compensation  scheme  and  client  asset  rules.  Client  asset  rules  are 
important because even if an investment firm fails, they ensure that client assets would be 
secure. 
The recent Custom House Capital case is a stark and timely reminder of the importance of 
having an effective supervisory framework for client assets. Looking overseas, the case of 
MF  Global  appears  to  demonstrate  this  issue  on  a  much  bigger  scale.  Arising  out  of  our 
concern following the Custom House Capital case – concern that large scale abuse of client 
funds could continue undetected by audit reports and our own and third party reviews – we 
have commissioned a Client Asset Review. Led by two of the Central Bank’s Risk Advisers 
this  review,  which  is  due  to  report  early  in  the  New  Year,  will  make  recommendations  to 
strengthen the current audit, supervisory and regulatory framework. This review is examining 
the  scope  of  the  current  regime,  the  Central  Bank’s  current  supervisory  approach,  the 
adequacy  of  the  existing  arrangements  and  guidelines  for  independent  client  asset  audits, 
the potential for the use of “skilled persons” reports, and the sufficiency of the current rules 
and  regulations  that  are  in  place  for  client  asset  protection  taking  account  of  forthcoming 
changes to the MiFID and UCITS directives. We want to make sure that we have the right 
technical skills available to do appropriate work on client money security. But I must caution 
that  no  amount  of  skilled  supervision  or  enhanced  audit  can  absolutely  guarantee  that 
determined and deliberately concealed efforts to misuse client funds can be prevented in the 
future. It is important to acknowledge that.  
Enforcement 
Enforcement action is very important in the client asset area. The Central Bank has sought 
powers  in  the  forthcoming  Central  Bank  (Supervision  and  Enforcement)  Bill  to  allow 
investment firms be put into administration so that investors interests can be protected. As I 
said  earlier,  themed  investigations  will  be  a  source  of  enforcement  action.  And  we  are 
gearing up for enforcement action where required on low impact firms – we see enforcement 
action having a powerful deterrent effect on other low impact firms.  
In  our  Enforcement  Strategy  we  have  set  out  the  two  broad  categories  for  enforcement 
actions – pre-defined and reactive. Pre-defined enforcement derives from the work priorities 
of the Supervisory Divisions. We will announce our 2012 enforcement priorities early in the 
New  Year.  Reactive  enforcement  relates  to  the  enforcement  actions  deriving  from  other 
sources of information and events, both internal and external. 
During  2011,  we  opened  32  enforcement  case  files  with  the  vast  majority  of  these  in  the 
reactive category. In 2011, our supervisory divisions identified 6 priority areas: governance 
and risk management; systems & controls; controls around charging issues; compliance with 
the Mortgage Arrears Code; compliance with client money requirements; and timeliness and 
accuracy of information received by the Central Bank from regulated entities. 
Six of the seven settlement agreements we have entered into so far this year have related to 
these  pre-defined  priorities.  Over  the  same  period  we  have  taken  reactive  enforcement 
action in a single case which related to a breach of the MiFID suitability requirements by a 
spread trading firm. The Administrative Sanction Procedure cases concluded this year have 
resulted in monetary penalties totalling €1.59 million, 6 reprimands and the disqualification of 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
two persons concerned in the management of a regulated entity for a period of three and a 
half years each. 
Over 2011 a number of our enforcement cases involved action against lower impact firms. 
We  know  that  enforcement  action  can  have  a  powerful  deterrent  effect  on  groups  of  low 
impact firms where we may not have a close supervisory relationship. We will also ensure 
that adequate enforcement resources are allocated to low impact firms to ensure that when 
our rules are breached, we have a capacity to take action, creating a credible deterrence. 
As I mentioned, we plan to announce our 2012 enforcement priorities early in the New Year 
at the same time as our thematic plan. 
Conclusion 
In  summary,  the  PRISM  framework  will  help  us  challenge  ourselves  and  our  firms  in  a 
constructive fashion. It will help us form consistent judgements about the risks firms pose to 
our  objectives  of  financial  stability  and  consumer  protection  and,  having  established  what 
those risks are, it will help us formulate appropriate mitigation steps and monitor the success 
of that mitigation. 
We will work to ensure that we supervise all types of financial firm in an appropriate fashion 
but we will never be infallible – we cannot guard society against all risks. Our objective with 
the PRISM framework is to give ourselves the best chance to guard against the most severe 
threats to financial stability and consumers in the future. 
Thank you for your attention. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
