Deepak Mohanty: Changing contours of monetary policy in India 
Speech  by  Mr  Deepak  Mohanty,  Executive  Director  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India,  at  the 
Royal Monetary Authority of Bhutan, Thimphu, 1 December 2011. 
 The assistance provided by J.K. Khundrakpam and Rajeev Jain is acknowledged. 
I thank the Royal Monetary Authority of Bhutan and Governor H.E. Daw Tenzin for inviting 
me to address such a distinguished gathering.  I thought of speaking on monetary policy in 
India for four reasons. First, the currencies of Bhutan and India, i.e., Ngultrum and Rupee are 
closely linked. Hence, monetary policy developments in India have implications for monetary 
policy in Bhutan. Second, in October 2011, the Reserve Bank deregulated savings deposit 
interest  rate  of  banks  dismantling  the  last  vestige  of  interest  rate  regulation.  Earlier  we 
completed the process of deregulation of lending rates of banks with the introduction of the 
base rate system in July 2010.  Third, in May 2011 we also modified our monetary operating 
procedure  with  a  move  to  a  single  policy  repo  rate  to  unambiguously  signal  the  stance  of 
monetary policy.  Fourth, we are also addressing the challenge of near double-digit inflation 
for  almost  two  years  now.  These  developments  obviously  are  of  some  interest  in  Bhutan 
given the close interlinkages of our currencies. 
I will begin my presentation by briefly describing the objectives and framework of monetary 
policy before coming to various aspects of implementation and formulation process in India. I 
will  then  briefly  touch  upon  on  our  recent  growth-inflation  performance.  I  will  conclude  by 
drawing attention to some of the lessons that can be drawn from the recent global crisis for 
the process of monetary policy formulation. 
Objectives of monetary policy 
Monetary policy is an arm of public policy. It, thus, has set objectives and priorities, which are 
derived from the respective mandates of central banks. It ranges from a single objective of 
price  stability,  considered  to  be  the  dominant  objective  of  monetary  policy,  to  multiple 
objectives that also include growth and financial stability. 
In the Indian context, the preamble to the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 delineates the basic 
functions of the Reserve Bank as, “to regulate the issue of Bank notes and keeping of reserves 
with a view to securing monetary stability in India and generally to operate the currency and credit 
system of the country to its advantage.” The objectives of monetary policy evolved from this broad 
guideline as maintaining of price stability and ensuring adequate flow of credit to the productive 
sectors  of  the  economy.  Monetary  stability  cannot  be  ensured  without  safeguarding  the 
purchasing power of the currency. Similarly, the credit system helps foster growth which could 
reinforce  monetary  stability.  Hence,  stabilisation  of  inflation  at  a  low  level  and  stabilisation  of 
output around its potential level remain the quintessential objectives of monetary policy in most 
countries.   In  practice,  monetary  policy  in  India  endeavoured  to  maintain  a  judicious  balance 
between economic growth and price stability. 
Price stability does not necessarily mean a constant price level, but a low and stable inflation. This 
is because both high inflation and deflation impose costs on the economy by way of loss of output 
and misallocation of resources. However, it is difficult to define the precise level of low and stable 
inflation. In practice, inflation targets range from 2 per cent for developed countries to 3.5 per cent 
for developing countries which have come to be understood as price stability.1  
                                                 
1   Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martin Uribe (2011), “The Optimal Rate of Inflation” in Handbook of Monetary 
Economics, Friedman, B. and Woodford, M. , (eds.). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
For India, the Chakravarty Committee (1985) had defined an annual inflation rate of 4 per 
cent as the tolerable level. In this context, the notion of threshold level of inflation, which is 
the inflexion point in the growth-inflation trade-off, becomes important. Beyond the threshold, 
inflation  by  itself  becomes  inimical  to  growth.   Recent  studies  on  India  suggest  that  the 
threshold inflation could be in the range of 4-6 per cent.2 However, inflation threshold need 
not necessarily be the target of monetary policy.  In fact, the inflation objective or the target 
level of inflation for monetary policy should be lower than the inflation threshold, considering 
the  existence  of  significant  lags  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  measures  and  the 
costs of inflation. 
Historically, India  has  been  a  moderate  inflation  country  in  the  context of  EMEs  and  other 
developing  economies.  The  long-term  average  inflation  rate  since  1970-71  till  the  end  of 
2000s  had  remained  in  a  single  digit  of  about  7.5  per  cent.   In  fact,  the  average  inflation 
during  the  2000s  was  even  lower  at  5.5  per  cent.  However,  near  double-digit  inflation 
persisting since the beginning of 2010-11 has been posing a challenge for monetary policy in 
India.  Notwithstanding  this  recent  inflation  upsurge,  monetary  policy  continues  to  be 
conducted to condition and contain perception of inflation in the range of 4.0-4.5 per cent. 
This is in line with the medium-term objective of 3.0 per cent inflation consistent with India’s 
broader integration into the global economy. 
Recent global financial crisis has, however, shown that low levels of inflation and high levels 
of growth do not guarantee financial stability. Accordingly, there is an increasing emphasis 
that  financial  stability  should  also  be  an  explicit  objective  of  central  banks  besides  price 
stability  and  growth.  In  India,  however,  financial  stability  was  recognised  as  another 
important objective of monetary policy much before the crisis. 
Thus,  monetary  policy  in  India  has  evolved  to  have  multiple  objectives  of  price  stability, 
growth  and  financial  stability.  These  objectives  are  not  inherently  contradictory,  but  rather 
they  are  mutually  reinforcing.  This  is  so  as  price  and  financial  stability  are  important  for 
sustaining a high level of growth, which is the ultimate objective of public policy.  
Monetary policy framework 
Achieving the monetary policy objectives requires articulation of a consistent monetary policy 
framework. This becomes necessary as central banks strive to achieve these objectives only 
indirectly  through  instruments  which  are  under  their  direct  control.  For  instance,  under  the 
monetary  targeting  framework,  central  banks,  through  the  instruments  under  their  direct 
control such as cash reserve ratio (CRR), tried to influence an intermediate target such as 
money supply which had a stable relationship with the final objectives of price and output. 
Monetary policy framework, however, has been a continuously evolving process contingent 
upon  the  level  of  development  of  financial  markets  and  institutions  as  also  the  degree  of 
global integration. In India as in other countries, monetary policy framework has undergone 
significant  transformation  over  time.  India  followed  a  monetary  targeting  framework  with 
feedback  during  the  mid-1980s  to  1997-98  under  which  broad  money  was  used  as  an 
intermediate target for monetary policy. This framework was, however, rendered increasingly 
inadequate  by  the  mid-1990s  due  to  several  developments  that  took  place  with  economic 
and financial sector reforms. 
First, on account of measures undertaken during the 1990s to develop the various segments 
of the financial market, there was discernible deepening of the financial sector (Chart 1). This 
                                                 
2   Mohanty et al. (2011), “Inflation Threshold in India:  An empirical investigation”, RBI Working Paper Series, 
18/2011;  Pattanaik  and  Nadhanael  (2011),  “Why  Persistent  High  Inflation  Impedes  Growth?  An  Empirical 
Assessment of Threshold Level of Inflation in India”, RBI Working Paper Series, 17/2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
significantly improved the effectiveness in the transmission of policy signals through indirect 
instruments such as interest rates.  
 Second, with the opening up of Indian economy, increase in liquidity emanating from capital 
inflows raised the ratio of net foreign assets to reserve money. This rendered the control of 
monetary aggregates more difficult. Third, there was also increasing evidence of changes in 
the  underlying  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  with  interest  rate  and  the 
exchange  rate  gaining  importance  vis-à-vis  quantity  variables.  Due  to  these  financial 
innovations in the economy during the 1990s, the stability of the demand function for money 
came under question. Recognising the challenges posed by financial liberalisation and the 
growing  complexities  of  monetary  management,  the  Reserve  Bank  switched  to  a  multiple 
indicator approach in 1998-99. 
Under  the  multiple  indicator  approach,  while  broad  money  continued  to  remain  an 
information  variable,  greater  emphasis  was  placed  on  rate  channels  for  monetary  policy 
formulation. A host of macroeconomic indicators including interest rates or rates of return in 
different  segments  of  financial  markets,  along  with  other  indicators  on  currency,  credit  by 
banks and financial institutions, fiscal position, trade, capital flows, inflation rate, exchange 
rate, refinancing and transactions in foreign exchange available on high frequency basis are 
juxtaposed  with  output  data  for  drawing  implications  for  monetary  policy  formulation.  As  a 
result, monetary policy operation became more broad-based on a diverse set of information 
and provided flexibility in the conduct of monetary management. 
The  multiple  indicator  approach  itself,  however,  continued  to  evolve  and  was  further 
augmented  by  forward-looking  indicators  and  a  panel  of  parsimonious  time  series  models. 
The forward-looking indicators are drawn from the Reserve Bank’s industrial outlook survey, 
capacity utilisation survey, professional forecasters’ survey and inflation expectations survey. 
The  assessment  from  these  indicators  and  models  feed  into  the  projection  of  growth  and 
inflation. Simultaneously, the Reserve Bank also gives the projection for broad money (M3), 
which serves as an important information variable, so as to make the resource balance in the 
economy consistent with the credit needs of the government and the private sector. Thus, 
the current framework of monetary policy can be termed as an augmented multiple indicator 
approach as illustrated in Chart 2. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
 Implementation of monetary policy 
For  effective  implementation  of  monetary  policy,  monetary  policy  framework  needs  a 
supporting  operating  procedure.  An  operating  procedure 
is  defined  as  day-to-day 
management of monetary conditions consistent with the overall stance of monetary policy. 
Generally, it involves: (i) defining an operational target, generally an interest rate; (ii) setting a 
policy rate which could influence the operational target; (iii) setting the width of corridor for 
short-term market interest rates; (iv) conducting liquidity operations to keep the operational 
target interest rate stable within the corridor; and (v) signalling of policy intentions. 
As with monetary policy framework, the corresponding operating procedure has also been an 
evolving  process  in  India.  Application  of  CRR  on  banks’  liabilities  and  open  market 
operations (OMO) have traditionally been the instruments of monetary policy. But, with the 
introduction of liquidity adjustment facility (LAF) in 2004, overnight management of systemic 
liquidity at desired interest rate emerged as the most active instrument of monetary policy. 
The LAF was operated through overnight fixed rate repo (central bank liquidity injection rate) 
and  reverse  repo  (central  bank  liquidity  absorption  rate)  to  provide  necessary  guidance  to 
market interest rate. However, this procedure had two major drawbacks. First was the lack of 
a  single  policy  rate.  Consequently,  the  operating  policy  rate  alternated  between  repo  and 
reverse repo rates depending upon the prevailing liquidity condition. Second was the lack of 
a firm corridor which often led the implicit target rate (call rate) breaching the upper and lower 
limits  under  liquidity  stress  conditions.  Recognising  these  shortcomings,  a  new  operating 
procedure was put in place in May 2011. 
New operating procedure 
The new operating procedure retained the essential features of the earlier LAF framework 
with the following key  modifications. First, the weighted average overnight call money rate 
was explicitly recognised as the operating target of monetary policy. Second, the repo rate 
was made the only one independently varying policy rate. Third, a new Marginal  Standing 
Facility (MSF) was instituted under which scheduled commercial banks (SCBs) could borrow 
overnight  at  their  discretion  up  to  one  per  cent  of  their  respective  net  demand  and  time 
liabilities (NDTL) at 100 basis points above the repo rate. Fourth, the revised corridor was 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
defined with a fixed width of 200 basis points. The repo rate was placed in the middle of the 
corridor,  with  the  reverse  repo  rate  100  basis  points  below  it  and  the  MSF  rate  100  basis 
points above it. The current operating framework is illustrated in Chart 3. 
 The new operating procedure, by removing some of the major drawbacks in the earlier LAF 
framework,  was  expected  to  improve  the  implementation  and  transmission  of  monetary 
policy.  First,  explicit  announcement  of  an  operating  target makes  market  participants  clear 
about the desired policy impact. Second, a single policy rate removes the confusion arising 
out of policy rate alternating between the repo and the reverse repo rates. It also improves 
the  accuracy  of  signalling  monetary  policy  stance.  Third,  the  institution  of  MSF  provides  a 
safety valve against unanticipated liquidity shocks. Fourth, a fixed interest rate corridor set by 
MSF  rate  and  reverse  repo  rate,  by  reducing  uncertainty  and  avoiding  communication 
difficulties  associated  with  a  variable  corridor,  will  help  keep  the  overnight  average  call 
money rate close to the repo rate. 
Improvement in monetary policy transmission 
As the new operating procedure was implemented just six months ago, it may be too early to 
draw  conclusions  regarding  its  efficacy.   However,  the  experience  so  far  suggests  that 
overnight interest rate has been more stable since its implementation (Chart 4). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  5
The  new  operating  framework  presupposes  the  dominance  of  the  interest  rate  channel  of 
monetary transmission, which is found to be more effective under deficit liquidity condition. 
Since  its  implementation,  we  have  been  able  to  maintain  the  systemic  liquidity  in  deficit 
mode.  Consequently,  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  in  terms  of  movement  in  call 
money market interest rate has shown improvement (Chart 5). 
It  has  also  been  observed  that  money  market  interest  rates  are  better  aligned  after  the 
implementation of new operating framework (Chart 6). 
 Further,  better  transmission  to  debt  market  segment  is  also  evident  from  closer  alignment 
between rates on debt market instruments and call rate (Chart 7). 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The  transmission  to  the  credit  market  is  much more  complex  and  occurs  through  the  cost 
channel.  Banks  respond  to  policy  changes  by  altering  deposit  rates depending  on  liquidity 
conditions and credit demand. As the cost of deposits rises alongside money market rates, 
lending rates respond to policy rate changes with a lag (Chart 8). 
  Policy formulation processes 
Given the  monetary policy framework and the  corresponding operating procedure, there is 
also a process in policy formulation. The process of monetary policy formulation in India had 
traditionally been largely internal with only the end-product of actions being made public. The 
process  has,  over  time,  become  more  consultative  and  participative  with  an  external 
orientation.  The  process  leading  to  monetary  policy  actions  entails  a  wide  range  of  inputs 
involving the internal staff, market participants, academics, financial market experts and the 
Reserve Bank Board (Chart 9). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
 Within  the  Reserve  Bank,  the  work  process  has  been  re-oriented  to  focus  on  technical 
analysis,  co-ordination,  horizontal  management  and  more  market  orientation.  The  three 
concerned  research  departments  –  Monetary  Policy  Department  (MPD),  Department  of 
Economic  and  Policy  Research  (DEPR)  and  Department  of  Statistics  and  Information 
Management  (DSIM)  –  provide  independent  technical  inputs  and  assessment  in  the 
monetary  policy  strategy  meeting  chaired  by  the  Governor  and  attended  by  the  top 
management.   Given  the  inherent  complexity  of  macroeconomic  management,  diversity  of 
viewpoints helps avoid the pitfalls of groupthink. 
Since banks are the major counterpart of the Reserve Bank, pre-policy consultations through 
resource management discussions are held with 20 large commercial banks which together 
account for more than three-fourths of banking business. In addition, in the financial sector, 
consultations are held with the Indian Banks Association (IBA), urban and rural co-operative 
bank/credit  associations  and  association  of  non-banking  financial  companies.  In  the  real 
sector, consultations are held with national level trade associations. Consultations are also 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
held with select economists and senior economic journalists to ascertain their reading of the 
economic situation and policy recommendation. 
In  keeping  with  international  best  practice,  the  Reserve  Bank  has  constituted  a  technical 
advisory committee (TAC) on monetary policy with outside experts, though its role remains 
advisory.   In  order  to  enhance  transparency,  the  deliberations  of  the  TAC  and  policy 
recommendations are released to the public within four weeks of such meetings. However, 
the  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  is  the  ultimate  authority  to  take  decisions  on  monetary 
policy matters. 
There are several other standing and ad hoc committees or groups which play a critical role 
with  regard  to  policy  advice.  An  interdepartmental  Financial  Markets  Committee  (FMC) 
focuses on day-to-day market operations and tactics on an ongoing basis. The whole range 
of  consultations  and  technical  analysis  enable  the  Governor  to  make  the  best  possible 
decision under the circumstances besides enhancing the transparency of the policymaking 
process. In addition, the Governor and the top management of the bank set out the rationale 
of  policy  decisions,  through  quarterly  policy  statements,  mid-quarter  reviews,  press 
interviews and speeches. 
While  monetary  policy  formulation  is  a  technical  process,  it  has  evolved  to  be  a  highly 
consultative and participative process. This not only enhances the transparency of monetary 
policy  but  policy  decisions  become  informed  with  the  analysis  and  viewpoints  of  the 
concerned stakeholders. As many outcomes in modern market-based economies are guided 
by expectations, a consultative process also helps in managing expectations. 
Growth-inflation performance 
As I mentioned, monetary policy framework in India shifted from a monetary targeting regime 
to  a  multiple  indicator  regime.  Such  a  transition  was  conditioned  by  the  developments  of 
financial markets, increasing integration of the Indian economy with the global economy and 
changing  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  A  pertinent  question  is  how  did  this  transition 
impact economic outcomes, in particular the growth-inflation performance? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
  9
From  Table  1,  two  broad  trends  can  be  gleaned.  First,  real  GDP  growth,  on  an  average, 
improved  over  the  period  and  became  less  volatile.  Second,  inflation  performance  had 
improved  significantly  in  the  last  decade  coinciding  with  the  adoption  of  multiple  indicator 
approach. However, inflation performance deteriorated in the years 2010-11 and 2011-12 so 
far. In this context, it is important to recognise that the recent inflation surge has followed the 
global financial crisis. Managing inflation in an economy which is recovering from a downturn 
is  much  more  complex  because  of  associated  uncertainties  than  managing  inflation  under 
normal conditions. 
In the initial phase of the crisis in 2007, it appeared that emerging market economies (EMEs) 
were better positioned to weather the storm created by the global financial meltdown on the 
back of their substantial foreign exchange reserve cushion, improved policy frameworks and 
generally  robust  banking  sector  and  corporate  balance  sheets.  However,  any  hope  about 
EMEs  escaping  unscathed  could  not  be  sustained  after  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in 
September  2008  which  triggered  global  deleveraging  and  heightened  risk  aversion. 
Eventually,  EMEs  were  also  adversely  affected  by  the  spillover  effects:  first  through 
contraction in world trade and then from reversal in capital flows. 
India,  though  initially  somewhat  insulated  from  the  global  developments,  was  eventually 
impacted  significantly  by  the  global  shocks  through  all  the  channels  –  trade,  finance  and 
expectations channels. In response, the Reserve Bank swiftly introduced a comprehensive 
range of measures to limit the impact of the adverse global developments on the domestic 
financial system and the economy. 
The  Reserve  Bank,  like  most  central  banks,  took  a  number  of  conventional  and 
unconventional  measures  to  augment  domestic  and  foreign  currency  liquidity,  and  sharply 
reduced the policy rates. In a span of seven months between October 2008 and April 2009, 
there was unprecedented policy activism. For example: (i) the repo rate was reduced by 425 
basis points to 4.75 per cent, (ii) the reverse repo rate was reduced by 275 basis points to 
3.25 per cent, (iii) the cash reserve ratio (CRR) of banks was reduced by a cumulative 400 
basis points of their net demand and time liabilities (NDTL) to 5.0 per cent, and (iv) the total 
amount  of  primary  liquidity  potentially  made  available  to  the  financial  system  was  over 
5.6 trillion  or  over  10  per  cent  of  GDP.  The  Government  also  came  up  with  various  fiscal 
stimulus measures. 
As there was increasing signs of recovery in growth and build up of inflationary pressures 
emanating  from  drought  and  spikes  in  global  commodity  prices,  exit  from  the  excessively 
accommodative monetary policy stance began in October 2009 in anticipation of the likely 
path of the inflation trajectory as also on consideration of its source and composition. The 
initial  rounds  of  monetary  policy  response  were  in  the  nature  of  normalisation  from  an 
excessively  stimulative  stance  in  a  non-disruptive  manner.  The  policy  response  was 
calibrated  to  the  domestic  growth-inflation  dynamics.  As  growth  took  hold  and  inflation 
became  more  generalised,  monetary  policy  response  was strengthened.  Initially,  monetary 
transmission  was  weak  as  systemic  liquidity  was  in  surplus.  But  once  liquidity  turned  into 
deficit in July 2010, monetary transmission improved. 
Since October 2009, the CRR has been raised by 100 basis points. The policy repo rate has 
been raised by a cumulative 375 basis points. As the liquidity in the system transited from 
surplus to deficit, the effective tightening has been of the order of 525 basis points. Thus, the 
cumulative monetary policy action would have the desired impact on inflation. It is expected 
that  inflation  would  moderate  towards  the later  part  of  2011-12  and  come  down  to  around 
7 per cent by the end of the year. The current monetary stance remains anti-inflationary. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Lessons from the global financial crisis 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  monetary  policy  evolution  is  influenced  not  only  by  the  changing 
paradigm in monetary economics but also by the developments in the financial market and 
macroeconomic  outcomes.  In  the  event  of  adverse  developments,  adequacy  of  extant 
economic policies is put to test as was during the recent global financial crisis. Crises are not 
desirable  but  they  seem  unavoidable.  They  do,  however,  provide  us  the  opportunity  to 
assess various tenets of extant policy framework. Against this backdrop, let me highlight a 
few important monetary policy lessons that emerged from the recent crisis. 
First, the recent crisis has demonstrated that a monetary policy solely aimed at fine-tuning of 
short-term  objectives  can  pose  risks.  Before  the  crisis,  monetary  policy  focused  more  on 
short-term demand management while inflation was firmly under control, particularly in the 
advanced economies. It was felt that fine-tuning of monetary policy on the basis of indicators, 
such  as  output  gaps  and  measures  of  core  inflation,  led  central  banks  towards  excessive 
‘short-termism’. This in turn contributed to build up of risks.  Thus, policies focused on short-
term objectives may not deliver desired economic outcomes in medium to long term. 
Second, the experience of recent crisis has changed the perception as to how central banks 
should go about achieving their macroeconomic stabilisation objectives. It has become clear 
that  mandate  of  monetary  policy  should  encompass  macro-financial  stability  and  not  just 
price stability. This has drawn attention to the impracticability of Tinbergen’s rule of assigning 
one instrument for one objective. In practice, interest rate changes affect financial stability. 
Similarly,  macroprudential  tools  impact  credit  growth  and  hence  monetary  transmission. 
Recognition of interaction between interest rate and macroprudential tools becomes critical 
for  the  appropriate  design  of  monetary  policy.  This  underscores  the  importance  of  close 
monitoring and analysis of financial system developments so that possible risks can be better 
integrated into the formulation and implementation of monetary policy. 
Third, inadequacy of monetary policy instruments in central banks’ operational frameworks 
was also evident during the crisis. As was seen during initial phase of the crisis, monetary 
policy  framed  and  implemented  via  instrument  of  policy  interest  rate  remained  ineffective. 
Consequently, central banks had to resort to a number other unconventional quantity-based 
measures  to  ease  financial  conditions.  Thus,  there  is  a  need  to  broaden  the  toolkit  of 
monetary instruments. 
Fourth,  though  financial  frictions  play  an  important  role  in  business  cycles,  they  were  not 
explicit part of the models used for policy analysis by central banks (Mishkin, 2011).3 In most 
crises, including the recent one, it has been seen that shocks to financial system accentuate 
information  asymmetry  and  affect  policy  transmission.  Therefore,  not  only  must  financial 
frictions be properly understood, but they should also be built into macro-econometric models 
that central banks use for forecasting and policy formulation.  
Fifth, after the crisis, it has been increasingly felt that central banks could better discharge 
lender of last resort (LOLR) function if they are also vested with micro-prudential regulation 
and  supervision  of  banks.  It  could  reinforce   macroprudential  action  by  eliciting  regulatory 
and supervisory instruments to dampen pro-cyclicality. 
Sixth, the operating procedures of monetary policy in future would have to take into account 
the  implications  of  build-up  of  sovereign  debt  during  the  crisis.  In  this  context,  Cecchetti 
(2011)  cautions  that  central  bank  operating  procedures  in  the  future  are  likely  to  be  more 
                                                 
3   Mishkin,  Frederic  S.  (2011),  “Monetary  Policy  Strategy:  Lessons  from  the  Crisis”,  NBER  Working  Paper 
16755, February. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
complicated with more tools and more options.4 Monetary and fiscal coordination, therefore, 
assumes further importance in the implementation of monetary policy. 
Conclusion 
Major crises do influence  monetary policy formulation as they question the adequacy of the 
extant practices and belief. In this regard, the issues that I have mentioned are already being 
widely debated, though a consensus eludes. But one thing is clear: central banks will have to 
increasingly  grapple  with  the  challenge  of  a  broader  set  of  objectives  without  diluting  the 
objective of price stability. 
Monetary  policy  formulation  is  an  ever  evolving  process  both  in  response  to  and  as  a 
consequence  of  changes  in  the  financial  markets  and  the  real  economy.  This  is  a 
phenomenon we have observed in India in our monetary policy formulation over the years. In 
the  process,  monetary  policy  in  India  has  become  increasingly  transparent  with  greater 
involvement of all the stakeholders for better policy outcome.  
                                                 
4   Cecchetti, Stephen G. (2011), “Monetary policy lessons learned from the crisis and the post-crisis landscape”, 
Remarks at the SEACEN-CEMLA Conference, Kuala Lumpur, October. 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
