Ewart S Williams: The current state of the economy and the outlook  
for 2012 
Feature  address  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at the Trinidad and Tobago Chamber of Industry and Commerce Luncheon Meeting, 
Port-of-Spain, 30 November 2011. 
 Let me thank the Chamber of Commerce for inviting me to speak at this luncheon session. 
Indeed, the Chamber should be complimented for promoting these quarterly sessions as a 
forum for the exchange of views on matters of importance to the business community.  
My remarks will focus on recent developments  and prospects for the economy of Trinidad 
and Tobago in 2012. Unfortunately, one cannot fully understand and address the challenges 
that  we  are  facing  unless  one  appreciates  the  momentous  changes  that  are  currently 
taking place in the international economy. It is no cliché that the global economy is going 
through  a  major  transformation  and  that  economies,  large  and  small,  need  to  adapt  to 
survive.  
As we meet today, the eyes of the world are locked on Europe, since the storm in the euro 
area is casting a long shadow over the entire global economy.  
Essentially, we are witnessing how years of fiscal indiscipline and its consequence – the 
unsustainable  build-up  in  sovereign  debt  –  are  once  again  threatening  to  push  the  global 
economy to the brink of the second major crisis in the space of five years.  
Currently,  Ireland,  Greece,  Portugal  and  Italy  among  others,  are  facing  grave  difficulty  in 
servicing  their  sovereign  debt.  The  crisis  has  spread  from  debt  markets,  to  the  European 
banks  (which  are  now  facing  funding  shortfalls  similar  to  those  experienced  in  2008),  to 
European equity markets, and is threatening the viability of the Euro itself.  
It has also had a significant impact on the real economy in Europe.  
Real GDP in the Eurozone is projected to contract at an annualized rate of 1 per cent in 
the last quarter of 2011 and by a further 0.4 per cent in the first three months of 2012. For 
2012 as a whole, the Eurozone economy is projected to grow by at most 0.2 per cent and 
about 1 per cent in 2013. Unemployment in the Eurozone now averages 10.2 per cent but 
has reached 22.6 per cent and 17.6 per cent in Spain and Greece, respectively.  
Very  significantly,  the  EU  leaders  are  now  negotiating  new  rules  that  would  make  fiscal 
discipline legally binding and move the currency block closer to a fiscal union.  
Across the Atlantic, in the US, the situation is only slightly better. The level of the fiscal deficit 
and  the  political  difficulty  in  reaching  agreement  on  an  appropriate  deficit-reduction  plan, 
resulted in a US downgrade (the first in its history). Earlier this week, Fitch Ratings revised 
the US ratings outlook, from stable to negative.  
The OECD projects that the US economy will grow at a 2 per cent rate next year. It insists, 
however,  that  this  tepid  recovery  will  only  hold  if  policy  makers  in  Washington  break  their 
impasse over the federal budget.  
Without  action  by  Congress,  the  OECD  projects  that  economic  growth  would  be  barely 
measurable at 0.3 per cent next year, and 1.3 per cent in 2013.  
I  have  just  painted  a  situation,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  where  our  major  export  markets  
– countries that account for more than 65 per cent of our total exports – are facing real 
crisis – perhaps, several years of anemic growth and continued high unemployment levels.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
And what about our regional economies, which account for the bulk of the remainder of our 
exports? They are also facing fiscal and debt challenges, while economic growth continues 
to suffer from the impact of sluggish tourism activity, a sharp decline in workers’ remittances 
and  the  slump  in  direct  investment  flows.  Already  in  2011,  two  Caribbean  countries  have 
signed new arrangements with the IMF, and three countries – The Bahamas, Barbados and 
Jamaica, have been downgraded by rating agencies.  
The  Caribbean  region  is  projected  to  grow  modestly  at  around  3  per  cent  in  2012,  with 
Guyana and Suriname being the only countries showing robust growth.  
The  economy  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago  has  shown  remarkable  resilience,  thanks  to  our 
energy resources and to our much lower public debt position. Unfortunately, we are yet to 
see  tangible  signs  of  a  solid  recovery  from  the  downturn  that  began  in  late  2008. 
Moreover,  we  are  now  facing  a  new  reality  in  which  we  could  no  longer  expect  exclusive 
dependence on the energy sector, now facing a situation in which growth and employment 
generation  will  have  to  depend  increasingly  on  a  diversified  and  competitive  non-energy 
sector.  
Let me give a brief summary of our current economic position.  
You  would  recall  that,  after  strong growth  in  the  period  2002–2008,  real GDP  declined  by 
3 per cent in 2009 and stagnated in 2010. Projections made by the CSO point to a further 
GDP decline of 1.4 per cent in 2011.  
Production indicators compiled by the Central Bank suggest that there was a decline in real 
GDP of about 0.9 per cent in the first half of 2011. If one tries to reconcile these two sets 
of the data, one arrives at the conclusion that there was a continued decline in economic 
activity in the second half of 2011.  
Anecdotal evidence confirms this; pointing to reduced working hours and other dislocations 
associated  with  the  state  of  emergency  and  the  curfew  which  affected,  in  the  main,  the 
distribution, manufacturing and even the energy sectors.  
The  data  for  the  first  half  of  the  year  confirm  a  decline  in  crude  oil  and  natural  gas 
production of 7.8 and 1.4 per cent respectively, compared with the corresponding period of 
last year. As you know, there has been a secular decline in crude oil production since 
2006, reflecting the maturation of our oil fields. At the same time, natural gas production has 
plateaued over the past few years reflecting (a lack of new gas-based projects) as well as 
capacity constraints. In addition to these structural factors, since the beginning of the year, 
there  have  been  disruptions  to  oil  and  natural  gas  production  because  of  ongoing  safety 
upgrades and maintenance work at some of our production facilities. Moreover, a shortage 
of gas supplies has also impacted output of the petro-chemical sector.  
In  the  non-energy  sector,  construction  activity  has  remained  at  very  depressed  levels, 
reflecting the delayed start-up of several government projects and the virtual absence of new 
private sector construction projects. Cement sales declined by 10.5 per cent in the first half of 
2011 compared to January to June 2010. Latest unemployment statistics also show that the 
construction  sector  lost  about  15,500  jobs  between  the  third  quarter  of  2009  and  the 
corresponding period of 2010.  
Some other notable economic developments are:  
 
One, the employment impact of the continued economic downturn. According 
to the latest official data, unemployment rose to 6.3 per cent in the fourth quarter of 
2010. While official unemployment figures for 2011 are not yet available, the Bank, 
also  keeps  track  of  the  retrenchment  notices  lodged  at  the  Ministry  of  Labor  and 
Small  and  Micro-enterprises.  These  data  show  that  in  the  third  quarter  of  2011 
retrenchment  notices  were  more  than  double  the  amount  filed 
in  the 
corresponding  period  of  2010  due,  in  large  part,  to  the  closure  of  one  food 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
     processing company. Based on information for October, the spate of retrenchment 
has continued apace during the last quarter of 2011.  
Bank  credit  data  have  also  reflected  the  depressed  economic  conditions.  Total 
commercial  bank  credit  outstanding  declined  steadily  since  early  2009,  led  by  a 
sharp contraction of business credit. A slow turnaround in consumer credit started in 
October 2010 and there are indications that the decline in business credit may be 
finally bottoming out.  
Consistent  with  the  pick-up  in  consumer  credit,  there  were  signs  of  an  incipient 
recovery in retail sales during the second quarter of 2011, spread over a range of 
consumer  goods  categories  (dry  goods,  supermarkets,  household  appliances, 
furniture and new motor vehicles).  
Of course, with domestic demand relatively subdued, with abundant spare capacity, 
and food prices showing only moderate increases, inflation remained under control, 
at about a 3.7 per cent rate (year on year) in October 2011.  
In the external sector, after two consecutive years in which non-energy exports to 
CARICOM  declined,  there  was  a  25  per  cent  increase  in  these  exports  in  the 
first half of 2011, compared with 2010. However, reflecting the sluggish domestic 
demand  (noted  above),  non-energy  imports  declined  by  18  per  cent  in  the 
January–June period.  
Interestingly  enough,  notwithstanding  the  decline  in  imports,  there  was  a 
12 per cent increase in foreign exchange sales to the public in the first ten months of 
2011, (compared with the corresponding period of last year). Over this period, the 
Central Bank sold US$ 1.3 billion, some 15 per cent more than in 2010.  
In the face of lagging private demand, the government budget served as the main driver of 
economic activity during 2011. Based on preliminary data,  the overall balance of central 
government operations shifted from near balance in FY2010 to a deficit of $5 billion in 
FY2011 (about 3.6 per cent of GDP). If the last few years are a guide, the final figures for 
FY2011  are  likely  to  show  a  much  smaller  deficit,  as  government  revenues  are  revised 
upwards and final government expenditure is revised downwards.  
Even so, I believe that the overall stance of fiscal policy in 2011 was appropriate, given 
the need to promote economic recovery and the country’s comfortable public debt position.  
I would now like to turn to the outlook for 2012.  
First,  let’s  clarify  that  the  external  conditions are expected to be uncertain, at best,  or 
most likely very unfavorable. In the case of the Eurozone, the consensus is that the scale 
of  the  imbalances  would  imply  a  prolonged  period  of  subdued  growth.  In  the  US,  political 
stalemate,  in  the  run-up  to  the  Presidential  elections,  is  likely  to  postpone  effective  policy 
action  –  setting  the  stage  for  another  year  of  anemic  growth  and  continued  high 
unemployment.  
The  implications  of  these  conditions  for  our  regional  economies  have  already  been 
mentioned i.e. – no major improvement in economic activity, and perhaps, the need for 
more austerity measures to address their high debt burdens.  
Here at home, certain domestic factors seem to suggest an improved outlook for 2012.  
 
First, as noted earlier there is some evidence of a slow recovery in the demand for 
bank credit, including by business firms.  
Second,  since  the  end  of  the  last  fiscal  year,  there  are  indications  of  a  modest 
improvement in central government project implementation.  
Third,  while  we  cannot  claim  to  have  conducted  a  scientific  survey,  our 
discussions with several private sector representatives, suggest that the latest 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
budget  (along  with  the  attempts  to  deal  with  security  concerns)  have  given  a 
cautious boost to private sector confidence.  
Based on these underlying assumptions and a modest turnaround in the energy sector, the 
Central Bank’s projection is for real GDP growth of around 1.5 per cent in 2012, although 
the balance of risks are tilted on the downside.  
Let me elaborate a bit on this projection.  
In the energy sector, 
 
The expectation is for a continued decline in crude oil production, largely because of 
the ageing of the oil fields. However increased exploration is expected to stimulate 
activity in the energy services sector.  
According to industry sources, the ongoing safety upgrades and maintenance work 
that affected output in 2011, should be completed by the first quarter of 2012. This 
would allow for gas production and petro-chemical output to return to 2010 levels. 
The projections provide for no new plants coming on stream.  
 In the non-energy sector, we make the aggressive assumption that construction activity will 
finally begin to recover, based on the implementation of certain public sector projects – the 
highway to Point Fortin, the HDC housing repair programme, the three mega sport facilities 
announced in the budget and some smaller construction projects, for which contracts are 
expected to be awarded soon. Continued delays in settling the arrears to contractors, could 
however dampen these expectations.  
In our discussions with the private sector, we did not get the impression that any major new 
investments were on the cards for 2012. Many business people were hopeful, however, that 
increasing demand, both from the domestic market and from CARICOM, would facilitate a rise 
in capacity utilization in the manufacturing sector current levels – now about 66–68 per cent.  
In principle, the tepid recovery, after three years of economic stagnation, should not have a 
major impact on employment. However, the projects that the Government has targeted for 
implementation  are  expected  to  be  highly  labour-intensive,  a  fact  which  could  ease  the 
current unemployment problem somewhat.  
I should note also that an increase in real GDP of 1.5 per cent should not, in itself, re-kindle 
inflation  pressures  because  of  the  existence  of  considerable  spare  capacity.  Barring 
weather-related setbacks or a new round of commodity price shocks, inflation should remain 
at around 5 per cent in 2012.  
There are several downside risks to the Bank’s GDP projection for 2012. The most obvious is 
a pronounced worsening of the international environment, which would affect our energy 
and  non-energy  exports  and  weaken  consumer  and  business  confidence  –  the  kind  of 
scenario, we faced in late 2008 and the first half of 2009.  
Moreover  because  the  recovery  in  2012  depends  so  heavily  on  a  strong  fiscal  impulse, 
bottlenecks  in  the  project  implementation  (for  example,  arising  from  problems  in  the 
procurement system or delays in raising financing) also represent a serious downside risk to 
the GDP projection.  
I would like to conclude with some thoughts on economic policy challenges for the medium 
term.  
While  the  advanced  economies  have  been  facing  difficult  economic  times,  several  Latin 
American  countries  –  most  notably  Brazil,  Mexico,  Peru  –  are  now  enjoying  high  rates  of 
growth with reduced vulnerabilities because they have established strong fundamentals, 
sound policy frameworks and prudent macro-economic policies. These countries have 
recognized that in the current volatile global environment, there is need for sizeable buffers, 
to be achieved through prudent fiscal policies, low public debt and adequate savings.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
It is my view, and I have said it before, that we need to move to a more sustainable fiscal 
position,  even  as  we  prepare  for  a  gradual  reduction  in  our  dependence  on  energy 
sector  taxes.  This  strategy  will  require  a  combination  of  measures  to  increase  non-
energy  tax  collections  and  concerted  efforts  to  reduce  the  share  of  subsidies  and 
transfers in total government expenditures. This kind of fiscal consolidation will allow a 
return  to  fiscal  balance,  while  leaving  adequate  room  for  productive  investment  in 
education, health and infrastructure. It will also permit an increase in the rate of savings 
in the Heritage and Stabilization Fund.  
We  also  need  to  find  a  way  of  pursuing  a  meaningful  diversification  of  the  non-energy 
sector  that  promotes  an  expansion  in  non-energy  exports  and  a  broadening  of  our 
non-energy export markets. Currently, the bulk of our exports are directed to the US, the 
UK, and the Eurozone. The conventional wisdom is that, over the medium term, growth in 
these traditional markets would continue to lag behind the more dynamic emerging market 
economies – China, India and Latin America. The greater diversification of regional exports 
of goods and services towards these new growth poles, would make our non-energy sector 
less vulnerable to the kinds of shocks experienced in the past few years.  
Ladies and Gentlemen 
The latest budget has underscored the importance of public-private sector partnerships in the 
transformation  of  our  economy.  It  has  proposed  a  new  financing  mechanism  through  the 
Junior Stock Exchange and has again offered Government facilitation to gain entry into new 
export markets. It is high time that we stop talking about diversification and actually start 
doing  it.  If  we  are  to  ensure  our  country’s  long-term  economic  viability  and  secure  its 
economic future, it needs to happen sooner rather than later.  
The time for action is now. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
