Ravi Menon: A competent, trusted, and clean financial centre 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at 
Institute)  Connection,  Singapore, 
27 October 2011. 
(Wealth  Management 
the  WMI 
 Mr Ng Kok Song, Chairman of the Wealth Management Institute, distinguished guests, ladies 
and gentlemen, good evening. 
I  am  delighted  to  join  you  tonight,  to  celebrate  the  8th  anniversary  of  the  Wealth 
Management  Institute  (WMI).  And  I  want  to  add  a  special  word  of  congratulations  to  the 
258 graduates who have recently completed WMI programmes ranging from the Master of 
Science in Wealth Management to the Advanced Wealth Management Programme. 
Explosive growth in Asian wealth 
Across the world, we are seeing strong growth in the creation of wealth.  
 
Globally, the wealth held by high net worth individuals1 has increased by 63 percent 
over the last ten years.2 
As at end-2010, there were nearly 11 million high net worth individuals, compared to 
7 million ten years ago. 
 Wealth is growing most rapidly in the Asia-Pacific region, accounting for more than half of the 
increase in global wealth last year. 
 
There are 3.3 million high net worth individuals in the Asia-Pacific, 18 percent more 
than the pre-crisis peak. In fact, there are now more high net worth individuals in the 
Asia Pacific than in Europe and almost as many as in North America. 
Notwithstanding the challenges facing the global economy and the recent increase in market 
uncertainties, the ranks and fortunes of the wealthy are expected to continue growing rapidly. 
Global wealth is assessed to have the potential to rise 50 percent over the next five 
 
years,  spurred  by  a  surging  middle-class  in  the  Asia-Pacific,  Latin  America,  and 
Africa. 
The  Asia  Pacific  region  in  particular  is  forecast  to  have  the  highest  projected 
compound annual growth rate of 11.4 percent for assets under management from 
2010–2015.  Eight  of  the  twenty  fastest-growing  high  net  worth  markets  are  in  the 
Asia-Pacific. 
 Wealth management – the Singapore advantage 
As John Rockefeller once asked “The only question with wealth is, what do you do with it?” 
Those  of  you  who  manage  wealth  have  a  key  role  to  play.  You  are  at  the  heart  of  this 
explosion of wealth in Asia and in serving the needs of your clients, you help to intermediate 
                                                 
1  Merrill Lynch – Capgemini World Wealth Reports and Global Private Banking and Wealth Management – The 
New  Realities,  by  David  Maude.  Market  defined  in  terms  of  individuals  with  financial  wealth  of  more  than 
US$1 million. 
2  US$42.7 trillion as at end 2010 as compared to US$26.2 trillion as at end 2001 – ML-Capgemini World Wealth 
Reports. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
this  growing  pool  of  wealth  and  put  it  to  productive  use.  And  Singapore  has  a  compelling 
value proposition in helping to make this happen. 
What  makes  Singapore  attractive  as  an  international  financial  and  wealth  management 
centre? Wealth desires stability. Singapore’s political and economic stability, transparency in 
governance,  and  sound  and  predictable  regulation,  are  often  cited  by  private  bankers  and 
clients  alike  as  the  fundamentals  underpinning  its  attraction.  Efficiency,  connectivity,  and 
sound infrastructure are added advantages. Singapore has been ranked by the World Bank, 
for the sixth year running, as the easiest place to do business in the world. 
Perhaps the decisive advantage is the larger financial eco-system that exists in Singapore. 
Strong capabilities in asset management, foreign exchange and derivatives trading, coupled 
with  deep  and  liquid  capital  markets  –  these  are  the  ingredients  that  make  Singapore  the 
ideal base for the intermediation of wealth in Asia. 
But  to  use  a  common  phrase  in  the  industry,  past  trends  are  no  guarantee  of  future 
performance.  Whether  Singapore  continues  to  do  well  in  wealth  management  will  depend 
critically on three imperatives. 
 
 
 
First, we must raise competencies in the industry. 
Second, we must enhance market conduct. 
Third, we must keep the financial sector clean. 
Strong competencies 
Let me begin with raising competencies. The wealth management industry in Asia is facing a 
shortage  of  talent.  Private  banks  are  rapidly  expanding  to  meet  the  needs  of  a  growing 
affluent class. If Singapore is to sustain its growth as a wealth management centre, there is 
an urgent need to raise competency levels in the industry and to build a strong pipeline of 
talent.  We  need  qualified  professionals  to  fill  not  just  front  office  jobs  like  relationship 
management and investment advice but also mid to back office functions in risk management 
and compliance. 
There  are  two  reasons  why  we  cannot  be  complacent.  One,  the  markets  have  changed. 
Average investment returns are likely to be lower over the next decade than they were in the 
last,  as  the  developed  economies  deleverage  and  global  demand  rebalances.  The  wealth 
manager can no longer sit back and let a buoyant market do the job. He needs to chart clear 
strategies  and  manage  his  clients’  portfolios  amidst  a  more  uncertain  and  volatile 
environment. 
Two, the clientele has changed. Post-Lehman, the client is more cautious and less trusting. 
He  wants  better  service  and  clearer  value.  Asian  clients  with  different  backgrounds  and 
needs will demand more tailored solutions. The wealth manager must be well-attuned to their 
social, cultural, and generational considerations, and be able to provide advice on not just 
wealth accumulation and preservation, but also wealth transfer across generations. 
MAS is committed to working with the industry to help expand the talent pool and to enhance 
capabilities  and  skills  in  the  industry.  The  Financial  Industry  Competency  Standards,  or 
FICS,  is  a  good  example.  Supported  by  MAS,  but  developed  by  the  industry,  and  for  the 
industry, FICS provides a practice-oriented approach for finance professionals to attain the 
competencies they need to do their jobs well. In wealth management, competency standards 
have been established for the full range of job families – from relationship management to 
product  development  to  trusts  and  estate  planning.  More  than  1,500  wealth  management 
professionals have been trained to-date. 
A key partner is the Wealth Management Institute, set up by GIC and Temasek in 2003, to 
expand and develop the pool of talent and expertise for the wealth management industry in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Singapore. More than half of the wealth management professionals trained under the FICS 
framework came through WMI’s programmes.  
A  more  recent  initiative  to  raise  competency  levels  for  the  private  banking  industry  is  the 
introduction  of  the  Client  Advisor  Competency  Standards,  or  CACS.  This  industry-led 
initiative  provides  an  independent  mode  of  assessing  the  private  banking  professional’s 
competency before he is allowed to provide financial advice to clients. I am pleased that WMI 
has  given  strong  support  for  CACS.  The  Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance  (IBF),  which 
administers  the  CACS,  tells  me  that  there  is  already  steady  interest  by  private  banks  and 
individuals. The CACS, despite not being a regulated examination, is now being seen as a 
requirement  for  those  interested  in  getting  into  the  wealth  management  industry.  This  is  a 
good sign. 
As Chairman of the Institute of Banking and Finance, let me set a target. In three years’ time, 
let  us  aim  for  all  new  entrants  in  the  wealth  management  industry  to  have  gone  through 
either the industry-endorsed CACS or some formal certification programme under FICS. This 
is the most tangible way to ensure a high level of competency in the  wealth management 
industry. 
Sound market conduct 
Competency  without  integrity  is  useless  at  best,  and  dangerous  at  worst.  A  second 
imperative  for  successful  private  banking  is  therefore  to  strengthen  market  conduct.  At  its 
core, private banking is about trust. This means acting with integrity, putting the interests of 
the client first and safeguarding the confidentiality of the client at all times. Let me highlight 
two areas for improvement. 
First, we are seeing increasing cases of mis-selling and mis-conduct in the private banking 
space. Such practices are ultimately self-defeating. Wealth managers must move away from 
a transaction-driven approach of pushing products to a client-centred approach that focuses 
on  customised  advice  to  meet  long-term  needs.  Private  banks  must  move  away  from 
remuneration  structures  that  rely  primarily  on  commissions,  or  which  are  biased  towards 
rewarding staff for recommending certain investment products. Dealing fairly with customers 
must be made a priority. The Private Banking Code of Conduct developed by the industry 
sets out principles for proper business conduct by private banks and their staff, and seeks to 
enhance  transparency  to  clients.  MAS’  Guidelines  on  Fair  Dealing  emphasise  the 
responsibilities  of  the  Board  and  Senior  Management  of  financial  institutions  to  deliver  fair 
dealing  outcomes  to  customers  and  instill  a  culture  of  fair  dealing  that  goes  beyond 
compliance with regulatory requirements. 
Second, the aggressive poaching of private bankers and rapid churning of professional staff 
are not healthy for the industry. They cause instability and unsustainable wage escalation in 
the industry, not to mention, increased operational risks. Worse still, there have been a few 
cases of unauthorised leakage of customer information accompanying such moves. Constant 
change in wealth advisors and porting over of client information from one bank to another is 
not the sort of service or behaviour a client expects. The wealth manager or private banker 
must  respect  the  trust  placed  in  him  by  his  client  as  well  as  his  employer  and  focus  on 
building long-term relationships. 
A clean financial centre 
Let me now move to the third imperative for growth – keeping the financial centre clean. I 
want  to  spend  a  bit  more  time  talking  about  this  issue,  in view  of  the  growing  risks  to  the 
industry on this front. 
Singapore’s financial centre is built on a bedrock of trust and integrity. But there are risks – 
both  real  and  reputational.  Cross-border  crimes  have  become  increasingly  sophisticated. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Like any international financial centre, Singapore is vulnerable to being used as a conduit for 
illicit  funds.  And  given  our  growing  prominence  as  a  centre  for  wealth  management,  the 
vulnerability  is  greater.  We  need  to  guard  against  financial  flows  relating  to  corruption, 
terrorism,  politically  exposed  persons,  and  weapons  proliferation.  More  recently,  efforts  by 
various  governments  to  strengthen tax  enforcement  have  increased  the  risk  of  undeclared 
monies flowing to Singapore. 
In response, the international community has strengthened considerably the frameworks for 
anti-money  laundering  (AML)  and  counter  financing  of  terrorism  (CFT)  and  exchange  of 
information on tax-related crimes. These developments will have implications for the wealth 
management industry globally. 
MAS is fully committed to safeguarding the integrity and reputation of Singapore as a clean 
financial centre: 
 
One, we have a strong legal and regulatory framework on AML and CFT, in line with 
international standards. 
Two, we have a rigorous regime of supervision to monitor compliance by financial 
institutions. 
Three, we will strengthen cross-border co-operation to fight trans-national financial 
crime. 
Four,  we  will  step  up  vigilance  against  suspicious  flows  of  funds  arising  from 
external developments. 
   Let me give you an update on what MAS has done and will do in each of these areas. 
A robust legal and regulatory framework 
Singapore  has  a  robust  regulatory  framework  on  AML/CFT.  The  key  legislation  is  the 
Corruption,  Drug  Trafficking  and  Other  Serious  Crimes  (Confiscation  of  Benefits)  Act,  or 
CDSA. The CDSA makes it a crime to engage in the money laundering of benefits from a 
total of 417 so-called predicate offences, ranging from criminal breach of trust, to dealing with 
property of terrorist and market manipulation. The CDSA makes the reporting of suspicious 
transactions mandatory for all persons who become aware of such transactions in the course 
of their work. 
MAS gives force to the CDSA by requiring all financial institutions in Singapore to have in 
place an effective AML/CFT framework. Our coverage is comprehensive – banks, merchant 
banks, finance companies, insurance companies, capital market services licensees, licensed 
trust  companies, 
fund  managers, 
moneychangers, and remittance houses. Financial intermediaries are held to rigorous client 
due diligence requirements. They are required to verify the bona fides of their customers and 
assess their risk profiles. Where particular customers, business relationships, or transactions 
present  a  higher  risk  of  money  laundering  or  terrorism  financing,  enhanced  customer  due 
diligence is required. 
Singapore’s AML/CFT regime was evaluated three years ago by the Financial Action Task 
Force  or  FATF,  the  global  standard  setter  for  AML/CFT.  FATF  assessed  that  Singapore 
operates  a  strict  and  rigorous  AML/CFT  regime,  centred  on  a  comprehensive  and  sound 
legal, institutional, policy, and supervisory framework. 
Can we do more? Let me cite three areas. 
First,  MAS  is  considering  a  tougher  penalty  regime  for  violations  of  AML/CFT.  In  a  recent 
announcement, the Attorney General has stated that Singapore will seek tougher penalties 
for white-collar criminals. MAS is in full alignment with this. We will ensure that financial crime 
insurance  brokers,  exempt 
financial  advisers, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
does  not  pay  in  Singapore  and  that  those  who  jeopardise  Singapore’s  hard-earned 
reputation as a financial centre of integrity face severe consequences. 
Second, Singapore intends to make criminal the laundering of proceeds from tax offences. 
This is a pre-emptive move. In February next year, FATF is expected to take a decision on 
this  matter.  Singapore  will  fully  align  its  regime  to  FATF’s  new  requirements;  not  only 
because we are a FATF member, but more importantly, we want to discourage tax evasion 
monies from attempting to enter our system. As other jurisdictions tighten their regimes and 
tax evasion monies seek cover, Singapore is sending a clear message that it neither wants 
nor  will  tolerate  these  illicit  inflows.  This  being  a  significant  policy  move,  we  will  conduct 
public consultations and welcome stakeholder inputs to shape a regime that is practical to 
implement and effective in outcome. 
Third, Singapore will step up its enforcement resources to deal with suspicious transactions 
reported  by  financial  institutions.  The  Commercial  Affairs  Department  will  double  the 
manpower  of  the  Suspicious  Transaction  Reporting  Office  and  enhance  its  analytical  and 
reporting systems to detect criminal activity and illicit funds. 
Rigorous supervision 
Having a good AML/CFT framework is not enough. It is necessary to ensure compliance with 
the framework through supervision. Since MAS’ supervisory activities are not as visible, let 
me say more about this. 
MAS uses a risk-based approach, evaluating the money laundering and terrorism financing 
risks  of  each  institution  by  taking  into  account  its  business  activities;  types  of  customers, 
products  and  services;  its  geographical  areas  of  operation,  as  well  as  the  quality  of  the 
institution’s internal risk management systems and processes in mitigating the risks. 
MAS  conducts  both  off-site  surveillance  and  on-site  inspections  to  check  institutions’ 
compliance with AML/CFT requirements. This ensures that policies and procedures set out in 
the institutions’ manuals are adhered to on the ground. Institutions deemed as having higher 
risk are subject to more frequent onsite inspections. 
Let  me  cite  some  outcomes  from  our  inspections.  Institutions  that  have  failed  to  meet  our 
requirements  have  been  warned  or  reprimanded  in  writing.  A  few  have  been  required  to 
appoint  external  consultants  to  conduct  a  thorough  review  of  their  AML/CFT  frameworks; 
others have been asked to increase the resources devoted to this function. In a couple of 
cases,  where  the  frameworks  and  procedures  were  adequate  but  ineffective  management 
oversight resulted in inadequate implementation, we have asked the senior management to 
be replaced. In all cases, MAS informs the institution’s parent supervisor of our findings and 
concerns. 
Our supervisory approach aims to be preventive in nature. This means that sanctions can be 
taken against financial institutions for weak AML/CFT controls, even if no predicate offence 
has occurred. Having reviewed our regulations and our supervisory and enforcement actions, 
the  FATF  assessors  concluded,  “Singapore’s  AML/CFT  sanctions  regime  is  effective, 
proportionate, and dissuasive”. 
In  a  nutshell,  while  a  lot  has  been  done,  our  institutions  can  always  do  better.  MAS  is 
reviewing  whether  we  need  to  increase  our  supervisory  intensity  and  is  considering  if  we 
should make public, sanctions against persistently or egregiously errant institutions. 
Strengthened cross-border co-operation 
The third prong of our efforts is international co-operation. Given the cross-border nature of 
illicit  financial  activities,  it  is  not  enough  that  we  have  strong  regulation  and  supervision  in 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Singapore;  we  must  be  able  to  co-operate  effectively  with  supervisory  authorities  and 
enforcement agencies abroad. 
Singapore contributes actively to the work of the FATF, the Global Forum on Transparency 
and Exchange of Information for Tax Purposes, and the AML/CFT Expert Group under the 
Basel  Committee,  to  shape  well-balanced  international  standards  that  are  effective  and 
proportionate.  MAS  co-operates  with  our  international  counterparts,  through  sharing 
inspection reports, participating in supervisory colleges, and facilitating home regulator visits. 
We also co-operate with home supervisors to enhance AML/CFT controls and standards not 
only at the branch but at the group level for financial institutions operating across borders. 
Internationally, the new emphasis is on co-operation in pursuing cross-border tax offences. 
Singapore  has  endorsed  the  internationally-agreed  standard,  known  as  Article  26  of  the 
OECD Model Tax Convention on Income and Capital, for the exchange of information upon 
request, and is committed to supporting the effective implementation of this global standard. 
Singapore amended legislation in 2009 to lend effect to its obligations and has since signed 
30 Avoidance of Double Taxation Agreements incorporating the new standard. This ensures 
that we are able to assist in foreign requests for information on a person’s tax position, so 
long as the request is clear, specific, relevant and backed with good reason. 
Some people think that Singapore’s banking confidentiality regime fetters such international 
cooperation.  Let  me  stress  that  banking  confidentiality  is  not  absolute.  It  is  intended  to 
protect the legitimate privacy needs of investors. But we will not allow banking confidentiality 
to be used to shield criminal activities. Where there are sufficient grounds to indicate that a 
crime  has  been  committed  with  wilful  intent,  then  confidentiality  is  no  bar  to  co-operation. 
MAS  will  review  the  Banking  Act  to  ensure  that  this  continues  to  be  the  case,  as  new 
modalities on cross-border co-operation evolve. 
Enhanced vigilance against suspicious flows 
Let me move on to my fourth point on enhanced vigilance against suspicious flows. Some 
people  have  alleged  that  Singapore  is  benefiting  from  an  inflow  of  hot  monies,  especially 
from  Europe,  supposedly  following  the  adoption  of  enhanced  exchange  of  information 
provisions among EU countries.  
Tales of large inflows of funds from Europe into Singapore are vastly exaggerated. According 
to the Boston Consulting Group, European wealth is estimated at just 10 percent or US$90 
billion  of  the  US$900  billion  offshore  assets  under  management  in  Singapore  and  Hong 
Kong.3 This is corroborated by anecdotal feedback. As one banker puts it, the emergence of 
Singapore and Hong Kong as wealth management hubs has to do with more Asian wealth 
being retained in Asia rather than a flight of new funds to Asia. The growth of Singapore’s 
private  banking  industry  has  been  and  will  continue  to  be  spurred  largely  by  the  wealth 
created from the strong economic growth in Asia. 
Nonetheless,  we  must  remain  vigilant  against  potential  negative  spillovers  of  illicit  funds 
triggered by external developments. Recently, when Switzerland signed bilateral treaties with 
the United Kingdom and Germany on tax-related matters, MAS issued a set of guidelines as 
a  pre-emptive  step  to  guard  against  any  potential  inflows  of  illicit  funds.  The  guidelines 
remind financial institutions that they have a key role to play in preserving the integrity of our 
financial system, and safeguarding it from being used as a haven for illegitimate funds or as 
a conduit to disguise the flow of such funds. This vigilance should be extended to all forms of 
suspicious flows, be they from tax evasion or corruption. 
                                                 
3  Boston Consulting Group’s Global Wealth Report 2011. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Don’t  get  me  wrong.  Legitimate  funds  from  Europe,  or  anywhere  else,  seeking  to  be 
managed  out  of  Singapore  for  the  stability  and  infrastructure  we  provide,  the  depth  of  our 
markets, the quality of our service, and the conducive ecosystem that has taken root here, 
are most welcome. But not illicit funds seeking shelter from scrutiny. 
Working with industry 
In our efforts to uphold Singapore as a competent, trusted, and clean wealth management 
centre, MAS will abide by a key guiding principle – to work hand in hand with industry players 
like you. We want to leverage off your knowledge and perspectives on the ground, to ensure 
that initiatives translate to meaningful regulations. 
The industry has to take charge of the issues, actively debate them, and advocate solutions. 
The Private Banking Code of Conduct introduced earlier this year, is an excellent example of 
this. It has been described as the world’s first set of professional standards written for private 
banks by private banks. 
I  am  pleased  that  the  group  which  formulated  the  Code  has  now  organised  itself  as  the 
Private  Banking  Industry  Group,  or  “PBIG”.  Besides  overseeing  the  implementation  of  the 
Code, the PBIG will look at initiatives to grow the private banking industry in a sustainable 
manner  and  to  enhance  Singapore’s  reputation  as  international  responsible  wealth 
management centre. It is co-chaired by the Chairman of Citi Private Bank Deepak Sharma 
and MAS Assistant Managing Director, Ng Nam Sin, signifying an industry-MAS collaborative 
effort. 
Another laudable example of industry-MAS collaboration is the Governance and Compliance 
Standing  Committee  under  the  Association  of  Banks  in  Singapore  (ABS).  This  Committee 
has been working closely with the industry and MAS to promote compliance with AML/CFT 
measures.  They  have  organised  seminars 
training 
programmes, and issued industry guidelines to level up AML/CFT standards. 
to  raise  awareness,  conducted 
Conclusion 
Let me sum up. 
First, competence. The wealth management industry is growing rapidly amidst a tight labour 
market. Standards must not slip. We must maintain strong competencies. Let us commit to 
all  new  entrants  to  the  industry  going  through  the  requisite  industry  certification  before 
admission. 
Next, trust. The global financial crisis has given the financial industry a bad name. This need 
not be the case. We must bring back to the centre of finance the notion of ethics – doing the 
right thing for customers, dealing fairly, and acting with integrity at all times. We must foster a 
culture in the industry that looks beyond the question of “is this legal?” to the larger question 
of “is this right?”. 
Finally, staying clean. Confidentiality of customer information will continue to be protected: it 
is a basic right and underpins confidence in Singapore as a wealth management hub. But 
confidentiality cannot and will not be used to conceal financial crime or the flow of illicit funds. 
Neither  will  confidentiality  stand  in  the  way  of  cross-border  exchange  of  information  for 
investigating crimes. There is no conflict between high standards of financial integrity and our 
attractiveness as a centre for managing wealth. On the contrary, Singapore will continue to 
be  a  vibrant  wealth  management  centre  only  by  having  a  clean  regime  that  safeguards 
legitimate funds and weeds out tainted money. 
Only a competent, trusted, and clean financial centre can be a successful financial centre. 
Thank you.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
