Njuguna Ndung’u: Kenya – successes, challenges and future path 
Keynote speech by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
Kenya Institute of Bankers’ (KIB) Annual Dinner, Nairobi, 25 November 2011. 
 The Chairperson, Board of Directors, KIB;  
Members of the KIB Council Here Present;  
The Chief Executive, Management and Staff, KIB;  
Chief Executive Officers of banks and financial institutions;  
Distinguished Guests;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
I am pleased and honoured to join you this evening. I therefore take this early opportunity to 
thank  the  Kenya  Institute  of  Bankers  (KIB)  for  inviting  me  to  speak  at  this  2011  Annual 
Dinner. This is a valuable opportunity to celebrate our successes, reflect on the challenges 
during the year and chart our future path.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: In many ways 2011 has been a challenging year given the global 
and domestic shocks hitting the economy. The characteristic supply shocks – like fuel prices – 
have affected negatively both domestic prices and output.  
Despite the shocks, the economy has remained resilient and is expected to register a modest 
growth of 5% in 2011 compared with 4.6% in 2010. Having endured the shocks buffeting the 
economy,  the  Central  Bank  has  focused  its  policy  response  on  containing  inflation  and 
stabilizing  the  exchange  rate.  The  Central  Bank  tightened  monetary  policy  by  raising 
gradually both the CBR and CRR to 16.5% and 5.25%, respectively. We have started to see 
these measures bearing fruit: there are signs of easing in domestic demand pressures while 
the exchange rate is stabilizing.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: Even with the shocks hitting the economy and the policy responses 
putting  us  on  a  tight  rope,  the  banking  industry  performance  in  the  first  three  quarters 
surpassed expectations. Let me highlight some of these performance indicators;  
 
The  industry’s  deposit  base  grew  by  an  impressive  21%  as  at  end  October  2011 
compared  to  October  last  year.  Deposit  mobilization  efforts  were  boosted  by  the 
new  delivery  channels  introduced  in  the  year,  including  the  adoption  of  agency 
banking that has taken root with more than 8,700 agents spread across the country.  
Branches of banks also continued to grow and by September 2011, bank branches 
stood  at  1,113.  The  banking  sector  now  has  a  presence  in  each  of  Kenya’s 
47 counties,  which  provides  banks  with  a  vantage  position  to  contribute  to  the 
development agenda of the nascent Counties.  
The  asset  base  hit  the  KSh.2  trillion  mark  in  September  2011.  This  is  mainly 
attributed  to  the  banks  continued  expansion  of  their  lending  portfolio  through 
introduction  of  loan  products  that  suit  the  needs  of  different  market  niches.  The 
gross  loans  stood  at  KSh.1.2  trillion  as  at  October  2011,  a  35%  increase  from 
October 2010.  
  Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  policy  response  to  shocks  has  its  pitfalls.  Right  now,  the 
concern is on interest rates and fear of non-performing loans rising. Some commercial banks 
in November 2011 have revised their base rates to as high as 25%.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
There is growing public concern on the rising lending rates and the wide interest rate spread. 
Banks will, therefore, need to read the public mood and keep any increases to a minimum to 
take into account the difficult circumstances that borrowers are facing.  
We recognise that pricing of credit risk by banks had proved a major challenge in the past; 
however, the introduction of credit information sharing in 2010 has minimized this challenge. 
So  far,  over  one  million  credit  reports  have  been  requested  by  banks  and  about  4000  by 
bank  customers.  In  this  regard,  the  Central  Bank  has  spearheaded  reforms  aimed  at 
lowering the cost of doing business. These include introduction of credit information sharing, 
roll-out of agency banking and setting up of Currency Centres. Banks should therefore pass 
on the cost savings from these initiatives to customers as you review lending rates.  
On the National Payment Systems front, the retail payments system continued to evolve in 
line with the payments system reform and modernization strategy. In particular, the Central 
Bank  in  conjunction  with  the  Kenya  Bankers  Association  successfully  implemented  the 
Cheque  Truncation  System  that  will  eliminate  the  hitherto  manual  cheque  clearing  by 
automating the entire clearing cycle. The benefits accruing from improvement in the national 
payment system should be passed on to your customers.  
I am glad to inform you that on 23rd November 2011, Parliament finally passed the National 
Payments System Bill, 2011. The Bill seeks to provide for the regulation and supervision of 
Payment Systems and Payment Service Providers. In particular, the Bill will enables Kenya’s 
payment  system  to  comply  with  the  Bank  for  International  Settlement  Core  Principles  and 
give Central Bank enhanced legal and regulatory powers over the payment systems.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Looking  into  the  future,  the  economic  outlook  for  the  next 
12 months is positive given the current short rains that have improved the food situation in 
the  country;  the  Governments’  concerted  efforts  in  implementing  Vision  2030  flag  ship 
projects  and  the  current  coordinated  policy  measures  including  monetary-fiscal  policies 
aimed at maintaining macroeconomic stability while boosting broad based growth.  
On the financial sector front, the Central Bank in conjunction with the Government will scale 
up reforms to enhance the sector’s competitiveness, efficiency, access and stability as well 
as making Kenya a financial hub in the medium term. The banking sector is also expected to 
continue with its’ excellent performance underpinned by regional expansion and lowered cost 
of business as the various reforms take root.  
Looking  ahead  for  Monetary  Policy,  the  priority  is  to  reverse  inflation  and  inflationary 
expectations  and  exchange  rate  volatility  to  protect  the  economic  growth  base.  Tight 
monetary  policy  will  be  sustained  until  inflationary  pressures  have  been  reversed  and  the 
foreign exchange market stabilized. From a historical perspective, we have seen the same 
measures work and we still have confidence it will work in 2012. The Bank will also continue 
with  regular  interactions  with  key  stakeholders  including  market  players  to  enhance  the 
effectiveness  of  the  transmission  mechanism  of  monetary  policy  and  other  policy  strategy 
actions.  
In closing, Ladies and Gentlemen, let me thank you all for the support and cooperation in 
developing the financial sector. I look forward to more fruitful collaboration and partnership 
going  forward  and  in  addressing  any  challenges  facing  the  sector.  Lastly,  let  me  end  by 
wishing you all a happy holiday season and fruitful 2012.  
THANK YOU. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
