Jean-Pierre Danthine: The strong franc and the future of Switzerland’s 
financial market infrastructure – two current challenges for the Swiss 
National Bank 
Speech by Mr Jean-Pierre Danthine, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss National 
Bank, at a Money Market Event, Geneva, 3 November 2011. 
 The  speaker  would  like  to  thank  Marlene  Amstad,  Anna  Faber,  Peter  Kuster,  Angelo  Ranaldo,  Andy  Sturm, 
Dominik  Salierno  and  Andreas  Wehrli  for  their  valuable  support  in  drafting  this  speech  and  preparing  this 
presentation. 
Introduction 
In today’s global economy, central banks face no shortage of challenges. Of the many issues 
we confront, I will discuss two that are currently of particular relevance to the Swiss National 
Bank (SNB). The strength of the Swiss franc is on everyone’s mind. This summer it became 
a predicament of unprecedented dimensions and it continues to put tremendous pressure on 
the Swiss economy. I will address this topic in the second part of my speech. 
By  contrast,  the  challenge  I  will  discuss  first  –  the  future  of  Switzerland’s  financial  market 
infrastructure  (FMI)  –  is  not  making  headlines  at  present.  Essentially,  the  term  FMI 
encompasses the exchanges, central counterparties, settlement systems, central securities 
depositories  and  other  service  providers  which  support 
financial  system.  This 
infrastructure  is  central  to  the  functioning  of  financial  markets.  It  is  crucial  for  the 
implementation of monetary policy and participants’ access to central bank liquidity.  
As long as the FMI functions smoothly, it rarely attracts public attention. But, from a long run 
perspective,  its  performance  is  highly  significant.  Internationally,  many  changes  are  taking 
place in the FMI arena and it is vital that our FMI – often referred to as the “plumbing of our 
financial markets” – continues to serve Switzerland’s best interests in the future. My goal this 
evening is to raise awareness of the FMI’s importance and of the need to develop a strategy 
to ensure that it remains an asset for us in the future.  
the 
Part I: Financial market infrastructure  
Overall, the key elements of the Swiss FMI function well. In the recent crisis, the resilience of 
our infrastructure has been remarkable. But, increased competition, international regulatory 
changes, growing trade volumes and, on occasion, heightened volatility imply that it will have 
to evolve in order to remain effective. I will hence highlight three aspects of our FMI tonight: 
its relevance, its strengths and the challenges it faces.  
The importance of a safe and efficient financial market infrastructure  
The  summer  of  2011  will  take  its  place  in  history  as  a  period  of  considerable  market 
uncertainty and volatility. On three occasions we saw daily moves of the Swiss franc against 
the Euro which were among the most extreme experienced since the inception of the euro in 
1999. The most significant one day move of 3.2% occurred on 9 August. The same day the 
Swiss  franc  reached  a  record  high,  peaking  close  to  parity,  at  1.0073  per  euro.1  These 
extreme  movements  on  the  foreign  exchange  market  were  also  accompanied  by  high 
                                                 
1   Measured using the Electronic Broking Services (EBS) currency trading platform. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
volatility in equities and bond markets. Between July and early August, the equity volatility 
index, VIX,2 abruptly doubled from less than 20% to over 40% and the broad bond volatility 
index, the MOVE Index,3 went from around 85 to almost 120 base points.  
This extreme level of volatility had a huge impact on front office operations. It also affected 
“post-trade” processes in the back office, where volumes increased at much the same pace. 
While  the  average  EUR/CHF  turnover  on  Electronic  Broking  Services  (EBS)  in  August 
usually hovers around EUR 3.5 billion, the daily average in August of this year was closer to 
EUR 12.5 billion. These figures are symptomatic of the pressure the FMI is under. They also 
highlight the importance of ensuring that it can cope with such significant increases in trading 
volumes.  After  all,  as  trade  volumes  swell,  so  do  operational  risks.  Thankfully,  there  have 
been few instances in which the FMI, or a lack of effective infrastructure services, were at the 
root of any market crashes. Let me, however, highlight three instances in which the system 
has been put to the test.  
The first case was referred to as the “Paperwork Crisis” of 1968 and 1969. Daily trading on 
the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) went from two million shares a day in the early 1960s 
to twelve million by the end of the decade. Meanwhile, stock trades continued to be settled 
by the physical delivery of engraved stock certificates between brokerage firms. As trading 
volumes  soared,  the  post-trading  industry  could  not  keep  up  with  the  paper  blizzard.  By 
1968, the NYSE was forced to close every Wednesday for six months to catch up with the 
paperwork. It then reduced its official operating hours for a further six months to enable its 
member brokerage firms to keep pace with the trading volumes.4 Technology subsequently 
caught up. 
A second example is “Black Monday” when, on 19 October 1987, stock markets crashed all 
over  the  world.  That  day,  the  Dow  Jones  Industrial  Average  dropped  by  over  22%.  One 
factor  that  increased  the  severity  of  this  market  crash  was  the  difficulty  people  faced  in 
obtaining reliable information. The record trading volumes on Black Monday – three times the 
daily average – overwhelmed many systems. As the Brady Report put it: “On the NYSE, for 
example, trade executions were reported more than an hour late, which … caused confusion 
among traders. Investors did not know whether limit orders had been executed or whether 
new limits needed to be set.”5 
In  the  years  since  1987,  both  trading  and  post-trade  technology  have  come  a  long  way. 
Today, trading algorithms buy and sell hundreds of thousands of times in a single second, 
leading to increased trading volumes. This leads to my third example, the “Flash Crash” of 
6 May 2010. That day, the Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged almost 1,000 points in five 
minutes, only to regain almost 600 points twenty minutes later. Full explanations for this turn 
of  events  have  yet  to  be  determined,  but  a  report  by  U.S.  regulatory  authorities,  the 
Commodity  Futures  Trading  Commission  and  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission, 
concluded  that:  “One  key  lesson  is  that  under  stressed  market  conditions,  the  automated 
execution  of  a  large  sell  order  can  trigger  extreme  price  movements,  especially  if  the 
automated execution algorithm does not take prices into account. Moreover, the interaction 
between automated execution programs and algorithmic trading strategies can quickly erode 
liquidity  and  result  in  disorderly  markets.”6  Technological  developments  would  therefore 
                                                 
2   The VIX tracks volatility on the S&P 500 Index. 
3   Merrill Lynch Option Volatility Estimate Index. 
4   “History of New York Stock Exchange Holidays,” New York Stock Exchange, revised in January 2011. 
5   Brady Report 1988, Study III, p. 21. Cited in, “Marc Carlson: A Brief History of the 1987 Stock Market Crash 
with a Discussion of the Federal Reserve Response,” p. 9. 
6   “Findings Regarding the Market Events of May 6, 2010,” Report of the Staffs of the CFTC and SEC to the 
Joint Advisory Committee on Emerging Regulatory Issues, 20 September, 2010. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
seem to be like a dual-edged sword. On the one hand, they increase efficiency and reduce 
costs. On the other, they intensify the severity of potential market crashes. 
Such examples illustrate the importance of the FMI for the effective functioning of financial 
markets  as  a  whole.  I  would  now  like  to  explain  why  it  matters  to  the  SNB.  To  fulfil  its 
mandate, the SNB is involved on three levels. First, as a market participant with a special 
role because it uses market transactions to implement monetary policy. Second, it acts as 
the “system manager” of the Swiss Interbank Clearing (SIC) payment system, making sure 
that high value transactions can be made with central bank money. In this function, the SNB 
also  monitors  daily  operations  and  is  responsible  for  crisis  management  in  the  event  of 
disruptions  or  incidents.  Third  and  finally,  the  SNB  oversees  the  systemically  important 
elements  of  the  FMI,  monitors  developments  and  strives  to  identify  areas  of  tension  or 
imbalance that could jeopardise the stability of the system. These observations make it clear 
that a well-functioning, safe and efficient FMI is critical to the central bank. 
The strengths of Switzerland’s FMI and its collaborative roots 
Switzerland’s FMI has been effective to date. I would now like to describe its strengths and 
discuss their foundations. The strong suit of the Swiss FMI is the integration of all back-office 
components in a chain of systems known as the Swiss value chain (SVC).7 The SVC allows 
complete  electronic  integration  of  different  types  of  platform:  trading  systems,  securities 
settlement systems, central counterparties and payment systems.  
Most notably, as the SVC integrates several processes, it is fast, efficient and safe. In equity 
trading, “straight-through processing” has technically reduced “time to settlement” to as little 
as  four seconds,  though  in  market  practice  the  settlement  cycle  for  equities is three  days. 
Domestically, the system is inexpensive and the price of trading has decreased significantly 
in recent years. “Straight-through processing” has also been applied to and strengthened the 
Swiss repo market, where not a single “fail”, i.e. a settlement that is one or more days late, 
has occurred in the interbank repo transactions since May 2009.  
In terms of automation, the integrated Swiss approach compares favourably to other systems 
of its kind. Despite the omnipresence of electronic systems worldwide, only one third of all 
repo  transactions  in  Europe  are  in  fact  handled  by  automatic  trading  systems  such  as 
BrokerTec, Eurex Repo or MTS. In several national markets, most steps are still performed 
manually.8 
As  the  Swiss  value  chain  was  built  in  the  mid-1990s,  it  was  a  frontrunner  in  the  move 
towards straight-through processing. It is still a “state-of-the-art” set-up, but this is no time to 
be complacent in view of the ever-increasing strengths of competing systems. Given its high 
level of performance, it is interesting to observe that the Swiss value chain is the result of a 
typically  Swiss  form  of  collaboration,  known  as  “Gemeinschaftswerk”.  The  principle  of 
“Gemeinschaftswerk”  has  been  vital  in  shaping  and  maintaining  Switzerland’s  FMI.  It  has 
provided all relevant private and public stakeholders with a voice in the process - from the 
SNB to large banks with an international focus, to smaller and regional institutes.  
The twelve year history of the Swiss repo market illustrates this principle at work. At the end 
of the 1990s, commercial banks, financial infrastructure providers and the SNB collaborated 
                                                 
7  
It consists of four elements: i) the electronic trading platforms, SIX Swiss Exchange and Eurex (derivatives); 
(ii) the central counterparty SIX x-clear; (iii) the securities settlement system SECOM; and (iv) the payment 
systems, Swiss Interbank Clearing (SIC) and euroSIC. Also directly integrated are the central counterparties, 
London Clearing House (LCH) and Eurex Clearing, as well as the euroSIC payment system. 
8   Cf.  “International  Capital  Market  Association:  European  repo  market  survey.”  Number  18,  conducted 
December  2009,  published  March  2010.  p.  10.  Cf.  also  BIS,  “CPSS:  Strengthening  repo  clearing  and 
settlement arrangements,” published September 2010., pp. 10–12. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
closely  to  develop  the  repo  market.  The  resulting  electronic  Eurex  Repo  trading  platform9 
standardised repo transactions. Crucially, since 1999 the Eurex Repo trading platform has 
been linked to the SECOM securities settlement system, which is connected to the SIC real-
time gross-settlement payment system. Not only does this make straight-through processing 
possible,  the  system  also  sets  itself  apart  by  integrating  central  bank  repos  and  interbank 
repos on the same platform. 
The  SIC  payment  system,  whose  technical  and  operational  components  are  handled  by  a 
subsidiary of the SIX Group, is also a product of the “Gemeinschaftswerk”. In contrast to this 
successful public-private partnership, in other countries most large-value payment systems 
belong to the central banks. On an functional level, vertical integration thus appears to be 
more complete in Switzerland than in other European markets. In Germany and the United 
Kingdom, for example, the private firms which dominate the FMI (Deutsche Börse Group and 
London Stock Exchange Group, respectively) do not operate the national payment systems. 
Conversely,  on  an  organisational  level,  in  the  1990s  and  early  2000s  demutualisation 
occurred in most European countries, shifting governance away from a “user-owned,” “user-
governed” model towards an investor-centric structure. 
The changing world of FMIs 
As I have inferred, the world of FMIs and their stakeholders is in a state of flux. It is hence 
crucial that we consider how such changes influence the Swiss market and how they will do 
so in years to come.  
A mere glance at the news headlines illustrates the extent to which established financial and 
economic entities are evolving as never before. There are several examples of shifts in the 
landscape of trading venues, which stem from various factors, such as regulatory changes, 
e.g.  MIFID,10  the  trend  towards  demutualisation  and  increased  international  competition. 
These include the announced merger of Deutsche Börse and NYSE, the sale of SIX Group’s 
Eurex-stake to Deutsche Börse and a move of trading volumes away from “national” quasi-
monopolies towards multilateral trading venues such as multilateral trading facilities (MTF). 
Some estimates indicate that as much as 25% of equity trading volumes are now handled by 
these  new  players.  Because  of  such  developments,  in  the  Swiss  Blue-Chip  segment,  SIX 
Swiss Exchange’s average market share declined from over 80% in 2009 to around 70% in 
2010.11 
Post-trade  infrastructure  is  also  under  pressure  to  evolve.  Notably,  the  Financial  Stability 
Board  recommends  a  wider  adoption  of  Central  Counterparties  (CCPs)  in  the  over-the-
counter (OTC) derivatives markets. By mitigating counterparty risk, increasing transparency 
and  limiting  the  likelihood  of  contagion  in  these  complex  markets,  CCPs  reduce  systemic 
risk.  Regulators  in  both  the  European  Union  and  the  United  States  are  thus  promoting 
increased use of CCPs. A second example, upon which I would like to dwell, is the European 
Central  Bank’s  (ECB)  “TARGET2-Securities  (T2S)”  project,  which  has  attracted  much 
attention  in  the  industry.  For  those  of  you  who  are  unfamiliar  with  the  initiative,  it  aims  to 
establish  a  single  venue  where  securities  may  be  settled  against  the  euro  and  possibly 
against other currencies, partially replacing the existing national settlement infrastructures.  
For the SNB, as Switzerland’s central bank and monetary authority, the ECB’s project raised 
the  issue  of  whether  the  Swiss  franc  should  be  included  as  a  settlement  currency  on  the 
                                                 
9   In October 2000, the SWX-Repo was integrated into Eurex under the name Eurex-Repo. 
10   Markets in Financial Instruments Derivative: This European law aims to increase competition and 
consumer protection in investment services. As of 1 November 2007, it replaced the Investment 
Services Directive. 
11   SIX Group Media Release, 15 March 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
T2S platform. Although the formal decision was solely the responsibility of the SNB, in the 
spirit of the “Gemeinschaftswerk” the central bank consulted all stakeholders (including the 
SIX  Group)  before  reaching  an  informed  decision.  On  the  basis  of  the  stakeholders’  cost-
benefit  analysis,  which  highlighted  the  complexity  of  the  market  infrastructure  challenges 
confronting  the  Swiss  market,  the  SNB  decided  not  to  include  the  Swiss  franc  as  a 
T2S settlement currency at this stage12. 
That said, though Switzerland decided to stand back from this process, T2S will nevertheless 
impact the Swiss market and accelerate structural reforms of Switzerland’s FMI, which will in 
turn  affect  our  money  market  operations.  After  all,  securities  denominated  in  foreign 
currencies  are  accepted  as  collateral  on  the  Swiss  repo  market.  In  fact,  collateral 
denominated  in  euros  account  for  about  50%  of  the  posted  securities.  In  the  future, 
settlement  of  these  securities  and  potentially  also  of  the  securities  denominated  in  other 
eligible currencies will involve some use of the T2S infrastructure. 
What now? 
The  principle  of  “Gemeinschaftswerk”  has  served  us  very  well  of  late.  Its  technical  and 
economic  efficiency  has  permitted  a  convergence  of  individual  institutional  interests  with 
those  of  the  Swiss  financial  centre.  However,  the  environment  in  which  Switzerland’s 
financial  market  infrastructure  operates  is  now  changing  considerably.  To  remain  reliable, 
efficient and competitive, it must evolve. This is a challenge, not only for the SNB, but for all 
financial  markets,  that  is  all  stakeholders  in  the  “Gemeinschaftswerk”.  The  Swiss  financial 
centre urgently needs to agree upon a clear proactive strategy to ensure that Switzerland’s 
FMI  remains  competitive  in  the  long-term.  Should  the  “Gemeinschaftswerk”  not  be  the 
chosen modus operandi in the future, this issue could prove to be even more pressing.  
Let me now conclude my thoughts on the plumbing of our financial markets and return to the 
front office to discuss the more prominent challenges on the foreign exchange market. 
Part II: The strong Swiss franc 
Since the breakdown of the Bretton Woods system in 1973 the Swiss franc has significantly 
appreciated against most major currencies. From this juncture, its value increased massively, 
in nominal terms, with respect to the US dollar, the British pound, and, in the relevant period, 
to  the  Deutschmark.  Since  the  inception  of  the  euro  in  1999,  the  franc  also  appreciated 
against the euro - the currency of our primary trading partner, though the exchange rate was 
stable until the onset of the recent crisis.  
Little can be gleaned from a comparison of the various currencies’ nominal values, however. 
It does not take into account that the evolution of relative exchange rates stems, to a great 
extent, from a natural compensation for inflation rate differentials. This is particularly relevant 
to Switzerland, where we have experienced far less inflation than our commercial partners 
over the last thirty years. If this issue is accounted for, that is, in real terms, the Swiss franc 
can  then  be  said  to  have  appreciated  by  around  100%  against  the  US  dollar  and  70% 
against the British pound since 1973 and by 14% against the Euro between 1999 and today.  
We  learn  more  if  we  take  a  multilateral  viewpoint,  based  on  the  real  effective  exchange 
rate13. On a statistical basis, it can be argued that the Swiss franc’s effective exchange rate 
has  remained  more  or  less  stable,  at  least  from  1990  until  recently.  This  does  not  mean, 
however,  that  it  has  been  constant.  On  the  contrary,  it  fluctuates  constantly  around  its 
                                                 
12   The Bank of England has reached the same decision regarding the British pound.  
13   This rationale and the figures that follow refer to the export-weighted real exchange rate (nominal rates which 
correct the gaps between price indexes and consumption), as published by the BIS. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
average.14 You may recall, in particular, that for approximately three years in the mid-1990’s 
it remained well above its long-term average, then peaking at 12% in 1995. Until now, this 
was  the  Swiss  franc’s  most  significant  deviation  from  the  long  term  average  observed.  In 
contrast, between 1999 and 2008, the real effective exchange rate generally remained below 
its long-term average. It had started to increase around August 2007, then gaining over 30% 
between that time and the end of June 2011. 
With  these  numbers  in  mind,  the  additional  changes  registered  this  summer  are  quite 
extraordinary. Between early July and 9 August, when the Swiss franc reached its historic 
peak, its real value climbed another 17%. Estimates show that the currency was then almost 
40% above its long-term average and more than 50% above its pre-crisis level.15  
It can be argued that the Swiss franc is strong because the Swiss economy is faring well in 
absolute terms and, most importantly, in comparison with many of the country’s neighbours. 
Indeed,  the  Great  Recession  was  less  pronounced  in  Switzerland  than  in  most  other 
developed  economies.  The  ensuing  recovery  was  also  relatively  dynamic.  The  Swiss 
economy was one of the first advanced economies to return to the pre-crisis level of GDP 
and, in striking contrast with many other countries, Switzerland emerged from the crisis with 
solid public finances. Indeed, this explains why, in the crisis years, the country’s overall debt-
to-GDP level fell below 40%. Exchange rate movements, like those observed this summer, 
strongly  suggest,  however,  that  such  explanations  do  not  suffice.  Slow-moving  economic 
fundamentals  or  macroeconomic  drivers  can  almost  certainly  not  account  for  the  sudden 
large  movements  of  our  exchange  rate  in  July  and  August.  The  Swiss  franc’s  safe  haven 
properties and financial market participants’ perceptions that the risks to the global economy 
were extreme in size and uncommon in nature (and thus hard to evaluate) offer a far more 
complete explanation.  
The unique safe haven properties of the Swiss franc are well recognised. They have rarely 
been as clearly demonstrated as in recent history. It is striking, for instance, that the price of 
gold  in  Swiss  francs  depreciated  by  approximately  5%  between  early  2011  and  2  August, 
while, in the meantime, the US dollar price of gold kept breaking one record after another. 
The  Swiss  franc’s  safe  haven  properties  are  also  illustrated  by  the  negative  correlation 
between  its  movements  and  the  price  of  risky  assets,  such  as  equity  shares.  Additionally, 
these movements are positively correlated with risk indicators, such as the VIX index. The 
Swiss  franc’s  significant  appreciation  within  a  few  hours  of  the  first  plane  crash  into 
Manhattan’s  twin  towers  on  11  September  2001  constitutes  another  vivid  example  of  the 
strength of its safe haven properties.  
While the Swiss franc’s status as a so-called safe haven currency may be a testimony to the 
country’s long history of stability, in times of global uncertainty on the financial markets, it is 
an essentially financial phenomenon which may inflict significant and potentially permanent 
damage upon the real economy. When financial forces push a currency so far away from its 
fundamental value so quickly, the consequences are very real. After all, most businesses do 
not work with margins that can absorb such extreme exchange rate fluctuations, in terms of 
both speed and level. The Swiss economy is very open and dependent on exports. Every 
second  Swiss  franc  is  earned  abroad.  The  massive  overvaluation  of  our  currency  this 
summer carried with it the risk of a recession and of deflationary developments. This is why 
                                                 
14   It is worth noting that this long run average is a purely backward-looking statistical concept and not a forward-
looking or equilibrium concept. We use it throughout as a statistical yardstick. The SNB does not endorse a 
specific equilibrium exchange rate level as the notion of equilibrium is model-dependent and thus not uniquely 
defined. Every model we know of concludes, however, that at CHF 1.20 per euro, the Swiss franc remains 
high. 
15   This  is  an  approximation  of  the  real  effective  exchange  rate,  assuming  constant  weights  and  inflation 
differentials.  
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
the SNB concluded that it had to act in order to protect the economy and safeguard price 
stability.  
On 3 August, the SNB announced that it would be aiming for a three-month Libor as close to 
zero  as  possible.  This  was  to  take  immediate  effect.  It  would  also  expand  banks’  sight 
deposits from their then level of around CHF 30 billion to CHF 80 billion. In two additional 
steps,  on  10  and  17  August  this  quantitative  easing  policy  was  further  expanded  with  an 
ultimate target of overall sight deposits in excess of CHF 200 billion. This significant increase 
in  the  supply  of  liquidity  to  the  Swiss  franc  money  market  was  achieved  by  discontinuing 
reverse repo operations and repurchasing outstanding SNB Bills, in a first step, and entering 
into  foreign  exchange  swaps  and  reinstating  liquidity-providing  repos  afterwards.  These 
operations exerted massive downward pressure on money market rates and expectations of 
future  interest  rates.  They  also  caused  the  Swiss  franc  to  weaken  considerably.  However, 
the  increasing  torrent  of  bad  news  about  the  global  economic  situation  made  their  impact 
only  temporary  in  nature.  The  massive  overvaluation  of  the  Swiss  franc  continued  anew, 
posing an acute threat to the Swiss economy. On 6 September, the SNB hence announced 
that  it  would  no  longer  tolerate  a  EUR/CHF  exchange  rate  below  a  minimum  rate  of 
CHF 1.20.  It  also  indicated  that  it  would  enforce  this  minimum  rate  with  the  utmost 
determination and was prepared to buy foreign currency in unlimited quantities, if necessary. 
Even  at  a  rate  of  CHF  1.20  per  euro,  the  Swiss  franc  remains  high.  It  should  continue  to 
weaken  over  time.  If  the  economic  outlook  and  deflationary  risks  so  require,  further 
measures will be taken. 
The decision to impose a minimum exchange rate was not taken lightly. It was a major step 
and has naturally elicited a wide variety of reactions. Today, I would only like to address one 
of  them.  Advocates  of  market  efficiency  claim  that  our  intervention  is  misplaced  as  it 
interferes with the working of free markets. My first academic paper on the “efficient market” 
hypothesis was published in 1977 and I remain convinced that the more moderate versions 
of  this  hypothesis  are  valid.  In  particular,  I  think  investors  should  always  start  from  the 
premise  that  the  market  is  “hard  to  beat”  and  that  “free  lunches”  are  extremely  rare. 
However, I also believe that the extreme form of market efficiency, according to which the 
market price always and immediately reflects and reveals the underlying fundamental value 
of  the  asset  in  question,  has  been  disproved  in  multiple  instances.  Scholars  have 
convincingly documented episodes of market overreaction, herd behaviour and momentum 
trading.  There  have  also  been  numerous  cases  of  what  appeared  ex-post  to  be  manifest 
examples of mispricing in financial history, from the “tulip mania” in Holland in the 1600s, to 
the recent house price bubble in the United States. One possible reason for this, which has 
been  stressed  in  recent  academic  literature,  is  that  investors  who  disagree  with  market 
valuations, and wish to trade on their convictions, have little chance of making a profit if the 
mass of ill-informed or irrational (“noise”) traders is too large.  
In  the  rare  case  of  a  safe  haven  currency,  like  the  Swiss  franc,  there  is  an  economic 
justification  for  the  central  bank  attempting  to  limit  the  detrimental  impact  of  safe  haven 
“financial” considerations on the real economy by, in a sense, accommodating demands for 
the safe haven. The safe haven effect leads to a form of Dutch disease which cannot leave 
the central bank indifferent. This term refers to the state of the Dutch economy following the 
discovery of natural gas in the North Sea in the 1980’s. This significant discovery and the 
boom it generated in the energy-related sectors of the economy led to an overvaluation of 
the Dutch currency. This, in turn, had a severe negative impact on large sectors of the real 
economy which did not directly benefit from the discovery. There is, however, a difference 
between the “Dutch disease” and the impact of the demand for a safe haven currency. In the 
second  instance,  the  “disease”  takes  on  a  pernicious  form  as  it  negatively  affects  the 
economy, without the latter benefitting from the initial positive effect of a newfound natural 
resource. 
It  can  further  be  argued  that  safe  haven  flows  in  an  environment  marked  by  extreme 
uncertainty and a world-wide dearth of safe assets led to a profound disconnect between the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
value of the Swiss franc and the reality of the Swiss economy. The scale of this disconnect 
could in turn explain the extreme market volatility we have witnessed this summer. Indeed, 
another segment of the academic literature explains that, in such extreme market conditions, 
coordination  problems  can  arise,  causing  so-called  “stabilizing  investors”  to  remain  on  the 
sidelines instead of entering their trades, which would normally have a stabilizing effect. The 
intervention of the central bank is then viewed as a means of helping market participants to 
coordinate on valuations which are more in line with the real fundamentals. Today, the Swiss 
franc remains high and should therefore continue to depreciate in the future.  
Conclusion 
As I stated at the outset, we face no shortage of challenges. I have addressed two of them 
today. The Swiss franc was overvalued to such an extent that the SNB has been forced to 
take  the  extraordinary  decision  of  setting  a  minimum  exchange  rate.  This  carefully 
considered  decision  reflects  the  extent  to  which  we  live  in  extraordinary  times.  Given  the 
prevailing circumstances this summer, to the SNB, this seemed to be the only way in which 
the central bank could fulfil its mandate to ensure price stability while taking due account of 
economic developments. 
Behind the scenes, the rapid and complex evolution of FMIs worldwide is a matter of long-
term  interest.  This  infrastructure  is  central  to  the  functioning  of  financial  markets.  It  is  a 
challenge of primordial importance to the financial markets. Today, we are the beneficiaries 
of  an  effective  infrastructure,  in  part  thanks  to  the  adoption  of  “Gemeinschaftswerk”,  a 
collaborative modus operandi which has permitted a near-perfect alignment of stakeholders’ 
individual  and  collective  interests.  It  cannot  be  taken  for  granted,  however,  and  it  is  our 
collective  responsibility  to  act.  The  “Gemeinschaftswerk”  may  not  be  the  sole  means  of 
ensuring that progress is made but, in any case, a well-defined proactive strategy is called 
for if we are to rise to the challenges ahead.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
