Bwalya K E Ng’andu: Accelerating growth and adoption in mobile 
payments 
Speech by Dr Bwalya K E Ng’andu, Deputy Governor (Operations) of the Bank of Zambia, at 
the  3rd  Celpay  Mobile  Banking  Conference,  hosted  by  Celpay  Zambia  Limited,  Lusaka, 
26 October 2011. 
 The Chief Executive Officer, Celpay International BV;  
Managing Director, Celpay Zambia Ltd, Mr. Miyanda Mulambo;  
The Conference Chairperson, Mr. Maxwell Banda;  
Chief Executive Officers of Commercial Banks and Financial Institutions;  
Representatives of International Organizations;  
Representatives of Zambian business associations;  
Distinguished participants;  
Members of the Press;  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
Chairperson,  it  is  my  honour  and  privilege  to  speak  at  this,  the  3rd  Mobile  Banking 
Conference  being  hosted  by  Celpay  Zambia  Limited  under  the  theme  “Accelerating  Growth 
and Adoption in Mobile Payments”. The theme of this conference is particularly appropriate as 
it fits in very well with one major policy objective of the Financial Sector Development Plan; 
which is to increase access to financial services for the majority of the Zambian people. This 
conference,  I  believe,  will  provide  a  unique  opportunity  for  participants  to  share  ideas  and 
experiences  on  innovations  and  trends  taking  place  in  the  use  of  the  mobile  telephone 
technology as a convenient, safe and cost effective payment system. It should also offer the 
platform from which to address the challenges that such innovations can present in order to 
minimize potential disruption to the operations of the financial system that can arise from our 
failure to appreciate the possible impact of these challenges. I therefore wish to thank, from the 
outset, Celpay for organising this timely conference and to welcome most warmly our foreign 
participants who I’m sure will bring a rare insight to this conference with their own experiences.  
It is widely acknowledged that expanding access to financial services for Zambia’s unbanked 
population  remains  one  of  the  biggest  challenges  confronting  the  financial  sector  in  this 
country.  Findings  from  the  last  FinScope  Zambia  Survey  which  was  conducted  in  2009 
showed that 62.7% of Zambian adults still remained financially excluded compared to 66.3% 
reported in 2005. This slight increase in access to financial services, however, fails to match 
the significant increase in the number of banking and non-banking institutions which over the 
same period increased from 14 to the current 19 banks and to over 90 in the case of the non-
bank  sector.  The  mismatch  in  growth  between  the  supply  side  and  the  demand  tells  us  a 
story  that  the  physical  increase  in  the  number  of  the  traditional  financial  service  providers 
does not necessarily translate into a corresponding increase in access to financial services 
among the population. I believe it is this mismatch that calls for the need to examine the role 
that  the  non  traditional  platforms,  such  the  mobile  phones,  can  play  in  enhancing  greater 
access to financial services.  
Chairman, the 2009 Finscope Survey highlighted a number of barriers to financial inclusion, 
which were broadly categorized into  
 
 
The physical access or proximity to financial institutions 
Affordability of financial products 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Appropriateness of financial products 
Regulation barriers such as know your customer requirements 
 
 
Chairman, we know, for instance, that the apparent high cost of providing banking services 
to  a  population  that  is  largely  subsistence  and  therefore  financially  challenged  excludes 
many from  accessing financial services. Brick and mortar establishments are expensive to 
set up and even when they are set up, distance to the nearest branch for many, particularly 
for those in the rural areas becomes a problem. The findings relating to the cost of providing 
financial services contained again of the Finscope™ Zambia Survey (2005) goes some way 
in underscoring the nature of the problem. The survey found that about 32% of the banked 
reported that it costs them between K5,000–K10,000 to get to their bank while about 26% 
spend between K11,000–K25,000. At these cost levels it is not difficult to see why certain 
segments of our population do not actively seek financial services.  
The  mobile  payment  system  does  therefore  address  some  of  these  challenges  and 
consequently can be an important platform for expanding the delivery of financial services. In 
some respects it complements conventional financial services or products. In other respects 
it  makes  up  for  the  weakness  of  the  conventional  financial  service  providers.  With  mobile 
payments, the cost of travel to a financial service provider is reduced to pressing a button, 
the risks associated with carrying cash are managed by simply securing a pin number. Since 
the mobile telephone industry has seen tremendous growth in its coverage, mobile payments 
seems to be the inevitable retail payment method that reaches out to large segments of the 
population a way that the conventional ones do not.  
Chairperson, notwithstanding these advantages, mobile payment platforms are not without 
challenges. At the centre of these challenges is the need to protect the consumer or user of 
mobile  payment  platforms.  Undoubtedly,  the  number  of  people  with  access  to  mobile 
payment  services  in  Zambia  has  significantly  increased  since  the  early  days  of  Celpay. 
However, for us at the Bank of Zambia, as regulators we have taken note of how growth has 
been  accompanied  by  a  change  in  the  character  of  mobile  payments.  The  line  between  a 
mobile payment product and a conventional banking product has now become a fine line. For 
this reason developing appropriate regulations that protect the consumer against fraud and 
such risks anti-competitive practices, is a critical and necessary response to the innovations 
brought about by the mobile telephone technology. But it is important to understand that by 
its  nature  technological  innovation  can  achieve  an  overnight  quantum  leap  by  the  sheer 
ingenuity  of  one  person.  Where  this  happens,  there  is  a  danger  that  the  development  of 
appropriate regulation can lag behind technological advancement. But regulators cannot halt 
the advancement of technology just so that they are ready to regulate. In this situation, our 
challenge is to ensure that we keep pace with technology so that we are able to offer the 
required  protection  to  all  who  access  financial  services  using  the  new  and  unconventional 
payments systems.  
On  our  part,  the  Bank  of  Zambia  shall  focus  its  attention  on  the  development  of  a  robust 
regulatory framework that will address the key “hot button” issues of;  
1. 
Prudential requirements; particularly those that relate to liquidity management and 
capital for infrastructure,  
Consumer protection; with emphasis on disclosure of charges and confidentiality of 
customer information, and 
Unfair trading practices particularly those related to monopolistic tendencies such as 
development of platform that are not compatible or not interoperable with platforms 
of other service providers.  
2. 
3. 
To strike a balance between a robust regulatory framework and the need for the framework 
not  to  hinder  innovation  and  allow  business  to  flourish,  our  efforts  in  establishing  a  robust 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
3. 
framework  will  therefore  be  anchored  on  five  key  or  internationally  accepted  best  practice 
principles. These are:  
1. 
2. 
The need to identify the types of mobile payment platforms to be permitted;  
The  need  for  an  efficient  mobile  payments  infrastructure  such  as  settlements 
systems;  
The  need  to  design  rules  to  regulate  the  information  communication  technology 
platform which is itself rapidly evolving;  
Consumer protection; and finally  
The need for compliance monitoring.  
4. 
5. 
Another issue that should be considered in connection with the development of the mobile 
payment  system  is  that  of  inter-operability.  The  ability  of  systems  to  work  together  makes 
further  innovation  possible,  provides  convenience  for  customers,  allows  for  sharing  of 
infrastructure  and  therefore  greater  use  of  facilities.  We  are  therefore  looking  to  you  to 
ensure  that  your  retail  payment  systems  allow  cross  network  acceptance  of  payments. 
Ultimately, we should work towards developing a single switching platform through which all 
payment systems are connected to each other for maximum efficiency.  
Chairperson,  as  you  deliberate  at  this  conference,  I  expect  that  you  will  challenge 
yourselves  to  the  issues  that  I  have  outlined  above.  Accelerated  growth  and  adoption  of 
mobile payments are possible but we must in the process adequately address issues of cost 
of mobile payments, security of payments, ease of use of technological platforms and design 
of compatible and interoperable platforms.  
The Bank of Zambia looks forward to receiving the recommendations and outcomes of this 
conference.  
I thank you and wish you fruitful deliberations. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
