Vítor Constâncio: The future of the international monetary system 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  for  the 
Golden  Series  lecture  at  the  Official  Monetary  and  Financial  Institutions  Forum  (OMFIF), 
London, 23 November 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is with pleasure that I have accepted the invitation from the OMFIF Golden Series on World 
Money  to  talk  about  the  future  of  the  international  monetary  system.  This  subject  has 
become very topical this year, not least in view of the discussions and progress achieved at 
the very recent Cannes Summit.  
I will start by briefly recalling the key features of a good international monetary system and 
on this basis, I will try to define what are, in my view, the main weaknesses of the present 
system (or “non-system” as many describe it). This will allow me to dwell upon the possible 
evolution over the medium run of some of the main components of the international monetary 
system.  When  concluding,  I  will  assess  whether  such  an  evolution  may  prove  to  be  an 
adequate response to the challenges we are confronted with. 
What can we expect from a good-quality international monetary system? 
The  ultimate  goal  of  the  international  monetary  system  (hereafter:  IMS)  is  to  maintain  an 
orderly system of payments among nations. To this aim, the IMS has to provide the services 
of an international currency, ensure adequate creation of global liquidity, define an exchange 
rate  regime  among  national  currencies  and  include  an  adjustment  mechanism  to  avoid 
excessive external real and financial imbalances across nations. 
Both  global  liquidity  and  the  adjustment  mechanism  can  be  interpreted  as  global  public 
goods  (see  e.g.  Eichengreen  1987,  Camdessus  1999,  Dorrucci  and  McKay  2011).  It  is 
indeed only through access to global liquidity that it becomes possible to participate in, and 
finance,  the  global  economy  by  using  one  or  more  reserve  currencies  as  a  means  of 
payment, a unit of account or a store of value.  
And  it  is  only  through  an  efficient  and  effective  adjustment  mechanism  that  it  becomes 
possible  to  benefit  from  “external  stability”,  namely  a  global  sustainable  constellation  of 
cross-country  economic  linkages  (e.g.  via  current  accounts  and  asset/liability  positions). 
Once  external  stability  is  achieved,  cross-country  linkages  do  not  give  rise  to  disruptive 
developments, such as disorderly exchange rate and asset price swings or contractions in 
real output and employment. External stability crucially depends on the policy behaviour of 
those issuers and holders of international currencies that are systemically relevant. 
The  exchange  rate  and  capital  flow  regimes  are  probably  the  core  elements  of  the 
adjustment  mechanism,  since  they  define  the  degree  of  flexibility  of  each  IMS,  i.e.  its 
adaptability to changing economic circumstances. In contrast to the Bretton Woods system 
with fixed exchanges rates, semi-closed capital accounts and a strict adjustment mechanism, 
an IMS such as the present one enjoys a much higher degree of adaptability. Each country is 
free  to  choose  its  exchange  rate  and  capital  account  regime,  and  the  reserve-issuing 
countries  face  no  IMS-embedded  limits  to  the  creation  of  global  liquidity.  This  is  a 
fundamental strength of today’s system, but it may also become – as we will see – a major 
weakness to the extent that it creates scope for unsustainable domestic growth models and 
the ensuing accumulation of real and financial imbalances.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
What are the shortcomings of the present “non-system” 
Besides  the  persistent  external  imbalances,  there  are  many  other  shortcomings  being 
mentioned about the present “non-system”. I can mention a few of them: abrupt reversal of 
capital  flows;  systematic  inflows  going  from  emerging  to  developed  countries;  inefficient 
accumulation  of  reserves  by  emerging  countries;  excessive  exchange  rate  volatility 
ineffective  to  ensure  external  balance;  asymmetry  of  adjustment  pressure  between  deficit 
and surplus countries; absence of mechanisms to ensure the sufficient and timely supply of 
global liquidity in times of financial crises.  
This  list  means  that,  potentially,  all  the  features  of  an  IMS  can  be  at  stake  in  the  present 
discussion,  contrary  to  what  happened  in  the  late  nineties  when  the  discussion  revolved 
around  the  functioning  of  the  financial  sector  and  the  crisis  prevention  and  resolution  in 
emerging economies. The debate then was not about the reform of the IMS but rather about 
a new Global Financial Architecture, meaning the international framework for safeguarding 
and ensuring the efficient functioning of the global financial system.  
Today, after the start of the crisis in 2007, the issues under discussion are at the core of what 
constitutes an International Monetary System: 1) Are new international currencies necessary 
and/or unavoidable in the present circumstances? 2) Should changes be introduced in the 
foreign exchange regime? 3) Does the system need new and stronger instruments of liquidity 
provision, especially in times of financial crises? 4) What changes should be introduced in 
the  adjustment  mechanism?  5)  Which  reforms  are  needed  in  the  about  international 
regulation of the financial sector? 
I will not address this last point. Regarding the second issue on the exchange rate regime, I 
will only mention that I see no justification to change the floating regime among the major 
currencies or to modify the recommendation that big emerging economies should also adopt 
much more flexible rate regimes. This means that in the conflict characterised by MacKinnon 
(1994)  between  the  international  adjustment  view  of  exchange  rates  and  the  monetary 
standard  view,  I  take  the  side  of  the  former.  Also,  the  present  situation  of  financial 
globalisation confirms the early “bipolar view” of Alexander Swoboda that with high capital 
mobility  the  only  stable  exchange  rate  regimes  are  floating  rates  or  hard  pegs,  of  which 
monetary unions are an extreme example (see Eichengreen, 2010). 
Towards an unavoidable, but desirable, multi-polar IMS? 
There are many predictions about the gradual addition of other currencies to the dollar as 
truly  international  currencies.  What  seems  to  make  this  unavoidable  it  is  not  only  the 
emergence of the euro, the increasing strength of China or the growing vulnerabilities of the 
US. The growth in importance of emerging countries, that have seen their share in the world 
GDP augmented by 15 percentage points in the last 20 years, creates a structural increase 
for the demand of reserves that the developed countries, including the USA, will not be in a 
position to supply.  
This question is linked with the problem of the provision of official international liquidity. As 
Maurice  Obstfeld  (2011)  has  recently  recalled,  there  is  a  fiscal  dimension  to  the  supply  of 
official  reserves.  No  single  country  in  the  world  could  indefinitely  offer  its  currency  as  the 
reserve asset that could satisfy all the needs of a growing rest of the world. In the present 
circumstances where deficit and debt ratios need to be decreased, the US could not offer its 
bonds and T-bills as the almost exclusive reserve asset of the world. In this context, Euro 
assets are necessary. Even if they are clearly seen as an unrealistic prospect, Eurobonds, 
from  the  pure  perspective  of  the  International  Monetary  System,  would  be  useful  as  a 
reserve asset for the world economy. In the future, the system will also need assets in the 
Chinese currency, when China will have a convertible currency, a flexible exchange rate and 
a developed bond market. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
All this implies that one possible scenario is the evolution towards a truly multi-polar IMS, 
which,  as  many  have  recently  observed,  would  produce  credible  alternatives  to  dollar-
denominated  investments,  thereby  enhancing  policy  discipline  in  the  core  reserve  issuer. 
Also,  a  multi-currency  world  would  imply  greater  monetary  policy  autonomy  in  emerging 
economies  such  as  China,  which  would  thus  be  in  a  better  position  to  tackle  its  own 
imbalances (see e.g. Bini Smaghi 2011).  
 
There  are  five  key  conditions  for  a  currency  to  become  a  major  international 
currency. The first one is having a very large economy, which engenders network 
externalities  and  lowers  transaction  costs.  The  second  is  given  by  deep,  efficient 
and open financial markets. Third, good political and macroeconomic governance is 
of course of the essence to preserve the external value of a currency. Fourth, full 
enforcement  of  the  rule  of  law  is  equally  crucial  as  it  ensures  the  protection  of 
investors’  property  rights.  Fifth,  one  should  not  overlook  the  importance  of 
geopolitical influence and political stability.  
It is therefore not easy for a currency to fill all the conditions necessary for it to have 
an international role. Consequently, I do not think that we will see a major change in 
the role of the US dollar over the next 10–15 years – though the conclusion may well 
be different over a longer horizon. The appearance of the euro as a new globally 
important currency has not produced a shift to a genuine duopoly in the supply of 
international  currencies,  and  had  little  impact  on  the  dollar’s  centrality  in  the  IMS. 
We  are  likely  to  see  the  shares  of  other  currencies  growing  over  time,  but  it  is 
unlikely that there will be just one currency replacing the US dollar’s hegemony.  
 The euro has established itself as the second most important international currency after the 
US dollar. At the same time, this role is predominantly regional in nature, since the euro is 
mainly used by economic agents resident in euro area neighbouring countries with special 
political  and  economic  ties  to  the  European  Union  and  the  euro  area.  More  recently,  it  is 
known that Asian investors and foreign central banks accounted for a sizable share of the 
demand for bonds issued by the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF).  
Looking ahead, the share of the euro in international markets has the potential to rise further 
once  financial  stability  and  market  integration  is  restored  in  the  euro  area.  The  ongoing 
efforts  to  improve  the  governance  of  the  euro  area  and  provide  it  with  a  credible  crisis 
resolution mechanism will also indirectly affect the international use of the euro, even if the 
ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  do  not  take  any  initiatives  to  directly  promote  its  use  (Angeloni, 
Sapir 2011). This neutral stance – neither foster nor hinder – is based on our conviction that 
the international use of currencies should be a by-product of autonomous market decisions 
driven by the aforementioned five determinants. 
Turning  to  the  Chinese  renminbi,  one  can  observe  that  the  use  of  the  renminbi  as  an 
international currency has remained limited although China is now the third largest economy 
(after the United States and the euro area) and second largest exporter (after the euro area) 
of the world.  
The  Chinese  authorities  have  launched  several  initiatives  since  March  2009  to  promote  a 
wider international use of the renminbi, e.g. in trade invoicing, in deepening the role of the 
offshore centre played by Hong Kong S.A.R., or in agreeing local currency swap agreements 
with several central banks.  
Nevertheless,  the  full  potential  of  the  renminbi  can  ultimately  only  be  achieved  with  the 
liberalisation  of  the  capital  account,  accompanied  by  the  reform  of  domestic  financial 
markets. Once these will be in place, a major internationalisation of the renminbi will happen 
as  a  by-product.  For  the  time  being,  Chinese  authorities  seem  to  be  trying  to  prudently 
promote  financial  liberalization  via  experimenting  with  market-driven  renminbi  securities  in 
Hong  Kong  S.A.R..  But  this  comes  at  the  expense  of  increasing  exposure  to  capital  flows 
which  poses  challenges  for  the  macro-prudential  set-up,  especially  given  the  current 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
undervaluation of the renminbi. Hence, Chinese authorities may also slow down the use of 
the  renminbi  abroad  should  tensions  for  domestic  policy  makers  mount.  All  in  all,  the 
potential  for  the  renminbi  to  upgrade  as  an  international  currency  is  clearly  huge,  but  the 
timing is difficult to predict.  
The necessary reform of the adjustment mechanism 
I  share  Kregel’s  (2010)  view  that  “the  basic  problem  [with  the  current  IMS]  is  not  the 
particular  national  liability  that  serves  as  the  international  currency,  but  the  failure  of  an 
efficient adjustment mechanism for global imbalances”. 
Indeed,  one  needs  only  to  look  at  the  problem  of  global  payment  imbalances  to  find 
weaknesses  of  the  current  IMS,  or  rather  “non-system”.  The  build  up  of  increasingly  large 
current account surpluses in some export-oriented economies, which rely on a growth-model 
based  on  over-savings,  was,  in  conjunction  with  accumulating  deficits  in  a  number  of 
consumption-driven economies, a major source of concern in the years which preceded the 
global financial crisis. Such imbalances were coupled with “twin gluts” in global liquidity and 
planned savings which led to historically low risk premia – the main symptom that systemic 
risk was escalating in the presence of easy finance accommodating complacent borrowers. 
Even the global financial crisis and the policy responses have reduced the imbalances only 
partly  and  temporarily  over  the  most  recent  years.  The  fact  that  these  imbalances  have 
persisted for so long exposes a key weakness of the system, namely the inadequacy of the 
adjustment  mechanisms.  Let  me  explain  this  in  more  detail  by  looking  at  the  various 
stakeholders:  
National authorities in deficit and surplus countries had little incentives to depart from their 
growth  model  and  policy  course.  Indeed,  prior to  the  crisis  the  economies  with  the  largest 
external imbalances were often outperforming their peers in terms of GDP growth: the larger 
the imbalance, the higher was the growth rate over the short run. Moreover, the deficit and 
surplus countries, rather than exerting policy discipline on each other, in fact accommodated 
the other in the pursuit of their respective growth models (see Dooley et al. 2003).  
Market discipline also proved partly unreliable for a number of reasons.  
Firstly, markets frequently do not function in line with fundamentals as expected, leading to 
mispricing and undue volatility in, for example, exchange rates and credit risk premia. This 
may be explained in part by factors such as herding behaviour, but also the lack of a shared 
view on the relevant fundamentals.  
Secondly,  market  behaviour  has  also  been  constrained  by  structural  factors  and  policy 
regimes. On the deficit side, the fact that the United States provides the deepest and most 
liquid  financial  market  –  and  issues  the  dominant  reserve  currency  –  provides  it  with  an 
unparalleled platform to offer “safe” debt instruments. The insatiable demand for such debt 
instruments  puts  strong  pressure  on  the  US  financial  system  and  its  incentives  (Caballero 
2009).  At  the  same  time,  the  US  derives  its  “exorbitant  privilege”  from  this  situation.  The 
demand for US assets constrains the growth in credit and exchange rate risk premia charged 
by markets on rising US debt. This effectively limits the increase in external borrowing costs, 
thus removing an incentive to curb borrowing. On the surplus side, the semi-fixed exchange 
rate regimes and the semi-closed capital account of some major surplus countries prevent 
markets  from  exerting  excessive  pressure  on  capital  flows  or  the  exchange  rate  of  such 
countries.  
Thirdly,  accommodated  by  a  trend  towards  self-regulation,  financial  markets  encouraged 
rather  than  tamed  excessive  borrowing.  Income  constraints  on  debt  accumulation  were 
circumvented  through  innovative  debt  instruments,  which  were  insufficiently  checked  by 
quality  credit  analysis  and  internal  controls.  Moreover,  in  the  search  for  yield  and 
diversification, capital flows to emerging markets and “carry trade economies” have surged, 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
prompting, in certain cases, the imposition of capital controls to limit the potentially disruptive 
influences of both excess inflows and their reversals.  
The international community has a role to play in exerting pressure on countries to adjust, 
primarily  the  International  Monetary  Fund  (IMF)  and  the  G20.  Although  helpful  policy 
recommendations  have  been  put  forward  at  the  global  level,  the  traction  gained  by  the 
international community has often not been as strong as it needed to be. The IMF, to some 
extent, has been hampered in its efforts to ensure the stability of the IMS. The existing rules 
were  designed  for  the  pre-globalisation  era  and  the  enforcement  mechanisms  are  not 
sufficiently effective.  
Regarding  the  rules,  these  were  agreed  in  an  era  of  fixed  exchange  rates,  closed  capital 
accounts  and  highly  regulated  financial  markets  when  the  financial  sector  was  the 
handmaiden of the real economy. This was well before the widespread liberalisation of trade, 
financial markets and capital accounts that defines globalisation. For example, under the IMF 
Articles of Agreement, members are free to pursue capital account regimes and exchange 
rate regimes of their choice, with only limited constraints.  
The  outcome  is  a  global  constellation  of  exchange  rate  regimes  that  does  not  ensure 
sustained economic, financial and monetary stability. The peg of currencies of a number of 
emerging economies to the US dollar creates a symbiosis that fosters ever larger imbalances 
and hence risks of disorderly adjustment. Particularly when one of the emerging economies 
is very large, the pegging of its currency to another risks limiting the flexibility of adjustment 
in both, which in turn threatens to distort the exchange rate of other major currency pairs, 
with implications for global economic performance.  
Turning  to  the  enforcement  mechanisms,  surveillance  and  peer  policy  review  have  an 
essential  role  to  play  in  identifying  risks  and  encouraging  remedial  policy  action.  But 
international pressure – including via the IMF and the G20 – still suffers from lack of grip. 
Even when risks are correctly identified and policy recommendations are appropriate, as it 
happened  during  IMF’s  multilateral  consultations  in  2006–07,  there  is  no  guarantee  of 
necessary  policy  adjustments  being  made.  This  remains  the  weakest  aspect  of  the 
surveillance process. 
The crisis has led to increased efforts to improve surveillance, e.g. with the transformation of 
the  Financial  Stability  Forum  into  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  with  an  enlarged 
membership and broadened mandate, changes inside the IMF, and the launching of the G20 
Framework  for  Strong,  Sustainable,  and  Balanced  Growth  and  its  Mutual  Assessment 
Process. There is a general recognition of the need to strengthen the multilateral angle of 
surveillance, to better encompass interlinkages and spillover effects, and to better integrate 
macroeconomic and financial sector.  
More  work  needs  to  be  done,  however,  to  further  strengthen  the  effectiveness  of 
surveillance. There is no widespread consensus yet on how a country’s policies impact on 
other countries and – more importantly – no willingness of countries to submit themselves to 
closer scrutiny. By contrast, we can observe a lot of mutual finger-pointing, mainly between 
advanced and emerging economies, but to some extent also within the two groups. It follows 
that EMEs push for an inclusion of global liquidity and its drivers into multilateral surveillance, 
whereas advanced countries see a need for more scrutiny of reserve accumulation practices, 
exchange rate policies and capital controls. Against this background, it is also obvious that a 
lot of countries do not have any appetite to change the IMF’s Articles of Agreement to ratify a 
broadening and strengthening of surveillance.  
What can be done in such circumstances? I think that first of all we need to work even harder 
to achieve a better understanding of interlinkages and spillover effects. This implies the need 
for more and better analysis. The new pilot spillover reports that the IMF started  this year 
with  a  handful  of  systemically  important  countries  are  one  welcome  step  in  that  direction. 
Further  research  on  the  impact  of  policies  in  systemically  important  economies  on  global 
liquidity conditions and on capital flows will also help framing the discussions.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Going  forward,  better  awareness,  a  certain  spirit  of  multilateralism  and,  last  but  not  least, 
improved  mechanisms  to  foster  traction  of  policy  advice  will  be  crucial  elements  to 
strengthen the effectiveness of surveillance in contributing to global stability.  
Evolution of global official liquidity 
Another area in which views are very much divided is the debate about the enhancement of 
official liquidity provision. One idea is to strength the so-called global financial safety net 
(GFSN).  It  would  be  used  in  those  exceptional  situations  when  countries  with  sound 
fundamentals  suffer  from  financial  market  disruptions  –  such  as  foreign  currency  liquidity 
shortages or sudden stops in capital inflows – caused by contagion from major (e.g. Lehman-
type) external shocks .  
Also here significant progress has been achieved over the last years: IMF resources have 
been tripled compared to 2008, access rights to IMF financing increased, and new facilities 
were created. But some believe that this is not enough, and argue with pertinent arguments, 
that further enhancing the global financial safety net would provide incentives for countries to 
decrease  their  reserve  holdings  (see  Fahri,  Gourinchas  and  Rey,  2011).  However,  as  I 
mentioned  earlier,  the  accumulation  of  large  stocks  of  reserves  is  not  only  based  on 
precautionary  motives.  Even  the  most  customer-friendly  IMF  facilities  might  not  lead 
countries to lower their reserves since they offer a higher level of comfort and convenience 
than  IMF  facilities.  At the  same  time,  countries  might  face  problems  in  actually using  their 
reserves  in  times  of  crisis,  given  that  markets  might  not  focus  on  the  absolute  level,  but 
rather on the relative changes.  
Further  reforms  of  the  Fund’s  toolkit  need  to  be  based  on  a  thorough  assessment  of  the 
experience  with  the  existing  tools  and  the  resource  implications  further  insurance-type 
facilities would have. The call for increased Fund resources, which is recently being voiced 
again, has also to be assessed carefully in light of existing and potential demand for Fund 
support.  Concerning  another  SDR  allocation,  one  should  consider  that  during  the  recent 
crisis only a very small amount of SDRs allocated in 2009 has actually been converted into 
usable currencies.  
What would seem to be justified is to foresee established mechanisms to provide liquidity in 
times of financial crises when private liquidity suddenly disappears. In this context there have 
been  also  calls  on  central  banks  to  establish  a  permanent  scheme  of  swap  lines  to  help 
countries in times of systemic stress. However, while central banks will certainly continue to 
assume  their  responsibilities  in  times  of  distress,  they  cannot  commit  ex-ante  to  any 
significant  provision  of  liquidity  as  this  could  interfere  with  their  mandate  and  create  moral 
hazard.  
Concluding remarks: is this enough? 
Will  the  changes  in  the  IMS  which,  based  on  current  information,  we  are  likely  to  witness 
over  the  next  ten-fifteen  years  be  sufficient  to  make  it  resilient  and  sustainable?  I  am 
certainly not among those who consider that this is the case. But then, what further changes 
are indispensable? The answer to this question depends upon the longer-term vision. If we 
are  really  heading  towards  a  multi-polar  system,  this  may  well  set  stronger  incentives  for 
policy discipline, since the exorbitant privilege will be more widely shared.  
But will the road towards the new multi-polar system be smooth or very bumpy? Well, a lot 
will depend on the path of further financial market development, capital account liberalisation 
and  exchange  rate  flexibility  in  EMEs,  since  this  will  progressively  reduce  the  demand  for 
safe debt instruments issued by advanced economies. It will also allow a better channelling 
of domestic credit to investment and consumption, which in turn will help to promote growth 
driven by domestic demand. And a lot will obviously also depend on the ability of advanced 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
economies,  starting  with  the  euro  area,  to  learn  the  appropriate  lessons  from  the  current 
sovereign  debt  and  banking  crisis.  The  speed  and  scope  of  this  process  will  depend  on 
decisions of policy makers and market participants in the various parts of this world. If this 
whole process will be resolute and gradual at the same time, it should allow for an orderly 
transition towards a multi-polar IMS.  
Another  question  is  whether  the  new  IMS  would  be  steady  in  nature  or  whether  a  new 
hegemon would emerge possibly to accomplish the “hegemonic stability theory” promoted by 
Kindleberger (Kindleberger, 1970). The answer will, again, depend predominantly on policy-
makers. It remains to be seen whether the currency competitors of such a multi-polar world 
will be of relatively close weight, both in economic and financial terms, but also with respect 
to the political and governance factors discussed before when considering the preconditions 
for a currency to become a major international currency.  
As regards the necessary changes to international cooperation, we will need to see a greater 
awareness among global partners about their interlinkages and the ensuing responsibilities 
to ensure the stability of the whole system. I am convinced that, without a minimum spirit of 
multilateralism  and  a  minimum  degree  of  cooperation,  no  future  IMS  will  remain  stable  for 
long. It is to be hoped that countries, especially those with systemic relevance, understand 
that  it  is  in  their  best  self-interest  to  consider  externalities  and  cooperate.  But  such 
“enlightenment” alone will not be sufficient to ensure stability. If the IMS as such does not 
deliver  the  right  incentives,  the  international  community  will  have  to  eventually  agree  on 
enhanced  adjustment  mechanisms,  e.g. 
traction  of  policy 
recommendations.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  we  do  not  need  another  global  crisis  to  instil  the 
necessary incentives.  
in  order 
foster 
the 
to 
the  Triffin 
reform  proposals,  marking 
References 
Angeloni,  Bénassy-Quéré,  Carton,  Darvas,  Destais,  Pisani-Ferry,  Sapir  and  Vallée  (2011): 
“Global currencies for tomorrow: A European perspective”, Bruegel Blueprint Series, vol. XIII. 
Angeloni,  I  and  Sapir,  A.  (2011),  The  international  monetary  system  is  changing:  What 
opportunities for Europe?, paper for Bruegel-PIIE Conference The Transatlantic Relationship 
in an Era of Growing Multipolarity, Berlin, 27 September 2010. 
Bini  Smaghi,  L.  (2011):  “The  Triffin  dilemma  revisited”,  speech  at  the  Conference  on  the 
the 
International  Monetary  System:  sustainability  and 
International  Foundation,  Brussels, 
100th anniversary  of  Robert  Triffin; 
3 October 2011.  
Caballero,  R.  (2009),  “The  ‘Other’  Imbalance  and  the  Financial  Crisis”,  paper  for  the 
Baffi Lecture delivered at the Banca d’Italia, 10 December. 
Camdessus,  M.  (1999),  “International  Financial  and  Monetary  Stability:  A  Global  Public 
Good?”,  remarks  at  the  IMF/Research  Conference  entitled  “Key  Issues  in  Reform  of  the 
International Monetary and Financial System”, Washington, D.C., 28 May. 
Dorrucci,  E.  and  McKay,  J.  (2011),  The  International  Monetary  System  after  the  Financial 
Crisis, Occasional Paper Series, No 123, ECB, Frankfurt am Mai, February. 
Dooley,  M.P.,  Folkerts-Landau,  D.  and  Garber,  P.  (2003),  “An  essay  on  the  revived 
Bretton Woods  System”,  NBER  Working  Papers,  No  9971,  National  Bureau  of  Economic 
Research, September. 
Eichengreen,  B.  (2010)  “Exchange  rate  regimes  and  capital  mobility:  how  much  of  the 
Swoboda  thesis  survives?”  in  Charles  Wyplosz  (ed)  “The  New  International  Monetary 
System” Routledge. 
Eichengreen, B. (2011), Exorbitant Privilege – The Decline of the Dollar and the Future of the 
International Monetary System, Oxford University Press, January. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Eichengreen  (1987),  “Hegemonic  Stability  Theories  of  the  International  Monetary  System”, 
NBER Working Papers, No 2193, National Bureau of Economic Research, March. 
Farhi,  E.,  Gourinchas,  P-O  and  Rey,  H.  (2011)  “Reforming  the  International  Monetary 
System” CEPR 
Kindleberger, C. (1970): “Power and Money. The Economics of International Politics and the 
Politics of International Economics”, Basic Books, New York. 
Kregel,  J.  (2010),  “An  Alternative  Perspective  on  Global  Imbalances  and  International 
Reserve Currencies” – Economic Public Policy Brief Archive, Levy Economics Institute  
McKinnon,  Ronald  (1994)  Discussion  of  Peter  Kenen  “Floating  exchange  rate  regimes 
reconsidered” in Peter B. Kenen et al (ed) “The International Monetary System” Cambridge 
University Press, page 165 
Obstfeld, Maurice (2011) “International liquidity: the fiscal dimension” Keynote speech at the 
Bank  of  Japan,  Institute  of  Monetary  and  Economic  Studies,  International  Conference, 
Tokyo, June 2–3, 2011. 
Triffin, R. (1960): “Gold and the dollar crisis”, Yale University Press, New Haven. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
