Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech by Mr Mervyn King, Governor of the Bank of England, to the Institute of Directors, 
St George’s Hall, Liverpool, 18 October 2011. 
 Mr Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Surrounded  by  the  magnificent  architecture  of  St  George’s  Hall,  we  are  reminded  of  the 
benefits  and  the  costs  of  exposure  to  the  world  economy.  Built  at  the  peak  of  Liverpool’s 
mercantile  fortunes,  the  Hall,  and  the  other  magnificent  buildings  of  the  cultural  quarter, 
exhibit the prosperity derived from openness to trade. Indeed, tonight is the anniversary of a 
grand banquet held here on 18th October 1860 to celebrate the opening of the public library 
and museum building that stands opposite. Its construction had been financed by the guest 
of honour at the banquet that evening, William Brown, whose statue stands in the Hall today. 
Brown had profited from transatlantic trade both as a merchant and by establishing a bank 
which  financed  trade  –  at  the  time  a  risky  business.  In  those  days,  finance  and  trade 
supported  each  other,  and  the  city  prospered.  But  the  subsequent  history  of  St  George’s 
Hall, which fell into neglect in the last century, illustrates Liverpool’s vulnerability to changes 
in the rest of the world.  
The British economy too has enjoyed the benefits of globalisation. Now we are seeing some 
of  the  costs,  as  they  play  out  in  a  global  financial  crisis.  As  a  country,  we  are  trying  to 
rebalance our economy at a time when a global slowdown, and concerns about the solvency 
of European banks and sovereigns, threaten recovery here in the United Kingdom.  
Two  weeks  ago,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC)  decided  to  resume  its  asset 
purchase programme and create new money. Before I set out the reasons for that decision, I 
want to explain why the global nature of the crisis means that monetary and fiscal policy in 
the  United  Kingdom  can  only  do  so  much.  Our  fate  rests  to  a  considerable  extent  on  the 
policies pursued by our trading partners. That is why the Chancellor and I put such weight on 
this interdependence among the major economies at last weekend’s G20 Meetings in Paris. 
Countries  have  responsibilities  to  each  other,  and  we  need  to  work  with  our  partners 
overseas to find a solution to present problems.  
Four  years  into  the  crisis  it  is  surely  time  to  accept  that  the  underlying  problem  is  one  of 
solvency not liquidity – solvency of banks and solvency of countries. Of course, the provision 
of additional liquidity support to countries or institutions in trouble can buy valuable time. But 
that time will prove valuable only if it is used to tackle the underlying problem.  
After the crisis began, it took a year before governments in Europe and the United States 
were persuaded that the problems of their banking sectors resulted not from a shortage of 
liquidity – that was merely the symptom – but from massively over-leveraged balance sheets. 
Eventually,  in  October  2008,  banks  were  recapitalised,  albeit,  especially  on  the  Continent, 
inadequately so. But the underlying problems of excessive debt have not gone away. As a 
result, markets are now posing new questions about the solvency of banks, and indeed of 
governments themselves.  
What were the causes of the unsustainable build-up of debt in Europe and elsewhere? They 
lay  in  the  continuing  imbalance  between  those  economies  running  large  current  account 
surpluses  and  those  running  large  current  account  deficits.  Persistent  trade  surpluses  in 
some  countries  and  deficits  in  others  did  not  reflect  a  flow  of  capital  to  countries  with 
profitable investment opportunities, but to countries that borrowed to finance consumption or 
had lost competitiveness. The result was unsustainably high levels of consumption (whether 
public  or  private)  in  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom  and  a  range  of  other  advanced 
economies, and unsustainably low levels of consumption in China and other economies in 
Asia, and some advanced economies with persistent trade surpluses, such as Germany and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Japan.  The  burden  of  debt  will  go  on  rising  in  the  former  group  of  countries  until  these 
spending  patterns  adjust  and  the  latter  group  will  find  their  loans  eventually  repaid  in 
depreciated  currencies,  if  at  all.  Surplus  countries,  a  group  which  includes  three  of  the 
world’s  largest  four  economies,  share  a  major  responsibility  to  respond  to  our  present 
dilemma  by  expanding  domestic  demand.  By  importing  more  they  would  provide  deficit 
countries with the wherewithal to export and service debt repayments.  
When the crisis hit, the starting point was the need for a substantial rebalancing of demand 
and a repayment of debt. In the deficit economies, there was an inevitable tension between 
the short run need to stimulate demand to prevent rising unemployment and falling inflation, 
and the long run need to rebalance demand and reduce indebtedness. In January 2009, I 
described this as “the paradox of policy … almost any policy measure that is desirable now 
appears diametrically opposite to the direction in which we need to go in the long term”. The 
almost  intractable  challenge  facing  policy-makers  is  how  to  balance  those  short-run  and 
long-run considerations. There is a long journey ahead before the world economy returns to 
a sustainable equilibrium, involving rebalancing and a reduction of debt burdens. For the time 
being, a significant degree of policy stimulus is appropriate to support demand. But that will 
delay and exacerbate the size of the adjustment ultimately required. 
It  is  hard  to  imagine  a  solution  that  does  not  involve  actions  in  more  than  one  country.  In 
2008–09, it was easy to coordinate international action in the G20 economies. In the face of 
a collapse in world trade even faster than that in the 1930s, countries needed no persuasion 
of the necessity of policy stimulus. But it has proved much harder to form a consensus on 
how  to  tackle  the  underlying  problems.  So,  three  years  later,  the  imbalances  in  demand 
remain. Around the world, short-run stimulus packages of various kinds, and unsustainably 
low  interest  rates,  have  bought  time.  So  far  that  time  has  not  been  used  to  deal  with  the 
underlying  imbalances,  or  the  weaknesses  in  bank  and  sovereign  balance  sheets.  Four 
years  after  the  financial  crisis  began,  the  foreign  exchange  reserve  holdings  of  China  are 
substantially larger than at the onset of the crisis. Markets now realise that before the crisis 
banks were seriously undercapitalised and so react in a volatile way to any news about the 
health  of  the  banking  system.  And  the  indebtedness  of  governments  around  the  world  is 
certainly greater. Time is running out. 
So what is to be done? One way or another, domestic spending must be raised in the surplus 
countries and lowered in the deficit countries, relative to current trends. In the past, market-
determined exchange rates have played an important role in rebalancing world demand and 
trade. Exchange rates are the natural safety valve, which can limit the extent of imbalances 
in demand across countries. Governments in the G7 agreed that intervention in the currency 
markets  should  be  undertaken  only  when  there  was  a  collective  view  that  exchange  rates 
had become out of line with their longer run fundamental values. That reticence served us 
well.  But  over  the  past two  decades,  some  governments,  particularly  in  Asia  and the  euro 
area,  have  tried  to  fix  exchange  rates  without  putting  in  place  mechanisms  to  ensure  that 
competitiveness could be rebalanced by other means. That has contributed significantly to 
the problems facing us.  
It is crucial to the health of the world economy that we find ways of allowing competitiveness 
to  adjust  so  that  trade  imbalances,  and  hence  the  present  scale  of  indebtedness,  can  be 
reduced. Neither liquidity nor austerity are answers to the question of how to restore a loss of 
competitiveness.  
Dealing  with  these  structural  issues  will  take  time.  Meanwhile,  how  do  we  resolve  the 
immediate  crisis  of  confidence  in  some  banks  and  sovereigns?  Since  the  summer,  there 
have been renewed concerns about the adequacy of the capital of banks in the euro area to 
absorb likely future losses, thus jeopardising their ability to raise funds. Wholesale funding 
dried up for many banks over the summer, and share prices of European banks are around 
35%  lower  today  than  at  the  start  of  July.  A  transparent  recognition  of  losses  and  a 
substantial injection of additional capital are necessary to restore market confidence. On its 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
own,  however,  such  a policy  will  raise  difficult  political  questions  about  the  capacity  of  the 
weaker  sovereigns  to  pay  for  any  recapitalisation  of  their  banks.  Bank  and  sovereign 
solvency concerns are inextricably intertwined. In the end, the underlying solvency concerns 
require countries to adopt compatible policies so that they can credibly service their internal 
and external debts. 
What does this mean for our own economy? Our objective must be to steer the UK economy 
slowly  back  to  a  position  of  more  normal  interest  rates  and  lower  budget  deficits.  With  a 
lower level of sterling and a credible plan to reduce the fiscal deficit over the medium term, 
we were on track. But the problems in the euro area and the marked slowing in the world 
economy have lengthened the period over which a return to normality is likely.  
2011 has been the year of the reluctant recovery. Growth has disappointed, both here and 
abroad. Business and consumer confidence have fallen sharply, not only at home but also 
elsewhere  in  Europe  and  the  United  States.  And  the  level  of  world  trade  in  goods  has 
stagnated.  
A slowing of the world economy, especially in the euro area, is a threat to our strategy of 
rebalancing and recovery of the UK economy. Despite the more competitive level of sterling, 
the  recovery  in  our  trade  position  is  at  risk  of  stalling.  It  is  not  surprising,  therefore,  that 
although  unemployment  has  been  broadly  stable  over  the  past  two  years  at  around 
2½ million, a rate of about 8%, it has risen in recent months, especially among young people. 
And total output remains around 4½% below its peak three years ago.  
Despite  depressed  levels  of  activity,  inflation  has  been  well  above  our  2%  target.  This 
morning’s  confirmation  that  CPI  inflation  rose  to  5.2%  in  September  was  in  line  with  the 
expectations of the MPC at the time of our August Inflation Report. That is likely to be at, or 
close to, the peak, and we expect inflation now to start to fall back, as it did in the months 
following the peak in inflation in September 2008. Nevertheless, it will seem odd to many that 
at a time of high and rising inflation, the MPC has eased policy further. So let me explain why 
the  Committee  considered  it  necessary  two  weeks  ago  to  resume  its  programme  of  asset 
purchases.  
In contrast to headline inflation, domestically generated inflation remains subdued – and on 
some  measures  barely  above  zero.  Increases  in  energy  prices,  import  prices  and  VAT 
account  for  the  current  high  level  of  inflation.  Once  the  effect  of  these  temporary  factors 
begins to dissipate, inflation should fall back sharply early next year. A persistent margin of 
spare capacity in the economy, and the recent deterioration in demand prospects linked to 
the crisis in financial markets, will add to the downward pressure on inflation in the medium 
term. So it is the outlook for inflation, rather than its current rate, which explains the MPC’s 
decision to resume asset purchases. 
Asset purchases work by increasing the amount of money in the economy. When the Bank 
buys assets, the people who sell the assets to us receive money which can then be used to 
buy other assets. In turn, the sellers become buyers of other assets, and so on indefinitely as 
the  money  is  transferred  from  one  account  to  another.  The  prices  of  assets  that investors 
choose  to  buy  go  up,  raising  wealth  and  pushing  down  on  yields.  Those  yields  are  the 
opposite  side  of  the  coin  to  the  borrowing  costs  of  companies.  In  these  ways,  the  Bank’s 
purchases of assets increase demand in the economy.  
Some of you have asked why the MPC has focused largely on purchases of gilts, rather than 
securities  issued  by  companies.  The  answer  is  three-fold.  First,  gilts  are  the  only  asset 
available in sufficient quantity such that the Bank can rapidly inject large amounts of money 
into the economy – £75 billion in the present case. Second, we have bought, and continue to 
buy,  corporate  securities,  but  this was  designed  to  ensure  that  the  corporate  bond  market 
functioned normally with the Bank acting as a temporary market-maker in a dysfunctional but 
previously liquid market. We were able to achieve that objective without the expenditure of 
large sums of money – unnecessary given the size of the market. Third, the Bank should not 
take decisions that discriminate between different companies and sectors. There may well be 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
good  reasons  for  discriminating  in  some  circumstances  but  that  is  a  decision  properly 
reserved to elected politicians. By buying gilts we leave the private sector to decide in which 
directions the money we create should percolate through the economy.  
Any positive impact of asset purchases will benefit all companies, large and small, through its 
impact on overall demand. Our programme of gilt purchases has helped large companies to 
reduce  their  reliance  on  the  banking  system  and  obtain  finance  directly  from  equity  and 
corporate bond markets. In fact, the majority of Britain’s largest companies can borrow more 
cheaply in capital markets than the average of the largest six banks.  
Smaller and medium-sized companies (SMEs), however, are constrained to borrow through 
the banking system. And there is special concern about their ability to obtain credit – I share 
that concern based on my experience of meeting many such firms during visits to all parts of 
the United Kingdom and hearing reports from the Bank’s regional agents. We have made this 
point repeatedly at hearings of the Treasury Committee in Parliament. Over the past year the 
stock of SME borrowing has shrunk by around £5 billion or 5%. By far the most effective way 
of  helping  SMEs  quickly  would  be  to  provide  incentives  for  lending  by  existing  banks 
because  they  can  assess  credit  risk  in  a  way  that  no  other  institution  could  do  in  the 
immediate future. Bank and Treasury officials are working together on such ideas. In the end, 
however, the shape and parameters of any scheme will be, and properly so, determined by 
the Government. 
Let me sum up. From the very beginning of the global crisis there has been a reluctance by 
governments  to  face  up  to  the  underlying  solvency  problems  generated  by  apparently 
unending trade deficits with no mechanism, whether flexible exchange rates or some other 
means,  for  correcting  these  disequilibria.  Those  solvency  problems  have  shown  up  on 
country and bank balance sheets. The initial reaction has always been to provide liquidity: 
through central banks or an extension of official lending by governments. Providing liquidity 
to buy time to devise and put in place a coherent response to the underlying problem can be 
not  only  valuable  but  necessary.  But  liquidity  can  never  be  the  answer  in  itself.  And  if  the 
time  bought  is  not  used  then  the  size  of  the  debt  problem  becomes  larger  and  its  cost  is 
gradually transferred from private sector creditors to taxpayers. 
The main impediment to the strategy of rebalancing our economy is markedly slower growth 
in our major export markets, especially in the rest of Europe. That is why we are treading a 
fine line between stimulus to demand in the short run, and a rebalancing away from private 
and public consumption towards exports and import substitution in the longer run. Without 
monetary stimulus – low interest rates and large asset purchases – there is a risk that growth 
will  stall  and  inflation  fall  below  our  symmetric  2%  target.  But  easy  monetary  policy,  by 
bringing forward spending from the future to the present, means that the ultimate adjustment 
of borrowing and spending will be even greater. That is our dilemma, and that of other deficit 
countries.  The  best  way  to  escape  this  dilemma  would  be  higher  spending  by  the  surplus 
countries – to make possible rebalancing by the deficit countries – and supply-side reforms in 
the  deficit  countries  –  to  raise  expected  future  incomes  and  ease  the  burden  of  debt 
repayments. Each country can put itself in a position to rebalance, as we have done in the 
UK. But in the absence of rebalancing, globally and especially in the euro area, we could be 
facing a recovery that is not merely reluctant but recalcitrant. 
Just as St. George’s Hall was reconstructed to meet the needs of Liverpool in the twenty-first 
century,  so  the  international  financial  system  must  be  reconstructed  to  ensure  a  return  to 
prosperity.  We  can  be  optimistic  –  the  fundamentals  of  the  UK  economy  are  strong.  But 
without  a  rebalancing  of  spending  in  the  world  economy,  a  struggle  between  debtor  and 
creditor  countries  will  inflict  economic  pain  on  everyone.  We  must  use  the  gravity  of  the 
global crisis to provoke a bold response. We acted together in 2009; we can do so again.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
