Paul Tucker: Central counterparties – the agenda 
Speech by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor for Financial Stability at the Bank of England, 
at the European Commission Conference on “European Post Trading Landscape: The Road 
Ahead”, Brussels, 24 October 2011. 
 Thank  you very  much  for  inviting me  today.  The  map  for post-trade  infrastructure  is  being 
redrawn, here in the EU, in the US, and in Asia, under the policies of the G20 and Financial 
Stability Board. This renewed focus on the plumbing of the financial system is welcome to 
central bankers. 
I should like to  make just four points1. All starting from the  proposition that the safety and 
soundness of central counterparties (CCPs) is absolutely vital to preserving stability in global 
capital markets. 
1.  Organisational structure 
Some years ago, there was a debate about whether the authorities should favour “horizontal 
integration” or “vertical integration” of trading, clearing and settlement infrastructure. Events 
have taken their course, and vertically integrated groups – concretely, of exchanges owning 
clearing houses – have become commonplace. 
The  authorities  need  policies  to  address  this.  One  dimension  is  competition.  The 
Commission are focussed on that. 
In terms of financial stability – my own focus – it is vital that the risk manager in the CCP, 
which means the heart of the CCP, should have a clear and independent line to the group 
board,  so  that  they  cannot  be  lent  on  by  the  affiliated  exchange  to  reduce  or  shade  initial 
margin requirements or collateral terms or portfolio investment policies in order to generate 
more turnover. This will matter more than ever during a period in which there is likely to be 
more than one CCP clearing some markets.  
In the same spirit, the core risk management functions of CCPs should not be outsourced. 
Regulators  have  been  slow  to  embrace  this.  But  I  am  glad  to  say  that  it  does  get  some 
recognition in the EMIR text, perhaps not as unambiguously as is warranted in my view. 
Global CCPs and access 
2. 
The efficiencies and risk management advantages of multilateral netting across a variety of 
products  make  it  likely  that  the  world  will  have  a  few  global  CCPs.  There  must  be  broad 
access to these CCPs, provided always that that can be made consistent with maintaining 
the integrity of risk management (including default procedures). The benefits of putting over 
the counter (OTC) derivatives trading through CCPs cannot be confined to a few currencies 
or  markets.  That  is  not  what  the  G20  mandated;  and,  in  any  case,  it  would  not  be  in  the 
interests of global stability. 
Related to all this, the EU must ensure that requirements to clear through CCPs apply also to 
exchange-traded  derivatives  and  to  vital  cash  markets,  not  just  to  “standardized”  OTC 
derivatives. Whatever anyone says, there is really no excuse for where things currently stand 
on  this  in  Europe.  The  MIFID  II  package  provides  an  opportunity  to  correct  it  next  year. 
                                                 
1  Thanks for comments to Andy Haldane, Edwin Schooling-Latter, Anne Wetherilt, Graham Young and David 
Lawton (FSA). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Those who argue that the gap in the EU’s framework should persist are serious about private 
gain but, sadly, not about stability. The crisis that threatens to engulf us all illustrates why we 
should give no room to such sentiments.  
CCP default and resolution 
3. 
There is a big gap in the regimes for CCPs – what happens if they go bust? I can tell you the 
simple  answer:  mayhem.  As  bad  as,  conceivably  worse  than,  the  failure  of  large  and 
complex banks2.  
We  therefore  need  effective  resolution  regimes  for  CCPs  (and  other  financial  market 
infrastructure). The Financial Stability Board will drive this forward as part of our work on the 
resolution of SIFIs. (A comprehensive package on the resolution of banks and dealers will go 
to the G20 Leaders Summit shortly. If endorsed, and Finance Ministers have already given 
their  endorsement,  it  will  become  a  Standard  to  which  countries/jurisdictions  pledge  to 
abide.) The EU’s own work on resolution regimes has been a hugely positive input to this 
global process.  
As part of the FSB-led and co-ordinated effort, the central bank Committee on Payment and 
Settlement Systems and IOSCO are beginning to work on this area of resolution. They must 
make  a  clear  distinction  between  measures  to  procure,  on  the  one  hand,  Recovery  from 
distress  and,  on  the  other  hand,  Resolution.  Orderly  resolution  is  what  is  needed  when  a 
CCP  is  bankrupt,  when  we  all  need  somehow  to  avoid  the  chaos  that  follows  a  standard 
liquidation of assets and closing out of positions.  
The issue, always, is where do the losses go? The answer cannot be the taxpayer. In the 
banking  sphere,  the  answer,  broadly,  is  bond  holders  and  other  unsecured,  uninsured 
creditors.  In  the  CCP  sphere,  it  is  probably  the  clearing  members,  as  they  would  be  the 
principal creditors in an insolvent liquidation. The technical issue is how to achieve that in a 
way that minimises disruption and value destruction and enables essential CCP services to 
be  maintained.  This  is  a  key  agenda  item  going  forward.  It  will  involve  achieving  greater 
clarity  in  the  related  area  of  the  optimal  “waterfall”  of  margin,  default  fund  and  CCP  own-
capital resources in absorbing losses. 
Margin requirements and macroprudential policy 
4. 
Earlier  this  year,  US  Treasury  Secretary  Geithner  called  for  the  world’s  major  financial 
authorities  to  agree  minimum  initial  margin  requirements  for  uncleared  OTC  derivative 
contracts, on the grounds that we must avoid a race to the bottom and incentives that make it 
attractive to clear bilaterally rather than via a CCP. I agree.  
But,  looking  ahead,  we  must  surely  establish  a  system  that  can  extend  beyond  that  “first 
base”.  First,  we  need  policies  that  extend  across  markets.  If  we  apply  them  only  to  OTC 
contracts, exchange-traded contracts might be subject to different requirements. And if we 
applied such minima only to, say, futures, we could see the economic substance of futures 
synthesized via cash repo markets on looser terms. The same applies to other products and 
markets.  Generally,  we  should  take  care  to  avoid  regimes  that  give  market  participants 
incentives to chose between economically equivalent transactions and post-trade processing 
on the basis of different margin or haircut requirements.  
Secondly, we have to recognise that economic and financial conditions change – sometimes 
beyond our wildest dreams – so any minima set for one period may not be at all suitable for 
                                                 
2  See Tucker, P M W, “Clearing houses as system risk managers”, June 2011. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
another. We need, therefore, to be able to vary any such minima as threats to stability evolve 
(crudely, cyclically).  
You will recognise in this an echo of the plans for varying bank capital requirements. This is 
all part of an evolving macroprudential toolkit. As a contribution to that, EMIR should make 
explicit  provision  for  macroprudential  tools.  The  initial  text  did  not  do  so,  I  think  mainly 
because  macroprudential  thinking  has  been  advancing  as  the  crisis  has  evolved,  but  I 
understand that the Parliament’s text does take a step in this direction. It is not too late for 
Europe  to  lead  the  world  in  this  area  on  macroprudential  policy  generally,  by  providing  a 
framework for national regimes co-operating with ESRB and, where relevant, the ESAs. 
Thank you. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
