K C Chakrabarty: Financial inclusion and banks – issues and 
perspectives 
Address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the FICCI 
(Federation  of  Indian  Chambers  of  Commerce  &  Industry)  –  UNDP  (The  United  Nations 
Development  Programme)  Seminar  on  “Financial  Inclusion:  Partnership  between  Banks, 
MFIs and Communities”, New Delhi, 14 October 2011. 
 Assistance provided by Shri Bipin Nair in preparation of this address is gratefully acknowledged. 
Ms.  Naina  Lal  Kidwai,  Vice  President,  FICCI  and  Country  Head  HSBC  India  &  Director, 
HSBC Asia Pacific, Ms Meera Sanyal, Chairperson, FICCI’s Financial Inclusion Committee & 
Country  Executive  India,  The  Royal  Bank  of  Scotland  N.V.,  Ms  Caitlin  Wiesen,  Country 
Director,  UNDP,  Mr  Mathew  Titus,  Co-chair,  FICCI’s  Financial  Inclusion  Committee  & 
Executive Director, Sa-Dhan, Ms Jyoti Vij, Assistant Secretary General, FICCI, members of 
the print and electronic media, ladies and gentlemen. It is indeed a pleasure to be present 
here  today  to  address  this  gathering  on  the  bankers’  role  in  promoting  financial  inclusion, 
their achievements, and the key issues and challenges being faced by them. 
Role of FICCI and UNDP 
As  you  are  all  aware,  financial  inclusion  is  a  mammoth  task  and  it  cannot  be  achieved 
without  the  active  collaboration  of  all  stakeholders.  It  is  in  this  context  that  this  particular 
seminar  organised  by  Federation  of  Indian  Chambers  of  Commerce  and  Industry  (FICCI), 
which is an apex industry association and brings a large number of stakeholders under its 
fold,  and  United  Nations  Development  Programme  (UNDP),  which  is  at  the  centre  of  the 
UN’s  efforts  to  reduce  global  poverty,  assumes  significance.  FICCI  has  been  playing  a 
leading role in policy debates touching social, economic and political issues and I believe that 
corporates  have  a  great  role  to  play  in  furthering  financial  inclusion.  It  is  in  their  interest. 
UNDP, as I am aware, has always been a solution-oriented, knowledge-based development 
organization,  supporting  various  countries  to  reach  their  development  objectives  and 
internationally agreed goals. The strength of UNDP is that it partners with people at all levels 
of society to help build nations as also helps build capacities for sustained development and 
to  meet  the  emerging  developmental  needs.  It  also  brings  in  global  perspective  which  is 
much  needed.  Within  the  thematic  area  of  poverty  reduction,  UNDP  has  also  associated 
itself  with  state  governments  to  facilitate  the  design  and  implementation  of  pro-poor  and 
inclusive  livelihood  promotion  strategies  with  focus  on  excluded  groups  such  as  women, 
Schedule Castes (SCs), Scheduled Tribes (STs), Minorities, below-poverty line and migrant 
households  and  involuntarily  displaced  people.  It  is  indeed  an  opportune  time  for  FICCI-
UNDP to release the paper on “A study on the progress of Financial Inclusion in India” 
which aims to analyze the role played by banks in creating Financial Inclusion and the future 
strategy they need to adopt to make further progress. 
The important objectives under Financial Inclusion were aptly deliberated by the Committee 
on Financial Inclusion and the Committee on Financial Sector Reforms headed by respected 
Dr. Rangarajan and Dr. Raghuram Rajan. These reports have spelt out the imperative need 
to modify the credit and financial services delivery system to achieve greater inclusion. The 
full implementation of the recommendations made in these Reports will definitely go a long 
way  to  modify  particularly  the  credit  delivery  system  of  the  banks  and  other  related 
institutions to meet the credit requirements of marginal and sub-marginal farmers in the rural 
areas in a fuller measure. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
National focus on inclusive growth 
Today, there is a national as well as global focus on inclusive growth. The Financial Stability 
and Development Council (FSDC) headed by the Finance Minister is mandated to focus on 
financial inclusion and financial literacy. All financial sector regulators including the Reserve 
Bank  of  India  are  committed  to  the  mission.  And,  very  publicly,  so  are  banks  and  other 
financial  sector  entities.  If  we  are  advocating  any  kind  of  stability  whether  financial, 
economic,  political  or  social  and  inclusive  growth  with  stability,  it  is  not  possible  to  attain 
these  goals  without  achieving  financial  inclusion.  Financial  inclusion  promotes  thrift  and 
develops culture of saving, improves access to credit both entrepreneurial and emergency 
and also enables efficient payment mechanism, thus strengthening the resource base of the 
financial institution which benefits the economy as resources become available for efficient 
payment  mechanism  and  allocation.  Empirical  evidence  shows  that  countries  with  large 
proportion of population excluded from the formal financial system also show higher poverty 
ratios and higher inequality. Thus, financial inclusion is no longer a policy choice today but a 
policy compulsion. And, banking is a key driver for financial inclusion/inclusive growth. 
Role of banks 
But, it is well recognized that there are supply side and demand side factors driving inclusive 
growth.  Banks  and  other  financial  services  players  are  largely  expected  to  mitigate  the 
supply  side  processes  that  prevent  poor  and  disadvantaged  social  groups  from  gaining 
access to the financial system. Access to financial products is constrained by several factors 
which  include  lack  of  awareness  about  the  financial  products,  unaffordable  products,  high 
transaction costs and products which are inconvenient, inflexible, not customized and of low 
quality. However, we must bear in mind that apart from the supply side factors, demand side 
factors  such  as  lower  income  and  /or  asset  holdings  also  have  a  significant  bearing  on 
inclusive growth. Owing to difficulties in accessing formal sources of credit, poor individuals 
and small and micro enterprises usually rely on their personal savings and internal sources 
or  take  recourse  to  informal  sources  to  invest  in  health,  education,  housing  and 
entrepreneurial  activities  to  make  use  of  growth  opportunities.  The  mainstream  financial 
institutions like banks have an important role to play in overcoming this constraint, not as a 
social obligation, but as pure business proposition. 
Financial inclusion – a global policy priority 
The importance of an inclusive financial system is widely recognized in the policy circles, not 
only in India, but has become a policy priority in many countries. Several countries across 
the  globe  now  look  at  financial  inclusion  as  the  means  of  a  more  comprehensive  growth, 
wherein each citizen of the country is able to use their earning as a financial resource that 
they can put to work to improve their future financial status, adding to the nation’s progress. 
In advanced markets, it is mostly a demand side issue. Initiatives for financial inclusion have 
come from the financial regulators, the governments and the banking industry. The banking 
sector has taken a lead role in promoting financial inclusion. Legislative measures have been 
initiated in some countries. For example, in the United States, the Community Reinvestment 
Act  (1997)  requires  banks  to  offer  credit  throughout  their  entire  area  of  operation  and 
prohibits  them  from  targeting  only  the  rich  neighborhood.  In  France,  the  law  on  exclusion 
(1998)  emphasizes  an  individual’s  right  to  have  a  bank  account.  The  German  Bankers’ 
Association introduced a voluntary code in 1996 providing for an “everyman” current banking 
account that facilitates basic banking transactions. In South Africa, a low cost bank account 
called “Mzansi” was launched for financially excluded people in 2004 by the South African 
Banking  Association.  In  the  United  Kingdom,  a  “Financial  Inclusion  Task  Force”  was 
constituted  by  the  government  in  2005  in  order  to  monitor  the  development  of  financial 
inclusion. The “Principles for Innovative Financial Inclusion” serve as a guide for policy and 
regulatory approaches with the objectives of fostering safe and sound adoption of innovative, 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
adequate, low-cost financial delivery models, helping provide conditions for fair competition 
and a framework of incentives for the various bank, insurance, and non-bank actors involved 
and delivery of the full range of affordable and quality financial services. 
Definition of financial inclusion 
What is our definition of Financial Inclusion? Financial Inclusion is the process of ensuring 
access to appropriate financial products and services needed by all sections of the society in 
general and vulnerable groups such as weaker sections and low income groups in particular, 
at an affordable cost in a fair and transparent manner by regulated mainstream institutional 
players. It is in this context that I would like to point that MFIs/NBFCs/NGOs on their own 
would not be able to bring about financial inclusion as the range of financial products and 
services which we consider as the bare minimum to qualify as availability of banking services 
cannot  be  offered  by  MFIs/NBFCs/NGOs.  But,  yes,  they  have  an  immense  and  extremely 
important role to play in furthering financial inclusion in the sense that they bring people and 
communities into the fold of the formal financial system. 
What it means to us? Objective 
Our broad objective is to take banking to all excluded sections of the society, rural and urban. 
Our attention was specifically attracted to provide banking services to all the 6 lakh villages 
and  meet  their  financial  needs  through  basic  financial  products  like  savings,  credit  and 
remittance  for  obvious  reasons.  Though,  the  focus  initially  was  to  cover  villages  with 
population  above  2000  by  March  2012,  banks  have  since  drawn  up  their  Board  approved 
Financial  Inclusion  Plans  to  put  in  place  a  roadmap  for  extending  banking  services  in  all 
villages in an integrated manner over a period of next 3 to 5 years. 
Is it the first time? 
It  is  not  that  efforts  have  not  been  made  in  the  past  to  promote  financial  inclusion.  The 
Nationalization of banks, Lead Bank Scheme, incorporation of Regional Rural Banks, Service 
Area Approach and formation of Self-Help Groups- all these were initiatives to take banking 
services to the masses. The brick and mortar infrastructure expanded; the number of bank 
branches  multiplied  ten-fold  –  from  8,000+  in  1969  when  the  first  set  of  banks  were 
nationalized to 80,000+ today. Despite this wide network of bank branches spread across the 
length  and  breadth  of  the  country,  banking  has  still  not  reached  a  large  section  of  the 
population. A number of rural households are still not covered by banks. They are deprived 
of basic banking services like a savings account or minimal credit facilities. The proportion of 
rural residents who lack access to bank accounts is nearly 40 per cent, and this rises to over 
three-fifths  in  the  eastern  and  north-eastern  regions  of  India.  The  major  barriers  cited  to 
expand  appropriate  services  to  poor  by  financial  service  providers  are  the  lack  of  reach, 
higher cost of transactions and time taken in providing those services. The existing business 
model does not pass the test of convenience, reliability, flexibility and continuity. 
So, what has changed now? 
It is not correct to surmise that banks were uninterested in increasing penetration. They were 
constrained by their capacity/ability as, till a few years ago, appropriate banking technology 
was not available. But, now, with the availability of suitable banking technology, the time has 
come when the Indian banking system can make and deliver on that promise. Quite clearly, 
the task to cover 1.2 billion population with banking services is gigantic and, hence, banks 
have  now  realized  that  technology  is  the  driving  force  for  achieving  this.  Harnessing  this 
power of technology for making the banking system more efficient for achieving the goals set 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
under financial inclusion is going to be a big opportunity as well as a bigger challenge for the 
banking  system.  We  should  also  understand  that  poor  people  are  bankable  and  there  is 
tremendous potential for business growth by providing banking services to them. What we 
need is an appropriate business and delivery model. 
Is financial inclusion a viable business model today? 
Contrary  to  common  perception,  financial  inclusion  is  a  potentially  viable  business 
proposition  because  of  the  huge  untapped  market  that  it  seeks  to  bring  into  the  fold  of 
banking  services.  Financial  inclusion,  prima  facie,  needs  to  be  viewed  as  “money  at  the 
bottom  of  the  pyramid”  and  business  models  should  be  so  designed  to  be  at  least  self-
supporting in the initial phase and profit-making in the long run. It is important to keep in mind 
that service provided should be at an affordable cost. It is also pertinent to note that providing 
subsidy does not necessarily lead to a better delivery mechanism. 
What RBI has done? Removed all regulatory roadblocks 
It  has  been  RBI’s  endeavour  to  remove  all  hurdles  in  the  way  of  its  regulated  entities  in 
achieving  financial  inclusion  objectives.  While  I  would  mention  a  couple  of  enabling  policy 
measures  undertaken  by  RBI  a  little  later,  I  would  first  like  to  highlight  certain  special 
characteristics of India’s financial inclusion model. 
 
RBI has adopted a bank-led model as its main plank for achieving the goals under 
financial inclusion. 
Due  to  the  constraints  involved  in  going  for  a  full-fledged  brick  &  mortar  branch 
model,  RBI  has  adopted  the  ICT  based  agent  bank  model  through  Business 
Correspondents for ensuring door step delivery of financial products and services. 
The  approach  adopted  has  been  technology  and  delivery  model  neutral,  whether 
through handheld devices, mobiles, mini ATMs, etc. 
We have endeavoured to deliver a minimum of four basic products and services, viz. 
a  savings  account  with  overdraft  facility,  a  remittance  product,  a  pure  savings 
product, preferably, variable recurring deposit, and an entrepreneurial credit product 
such as Kisan Credit Card (KCC) or General purpose Credit Card (GCC). Naturally, 
the front end devices must be able to transact all these four products and services. 
   RBI has undertaken a series of policy measures to make our unique model a success. Some 
of the important ones are: 
i. 
Relaxation on KYC norms: Know Your Customer (KYC) requirements for opening 
bank accounts were earlier relaxed for small accounts in August 2005, simplifying 
procedure  by  stipulating  that  introduction  by  an  account  holder  who  has  been 
subjected to full KYC drill would suffice for opening such accounts or the bank can 
take any evidence as to the identity and address of the customer to the satisfaction 
of the bank. During the year, it has been further relaxed to include job card issued 
by NREGA duly signed by an officer of the State Government or the letters issued 
by  the  Unique  Identification  Authority  of  India  containing  details  of  name,  address 
and AADHAAR number.  
Simplified branch authorisation: To address the issue of uneven spread of Bank 
branches,  since  December  2009,  domestic  scheduled  commercial  banks  are 
permitted to freely open branches in Tier 3 to Tier 6 centres with population of less 
than  50,000  under  general  permission,  subject  to  reporting.  In  the  North  Eastern 
States and Sikkim, domestic scheduled commercial banks can now open branches 
in  rural,  semi  urban  and  urban  centres  without  the  need  to  take  permission  from 
Reserve Bank in each case, subject to reporting.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
ii. 
4 
 iii. 
iv. 
v. 
vi. 
Pricing  has  been  made  free:  Banks  have  been  given  the  freedom  to  price  their 
advances.  
Liberalisation of Business Correspondents Model: In January 2006, the Reserve 
Bank  permitted  banks  to  engage  business  facilitator  and  business  correspondent 
(BC) as intermediaries for providing financial and banking services. The BC model 
allows banks to provide door step delivery of services especially “cash in – cash out” 
transactions at a location much closer to the rural population, thus addressing the 
last mile problem. The list of eligible individuals/entities who can be engaged as BCs 
is being enlarged from time to time. For-profit companies have also been allowed to 
be  engaged  as  BCs.  You  would  be  happy  to  know  that  as  on  March  31,  2011, 
domestic commercial banks have reported deploying 58,361 BCs, providing banking 
services in 76,081 villages.  
Opening of branches in unbanked rural centres: To further step up the opening 
of  branches  in  rural  areas  so  as  to  improve  banking  penetration  and  financial 
inclusion rapidly, the need for opening of more brick and mortar branches, besides 
the use of BCs, was felt. Accordingly, banks have been mandated in the Monetary 
Policy Statement – April 2011, to allocate at least 25 per cent of the total number of 
branches to be opened during a year in unbanked rural centres.  
Financial  Inclusion  Plan  for  Banks:  In  our  effort  to  achieve  sustained,  planned 
and  structured  financial  inclusion,  in  January  2010,  all  public  and  private  sector 
banks were advised to put in place a Board approved three year Financial Inclusion 
Plan (FIP) and submit the same to the Reserve Bank by March 2010. These banks 
prepared  and  submitted  their  FIPs  containing  targets  for  March  2011,  2012  and 
2013. These plans broadly include self determined targets in respect of rural brick 
and mortar branches to be opened; business correspondents (BC) to be employed; 
coverage of unbanked villages with population above 2000 as also other unbanked 
villages  with  population  below  2000  through  branches/BCs/other  modes;  no-frill 
accounts opened including through BC-ICT; Kisan Credit Cards (KCC) and General 
Credit Cards (GCC); and other specific products designed by them to cater to the 
financially  excluded  segments.  Banks  were  advised  to  integrate  Board  approved 
FIPs with their business plans and to include the criteria on financial inclusion as a 
parameter in the performance evaluation of their staff. The implementation of these 
plans is being closely monitored by the Reserve Bank.  
What has been done by banks so far? Snapshots from FIP 
A criticism that the bankers’ often face is that they are not doing enough or that they are not 
sincere  enough.  But  is  that  really  true?  Let  me  quote  a  couple  of  statistics  from  the 
consolidated  FIP  of  the  scheduled  commercial  banks  to  debunk  some  of  these  myths 
(Detailed statistics in Annex 1). 
i. 
Coverage  of  villages:  Banks  have,  up  to  June  2011,  opened  banking  outlets  in 
1.07  lakh  villages  up  from  just  54,258  as  on  March  2010.  Out  of  these, 
22,870 villages have been covered through brick & mortar branches, 84,274 through 
BC outlets and 460 through other modes like mobile vans, etc. 
Opening of No-frills accounts: Basic banking “no-frills” account, with “nil” or very 
low minimum balance requirement as well as no charges for not maintaining such 
minimum balance, were introduced as per RBI directive in 2005. As on June 2011, 
7.91 crore No-frills accounts have been opened by banks with outstanding balance 
of  Rs.5,944.73  crore.  These 
respectively,  were  4.93  crore  and 
Rs 4257.07 crore in March 2010.  
Small Overdrafts in No-frills accounts: Banks have been advised to provide small 
ODs  in  such  accounts.  Up  to  June  2011,  banks  had  provided  9.34  lakh  ODs 
figures, 
ii. 
iii. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
iv. 
v. 
amounting  to  Rs.37.42  crore.  The  figures,  respectively,  were  1.31  lakh  and 
Rs 8.34 crore in March 2010. 
General  Credit  Cards:  Banks  have  been  asked  to  consider  introduction  of  a 
General  Purpose  Credit  Card  (GCC)  facility  up  to  Rs.  25,000/-  at  their  rural  and 
semi-urban braches. The credit facility is in the nature of revolving credit entitling the 
holder to withdraw up to the limit sanctioned. Based on assessment of household 
cash  flows,  the  limits  are  sanctioned  without  insistence  on  security  or  purpose. 
Interest rate on the facility is completely deregulated. As on June 2011, banks had 
provided  credit  aggregating  Rs.2,356.25  crore  in  10.70  lakh  General  Credit  Card 
(GCC) accounts. 
Kisan Credit Cards: Kisan Credit Cards to small time farmers have been issued by 
banks. As on June 30, 2011, the total number of KCCs issued has been reported as 
202.89 lakh with a total amount outstanding to the tune of 1,36,122.32 crore. 
Now, these figures in themselves may not seem very impressive considering the gargantuan 
task that we have at hand. But if we look at the progress that has been achieved in the last 
one and a quarter years, and if we are able to scale up and sustain our efforts, I am quite 
hopeful that the targets set by the banks and our objective of achieving universal financial 
inclusion is attainable. But, it is not automatic and cannot be taken for granted. There are a 
number of issues and challenges that have to be surmounted.  
Way forward – future of financial inclusion 
i. 
One of the major challenges under Financial Inclusion has been addressing the last 
mile connectivity problem. For addressing this issue and for achieving the goals set, 
experts have recommended the Business Correspondent/Facilitator (BC/BF) model. 
Though the BC model may not be commercially viable at the initial stage due to high 
transaction costs for banks and customers, the appropriate use of technology can 
help  in  reducing  this.  The  need  is  to  develop  and  implement  scalable,  platform-
independent technology solutions which, if implemented on a large scale, will bring 
down the high cost of operation. Appropriate and effective technology, thus, holds 
the key for financial inclusion to take place on an accelerated scale. 
Banks  need  to  perfect  their  delivery  and  business  model.  A  number  of  different 
models  involving  handheld  devices  with  smart  cards,  mobiles,  mini  ATMs,  etc  are 
being  tried  out  and  it  is  necessary  that  they  are  integrated  with  the  backend  CBS 
system  for  scaling  up.  A  good  delivery  model  is  also  needed  and,  perhaps,  even 
more  so  if  there  is  a  glitch  and  customer  grievances  needs  to  be  resolved 
expeditiously.  Thus,  the  time  is  approaching  when  these  various  experiments  with 
different models are taken to their logical conclusion and banks start scaling up their 
implementation.  At  the  same  time,  banks  must  also  have  an  integrated  business 
model. These hold the key to the success and failure of the financial inclusion efforts.  
In addition to this, RBI has advised banks to focus more towards opening of Brick & 
Mortar branches in unbanked villages. These branches can be low cost intermediary 
simple structures comprising of minimum infrastructure for operating small customer 
transactions and supporting up to 8–10 BCs at a reasonable distance of 2–3 kms. 
This  will  lead  to  efficiency  in  cash  management,  documentation  and  redressal  of 
customer  grievances.  Such  an  approach  will  also  act  as  an  effective  supervisory 
mechanism  for  BC  operations.  Another  very  important  thing  is  that banks  have  to 
realise that for Business Correspondent (BC) model to succeed, the BCs, who are 
the first level of contact for customers, have to be compensated adequately so that 
they too see this as a business opportunity  
As  mentioned  earlier,  banks  should  strive  to  provide  a  minimum  of  four  basic 
products and, in addition, design new products tailored to income streams of poor 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
ii. 
iii. 
iv. 
6 
 borrowers and according to their needs and interests. Banks must be able to offer 
the entire suite of financial products and services to the poor clients at an attractive 
pricing. Though the cost of administering small ticket personal transactions is high, 
these can be brought down if banks effectively leverage ICT solutions. This can be 
supplemented  through  product  innovation  with  superior  cost  efficiency.  Mobile 
banking  has  tremendous  potential  and  the  benefits  of  m-commerce  need  to  be 
exploited. 
It is important that adequate infrastructure such as digital and physical connectivity, 
uninterrupted power supply, etc. are available.  
All  stakeholders  will  have  to  work  together  through  sound  and  purposeful 
collaborations  to  ensure  appropriate  ecosystem  development.  This  would  include 
government,  both  Central  and  State,  Regulators,  Financial  Institutions,  Industry 
Associations,  Technology  Players,  Corporates,  NGOs,  SHGs,  Civic  Society,  etc. 
Local and national level organizations have to ensure that these partnerships look at 
both commercial and social aspects to help achieve scale, sustainability and desired 
impact. This collaborative model will have to tackle exclusion by stimulating demand 
for  appropriate  financial  products,  services  and  advice  with  appropriate  delivery 
mechanism  and  by  ensuring  that  there  is  a  supply  of  appropriate  and  affordable 
services available to those that need them.  
Mindset, cultural and attitudinal changes at grass roots and cutting edge technology 
levels  of  branches  of  banks  are  needed  to  impart  organisational  resilience  and 
flexibility.  Banks  should  institute  systems  of  reward  and  recognition  for  personnel 
initiating, ideating, innovating and successfully executing new products and services 
in the rural areas. 
v. 
vi. 
vii. 
Conclusion 
These days, it is difficult for central  bankers like us to stop  talking about financial inclusion 
once we start, I would nevertheless restrain myself. To sum up, financial inclusion is the road 
which India needs to travel towards becoming a global player. An inclusive growth will act as a 
source of empowerment and allow people to participate more effectively in the economic and 
social  process.  Banks  that  have  global  ambitions  must  meet  local  aspirations.  Financial 
access  will  also  attract  global  market  players  to  our  country  that  will  result  in  increasing 
employment  and  business  opportunities.  As  we  have  all  recognized,  technology  is  a  great 
enabler and has to act as a ladder to achieve the ultimate goal of providing financial services 
to the financially excluded. A line of caution here is that in order to serve millions of our poor 
villagers, what we need is “Technology with a human touch”. Banks should, therefore, take 
extra care to ensure that the poor are not driven away from banking because the technology 
interface is unfriendly. This requires training the banks’ frontline staff and managers as well as 
Business  Correspondents  on  the  human  side  of  banking.  Sufficient  provisions  should  be  in 
built in the business model to take care of customer grievances. It can be summarized that the 
“The future lies with those who see the poor as their customers” as commerce for the 
poor  is  more  viable  than  the  rich.  In  this  task,  a  concerted  and  structured  effort  by  all 
stakeholders  is  necessary.  The  participants  of  this  seminar  should  deliberate  on  and 
crystallize the role of each stakeholder – what banks should do, what society should do, what 
MFIs should do, and what FICCI/Corporates should do. Being a global seminar as UNDP is 
also a co-organizer, it should also be used as an opportunity to share experiences of different 
countries. I wish the deliberations of this seminar a success and do hope that a contour for a 
meaningful partnership between banks, MFIs and communities emerge from it. From the RBI 
side, I would only like to assure you that we would have an open mind to any suggestions that 
you may have on any issue which you still perceive as a regulatory bottleneck. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
Annex 1 
 8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
References: 
1. 
Chakrabarty, K.C.(2011), “Financial Inclusion – A road India needs to travel”, Article 
published in www.livemint.com on Sep 21, 2011 
Chakrabarty, K.C.(2011), “Financial Inclusion”, Presentation at St. Xavier’s College, 
Mumbai on September 7, 2011 
Chakrabarty, K.C.(2010), “Inclusive Growth – Role of Financial Sector”, Address at 
the  National  Finance  Conclave  2010,  KIIT  University,  Bhubaneswar  on  November 
27,2010  
Chakrabarty,  K.C.(2010),  “Financial  Deepening  by  putting  Financial  Inclusion 
Campaign into Mission Mode”, Address at the 23rd Skoch Summit on 17 June 2010 
at Mumbai 
Chakrabarty, K.C.(2009), “Furthering Financial Inclusion through Financial Literacy 
and Credit Counselling”, Address at launch of Federal Ashwas Trust, Kochi, Kerala  
Chakrabarty, K.C.(2009), “Banking: Key Driver for Inclusive Growth”, Address at the 
Mint’s “Clarity Through Debate” series on August 10th, 2009 at Chennai  
Rangarajan, C. (2008), Report of the Committee on Financial Inclusion 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
