Ewart S Williams: Some reflections on the regional banking system 
Luncheon  address  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago,  at  the  Financial  Institutions  Conference  “General  Financial  Sector  Issues  and 
Policies”, Bridgetown, Barbados, 3 November 2011. 
 I would like to thank Governor Worrell for his invitation to address this Seminar. I would also 
like to congratulate the Central Bank of Barbados for organizing this Seminar which, based 
on  this  morning’s  proceedings  is  an  excellent  forum  for  the  exchange  of  views  and  for 
building trust between the Central Bank and the financial sector.  
Governor Worrell invited me to speak on whatever topic I wished. Accordingly, I think it is 
only fair I state at the onset that “the views expressed do not necessarily reflect those of 
my Host.” 
It’s  no  secret  that  the  last  few  years  have  been  a  difficult  time  for  the  financial  services 
industry all over the world. 
In the US, some four years after the financial system faced the greatest crisis in close to a 
century and after a significant official support, including bouts of quantitative easing, banks 
are still in the process of repairing their balance sheets (and remain very vulnerable). 
In  the  Eurozone,  sovereign  risks  have  spilled  over  to  the  banking  system  as  contagion 
spread from Greece to Ireland and Portugal and more recently to Spain, France and Italy. 
Many  European  banks  that  are  holding  risky  and  volatile  sovereign  debt  are  now  facing 
major difficulties. 
An  agreement  reached  among  EU  members  late  last  week  calls  for  banks  to  accept  a 
50 per cent principal haircut on Greek sovereign debt with EU Governments providing up to 
euro 100 billion in loans to help re-capitalize weak banks.  
You may have seen that yesterday a major financial institution had significant exposure to 
EU,  sovereign  debt  went  belly-up,  underscoring  the  close  links  between  the  US  and 
European banks and the vulnerability of US banks. 
And  then  there  is  the  “Occupy  Wall  Street”  movement  which  began  in  New  York  and  has 
since  spread  to  70  major  US  cities  as  well  as  throughout  Europe.  What  started  as  an 
expression of discontent with income inequality and corporate greed has now expanded into 
a  more  general  concern  about  all  the  ills  plaguing  the  US  economy  and  other  advanced 
economies.  Dissatisfaction  with  the  banking  industry  stands  at  the  heart  of  the  protests. 
Banking corporations are seen as being increasingly insensitive to the plight of the average 
customer and overly focused on their bottom line. 
Some  of  you  may  have  read  that  in  September,  Bank  of  America  decided  to  charge 
customers  US$5  per  month  to  make  purchases  via  debt  cards.  Viewed  as  a  source  of 
customer  irritation,  client  reaction  was  swift  and  decisive  with  large  numbers  of  customers 
moving their accounts to institutions with less onerous fee structures, such as credit unions. 
Fortunately, our regional banking system is in far better shape and enjoying a much 
greater degree of consumer trust – at least, we hope so. 
The  regional  banking  system  demonstrated  remarkable  resilience  to  the  international 
financial  crisis,  thanks  to  the  banks’  conservative  operating  policies  which  left  them  with 
limited, if any, exposure to the type of toxic assets that contaminated the balance sheets of 
the banking system of many of the developed countries. Also, the loan portfolios of our banks 
were  largely  funded  from  domestic  deposit  mobilization  with  little  exposure  to  wholesale 
financing from external sources. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
There  is  the  argument  in  some  quarters  that  the  international  financial  crisis  was  one  of 
several factors that contributed to the collapse of CL Financial and the Stanford Bank. While 
this may be true, the demise of these institutions was in the main self-inflicted. 
Several  macro-prudential  indicators  paint  a  fairly  robust  picture  of  the  regional  banking 
system. 
I  have  sought  to  show  these  indicators  in  comparison  with  those  of  the  advanced 
countries in a few slides. I am fully aware of the problems with inter-country comparisons, but 
I  believe  that  even  allowing  for  definitions  and  other  differences  the  data  provide  an 
interesting picture …… 
(i) 
Table 1 shows that the regional banking system is more than adequately capitalized. 
Banks in the region maintain capital adequacy ratios in a range of 15 to 20 per cent 
way above the statutory minimum of 8 per cent. In Trinidad and Tobago the average 
is 27 per cent. 
Table 2 presents indicators of the profitability of the regional banking sector. While 
profitability,  measured  both  by  return  on  assets  and  return  on  equity  has 
declined  somewhat  since  the  international  financial  crisis,  by  and  large,  the 
regional banking industry is still very profitable by international standards. The 
Trinidad and Tobago banks more so. According to the data Barbadian banks have 
faced a sharp decline in profitability, as measured by “return” on equity. 
(ii) 
A  recent  article  in  Latin  American  Markets  Monitor  predict  “tough  years  ahead”  for  the 
banking  system  in  Barbados  given  the  rising  level  of  non-performing  loans  and  the 
expected weak economic recovery. I don’t subscribe to an overly pessimistic outlook for the 
banking system in Barbados. Though I agree that there could be challenging times ahead. 
One of the factors behind the “weakening” of the regional profit picture is clearly the sharp 
increase in loan delinquency rates which is now apparent, throughout the regional banking 
system.  
As shown in Table 3, here in Barbados the loan delinquency rate has increased three-fold 
from around 3 ½ per cent to 10 ½ per cent of total loans. 
In  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  the  relative  increase  in  loan  delinquency  is  even  larger  –  from 
1 per cent in 2008 to over 6 per cent currently.  
The  non-performing  loan  ratio  has  also  risen  sharply  in  Jamaica  –  from  a  little  over 
2½ per cent to close to 8 per cent of total loans. 
And  while  we  don’t  have  a  consistent  series  for  the  ECCU,  the  2011  IMF  Staff  Report 
indicated that aggregate NPLs measured 9.6 per cent in June 2010, but were higher for 
the  indigenous  banks,  also  an  issue  in  the  ECCU  as  provisions  cover  less  than 
30 per cent of NPLs. ECCU banks were also heavily exposed to general government 
debt (to an extent of almost 30 per cent of regional GDP) concomitant with the rise in 
public sector debt and while some of these loans are not being serviced … they are not 
classified as non-performing. 
But  even  this  relatively  comfortable  macro-prudential  picture  begs  the  question  as  to 
whether our regional banking system should not be making a greater contribution to 
regional economic development. I think it should be and I also believe that over the next 
few years, if we are to enhance our economic viability, our banking system will need to be 
more innovative and even more supportive than it has been in the past, to our developmental 
efforts. 
As I noted, our Caribbean economies are still digging themselves out of the global crisis of 
2008 and unfortunately the recovery of the region is lagging behind that of other developing 
countries.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
According to the World Bank statistics, in 1980, the Caribbean’s average per capita income 
was  twice  as  high  as  the  average  for  developing  countries;  today  it  is  only  a  third  higher. 
Countries in the region have been growing at an average rate of 2 per cent per year while 
other  small  island  states  have  been  growing  at  an  average  rate  of  3.6  per  cent  per  year, 
roughly the average for the world economy. 
Unfortunately,  as  we  seek  to  reverse  this  trend  and  address  the  challenge  of  long-term 
viability, the region faces the reality that it has lost some comparative advantage at a 
time  when  the  global  economy  has  become  less  friendly.  The  following  examples  are 
worth noting: 
(i) 
First, the traditional preferences for bananas and sugar have ended but the region 
still finds itself unable to compete with lower-cost producers; 
Second, foreign aid flows to the region (with the exception of Haiti) have all but dried 
up and FDI has been declining; 
Third, while Caribbean tourism continues to be a viable brand, the region is facing 
stiffer competition from stay-at-home tourism in both the US and Europe and will 
experience even greater competitive pressures when Cuba is fully opened up (as it 
could in the not too distant future); and 
Fourth, the prospect of continued high unemployment in the US and the UK for the 
next  2–3  years  will  have  implications  for  workers’  remittances  which  are  very 
important to some Caribbean economies. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
To add to these exogenous factors, most countries in the region already have unsustainably 
high public debt burdens, which limit the extent to which government spending could lead the 
recovery. 
Some of my countrymen would like to argue that Trinidad and Tobago represents a 
variation of this theme, given our energy resources, our stronger public finances and our 
much lower public debt burden which gives us more room to manoeuvre. I warn them to be 
careful about pushing this argument too far since: 
(i) 
our  proven  energy  reserves  are  fast  dwindling  (though  some  experts  think  that 
prospects for new discoveries are high); 
our  fiscal  space  is  being  steadily  consumed,  the  more  the  private  sector  activity 
remains subdued and government steps in to lead the recovery; and 
three years of fiscal deficits and the CLF/CLICO bailout are taking a heavy toll on 
our public sector indebtedness.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
The slow recovery of the Caribbean economies is mainly due to the challenges being faced 
by the regions main export markets – the U.S and Europe. The conventional wisdom is that 
over the medium term, growth in these traditional markets would continue to lag behind the 
more  dynamic  emerging  market  economies  –  China,  India  and  Brazil.  According  to  this 
thesis  a  greater  diversification  of  regional  exports  of  goods  and  services  towards 
these new growth poles would make regional economies less vulnerable to the kinds 
of shocks experienced in the past few years. This, combined with the establishment of 
greater regional linkages would seem to be a desirable medium-term economic strategy for 
our regional economies. 
With  limited  fiscal  space  and  with  uncertain  prospects  for  foreign  direct  investment,  the 
private  sector  would  need  to  play  an  enhanced  role,  supported  by  innovative  financing 
mechanisms. And herein lies the challenge for our regional banking system. 
Available  data  suggests  that  compared  with  the  more  dynamic  emerging  market  countries 
banking services in our region are relatively high cost and inefficient.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
For  example,  total  operating  costs  for  banks  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  average  about 
6 per cent of total assets compared with under 2 per cent in the EU and 3 per cent in the US 
and about 4 per cent in most emerging markets. Yet, the rates of return in assets and equity 
for Trinidad and Tobago banks are considerably higher than international norms.  
The greater profitability of the local banks is related, inter alia, to the high interest margins. In 
Trinidad and Tobago the data show that these margins increased from 7 percentage points 
in  2004  to 10  percentage  points  in  2009,  before  declining  to  9  percentage  points  in  2010. 
Barbados has the lowest interest margins at around 6 ½ percentage points.  
The relatively high cost of banking in the region is certainly related to its small scale but also 
has to do with the limited exploitation of new technologies and the oligopolistic structure of 
our  banking  market  which  limits  competition,  allowing  banks  to  maintain  their  profitability 
without increasing efficiency.  
My banking colleagues always remind me that as Regulator I should be pleased when banks 
make profits instead of having to show losses, and I fully agree. Clearly the large margins 
are  excellent  for  banks’  bottom  line,  and  for  bank  shareholders  but  there  is  a  difference 
between private and social rates of return and particularly, going forward, where banks would 
be critical to the diversification effort, we need to seek a better balance between one and the 
other.  
In  the  long  term,  a  diversified  economy  that  facilitates  a  steady  and  sustainable  rate  of 
growth is better for banking than an economy of anemic growth or stagnation.  
Our banks have also been somewhat slow to embrace technology than perhaps they should. 
Thus,  for  example,  while  transactions  volumes  have  been  increasing,  electronic  banking 
remains rudimentary in Trinidad and Tobago and has not yet started to produce major cost 
savings  for  the  banks.  Our  investigations  suggest  that  the  still  limited  acceptance  of 
e-banking  has  to  do  with  concerns  about  security,  quality  of  internet  connection  and  a 
general lack of awareness about internet banking. A recent survey revealed that 75 per cent 
of those questioned were familiar with debit cards, while only 22 per cent were familiar with 
internet banking and 27 per cent with tele-banking. 
It is noticeable that not only individuals, but businesses and the public sector are still slow to 
adapt to the electronic environment. If I could cite another example from our experience. The 
Central Bank, in collaboration with the banking system, has invested considerable resources 
to establish electronic payments systems – the Real Time Gross Settlement System (RTGS), 
for  large  value  transactions,  and  the  Automated  Clearing  House  (ACH)  for  small 
transactions.  However,  the  transition  from  cheques  (and  other  paper-based  systems)  to 
electronic payments has been very slow even after having sought to advertise the advantage 
of using electronic payments and have imposed a $100 surcharge on large cheques. 
The  good  news  is  that  the  government  is  now  taking  steps  to  change  the  long  outdated 
legislation to facilitate electronic payments on its own account. Hopefully, this should set 
the example and provide the necessary incentive for the private sector to do likewise. 
A few words on banking and the consumer. 
It is widely agreed that the last decade or so has seen a rapid acceleration in the pace of 
product innovation in the financial services industry, due in large measure, to advances in 
information  technology.  The  challenge  posed  by  the  proliferation  of  new  financial  products 
and service delivery models, has prompted many jurisdictions to scale up financial education 
and consumer awareness and to increase emphasis on consumer protection. 
In the aftermath of the crisis, in addition to the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform, intended to 
guard against financial instability, the US Government enacted the Consumer Protection Act 
and created the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to ensure that markets for financial 
products  and  services  operated  in  a  fair,  transparent  and  competitive  manner  and  were 
subject to meaningful oversight. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
to  reach 
later  against 
they  are  allowed 
to  better  address  complaints  before 
In the UK, the Financial Services Authority has outlined a new consumer protection strategy 
aimed at (i) making retail financial services operate better for consumers; and (ii) facilitating 
the delivery of prompt and effective redress as needed. 
In  2003,  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and  Tobago,  in  collaboration  with  the  commercial 
banks  set  up  an  Office  of  the  Financial  Services  Ombudsman  to  deal  with  specific 
complaints  by  customers  against  banks  (and 
insurance  companies). 
Interestingly enough, perhaps the major impact of the Ombudsman’s office is the fact that it 
has  served  as  a  catalyst  for  commercial  banks to  upgrade  their  internal  dispute  resolution 
mechanisms 
the 
Ombudsman’s  office.  Because  of  this  success  the  number  of  complaints  against  banks 
currently  handled  by  the  Ombudsman’s  office  has  declined  from  a  high  of  156  in  2004  to 
about 20 in 2010. 
I should note that the Ombudsman’s terms of reference do not cover the fees, commissions 
and  interest  rates  charged  by  banks.  I  should  note  also  that  the  level  of  fees  and 
commissions remain a principal area of complaints and irritation for bank customers.  
Our bankers insist that fees and commissions charged by banks in Trinidad and Tobago are 
the lowest in the region. If that is correct the level of these fees in Barbados may also be a 
problem, as indeed they are in Jamaica. 
The Central Bank in 2007, also launched (in collaboration with the Central Government and 
the financial sector) a National Financial Literacy Programme (NFLP) aimed at increasing the 
level  of  financial  education  and  awareness  of  the  population.  The  programme  which  has 
been funded by donations from stakeholders has targeted primary and secondary schools; 
small and micro-businesses; employees in the workplace and community groups. Under the 
NFLP, the Central Bank has launched a national campaign entitled “Savings for Retirement” 
and is promoting retirement planning in many communities. 
The  issue  of  consumer protection  in  the  financial  services  industry  is,  surprisingly,  not  a 
contentious  one  with  some  bankers  insisting  on  the  free  play  of  market  forces  and 
competition. The fact is however, that particularly in small economies like ours, where sheer 
size constitutes a barrier to entry and where there are information asymmetries, there 
is a case for the Regulator to intervene to insist on adequate disclosure and to provide some 
level of protection for the most vulnerable groups. 
The  challenge  is  therefore  to  balance  regulation,  competition  and  financial  education  to 
achieve the twin objectives of financial stability and consumer protection.  
Let me say a few words on financial regulation in the region. 
It  is  a  fact  that  the  evolution  of  the  financial  sector  in  the  region  has  outpaced  that  of  the 
regulatory system. The gaps have been widest in the areas of insurance, credit unions and 
securities  regulations  but  we  are  also  lagging  in  respect  of  bank  supervision  which  is  our 
strongest forte.  
I  know  that  many  regional  jurisdictions  are  currently  in  the  process  of  upgrading  financial 
legislation. 
In Trinidad and Tobago we recently enacted a new Financial Institutions Act and are about to 
send a new Insurance Act to Parliament.  
As  regards  supervision  our  supervisory  authorities  have  taken  the  initiative  to  establish  a 
regional  Colleges  of  Regulators  to  more  effectively  supervise  the  international  banks  that 
operate in multiple territories. 
Our regulators are now working on a Regional Crisis Management Plan that would inter alia: 
(i) 
seek to enhance information-sharing among regulatory authorities; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
(ii) 
(iii) 
introduce a regime of macro-prudential indicators and a framework to be used as an 
early warning system for an emerging crisis; and 
formulate agreed strategies for the timely and orderly intervention into the affected 
institutions so as to limit the impact on the regional financial system. 
While  we  can  never  rule  out  another  regional  financial  crisis  we  can  certainly  be  more 
prepared than we were, when it happens again. 
Let me end where I started with reference to the movement – Occupy Wall Street – I think 
there  is  a  message  there  for  us  (and  I  think  that  public  reaction  to  the  Clico  crisis 
underscores this message). The message is that banks and other financial service industries 
have a responsibility to the country’s development and a sacred obligation to consumer well-
being, even as they keep an eye on their bottom line. 
I think that regional regulators need to listen to and be responsive to the voices of consumers 
of  financial  services  if  trust  in  the  regional  financial  system  is  to  be  maintained  and 
strengthened. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   7
 8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
