Thomas Jordan: Government debt and the independence of monetary 
policy 
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss National Bank, at the 21st Internationales Europa Forum Luzern, 8 November 2011. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 Monetary  policymakers  are  not  responsible  for  fiscal  policy,  yet  they  still  have  to  take  an 
active interest in government finances. The current financial and debt crisis reminds us that 
unsound  government  budgets  can  compromise  independent  monetary  policy  in  the  long 
term.  Excessive  debt  carries  the  risk  that  fiscal  policy  can  no  longer  be  effectively 
implemented.  It  is  therefore  no  surprise  that  this  responsibility  gets  passed  to  the  central 
bank, which is thought to be able to solve all manner of problems by simply printing more 
money. Faced with this situation, the central bank must – either under political pressure or by 
having to weigh up all the relevant factors – contribute to state financing or take quasi-fiscal 
policy measures. This can lead to a gradual loss of its effective independence and – in an 
extreme  case  –  to  it  losing  its  statutory  independence.  Only  an  independent  central  bank, 
however, can pursue its goal of ensuring price stability in a credible way. 
The debt situation in Switzerland is much better than that of other comparable countries. A 
major reason for this is the debt brake, which is extremely important for monetary policy and 
contributes  to  safeguarding  an  independent  monetary  policy.  By  pursuing  a  monetary  and 
fiscal  policy  oriented  towards  stability,  the  negative  impact  of  the  crisis  on  the  Swiss 
economy could be mitigated. As the events of the last two years have brought into focus, the 
monetary policy of a small open economy must also be able to rely on healthy fiscal policies 
in other countries. The debt crisis and the way the markets perceived it have considerably 
impaired  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  Switzerland.  To  fulfil  its  mandate,  the  Swiss 
National Bank has had to take far-reaching measures, such as setting a minimum exchange 
rate against the euro.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
