Vítor Constâncio: A European solution for crisis management and bank 
resolution 
Speech by Mr Vítor Constâncio, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at Sveriges 
Riksbank and ECB Conference on Bank Resolution, Stockholm, 14 November 2011. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  an  honour  for  me  to  speak  at  today’s  conference,  which  has  provided  a  stimulating 
debate on the challenging topic of bank recovery and resolution.  
The complexity of developing an effective framework for crisis management and resolution 
arises  from  the  objective  of  achieving  stability  in  increasingly  integrated  financial  systems, 
where  the  authorities  responsible  for  safeguarding  their  respective  stability  are  still 
responsible towards their respective taxpayers.  
This element of complexity has been taken into account in a number of policy initiatives and 
suggestions worldwide. Especially in the EU context, I wish to acknowledge the pivotal role 
played  by  Lars  Nyberg  in  this  domain.  His  long-time  devotion  to  the  design  and 
implementation  of  EU  crisis  management  arrangements,  coupled  with  his  qualities  as  a 
central banker, have made Lars a key policy-maker for crisis management in the EU.  
I would also like to thank Lars for his long-standing and fruitful collaboration with the ECB in 
this  field.  Principally  in  the  context  of  the  work  carried  out  by  the  Banking  Supervision 
Committee,  but  also  as  Chairman  of  the  EFC  High-Level  Working  Group  on  Crisis 
Management,  Lars  has  very  often  acted  as  a  catalyst  for  coordination  and  cooperation 
among national authorities and EU institutions.  
In my speech today, I would like to focus on the ongoing reforms aimed at enhancing the 
mechanisms with which authorities can handle problems in banks and reduce the potential 
impact of failures, should they occur. First, I will briefly recall the main shortcomings of the 
current resolution regimes. Second, I will consider the international, European and national 
initiatives  to  cope  with  the  challenges.  Finally,  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  the 
future path towards an optimal arrangement for cross-border resolution. 
The main shortcomings of the current frameworks 
During  the  current  crisis  we  have  seen  several  government-funded  bailouts  and  one  case 
where, in place of a bailout, a disorderly collapse occurred with widespread effects around 
the globe. There are multiple reasons why no better alternative between these two extreme 
solutions was available in these cases.  
First,  letting  financial  institutions  fail  was  often  not  a  feasible  alternative  from  a  legal 
perspective. In a majority of countries, only normal corporate insolvency proceedings were  
– and in many countries, still are – available to banks. However, limiting credit and liquidity 
losses  in  the  case  of  failure  may  not  be  effectively  ensured  by  using  these  mechanisms, 
because they were not designed to take into account the special nature of credit institutions.  
Second, even if a well-designed special bank resolution or insolvency regime is in place in a 
particular  country,  this  does  not  guarantee  that  cross-border  banks  can  also  be  dealt  with 
effectively.  A  cross-border  crisis  situation  involves  several  national  authorities,  of  course, 
each  having  different  mandates  regarding  when  and  how  they  can  intervene.  Even  more 
importantly,  these  authorities  may  have  different  objectives  to  pursue,  but  are  in  all  cases 
accountable to national taxpayers and depositors. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Third,  and  closely  linked  to  the  previous  two  points,  the  lack  of  private  financing 
arrangements also poses a significant barrier to effective resolution. Even the best resolution 
framework  needs  some  funds  to  finance  the  measures.  However,  as  long  as  strong  inter-
linkages  exist  between  supervisory  and  crisis  management  policies  on  the  one  hand  and 
fiscal policies on the other, cooperation will be hard to ensure among national authorities. As 
an alternative, there are many possible forms of private financing: one could use the funds of 
the deposit guarantee scheme, set up an ex ante resolution fund, or ensure that the creditors 
contribute  to  recapitalisation.  The  bottom  line  is  that  the  lack  of  such  a  means  ultimately 
undermines the effective implementation of resolution measures. 
Initiatives at the global level 
Work  at  the  international  level  to  address  these  issues  is  ongoing  and  there  are  some 
promising developments.  
The Financial Stability Board’s (FSB) new standard, “Key Attributes of Effective Resolution 
Regimes”,  adopted  by  the  G20,  is  a  point  of  reference  for  the  reform  of  our  national 
resolution regimes. These key attributes aim to enable authorities to resolve failing financial 
firms in an orderly manner and without exposing the taxpayer to the risk of loss. 
This  initiative  addresses  all  the  three  shortcomings  that  I  have  just  mentioned.  The  FSB 
standard contains a comprehensive list of tools and powers which every national resolution 
authority should have. This means that they aim to improve the national regimes, while at the 
same time providing for convergence.  
The  FSB  key  attributes  also  strengthen,  in  my  view,  the  group  resolution  concept,  by 
envisaging  that  recovery  and  resolution  plans  also  have  a  global  perspective.  Making  the 
national  supervisors  and  resolution  authorities  plan  together  how  the  problems  of  their 
groups could be handled would already be a big step forward. In that context, the authorities 
will  also  be asked  to  take  into  consideration  the  effects  of cross-border  contagion in  crisis 
scenarios  and  simultaneous  stress  situations  in  several  significant  markets.  I  would  also 
highlight the fact that authorities will also have the right to improve the resolvability of large 
and  complex  groups.  Let  me  recall  here  that  Lehman  Brothers  had  a  presence  in  some 
50 countries  and  comprised  almost  3000  legal  entities  before  the  crisis.  Simplifying  the 
structure  of  global  systemic  groups  could  well  be  extremely  useful  in  preparing  for  future 
crises, but authorities will clearly need to work very closely with one another to implement 
such modifications with great care. 
Should the group get into difficulties, the Crisis Management Groups could indeed be helpful 
in promoting cooperation. With such a forum in place, there would at least be a chance of 
authorities reaching a consensus on how to resolve a cross-border bank. Already today we 
are quite advanced in this regard, as there are 14 Crisis Management Groups for which EU 
authorities  act  as  coordinators.  These  groups  are  truly  global,  involving  authorities  of 
numerous countries, ranging from Japan to Mexico. 
The issue of private financing is also addressed. The FSB standard states that jurisdictions 
should have in place privately financed deposit insurance or resolution funds, or a funding 
mechanism  for  ex  post  recovery  from  the  industry  of  the  costs  of  providing  temporary 
financing to facilitate the resolution of a firm.  
Bail-in, a form of creditor-financed recapitalisation, is also an important element of the FSB 
standard.  I  consider  bail-in  as  an  apparently  promising  resolution  tool.  However,  in  many 
cases, in order to ensure the robust viability of the distressed bank after such a measure and 
to  limit  moral  hazard,  a  bail-in  mechanism  will  need  to  accompanied  by  a  set  of  other 
restructuring  (such  as  replacement  of  management)  or  resolution  measures  (like  asset 
transfers,  termination  stays  of  contracts,  segregation  of  troubled  assets,  bridge  banks, 
etc... ) . For cross-border institutions, international cooperation to elaborate resolution plans 
and  implement  them,  it  would  help  if  other  measures  would  be  adopted  like  enforceable 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
netting  agreements,  segregation  of  clients  positions  and,  specially,  the  move  of  OTC 
derivatives to central counterparties (CCPs) and to organised markets.  
The new bank resolution regime in the EU 
Let me now turn more specifically to the EU, where a legislative proposal for a directive – in 
line  with  the  FSB  standard  –  will  shortly  be  published  by  the  Commission.  Judging  by  the 
papers  and  communications  previously  made  public,  the  new  framework  has  the  overall 
objective of dealing with failing institutions in a way that safeguards the stability of the EU 
financial system as a whole and minimises public costs and economic disruption. A number 
of innovative elements can be identified in this emerging framework.  
First, it covers not only resolution, but rather all phases of a bank crisis, including preventive 
measures and early intervention powers. Accordingly, if problems were to arise in a bank, so 
that it became likely that it would breach the prudential requirements, a harmonised set of 
early intervention measures could be applied by supervisors. This area is highly important, 
since I strongly believe that a timely step by a supervisor to prevent things from getting worse 
is worth more than the best resolution efforts. The early intervention measures envisaged, 
such  as  prohibiting  the  payment  of  dividends,  imposing  additional  reporting  requirements, 
and  requiring  the  replacement  of  managers  or  directors  or  the  cessation  of  certain  risky 
activities, are already in the toolkit of some Member States, but the new framework would 
mean that each tool would be available in each Member State, and it would be applied in a 
harmonised manner, based on common triggers.  
Second,  a  forward-looking  element  of  the  new  framework  is  the  concept  of  intra-group 
financial  support,  which  could  reduce  the  current  legal  uncertainty  that  surrounds  asset 
transferability within groups. In today’s regulatory environment, group liquidity management 
may in some cases be suboptimal, making the survival of a group more difficult as a result of 
–  for  instance  –  supervisory  ring-fencing  measures.  At  the  same  time,  some  of  these 
restrictions  are  in  fact  justified,  since  they  serve  to  protect  domestic  creditors  and 
shareholders  from  unfavourable  transfers.  This  implies  that  the  conditions  for  intra-group 
loans,  guarantees  and  transfers  of  assets  for  collateral  could  be  set  out  in  group  financial 
support agreements between parent banks and bank subsidiaries. However, progress in this 
area is extremely challenging, since group interest is not a well-defined legal concept, while 
national laws focus on protecting local creditors. Here I think the critical issue is whether we 
manage to include adequate safeguards in the framework to ensure that the financial stability 
of the transferring country is not exposed to undue risk as a result of the support provided 
according to the agreement. This means that host countries supervisors have to be involved 
in any solution implementation. 
Third,  I  also  consider  the  involvement  of  the  European  Banking  Authority  (EBA)  as  a  very 
promising element of the EU plans. The EBA could play two equally important roles in the 
future  regime.  As  a  standard-setter,  the  EBA  drafts  binding  technical  standards  and  non-
binding guidelines. This could be key to ensuring true convergence in national approaches 
as  well  as  transparency  vis-à-vis  market  players  regarding  the  details  of  the  possible 
measures  to  be  applied.  As  a  supervisory  authority,  the  EBA  is  involved  in  the  resolution 
colleges  and,  even  more  importantly,  its  mediation  powers  have  the  capacity  to  actively 
foster cooperation and coordination also in practice.  
The  new  EU  bank  resolution  regime  can  also  draw  inspiration  from  a  number  of  ongoing 
national  initiatives.  These  national  laws  already  aim,  in  large  part,  to  stay  close  to  the 
Commission’s proposals. The ECB is currently involved in supporting the implementation of 
new  resolution  frameworks  in  Ireland  Portugal  and  Greece.  The  practical  development  of 
these regimes sheds light on some important areas. In particular, a number of critical points 
have emerged.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
To mention just a few, the property rights of stakeholders constitute a legally complex issue. 
For instance, obligations to hold a general meeting to decide on an increase in capital could 
hamper the efficient and swift resolution or restructuring of a bank. For any regime, it will be 
important to properly balance the fundamental rights of shareholders and also creditors with 
the general interest in the financial system’s stability. In this perspective, the example of the 
US FDIC´s powers should be taken into consideration. 
The  establishment  of  temporary  credit  institutions  or  bridge  banks  is  emerging  as  a  key 
resolution  tool,  but  the  new  resolution  frameworks  need  to  address  a  number  of  related 
technical issues, such as the question of who provides the necessary capital and liquidity to 
the bridge institution, how the bridge bank can use the infrastructure of the failed bank, and 
how and when it is ultimately dissolved, since bridge banks are temporary entities needing a 
good exit strategy. 
Finally, the design of bank levies, which could usefully be collected into resolution funds, is 
also  a  delicate  area.  Mechanisms  are  under  examination  both  to  recoup  the  losses  of  the 
crisis and to create provisions against future events. I believe that ex ante funding is a crucial 
element, since it may reduce moral hazard and improves the authorities’ ability to react to 
crises earlier, thus strengthening the credibility of such actions. Levies are valuable revenue-
raising  mechanisms  with  which  to  finance  crisis  measures.  Uncertainty  remains  as  to  how 
they would affect the particular problem of moral hazard in the financial sector, and both the 
rate and the base of levies need to be determined with care, especially if we want to include 
the  aspect  of  systemic  risk  as  well.  However,  maintaining  a  level  playing  field  and 
coordination  between  Member  States  remains  in  my  view  paramount  in  order  to  avoid  a 
distortion of fund contributions and resolution tools.  
Challenges ahead – more integration 
I am confident that the emerging EU regime will appropriately address all these challenges. 
As  for  cooperation  among  authorities,  the  new  resolution  regime  will  take  the  form  of  a 
coordination  framework.  Accordingly,  national  authorities  will  ultimately  maintain  their 
discretion in the most important decisions, although they will be strongly encouraged to try to 
reach joint decisions on the ways to handle bank crises in resolution colleges.  
This is a realistic approach, already representing a major step forward. However, I think there 
may be a need for even more integration in the longer term. 
As  an  example,  insolvency  laws  are  addressed  by  neither  the  FSB  standard  nor  the  EU 
proposal  –  at  least  not  its  first  phase  of  implementation  –  although  they  may  well  be 
important in practice.  
One also wonders whether there are other areas in which we could make progress. There 
were, and in fact continue to be, numerous proposals for the optimal European arrangement 
in  the  academic  and  policy  sphere.  Let  me  just  mention  three  of  them,  which  I  find 
particularly inspiring. 
Most  of  you  will  be  familiar  with  the  influential  arguments  of  Charles  Goodhart  and  Dirk 
Schoenmaker, who have said that, as a form of coordination among national governments to 
handle cross-border bank crises, legally binding burden-sharing rules should be drawn up ex 
ante. 
Others, including David G. Mayes, have recommended adopting the prompt corrective action 
approach of the United States by designing a framework that would be based on stringent 
rules.  Under  such  a  framework,  it  would  be  clear  for  both  banks  and  the  authorities,  that 
measures of increasing intrusiveness would have follow as the financial situation of a bank 
worsened.  An  important  element  of  such  a  regime  that  limits  moral  hazard,  regulatory 
forbearance and creditor losses as well, is that authorities are obliged to take over a failing 
bank before its capital is fully depleted.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Finally,  many,  including  the  staff  of  the  IMF,  have  supported  the  idea  of  a  European 
Resolution Authority  responsible  for  crisis  management  and  resolution,  probably  combined 
with a European Deposit Insurance and Resolution Fund. This is certainly the most ambitious 
plan  of  all,  but  was  always  considered  as  politically  challenging  and  legally  difficult  to 
implement.  
Advancing towards a truly European solution 
I  believe  that  all  these  proposals  have  important  elements.  In  my  view,  the  optimal 
arrangement for the EU would probably draw on all of these. There should be binding rules 
for the cooperation of Member States, and measures should be activated according to clear 
and  transparent  –  although  not  automatic  and  not  solely  quantitative-based  –  triggers. 
Indeed,  the  resolution  of  a  cross-border  systemically  important  financial  institution  would 
probably  be  most  efficient  if  the  measures  were  at  least  strongly  coordinated  by  one  lead 
authority. Or, if we go a step further in our thinking, the ultimate long-term vision could be to 
establish  one  supranational  authority,  an  FDIC-type  entity  implementing  group  resolution. 
Clearly,  at  the  international  level,  this  now  seems  to  be  out  of  reach,  but  one  could  ask 
whether at least in the EU such an arrangement might be feasible sometime in the future. If 
ever  put  in  place,  an  EU-level  resolution  authority  could  act  as  a  resolution  authority 
responsible  for  all  the  major  cross-border  banks  of  the  EU,  working  together  with  national 
authorities  as  its  agents,  operating  on  the  basis  of  a  single  crisis  management,  resolution 
and insolvency framework for EU banks. 
In the field of prudential regulation, something similar is already happening, since the new 
Basel  rules  will  partly  take  the  form  of  an  EU  regulation,  thereby  eliminating  the  room  for 
national differences in transposition. In the future, the Single Rulebook could ultimately be 
one  that  also  covers  the  crisis  management,  resolution  and  insolvency  of  banks.  If  we 
continue to unfold this vision, there would also be a need for robust arrangements to finance 
the measures of such an authority. An obvious option for that purpose would be an EU-level 
fund of resolution funds, or a single EU resolution fund. The benefits of such an integrated 
regime  are  most  easily  seen  if  we  imagine  how  resolution  under  a  loose  cooperation 
framework  would  work.  A  previous  mapping  exercise  by  the  ECB  identified  more  than 
40 banking  groups  with  significant  cross-border  activities  which  were  headquartered  in  the 
EU.  Notably,  17  of  them  had  a  presence  in  at  least ten Member  States.  The  resolution  of 
such  a  bank  would  involve  ten  national  authorities,  ten  resolution  funds  and  ten  deposit 
guarantee schemes; needless to say, there would be many challenges involved in ensuring 
efficient  coordination.  The  envisaged  EU  authority  would  spare  us  a  great  deal  of  these 
efforts. 
And I see no reason why such a vision should be considered unrealistic. Events are moving 
faster  now  than  before.  Crises  make  us  reconsider  things  that  we  would  have  seen  as 
beyond  the  feasibility  horizon.  For  example,  of  the  challenges  that  I  have  mentioned  here 
today, the financing part is probably the biggest obstacle for such a quantum leap. However, 
in  another  dimension  and  for  the  euro  area  we  already  have  the  EFSF  in  place.  Such  a 
facility would have been simply unthinkable a couple of years ago. 
Similarly, I consider the setting-up of a permanent EU or euro area resolution fund to be one 
imaginable  way  to  proceed.  Of  course,  I  am  fully  aware  of  the  technical,  legal  and,  most 
importantly, political complexities of such a move. Nonetheless, Europe could advance step 
by step. The euro area may be the most realistic starting point, since a stronger concept of 
the euro area as a legitimate entity has already been emerging. Likewise, fiscal coordination 
has  been  fundamentally  strengthened  during  the  crisis,  paving  the  way  for  a  specific 
economic governance concept for the euro area. For the euro area I will say clearly: we need 
for cross-border banking institutions a European Resolution Authority, including or combined 
with a Resolution Fund, as well as a European Supervisor. This requirement is not only a 
necessity stemming from the high degree of interconnectedness among euro area banks, but 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
constitutes also a major lesson of the present crisis. Indeed, some of the major imbalances 
that  are  besetting  the  euro  area  stemmed  from  uncontrolled  behaviour  of  some  banking 
sectors that eventually contaminated the sovereign. 
However, in the longer term, one can only envisage an integral EU resolution framework on a 
full EU basis, reflecting the highly integrated financial system in the EU. In parallel with the 
establishment of an EU resolution fund, we could gradually also start preparing to set up an 
EU-level resolution authority. 
Following  a  pragmatic  approach, we  could  focus  on  the recently  established  Cross-Border 
Stability Groups. Common practical guidelines and blueprints could be prepared for them to 
foster a more harmonised approach for resolution across jurisdictions. With a more forward-
looking  approach,  on  the  basis  of  frequent  peer  reviews,  qualitative  assessments  and 
stocktaking  of  best  practices,  we  could  gradually  explore  the  possibilities  of  entering  into 
more binding multilateral agreements within these groups, which in turn would pave the way 
for an EU-level authority.  
We  should  not  forget  that  the  supervisory  reform  process  based  on  the  De  Larosière 
proposals is not yet finished. The review of the new EU supervisory authorities is scheduled 
for  2014.  While  the  optimal  supervisory  structure  of  the  EU  is  a  topic  that  deserves  a 
separate speech of its own, it may suffice to say that this supervisory review may be a very 
good occasion to consider the suitability of moving both supervision and resolution together 
into an even more European set-up.  
Likewise,  there  are  already  legislative  proposals  for  a  network  of  national  EU  deposit 
guarantee schemes, having the possibility to borrow from each other, if need be. I consider 
this as an ambitious plan which rightly mirrors the cross-border nature of our banks. In fact, 
such  a  mutually  supportive  structure  of  deposit  insurance  is  not  far  removed  from  an  EU-
level fund of funds, nor from an EU-level deposit guarantee scheme. 
Concluding words  
Let  me  conclude  by  saying  that  the  seeds  of  an  integrated  EU  resolution  framework  are 
already there today, but it is an open question whether the EU will have the audacity, and, in 
particular, the political will, to move towards that. I firmly believe that if we wish to preserve 
the  benefits  of  integrated  cross-border  banks  in  Europe  and  globally  we  must  built  an 
European  resolution  regime  that  enhances  market  discipline  by  mitigating  moral  hazard, 
maintains stability by ensuring continuity of basic services of unwinding institutions, orderly 
allocates losses and protects taxpayers.  
To  achieve  this  goal,  we  will  have  to  make  sure  that  our  authorities  speak  a  common 
language and that the thorny issue of public burden-sharing is replaced by private burden-
sharing  as  far  as  possible.  Based  on  these  preconditions  and  building  on  the  practical 
operation  of  cross-border  stability  groups,  we  should  gradually  move  towards  a  stronger 
coordination  of  cross-border  resolution,  with  the  ultimate  vision  of  a  single  EU  resolution 
authority and an integrated EU resolution regime. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
