John Murray: With a little help from your friends – the virtues of global 
economic coordination 
Remarks  by  Mr  John  Murray,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  at  the  State 
University of New York at Plattsburgh, Plattsburgh, New York, 29 November 2011. 
 “Uneven growth and widening imbalances are fuelling the temptation to diverge 
from global solutions into uncoordinated actions. However, uncoordinated policy 
actions will only lead to worse outcomes for all.” 
G-20 Leaders Declaration, Seoul Summit 
11–12 November 2010 
“We, the Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors of the G-20, affirm our 
commitment  to  take  all  necessary  initiatives  in  a  coordinated  way  to  support 
financial  stability  and  to  foster  stronger  economic  growth  in  the  spirit  of 
cooperation and confidence.” 
Statement of G-20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors 
8 August 2011 
Introduction 
Thank you very much for the invitation to deliver the Distinguished Canadian Address on a 
contemporary public policy issue. I am honoured to be here and grateful for the opportunity 
to speak to you about one of the most important public policy issues that we are confronting 
in these extraordinarily difficult times. 
Policy-makers around the world are facing two critical challenges of a truly systemic nature: 
restoring  stability  in  Europe  and  rebuilding  strong,  sustainable  and  balanced  growth  in  the 
global economy. The two quotes above are testament to the firm and shared belief of today’s 
policy-makers  that  these  challenges  can  be  met  only  through  timely  and  comprehensive 
policy  coordination  across  countries.  Yet  a  generation  ago,  both  academics  and  policy-
makers  shared  the  equally  firm  belief  that  the  prospective  gains  from  global  coordination 
were  minimal,  if  not  negative.  They  advocated  a  more  independent  approach  to  policy 
formulation and implementation, and advised authorities to simply “keep their own houses in 
order” and leave the rest to the insulating properties of flexible exchange rates. 
This quote from Stanley Fischer is representative of the consensus view that prevailed in the 
late 1980s: 
“[M]ore  consistent  ongoing  policy  coordination  in  which  countries,  including  the 
United States, significantly modify national policies “in recognition of international 
policy  interdependence”  is  not  on  the  near  horizon.  Fortunately,  the  evidence 
suggests  that  the  potential  gains  from  coordination  are  in  any  event  small:  the 
best that each country can do for other countries is to keep its own economy in 
shape.”1  
My  remarks  today  are  divided  into  three  parts.  First,  I  will  outline  the  assumptions  and 
research that supported the earlier, independent view of policy making. Second, I will trace 
                                                 
1  S. Fischer, “International Macroeconomic Policy Coordination,” International Economic Cooperation, edited by 
Martin Feldstein, NBER, (Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 1988) 11–43. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the evolution of thought since that time, and track the principal drivers behind the apparent 
change in attitude. Finally, I will present an example, drawn from the Bank of Canada’s own 
modelling work, that highlights the prospective benefits of more effective policy coordination 
in the context of the current challenges. 
Prevailing view in the 1970s and 1980s 
Most  academic  economists  and  policy-makers  in  the  period  immediately  following  the 
collapse  of  Bretton  Woods  readily  acknowledged  the  potential  benefits  of  co-operative 
behaviour, but viewed these gains as small in practice. 
In a world characterized by growing economic interdependence and cross-border spillovers, 
it  stood  to  reason  that  something  could  be  gained  by  operating  in  a  more  coordinated 
manner.  Such  actions,  they  believed,  would  minimize  negative  externalities  and  lead  to 
Pareto-improving  outcomes  in  which  all  parties  would  benefit  and  the  losses  inherent  in 
non-co-operative  Nash  outcomes  could  be  avoided.  As  a  practical  matter,  however,  these 
gains were believed to be very modest and perhaps even negative. 
One of the principal reasons for this was a strong belief in the insulating effects of flexible 
exchange  rates,  which  would  not  only  give  authorities  the  ability  to  conduct  effective, 
independent  monetary  policies  but  would  serve  as  an  automatic  buffer  from  both  external 
and internal shocks. 
A second reason for this independent approach to policy-making was the limited degree of 
economic interdependence that existed at the time. Although trade flows had been liberalized 
in  successive  GATT  rounds  through  the  1960s,  1970s  and  1980s,  they  remained  a  small, 
albeit  rapidly  growing,  component  of  the  GDPs  of  most  countries.  Moreover,  this  was  the 
only metric by which interdependence was typically judged. International capital flows were 
still severely restricted in Europe and Japan, and financial linkages were still at a relatively 
vestigial stage – the Herstatt Bank incident notwithstanding.2  
Persuasive  theoretical  and  empirical  arguments  against  coordination  were  also  brought  to 
bear  during  this  period.  Rogoff  (1985)  wrote  an  influential  paper  showing  how  greater 
co-operation  among  monetary  authorities  might  lead  to  an  undesirable  equilibrium, 
characterized by increased instability and higher global inflation.3 He argued that without the 
discipline  provided  by  individual  decision-making  in  a  competitive  setting  and  the  risk  of  a 
sharply  depreciating  exchange  rate  in  response  to  any  suspected  policy  misbehaviour, 
authorities would feel free to collectively ease interest rates in the hopes of securing some 
short-term gain in output and employment. 
Frankel and Rockett (1988) joined the debate and underscored the problems that might arise 
if policy-makers decided to coordinate using the wrong macro model of the economy.4 The 
authors conducted a “horse race” with 11 of the most popular models of the time, and found 
dramatically different results depending on which model was chosen. Since only one of them 
could be right – but which one remained uncertain – putting all your policy eggs in a single 
basket was probably unwise. They showed that better results might be obtained through time 
                                                 
2  Bankhaus Herstatt was a mid-sized German bank that was active in foreign exchange markets and failed in 
1974 during the first oil shock. It was shut down at the end of the business day, when many banks still had 
foreign  exchange  contracts  for  settlement.  The  international  impact  was  substantial,  even  in  the  “less-
connected”  world  of  the  1970s.  As  the  repercussions  from  failed  transactions  mounted,  gross  funds 
transferred in New York fell by 60 per cent over the next several days. 
3  K.  Rogoff,  “Can  International  Monetary  Policy  Cooperation  be  Counterproductive?”  Journal  of  International 
Economics 18 (1985): 199–217. 
4  J. Frankel and K. E. Rockett, “International  Macroeconomic Policy Coordination  when Policymakers Do not 
agree on the True Model,” American Economic Review 78, no.3(1988): 318–340. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
by  allowing  policy-makers  to  choose  their  favourite  model  rather  than  forcing  everyone  to 
coordinate around a single model. 
Oudiz  and  Sachs  (1984)  reinforced  the  case  against  coordination  by  simulating  their  
state-of-the-art  general  equilibrium  model  and  showing  that,  even  if  one  picked  the  right 
model, the improvement, relative to proceeding independently, was very modest.5  
It is important to note that all of these cautions came from the economics side. If one factored 
in  the  risk  of  political  misdirection  and  the  scope  for  the  inept  application  of  policy,  the 
chances  of  success  seemed  even  more  remote.  Doug  Purvis,  a  well-known  Canadian 
macroeconomist, referred to G-7 policy coordination as fine-tuning to the seventh power. 
Certainly, real-world evidence did not seem to offer great hope. Mixed success at attempted 
coordination through the 1970s and 1980s, and the collapse of the Bretton Woods system 
itself – the most ambitious effort at international policy coordination – all appeared to point in 
the same direction. 
So what changed? 
Looking at the more recent policy statements from the G-20 leaders one can’t help but be 
struck by the sea change that has occurred in received wisdom. Has the world changed, or 
were earlier views simply wrong? It is probably a little of both. 
First  and  foremost,  international  linkages  have  risen  dramatically  over  the  past  20  years, 
increasing  the  significance  of  spillovers.  This  is  clear  in  the  trade  numbers,  which  have 
typically increased at twice the rate of global GDP, but is even more evident in the escalating 
volume of gross financial flows (Charts 1 and 2). Recent evidence suggests that their effects 
can far outweigh those of trade flows. 
Second, flexible exchange rates, which have a great deal to recommend them, have failed to 
live up to their initial optimistic billing. (Canada’s positive experience with a flexible exchange 
rate  through  the  1950s  and  early  1960s  might  have  contributed  to  this  overly  sanguine 
assessment.)  Their  stabilizing  properties  were  shown  to  be  more  limited  than  previous 
enthusiasts had credited. 
Adding to these complications is the limited scope that now exists for significant adjustment 
in policy-makers’ standard fiscal and monetary instruments. The zero lower bound on interest 
rates and the elevated levels of government debt and deficits in most of the major advanced 
economies have left very little room for manoeuvre (Charts 3 and 4). 
It is important to note that the earlier view had more of an ex ante orientation. “Tending to 
your knitting” or “keeping your own house in order” (with apologies for the mixed metaphors) 
was seen as a way of avoiding trouble for oneself and others. The fact that this prescription 
was  not  followed  by  everyone  is,  no  doubt,  one  of  the  contributing  factors  in  the  present 
dilemma, if not the primary cause. 
Second-best strategies for staying out of trouble, such as keeping your own house in order, 
may now have to give way to third-best coordination strategies, ex post, if one is trying to 
escape from a difficult situation with limited room for manoeuvre on the policy front. A little 
help from your friends might be all you have left. 
In fairness to the proponents of the earlier independent approach, while they were skeptical 
of formal policy coordination, they typically assumed that a light-handed but important form of 
“soft”  policy  co-operation  would  nevertheless  exist.  More  specifically,  policy-makers  were 
assumed to meet regularly – as they in fact do – in order to exchange views on the state of 
                                                 
5  G.  Oudiz  and  J.  Sachs,  “Macroeconomic  Policy  Coordination  among  the  Industrial  Economies,”  Brookings 
Papers on Economic Activity 1 (1984): 1–65. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
the global economy and get a sense of what they might do in alternative states of the world – 
if not fully revealing their near-term game plan. Proponents of the “less is more” view also 
expected countries to play by the rules of the game as implicitly understood at the time. Most 
importantly,  advanced  economies,  which  dominated  the  global  scene  by  a  wide  margin 
during  this  period,  were  assumed  to  operate  under  a  fully  flexible  exchange  rate  system. 
Even if some countries might choose to fix their currencies, this would not necessarily pose a 
problem. Unlike many of the present-day emerging market economies (EMEs), they were not 
expected  to  engage  in  persistent  sterilized  interventions  in  an  effort  to  subvert  the  price 
adjustment process. 
finding a solution to the European debt crisis; and 
putting the global economy on a path to strong, sustainable growth. 
Challenges facing policy-makers today 
As noted earlier, the two most pressing challenges facing policy-makers today are: 
• 
• 
The  first  of  these  is  in  some  sense  logically  prior  to  the  second.  However,  providing  a 
credible  prospect  of  long-term  growth  is  also  necessary  for  achieving  the  first  objective. 
Fiscal and banking problems are not going to be solved by deleveraging alone. It will also be 
necessary to expand the size of the global pie in a more evenly distributed manner if long-run 
stability is to be achieved. 
The remainder of my presentation will focus on the G-20 Framework for Strong, Sustainable 
and Balanced Growth. The world economy, in aggregate, is suffering from deficient demand 
(i.e.,  a  deflationary  gap).  Beneath  these  aggregate  numbers,  however,  is  an  obvious 
imbalance.  Some  countries,  mostly  EMEs,  have  been  growing  too  quickly,  leading  to 
inflationary  pressures  and  other  serious  market  distortions.  Others,  mainly  –  but  not 
exclusively – advanced countries, suffer from too little growth. Given these starting positions, 
there should be a way of making both groups better off by rotating demand from one to the 
other. Unfortunately, this has been much more difficult to achieve in practice than it would 
appear. 
The  uneven  pattern  of  growth  that  we  are  presently  experiencing  is  matched  by 
unsustainable  external  imbalances,  with  many  advanced  countries  running  sizable  current 
account deficits, despite their slow growth, while many EMEs are running sizable surpluses, 
despite their strong growth (Chart 5). In many cases, of course, the export-led development 
strategies that some EMEs pursue, and the resulting trade surpluses, are the reason for their 
phenomenal growth. 
While exchange rate misalignment is an important external driver of the trade imbalances, a 
number  of  internal  imbalances  have  also  contributed  to  the  problem,  such  as  runaway 
government and household debt, and will have to be addressed before a sustainable solution 
can be achieved. 
Major  advanced  economies  with  deficient  demand  cannot  consolidate  their  fiscal  positions 
and boost household savings without support from the external side in the form of increased 
foreign  demand.  Meanwhile,  EMEs,  seeing  their  growth  decelerate  because  of  sagging 
demand in advanced countries, are reluctant to abandon a strategy that has served them so 
well  in  the  past,  and  have  refused  to  let  their  exchange  rates  adjust  in  a  material  way. 
Sterilized  intervention  continued  at  an  accelerating  pace  over  most  of  the  past  four  years, 
and new “macroprudential stabilization tools” (i.e., capital controls) have been introduced to 
further buttress their defences. Advanced countries, receiving limited assistance from some 
of their most important EME trading partners, have been forced either to use what little fiscal 
space  remains  to  stimulate  their  economies  or  to  resort  increasingly  to  unconventional 
monetary policy remedies, such as the Fed’s quantitative easing. The latter, in turn, tend to 
push capital flows toward EMEs in ever-larger amounts, exacerbating EME concerns about 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
fiscal consolidation in those countries that need it; 
a rotation of global demand (facilitated by greater exchange rate flexibility); 
sweeping financial sector reforms; and 
ambitious structural reforms to the real economy to foster higher long-run growth. 
the twin Hecubas of sudden stops and destabilizing credit growth, causing them to tighten 
their controls further (Chart 6). The vicious circle that is thereby created, as each waits for 
the other to do the right thing, threatens to destabilize the entire global economy. 
How can we escape this “prisoner’s dilemma”? The G-20 Framework for Strong, Sustainable 
and Balanced Growth offers just such an escape. It has four key components: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
I will not have much to say about financial sector reform, except to note that it is probably 
proceeding  at  a  faster  pace  than  the  other  three  components,  despite  the  breadth  of  the 
reform agenda. While much has already been agreed upon, actions mean more than words 
and implementation is obviously critical. 
Structural reform, in contrast, is moving exceptionally slowly, with few specific and concrete 
reforms being proposed by any of the G-20 countries. While it is difficult to garner the sort of 
political support necessary to drive significant change in the midst of a crisis, the reverse is 
also true. The momentum for reform seems to disappear once things appear to be getting 
better. Countries must break out of this paralyzing pattern and, instead, seize the opportunity 
to do the right thing now. 
Fiscal  consolidation 
than  short-term 
macroeconomic conditions might warrant. However, countries are being forced to accelerate 
the pace of tightening by increasingly skeptical and impatient market “vigilantes,” lest they fall 
into the ranks of those already deemed too far gone to save. Ideally, countries would be able 
to outline a credible longer-term plan for fiscal sustainability, and receive in return increased 
room  for  manoeuvre  (i.e.,  easing,  or  less  tightening)  in  the  short  term.  This  Augustinian 
approach to fiscal probity is clearly difficult, if not impossible, to effect in practice. As a result, 
many countries are finding themselves with less room for manoeuvre than they expected. 
Regrettably,  it  is  movement  on  the  exchange  rate  front  and  the  correction  of  external 
imbalances that are proceeding at the most glacial pace (Chart 7). A way must be found to 
break this log-jam to everyone’s advantage. The Mutual Assessment Process (MAP) that the 
G-20 has initiated and the use of indicative guidelines are expected to help push the process 
forward,  but  meaningful  action,  as  opposed  to  agreement  on  the  mechanics  of  the  MAP, 
appears to be lacking. 
is  proceeding  more  rapidly, 
in  some  cases, 
Model simulations 
The  final  section  of  my  presentation  contains  some  model  results  highlighting  how  much 
could be gained globally from timely and simultaneous action on many of these fronts – and 
by the converse – how much could be lost if it is done poorly or not done at all. I’d like to 
stress at the outset that these simulations are not merely illustrative. They are based on an 
estimated global model that the Bank of Canada uses internally for its forecast exercises and 
analysis  of alternative  policy  scenarios.  By  the  same  token,  I  won’t  try  to  suggest  that  the 
model does more than it can, despite being the best of breed. A healthy degree of caution 
has to be applied to all such exercises. 
Still, I think you’ll find the results interesting. We begin with a base case and use our model 
to identify a set of conditions that are sufficient for the resolution of global imbalances. These 
include: 
• 
increasing  U.S.  private  savings  rates  and  maintaining  them  through  time  at  6  per 
cent of GDP; 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
    engineering a gradual, timely and credible fiscal consolidation in the United States, 
Europe and Japan; 
allowing  the  real  effective  exchange  rate  for  China  to  appreciate  by  20  per  cent, 
while the U.S. dollar depreciates by 15 per cent; 
implementing  policies  to  stimulate  domestic  demand  in  China  and  emerging  Asia; 
and 
pursuing a program of gradual but meaningful structural reform in Europe and Japan 
to raise potential growth.  
This  should  not  be  interpreted  as  a  Goldilocks  scenario.  It  might  be  possible  to  do  much 
better  with  more  ambitious  and  concerted  action;  however,  it  is  sufficient  to  stabilize 
government debt and deficits, together with current account balances, at sustainable levels. 
We might call it a “good,” as opposed to “great,” outcome. 
In  an  alternative  scenario,  we  ask  what  would  happen  if  the  implementation  of  these 
corrective measures were delayed by five years (i.e., over our projection horizon), after which 
time they are allowed to kick in. In other words, this alternative scenario eventually course 
corrects and is by no means as bad as it can be. The results for the good and (somewhat) 
bad scenarios are shown in the graph below. 
Postponing  the  required  policy  measures  in  emerging  Asia,  including  China,  and  in  the 
advanced countries produces a cumulative 8 per cent decline in world and U.S. GDP relative 
to the baseline, while the difference in China’s GDP is roughly 12 per cent. In 2017, world 
GDP is lower by over US$7 trillion, and it could well be much worse (Chart 8). 
A third, and separate, scenario that we conducted on an earlier occasion is in many ways 
even  more  interesting.  It  asks  what  would  happen  if  fiscal  consolidation  and  household 
balance-sheet repair were actively pursued in the advanced countries – whether voluntarily 
or driven by impatient financial markets – but without the support of rising external demand in 
those countries that needed it (i.e., absent exchange rate adjustment and stimulative policies 
in emerging Asia). 
The resulting loss in global GDP is greater than under the bad solution, at least over the five-
year horizon. Doing half the job, in other words, is worse over the short- to medium run than 
doing  nothing.  Fiscal  consolidation  and  the  repair  of  household  balance  sheets  are 
necessary  and  inevitable,  but  doing  them  quickly,  unassisted  by  growth  from  elsewhere, 
deepens global deflation. 
EMEs  will  not  be  able  to  decouple  in  these  scenarios.  Although  many  of  them  face 
inflationary pressures  at  the  moment,  and  serious  distortions  to  their domestic  economies, 
they will be quickly caught up in a vortex of imploding demand from the advanced economies 
and follow them down. Rotating global demand through the timely adjustment of exchange 
rates and structural reform could prevent this. 
Sounds good. Everybody wins. So  why hasn’t it happened? Fear, narrow self-interest and 
political  inertia  are  the  reasons.  This  is  why  adopting  an  “After  you,  Alphonse  strategy"  is 
bound to fail. The hope is that, by everyone agreeing to move together, these impediments 
can be overcome. Everyone should hold hands and take a leap of faith – but not blind faith, 
mind  you.  There  is  good  reason  to  think  it  will  work.  It  certainly  looks  better  than  the 
alternatives. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
    BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
  8 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
   BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
   10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
