Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Financial inclusion – enhancing access to banking 
services in Malaysia 
Speech by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Launch of 
Bank Negara Malaysia’s MobileLINK, Kuala Lumpur, 9 December 2011. 
 Coach’  Bergerak  Laman  Informasi  Nasihat  dan  Khidmat  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  ini,  iaitu 
“MobileLINK” adalah untuk memperluaskan rangkuman kewangan kepada masyarakat luar 
bandar.  Saya  amat  berbesar  hati  untuk  mengalu-alukan  kehadiran  Tuan-tuan  dan  Puan-
puan ke Majlis Pelancaran Rasmi “MobileLINK”.  
Financial  inclusion  has  now  become  an  important  global  agenda  to  ensure  sustainable 
economic growth. It has become one of the main pillars of the global development agenda in 
which importance is given to outreach so that the economic growth and development that is 
achieved  will  be  inclusive.  Financial  inclusion  is  an  integral  part  of  this  process.  Financial 
inclusion  aims  to  ensure  that  all  segments  of  the  economy,  regardless  of  income  levels, 
economic activity or regions have access to financial services. 
The Bank’s efforts towards promoting financial inclusion is focused in enhancing access to 
basic banking services; and to financing; and undertaking financial education, and to 
build  greater  and  awareness  on  financial  matters  and  management.  We  have  seen 
significant progress on several fronts as more and more of the members of the population 
enter into the financial and economic mainstream and as those that are already participating 
in the financial system are able to do so in a more effective manner. Deposit accounts have 
increased  from  19,738  deposit  accounts  per  10,000  adults  in  year  2000  to  29,311  deposit 
accounts per 10,000 adults this year. Similarly, there has been significant increase in loan 
accounts  from  3,105  loan  accounts  per  10,000  adults  to  8,600  loan  accounts  per 
10,000 adults. More than 80% of our adult population have some form of deposit accounts. 
The ranking by World Bank’s Consultative Group to Assist the Poor shows that Malaysia is in 
the 20th position globally, [Singapore is in the 16th position; Thailand: 33rd; Indonesia: 70th; 
and the Philippines: 71st]. While we have made considerable progress in improving financial 
inclusion agenda, the Bank is unrelenting in our aspiration to shape our financial system to 
be more inclusive and effective in supporting a balanced economic growth for our country. 
Our  financial  sector  Blueprint  that  will  chart  the  direction  of  development  of  our  financial 
system in the next ten years places a high priority on the financial inclusion agenda. Among 
the areas of focus are the development of cost efficient delivery channels that will enhance 
the  outreach  of  financial  services,  expand  the  range  of  products  and  services  to  meet  the 
distinct financial needs of the underserved and strengthen the institutional arrangements to 
enhance the capacity of providers of such financial services. Equally, important will be the 
attention accorded to financial consumer education and protection in which the standards of 
consumer care are high and consumers have choices and are confident about making their 
financial decisions.  
The launch of the Bank’s MobileLINK today is one of the efforts to facilitate the achievement 
of  the  objective  to  enhance  our  reach  to  a  wider  community.  This  custom-made  coach  is 
equipped with all the supporting facilities, and is another avenue for members of the public 
particularly  from  the  non-urban  areas  to  engage  on  matters  relating  to  banking  services 
which  need  to  be  addressed  and  on  any  other  financial  services  that  are  offered  by  our 
financial institutions. This will allow members of the public including SMEs to receive rapid 
response  and  facilitation  on  financial  matters.  It  will  also  enable  the  Bank  to  hear  directly 
from the public on financial issues concerning our financial system.  
The  journey  for  MobileLINK  will  begin  today  to  cover  about  50%  of  the  identified  the  non-
urban areas nationwide in the next 3 years. In the first phase, the MobileLINK’s journey will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
start from Mersing, Johor and will continue to northern states and later back to the south to 
Jerantut, Pahang. This part of the journey will be completed in December 2012. The Bank 
looks forward to this new venture. It would also help to identify the specific financial needs of 
the  local  communities  and  the  financial  assistance  and  the  advice  for  the  different 
communities in our country. 
The terminals in the MobileLINK coach are connected to the Bank’s information technology 
systems  such  as  Central  Credit  Reference  Information  System,  Customer  Redress 
Mechanism  System  and  the  Bank’s  corporate  website.  Among  the  services  that  will  be 
available are advisory services on banking, insurance & takaful and SMEs financing related 
matters; retrieval of personal credit status through the Central Credit Reference Information 
System (CCRIS); and advisory on any other financial related matters under the purview of 
the Bank.  
The  introduction  of  MobileLINK  complements  the  series  of  consumer  financial  advisory 
initiatives  that  have  been  introduced  by  the  Bank  since  2005  with  the  establishment  of 
BNMLINK  at  the  Bank’s  six  offices;  the  Bank’s  call  center,  BNMTELELINK;  as  well  as 
BNMLINK  mobile  counter  services  in  semi-urban  areas  to  provide  access  of  financial 
information and consumer redress mechanisms. 
The introduction of MobileLINK also provides a platform for enhancing financial literacy and 
financial capability of consumers to make well informed and responsible financial decisions 
and thus participate meaningfully and effectively in the financial system. 
Akhir  kata,  saya  ingin  merakamkan  penghargaan  kepada  semua  hadirin  sekalian  yang 
memberi  sokongan  kepada  inisiatif “MobileLINK”  ini.  Kami  berharap  inisiatif  ini  akan  dapat 
merealisasikan usaha Bank dalam mencapai rangkuman kewangan yang menyeluruh. Bagi 
mencapai  objektif  ini,  kerjasama  pihak  yang  hadir  pada  hari  ini  dengan  Bank  Negara 
Malaysia adalah dialu-alukan bagi memastikan usaha yang lebih bersepadu dan berkesan 
dapat digembleng bersama. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
