Charles L Evans: The Fed’s dual mandate responsibilities – maintaining 
credibility during a time of immense economic challenges 
Speech  by  Charles  L  Evans,  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago,  at  the 
Michigan  Council  on  Economic  Education,  Michigan  Economic  Dinner,  Detroit,  Michigan, 
17 October 2011. 
 The enormity of the problem 
In the summer of 2009, the U.S. economy began to emerge from its deepest recession since 
the 1930s. But today, more than two years later, conditions still aren’t much different from an 
economy actually in recession. Gross domestic product (GDP) growth was barely positive in 
the first half of 2011. The unemployment rate is 9.1 percent, much higher than anything we 
had  experienced  for  decades  before  the  recession.  And  job  gains  over  the  past  several 
months have been barely enough to keep pace with the natural growth in the labor force, so 
we’ve made virtually no progress in closing the “jobs gap”. 
With  unemployment  having  lingered  for  so  long  at  rates  around  9  percent,  it  is  perhaps 
natural that some would begin to think that nothing more can be done to improve upon this 
situation.  However,  I  don’t  agree.  Before  seriously  contemplating  doing  nothing,  it  is 
important  to  realize  just  how  enormous  this  economic  problem  really  is.  To  put  this  in 
perspective,  consider  that  prior  to  the  recession,  most  analysts  thought  the  long-run  trend 
growth rate of GDP was about 2-1/2 percent per year. Given the sharp drop in output during 
the  recession  and  lackluster  early  recovery,  GDP  is  currently  below  its  potential  by  nearly 
7 percent, or $1 trillion dollars.1 Just prior to the recession, the unemployment rate averaged 
between 4-1/2 and 5 percent. It peaked at 10.1 percent during the recession and, as I just 
noted, is still 9.1 percent today. In terms of jobs, payroll employment is about 6-1/2 million 
below its pre-recession level. These are massive shortfalls in output and employment. 
It does not appear as if these gaps are going to be reduced significantly any time soon. Real 
GDP growth has been anemic so far this year. Gains in employment have slowed markedly. 
Even  though  credit  conditions  overall  have  been  improving,  many  households  and  small 
businesses still  seem  to  be  having  trouble  getting  credit.  In  addition,  the  repair  process  in 
residential real estate markets is painstakingly slow, and households are still in the process 
of paring debt and adapting to the huge losses in real estate and financial wealth that they 
experienced during the recession. 
I largely agree with economists such as Paul Krugman, Mike Woodford and others who see 
the  economy  as  being  in  a  liquidity  trap:  Short-term  nominal  interest  rates  are  stuck  near 
zero, even while desired saving still exceeds desired investment. This situation is the natural 
result of the abundance of caution exercised by many households and businesses that still 
worry  that  they  have  inadequate  buffers  of  assets  to  cushion  against  unexpected  shocks. 
Such caution holds back spending below the levels of our productive capacity. For example, I 
regularly hear from business contacts that they do not want to risk hiring new workers until 
they actually see an uptick in demand for their products. Most businesses do not appear to 
be cutting back further at the moment, but they would rather sit on cash than take the risk of 
further expansion. 
                                                 
1  Real GDP fell about 5 percent during the recession, and growth has averaged about a 2-1/2 percent annual 
rate so far in the recovery. (The number in the text was based on the difference between actual and potential 
real GDP as calculated by the Congressional Budget Office through 2011:Q2.) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Considering the substantial lost wealth that came with the Second Great Contraction and the 
enormous  uncertainty  over  the  recovery  today,  it  is  understandable  why  households, 
businesses and market participants are exceedingly cautious. We seem to be following the 
tendency,  documented  by  Carmen  Reinhart  and  Kenneth  Rogoff,  that  recoveries  from 
economic downturns caused by large financial crises usually are painfully slow. Accordingly, 
it is of the utmost importance for monetary policymakers to respond appropriately. 
Recently, many critics of the Fed’s actions have raised concerns about the credibility of Fed 
policy.  Credibility  –  that  is,  the  general  belief  that  the  Fed  does  what  it  can  to  achieve  its 
mandated policy objectives – is certainly a critical issue. Defining “credibility” sounds easy, 
but  there  are  several  aspects  to  credibility.  For  example,  at  any  point  in  time,  the  Federal 
Reserve will likely need to contemplate a series of current and future policy actions in order 
to  effectively  influence  the  trajectory  of  the  economy  and  better  achieve  the  goals  of 
monetary  policy.  In  order  for  households,  businesses  and  financial  markets  to  conduct 
business  in  accordance  with  the  Fed’s  planning,  the  public  must  believe  that  the  Fed  will 
carry  out  these  future  actions  as  expected  to  achieve  its  well-understood  objectives. 
Credibility requires a clear public understanding of the Fed’s policy objectives, as well as a 
belief  by  the  public  that  the  Fed’s  actions  are  consistent  with  achieving  these  objectives. 
Lower levels of credibility would be associated with erratic and misunderstood policy actions 
that seemed inconsistent with the stated objectives of monetary policy. 
At this point, it would be useful to describe the typical way in which monetary policy is set by 
central  banks  with  any  eye  toward  discussing  how  deliberations  should  be  evaluated  for 
effectiveness and credibility. 
important 
issues.  Perhaps  at 
The policy decision process 
In  setting  monetary  policy,  a  central  bank  like  the  Federal  Reserve  must  deliberate 
systematically  about  a  wide  variety  of 
the  cost  of 
oversimplifying,  I  will  broadly  characterize  this  deliberative  process  as  consisting  of  four 
steps. 
First, members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) must have a clear vision of 
the goals of monetary policy. In my mind, the Federal Reserve Act is very clear in specifying 
that the Federal Reserve has a dual mandate: The FOMC should provide for monetary and 
financial  conditions  that  support  maximum  employment  and  price  stability.2  With  regard  to 
inflation, we should seek to keep inflation near 2 percent over the medium term. We should 
also remember that a 2 percent objective should represent an average level of inflation, not 
an impenetrable ceiling. With regard to our real economy mandate, we should minimize the 
deviations of the actual path of the real economy from its potential path (or more technically, 
its  efficiently-achievable  path).  From  my  earlier  discussion  of  the  immensity  of  the  current 
problem, we are far from minimizing these real deviations today. 
Second, the FOMC needs to closely look at the plethora of data that comes out every month 
in order to evaluate the outlook for the economy and inflation, keeping in mind a variety of 
potential  risk  scenarios  and  financial  stability  considerations.  Four  times  each  year,  the 
FOMC formally publishes forecasts in its Summary of Economic Projections. Of course, it is 
crucial for each FOMC member to update his/her outlook for each meeting. 
Third,  in  evaluating  the  state  of  the  economy  and  inflation  pressures,  the  FOMC  must 
periodically step back and ask itself whether something very different than normal is afoot. 
We all recognize that our views about how the economy works are imperfect. So we must 
always ask if we have seen anything that would move us away from our current viewpoints 
                                                 
2  See Evans (2011). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
and  forecasting  methodologies  –  and  if  things  have  changed  significantly,  we  must  ask  if 
achievable paths for our policy goals or the channels through which monetary policy works 
have  been  altered  in  any  substantive  way.  These  considerations  would  include  questions 
about whether we are facing structural economic change that lowers the economy’s potential 
output, substantial financial impediments holding back demand along the lines stressed by 
Reinhart and Rogoff, global financial stress, and the like. A good portion of these concerns 
are related to appropriate risk-management considerations. 
Fourth,  policymakers  must  make  a  decision  regarding  the  stance  and  course  of  monetary 
policy. They must ask if their forecasts are consistent with their medium- and long-term policy 
objectives,  and  if  not,  what  then  is  the  best  response  for  monetary  policy  to  influence  the 
trajectory of the economy and inflation in order to meet the FOMC’s objectives? 
That is a very quick summary of the necessary steps for effective monetary policymaking. 
Where does credibility come into play in all of this? 
Since  no  policymaking  process  can  be  perfect,  some  errors  will  naturally  arise.  At  the 
forecasting stage, no one has a perfect crystal ball. Forecast errors will be made, and these 
errors  could  have  an  impact  on  credibility.  It  seems  natural  to  believe  that  greater  losses 
would occur if there were repeated mistakes in economic projections of a one-sided nature. 
An  example  would  be  repeated  extreme  optimism  or  extreme  pessimism  in  the  face  of 
reasonable  evidence  to  the  contrary.  Such  bouts  could  be  due  to  mistakes  about  cyclical 
factors or a misunderstanding of the changing structure of the economy. 
At the policymaking level, a continuing pattern of not taking appropriate policy actions in the 
face of a changing economic outlook or structure would presumably lead to poor outcomes 
against medium-term goals. Now, caution in policymaking can be a virtue. But at some point, 
when the weight of the evidence is large, continued delays in action could erode credibility. 
In general, although a policymaker’s credibility account is credited and debited on a regular 
basis,  the  most  substantial  credibility  losses  come  in  two  varieties:  1)  really  large  and 
systematic  deviations  of  outcomes  from  ex  ante  chosen  policy  objectives;  and  2)  a 
substantial  misunderstanding  of  policy  objectives.  Monetary  economists  often  point  to  the 
poor economic experiences of the 1970s and 1930s as times when the Federal Reserve’s 
credibility account was debited substantially because of both of these factors. I believe the 
current  liquidity  trap  environment  following  the  2008  financial  crisis  is  similarly  challenging 
today’s policymakers. So far, I believe we have done the right thing. Since the recession’s 
end  in  2009,  more  than  once  the  FOMC’s  projections  have  proved  too  optimistic,  and  the 
U.S.  economy  has  been  unable  to  achieve  escape  velocity  for  returning  to  stronger,  self-
sustaining  growth.  But  instead  of  doing  nothing,  the  FOMC  took  further  policy  actions  to 
support  stronger  growth  in  the  context  of  continued  price  stability.  These  actions  have 
provided a credible counterweight to the forecast errors and maintained steadfastness with 
our medium-term policy objectives. I’m not so sure how well we will do going forward. My 
recent speech in London on dual mandate arithmetic was meant to clarify the challenges we 
face  in  describing  the  Federal  Reserve’s  policy  objectives.  The  upshot  I  take  from  that 
analysis is this: If we sit on our hands as the economy withers relative to our mandate, then 
we could take a huge hit to our credibility, akin to what happened to our credibility following 
the devastating mistakes of the 1930s. 
Two examples of enormous credibility hits to monetary policy: the 1970s and 1930s 
The  Federal  Reserve’s  policy  actions  during  the  1970s  and  1930s  stand  out  as  two 
exemplary  cases  of  poor  monetary  policymaking.  In  the  post-war  era,  most  critics  of 
expansionary monetary policy cite the 1970s Fed Chairmen, Arthur Burns and William Miller, 
as writing the playbook for high inflationary outcomes. By most accounts, the Burns - Miller 
Fed failed to understand that growth in the productive capabilities of the U.S. economy had 
slowed. In addition, changes in labor markets made it harder to allocate workers to new jobs 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
in quick order. As a consequence of these structural shifts in the functioning of the economy, 
the Fed policymakers failed to realize that output was higher than they thought relative to its 
potential. As a result, additional monetary stimulus couldn’t bring about stronger growth and 
lower unemployment, but only exacerbated inflation, higher inflationary expectations and an 
accelerating wage – price spiral. In fact, inflation rose to double digits, wages chased these 
prices  higher  in  order  to  minimize  reductions  in  living  standards,  and  unemployment 
remained high. 
The  Burns-Miller  Fed  failed,  but  where  was  the  failure greatest?  With regard  to  my  earlier 
description of the policymaking process, the Burns-Miller Fed did not properly understand the 
changing  evolution  of  the  U.S.  economy  in  the  1970s,  nor how  monetary  policy  interacted 
with the new structure. To be fair, the Burns-Miller Fed was not alone – other experts at that 
time made the same mistakes. These common misunderstandings meant that the credibility 
loss over being slow to understand the changing environment probably was not large. 
Far more damaging to the Burns-Miller Fed’s credibility was the failure to adjust policy when 
it later saw rising and high inflation and inflation expectations. Surely, those developments 
were major evidence of a change in the structure of the economy, and the Burns-Miller Fed’s 
failure to adjust its thinking and policy in light of them had huge implications for credibility. I 
take such credibility risks extraordinarily seriously. 
The  1930s  were  an  episode  of  even  worse  Fed  policymaking.  This  was  a  period  of  far 
greater economic dislocation and hardship. When thinking about the 1930s, I find it useful to 
turn to the wisdom of Milton Friedman and Anna Schwartz from their book titled A Monetary 
History  of  the  United  States,  1867–1960.  Friedman  and  Schwartz  discuss  how  monetary 
policy  in  the  early  1930s  actually  contributed  to  the  contraction,  despite  the  fact  that  bank 
reserves  increased  significantly  over  that  period.  Broad  monetary  aggregates  contracted, 
even  though  bank  reserves  were  higher,  because  1)  banking  panics  and  the  weak  real 
economy  led  the  public  to  hoard  cash  and  2)  banks  wanted  to  increase  reserve  ratios  as 
insurance against liquidity shortages and runs. As a result, the amount of lending supported 
by a given level of reserves fell dramatically, and the U.S. economy experienced a period of 
deflation.  However,  the  Fed  failed  to  see  that  it  was  running  a  restrictive  monetary  policy. 
One reason was they were striving to stay on the gold standard, which dictated policies to 
counter gold outflows. In addition, the Fed interpreted the excess reserves on banks’ books 
and the associated low level of money market interest rates as signs of an accommodative 
financial environment and so did not aggressively loosen monetary policy. But, as Friedman 
and Schwartz note, this interpretation was misguided – the excess reserves were attempts 
by banks to maintain a larger buffer stock against liquidity shortages, and low interest rates 
reflected  heightened  demands  for  low-risk  assets  that  the  Fed  should  have  further 
accommodated. 
I bring up the 1970s and 1930s Fed policymaking examples because they are relevant for 
the critiques of monetary policy that we are hearing today. It’s safe to say that the aggressive 
moves the Federal Reserve has made to provide monetary accommodation have not been 
universally applauded. Critics point to the large expansion of bank reserves and low levels of 
interest  rates  throughout  the  Treasury  yield  curve  and  surmise  that  the  Fed  is  sowing  the 
seeds  of  future  inflation,  as  in  the  1970s.  They  believe  we  should  be  taking  back 
accommodation – some say now, some say soon – as the recovery gains some more steam 
or inflation creeps up a few more tenths. 
I  don’t  see  it  that  way.  Rather  than  fighting  the  inflation  ghosts  of  the  1970s,  I  am  more 
worried about repeating the mistakes of the 1930s. As in the 1930s, today we see a lack of 
demand for loans and a resistance of lenders to take on risk – factors that mean the high 
level of bank reserves is not finding its way into broader money measures. As in the 1930s, 
today’s low Treasury interest rates in good part reflect elevated demand for low-risk assets – 
we see investors run to U.S. Treasury markets every time they hear any bad economic news 
from anywhere in the world. Consider another metric for interest rates, the well-known Taylor 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Rule, which captures how monetary policy typically adjusts to output gaps and deviations in 
inflation from target. Its prescriptions would call for the federal funds rates to be something 
like –3.6 percent now, well below the zero lower bound the funds rate is currently stuck at. 
Our  large-scale  asset purchases have  provided  additional  stimulus, but  by  most  estimates 
not  enough  to  bring  us  down  to  the  Taylor  Rule  prescriptions.  Also,  I  should  note  that  in 
1998, Friedman gave a similar recommendation to the Japanese, advocating that the Bank 
of Japan undertake more accommodation by buying government bonds on the open market. 
Other  critics  raise  the  specter  of  1970s-like  structural  changes  in  the  economy.  Such 
changes, they argue, have reduced our productive potential, in particular the mechanisms by 
which  resources  –  most  notably  labor  –  move  from  declining  to  expanding  sectors  of  the 
economy.3 I am acutely aware of the costs of making such an error. No central banker wants 
to repeat the painful experiences of the 1979–83 period. Indeed, the FOMC discussed this 
issue at great length (see the minutes of our January 2011 meeting).4 However, I have yet to 
see  empirical  evidence  based  on  a  modeling  framework  that  successfully  captures  U.S. 
business cycle dynamics that shows such supply-side structural factors can come close to 
explaining the huge shortfalls in actual GDP from trend and the high level of unemployment. 
For  example,  extended  unemployment  insurance  and  increased  difficulties  in  matching 
workers  to  vacant  jobs  may  have  resulted  in  a  transitory  increase  in  the  natural  rate  of 
unemployment,  but  the  analysis  I’ve  seen  doesn’t  get  you  close  to  the  9  percent  rate  we 
currently are experiencing. 
The policy loss function 
The  macroeconomics  literature  often  describes  the  policymaker’s  problem  as  one  of 
minimizing  societal  costs  of  bad  outcomes  –  which  it  mathematically  approximates  by  the 
sum of the squared deviations in inflation from its target and the unemployment rate from its 
so-called  natural  rate.  It  turns  out  that  a  conservative  and  tough-minded  central  banker 
should  value  these  deviations  about  equally.5  Accordingly,  an  inflation  rate  of  5  percent 
against  an  inflation  goal  of  2  percent  is  the  same  sized  loss  as  an  unemployment  rate  of 
9 percent against a conservative estimate of 6 percent for the natural rate of unemployment. 
Today, we are facing an unemployment rate of 9 percent with little prospect of meaningful 
declines soon and the medium-term outlook for inflation is under 2 percent. 
This  policy  framework  is  often  described  as  flexible  inflation  targeting.  In  strict  inflation 
targeting,  all  policy  actions  are  aimed  at  hitting  an  inflation  target.  In  flexible  targeting, 
policymakers balance deviations from both the unemployment and inflation targets. Usually, 
the policy prescriptions from the two targets are not in conflict. Above target unemployment is 
typically  associated  with  muted  inflationary  pressures,  and  accommodative  policies  are 
appropriate  to  reduce  both  gaps  from  their  respective  targets.  At  times,  however,  conflicts 
can occur. When they do, a flexible targeter does not accept a large miss in one target in 
order  to  hit  the  other  perfectly,  but  instead  accepts  moderate  misses  in  both  in  order  to 
minimize the total loss. A corollary is that any flexible inflation targeter has to accept the idea 
that optimal policy may involve inflation running for a time above the long-run target if that is 
a consequence of policies designed to bring unemployment more in line with its target rate. 
                                                 
3  For  example,  the  economy  may  have  experienced  some  permanent  loss  of  potential  output  during  the 
recession partly because of reduced capital deepening with lower rates of investment and partly because of 
other factors. In addition, extended unemployment insurance benefits and difficulties in matching workers with 
jobs may be temporarily pushing up the natural rate of unemployment. 
4  See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011). 
5  See Evans (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Policy prescription 
Given  the  economic  scenario  and  inflation  outlook  I  have  discussed,  if  it  were  possible,  I 
would favor cutting the federal funds rate by several percentage points. But since the federal 
funds rate is already near zero now, that’s not an option. To date, the Fed’s policymaking 
committee,  the  FOMC,  has  used  a  number  of  nontraditional  policy  tools  to  impart  greater 
financial accommodation. I have fully supported these policies. However, I would argue for 
further policy actions based on our dual mandate responsibilities and the strong impediments 
of the financial crisis. 
In  a  recent  Financial  Times  commentary,  Michael  Woodford  of  Columbia  University 
discussed  how  greater  clarity  in  policy  communications  would  help.6  I  agree.  As  I  see  it, 
current  financial  conditions  are  more  restrictive  than  I  favor,  in  part  because  households, 
businesses  and  markets  place  too  much  weight  on  the  possibility  that  Fed  policy  will  turn 
restrictive  in  the  near  to  medium  term.  The  FOMC’s  announcement  in  August  that  it 
anticipates short-term rates remaining low through mid-2013 was certainly a step in the right 
direction because it significantly raised the hurdle for early policy tightening. But I think we 
could go even further. One way would be to make a simple statement about our policy plans 
that  clearly  lays  out  our  conditionality  in  terms  of  our  dual  mandate  responsibilities  and 
observable  economic  data.  This  could  be  done  by  stating  that  we  would  hold  the  federal 
funds rate at extraordinarily low levels until particular markers were reached with regard to 
the  unemployment  rate  and  inflation.  I  will  talk  about  this  in  more  detail  in  a  minute. 
Alternatively,  I  have  previously  discussed  how  state-contingent,  price-level  targeting  would 
work in this regard.7 Another possibility might be to target the level of nominal GDP, with the 
goal of bringing it back to the growth trend that existed before the recession. I think these 
kinds of policies are worth seriously contemplating as ways to enhance economic growth and 
employment while maintaining a disciplined inflation performance. 
Policy problem 
Such conditional-trigger and level-targeting policies could result in inflation running at rates 
that  would  make  us  uncomfortable  during  normal  times.  I  understand  this  discomfort.  The 
difficulties in reestablishing credibility following the inflation of the 1970s weigh on all central 
bankers’ minds. And many of us are conditioned by the work of Ken Rogoff8 and others, who 
note that in normal times, we may want conservative central bankers as institutional offsets 
to what would otherwise be inflationary biases in the monetary policy process. 
Given  this  strong  anti-inflationary  orientation  of  central  bankers,  appropriate  policy  actions 
may face a credibility challenge of a different nature than we are used to talking about – can 
conservative central bankers be counted on to commit to keeping interest rates low in the 
event inflation rises above their long-run target? To the degree that the public doubts that we 
will,  current  accommodation  is  reduced  because  expected  future  short-term  rates,  interest 
rate uncertainty and associated risk premiums all will be higher than they otherwise would 
be. Premature talk of exit strategies or assertions of inflation targets as ceilings only feed the 
perception that we are not committed to the low rates. And thus, I think we are seeing such 
added restraint today. 
                                                 
6  Woodford (2011). 
7  Again, see Evans (2011). 
8  Rogoff (1985). 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
A proposed policy 
I believe that we can substantially ease the public’s concern that monetary policy will become 
restrictive  in  the  near  to  medium  term  and,  hence,  reduce  the  restraint  in  expanding 
economic  activity.  This  can  be  done  by  clearly  spelling  out  in  our  policy  statements  the 
conditionality of our dual mandate responsibilities. What should such a statement look like? I 
think  we  should  consider  committing  to  keep  short-term  rates  at  zero  until  either  the 
unemployment rate goes below 7 percent or the outlook for inflation over the medium term 
goes  above  3  percent.  Such  policies  should  enable  us  to  make  progress  toward  our 
mandated goals. But if this progress is too slow, then we should move forward with increased 
purchases  of  longer-term  securities.  We  might  even  consider  a  regime  in  which  we 
reevaluate our progress toward our policy goals and the rate of purchase of such assets at 
every FOMC meeting. 
Let  me  note  several  aspects  to  this  policy  conditionality.  As  I  just  said,  I  subscribe  to  a 
2 percent target for inflation over the long run. However, given how badly we are doing on 
our employment  mandate, we need to be willing to take a risk on inflation going modestly 
higher in the short run if that is a consequence of polices aimed at lowering unemployment. 
With  regard  to  the  inflation  marker,  we  have  already  experienced  unduly  low  inflation  of  1 
percent;  so  against  an  objective  of  2  percent,  3  percent  inflation  would  be  an  equivalent 
policy loss to what we have already experienced. On the unemployment marker, a decline to 
7 percent would be quite helpful. However, weighed against a conservative estimate for the 
natural rate of unemployment of 6 percent, it still represents a substantial policy loss. Indeed, 
weighed against a less conservative long-run estimate of the natural rate, it is a larger policy 
loss than that from 3 percent inflation. Accordingly, these triggers remain quite conservatively 
tilted  in  favor  of  disciplined  inflation  performance  over  enhanced  growth  and  employment, 
and it would not be unreasonable to consider an even lower unemployment threshold before 
starting policy tightening. 
I would also highlight that while I believe that optimal policy would be consistent with inflation 
running above our 2 percent target for some time, this policy does not abandon the 2 percent 
target  for  long-run  inflation.  Indeed,  I  would  support  combining  this  policy  with  a  formal 
statement of 2 percent as our longer-run inflation target in conjunction with reaffirming our 
commitment to flexible inflation-targeting. Furthermore, I see a 3 percent inflation threshold 
as a safeguard against inflation running too high for too long and thus unhinging longer-run 
inflation expectations. It also is a safeguard against the kinds of policy errors we made in the 
1970s. If potential output is indeed lower and the natural rate of unemployment higher than I 
currently think, then resource pressures would emerge and actual inflation and the outlook 
for inflation over the medium term would rise faster than expected. If this outlook for inflation 
hit 3 percent before the unemployment rate falls to 7 percent, then we would begin to tighten 
policy. 
I understand that some may find such a policy proposal to be hard to understand, or even 
risky.  But  these  are  not  ordinary  times  –  we  are  in  the  aftermath  of  a  financial  crisis  with 
massive  output  gaps,  with  stubborn  debt  overhangs  and  high  degrees  of  household  and 
business  caution  that  are  weighing  on  economic  activity.  As  Ken  Rogoff  wrote  in  a  recent 
piece in the Financial Times, “Any inflation above 2 percent may seem anathema to those 
who  still  remember  the  anti-inflation  wars  of  the  1970s  and  1980s,  but  a  once-in-75-year 
crisis calls for outside-the-box measures”.9 The Fed has done a good deal of thinking out of 
the box over the past four years. I think it is time to do some more. 
                                                 
9  Rogoff (2011) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
References 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2011, Minutes of the FOMC Meeting, 
January 25–26. 
Evans, Charles, 2011, “The Fed’s dual mandate responsibilities and challenges facing U.S. 
monetary  policy”,  Remarks  delivered  at  the  European  Economic  and  Financial  Centre, 
London, September 7. 
Friedman,  Milton,  and  Anna  J.  Schwartz,  1971,  A  Monetary  History  of  the  United  States, 
1867–1960, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Rogoff,  Kenneth,  2011,  “The  bullets  yet  to  be  fired  to  stop  the  crisis”,  FT.com,  August  8, 
available to registered users. 
Rogoff,  Kenneth,  1985,  “The  optimal  degree  of  commitment  to  an  intermediate  monetary 
target”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 100, No. 4, November, pp. 1169–1189. 
Woodford, Michael, 2011, “Bernanke should clarify policy and sink QE3”, FT.com, August 25, 
available to registered users. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
