Luc Coene: The Belgian banking sector in 2020 
Speech by Mr Luc Coene, Governor of the National Bank of Belgium, at the colloquium “The 
Belgian  Banking  Sector  in  2020”  in  celebration  of  the  75th  anniversary  of  the  Belgian 
Financial  Forum  publications  “Revue  bancaire  et  financière/Bank-  en  Financiewezen”  and 
“Droit bancaire et financier/Bank- en Financieel Recht”, Brussels, 22 November 2011. 
 framework  not  only  strengthens 
The  many  lessons  learned  from  the  crisis  that  began  in  2007–2008  have  given  rise  to  an 
ambitious, internationally coordinated, and broad-based set of regulatory reforms. The new 
regulatory 
the 
microprudential level, but it also incorporates new macroprudential requirements. Changes to 
the regulatory architecture have also led to the creation of new regulatory authorities, at both 
the European and Belgian levels. All of these developments will have significant impacts on 
the Belgian banking sector over the next decade. 
requirements  and  supervision  at 
Microprudential supervision – Basel III 
1.  
Key elements, which are designed to increase banks’ resiliency to shocks, include: 
 
An increase in minimum regulatory capital requirements: the range of risks for 
which regulatory capital must be held has also expanded.  
Higher quality of capital: an increase in the amount of capital that must be held in 
the form of common equity, which offers the greatest capacity for loss absorption.  
A leverage ratio, which is a non-risk-weighted capital requirement that should serve 
as a backstop to protect against situations where risk-weighted capital requirements 
are too low (through underestimation of risks or regulatory arbitrage)  
Liquidity ratios: the liquidity coverage ratio will ensure that banks can withstand a 
liquidity  shock  of  30  days  in  duration;  the  net  stable  funding  ratio  will  ensure  that 
banks have a sufficient amount of longer-term stable funding.  
   Macroprudential supervision 
2.  
One  of  the  striking  outcomes  of  the  crisis  has  been  a  change  in  the  focus  of  prudential 
regulation,  from  a  narrow  concern  with  the  resiliency  of  individual  institutions  to  a  broader 
preoccupation with the entire financial system. This concern has translated into the inclusion 
in  the  Basel  III  of  new  macroprudential  capital  requirements.  It  has  also  led  to  the 
establishment of a macroprudential authority in the new European regulatory framework.  
New macroprudential capital requirements: 
 
Countercyclical  capital  buffers  (CCBs)  have  been  introduced  into  the  Basel  III 
framework,  to  address  the  time  dimension  of  systemic  risk.  The  level  of 
countercyclical capital buffers, which will vary between 0 and 2.5% of risk-weighted 
assets, will be determined at national level for all credit exposures to counterparts in 
that country. When credit growth is judged excessive, national authorities will require 
banks to build buffers, which can then be drawn down in the ensuing downturn. The 
countercyclical buffer policy is reciprocal, meaning that all banks, even foreign ones, 
with exposures in a country must hold the buffer that has been set by that country’s 
authorities.  
SIFIs. Systemic risk also has a cross-sectional dimension, as illustrated in the crisis 
by the multiple instances where governments felt compelled to intervene with public 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
money  to  rescue  large  financial  institutions  whose  failure  could  have  transmitted 
distress  to  the  entire  financial  system.  On  the  one  hand,  failure  of  systemically 
important  financial  institutions  (or  SIFIs)  would  generate  large  costs  that  the 
institutions  themselves  do  not  internalize.  On  the  other  hand,  belief  that  these 
institutions  are  too  big  to  fail  creates  a  moral  hazard  problem,  weakening  market 
discipline and providing the institutions with an incentive to take excessive risk. Both 
of these observations point to the need to find ways to allow such institutions to fail 
without injections of public money.  
At  the  global  level,  the  Basel  Committee  is  working  together  with  the  Financial 
Stability Board to develop a comprehensive approach to address the systemic risk 
created  by  global  SIFIs.  A  methodology  has  been  developed 
to  2.5%, 
dependingidentify global SIFIs, which will face capital surcharges of 1 upon their 
degree  of  systemic  importance.  These  institutions  will  be  subject  to  enhanced 
supervision, as well as to the requirement to formulate recovery and resolution plans 
(or living wills).  
At  the  Belgian  level,  the  NBB  has  developed  a  methodology  for  identifying 
institutions whose failure could have a significant impact on the domestic financial 
system i.e., domestic SIFIs. The methodology, in line with the international practice, 
focuses on the institution’s size, its interconnectedness with other domestic financial 
institutions, and the ease of substitutability of the critical functions performed by the 
institution to gauge its degree of systemic importance.  
Domestic  SIFIs  will  be  required  to  submit  plans  for  all  strategic  decisions  to  the 
NBB,  which  has  the  power  to  veto  these  decisions  if  they  are  judged  to  have  a 
negative impact on the institution’s risk profile or on the financial system. D-SIFIs will 
also  have  to  comply  with  special  reporting  requirements  and  will  need  to  develop 
recovery and resolution plans.  
The recovery plan – which is developed by the bank – outlines the different options 
that  can  be  taken  in  response  to  a  major  shock  to  its  liquidity  or  solvency.  The 
resolution  plan,  developed  by  authorities,  outlines  options  for  cases  where  the 
recovery plan of an institution has not succeeded.  
Resolution frameworks 
The  focus  on  recovery  and  resolution  plans  highlights  another  critical  area  of 
regulatory  reform:  the  improvement  of  crisis  management  and  bank  resolution 
frameworks.  The  crisis  has  revealed  many  obstacles  to  the  resolution  of  cross-
border  financial  institutions,  and  here  is  now  a  clearly  acknowledged  need  to 
improve resolution regimes.  
Importantly, the effectiveness of crisis resolution framework also affects the behavior 
of financial institutions and their stakeholders, even in non-crisis times. If the crisis 
resolution mechanism is weak, leading to a high probability of government bailout of 
SIFIs that encounter distress, then stakeholders of these institutions will have little 
incentive  to  exert  discipline  on  management,  who  may  engage  in  excessive  risk 
taking.  
In  Europe, a  legislative  proposal soon  to  be  published  by  the  Commission should 
help to lay the foundations for a new crisis management framework. Key elements 
of  the  framework  will  involve  the  formulation  of  recovery  and  resolution  plans  (at 
least for large, cross-border institutions), enhanced resolution powers for authorities, 
and provisions linked to bail-in debt, which protects taxpayers by converting certain 
types of debt to equity at the point of non-viability of an institution.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
    3.  
 
  2 
  4.  
 
   Authorities in several G20 countries are currently working with their credit institutions 
to  develop  recovery  and  resolution  plans  (RRPs).  These  efforts  are  being 
coordinated  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board.  Along  similar  lines,  the  European 
Council conclusions of May 10, 2010, relating to crisis prevention, management and 
resolution  contain  a  requirement  that  Cross-Border  Stability  Groups  (CBSG) 
coordinate the drafting of RRPs.  
The new institutional architecture  
In  response  to  the  crisis,  a  new  supervisory  architecture  has  been  established  in 
Europe.  This  framework  includes  three  new  European  supervisory  authorities 
(ESAs)  –  for  banking,  insurance  and  securities  markets  –  and  the  European 
Systemic  Risk  Board  (ESRB),  which  is  responsible  for  macroprudential  oversight 
and based at the ECB.  
Each of the new supervisory authorities is responsible for creating a single rulebook, 
designed to establish harmonized regulatory technical standards and ensure a level 
playing field across the Union. The ESAs must also, in cooperation with the ESRB, 
initiate and coordinate Union-wide stress tests to assess the resilience of financial 
institutions to adverse market developments.  
The  ESRB  monitors  and  assess  systemic  risk  with  the  objective  of  lowering  the 
probability  of  a  build-up  of  systemic  risk  or  mitigating  the  impact  of  any 
materialization of systemic risk. The ESRB’s principal tasks include identifying and 
assessing systemic risks, issuing early warnings as risks emerge, and formulating 
policy  recommendations  in  response  to  the  observed  risks.  Warnings  and 
recommendations can be addressed to the European Union as a whole, to one or 
more  Member  States,  to  one  or  more  of  the  ESAs,  or  to  one  or  more  national 
supervisory authorities.  
The move in Belgium to the twin peaks model is in line with these developments. 
This adaptation of the domestic institutional framework allows for a regular flow of 
information  between  microprudential  and  macroprudential  supervisors  and  for  the 
coordination of micro and macro-prudential policies. It also permits application of the 
“four-eyes  principle”,  which  incorporates  a  transversal  approach  to  risk  analysis, 
across risks, institutions, and time.  
Impacts of these developments on the Belgian banking sector 
5.  
As  indicated  by  the  previous  speaker,  the  financial  sector  will  face  a  very  competitive 
environment in the search of stable financing. This will result in a number of consequences: 
 
More  costly  credit.  It  is  difficult  to  deny  that  the  stricter  capital  requirements, 
combined with the new liquidity rules and new taxes, will increase the cost of credit. 
We  do  not  yet  know  the  extent  to  which  this  higher  cost  will  impact  aggregate 
lending or the real economy. However, the experience of the past three years has 
clearly demonstrated that banking crises are extremely costly and have significant 
negative,  long-term  impacts  on  the  economy.  The  deleveraging  process  will 
reinforce  this  development.  This  is  likely  to  affect  more  SME’s  than  larger 
corporations, that can still access the financial markets. This last development may 
lead to some disintermediation.  
Fewer  cross-border  institutions  or  activity,  or  less  centralized  liquidity 
management. The failures of resolution frameworks revealed by the crisis and the 
difficulty  of  establishing  an  effective  resolution 
for  cross-border 
institutions  suggest  that  cross-border  activity  will  be  reduced  in  the  future. 
framework 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Contributing to this development may be the new liquidity requirements, which could 
result in less centralized liquidity management by cross-border groups.  
At  the  same  time,  while  some  degree  of  explicit  or  implicit  ring-fencing  is  an 
understandable outcome of the crisis, we must be aware of the fact that Belgium is a 
country  with  excess  savings.  We  would  not  be  doing  Belgian  banks  a  favor  by 
forcing them to employ all of Belgian savings within Belgium. We will need to ensure 
that  the  new  regulatory  framework  allows  for  an  appropriate  balance  between 
limiting the risks associated with cross-border activities and allowing savings to flow 
to their most profitable uses.  
Industrial  organization  and  SIFIs.  Another  dimension  through  which  the  future 
structure of the banking system may be affected is related to the treatment of SIFIs. 
The  identification  of  SIFIs  involves  gauging,  among  other  things,  size,  market 
shares,  and  the  degree  of  interconnectedness  between  banks.  Limiting  their  size 
and interconnectedness, which SIFIs should have the incentive to do, will potentially 
lower concentration in the banking system and reduce the potential contagion that 
could result from a shock. Risk management for systemically important banks will 
also likely differ from the past, as SIFIs will be required to formulate recovery plans 
and regularly update them. Developing a recovery plan requires envisaging a series 
of scenarios involving severe shocks and the bank’s possible responses to those the 
potential 
in  consultation  with  authorities  shocks,  as  well  as  assessing 
effectiveness of these responses. The recovery plan process must be ongoing and 
integrated into the bank’s risk management procedures. This process should require 
banks to undertake more advanced planning for distress situations than in the past 
and  should  encourage  a  fundamental  reflection  regarding  the  rationale  underlying 
the bank’s activities, complexity, and organizational structure.  
Greater focus on traditional banking. Several elements of the regulatory reforms 
(e.g.,  liquidity  requirements  and  increases  in  capital  requirements  for  the  trading 
book) provide the incentive for banks to move more toward the “traditional” model of 
banking.  While  a  requirement  such  as  the  ring-fencing  of  retail  banking  from 
investment  banking  proposed  in  the  UK  probably  goes  too  far,  a  toughening  of 
capital  requirements  for  the  trading  book  and  greater  alignment  of  capital 
requirements for exposures in the trading and banking book should give banks less 
incentive to take excessive risk through proprietary trading, thereby relying more on 
traditional banking activity. In smaller countries like Belgium ring fencing retail banks 
would be rather counterproductive. the main victims of such a reform could be the 
SME’s. They need more sophisticated instruments than those retails banks can offer 
and  they  would  be  too  small  for  investment  banks.  We  have  in  Belgium  a  strong 
model of universal banking. We should preserve that.  
Less discretion by banks in the determination of risk-weighted assets. Recent 
events,  including  the  European  stress  tests  and  the  sovereign  debt  crisis,  have 
highlighted  significant  differences  across  banks  and  across  jurisdictions  in  the 
calculation of  risk  weights  and  capital  requirements  for  certain  assets.  This  raises 
the question as to whether such outcomes are consistent with what was intended by 
the  designers  of  the  Basel  framework.  In  coming  months  work  will  be  initiated  by 
both  the  Basel  Committee  and  EBA  to  monitor  the  implementation  of  the  new 
regulatory framework and to ensure that risk-weighted assets are appropriately and 
consistently calculated for exposures in both the banking and the trading book. This 
will  likely  result  in  more  harmonization,  at  least  among  European  banks,  of  IRB 
models for determining PDs and LGDs. Significant differences across banks in risk-
weighted assets must arise as a result of true differences in risk and not from the 
underestimation of certain risks by some banks.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches
    4 
 6.  
 
   Challenges 
While  it  is  possible  to  make  some  predictions  about  the  changes  in  the  Belgian 
banking sector in the coming years, several open questions remain, linked in part to 
the challenges associated with implementation of the regulatory reforms.  
One issue that we are all now acutely aware of as a result of the crisis is the fact 
that  sovereign  debt  can  no  longer  be  considered  to  be  a  risk-free  asset.  It  now 
becomes  crucial  for  regulators  to  ensure  that  the  credit  risk  of  sovereign  debt 
exposures is adequately recognized by banks. A reflection needs to be undertaken 
concerning the role of sovereign debt in regulation. Questions that will need to be 
addressed  include  the  allowance  of  a  zero  risk  weight  for  certain  sovereign 
exposures  (standardized  approach  allows  zero  risk  weight  for  AAA  and  AA-rated 
sovereigns; IRB approach has no floor on sovereign PDs), the reliance of liquidity 
requirements  on  sovereign  debt  holdings,  and  exemptions  of  sovereign  debt  from 
large exposure rules. How these issues are resolved will obviously have an impact 
on the future composition of many banks’ balance sheets. E.g. we see now that the 
liquidity cover ratio (LCR) as it is designed, discourages interbank lending.  
Other open questions relate to potential unintended consequences of the regulatory 
framework.  To  what  extent  will  the  tougher  requirements  on  regulated  institutions 
cause risks and activities to flow into the shadow banking sector and what will be the 
implications  for  banks  and  for  systemic  risk?  Work  is  currently  ongoing  at  the 
international level, under the leadership of the FSB, to strengthen the oversight and 
regulation of the shadow banking sector, and European authorities are also working 
on  this  issue.  Yet,  authorities  will  still  need  to  remain  extremely  vigilant  over  the 
coming years in tracking the ultimate distribution of risks.  
Finally,  many  reforms  are  being  introduced  simultaneously.  We  do  not  yet 
understand  fully  the  extent  to  which  different  reforms  are  complements  or 
substitutes  and,  hence,  what  their  cumulative  impacts  will  be.  The  interactions 
between the various regulations must be carefully monitored, in order to understand 
the impact of the reforms on the financial landscape and to ensure that the goal of 
increasing  the  resilience  of  banks  and  the  financial  system  are  achieved  at  least 
cost.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
