Christian Noyer: The euro area sovereign debt crisis 
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France and Chairman of the Board of 
Directors of the Bank for International Settlements, at the Bank of France / Toulouse School of 
Economics Conference “The euro area sovereign debt crisis”, Paris, 19 December 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to give the introductory address to this stimulating conference 
that  the  Banque  de  France  is  very  pleased  to  organize  jointly  with  Toulouse  School  of 
Economics. Obviously, finding a more topical subject would be difficult, now that euro area’s 
sovereign  debt  markets  are  caught  in  the  vortex  of  the  financial  turmoil  that  has  been 
plaguing the world economy for the last four years. This topic is also the one we have chosen 
for our next Financial Stability Review, to be released next March, with a significant number 
of contributions stemming from today’s presentations. 
The  current  crisis  is  indeed  extremely  challenging.  Many  complex  factors  are  currently 
interacting, making policy decision-making particularly difficult. In such a context, academics 
have a critical role to play to help us clarify the tradeoffs and available options, so that we are 
better able to make the right choices in real time.  
This very fact that intellectual inputs from research are a precious resource in times of stress 
and  multi-faceted  uncertainty  confirms  me  in  my  view  that  central  banks’  investment  in 
economic research, be it in-house or through partnerships with academia, is a very valuable 
asset. Therefore, I also warmly welcome this conference as being one brilliant illustration of 
the benefits brought by our three years long partnership with Toulouse School of Economics 
(TSE).  Note  however  that,  while  the  organization  of  high-level  academic  conferences  has 
been an important achievement within this partnership, it is not the only one. Indeed, many 
avenues of fruitful collaboration have developed. Two series of regular joint seminars, one on 
monetary  economics,  the  other  on  financial  stability,  and  several  workshops  have  notably 
contributed  to  strengthen  the  links  between  Banque-de-France  and  TSE  researchers  and 
stimulate the scientific and policy debates. I would also like to take this opportunity to thank 
Jean Tirole for his personal involvement in the exchanges with Banque de France. Last but 
not least, let me also advertise the new Banque de France – TSE Senior and Junior Prizes in 
Monetary Economics and Finance which purpose is to distinguish outstanding contributions 
by academics. The first prizes will be awarded for the first time on 16 March 2012.  
In the remaining of this address, I will first discuss the sovereign nature of the current crisis, 
its origins, implications and the associated challenges. Then, I will focus on the response of 
the Eurosystem to this crisis. 
1. 
The euro-area sovereign debt crisis: some thoughts on its origins, its 
implications, and the challenges ahead 
The  origins  of  the  euro-area  sovereign  debt  crisis  are  twofold:  the  real  cost  of  the  overall 
financial crisis and the excesses of the pre-crisis period have jointly contributed to the gravity 
of the current situation. While this is not specific to the euro area, the consequences have 
turned out to be particularly harmful here. Indeed, by not internalizing the policy requirements 
associated  with  the  participation  in  a  monetary  union,  several  euro-area  countries  entered 
the global financial crisis in a particularly vulnerable position. 
One  of  these  policy  requirements  is  fiscal  discipline.  Within  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact, 
fiscal discipline was associated with pre-agreed quantitative ceilings for the deficit and debt-
to-GDP ratios. In practice, many euro-area countries did not take advantage of expansionary 
periods  to  reduce  the  probability  of  reaching  these  limits  in  recessionary  phases. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Unfortunately, an exceptionally hard recession, by all historical standards, hit the euro area in 
2009, as a consequence of the financial turmoil initiated in the US in  2007–2008. The tax 
revenue went down and the large fiscal stimulus packages that were then required to contain 
the  real  consequences  of  the  crisis  and  to  avoid  major  disruptions  in  the  financing  of  the 
economy also resulted in swift increases in public debts across the board. The fact that both 
public  and  private  indebtedness  had  followed  an  unsustainable  pace  of  growth  over  the 
previous decade then makes area-wide adjustments both necessary and painful. 
Among the factors that contributed to the excess of the pre-crisis period stands in my view 
the misleading belief that sophisticated financial engineering was able to achieve close-to-
perfect  risk  diversification  and  market  completeness  led  in  fact  to  excessive  risk-taking  by 
banks.  This  is  in  sharp  contrast  with  the  current  situation,  in  which  investors  have  doubts 
about even the risk-freeness of sovereign bonds of developed economies.  
Restoring market confidence is a difficult and potentially lengthy task. That said, all actions 
that  are  consistent  with  the  commitment  of  governments  to  address  national  fiscal 
imbalances and structural impediments to real growth are likely to accelerate this process. 
Besides,  it  is  clear  that  nominal  long-term  anchors  are  also  of  the  essence  to  reduce 
uncertainty  and  facilitate  such  reforms.  The  primary  mandate  and  the  best  possible 
contribution of the Eurosystem is precisely to ensure price stability in the medium run. Then, 
to  the  extent  that  dysfunctional  financial-markets  are  likely  to  jeopardize  our  ability  to 
maintain stable prices in the medium run, the Eurosystem must intervene. This analysis has 
motivated our decisions in the past and will continue to motivate future ones. This brings me 
to the second part of my talk today. 
Measures taken by the Eurosystem to fight against the financial crisis 
2. 
Our analysis of the recent situation suggests that the weak outlook for economic activity in 
the euro area is weighing downward on costs, wages and prices. Accordingly, the Governing 
council  decided  twice  to  lower  the  key  ECB  interest  rate  by  25  basis  points,  in  its  early 
November and early December Meetings. 
Changes in the ECB rates ultimately affect inflation through changes in bank lending rates, 
monetary  and  financial  conditions  and  aggregate  demand.  Under  normal  financial-market 
conditions,  monetary-policy  transmission  mechanisms  work  properly  and  non-standard 
measures  are  unnecessary.  But  when  transmission  mechanisms  are  impaired,  standard 
policy is likely to be less effective. In such exceptional circumstances, extraordinary, or non-
standard,  measures  must  be  implemented.  It  is  in  that  spirit  that  the  Eurosystem  has 
constantly and reactively updated its set of non-standard measures, keeping pace with the 
crisis’ developments. On December 8, we have announced extensive measures to contain 
the refinancing risks of Euro area banks. The Eurosystem has announced in particular two 
longer-term refinancing operations with a maturity of 36 months which will be conducted as 
fixed  rate  tender  procedures  with  full  allotment  as  well  as  the  extension  of  the  collateral  it 
considers  eligible  to  borrow  its  liquidity.  We  also  have  reduced  the  rate  of  reserve 
requirements from 2% to 1%, which is also contributing to stem collateral constraints of parts 
of the euro area banking system.  
I would like to recall again that, in the euro area, banks are the main channel for mobilizing 
domestic  savings  and  financing  investment.  This  explains  why  ECB’s  non-standard 
measures have primarily aimed at enhancing access of the banking sector to liquidity and at 
facilitating the functioning of the euro-area money market. 
Given the topic of the current conference, I would like to take the opportunity to elaborate on 
one  of  these  non-standard  measures,  namely  the  Securities  Market  Programme,  or  SMP. 
Sovereign  yields  are  central  in  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy,  in  particular  because 
government bonds provide a floor to the private-sector funding costs. This is the reason why 
we launched the SMP.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
I insist that, through the implementation of all its non-conventional measures – including the 
SMP – the Eurosystem has fully played its expected role as a lender of last resort (LLR), by 
which  I  mean  that  we  have  and  we  will  intervene  to  stem  liquidity  crises  that  threaten  the 
stability of the banking system.  
Having said that, it is clear that engaging in large-scale asset purchases of sovereign bonds 
is well beyond what should be expected of a central bank’s role as a LLR. Moreover, large-
scale  asset  purchases  are  not  without  risks.  While  they  may  help  to  alleviate  upward 
pressures  on  long-term  interest  rates  in  the  short  run,  they  could  also  affect  price  and 
financial  stability  in  the  medium-run,  by  endangering  the  value  of  the  central-bank  money. 
Such risks do not necessarily materialize, but when they do, the repercussions are dramatic.  
Altogether, considering the different tools are potentially at the disposal of policy-makers, it is 
crucial to gauge the short- to long-run benefits, limits and risks associated with each of them. 
I  do  not  think  that  confidence  would  really  benefit  from  measures  that  are  known  to  carry 
non-negligible long-run risks, even if some short-term relief is expected from them. 
As a way of conclusion, let me shortly consider the progress that has already been made to 
solve this crisis and list some of the remaining challenges ahead. 
First,  it  seems  important  to  welcome  the  significance  of  the  fiscal  stabilization  programs 
many euro-area governments have committed to. As mentioned earlier, this is a necessary 
step to restore confidence in a sustainable way. Although this is a difficult task, the timely 
delivery of the promised reforms is necessary. 
Second,  beyond  individual  policy  actions,  the  recent  progress  obtained  in  the  design  of  a 
common  fiscal  governance  in  the  euro  area  is  of  the  essence.  Indeed,  many  important 
decisions have been taken in that direction: The creation of the EFSF and the ESM or the 
agreement on fiscal rules and surveillance mechanisms during the Brussels EU Summit on 
December the 8th and 9th are historical steps in the right direction. Obviously, most of these 
newly established institutions, rules and processes would have been unthinkable four years 
ago. This makes me really optimistic about our prospects for restoring stability and growth in 
the euro area. 
Thus,  significant  progress  has  been  achieved.  However,  the  future  may  still  add  to  the 
extraordinary challenges we are now confronted with. I rely on the academic community to 
help the policymakers in the decisive decisions they will have to take. 
Thank you for your attention. I wish you all a fruitful and stimulating conference.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
