Glenn Stevens: The Inaugural Warren Hogan Memorial Lecture 
Text of The Inaugural Warren Hogan Memorial Lecture by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of 
the Reserve Bank of Australia, at the School of Economics, University of Sydney, Sydney, 
8 December 2011. 
 It  is  a  very  great  pleasure,  as  a  former  student  of  Professor  Warren  Hogan,  to  give  this 
lecture in his memory. Thank you to the Hogan family, many of whom are here this evening, 
and to the School of Economics at the University of Sydney for giving me this honour.  
Before  recounting  one  or  two  personal  reminiscences,  it  is  appropriate  to  say  something 
about his life. Many fascinating details of it are revealed in the interview with John Lodewijks, 
and the eulogy by Tony Aspromourgos, both fittingly published in the Economic Record.1 
Warren Pat Hogan was born in Papakura, just south of Auckland, New Zealand, in 1929. He 
completed his undergraduate and Master’s education at Auckland University College, where 
he was taught by Colin Simkin, who later was also at the University of Sydney. He married 
Ialene, a fellow student in the same faculty, in 1952. Hence it is not altogether surprising that 
Hogan’s children seemed drawn to economics. Four of the five children, and several of the 
grandchildren, have degrees in economics.  
After  gaining  early  work  experience  at  the  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand,  Hogan,  with  a 
young family in tow, came to Australia in the mid 1950s, where he gained a PhD from the 
Australian National University in 1959, his research being on growth theory. His supervisor 
for  that  work  was  Trevor  Swan,  one  of  Australia’s  most  renowned  theoretical  economists 
(and subsequently a member of the Reserve Bank Board). Ivor Pearce, with whom he would 
later  collaborate  in  writing  about  international  finance,  was  a  close  confidant  and  mentor. 
Among  the  early  fruit  of  this  work,  as  recounted  in  the  Lodewijks  interview,  is  that  Hogan 
uncovered an error in a celebrated paper by Robert Solow. This led to an exchange between 
Hogan and the future Nobel Prize winner in the Review of Economics and Statistics.2 Heady 
stuff indeed for a young graduate student from the antipodes.  
Hogan rose quickly through the ranks at Newcastle University College in the 1960s. But it 
was  as  Professor  of  Economics  at  the  University  of  Sydney,  for  30  years  from  1968,  that 
Hogan came to more prominence. Joined by Simkin, he sought to lift the technical standard 
of economics at the faculty, including by putting more emphasis on quantitative techniques. 
This  met  a  good  deal  of  resistance  as  part  of  the  broader  debates  about  how  economics 
should be taught. By the time I was a student here from 1976 on, both sides seemed to have 
dug into the trenches and the dispute had been bitter.3 
None of that stopped Warren Hogan from grappling with significant issues in economics or 
economic  policy.  In  fact,  Hogan’s  professional  life  shows  an  active  mind  always  pursuing 
some important question. In a career that produced over 150 articles, books and chapters of 
books and many shorter publications, he ranged broadly. As early as 1958 he was producing 
articles  examining  the  rise  of  new  financial  intermediaries  outside  the  regulated  banking 
system  –  a  theme  about  which  we  were  still  hearing  in  the  1980s,  and  one  which  should 
resonate today in light of the attention being given to “shadow banks” and the expansion of 
                                                 
1  Lodewijks (2007) and Aspromourgos (2010). 
2  Hogan (1958a) and Solow (1958). 
3  My own perspective, for what it is worth, is that the shift in emphasis towards quantitative techniques at the 
University of Sydney probably did not go far enough, at least as far as my own undergraduate education was 
concerned. This was something which had to be rectified at graduate school. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
the weight and width of the global regulatory footprint currently under way.4 Hogan retained 
an interest in both financial regulation and deregulation throughout his career, and married 
this with a nuanced understanding of the behaviour of financial players in their appetite for 
risk.  
Hogan also worked on issues of development in the emerging world, wages, immigration and 
transport. He served as economic adviser to one Federal Treasurer (Lynch) and as a director 
of  various  companies,  most  notably  serving  on  Westpac’s  board  for  15  years,  including 
through the period of deregulation and subsequent tumult. In his later years he conducted a 
major review of pricing in aged care. He also served in numerous capacities over the years in 
various  university  administrative  positions  and  on  other  committees  in  the  broader 
community. His was a full life indeed.  
It was in my third year at Sydney University that I think I first encountered Professor Hogan. 
This would have been in 1978. More than three decades after I sat in afternoon seminars 
conducted by him, the memories of his general style are clearer than the things he actually 
said. He was usually dressed in a suit – which would have been much more unusual for an 
academic in the late 1970s than it is now. The reason was perhaps that he had been in the 
city earlier in the day as he was active in dealing with practical policy issues and had links 
with the business world. On days when there might have been a nice business lunch, there 
was  a  certain  relaxed  expansiveness  to  his  demeanour.  He  spoke  often  without  notes  on 
whatever economic topic we were covering, and as he spoke he would take the various coins 
from  his  pocket  and  arrange  them  into  small  piles  on  the  table.  We  wondered  what 
subconscious  portfolio  balance  idea  might  have  been  behind  that  behaviour.  Warren  often 
had a somewhat elliptical way of saying things – you had to listen carefully to get what he 
may have really been saying, and sometimes you weren’t sure you had understood correctly. 
As  I  reflect  now  on  this  characteristic,  I  wonder  whether  he  missed  a  calling  as  a  central 
banker!  
He certainly had built up contacts in the central banking world, as an occasional visitor to the 
BIS, where he was on very good terms with the late Palle Schelde Andersen, a renowned 
BIS economist and student of the international economy and financial system. I assume that 
their  acquaintance  was  made  in  the  late  1970s,  when  Andersen  visited  the  University  of 
Sydney for a period, funded by a grant from the Reserve Bank.5 
One Hogan paper of that era that really struck a chord with me then – I have always recalled 
its title – was about the issue of revisions to economic statistics. It was entitled “How Do We 
Know Where We Are Going, When We Don’t Know Where We Have Been, Let Alone Where 
We Are?”.6 These days the study of revisions to data is an art in itself (though the quality of 
national accounts data is better than it was in the 1970s). Central banks put huge effort into 
what has come to be called “nowcasting” – that is, working out what the national accounts 
probably will, or should, say about the current quarter in three or four months’ time when they 
are  released.  Some  central  banks  actually  “backcast”  the  recent  past,  deciding  their  own 
version of GDP, not necessarily the same as the one published by the statisticians, in effect 
foreshadowing revisions to come.7 The RBA has not gone to that extent, though of course we 
have seen certain difficulties in assessing the current pace of underlying inflation in our own 
country over recent months, with reasonably significant revisions to some – as far back as 
1978.  
                                                 
4  See Hogan (1958b). 
5  Hogan was at the conference in Basel to honour Palle Schelde Andersen’s professional life in December 2007. 
6  Hogan (1978). 
7  For example, the Bank of England’s (BoE) Monetary Policy Committee, for some time, has been presented 
with output growth numbers that contain various adjustments by the BoE’s staff. For more information, see 
Cunningham and Jeffery (2007). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
But the work on which I wish to focus for a brief period tonight is the book Hogan co-authored 
with Ivor Pearce entitled The Incredible Eurodollar.8 Published first in 1982, with subsequent 
editions  published  in  1983  and  1984,  this  fascinating  little  book  sought  to  explain  the 
workings of the Eurodollar market and the institutions which operated in it. In the 1970s – the 
dataset  on  which  Hogan  and  Pearce  based  their  work  –  the  Eurodollar  markets  were  an 
exotic  new  development,  spawned  by  a  period  of  international  financial  turmoil  and 
innovation, some of which was in response to regulation.  
The post-World War II compact known as the Bretton Woods system had held for about 20 to 
25 years. This involved a US dollar standard, under which countries fixed, and occasionally 
adjusted, their exchange rates to the US dollar; the dollar was fixed to gold at US$35 per 
ounce;  private  capital  flows  were  limited  in  scope;  and  official  flows  made  major 
contributions, via the IMF, to international adjustment. But by the late 1960s and early 1970s, 
this arrangement had come under severe strain as private capital flows began to increase in 
size and US policymakers found they could not live with the constraints of the system. In a 
sequence  of  events,  including  the  break  of  the  link  with  gold  and  the  decision  by  key 
countries  to  allow  their  currencies  to  float  against  the  dollar,  the  system  broke  down.  The 
result  was  a  system  in  which  exchange  rates  between  the  then  major  currencies  have 
floated, with occasional efforts at management, ever since.  
The  Eurodollar  Market  was  in  essence  a  pool  of  obligations  issued  by  banks  outside  the 
US jurisdiction  but  denominated  in  dollars.  It  grew  rapidly,  apparently  unconstrained  by 
regulation conducted on a national basis (as all regulation was, and largely still is). It was 
part  of  a  large  increase  in  cross-border  financing  activity  by  internationally  active  banks. 
When  Hogan  and  Pearce  published  their  third  edition  in  1984,  the  stock  of  cross-border 
assets  held  by  BIS  reporting  banks  was  about  US$2  trillion.  Today,  it  is  around 
US$32 trillion.  
In the early 1980s, much of the talk about the Eurodollar Market was couched in terms of 
whether Eurodollar deposits should be added to measures of the money stock, which were 
the height of economic fashion at the time. As you will recall, this was the period in which the 
US Federal Reserve targeted monetary aggregates explicitly and in which weekly monetary 
aggregates data  were  scrutinised closely  for  signs  about  the  likely  direction  of  US  interest 
rates. One can see this background quite clearly in Hogan and Pearce’s little book, which 
has lots of discussion about whether Eurodollar deposits are “money” (they thought not) or 
just “debt” (they thought so).  
It was only a few years later that most countries gave up the effort to define “money” and to 
conduct  their  policy  discussion  in  terms  of  money  aggregates,  instead  going  back  to  the 
former model of setting a short-term interest rate. It is interesting, though, that in recent years 
the  “zero  lower  bound”  for  nominal  interest  rates,  which  as  students  we  would  have  been 
taught about as “the liquidity trap”, is no longer a curiosum in the textbook from a bygone era, 
but has actually been binding in several major countries. One implication, among others, has 
been  that  calibrating  monetary  policy  in  terms  of  monetary  quantities  has  come  back  into 
vogue  in  some  places  –  this  time  with  the  relevant  central  banks  consciously  seeking  to 
increase  the  size  of  their  balance  sheets.  Whether  the  relationship  between  “money”  and 
nominal GDP or prices has become any more reliable than it was 25 years ago, when it was 
found too fluid to be useful for policy purposes, is not clear.  
                                                 
8 
In choosing this work for more detailed consideration, I am conscious of the question: was it more Hogan’s 
work or Pearce’s? Certainly Pearce had already released a piece by that name (Pearce, 1980). But equally 
Hogan was clearly a student of financial intermediaries and markets from early in his career, and released two 
working papers on Eurofinance markets in 1979 (Hogan, 1979a and Hogan, 1979b). No doubt he and Pearce 
had  exchanged  views  on  such  issues  over  time,  particularly  during  Hogan’s  visit  to  the  University  of 
Southampton  in  1979.  My  assumption  is  that  the  book  published  as  Hogan  and  Pearce  (1982)  was  a 
genuinely collaborative effort. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
But  if  the  language  in  Hogan  and  Pearce’s  early  1980s  work  is,  perhaps,  a  product  of  its 
times, some of the observations are astute, and there are some quite prescient insights.  
To begin with, Hogan and Pearce note that the activities of Eurocurrency markets – and we 
could generalise this to cross-border private financing generally – lessened the pressure on 
countries to adjust to current account imbalances, especially on the deficit side. This could be 
seen as good – allowing capital to flow more efficiently to the locations offering the highest 
risk-adjusted  return.  Or  it  could  be  worrying:  the  markets  giving  a  nation  more  rope,  so  to 
speak, by allowing current account balances to become larger and more persistent than they 
would otherwise. Remember that at the time they wrote, current account positions had rarely 
been more than a few percentage points of GDP for any length of time, at least since 1945.  
The  analysis  of  the  mythical  planet  Htrae,  with  three  countries  Surplusia,  Deficitia  and 
Balancia,  with  respective  currencies  Surps,  Defs  and  Bals,  focuses  on  the  operation  of 
markets and, importantly, the role of financial institutions as intermediaries between savers in 
one  country  and  borrowers  in  another.  In  the  language  of  more  recent  times,  financial 
institutions  are  key  to  the  dynamics  of  so-called  “global  imbalances”.  Indeed,  Hogan  and 
Pearce  state,  rather  bluntly:  “Financial  intermediaries  live  upon  imbalances”.9  At  one  level 
that is obvious – financial intermediaries or markets exist to transfer resources from savers to 
borrowers  (and  back  again),  which  is  to  say  that  an  imbalance  between  saving  and 
investment at the level of an individual household or firm in the economy is matched against 
an equivalent imbalance of opposite sign in some other firm or household. The deeper sense 
in  which  this  “thriving”  takes  place  in  an  international  setting  is  that  savers  in  one  country 
lend their money to borrowers in another jurisdiction, about whom they know next to nothing, 
but  feel  safe  in  doing  so  because  what  they  hold  directly  is  an  obligation  of  a  large,  well-
known, globally active bank, assumed to be safe.  
But as Hogan and Pearce point out, a European entity raising dollars to fund a balance sheet 
does not have automatic access to a lender of dollars of last resort in the event that market 
conditions  change.  It  is  therefore  exposed  to  serious  funding  risk  in  a  way  that  does  not 
occur  in  purely  local  currency  operations.  The  average  “Eurobank”  in  the  early  1980s  had 
access to marks or francs – today euros – or pounds from its national central bank, but it 
could  not  be  assumed  that  in  times  of  stress  these  currencies  could  necessarily  easily  be 
swapped for dollars. In fact, this very phenomenon was at the heart of the crisis that began to 
unfold in 2007. It was in Europe, where banks had, and still have, a structural need for dollar 
borrowing  to  fund  US  dollar  denominated  assets,  that  the  market  strains  first  appeared  in 
August 2007. As the crisis intensified, the need for access to central bank funding in dollars 
required  a  number  of  central  banks  to  enter  into  swap  arrangements  with  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  so  their  domestic  banks  could  borrow  US  dollars  secured  by  local  currency 
collateral.  European  banks  were  by  far  the  largest  users  of  these  facilities  –  about 
US$400 billion was accessed via the ECB and other central banks in Europe at the peak in 
December 2008.  
Of course, it is also in Europe that we have seen the epicentre of the most recent stage of 
the crisis. In some other respects, today’s problems are a little different, and perhaps more 
complex,  from  those  of  three  years  ago.  They  arise  from  cross-border  lending  within  a 
currency  area  that  has  a  single  money  but  very  divergent  experiences  in  terms  of  fiscal 
discipline and productivity, and that lacks a well-developed capacity for intra-area transfers  
–  which  is  being  built  as  we  speak.  Nonetheless,  dollar  funding  for  European  banks  has 
again tightened up and the swap lines among major central banks have again been activated 
to assist. This is presumably designed to slow the speed of European bank deleveraging of 
dollar assets that would otherwise be forced to occur.  
                                                 
9  Hogan and Pearce (1984), p 60. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Lots of people claim to have predicted the crisis, though I doubt that Warren Hogan, were he 
here, would claim that he and Ivor Pearce foresaw it in all its dimensions almost 30 years 
ago.  I  think  they  would  perhaps  claim  that  their  saga  of  Htrae,  where  international  cross-
border financing ultimately produced a crisis, contained many relevant insights. I doubt that 
they fully appreciated the role that the financial institutions of the leading deficit country – the 
United States – would play in creating risk and transferring it elsewhere. In their story, the 
key  institutions  were  those  of  the  country  of  Balancia,  where  the  international  accounts 
initially were balanced. I think they would have expected the response of major central banks 
to the crisis to have resulted in more inflation than it has, so far. That may be a reflection of 
the inflationary times in which they were writing – when it seemed almost inconceivable that 
deflationary  problems  akin  to  the  1930s  could  re-emerge.  The  example  of  Japan,  where 
there has been deflation for well over a decade, had not yet occurred in 1982. Of course, 
they might just have expected the inflation still to be coming. They would not be alone in that 
view.  
It is certain though that Hogan would have been watching all these developments with close 
interest.  He  would  have  been  recognising  certain  things  that  he  could  have  broadly 
predicted, and I suspect he would have said so with that very dry turn of phrase he had. He 
would also, surely, have been observing things that would have surprised him, and he would 
have been thinking about how his view of the world needed revision. He would have been 
pondering the future of the international financial system.  
In that vein, I shall use the remainder of the time this evening to make a few observations in 
that area.  
The  first  is  that  there  is  an  extensive  program  of  regulatory  reform  under  way.  In  an 
international  setting  potentially  the  most  far-reaching  is  the  set  of  proposals  recently 
endorsed at the G-20 summit to mitigate the problems posed by institutions that are too big 
to fail at an international level, otherwise known as Globally Systemically Important Financial 
Institutions, or G-SIFIs. Some 29 individual banks have been identified as fitting the criteria to 
be labelled G-SIFIs at present, though the list is not a fixed one: banks can enter and leave it 
over  time.  There  will,  in  due  course,  be  a  framework  for  globally  systemic  insurance 
companies  with  parallel  criteria.  The  intention  of  the  policy  is  to  make  the  failure  of  such 
entities less likely by requiring additional capital, and to make the consequences of failure 
less dramatic by developing better tools to resolve entities that have failed or are on the point 
of  failure.  The  latter,  in  particular,  is  a  very  ambitious  undertaking  and  contains  some 
potentially far-reaching components – such as the ability to “bail in” certain creditors to an 
institution on the point of failure, effectively turning them into shareholders, so as to lessen 
the likelihood that taxpayers will be called upon in such a situation. To make it work would 
require considerable co-operation across jurisdictions at moments where everyone’s instinct 
is to protect creditors and counterparties in their own jurisdiction.  
I  don’t  know  what  Hogan  would  have  made  of  this.  I  suspect  he  would  be  wondering 
whether,  if  regulatory  actions  bind  on  one  group  of  institutions,  the  behaviour  in  question 
would end up migrating to other, less-regulated places. This possibility is understood by the 
international  regulatory  community,  which  also  has  a  regulatory  agenda  for  “shadow 
banking”.  This  is  actually  a  critical  point.  I  would  offer  the  observation  that,  if  we  can  get 
through  the  next  year  or  so  without  a  major  crisis  and  successfully  implement  the  various 
reforms – which might both be big “ifs” – the next financial crisis may not occur in the same 
sorts  of  institutions  as  last  time  (or  this  time),  but  in  different  ones.  It  could  well  occur  in 
institutions or markets that do not as yet exist.  
The key thing in avoiding disastrous crises in the future is less the specifics of regulation or 
resolution – as important as these are – than having a clear understanding of the nature and 
extent of risk-taking behaviour, in all its potential dimensions and locations. On my reading of 
Hogan’s  work,  I  believe  he  would  have  shared  this  view.  Put  in  the  simplest  of  terms,  we 
might ask: where are financiers apparently making easy money? In what area of risk-taking 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
are the profits large or expected to be large? There is a good chance that it is there that, 
given enough time, the likelihood of excesses is greatest.  
In Hogan and Pearce’s book, financial institutions and their behaviour were seen as central 
to the build-up of imbalances. But they are in one sense merely facilitating flows of capital 
that are reflective of other phenomena, resulting from the collective behaviour of the actors in 
surplus  and  deficit  countries.  So  in  contemplating  the  future  of  the  international  financial 
system, reforming the regulation of financial institutions, and understanding their behaviour, 
will be key, but it will be of equal importance to understand the underlying behaviour of the 
entities in the real economies.  
The  role  of  official  capital  flows,  in  particular,  is  one  element  of  the  post-crisis  world  that 
seems to be becoming quite prominent. Indeed, perhaps one of the most striking features of 
the  international  financial  system  is  the  size  of  official  reserve  assets  that  have  been 
accumulated by what Hogan and Pearce would have labelled “Surplusia” – the countries that 
have run persistent current account surpluses. In the early 1970s, the accumulation of US 
dollars  by  surplus  countries  made  for  problems  of  monetary  control  in some  large  reserve 
holders  like  West  Germany.  When  the  Bretton  Woods  system  finally  broke  down  in  1973, 
total foreign reserves of all countries amounted to about 2½ per cent of annual global GDP. 
West  Germany’s  reserves  were  about  7  per  cent  of  West  German  GDP.  Today,  total 
reserves in the world amount to the equivalent of about 15 per cent of global GDP, up from 
10 per cent only five years ago. China’s reserves are close to 50 per cent of Chinese GDP. 
Many other Asian countries have equivalent ratios around 30 per cent or more; while, in Latin 
America, foreign exchange reserve holdings are typically in the 10–15 per cent range.10 
There are numerous reasons behind this build up. The very high levels of energy prices in 
recent years have pushed up the reserves of oil producers, and this accumulation may have 
some logic as they seek to spread over a long period the income gains accruing from a finite 
resource. The reserves of many Asian countries have risen to much higher levels after the 
1997 crisis, as a form of insurance against capital flow reversal. Indeed the IMF advised this 
after  the  crisis,  advice  that  has  been  taken  to  heart  perhaps  a  little  more  than  the  Fund 
intended.  
One can understand the desire for self-insurance, and particularly as those Asian countries 
that had IMF programs in the late 1990s felt the conditions for mutual insurance – through 
the IMF – were very onerous. But the self-insurance provided by large holdings of reserves is 
costly, especially in the low interest rate environment we see in the major countries. Trillions 
of dollars and euros held on behalf of the citizens of countries across Asia (and elsewhere) 
are  earning  meagre  returns  and  subject  to  increasing  sovereign  risk.  This  cost  of  self-
insurance is therefore becoming increasingly apparent, a trend that will surely continue as, 
inevitably, Asian productivity levels continue to increase relative to the Western countries and 
their real exchange rates rise.  
Large  centres  of  high  saving  with  portfolios  that  are  overweight  in  foreign  assets  whose 
return is low and whose value is highly likely to go down, measured in the currencies of the 
holders, amounts to something of a problem. Attempts by those holders to exit this position 
quickly would be, to say the least, highly disruptive. They know that and that is why they do 
not attempt it, though there is a degree of diversification under way. To paraphrase the old 
line, if I owe you a few billion, I may have a problem. If I owe you a trillion or two, you may 
have a problem every bit as big as mine.  
So there is a very long-term issue of portfolio re-balancing to be addressed here as well as 
one of structural realignment of national price levels (i.e. real exchange rates). At the same 
time though, there are increasing calls for the emerging economies with large surpluses and 
                                                 
10  Australia’s official reserve assets, for comparison, are equivalent to about 3 per cent of our annual GDP. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
high reserve holdings to play a part in assisting Western economies facing budgetary and 
banking  sector  problems.  With  the  balance  sheets  of  many  Western  sovereigns  already 
under pressure, there is hope for contributions from large reserve holders – they, after all, 
are the ones with the cash.  
It has to be observed, surely, that pressing reserve-heavy emerging economies to lend into 
structures  designed  to  smooth  adjustment  processes  in  the  advanced  world  amounts  to  a 
call to perpetuate, to a fair extent and for at least a bit longer, some of the very “imbalances” 
that so many have lamented for so long. What people are really saying is that they want to 
move only quite slowly away from the current constellation of resource flows and prices that, 
in other discussions, have been seen as constituting the problem.  
That may well be the best approach. But it is observable that large reserve holding countries 
are  already  getting  uncomfortable  with  their  degree  of  exposures  to  major  Western 
governments. Hence, any offers of assistance are likely to be made with a careful eye to risk 
minimisation.  This  is  likely  to  mean  they  will  prefer  to  operate  through  international 
institutions, such as the IMF. Alternatively, they may prefer to take hard assets in return for 
their cash, rather than financial obligations, which, in turn, could easily raise the social and 
political tension level. At the very least, managing all this over the next decade will require 
level-headed  analysis,  far-sighted  decisions  on  the  part  of  national  policymakers  and  a 
degree of international co-operation much greater than we usually see.  
Moreover,  there  will  be  some  very  important  questions  to  be  confronted.  Not  least  among 
them will be that, with the relative economic weight of the emerging world rising quickly, and 
a  rise  in  their  financial  weight  flowing  from  their  high  rates  of  capital  accumulation  and 
increasing creditor status, they will expect an increased role in global financial governance as 
a  condition  of  accepting  more  obligations  to  contribute  to  the  global  common  good.  The 
willingness of the established, post-war leadership countries to cede a degree of status and 
control  to  the  emerging  world  will  need  to  increase  at  the  same  speed  as  the  emerging 
countries’  willingness  to  grasp  and  accept  their  rising  responsibilities.  Will  this  occur?  It  is 
hard to judge. Much will depend on whether the various parties have the same general ideas 
about  the  purpose  of  the  international  monetary  system.  That  is,  at  this  point  anyway,  not 
clear.  
Another thing we might see is a certain tendency towards the financial repression that was a 
feature of the post-war world in which Warren Hogan first studied economics. A legacy of the 
1930s was a much tighter regulatory regime for banks, elements of which lasted for decades. 
A legacy of the 1940s was a very large stock of government debt. Debt to GDP ratios were 
well  into  triple  digits  for  countries  like  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  United  States  (and  for 
Australia).  Yet  from  the  1950s  through  to  the  1970s,  debt-servicing  dynamics  were  kept 
within manageable bounds. The rapid growth in economic output in the long post-war boom, 
which was aided by demographics and productivity performance, was a major help. But also 
contributing  was  a  combination  of  central  banks  holding  down  long-term  interest  rates  at 
government  direction,  and  banks  and  other  entities  being forced  to  hold  government  debt. 
And of course, at the end of that boom, a period of unanticipated high inflation played a role 
in lowering debt to GDP ratios.  
In the current era, however, the rapid output growth will likely occur in the countries that don’t 
have  much  government  debt  but  do  have  productivity  catch-up  working  for  them,  while  in 
many of the countries that have a lot of debt the demographics will be going the wrong way. 
It  is  therefore  conceivable  that  with  slow-growing  countries  feeling  pressed  for  solutions, 
regulatory  actions  might  have  certain  attractions.  Given  this,  and  with  many  emerging 
countries having mixed feelings about many aspects of free financial markets anyway, it is 
conceivable that the current trend towards more assertive and intrusive financial regulation – 
which  is  occurring  for  very  understandable  reasons  –  will  end  up  going  much  further  than 
contemplated  at  present.  The  potential  for  an  outcome  that  eventually  involves  significant 
inflation is also obvious.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
I  have  only  touched  the  surface  of  many  of  these  issues.  As  I  said  earlier,  I  cannot  know 
what Warren Hogan would have thought of them, or whether he would agree with my views. I 
am sure, though, that he would have thought these matters worthy of further discussion and 
that  he  would  have  contributed  to  that  discussion.  Hopefully,  I  will  have  succeeded  in 
stimulating some further discussion tonight.  
Once  again,  thank  you  to  the  University,  and  to  the  Hogan  family,  for  permitting  me  this 
honour. I hope this marks the start of a successful series of lectures.  
References 
Aspromourgos, T (2010), “Warren Pat Hogan, 1929–2009”, Economic Record, Volume 86, 
Number 273, pp 289–93.  
Cunningham, A and C Jeffery (2007), “Extracting a Better Signal from Uncertain Data”, Bank 
of England Quarterly Bulletin, Volume 47, Number 3, pp 364–75.  
Hogan, WP (1958a), “Technical Progress and Production Functions”, Review of Economics 
and Statistics, Volume 40, Number 4, pp 407–11.  
Hogan,  WP  (1958b),  “The  Banking  System  and  the  New  Financial  Intermediaries”,  The 
Australian Quarterly, December, pp 17–29.  
Hogan, WP (1978), “How Do We Know Where We Are Going, When We Don’t Know Where 
We  Have  Been,  Let  Alone  Where  We  Are?”,  Economic  Society  of  Australia  and  New 
Zealand, NSW Branch General Meeting, October.  
Hogan,  WP  (1979a),  “Eurofinancing:  Currency,  Loans  and  Bonds”,  Working  Papers  in 
Economics, University of Sydney, Number 33.  
Hogan,  WP  (1979b),  “Controlling  Eurofinance  Markets”,  Working  Papers  in  Economics, 
University of Sydney, Number 36.  
Hogan, WP and I Pearce (1982), “The Incredible Eurodollar”, George Allen & Unwin, London.  
Hogan, WP and I Pearce (1984), “The Incredible Eurodollar, or Why the World’s Monetary 
System is Collapsing”, 3rd edition, Unwin Paperbacks, London.  
Lodewijks,  J  (2007),  “A  Conversation  with  Warren  Hogan”,  Economic  Record,  Volume  83, 
Number 263, pp 446–60.  
Pearce,  I  (1980),  “The  Incredible  Eurodollar”,  Discussion  Papers  in  Economics  and 
Econometrics, University of Southampton, Number 8006.  
Solow,  R  (1958),  “Technical  Progress  and  Production  Functions:  Reply”,  Review  of 
Economics and Statistics, Volume 40, Number 4, pp 411–13.  
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
