Yves Mersch: Challenges of excessive indebtedness 
Keynote  lecture  by  Mr  Yves  Mersch,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of Luxembourg,  at  the 
Euro Finance Week, Frankfurt am Main, 15 November 2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure and privilege to contribute to the Euro Finance Week. This conference has 
a  long  tradition  of  bringing  together  experts  in  finance,  economics  and  politics.  In  recent 
years it has become a distinguished forum to discuss ways to get out of the financial crisis 
we are still facing.  
The global rise in debt levels 
The financial crisis weighs heavy on the global economy for more than four years. It erupted 
in August 2007with the epicentre at the US subprime mortgages markets and deteriorated 
dramatically in September 2008 when the US investment bank Lehman Brothers collapsed. 
And it triggered the sovereign debt crisis in the euro area in spring 2010 that has not been 
resolved until today. 
The  debt  crisis  has  deeper  roots.  And  indebtedness  has  not  been  only  a  feature  of  the 
financial  industry  and  public  finances.  According  to  figures  of  the  Bank  of  International 
Settlement  (BIS)  the  aggregate  gross  financial  liabilities  of  industrial  country  governments, 
households and  non-financial  corporations  (represented  by  18  countries)  have  grown  from 
about 165% of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1980 to a record 320% of GDP by 2010. 
By contrast, most emerging market (EME) countries have been doing better. BIS data since 
the  mid-1990s  suggest  that  EME  debt  levels  have  remained  relatively  modest  and  stable. 
Their debt stands now at about 110% of GDP on average, i.e. – a little more than one third of 
that in advanced countries.  
The indebtedness of industrial countries is not only high. It is still rising. The average debt 
levels  of  industrial  countries  have  risen  to  reach  320%  of  GDP  by  2010,  starting  from  a 
modest  level  of  165%  of  GDP  in  1980.  This  is  an  annual  average  increase  of  more  than 
5 percentage points.  
Both  private  and  public  sector  debt  levels  have  risen  dramatically.  Adjusted  for  inflation, 
corporate debt has risen by three times, government debt by 4½ times and household debt 
by six times.  
This dramatic rise is widespread across advanced countries. Total non-financial sector debt 
now exceeds 450% of GDP in Japan, 350% in Belgium, Portugal and Spain, and 300% in 
two thirds of the countries. But also other major industrial countries have also experienced a 
substantial increase in their debt ratios. Household and non-financial corporate indebtedness 
in the United Kingdom began to rise rapidly in the early 2000s. In Germany and France, the 
aggregate  debt  ratio  started  to  increase  rapidly  beginning  in  the  mid-1990s,  led  by  the 
growing indebtedness of both the government and the private sector.  
These high levels of indebtedness imply serious risks. Borrowers’ ability to service their debt 
becomes  progressively  more  difficult  due  to  the  sensitivity  to  decreases  in  income  and 
increases in interest rates. For any external event, the likelihood of default rises together with 
the level of debt. Even for a mild shock, highly indebted borrowers may suddenly no longer 
be regarded as creditworthy.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Highly  indebted  governments  may  be  constrained  both  in  their  scope  for  engaging  in 
traditional countercyclical stabilisation policies and in their role as lenders of last resort during 
an economic or financial crisis. 
Moreover,  growth  might  be  hampered  by  excessive  debt  levels.  Following  the  empirical 
findings of Kenneth Rogoff and Carmen Reinhart, who concentrated on the impacts of public 
debt on growth, recent BIS research also looked at corporate and household debt. The main 
finding  is  that  there  is  a  threshold  of  about  85%  of  GDP  beyond  which  an  additional 
10 percentage points of debt reduces average per-capita growth by 13–14 basis points. 
What  has  caused  this  trend  of  accelerated  borrowing?  The  main  reasons  were  the 
liberalisation of credit markets since the late 1970s and the introduction of (complex) financial 
innovations which made it easier to borrow.  
In  several  countries  the  accumulation  of  debt  was  financed  by  property  investment,  which 
could be used as collateral for even more borrowing.  
Moreover, since the mid-1980s until the current crisis, the economic environment has been 
more stable, a period that has been coined the Great Moderation. Lower unemployment and 
inflation  rates  and  less  uncertainty  made  investors  more  optimistic.  Borrowers  borrowed 
more and lenders lent more – while inflation remained low.  
In addition financial innovation stabilized the credit supply. This allowed risks to move away 
from the banking system. General economic stability was improved, risk primea compressed, 
and future income prospects were boosted. 
On  the  political  level  a  persistent  deficit  bias  in  fiscal  policy  has  been  en  vogue  which 
additionally pushed debt levels upwards. The lack of fiscal discipline was accompanied by 
households’ and firms’ behaviour that did not properly discount a higher future tax liability in 
their spending decisions but instead increased their own liabilities.  
Last  but  not  least,  tax  incentives  distorted  financing  choices.  Preferential  tax  treatment  of 
interest expenses may have played a major role in boosting corporate borrowing to finance 
ever larger mergers and acquisitions as well as leveraged buy-outs. Likewise, generous tax 
deductions for mortgage interest payments, combined with public policy intervention to boost 
home  ownership,  may  have  contributed  to  a  sharp  growth  in  household  debt  in  some 
countries.  
Global economic challenges  
To  tackle  the  threat  of  a  debt  trap  three  main  approaches  are  generally  discussed:  fiscal 
consolidation  to  reduce  the  public  fraction  of  debt,  economic  growth  to  increase  the 
affordability of given liabilities, and inflation to lower the debt burden in real terms. 
Fiscal consolidation decreases the vulnerability of public finance. And public finance is the 
water mouth of debt from all sectors in an economy in times of crisis. Regardless of whether 
private debt has been socialized or the problem was from the beginning in public finances 
itself,  the  outcome  was  a  drastic  increase  in  the  public  debt  burden.  Even  John  Maynard 
Keynes was aware of the limits of public expenditure based on borrowing has to its limits. 
After  the  Great  Depression,  Keynes  acknowledged:  “Just  as  it  was  advisable  for  the 
government to incur debt during the slump, so for the same reasons it is now advisable that 
they should incline to the opposite policy.” To bring public finances in order is of additional 
importance  in  mature  economies  where  the  demographic  challenge  kicks  already  in  and 
might challenge the sustainability of established pension systems.  
Growth  should  be  stimulated.  To  this  goal,  structural  reforms  can  strengthen  confidence, 
market dynamics and job creation. Higher competitiveness will increase the flexibility of the 
economy  and  lift  the  longer-term  growth  potential.  In  particular,  rigidities  on  labour  market 
should be removed to increase wage flexibility. Structural reforms to increase competition in 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
product markets, particularly in services and the privatisation of services currently provided 
by the public sector might further accelerate growth. To improve supply side conditions will 
also help to dampen the negative short term impacts on aggregate demand that kick it when 
the necessary fiscal consolidation measures are implemented. 
Inflation, by contrast, is not a feasible option. This statement might not come as a surprise 
from a central banker. But there are sound reasons behind: 
1. 
Accelerated inflation would raise the risks of even higher future inflation and greater 
output volatility. Uncontrollable wage-price spirals would be likely.  
It would reduce incentives for governments to lower their public debt levels.  
Financial  markets  would  probably  not  buy  the  story  of,  for  instance,  a  temporary 
modest  increase  in  the  inflation  target.  Rather  they  would  add  an  inflation  risk 
premium  when  public  debt  is  rolled  over.  Real  refinancing  costs  of  governments 
could  become  even  higher  once  the  genie  of  higher  inflation  rates  was  out  of  the 
bottle. 
It is a myth that accelerated inflation can be a substitute for economic adjustment. 
Remember that the necessary disinflation policies of the late 1970 and early 1980 
came  along  with  high  costs  including  severe  recessions  and  sharp  increases  in 
unemployment.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
The case of the euro area  
Although elevated debt levels are a common feature of advanced economies the euro area 
has been at the epicentre of the current public debt crisis since spring 2010.  
Strangely  enough,  on  a  consolidated  base  public  finances  in  the  euro  are  in  a  more 
favourable position than for example in the US. The euro area as a whole will run a budget 
deficit of about 4.5% of GDP this year. The International Monetary Fund (IMF) expects a US 
budget shortfall of about 10 percent of GDP this year.  
According  to  the  Commission’s  spring  forecast,  the  euro  area  deficit  ratio  is  projected  to 
decline  to  3.5%  of  GDP  by  2012.  By  comparison,  in  the  US  and  Japan  fiscal  deficits  are 
expected to be at 8.6% and 9.8%, respectively, in 2012.  
On the other side of the channel, the UK expects for this fiscal year to meet its deficit target 
of  7.9%  of  GDP,  down  from  9.3%  of  GDP  in  the  previous  one  ending  in  April  2011.  The 
budget forecasts however are based on the assumption that the economy will grow 1.7% in 
2011 – a euphemistic view compared to private sector economists’ recent forecasts of 1.0 to 
1.3%. 
According  to  the  IMF  the  aggregate  public  debt-to-GDP  for  the  euro  area  stands  at 
87 percent.  Figures  for  the  UK  are  similar.  For  the  US  the  debt-to-GDP  ratio  in  2011  is 
expected to be 100 percent. In Japan public debt-to-GDP exceeds 200 percent. 
Under market scrutiny 
Still,  it  is  the  euro  area  that  is  under  particular  market  scrutiny.  Market  judgement  can 
sometimes deviate from economic fundamentals. Even wealthy states with sound economic 
fundamentals are in trouble to refinance themselves at reasonable conditions. Comparing for 
instance Britain and Spain based on debts, deficits and inflation, Britain should be the riskier 
credit. But British bonds yield around 2.3% while Spain’s yield around 5.5%.  
Moreover, market sentiments can deteriorate dramatically within days – although economic 
fundamentals might not have changed. In mid October Italian one year bonds yielded around 
3.5%. Last week they yielded around 7%.   
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Main differences to other countries  
Although financial markets might temporarily be irrationally pessimistic there is no room for 
complacency  and  the  challenges  must  still  be  addressed.  In  order  to  do  so,  it  seems 
reasonable to recall what makes the euro area different from other currency areas.  
The euro area is an alliance of sovereign countries without a central government or budget. 
Most  of  the  relevant  political  decisions  –  including  public  finance  –  are  taken  by  national 
governments. In this constellation member states share a common monetary policy and lack 
the instrument of the nominal exchange rate to react to internal or external imbalances.  
In this institutional environment there has always been a risk embedded: moral hazard could 
arise when fiscal profligacy of one single member state can be compensated on average by 
the  sound  economic  behaviour  and  stable  public  finances  of  the  majority  of  the  other 
countries. Such an incentive structure is flawed in so far as it can lead to unsustainable fiscal 
policies of individual member states which in turn would generate negative spill over effects 
to the monetary union as a whole and make financial markets to paint other members states 
with the same brush. 
With hindsight, the original attempt to substitute a single government by rules, market and 
peer pressure has not been sufficient. Although the no-bail-out clause and the Stability and 
Growth  Pact  (SGP)  were  installed  to  exclude  free  rider  incentives  and  to  ensure  the 
alignment of national fiscal policies, imbalances have emerged and the current crisis has not 
been prevented.  
Particularly, there was a lack of political will to commit to  sustained stability-oriented fiscal 
policy. The weak commitment was evident when the Stability and Growth Pact was watered 
down under the pressure of France and Germany in 2003.  
Moreover, a crisis was not included in the scenarios to be prepared for. No crisis resolution 
mechanism for the euro area was foreseen.   
Political and institutional challenges  
Crises always must be seen as opportunities. As the Swiss writer Max Frisch once said: “A 
crisis is a productive time. It just has to be cleansed of the taint of a catastrophe.” 
All  advanced  economies  have  to  take  swift,  decisive  and  credible  action  to  tackle  the 
challenges  that  go  along  with  the  global  debt  crisis.  This  clearly  includes  the  euro  area. 
Having discussed the feasible options to overcome the debt challenge and the particularities 
of  the  euro  area  it  is  important  that  the  consolidation  of  national  budgets  and  the 
strengthening of the growth potential have to be put in place in a more coordinated way.  
Important  decisions  have  already  been  taken.  In  late  September  the  European  Parliament 
approved  new  legislation  to  tackle  the  shortcomings  in  the  existing  economic  governance 
framework for co-ordinating fiscal and structural policies. The so-called “Six Pack” is a step in 
the  right  direction  as  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  will  be  strengthened;  imbalances  and 
competitiveness will be monitored at an earlier stage.  
In addition to the “Six-pack” the Heads of State or government of the euro area agreed in 
March 2011 on a “Euro Plus Pact” with the aim to strengthen policy coordination in the areas 
of competitiveness and convergence. A set of common indicators will be used to monitor the 
progress  of  labour-market  reforms,  reforms  to  wage-setting  arrangements  and  reforms 
addressing the sustainability of pension, health care and social benefit systems. 
Regarding  the  most  urgent  current  challenges  the  Heads  of  State  and  Government  of  the 
euro area agreed on 26 October on a set of measures to restore confidence and address the 
current tensions in financial markets. These include a significant leveraging of the European 
Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) resources which shall increase the fund’s ability to extend 
loans,  finance  bank  recapitalisations  and  conduct  bond  purchases  in  the  primary  and 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
secondary  markets.  The  crisis  mechanism  based  in  Luxembourg  had  been  set  up  to  help 
countries  with  stressed  liquidity  positions.  This  support  should  allow  them  to  return  to  a 
sustainable level of debt and regain competitiveness as soon as possible.  
As stated earlier, accelerated inflation is not a feasible option. Therefore, monetary policy in 
the euro area must remain focussed on delivering price stability. By doing so, the ECB can 
also  best  contribute  to  financial  stability,  by  including  a  firm  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations and supplying the financial system with the necessary liquidity. Monetary policy, 
however, cannot replace governments which have to live up to their own responsibilities.  
But challenges remain beyond today’s institutional framework to safeguard the own life of a 
currency union within a common market to further proceed. In the medium to long run, we 
will need an institution that is solely responsible for the euro zone. A single monetary policy 
needs support from sound public finances and closer economic policy coordination with an 
agreed  framework  for  national  budgetary  policies.  This  could  be  monitored  ideally  by  an 
independent body be it a European Commissioner with special authority or a finance minister 
(not  necessarily  with  a  huge  budget),  as  it  has  been  suggested  by  former  ECB  President 
Jean-Claude Trichet. But in any case, the institutional vacuum that currently exists must be 
filled in the long term. 
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
