Ignazio Visco: Investing in knowledge – young people and citizens, 
training and employment 
Talk by Mr Ignazio Visco, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the 30th National Congress of the 
Italian Association of Children’s and Family Court Judges (AIMMF), Catania, 25 November 
2011. 
 When  I  was  asked  to  speak  at  the  30th  National  Congress  of  the  Italian  Association  of 
Children’s and Family Court Judges (AIMMF), I certainly did not imagine that it would be one 
of my first talks as Governor of the Bank of Italy. So I have wondered whether it might not be 
best to withdraw from the engagement, since the issues one would expect me to deal with in 
my new role might be thought to be different, more pressing. But the reasons that led me to 
accept  your  invitation  in  the  first  place  have  not  lost  any  of  their  force.  The  title  of  this 
session,  “We  are  born  children,  but  we  become  citizens”,  not  only  imbues  our  everyday 
economic policy efforts with ultimate meaning but also prompts us to examine the structural 
problems  holding  our  economy  back,  and  to  think  about  schools  and  education,  public-
spiritedness and respect for the rule of law, and human and social capital. And that is what I 
intend  to  do  here  today.  It  means  tackling  the  issues  key  to  the  economic  and  human 
progress of our country. 
The current economic and financial crisis 
The economic and financial crisis that began in 2008 has compounded the difficulties that the 
Italian economy had been struggling with for a decade. Between 1995 and 2007, per capita 
GDP had grown on average by just over 1 per cent a year, compared to nearly 2 per cent in 
the euro area. The recession that hit almost all advanced economies in 2008–09 struck more 
profoundly in Italy than elsewhere. 
Even  with  little  or  no  growth,  the  low  interest  rates  made  possible  by  the  adoption  of  the 
single currency and measures aimed at public finance adjustment made the cost of servicing 
the large public debt bearable. In recent months, however, the heightened tension in financial 
markets has made this balance precarious, fueling operators’ doubts over the sustainability 
of  Italy’s  sovereign  debt.  The  measures  adopted  starting  this  summer  have  improved  the 
public  finances  but  are  not  sufficient  to  achieve  the  lasting,  structural  rebalancing  that  the 
country needs in order to return to growth. 
Italy’s  failure  to  thrive  is  in  good  part  due  to  the  hesitancy  with  which  the  economy  has 
responded  over  the  past  twenty  years  to  the  challenges  of  technological  innovation,  the 
emergence  of  new  economies  in  the  world  arena,  and  the  powerful  increase  in  European 
integration. Entry into the monetary union did away with the ephemeral gains deriving from 
the  devaluation  and  imposed  greater  fiscal  discipline  on  Italy  in  order  to  qualify  for 
membership. Boosting growth potential requires wide-ranging measures, including a reform 
of  the  institutions  responsible  for  economic  governance,  to  stimulate  business  activity  and 
encourage sustainable work inclusion, especially of women and youth. The main measures 
needed  have  long  been  perfectly  well  known  and  include:  heightened  competition, 
particularly in protected service sectors; wider access to risk capital, especially for innovative 
firms;  regulation  of  the  labour  market  and  a  social  welfare  system  which,  acting  together, 
help  reallocate  human  resources  towards  more  productive  uses;  and  a  more  efficient  civil 
justice  system.  There  is,  however,  one  further  point  that  is  at  least  as  important,  namely 
measures to increase the stock of human capital. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Human capital and new technologies 
Economists have always paid heed to the role of education and knowledge in increasing the 
productive  capacity  of  individuals.  More  recently,  we  have  come  to  use  the  term  “human 
capital” to indicate people’s endowment of skills, technical ability and know-how. The term 
thus  recognizes  the  economic  value  of  this  endowment  in  improving  the  quality  of  work, 
increasing  the  efficiency  of  production  processes  and  facilitating  the  adoption  and 
development of new techniques and products, with benefits to individuals and the system as 
a whole. This pool of skills and knowledge evolves over time in response to changes in the 
technological paradigm. 
Starting in the 1990s, the rapid spread of new information and communications technologies 
and their constant advancement have radically changed the nature of the skills demanded by 
the  productive  economy.  New  technologies  enable  the  automation  of  routine  activities  that 
require the simple application of standard skills and can be codified into sequences (however 
long) of instructions. 
The new technologies tend to reduce the demand for labour for all such activities, while they 
favour managerial and intellectual roles, and, to a lesser extent, non-repetitive manual jobs 
as well. Where such trends have been more pronounced, they have been of less benefit to 
those  with  intermediate  education  levels,  mainly  associated  with  the  possession  of  a 
standard skill set. 
No longer is human capital acquired once and for all at school and then applied in standard 
fashion throughout one’s entire working life. What educators call “competence” has become 
crucial:  namely,  the  ability  to  mobilize  internal  resources  (knowledge  and  know-how)  and 
external resources in an integrated way to cope with often unprecedented and non-routine 
situations. “Competence” interacts with innovation and enables rapid adaptation to change; 
together with specialized knowledge, it allows innovation to emerge from the everyday, by 
effectively combining available resources with known concepts. 
These  are  the  inputs  necessary  to  a  fundamental  change  of  gear  for  mature  economies, 
which  need  to  shift  away  from  a  model  of  growth  based  essentially  on  emulation  and 
progressive  advance  towards  a  technological  frontier  to  one  centring  on  the  ability  to 
generate  innovation  independently,  thus  advancing  the  frontier  itself.  It  will  be  increasingly 
necessary  to  cultivate  21st-century  skills,  namely  critical  thinking  and  an  aptitude  for 
problem-solving. Traditional areas of knowledge (including languages, mathematics, science, 
economics,  civics,  but  also  history,  art,  geography,  and  our  great  tradition  of  classical 
education) will continue to be an indispensable resource, but will need to be integrated within 
a dynamic context in which receptiveness towards innovation, as well creativity, intellectual 
curiosity,  the  ability  to  communicate  effectively,  and  openness  to  collaboration  and 
teamwork, will be decisive. 
Italy’s laggard performance 
Italy  is  lagging  behind  the  main  developed  countries,  both  in  high  school  and  university 
education and in the skill levels of young people and the adult population. Italy’s low stock of 
human  capital  by  international  standards  is  a  longstanding  issue.  At  the  time  of  national 
unification in 1861, the adult population averaged less than one year of education as against 
four  or  five  in  France,  Germany,  the  United  Kingdom,  and  the  United  States.  As  Giovanni 
Vecchi  recalls  in  his  recent  book  In  ricchezza  e  in  povertà,  at  the  beginning  of  the  last 
century two British historians, Bolton King and Thomas Okey, observed in a volume entitled 
Italy Today: “Education is the gloomiest chapter in Italian social history, a chapter of painful 
advance, of national indifference to a primary need, of a present backwardness, that gives 
Italy (next to Portugal) the sad primacy of illiteracy in Western Europe”. 
Since  then,  there  has  been  considerable  progress  in  education  levels,  but  not  enough  to 
bridge the gap. In 2009, according to the latest OECD figures, 54 per cent of Italians aged 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
between  25  and  64  years  had  earned  a  senior  high  school  diploma,  compared  with  the 
OECD average of 73 per cent. The gap was narrower but still substantial for younger age 
groups: in the 25–34 age bracket, the proportion of Italian senior high school graduates rose 
to  70  per  cent,  against  an  OECD  average  of  81  per  cent.  The  proportion  of  children 
completing junior high school studies has also been rising, gaining more than 10 points in 
recent  years  to  over  80  per  cent.  For  university  education,  however,  the  gap  is  certainly 
worrying. Here, Italy seems hard put to keep up with the other advanced countries: again in 
2009, the proportion of graduates in the 25–64 age group was less than 15 per cent, or just 
half the OECD average; amongst people aged between 25 and 34 years, it exceeded 20 per 
cent, compared to an OECD average of around 37 per cent. 
Over  the  past  twenty  years,  direct  testing  of  reading  comprehension,  logical  and 
mathematical  skills,  and  the  ability  to  combine  pieces  of  information  to  solve  problems  of 
varying complexity, reveals a similarly worrying picture. At the end of primary school Italian 
students are at least as skilled as in the other developed countries, but in the later stages of 
formal education they fall behind. For 15-year-olds, the gap found by the PISA survey carried 
out  by  the  OECD  in  2006  corresponded  to  around  one  school  year;  and  although  this 
diminished  between  2006  and  2009,  it  remained  significant.  The  gap  reflects  severe 
disparities  between  different  parts  of  Italy,  with  the  scores  in  the  North  slightly  above  the 
OECD average and those in the South dramatically lower. 
These  disparities  are  subject  to  various  interpretations  involving  their  geographical 
distribution or the discrepancies between different schools rather than within any individual 
school.  Yet  the  fact  remains  that  a  country  like  ours,  poor  in  material  resources  and  now 
lagging on various fronts, should invest in “knowledge”, not “below” or “around” but above the 
average of other countries with more natural resources. Such deficits are also observed in 
respect  of  the  skills  of  the  adult  population.  The  international  Adult  Literacy  and  Lifeskills 
Survey  (ALL)  conducted  in  2003  to  gauge  functional  literacy  and  numeracy  together  with 
analytical  and  problem-solving  abilities  shows  that  about  80  per  cent  of  Italians  aged 
between  16  and  65  are  unable  to  apply  linear  reasoning  and  draw  inferences  of  average 
complexity  by  extracting  and  combining  information  provided  in  written  texts  that  are  little 
more than basic. They are, that is to say, functionally illiterate: they lack adequate reading 
comprehension, logical and analytical skills to respond to the demands of modern life and 
work.  This  is  the  highest  percentage  in  any  of  the  advanced  countries  surveyed.  For 
purposes  of  comparison,  the  corresponding  figure  in  Switzerland  and  the  United  States  is 
50 per cent, in Canada 40 per cent, and in Norway 30 per cent. 
These  deficits  represent  a  milestone,  all  the  more  so  for  a  country  like  ours  with  our 
longstanding shortfall in growth. This is why education policies should not seek just to close 
the gaps with the other advanced countries but must rather aim for a radical reversal of the 
situation. 
Collective decisions and individual choices 
In order to accomplish this, there is a need for reflection on the tools society uses to increase 
the stock of human capital and on the determinants of individuals’ educational choices. We 
must  analyze  both  the  places  where  human  capital  is  developed,  namely  schools  and 
universities, and the reasons for individual choices that sometimes seem unwarranted in light 
of the economic returns to education. 
Learning and research evaluation mechanisms, greater decision-making autonomy, and the 
linking of public funding to indicators of quality in teaching and research in universities are 
recognized  internationally  as  important  to  the  effectiveness  of  an  educational  system.  The 
successive reforms in Italy in recent years seem to be a step in this direction, but the effort 
for improved and more efficient organization has been undermined by the inadequacy of both 
public and private resources devoted to the accumulation of human capital. And the situation 
risks getting worse in the current economic climate. In the middle of the last decade, a point 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
in  time  for  which  an  international  comparison  is  possible,  investment  in  knowledge  – 
approximated  by  total  public  and  private  expenditure  on  higher  education,  research  and 
development, and software – amounted to 2.4 per cent of GDP in Italy, as opposed to an 
OECD  average  of  4.9  per  cent.  The  capacity  of  the  educational  system  to  absorb  and 
generate  new  ideas  has  probably  also  been  constrained  by  slower  generational  turnover, 
which has dramatically reduced the number of young people in teaching positions. 
According  to  OECD  estimates  for  2009,  only  9  per  cent  of  teachers  in  Italian  senior  high 
schools  were  under  40  years  old,  compared  with  25  per  cent  in  Germany,  34  per  cent  in 
France, and over 40 per cent in the United Kingdom and the United States. In the same year, 
according to the Eurostat database, 16 per cent of university teachers in Italy were under 40, 
as  against  30  per  cent  in  France,  39  per  cent  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  47  per  cent  in 
Germany. 
Yet  despite  these  shortcomings,  the  metrics  available  indicate  that  education  remains  a 
worthwhile  investment  in  Italy.  People  with  more  education  have  less  difficulty  in  finding 
employment,  have  less discontinuous  work  careers  and  earn  higher  salaries.  According  to 
the OECD, in 2009 the average earnings gap in the adult population between people with at 
most  compulsory  schooling  and  high  school  graduates  was  close  to  the  average  for  the 
developed  countries,  whilst  that  between  the  latter  and  university  graduates,  although 
smaller than in the other major countries, was close to 50 per cent (compared to 63 per cent 
in France, 67 per cent in Germany, 78 per cent in the United Kingdom and almost 90 per 
cent  in  the  United  States).  The  additional  return  over  and  above  that  from  a  senior  high 
school diploma of a degree in a scientific discipline is, in Italy, between three and four times 
greater than that derived from a degree in the humanities. 
Yet, at the end of the last decade, 20 per cent of young people between the ages of 18 and 
24 with a junior high school certificate had not gone on to any further qualification, about half 
of  young  people  aged  20–24  with  a  senior  high  school  diploma  had  not  enrolled  at  a 
university,  and  of  those  that  had  gone  to  university,  nearly  half  failed  to  complete  their 
degree. 
So what are the reasons for this apparent discrepancy between the returns to education and 
people’s  educational  choices?  Firstly,  the  economic  benefits  of  higher  education  are  not 
properly perceived. According to the results of a survey for the European Commission this 
year,  scarcely  half  of  young  Italians  see  higher  education  as  advantageous.  This  is  the 
lowest proportion amongst all EU countries. Approximately two-thirds of Italian respondents 
recognized that university training does improve job opportunities, but only a third – less than 
in all the other countries surveyed – expected a gain in terms of higher remuneration. 
This lack of awareness exacerbates the consequences of the obstacles (often economic in 
nature)  to  investment  in  education.  The  strong  correlation  between  family  background  and 
educational choices reduces social mobility. Individuals suffer as a result, and so too does 
society  as  a  whole,  which  fails  to  cultivate  and  use  talent  emerging  from  less  privileged 
backgrounds. Learning and integration difficulties are even greater for the children of foreign 
nationals. By the end of primary school, around a third of them, compared with 2 per cent of 
Italian children, have already fallen behind the normal education cycle, and the disadvantage 
is  amplified  in  later  years,  as  is  shown  by  the  smaller  proportion  promoted  to  junior  high 
school and their greater likelihood of dropping out at the end of compulsory schooling (twice 
as high as among Italians). In the absence of effective integration mechanisms, our country’s 
stock of human capital thus risks being further penalized by the rapid increase in the relative 
proportion of young people with foreign backgrounds, which Istat projects to exceed 30 per 
cent by 2050. 
Furthermore, the Italian economy’s ability to reward and make the most of human resources 
remains poor. Wage differentials by educational attainment are not only smaller than in other 
countries  but  are  much  smaller  for  younger  than  for  older  workers.  Entry-level  wages  are 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
now  at  the  same  level,  in  real  terms,  as  decades  ago,  and  people  entering  the  workforce 
today appear to be precluded from the income growth registered in the meantime. 
This is probably due to the hesitancy – compounded by the financial and economic crisis – 
with  which  Italian  industry  has  adapted  to  the  trends  that  have  changed  the  world  so 
radically. It is possible that the generally inadequate standard of education provided by the 
school system – at least as perceived by firms – is a factor in the low salaries offered (and 
the accordingly low investment in human capital). In terms of the labour market, increased 
flexibility  has  certainly  facilitated  the  absorption  of  the  very  high  levels  of  unemployment 
registered in the mid-1990s. But while it has sustained the employment of young people, this 
increased  flexibility  –  together  with  protracted  wage  moderation  –  may  have  led  firms, 
especially the less efficient ones, to put off investment in R&D and advanced technologies. 
Indirect evidence of this is the fact that, in the teeth of conventional economic theory, Italy’s 
shortage of the human capital required by the new technological environment is linked to the 
comparatively low extra return to university graduates entering the labour market. 
So far I have concentrated on university education, a key component in the human capital 
stock of any modern economy, as it furnishes specialized skills that are not readily codified 
and  that  form  the  basis  for  the  further  advancement  of  knowledge  and,  hence,  the 
technological  frontier.  Good  graduates  are  produced  by  good  universities,  but,  above  all, 
good universities are in need of good students who are capable of learning to think critically 
and  creatively  to  solve  problems.  Such  students  are  cultivated  at  the  lower  levels  of  the 
education  system,  and  many  recent  studies  concur  that  investment  in  knowledge  directed 
towards the early years of education is the most effective, and that learning deficits at this 
stage are difficult to make up for in subsequent years. 
Human capital and social capital 
Investing  in  knowledge,  especially  in  the  early  years  of  schooling,  is  important  for  many 
reasons,  not  just  because  of  the  positive  effects  on  the  productivity  of  individuals.  The 
benefits of education go beyond private financial gain. For instance, better-educated people 
on  average  enjoy  better  health,  due  also  to  their  increased  awareness  of  the  value  of 
prevention and the cost associated with risk behaviors. According to Eurostat, at 25 years of 
age the residual life expectancy of a male Italian senior high school or university graduate is 
58 years, compared with 53 for those with only compulsory schooling (for women, 62 and 59 
respectively); at 65 years of age, the gap in life expectancy is reduced but not eliminated, still 
amounting to two years for men and one year for women. 
The benefits of better education extend to many other aspects of life. Of special significance 
to this particular gathering is its positive influence in curbing lawlessness. Whilst we do not 
have a statistical breakdown for Italy, the data for Sweden and the United States show that a 
higher average level of schooling brings a substantial reduction in the crime rate against both 
persons  and  property.  Among  other  things,  this  results  in  significant  cost  savings  for  the 
community. 
This outcome is the product of various mechanisms. In strictly financial terms – other things 
being equal – education reduces the incentives for crime by decreasing the gain compared to 
that achievable through legal means. Furthermore, there is a cultural impact stemming from 
the  enhanced  opportunities  for  socialization  of  people  going  to  school  compared  with 
dropouts. Conversely, an increase in lawlessness in a community or area may reduce the 
incentives  for  school  attendance  for  young  people  who  are  lured  by  the  prospect  of  even 
small but immediate gains and driven by a strong copycat effect. 
It is no surprise, then, that it is in social milieus and geographical areas with lower levels of 
schooling that crime is rife. Nor is it an accident that those same circles and areas have a 
smaller  stock  of  “social  capital”,  a  factor  increasingly  recognized  as  important  also  to 
economic development. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
A  community  of  educated  and  socially  aware  individuals,  which  is  more  likely  to  condemn 
deviations  from  legality  and  to  recognize  the  benefits  of  cooperation,  is  in  fact  also  more 
inclined to subscribe to values and norms that facilitate the achievement of the shared goals 
with  which  “social  capital”  is  frequently  identified.  For  our  country  this  is  a  particularly 
meaningful  concept,  whose  broad  modern  acceptance  derives  from  Robert  Putnam’s 
celebrated study of Italy’s regional administrations. It was that study that turned the spotlight 
on the poorer endowment of social capital in the regions of southern Italy compared to the 
Centre and North. 
In a market economy, social capital plays a central role by lowering transaction costs and so 
facilitating  commerce  between  economic  agents.  This  benefits  the  degree  of  financial 
development, the average size and innovation propensity of firms, the design of institutions, 
and, ultimately, the rate of economic growth. In contexts where education, trust in others and 
willingness  to  cooperate  are  limited,  vertical  relationships  characterized  by  subordination, 
cronyism and exploitation are more likely to prevail. It is in such conditions that lawlessness 
can take hold and crime – including organized crime – spread more easily. The social and 
economic costs can be enormous. 
Some  Italian  work  has  used  econometrics  to  gauge  the  extent  to  which  the  North-South 
development gap can be ascribed to organized crime. Comparing per capita GDP in some 
southern  regions  (where  crime  has  taken  hold  in  relatively  recent  years)  and  in  several 
regions in the Centre and North (which had statistically comparable baseline characteristics 
but  where  organized  crime  has  not  become  similarly  entrenched),  it  is  estimated  that  the 
cumulative economic growth of the former in the thirty years from 1977 to 2007 was some 
15 percentage points less. The corresponding impact on the development of regions marked 
by  the  long-established  presence  of  mafia-style  organized  crime  can  be  assumed  to  be 
greater  still.  Whilst  these  are  estimates  to  be  treated  with  great  caution,  they  do  give  an 
indication of the relevance of crime to the inhibited development of the southern regions and 
of the entire country. 
How  does  one  go  about  augmenting  a  community’s  social  capital?  Civic  sense,  trust,  and 
willingness  to  cooperate  are  values  that  take  time  to  ingrain  themselves,  and  they  display 
considerable persistence over time. Putnam even traces the current regional discrepancies 
in  Italy  back  to  the  different  political  regimes  prevailing  in  the  late  Middle  Ages.  Other 
scholars, however, maintain that the endowment of social capital can be increased – albeit 
slowly – by working on factors more directly influenced by policy choices. 
The  role  of  schools  and  education  is  central.  There  is  a  strong  correlation,  for  instance, 
between the literacy levels in the different regions of Italy at the end of the 19th century and 
the  degree  of  trust  in  others  observed  today.  Education  level  is  not  the  only  thing  that 
matters, though. International data also suggest the importance of teaching methods: where 
active  participation  and  teamwork  by  students  is  favoured  over  the  traditional  hierarchical 
relationship with teachers, one finds more trust in others and in institutions as well as more 
cooperative attitudes. Where more horizontal teaching methods predominate, one may find 
greater  willingness  to  delegate  decision-making  within  firms  and  less  conflict  in  the 
organization of labor. 
Some concluding considerations 
Like  other  countries  in  Europe  and  around  the  world,  Italy  is  going  through  a  very  difficult 
stage.  But  our  economic  problems  are  only  partly  the  consequence  of  the  severe  global 
recession.  Rather,  their  origins  go  far  back  and  are  rooted  in  structural  characteristics; 
today’s financial troubles reflect the budgetary policies of past years. There can be no illusion 
that macroeconomic interventions are capable of remedying these shortcomings, and this is 
not so much due to their now limited scope for action as to the belief that only by resolving its 
structural weaknesses can the Italian economy gain a new lease on life. Our economy must 
be made more inclusive through increased labour market participation, especially for young 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
people  and  women,  by  eliminating  the  needless  obstacles  to  economic  activity  and  the 
barriers connected with family background. 
This is the meaning of the continual calls for the removal of constraints, vested interests, and 
restrictions on competition and economic activity. The lack of competition curbs output and 
employment  in  many  sectors,  impinges  on  competitiveness  and  the  innovative  capacity  of 
the  entire  economy,  hinders  the  regeneration  of  a  manufacturing  base  that  is  still  too 
fragmented, and prevents talent from emerging. The institutional system must be such as to 
favour business dynamism, growth, stability and certainty in the regulatory framework, and to 
overcome the infrastructure deficit, particularly in high-tech sectors. The North-South labour 
market divide can be overcome through comprehensive regulatory and welfare reform; more 
decentralized and flexible collective bargaining arrangements could enable the remuneration 
and  organization  of  labour  to  be  better  tailored  to  actual  production  conditions.  Particular 
attention  should  be  paid  to  the  southern  regions,  where  structural  weaknesses  are  more 
acute. 
Human  capital  and  investment  in  knowledge  represent  one  of  the  key  economic  policy 
variables.  The  economic  returns  both  to  the  individual  and  to  the  community  are 
unquestionable. They are important not only for their direct impact on productivity but also for 
their  indirect  effects,  which  emerge  in  the  interaction  between  individuals,  in  the growth  of 
public  spirit,  respect  for  the  law  and  belief  in  the  triumph  of  justice,  and  the  fight  against 
corruption and crime – two major factors curbing sustained and continuous economic growth. 
It is clear, however, that despite the great advances since national unification we have not 
yet made good Italy’s historical lag. There is a pressing need for a strong commitment, both 
in  the  public  and  private  sector,  to  invest  in  knowledge  now,  in  order  to  break  the  vicious 
circle of the small stock of human capital and its undervaluation. 
As  an  economist,  I  have  considered  the  consequences  of  human  capital  for  economic 
development. However, this talk is not intended to offer a mechanical or one-sided vision of 
the  dynamics  of  this  relationship.  It  would  be  narrow-minded  to  think  that  knowledge  is 
important  and  should  be  invested  in  solely  because  it  can  increase  our  rate  of  economic 
growth.  Knowledge,  learning,  can  also  help  to  stimulate  public  spirit  and  increase  social 
capital, both of value in and of themselves quite apart from the benefits to economic growth. 
In other words, investment in knowledge constitutes a crucial factor in social cohesion and 
welfare. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
