Jürgen Stark: Macro-prudential supervision and financial integration – 
the ESRB at 1 
Diner speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the SUERF/Deutsche Bundesbank Conference 2011/IMFS – The ESRB at 1, Berlin, 
8 November 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  here  this  evening.  The  growing  integration  of  Europe’s 
financial  markets  and  the  financial  crisis  of  2007–2009  have  raised  important  questions 
about  the  design  of  European  banking  supervision.  If  we  had  relied  on  effective  macro-
prudential  oversight  and  policy  instruments  back  then,  one  can  argue  that  the  social  and 
economic  costs  of  the  crisis  would  have  been  much  lower.  Crucial  improvements  to  the 
financial system were needed, and are still needed, to prevent and mitigate systemic risk. In 
particular, financial institutions should be allowed to fail without imposing unacceptable costs 
on the rest of society. Tonight, I shall reflect on the recent developments in European macro-
prudential  supervision  and  try  to  clarify  our  understanding  of  what  European  macro-
prudential policy is and what it is not, and what it can achieve and what it cannot.  
To start with, I would like to quickly review the root causes of the global financial crisis, which 
give you the background to why and how the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) was 
set  up.  Then  I  will  dwell  on  the  inherent  tensions  that  exist  between  a  need  for  financial 
integration within European Monetary Union (EMU) and the micro-prudential supervision and 
fiscal policies that have remained national competencies. Finally, I will take a critical look at 
the role, power and limitations of the European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs), which I see 
as significant steps in the right direction towards shaping a system that will ensure financial 
stability. 
Let  me  begin  by  looking  back.  The  causes  of  the  recent  crisis  have  been  attributed  to 
macroeconomic  factors,  to  major  weaknesses  in  corporate  governance  in  financial 
institutions  and,  also,  to  an  inadequate  level  of  supervision  and  regulation.  At  the 
macroeconomic  level,  rapid  credit  expansion  over  a  protracted  period  of  time  in  a  benign 
environment  of  low  inflation,  high  growth  and  large  and  persisting  imbalances  fostered 
important leverage and maturity transformations, as well as a significant underpricing of risk. 
At the same time, at the microeconomic level, financial innovations were implemented in a 
manner  that  fostered  wrong  incentives,  notably  in  the  securitisation  process,  which  should 
have helped, in principle, to better diversify and manage economic risk. The securitisation of 
assets  made  it  possible  for  financial  institutions  to  sell  loans  within  complex  and  opaque 
financial  products  and  to  take  them  off  their  balance  sheets.  These  financial  techniques 
weakened incentives for the prudent screening and monitoring of credit risk and led to banks 
loosening their lending standards. Eventually, when the global financial system was thrown 
into crisis, many policy-makers were shocked to discover that they did not have the macro-
prudential tools to deal with part of the financial system spiralling out of control. Up until then, 
the common view in policy circles had been that the whole financial system would be stable 
as  long  as  its  single  parts  were  sound.  The  financial  crisis  painfully  demonstrated  how 
supervisory arrangements have not been sufficiently focused on ensuring the stability of the 
financial system as a whole. Therefore, to be able to monitor, assess and mitigate systemic 
risk, policy-makers have been working on creating new tools for a new policy area, namely 
giving a macro-prudential orientation to financial regulation and supervision. 
The European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) was established as the main body for macro-
prudential oversight and surveillance of EU financial markets.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
As  you  probably  know,  the  European  Central  Bank  (ECB)  has  close  links  with  the  ESRB. 
These include, first, a personal link: the President of the ECB also serves as the Chairperson 
of the ESRB. Second, the ECB provides logistical and administrative support by hosting the 
ESRB secretariat. And lastly, the ECB provides analytical and statistical support, collecting 
and processing information that feed into the ESRB’s discussions.  
Despite this, however, the ESRB remains a body that is quite distinct and separate from the 
ECB. The ESRB does not change in any way the functioning of the ECB’s statutory role and 
its unambiguous primary mandate for delivering price stability. The new institutional set-up, 
and  the  ECB’s  role  in  it,  rests  on  solid  institutional  and  legal  foundations.  The  ECB  has 
participated closely and constructively in the legislative process leading to the establishment 
of  the  ESRB.  It  has  thus  focused  on  establishing  in  Europe  the  most  effective  and  robust 
macro-prudential supervision set-up possible to prevent and mitigate systemic risk. 
The question remains, however, as to whether, within this new macro-prudential framework, 
there  might  not  be  some  tension  between  inter-connectedness  born  out  of  the  growing 
integration of financial markets and matters of national competencies. Let me look at two of 
the challenges we currently face. 
First,  increasing  financial  integration,  both  in  Europe  and  globally,  has  had  important 
implications for the cross-border propagation of systemic risk. Since the introduction of the 
euro,  we  have  seen  growing  integration  of  European  financial  markets.  This  has  been 
illustrated  by  a  significant  convergence  in  interest  rate  differentials  in  wholesale  and 
interbank markets, by a significant degree of convergence for the cost of capital for equity 
and  debt  issuance  across  countries  and,  by  a  gradually  decreasing  home  bias  in  the 
composition of asset classes in most regulated investment funds. This closer integration has 
been facilitated by the growing importance of the euro as a reserve currency, as well as by 
the  rapid  technological  advances  that  have  enabled  markets  to  operate  more  easily  in  a 
cross-border  environment.  As  financial  markets  have  become  more  inter-connected,  the 
structure  of  banking  markets  and  their  management  has  also  changed  significantly.  Large 
banking groups have been created from a growing number of cross-border bank mergers. 
Today, many banking groups have major operations in multiple jurisdictions, where they can 
pose systemic risk to a host banking system. 
At  the  same  time,  over  the  last  decade,  EU  legislation  has  been  growing  dramatically  in 
scope  and  coverage  for  many  areas  and  segments  of  financial  markets.  However,  the 
implementation and enforcement of this legislation has been ultimately left to the discretion 
and authority of supervisors in the individual Member States, based on the principle of home 
country control and mutual recognition. The recent financial crisis has clearly illustrated these 
substantial  cross-border  implications  and  the  need  for  a  more  robust  macro-prudential 
supervisory framework and micro-prudential supervisory regime. 
The second challenge concerns another aspect of policy-making left to the authorities in the 
individual  Member  States:  namely,  of  course,  fiscal  policies.  A  consequence  of  financial 
integration  is  that  European  banks  are  exposed  to  a  wide  range  of  risks  in  European 
government  debt  and  not  only  to  domestic  sovereign  risk.  This  implies  that,  in  a  crisis, 
distressed government debt tends to become a common liability for all governments, at least 
through  the  interdependence  of  banking  system  vulnerabilities  across  jurisdictions.  The 
current  sovereign  debt  crisis  in  Europe  is  proving  to  us  that  fiscal  policy  should  be  more 
grounded – in a similar way to monetary policy – within a rules-based framework with clear 
medium-term  objectives.  And  for  rules  and  sanctions  to  be  fully  credible,  they  should  be 
stricter, automatic, and as free as possible from the political process, so that countries have 
the right incentives to address their problems. This calls for substantial improvements in the 
quality of fiscal institutions and policy frameworks in Europe.  
All in all, a lesson to take from the current sovereign debt crisis is that there is an undeniable 
tension  between,  on  the  one  hand,  the  need  for  financial  integration  to  ensure  a  smooth 
functioning  of  Monetary  Union,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  micro-prudential  and  fiscal 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
competencies  that  have  remained  at  the  local  level.  And  this  tension  has  the  potential  to 
exacerbate  the  risk  of  future  financial  crises  and  hinder  effective  crisis  management.  We 
need bold steps towards a fiscal union. We need to go beyond and create a financial union. 
In one word, the crisis has clearly shown us that we need “more Europe”. 
The  new  EU  supervisory  framework  is  actually  based  on  two  pillars:  first,  the  ESRB  for 
macro-prudential  supervision  and, 
for  micro-prudential  supervision,  a  second  pillar 
comprising three different European Supervisory Authorities (ESAs) – one for banking, one 
for  insurance  and  one  for  the  securities  markets.  This  framework  provides  a  more 
consolidated  and  rational  institutional  design  for  linking  the  micro-prudential  supervision  of 
individual  institutions  with  the  supervision  of  linkages  between  institutions  and  within  the 
broader system. 
However, as the ESAs were only established at the beginning of 2011, they are too young for 
us to judge their effectiveness. Under the current framework, all supervisors in the Member 
States  continue  to  be  responsible  for  assuming  their  individual  supervisory  functions,  but 
they have to report on their practices to the relevant authority. The ESAs’ regulations provide 
for  a  review  of  the  new  institutional  arrangements  by  the  European  Commission  in  early 
2014. Should the ESAs be deemed not to have adequate tools and powers, there may be a 
case  for  greater  integration  of  the  supervisory  framework  –  including  tools  for  crisis 
management  and  resolution.  There  may  indeed  also  be  some  support  for  a  single  EU 
financial supervisor. The main argument for such an institutional consolidation is that given 
the growing financial “inter-connectedness” of Europe, a centralised supervisory body would 
promote  a  more  efficient  level  playing  field  in  supervisory  practices.  Moreover,  it  might 
enhance both the efficacy of supervision and the crisis management capabilities over credit 
institutions with a strong cross-border presence. Although there are obvious benefits of such 
a  centralised  institutional  structure,  there  are  also  obvious  concerns  about  the  issue  of 
national sovereignty. 
Let  me  wrap  up  and  conclude.  By  providing  the  basis  for  payments  and  by  acting  as  the 
principal intermediary between savers and borrowers, the banking system plays a role similar 
to the electricity supply network as a vital part of the economic infrastructure. However, as 
recent  experience  has  shown,  if  the  stability  of  the  system  is  undermined,  considerable 
disruption can ensue, leading to considerable effects on social and economic costs.  
For  these  reasons,  financial  stability  may  be  seen  as  a  “public  good”  which  requires 
adequate regulation. Regulators need to tread a careful path between controls that ensure 
the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  over-bearing  regulation,  which  would  hinder 
competition and efficiency.  
The  new  regulatory  reform  and  the  macro-prudential  oversight  now  in  place  constitute  an 
unprecedented  achievement.  At  the  same  time,  key  challenges  remain,  in  particular 
regarding 
interaction  between  macro-prudential  and  micro-prudential  authorities, 
especially against a background of growing inter-connectedness of financial markets and the 
sovereign  debt  crisis.  Looking  forward,  the  coming  years  will  be  crucial  to  judge  the 
functioning of the new financial supervision framework, to assess the efficiency of the new 
tools and methodologies that are being developed as academic research progresses in this 
field, and to minimise and correct potential inefficiencies. The achievements made so far are 
clearly  a  major  step  towards  creating  a  safer  financial  system,  but  further  ambitious 
arrangements may be needed to enhance the robustness of our financial systems. Not only 
stricter  fiscal  rules  and  the  creation  of  a  fiscal  union  are  needed,  but  it  has  to  be 
complemented with a financial union. 
Thank you for your attention. 
the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
