Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile: Introducing innovative services to meet 
credit needs in Uganda 
Speech by Mr Emmanuel Tumusiime-Mutebile, Governor of the Bank of Uganda, at the year-
end stakeholders’ function and sharing of Compuscan’s vision 2012, Kampala, 8 December 
2011.  
 The Board of Directors CompuScan Information Technologies,  
Managing Director CompuScan CRB Limited,  
Representatives of the Development Partners (Word Bank, KfW, GIZ),  
Representatives of the Participating Institutions (PIs),  
Distinguished Guests,  
Ladies and Gentlemen.  
I  would  like  to  welcome  you  all  to  this  event  to  launch  officially  the  Compuscore  and 
CompuScan’s  Vision  2012.  I  would  also  like  to  thank  the  Board  of  Directors  and 
Management of CompuScan CRB for inviting me to preside over this function.  
Credit  markets  are  plagued  by  informational  problems,  and  these  problems  are  especially 
acute  in  developing  economies.  Informational  problems  raise  transactions  costs,  often  to 
such an extent that potential borrowers are denied access to credit in the formal sector. The 
adverse consequences of informational imperfections for financial markets were analysed in 
the  1970s  by  Joseph  Stiglitz  and  George  Akerlof;  work  for  which  they  received  the  Nobel 
Prize.  The  etymology  of  the  word  “credit”  is  the  latin  verb  “credere”;  to  trust  or  believe. 
Unfortunately trust alone is rarely sufficient to ensure that a creditor will ever get her money 
back; hence credit decisions must be made on the basis of accurate, reliable data. Without 
such data creditors will be reluctant to risk their money.  
A  key  challenge  for  policy  makers  concerned  with  financial  market  development  is  how  to 
design policy interventions which can mitigate informational imperfections and thus reduce 
their negative externalities. The kernel of the challenge is how to ensure that accurate and 
reliable  information  about  those  which  wish  to  raise  finance  can  be  acquired  in  a  cost 
effective  manner  by  those  who  provide  finance  and  bear  the  risk  of  doing  so.  Credit 
Reference Bureaux provide an institutional solution to the problem. A well functioning Credit 
Reference Bureau mitigates information related market failures because it is compulsory for 
all  participants  in  the  credit  markets  to  provide  and  share  information,  in  circumstances 
where they may have private incentives not to do so. Furthermore, the pooling of information 
in a Credit Reference Bureau reduces the social costs of acquiring information. This was the 
motivation  for  the  Bank  of  Uganda,  with  the support  of  development  partners  –  KfW,  GTZ 
and the World Bank – to introduce a Credit Reference Bureau in Uganda.  
Our development partners have helped to subsidize the Credit Reference Bureau system in 
its  initial  phase  of  operation.  Although  the  services  of  the  credit  reference  bureau  are 
provided  to  private  enterprises,  driven  by  the  profit  motive,  a  subsidy  in  this  case  was 
warranted  because  of  the  social  benefits  which  a  well  functioning  credit  reference  service 
can generate, which exceed the private benefits accruing to individual financial institutions. 
Nevertheless, now that the institutional framework for the credit reference service has been 
established, the costs of providing credit reference services will fall and hence there will be 
much less of a need for ongoing subsidy.  
In  the  three  and  a  half  years  since  Compuscan  commenced  Credit  Reference  Bureau 
operations  in  Uganda,  in  May  2008,  great  progress  has  been  achieved.  All  supervised 
financial institutions – commercial banks, credit institutions and deposit taking microfinance 
institutions  –  are  participating.  A  total  of  640,000  financial  cards  have  been  issued  to  the 
customers of financial institutions; these are all borrowers or prospective borrowers. Nearly 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
50,000 credit enquiries are made to the Credit Reference Bureau every month. Furthermore, 
strong safeguards have been built into the system, stipulated through regulations issued by 
the Bank of Uganda, to protect the accuracy and confidentiality of information given to the 
Credit Reference Bureau and to ensure that it is only used for the purposes for which it is 
intended.  
To remain competitive, Credit Reference Bureaux worldwide must not stand on their laurels; 
they  must  introduce  innovative  services  to  meet  the  evolving  needs  of  their  clients. 
Compuscan is currently introducing a Credit Scoring System which is intended to facilitate 
quicker and better decision making by the participating financial institutions.  
We are now nearing the end of the first major phase of Credit Reference Bureau operations 
in  Uganda.  Looking  ahead,  we  hope  to  expand  the  scope  of  coverage  of  the  Credit 
Reference Bureau to include credit providers which are not supervised financial institutions; 
for example utility companies, mobile phone companies and SACCOs. We will also open up 
the market for credit reference services to competition after September 2012, when the rights 
of  Compuscan  to  be  the  sole  Credit  Reference  Bureau  expire.  Competition  should  benefit 
customers  of  the  credit  reference  services  because  of  the  incentives  it  will  give  service 
providers to reduce costs and introduce new products.  
I would like to commend Compuscan for its achievements over the last three and a half years 
in successfully launching the credit reference bureau in Uganda and for now introducing the 
Credit Scoring System. I would also like to thank all of our development partners, especially 
KfW, GTZ and the World Bank, who have supported the project through both financial and 
technical assistance.  
Thank you for listening.  
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
