Duvvuri Subbarao: Will the renminbi eclipse the dollar? 
Welcome remarks by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
talk  delivered  by  Dr  Arvind  Subramanian,  Senior  Fellow  at  the  Peterson  Institute  for 
International  Economics,  Washington  DC,  “Will 
the  dollar?”, 
Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, 7 October 2011. 
the  renminbi  eclipse 
 1. 
I  have  great  pleasure  in  welcoming  Arvind  Subramanian,  Senior  Fellow  at  the 
Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington DC. He will shortly be speaking 
to us on “Will the Renminbi Eclipse the Dollar?” based, I believe, on his latest book “Eclipse”. 
It will be presumptuous on my part to introduce Arvind. Some of us are privileged to 
2. 
know him personally, and almost everyone here knows him by name and by reputation.  
Stature and reputation 
3. 
Over the last few years, all of us have seen Arvind grow in stature and international 
recognition as a leading expert on the global economy. He has been widely acclaimed for his 
sharp mind, lateral thinking, and prized communication skills. I know for sure, because at the 
peak of the crisis, he was among the first, possibly the very first, to raise the issue of the 
need for EMEs to have a minimum amount of reserves for “self-insurance”. It is not surprising 
that Arvind was called upon by the White House to brief President Obama before his visit to 
India last year. 
Eclipse 
4. 
While  Arvind’s  achievements  to  date  have  been  truly  impressive,  his  recent  book 
“Eclipse: Living in the Shadow of China’s Economic Dominance” has catapulted him to the 
top league of thought leaders on the global economy. 
5. 
Since its release, barely three weeks ago (September 16), Arvind’s new book has 
made intellectual waves. It has been reviewed, critically acclaimed, discussed, debated and 
analyzed in virtually every major publication of intellectual repute. At a time when there is a 
new book on China practically every week, for a book to attract this sort of notice and praise 
is truly remarkable, and a tribute to Arvind’s solid scholarship, incisive insights, and analytical 
skills.  The  very  exclusive  Foreign  Policy  magazine  has  selected  Arvind  as  one  of  the  top 
100 global  thinkers.  Of  course,  I  am  not  surprised.  This  recognition  is  a  definitive 
acknowledgement  that  he  has  clearly  transcended  the  boundaries  of  a  single  discipline  of 
economics, and turned into an influential public intellectual at the global level.  
6. 
I have not read Arvind’s new book. But having been Governor for three years now, I 
know that one of the exclusive privileges of being the Governor is to be able to talk about 
books without having read them. However, I have read about the Eclipse, and so let me go 
on with my own understanding of Arvind’s thesis in the book. 
7. 
(i) 
Arvind thesis comprises three points: 
As  measured  by  an  index  made  up  of  the  share  of  world  GDP,  trade  and 
investment, China will overtake America as the world’s dominant economic power 
sooner  than  people  think.  By  2030,  China’s  share  of  global  economic  power  will 
match America’s in the 1970s and Britain’s a century before.  
The  three  forces  that  will  dictate  this  race  to  the  top  by  China  will  be 
(a) demography, (b) convergence, which is the scope for “catch up” and (c) “gravity” 
which is a measure of the trade potential of a country. 
(ii) 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
(iii) 
(iii) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
8. 
practice of intellectual integrity:  
(i) 
(ii) 
This projected rise of China to the top is imminent. The world should prepare for this 
through policies for reconciling China’s rise with continued openness in the global 
economic order.  
Arvind’s conclusions are clearly contentious and contestable. However, in the best 
He clearly lays out his assumptions about US and Chinese growth rates. 
I believe he actually makes very conservative estimates above China’s growth rate 
relative to its stellar performance over the last two decades. 
He  also  argues  out  clearly  why  China  will  overtake  America  in  the  twenty-first 
century faster than America overtook Britain in the nineteenth century.  
Arvind’s arguments 
9. 
(i) 
Arvind’s arguments and conclusions are persuasive for many reasons. 
China has put out dazzling growth performance over the last two decades. We may 
dispute  the  fine  numbers,  but  there  is  no  doubt  that  what  China  has  achieved  by 
way of lifting hundreds of millions of poor people out of poverty is by far one of the 
most spectacular economic achievements in human history.  
Last  year,  China  overtook  America  as  the  world’s  largest  manufacturer,  and 
overtook Japan as the world’s second largest economy. 
The Chinese growth model and the Chinese way of doing things have won grudging 
admiration, even if not legitimacy.  
Questions 
10. 
its performance and come out on top. Let me list a few important ones. 
(i) 
At the same time, there are several questions concerning whether China can sustain 
Can  the  China  growth  engine  maintain  its  momentum?  Is  the  so  called  “Chinese 
model”  of  export  thrust,  domestic  investment  binge  and  suppressed  domestic 
consumption  sustainable,  especially  in  a  large,  heterogeneous  country  with  a 
population of over 1.5. billion? In particular, 
(a)  Will the external environment sustain the export momentum? 
(b)   Can  a  country  continue  to  invest  50%  of  GDP  year  on  year  without  hitting 
against  immense  overcapacity,  diminishing  returns  and  a  staggering  non-
performing loan problem? In short, will China not hit a brickwall? 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
2 
 Second, can China make the strategic adjustment, what they call “rebalancing”, from 
external  to  domestic  demand,  and  from  investment  to  consumption  in  an  orderly, 
calibrated way?  
Another set of questions relates to what happens after China exhausts the scope for 
“catch up” growth as it already seems to. Will it not get locked into a middle income 
trap  because  of  ageing  population  and  rising  real  wages?  Will  China  be  able  to 
innovate new sources of growth to keep moving up the value chain to escape the 
middle income trap? 
Fourth, a political economy question is whether China can rise to dominance even 
as it continues under an authoritarian regime? The Chinese success so far has, of 
course,  given  near  legitimacy  to  China’s  authoritarian  model.  Will  continued 
authoritarianism be a plus point for China’s inexorable rise to the top or will it be a 
drag? Will the regime implode under its own weight? Or as some analysts argue, will 
BIS central bankers’ speeches
(v) 
China’s  growing  prosperity  itself  open  up  an  avenue  for  winding  down  the 
authoritarianism, and provide a roadmap towards democracy? 
Finally, a question more relevant here in the Reserve Bank is what of the renminbi, 
in particular its potential international status? Quite independent of any currency in 
view, we in India have held that for any currency to be a global reserve currency, it 
has to fulfill certain attributes:  
(a) 
(b) 
the currency must be freely convertible both on current and capital accounts; 
its  exchange  rate  must  be  determined  by  market  forces  of  supply  and 
demand; 
a significant portion of the world trade must be invoiced in the aspiring reserve 
currency;  
in order to enjoy the exorbitant privilege of issuing the reserve currency, the 
issuing  country  must  accept  the  “exceptional  responsibility”  of  maintaining 
sufficient liquidity in the currency; 
its financial markets must be open, deep and robust; 
the policies of the country must inspire trust and confidence.  
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f)  
For us in India, China means many things – an object of envy, a challenge and an 
I believe I have raised a lot of questions. But let me conclude with some thoughts on 
China and India 
11. 
India-China comparison which has almost become a national obsession. 
12. 
inspiration. 
Note  that  in  1700,  India,  with  a  population  of  165  m,  was  the  world’s  largest 
13. 
economy, followed by China with 138 m people. Even a century later, in 1820, as Industrial 
Revolution  was  gathering  pace,  India  and  China  accounted  for  half  of  world  GDP.  The 
pecking order completely changed after that. China and India got relegated to the bottom of 
the league of nations. And over the last 25 years, we are fighting our way back up.  
14. 
But China is ahead of us by miles. China is already a low middle income country, 
whereas India is still a low income country and home to the largest number of poor people in 
the  world.  As  recently  as  1990,  India  was  30  places  ahead  of  China  in  the  global 
competitiveness index. We are now 30 places behind China. As recently as 2000, there was 
at  least  one  Indian  university/institution  in  the  top  100  global  institutions  while  China  had 
none.  Today  China  has  five  and  India  has  none.  As  measured  by  patents  registered  or 
research publications, China is moving up, and India is moving down.  
15. 
I  am  making  this  comparison  not  so  much  in  despair,  but  to  trigger  some 
introspection about what India should do to regain the glory that we enjoyed as the world’s 
pre-eminent global power 300 years ago. China has demonstrated what is possible. To that 
extent China is an inspiration. The task for us in India is to match up to that record, or even 
surpass it, but by doing it the Indian way.  
16. 
questions and also provide us answers for our own way forward.  
17. 
I am sure listening to Arvind about China’s rise to the top will answer many of these 
Please join me in welcoming Arvind Subramanian. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
