Ardian Fullani: Recent economic and monetary developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the press conference on 
the  Monetary  Policy  Decision  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  Supervisory  Council,  Tirana, 
30 November 2011. 
 Today, on 30 November 2011, the Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania reviewed and 
approved  the  monthly  Monetary  Policy  Report.  Based  on  the  analysis  of  Albania’s  latest 
economic and financial developments and following discussions on the performance outlook, 
the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  decided  to  cut  the  key  interest  rate  by 
0.25 percentage  points.  Following  this  decision,  the  interest  rate  for  one  week  repurchase 
agreements fell to 4.75%. This key interest rate cut was triggered by contained inflationary 
pressures along the monetary policy time span and expectations for a more prudent fiscal 
policy  over  the  period  ahead.  The  Supervisory  Council  judged  that  this  decision  would 
provide appropriate monetary conditions to meet the inflation target over the medium run. It 
would also increase monetary stimulus and promote economic activity in Albania.  
(Let  me  now  proceed  with  an  overview  of  economic  developments  and  main  issues 
discussed at today’s meeting.)  
 Annual inflation rate was 3% in October, slightly up compared with the previous month’s 
figure. Annual consumer price rise continues to be influenced substantially by high food, oil, 
and  primary  commodity  prices  in  global  markets.  These  prices  have  been  reflected  in  a 
higher  contribution  of  imported  inflation  to  domestic  inflation  throughout  2011.  However, 
increase in domestic agricultural production, stable performance of exchange rate and price 
stabilization in global markets have reduced its impact in recent months. These factors, along 
with the cancelling out of regulated price inflation have led to a continuous slowdown in the 
inflation rate in recent months.  
From the macroeconomic aspect, consumer prices were influenced by drivers of a different 
impact and intensity. The shocks arising from high prices in global markets, the increase in 
several regulated prices in 2010 and excise taxes in early 2011 were offset on the downside 
by the below-potential performance of economic activity and sluggish demand pressures. In 
the presence of anchored inflation expectations and low monetary inflationary pressures, the 
overall macroeconomic environment has favoured the reduction of inflationary pressures for 
the second half of the year.  
In the absence of direct data, the Bank of Albania’s estimates on the country’s economic 
performance, based on indirect qualitative and quantitative indicators, suggest a moderate 
increase  in  aggregate  demand  over  the  second  and  third  quarters,  in  line  with  the  one 
registered over the first quarter. The economic activity has continued to be supported mainly 
by  foreign  demand  and  growth  of  exports,  whereas  the  public  sector’s  impact  has  been 
downward and private consumption and investments have remained weak. In particular, the 
private sector demand is assessed as sluggish. Notwithstanding the positive performance of 
real income, consumer spending is estimated as weak, affected by uncertainty surrounding 
the future and increased propensity of Albanian consumers to save. On the other hand, the 
need of private businesses to carry out new investments has been low, against the backdrop 
of  a  moderate  demand  for  goods  and  services  and  the  existence  of  spare  capacities  in 
production.  
Fiscal policy has been stimulating during 2011. For the first ten-month period of the year, 
budget  deficit  posted  ALL  30.9  billion  or  about  33.0%  higher  than  a  year  earlier.  The 
performance of budget deficit has been determined by the sluggish increase in expenditures 
and revenues by an annualized rate of 3.9% and 1.4%, respectively. The stimulating fiscal 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
policy has been winding down steadily following the first quarter of the year, as also shown 
by  the  decelerated  increase  in  public  spending  and  budget  deficit.  This  fiscal  stance  has 
contributed  to  maintaining  the  level  of  public  debt  under  control.  The  Bank  of  Albania 
assesses  the  latter  as  one  of  the  most  essential  indicators  of  macroeconomic  stability  at 
home. In this context, we encourage fiscal authorities to take appropriate measures, in order 
to ensure long-term sustainability of public debt.  
Foreign  demand  has  supported  the  Albanian  economic  growth,  notwithstanding  the 
concerns  surrounding  the  global  economy  and  especially  our  trading  partners.  Albanian 
exports  continue  to  grow,  albeit  at  decelerated  paces  compared  with  the  previous  year. 
Exports grew 27.3% in the third quarter of the year, while imports grew 8.6% over the same 
period. Trade deficit increased 6.8% in the first nine-month period of the year. The Bank of 
Albania  is  very  heedful  to  external  balances  of  the  Albanian  economy,  regarding  their 
correction  as  one  of  the  main  priorities  of  the  country’s  macroeconomic  policies.  This 
objective assumes more importance against the backdrop of recent developments in global 
financial markets. In the long run, its attainment requires ongoing structural reforms, which 
will  enhance  competitiveness  of  the  Albanian  economy  and  will  generate  higher  revenues 
from the export of goods and services.  
Monetary inflationary pressures remain subdued in the medium run. Monetary expansion 
has maintained stable annual growth rates during the year, resulting 10.4% in September. 
Public sector demand for funding has been downward in recent months, making the private 
sector’s  demand  provide  the  largest  contribution  to  money  supply  growth.  Private  sector 
credit grew 14.0% in September, marking a slight acceleration compared with the first half of 
the  year.  However,  as  we  have  constantly  stated,  the  relatively  sluggish  performance  of 
private sector credit reflects mostly its weak demand. The banking sector appears liquid and 
well capitalized to credit the Albanian economy, but it has increased its prudence in terms of 
lending, thus reflecting the new reality of the Albanian economy and global financial markets. 
The Bank of Albania assesses that, within the parameters of prudence, there is room for a 
more  rapid  growth  of  credit  and  for  supporting  sound  investment  projects  by  the  banking 
sector.  On  our  behalf,  we  will  continue  to  support  the  financial  system  with  liquidity  and 
monetary stimuli in order to boost lending.  
Financial  markets  continue  to  highlight  downward  liquidity  premiums  and  inflation.  The 
interbank  interest  rates have  further  declined,  remaining  close  to  the  key  interest  rate  and 
displaying  low  volatility.  A  more  moderate  government  demand  for  funding  and  the  short-
term interest rate cut in the money market have been reflected in an overall decline in the 
yields on primary market government securities.  
Our  assessments  on  economic  outlook  suggest  a  moderate  economic  growth  for  the 
remainder  of  the  year  and  for  the  next  year.  Boosted  uncertainties  surrounding  the  global 
economy  make  their  impact  on  current  and  expected  developments  of  the  Albanian 
economy. In particular, the situation of our trading partners is expected to be reflected in a 
sluggish  foreign  demand  for  Albanian  goods  and  services.  Also,  the  need  for  maintaining 
budget  deficit  and  public  debt  parameters  is  expected  to  materialize  in  the  public  sector’s 
lower contribution to aggregate demand over the period ahead. Under these conditions, the 
performance of economic activity at home will be determined substantially by the extent and 
speed  of  recovery  of  the  private  sector  demand  –  consumption  and  private  investments. 
Despite the positive growth, aggregate demand is expected to remain below the potential of 
the Albanian economy, determining the incomplete capacity utilization in the economy and 
generating  demand-driven  low  inflationary  pressures.  Considering  the  materialization  of 
these expectations and projections for further weakening of inflationary pressures from global 
conjuncture,  annual  inflation  is  expected  to  be  within  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  target  in  the 
medium run.  
 2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Taking  into  account  the  above  overview,  the  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania 
deemed  that  inflationary  pressures  are  downward  and  remain  subdued  over  the  monetary 
policy time span. Also, economic agents’ inflation expectations remain anchored around the 
Bank of Albania’s target.  
At  the  conclusion  of  discussions,  the  Supervisory  Council  decided  to  cut  the  key 
interest rate by 0.25 percentage points, down to 4.75%. This decision serves to comply 
with the inflation target in the medium run and provides appropriate monetary conditions to 
stimulate the economic activity. The Bank of Albania remains heedful to future economic and 
financial  developments  at  home  and  abroad,  with  a  view  to  take  the  right  steps  for  the 
fulfilment of its mandate. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
