Ravi Menon: Three “C”s of a good payment instrument 
Welcome  address  by  Mr  Ravi  Menon,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore (MAS), at the Currency Conference 2011, Singapore, 3 October 2011. 
 Why cash is still king 
Distinguished  guests,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  good  morning  and  a  warm  welcome  to 
Singapore and the 2011 Currency Conference. Singapore is honoured and delighted to host 
this flagship event. 
The  late  Mr  John  Shepherd-Barron,  who  pioneered  in  1967  the  development  of  the 
Automated  Teller  Machine,  or  ATM,  said  during  a  2007  interview:  “Money  costs  money  to 
transport. I am therefore predicting the demise of cash within three to five years.” 
Shepherd-Barron believed fervently that we would soon be swiping our mobile phones at till 
points,  even  for  small  transactions.  We  have  indeed  seen  an  increasing  use  of  cashless 
payments  at  point-of-sale.  Electronic  payment  alternatives  have  mushroomed  in  many 
countries, ranging from contactless stored value cards in Singapore to real-time settlement of 
electronic fund transfers in the United Kingdom.  
But cash remains “king”. Even in advanced economies. This is especially so for person-to-
person transactions and micro-payments. Take high-tech Singapore. The use of electronic 
payments  has  proliferated  rapidly  in  recent  years.  Yet,  currency-in-circulation  has  been 
growing  at an  average  7  per  cent per  annum  during  the  last  ten  years.  This  has reflected 
demand from a growing population and a growing economy. 
Less  well  known  is  how  the  demand  for  cash  globally  is being  driven  by  tourism.  Tourists 
have a habit of taking back home unused currency – both notes and coins. This represents a 
leakage  from  circulation  and  needs  to  be  replaced.  We  don’t  have  good  data  on  this.  But 
take for example, Singapore. Last year, we received almost 12 million visitors. If everyone 
took 8 coins back with them, close to 100 million coins would have leaked out of the country. 
And it will cost MAS about S$10 million to replace them. That’s why we have been working 
with  the  Singapore  Mint,  Changi  Airport  Group,  and  charity  organisations  to  increase  the 
availability  of  boxes  in  various  parts  of  Changi  Airport,  for  tourists  to  donate  their  excess 
notes and coins before they leave the country. 
Physical  cash  commands  a  premium  during  times  of  uncertainty.  We  saw  this  during  the 
2008 global financial crisis. Within the first month of the collapse of Lehman Brothers, there 
was  an  exceptionally  large  withdrawal  of  high  denomination  notes  by  banks  in  Singapore. 
Typically, 90 per cent or more of the high-denomination notes withdrawn from banks are re-
deposited within the month. During the initial months of the 2008 crisis, only 70 per cent of 
the $100, $1,000 and $10,000 notes withdrawn were returned. 
This phenomenon is insightful. The safety and soundness of banks in Singapore was never 
in question, and the impact of the crisis on Singapore’s financial system was minimal. But 
there was a discernible effect on consumer behaviour – people preferred to keep more cash 
in a climate of heightened uncertainty. 
The  bottom  line?  Reports  of  the  demise  of  cash  are  vastly  exaggerated.  Notes  and  coins 
have been with us a long time, and have served a crucial role in the growth of the modern 
economy. I suspect they will be with us for quite some time more. 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Three “C”s of a good payment instrument 
But be it physical cash or electronic payment, the medium of exchange for transactions must 
satisfy  three  requirements.  I  will  refer  to  these  as  the  three  “C”s  of  a  preferred  payment 
system – confidence, convenience, and cost-effectiveness. 
First,  confidence.  Businesses  and  consumers  must  be  assured  of  the  security  of  payment 
instruments. The widespread circulation of counterfeit notes and coins can impair confidence 
in a country’s currency. As John Maynard Keynes put it nearly a century ago, quoting Lenin, 
“There  is  no  subtler,  no  surer  means  of  overturning  the  existing  basis  of  society  than  to 
debauch  the  currency.”  Keynes  was,  of  course,  talking  about  the  deleterious  effects  of 
inflation. But it applies just as well to debasing the currency through counterfeiting. 
Ensuring  the  fidelity  of  notes  and  coins  and  the  soundness  of  electronic  payments  is 
therefore a critical function. Central banks and currency issuing authorities must continually 
innovate and stay ahead of fraudsters. In electronic fund transfers, we have instituted more 
end-to-end  security  measures  like  two-factor  authentication.  Modern  currency  notes  come 
with  very  advanced  security  features.  I  wanted  to  give  some  examples,  but  have  been 
advised that it would be tantamount to giving away our secrets! 
Confidence in a currency comes not only from its security but also its availability, especially 
during  times  of  uncertainty.  Central  banks  and  financial  institutions  must  have  robust 
business continuity measures to ensure adequate supply of cash to meet surges in demand 
and the resilience of national payment systems. 
The second “C” is convenience. Although cash is widely used and accepted in our society 
today,  e-payment  alternatives  such  as  mobile  payments  and  electronic  wallets are  gaining 
popularity.  The  “tap-and-go”  feature  of  contactless  cards  is  much  in  sync  with  the  hurried 
lifestyles of today, hence the growing popularity of these cards.  
Convenience  is  an  important  consideration  in  developments  within  the  cashless  space  of 
payments. In 2008, for the first time, GIRO overtook cheques by volume of transactions in 
Singapore.  In  fact,  GIRO  itself  –  which  is  based  on  batch  processing  –  will  be  eventually 
overtaken by straight-through, real-time payments systems. 
The third “C” is cost-effectiveness. Handling cash is costly. According to a 2010 study by Retail 
Banking Research, the cost of distributing, managing, handling, processing and recycling cash 
in Europe is estimated at €84 billion. This is equal to 0.6 per cent of Europe’s GDP.  
How  to  reduce  the  cost  of  cash  without  compromising  confidence  and  convenience?  A 
number  of  countries  are  exploring  alternative  note  substrates  and  coinage  materials  to 
increase  their  durability,  quality,  security,  and  cost  effectiveness.  Besides  managing 
manufacturing  costs,  countries  are  looking  at  the  end-to-end  costs  of  currency  distribution 
and collection. Some have outsourced their currency functions, while others have automated 
their currency facilities to improve efficiency in currency processing.  
In Singapore, we began automating currency processing and warehousing operations in 2000. 
Today, Singapore has one of the few fully automated currency handling facilities in the world. 
Conclusion 
All of us gathered here share a common objective in establishing a secure, convenient, and 
cost-effective payment system. It is important for central banks and key industry players to 
engage one another and share best practices and lessons learnt.  
The  Currency  Conference  serves  this  purpose.  We  have  a  large  turnout  from  some 
75 countries. We have many excellent speakers, and a diverse cast of delegates. I hope all 
of us can benefit from the sharing of experiences and the networking opportunities provided 
by the Conference. I wish you all a successful and fruitful Conference; and to our guests from 
abroad, an enjoyable stay in Singapore. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
