Prasarn Trairatvorakul: The outlook for Thailand’s economy in the face 
of concerns about the slowing US recovery and Europe’s debt crisis 
Address  by  Dr  Prasarn  Trairatvorakul,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Thailand,  at  the  Foreign 
Correspondents’ Club of Thailand, Bangkok, 3 November 2011. 
 Distinguished FCCT Members and Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First  of  all,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  FCCT  Board  for  inviting  me  to  share  my  view  on 
Thailand’s economic outlook in the face of the U.S. economic slowdown and the Eurozone’s 
sovereign debt crisis. Actually, the organizer’s original intention reflects very well what was in 
the back of everyone’s mind over the past few months when we talked about key challenges 
to  the  Thai  economy.  But  as  all  of  us  here  today  might  agree,  things  have  changed  so 
dramatically over the past month alone, with the country now being swept over by the flood. 
While our feet need to stand firm weathering through and recovering from the flood together 
as a nation, our eyes cannot lose focus on what happens in the U.S. and the Eurozone. I 
think it is fair to say that what happens in the U.S. and the Eurozone will likely reshape the 
global  financial  and  economic  landscape  over  the  years  to  come.  And  for  Thailand,  these 
factors and their implications on the global economy will also determine whether the recovery 
from the flood will be a rosy or a painful one. So, my talk today will be divided into two parts. 
First, I would like to touch briefly on the Bank of Thailand’s latest view on domestic growth in 
short  and  medium  term.  Then  I  will  delve  more  deeply  into  concerns  in  the  U.S.  and  the 
Eurozone, along with the likely implications on Thailand’s recovery. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to first share with you the Bank of Thailand’s latest economic projection and our 
outlook for the Thai economy. Despite the fact that we have less than two months to go for 
2011, the Bank has just revised down its growth projection for the Thai economy this year, 
from  4.1  percent  in  July’s  assessment  to  only  2.6  percent  in  October’s.  This  significant 
downward revision reflects the severity and the broad-based impacts of the flood, which has 
brought about a halt in agricultural and manufacturing production in affected areas, and has 
also disrupted production chains in other areas as well. The automobile industry, which has 
just recovered from supply chain disruptions following natural disasters in Japan earlier this 
year,  is  once  again  terribly  affected.  And  in  the  big  picture,  we  have  sharply  lower 
consumption  and  investment  spending  that  will  require  some  time  to  resume  their  normal 
trend. 
But  even  in  the  face  of  this  hardship,  and  amidst  the  external  environment  that  is  quite 
unpredictable  given  heightened  risks  and  uncertainty  from  the  U.S.  and  the  Eurozone,  we 
still  expect  Thailand’s  growth  outlook  to  be  favorable  next  year.  Provided  that  the  flood 
situation starts to improve by early December, we should see Thailand staging a respectable 
comeback  on  the  back  of  domestic  demand  revival.  We  expect  private  consumption  to 
rebound as early as the first quarter next year, and investment to regain its firm footing by the 
second.  This  will  be  made  possible  by  pushes  from  reconstruction  spending  and  fiscal 
stimulus,  both  through  the  government’s  direct  spending  and  additional  measures.  And  in 
particular,  higher  investment  on  developments  of  flood  warning  and  prevention  systems  is 
also  urgently  needed,  both  to  prepare  Thailand  for  future  flood  incidents  and  to  restore 
foreign investors’ confidence. 
I  would  like  to  stress  again  that  Thailand’s  fate  will  depend  upon  her  success  in  reviving 
domestic  demand,  given  that  the  problems  in  the  U.S.  and  the  Eurozone  are  still  far  from 
resolved and are expected to last well into the next year and beyond. Early resolution of the 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
U.S. and the Eurozone crises will rejuvenate the now-sluggish global growth momentum, and 
this  will  benefit  Thailand  by  allowing  her  exports  to  work  with  domestic  demand  in  driving 
growth. But if the opposite happens, then it is likely that another global economic slowdown, 
even a global recession, is coming underway. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
This  leads  us  to  our  second  focus  today  on  developments  in  the  U.S.  and  the  Eurozone, 
along with their implications on Thailand’s outlook going forward. Serious structural concerns 
continue to threaten the health of the U.S. economy. And given the lack of momentum from 
private and public sectors, U.S. growth will likely remain low for an extended period of time. 
While  economic  data  releases  have  pointed  time  and  again  to  delayed  consumption 
spending  and  persistently  high  unemployment,  available  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  space 
seems  to  be  quite  limited.  On  the  fiscal  side,  further  stimulus  will  be  constrained  by  the 
promised cuts in federal spending that accompany the recent raise of the U.S. debt ceiling. 
On the other hand, the Fed’s commitment to maintain the federal funds rate “exceptionally 
low”  at  least  through  mid-2013  should  remind  us  that,  in  order  to  be  even  more 
accommodative,  the  Fed  might  need  to  rethink  and  come  up  with  some  creative  policy 
actions – probably something that is much more creative than the recent “Operation Twist” 
that seems to disappoint many market participants. The fact that the U.S. government and 
the  Fed  are  running  out  of  traditional  policy  “bullets”  leaves  one  only  to  wonder  what  the 
government and the Fed will do in the face of future shocks. And if they eventually resort to 
“creative” policy actions, the implications of their policies on the global economy can be quite 
unpredictable. 
Across  the  Atlantic,  the  Eurozone  is  also  struggling  with  their  sovereign  debt  crisis,  which 
only deepens and intensifies as time passes. Over the past few months, we have seen some 
Eurozone member countries that are unwilling to collaborate fully, let alone going the extra 
mile, to get the problems solved. We have also seen Germany under tremendous pressure 
both at home and abroad with regard to its role in solving the crisis. Moreover, the future of 
Greece,  where  it  all  started,  also  remains  unclear.  We  have  seen  various  attempts  in 
engineering debt restructuring for Greece, even an “orderly default”; and in late October we 
have  seen  agreement  between  Eurozone  leaders  and  banks  on  Greek  debt’s  haircut. 
Personally, I am concerned that many of these steps are merely “technical” solutions that do 
not address the situation at its root causes, and only time will tell how these “technical” steps 
would play out as well as what the eventual fate of Greece in the European Union would be. 
Looking beyond Greece, some contagion of the sovereign debt crisis to the financial sector 
and the real economy of other European countries and beyond seem to be inevitable at this 
point, with countries that are “too big to bail” such as Italy also on the list. Private holders of 
PIIGS bonds face substantially higher risks, which have already led to recent downgrades of 
several financial institutions. Without decisive actions and unreserved collaboration in solving 
the  debt  crisis,  the  outlook  for  Eurozone  economy  is  likely  to  be  affected  –  given  the 
possibility of further fiscal consolidation in countries like Italy, Spain, and even France. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I would like to restate that what happens on both sides of the Atlantic will likely shape the 
global economy over the years to come. And at this point, I would like to stress more on why 
we cannot afford to be complacent with the situation. 
Most  importantly,  there  always  seems  to  be  an  unbridgeable  gap  between  what  market 
anticipates and what governments and central banks can really offer at the end of the day. 
And if history is any guide, it is precisely this gap that creates ripples of disappointment and 
risk aversion that propagate throughout the global financial market almost instantly. 
When we look back, not so far in the past, all of us have just witnessed a panic sell-off in 
global stock markets starting from late July to September. In addition to stocks, almost every 
type of risky assets was also under tremendous selling pressure across the board, and some 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
market commentators even went so far as comparing this event with the onset of the 2008 
global financial crisis. 
And when we look forward, the future is not very promising either due to two major reasons. 
First is the fact that so-called “milestone” developments toward the resolution of the crises in 
the  U.S.  and  the  Eurozone  so  far  do  not  seem  to  address  problems  at  their  root  causes; 
rather, issues have been dealt with merely temporarily, one after another. A recent example 
of this would be the eleventh-hour negotiation in the U.S. in raising debt ceiling limits only to 
meet the August-second deadline, which did nothing but leave the big elephant standing in 
the  room.  This  event  also  serves  very  well  to  highlight  the  second  reason,  namely  the 
political factor, which explains the temporary nature of the milestone steps mentioned earlier. 
Unless  the  so-called  political  “gridlock”  is  dealt  with  effectively  in  the  U.S.,  passing  and 
approving  laws  will  remain  a  daunting  task  that  needs  to  wait  until  the  last  minute.  And 
unless the Eurozone leaders collaborate unreservedly, full resolution of the Eurozone crisis 
seems to be too lofty a goal to materialize. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
High risks and uncertainty surrounding the crises in the U.S. and the Eurozone contribute to 
higher  risks  in  the  global  economy  and  financial  markets,  and  Thailand  will  be  affected  in 
three  primary  ways  –  through  international  trade,  financial  market  volatility,  and  inflation.  I 
would like to touch briefly on each of these three channels respectively. 
The  impacts  through  the  first  channel,  namely  international  trade,  are  natural  given 
Thailand’s  strong  tie  with  the  global  economy,  with  G3  economies  accounting  for  almost 
one-third of Thailand’s exports. Slowdown in the U.S. and the Eurozone, and their spillovers 
to  the  global  economy,  will  dampen  global  demand  for  Thai  exports.  But  fortunately,  the 
impacts  through  trade  can  be  cushioned  to  some  degree,  given  that  Thailand  has  moved 
toward  more  intra-regional  trade  within  Asia  and  also  has  succeeded  in  diversifying  to 
alternative export markets. Although I have mentioned before that Thailand’s economic fate 
next year will be in the hands of domestic demand recovery, further contribution from exports 
will be very helpful. 
In addition to the international trade channel, what we should be even more concerned about 
is higher financial market volatility. While market sentiment on the U.S. and the Eurozone will 
determine  the  direction  of  capital  movements,  we  anticipate  volatile  capital  flows  into  Asia 
given  the  region’s  continued  strong  growth  prospects  compared  to  advanced  economies. 
Over the period ahead, capital inflows into Thailand also owe to the fact that monetary policy 
in  advanced  economies  will  likely  remain  exceptionally  easy,  which  means  excess  global 
liquidity and capital inflows into emerging markets. 
The  third  channel  that  the  U.S.  and  the  Eurozone  crises  may  affect  the  Thai  economy  is 
through  inflation.  Generally  speaking,  global  demand  slowdown  will  likely  lead  to  lower  oil 
and commodity prices, hence the lower imported price pressures. So in contrast to the first 
two  channels,  this  is  a  positive  one.  Nevertheless,  domestically,  as  the  flood  situation 
improves,  public  and  private  spending  will  pick  up  thanks  to  reconstruction  spending  and 
fiscal stimulus. This, coupled with inflation expectations that will remain high over the months 
to come, points to significant upside risks to inflation that will need to be monitored. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Given  enormous  challenges  both  at  home  and  from  abroad,  moving  Thailand  forward  will 
require policymakers to utilize a wide range of policy instruments at their disposal. At the very 
least, it is crucial to ensure a proper, integrated conduct of fiscal and monetary policies. On 
the fiscal front, investment in effective water management systems is urgently needed on top 
of reconstruction and assistance for flood victims and affected firms. This will not only restore 
foreign  investors’  confidence,  but  will  also  enhance  the  economy’s  productivity  and  its 
potential growth by avoiding future disruptions and making more efficient use of the country’s 
abundant water resources. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Nevertheless, the expected massive spending for such purposes will unavoidably stretch the 
government’s fiscal resources. At the same  time, the government will have to spare some 
fiscal  policy  “bullets”  in  the  event  that  the  situations  in  the  U.S.  and  the  Eurozone  worsen 
more than expected and lead to another global recession. Against this backdrop, medium-
term  fiscal  discipline  is  needed  to  ensure  long-term  sustainability  of  the  country’s  public 
finance. This means the government will have to rethink or reprioritize certain policies that 
may not contribute to productivity enhancement. 
Meanwhile, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) had been raising the policy interest rate 
over  the  past  year,  until  the  last  meeting  in  October  where  the  MPC  hold  the  policy  rate 
unchanged.  Personally,  I  view  the  current  level  of  our  policy  rate  to  be  accommodative 
enough to support domestic recovery, with some room available for further easing if needed. 
While upside risks to inflation are not very serious at the moment, we still need to keep our 
eyes on inflation pressures that are likely to build up with the pick-up in public and private 
spending after the flood is over. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
To end my talk today, I would like to restate my firm belief in the Thai economy. Even in the 
face of challenges at home and heightened risks from abroad, particularly from the U.S. and 
the  Eurozone,  the  Thai  economy  should  manage  to  recover  soon  after  the  flood  situation 
resolves  given  the  overall  solid  economic  fundamentals.  The  Bank  of  Thailand  will  closely 
monitor upcoming developments both on domestic and external front, and will stand ready to 
take  appropriate  actions  to  ensure  a  smooth  recovery  process  in  the  short  term  and 
sustained growth over the longer term for the Thai economy. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
