Masaaki Shirakawa: The outlook and challenges for Japan’s economy 
Speech  by  Mr  Masaaki  Shirakawa,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Japan,  at  a  meeting  with 
business leaders, Osaka, 31 October 2011. 
 Introduction 
Let me first express my heartfelt sympathy for those who have suffered from two typhoons 
that hit the Kansai region particularly hard last month. I am sure you are still worried about 
the situation as the business leaders from the region, and I appreciate this opportunity you 
have given me to speak and exchange views with you at a time like this. I would also like to 
use this occasion to express my deep gratitude for your cooperation with the Bank of Japan’s 
branches in Osaka, Kobe, and Kyoto. 
It is now just over one year since we last met. In the interim, Japan’s economy experienced a 
severe  hardship  –  namely,  the  Great  East  Japan  Earthquake.  Although  it  is  not  quite 
appropriate  to  describe  the  effects  of  the  earthquake  disaster  only  in  terms  of  economic 
aspects, as such effects have spread to various areas of people’s lives, I should note that 
economic  activity  has  fortunately  recovered  faster  than  expected.  This  is  attributed  to  the 
remarkable capability of Japanese firms and people to respond to the hardship, as seen in 
the  restoration  of  supply  chain  disruptions  and  measures  to  address  power  shortages. 
Consequently, production and exports, which had plunged immediately after the earthquake, 
almost  recovered  to  their  pre-quake  levels  this  past  summer.  The  effects  of  the  disaster 
clearly spread beyond the disaster areas across the country in various forms. One example 
of this is the decline in operating rates of nuclear power plants. I am aware that, especially in 
the  Kansai  region,  electricity  supply  and  demand  conditions  are  likely  to  be  tight  in  the 
coming winter. Looking at overseas economies, strains in European economies continue and 
close attention should be paid to future developments. 
Before  we  exchange  views,  I  will  first  outline  the  outlook  for  Japan’s  economy  and 
developments in overseas economies that greatly affect its future course. I will then speak 
about the challenges it faces as well as the Bank’s conduct of monetary policy. 
Outlook for Japan’s economy 
I. 
I will start with the outlook for Japan’s economy. During the period between the time of the 
quake until summer, the pace of economic recovery had been determined by the speed at 
which supply-side constraints were being resolved. However, as they have now almost been 
resolved,  the  key  is  demand-side  developments  from  now  on.  The  outlook  for  Japan’s 
economy  in  this  regard  can  be  described  as  follows.  For  the  time  being,  the  pace  of 
economic  growth  is  likely  to  remain  only  moderate  compared  with  the  recovery  phase 
following the disaster, reflecting an adverse effect from a slowdown in overseas economies 
and  the  appreciation  of  the  yen.  After  that,  Japan’s  economy  is  expected  to  return  to  a 
moderate  recovery  path  because  the  pace  of  recovery  in  overseas  economies  will 
subsequently  pick  up  led  by  emerging  and  commodity-exporting  economies,  whose 
mechanism  of  domestic  demand  expansion  is  basically  being  maintained,  and  because 
demand  related  to  reconstruction  after  the  earthquake  disaster  will  gradually  materialize. 
According to the projection in the Outlook for Economic Activity and Prices (Outlook Report) 
that the Bank released last week, the real GDP growth rate is projected to remain relatively 
low in fiscal 2011, at 0.3 percent, due in part to the effects of the disaster (Chart 1). However, 
it  is  projected  to  be  2.2  percent  in  fiscal  2012,  partly  because  of  an  increase  in 
reconstruction-related demand, and 1.5 percent in fiscal 2013, continuing to register positive 
growth. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Turning  to  prices,  the  year-on-year  rate  of  decline  in  the  consumer  price  index  (CPI)  has 
continued  to  slow  consistently  since  the  summer  of  2009,  and  registered  0.2  percent  in 
September this year. As for the outlook on the basis of such a broad trend, the year-on-year 
rate of change in the CPI will remain at around 0 percent for the time being. Expressing the 
outlook in numerical terms shown in the October 2011 Outlook Report, the year-on-year rate 
of change in the CPI is projected to be 0 percent in fiscal 2011, 0.1 percent in fiscal 2012, 
and 0.5 percent in fiscal 2013. 
As  illustrated,  in  the  longer  run,  Japan’s  economy  will  eventually  return  to  a  sustainable 
growth  path  with  price  stability.  At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  fully  recognizes  that  such  an 
outlook is attended by various uncertainties. There are two particularly salient points. One is 
financial  and  economic  developments  in  overseas  economies  –  in  particular,  future 
developments in the sovereign debt problem in Europe. Another is the medium- to long-term 
growth potential of Japan’s economy. 
II. 
Sovereign debt problem in Europe 
Mechanisms for transmission to economic activity 
I will now talk about the sovereign debt problem in Europe. 
The origin of the problem is that in October 2009, triggered by a change of government in 
Greece, the country’s fiscal deficits turned out to be much more serious than suggested by 
the  data  that  were  already  released,  and  the  country’s  debt  repayment  became  doubtful. 
Greece  has  subsequently  implemented  fiscal  consolidation  measures  while  receiving 
financial  support  by  euro  area  countries  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund,  but  has 
remained to face a tough situation with negative economic growth and slow progress in fiscal 
consolidation. At the same time, the decline in market confidence in fiscal sustainability has 
spilled over to Ireland and Portugal, as well as bigger economies such as Spain and Italy, 
although  the  degree  varies.  The  prices  of  government  bonds  issued  by  countries  whose 
fiscal conditions became the subject of concern have declined, and financial institutions that 
were considered to be holding a large amount of such government bonds have come under 
close scrutiny (Chart 2). As illustrated, the decline in confidence in fiscal conditions caused 
the financial system problem, which in turn has started to affect the global economy through 
the following two channels. 
The  first  channel  works  as  follows.  Many  financial  institutions  in  Europe  continue  to  face 
difficulty  in  terms  of  raising  funds  in  the  markets.  Therefore,  they  restrain  lending  and  put 
priority on hoarding cash. As a result, borrowing costs and funding of firms that depend on 
European financial institutions are adversely affected. If such a situation continues, this could 
also affect project financing and trade financing in emerging economies. 
The second channel is as follows. Global investors have  become increasingly risk averse, 
which affects the flow of funds and prices of various assets worldwide. This materialized in 
the  form  of  the  fall  in  global  stock  prices  and  the  widening  of  credit  spreads  of  corporate 
bonds – that is, additional interest rates charged on government bond rates – in Europe and 
the United States since this past summer. Correspondingly, assets considered relatively safe 
have invited investors’ purchases; for example, yields on government bonds issued by the 
United States, Germany, and the United Kingdom were at historically extreme low levels. As 
for currencies, the Swiss franc, Japanese yen, and U.S. dollar have been regarded as having 
low  risks,  and  this  has  led  to  the  rise  in  these  currencies  in  the  exchange  market.  As 
illustrated,  it  can  be  said  that  the  recent  appreciation  of  the  yen  is  one  example  of  the 
spillover effect of the sovereign debt problem in Europe into Japan through the increasing 
risk  aversion  by  global  investors.  In  this  regard,  the  Ministry  of  Finance  intervened  to  the 
foreign exchange market today. The Bank strongly expects that such an action will contribute 
to the stable price formation in the market. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
The sovereign debt problem in Europe was triggered by the fiscal deficits, but it has started 
to  affect  economic  activity  in  Europe  through  the  financial  system.  If  the  economy 
deteriorates, it becomes more difficult to make progress with fiscal consolidation, which is the 
starting point of the problem. It should be recognized that the problem entails the risk that the 
adverse feedback loop among the fiscal situation, the financial system, and economic activity 
will intensify further. 
Japan’s financial environment continues to ease 
Fortunately, so far in Japan, unlike in the United States and Europe, the markets from which 
banks and firms raise their funds remain in a stable condition, without strains (Charts 3 and 
4). Looking at firms’ funding conditions, they have actually continued to ease. Bank lending 
rates  have  declined  moderately  and  credit  spreads  on  corporate  bonds  and  CP  have 
remained  stable  at  low  levels.  Underlying  such  stability  is  the  fact  that  Japanese  financial 
institutions  do  not  hold  a  large  amount  of  government  bonds  issued  by  those  European 
countries  that  are  a  source  of  concern.  Moreover,  Japanese  financial  institutions  in  recent 
years have strengthened their capital and restrained their total amount of risks within their 
capital. They face no significant difficulty in terms of funding in foreign currencies. In addition, 
firms hold ample on-hand liquidity. The Bank’s extremely accommodative  monetary policy, 
including the purchase of such risk assets as corporate bonds and CP, which a central bank 
does not usually purchase – I will touch upon this later – also contributes to the stability in 
Japanese financial markets. 
Given  the  stronger  correlation  among  increasingly  globalized  financial  markets,  Japanese 
financial  markets  cannot  remain  immune  from  negative  developments  overseas,  as  these 
further materialize. As I mentioned earlier, the problem in Europe has already spilled over to 
Japanese  markets,  in  the  form  of  the  yen’s  appreciation  and  weak  stock  prices  since  this 
past  summer.  Due  attention  should  be  paid  to  future  developments  in  global  financial 
markets. 
The response to the sovereign debt problem in Europe 
As I have mentioned, the sovereign debt problem in Europe poses a significant downside risk 
to the global economy at present. I would raise four challenges to be addressed to prevent 
the sovereign debt problem in Europe from developing into a crisis. 
First,  what  is  most  important  in  the  immediate  future  is  to  fully  ensure  financial  market 
stability and prevent the problem from developing into a global financial crisis akin to the one 
engendered by the Lehman shock. In this regard, the European Central Bank, which is the 
central bank at the epicenter, has continued to provide ample liquidity to financial markets. 
Central  banks  in  major  economies,  including  the  Bank  of  Japan,  have  worked  together  to 
establish frameworks in U.S. dollar funding markets for providing funds, including those with 
longer  maturities  covering  the  year-end,  which  marks  a  great  improvement  from  the  time 
prior  to  the  Lehman  shock  (Chart  5).  On  October  19,  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  the  Bank  of 
Korea agreed to substantially increase the size of the yen-won swap agreement. The Bank of 
Japan believes that this action will mitigate adverse influences of heightened uncertainty in 
the  global  financial  markets  on  the  two  economies  and  contribute  to  enhancing  stability  in 
regional financial and exchange markets in East Asia. 
Second, euro area countries need to strengthen the implementation of specific measures to 
restore confidence in the financial system. On this point, there has been some progress in 
the past several weeks. The 17 countries in the euro area have given approval to expand the 
functions of the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) and discussions about financial 
institutions’ recapitalization have started. At a series of meetings on October 26, European 
leaders  agreed  on  comprehensive  measures  including  a  new  Greek  bailout  package.  I 
strongly hope that each measure will be specified and then implemented promptly. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Third, those euro area countries drawing strong market concern over their fiscal conditions 
should  steadily  work  to  reduce  their  fiscal  deficits.  This  is  a  very  difficult  challenge,  but 
without addressing it, the risk of the situation evolving into a crisis will persist. 
And fourth, it is necessary to strengthen the euro area’s growth potential through structural 
reform of the economy. The root of the European sovereign debt problem lies in the decline 
in international competitiveness. Therefore, the countries in trouble need to make efforts to 
regain such competitiveness through an increase in productivity and via cost reductions. 
Sovereign debt problem as a lesson to be learned from 
The sovereign debt problem has many aspects that Japan should learn from. One important 
lesson  is  that,  as  government  bonds  have  a  privileged  position  in  financial  transactions 
based on the assumption that they are absolutely safe, once doubt about government bonds’ 
safety  emerges,  this  will  exert  a  wide  range  of  effects  on  the  financial  system  and 
subsequently on economic activity. 
Although  the  ratio  of  government  debt  to  GDP  in  Japan  is  the  highest  among  advanced 
economies, yields on Japanese government bonds have remained stable at low levels. As 
for the background to this stability, it is often pointed out that government bond markets in 
Japan are basically dominated by domestic investors backed by ample excess funds in the 
household and corporate sectors within the country. However, it is not quite appropriate to 
discuss this issue only in terms of the supply and demand balance. Needless to say, there is 
no problem if market participants are convinced by evidence that the government will work 
toward  fiscal  consolidation  in  the  medium  term.  If  not,  however,  the  possibility  cannot  be 
ruled out that, as in Europe, some events could cause market participants to become aware 
of  risks  to  government  bond  holdings,  which  could  in  turn  lead  to  a  discontinuous  rise  in 
interest rates. Confidence in government bonds is also a significant issue in Japan given the 
large  share  on  an  international  comparison  of  government  bond  holdings  in  the  assets  of 
financial institutions, which are the main suppliers of funds to firms. It is important to clearly 
present the medium-term roadmap for fiscal consolidation and implement specific measures 
to bring it to realization. 
Medium- to long-term growth potential of Japan’s economy 
III. 
So far, I have talked about the sovereign debt problem in Europe and related matters, which 
constitute one of the two main points concerning the outlook for Japan’s economy. I will now 
turn  to  the  other  point  –  namely,  the  medium-  to  long-term  growth  potential  of  Japan’s 
economy. 
Increasing importance of strengthening the growth potential 
Looking  at  the  long-term  developments  of  Japan’s  real  GDP  growth  rates,  the  average 
growth  rate  was  5  percent  in  the  1970s  and  maintained  relatively  high  growth  of  around 
4.5 percent in the 1980s (Charts 6 and 7). It dropped substantially to around 1.5 percent in 
the  1990s  and  further  to  less  than  1  percent  in  the  2000s.  As  illustrated,  since  before  the 
earthquake, Japan’s economy has faced a long-term downtrend in growth rates on the back 
of  the  rapid  aging  of  the  population  and  sluggishness  of  labor  productivity  growth.  Post-
earthquake, Japan’s economy faces the new challenges of steadily promoting reconstruction 
from the disaster, securing a stable electricity supply, and recovering the reputation abroad 
for  Japanese  products.  I  have  recently  heard  concern  over  whether  the  expansion  of 
overseas production by Japanese firms could lead to a hollowing-out of domestic industries. 
These are all serious challenges, but in what follows I would like to discuss my observations 
about  concern  over  the  hollowing-out  of  domestic  industries  and  thereby  highlight  the 
importance of strengthening the growth potential of Japan’s economy. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Meeting expanding overseas demand 
Among many reasons behind Japanese firms’ recent expansion of their overseas production, 
surveys targeting firms show that the predominant one is to meet expanding local demand 
overseas.  The  working-age  population  in  Japan  has  been  declining  since  peaking  in  the 
middle of the 1990s, and GDP growth rates abroad began to exceed those in Japan from 
around  that  time.  In  line  with  such  structural  changes,  the  overseas  production  ratio  of 
Japanese firms – that is, the ratio of production value of overseas bases to Japanese firms’ 
total production value – has been trending upward. 
The recent expansion of overseas bases can be understood in the context of this long-term 
trend  of  corporate  strategies  that  correspond  to  expanding  global  demand  (Chart  8).  In 
recent  years,  firms  not  only  in  the  manufacturing  sector  but  also  in  the  nonmanufacturing 
sector  have  accelerated  their  establishment  of  overseas  bases.  In  emerging  economies, 
there  continues  to  be  robust  demand  for  social  infrastructures.  Furthermore,  against  the 
background of an ongoing shift in the growth model from dependence on exports to a self-
sustaining expansion of domestic demand, those markets that are already mature in Japan 
are  expanding  rapidly  in  emerging  economies, including  markets  for  retail,  distribution  and 
logistics, food service, food and drink, and housewares. Amid expansion of global markets, 
firms  in  every  country  face  an  equal  increase  in  business  opportunities.  However,  an 
international comparison of the outstanding amount of outward foreign direct investment as a 
percentage  of  GDP  as  of  2010  shows  that  the  ratio  is  75  percent  in  the  United  Kingdom, 
44 percent in Germany, and 31 percent in the United States, while the ratio in Japan is only 
15 percent (Chart 9). These data suggest that Japanese firms’ overseas strategies are still 
lagging  behind  firms  in other  advanced  economies.  As  a population decline  has  started  in 
Japan ahead of other countries, actively capturing global demand is much more of a pressing 
challenge for Japan than for other countries. 
Dual strategy of expanding business globally and exploring domestic demand 
The question is whether the expansion of overseas production will induce a hollowing-out of 
domestic industries – specifically, a contraction of domestic production activity and a decline 
in employment – and thereby put downward pressure on growth rates of Japan’s economy in 
the medium to long run. Although the danger of a hollowing-out of domestic industries has 
been  an  issue  many  times  since  the  Plaza  Accord  in  1985,  experience  dictates  that  the 
expansion of overseas production has not resulted in a long-lasting overall negative impact 
on  the  domestic  economy.  This  is  because  the  increase  in  overseas  production  has  also 
generated  some  positive  effects  on  the  domestic  economy,  such  as  the  rise  in  exports  of 
parts  to  overseas  factories  and  the  increase  in  dividends  received  from  overseas 
subsidiaries. 
How should we factor in the effects of the yen’s appreciation? While the overseas production 
ratio of Japanese firms continues to be on a fairly consistent uptrend, there are times when 
the  pace  of  increase  is  relatively  fast  or  relatively  slow.  The  trend  of  expanding  overseas 
businesses is greatly determined by the pace of expansion of overseas demand, but within 
this trend the specific timing of individual firms’ decisions to go international is influenced by 
foreign exchange rate developments. Let me touch on one example of recent developments. 
Toward  the  middle  of  the  2000s,  the  pace  of  increase  in  the  overseas  production  ratio  of 
Japanese  firms  temporarily  paused  when  the  yen  depreciated  substantially  in  the  foreign 
exchange market, causing a shift back to domestic production in some ways. Although it is 
hard to evaluate the absolute level of foreign exchange rates, relatively speaking, the yen is 
without doubt getting much stronger in the exchange market than before the Lehman shock. 
At  present,  against  the  background  of  this  swing  in  foreign  exchange  rates  and  the 
fundamental  factor  of  the  expansion  of  global  markets,  Japanese  firms’  strategies  for  the 
location  of  operations  are  again  shifting  back  from  returning  home  to  going  overseas. 
Therefore,  in  the  short  run,  Japanese  firms’  shifting  of  production  sites  to  overseas  might 
accelerate  at  a  faster  rate  than  the  past  average.  It  is  difficult  to  imagine  that  production 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
bases  would  return  home  once  they  shift  to  overseas.  Therefore,  if  core  companies  and 
factories  move  overseas,  it  will  be  difficult  for  Japan’s  economy  to  regain  the  merits  of 
business  clusters  even  with  a  correction  in  the  yen’s  appreciation.  In  addition,  if  the  yen’s 
rapid appreciation accelerates the pace of firms’ shifting of production to overseas, there will 
be  an  increased  risk  that  the  pace  of  fostering  new  businesses  and  industries  at  home 
cannot keep up with the accelerated pace of the production shift. 
At any rate, the medium- to long-term trend of expanding overseas bases is likely to continue 
given that the driving force behind global economic growth is shifting to emerging economies. 
In  this  regard,  it  is  important  for  individual  firms  to  review  their  domestic  and  overseas 
business  operations  from  the  perspective  of  enhancing  corporate  value.  In  a  rapidly  aging 
Japan, a potential serious problem in the long run is not excess employment but indeed the 
shortage  of  labor.  Therefore,  it  is  also  important  to  transfer  the  work  that  can  be  done 
overseas and to focus on goods and services that can be generated most advantageously in 
Japan.  For  example,  Japanese  firms  should  sophisticate  the  functions  of  their  domestic 
bases by shifting their precious management resources and personnel to the development 
and manufacture of new technologies and high value-added goods. They will also need to 
divide the functions of their business operations by allocating domestic human resources to 
meet  diversifying  consumer  needs  as  well  as  develop  businesses  targeting  the  elderly  in 
Japan. 
It is also necessary to create an environment that attracts overseas firms and personnel to 
Japan. Earlier, I mentioned the data for outward foreign direct investment, but I must say that 
Japan is lagging far behind other advanced economies in inward foreign direct investment, or 
in  “globalization  of  domestic  markets.”  The  outstanding  amount  of  inward  foreign  direct 
investment as a percentage of GDP for 2010 shows that the ratio is 48 percent in the United 
Kingdom,  29  percent  in  Germany,  and  18  percent  in  the  United  States,  while  the  ratio  in 
Japan is low at only 4 percent – literally, an order of magnitude difference (Chart 9). The low 
ratio of inward investment basically reflects that overseas firms consider investment in Japan 
as  having  low  profitability.  The  other  side  of  the  coin  is  that  Japanese  firms  are  doing 
business in the market with such low profitability. At any rate, if firms in every country exert 
their strength and deepen the international division of labor across national borders, this will 
lead to the advancement of the global economy as a whole. It is important to enhance not 
only  outflow  to  overseas  but  also  inflow  to  Japan,  as  well  as  create  a  competitive 
environment  that  attracts  overseas  firms  and  personnel  to  Japan.  With  a  view  to 
strengthening the growth potential of its economy, Japan should implement a dual strategy of 
expanding business globally and exploring domestic demand. 
Need to explore frontiers by exerting Japan’s strength 
In a macroeconomic analysis of economic growth of the country as a whole, the concept of 
potential growth rate is often used. This corresponds to the ability of firms’ management to 
keep  generating  new  added  value  at  the  microeconomic  level.  Seeing  that  the  role  and 
profitability of businesses change as time passes, firms are able to increase the added value 
per worker – in other words, to increase wages and shareholder returns – by creating highly 
profitable  businesses  and  shifting  their  resources  to  those  businesses,  instead  of  fixing 
personnel  and  capital  to  businesses  with  low  profits.  Such  improvement  in  economic 
metabolism illustrates the abstract concept of strengthening the growth potential of Japan’s 
economy. 
Needless to say, the process of exploring frontiers is very tough. However, we should note 
that Japan has an advantage in international competition in terms of geography, in that it is 
located in Asia, which is the driving force behind global economic growth. Japan also enjoys 
sophisticated “soft power,” as exemplified by the credibility of made-in-Japan products and 
courteous service. Moreover, as I mentioned earlier, the great advantage at present is that 
financial  system  stability  is  being  maintained  in  Japan,  unlike  in  the  United  States  and 
Europe. The results of various surveys including the Bank’s Tankan (Short-Term Economic 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Survey  of  Enterprises  in  Japan)  show  that  the  lending  attitude  of  Japanese  financial 
institutions has recovered to a level exceeding the average since 2000, despite the strains in 
financial  markets  around  the  world.  In  the  past,  Japan  alone  suffered from  the  disposal  of 
nonperforming  loans,  and  the  weakness  in  the  financial  sector  dragged  down  economic 
activity.  However,  on  the  back  of  their  sound  balance  sheets,  I  believe  that  Japanese 
financial  institutions  at  present  are  able  to  effectively  provide  support  to  firms’  strategic 
efforts. This embodies the strength of Japan. If firms and financial institutions reconcile their 
growth strategies, they will discover ideas and methods for exploring new markets. 
The bank’s conduct of monetary policy 
IV. 
In my remarks today, I first mentioned the outlook for Japan’s economy and noted that it is 
likely to return to a moderate recovery path. In terms of points to be kept in mind concerning 
the  outlook,  I  then  talked  about  the  sovereign  debt  problem  in  Europe  and  challenges 
regarding  the  medium-  to  long-term  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy.  The  Bank,  in 
recognition of such outlook and risks, has been pursuing powerful monetary easing under the 
framework of comprehensive monetary easing (Chart 10). This framework has the following 
three pillars. 
First, the Bank sets the policy rate at 0 to 0.1 percent, which can be deemed a virtually zero 
interest rate. Second, the Bank is publicly committed to continuing this virtually zero interest 
rate policy until it judges that price stability is in sight. And third, as an exceptional measure 
for a central bank, it purchases from the markets not only long- and short-term government 
bonds but also risk assets such as CP, corporate bonds, and exchange-traded funds (ETFs) 
and  Japan  real  estate  investment  trusts  (J-REITs).  A  program  for  purchasing  financial 
assets,  called  the  Asset  Purchase  Program,  started  at  35  trillion  yen,  but  has  been 
repeatedly  expanded  in  size  on  a  significant  scale.  Last  week,  on  October  27,  the  Bank 
decided to increase the size by 5 trillion yen, to about 55 billion yen. This decision is based 
on the recognition that some more time will be needed to confirm that price stability is in sight 
and  due  attention  is  paid  to  the  risk  that  the  economic  and  price  outlook  will  further 
deteriorate depending on developments in global financial markets and overseas economies. 
As I have noted earlier, such pursuit of powerful monetary easing has become one of the 
factors  responsible  for  stability  in  the  financial  environment  in  Japan,  despite  continued 
strains in the U.S. and European financial markets. 
Although  an  accommodative  financial  environment  has  been  maintained,  as  illustrated, 
demand has been declining for a protracted period and thus deflation has been continuing. 
This  is  because  there  exist  fundamental  factors  –  namely,  a  long-term  downtrend  in 
economic growth rates in Japan and the resultant reduction in growth expectations by firms 
and  households.  In  this  regard,  the  Bank  has  been  supporting  firms’  positive  efforts  since 
summer  2010  by  providing  funds  to  financial  institutions  under  the  new  framework  of  the 
Fund-Provisioning Measure to Support Strengthening the Foundations for Economic Growth. 
Raising  the  medium-  to  long-term  growth  potential  of  Japan’s  economy  requires  vigorous 
efforts  from  concerned  parties  in  both  the  private  and  government  sectors.  In  order  for 
Japan’s economy to overcome deflation and return to a sustainable growth path with price 
stability, the Bank for its part will continue to consistently make contributions as the central 
bank. 
Concluding remarks 
As I have already used up most of my time, I would now like to conclude my remarks. At 
present,  all  regions  of  the  world  face  difficult  challenges.  I  mentioned  earlier  that  the 
sovereign debt problem in Europe was triggered by Greece, but the more fundamental factor 
is that the structural problem that was originally rooted in the present euro area framework 
was  revealed  by  the  Lehman  shock.  In  the  United  States,  debt  in  the  household  and 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
government  sectors  –  specifically,  excess  debt  in  the  household  sector  that  accumulated 
during  the  housing  bubble  period  and  government  debt  that  ballooned  in  the  course  of 
addressing  the  financial  crisis  and  economic  downturn  after  the  Lehman  shock  –  have 
become factors in destabilizing financial markets and the economy. 
Emerging  economies  are  likely  to  increase  their  presence  as  engines  driving  global 
economic growth. For the time being, however, there is a high degree of uncertainty as to 
whether  they  can  ensure  the  sustainability  of  economic  growth  by  containing  inflationary 
pressure. In the medium to long run, not a few Asian countries will experience rapid aging of 
their  societies,  following  the  lead  of  Japan.  There  is  also  an  issue  of  whether  the  global 
capacity to supply energy and food will manage to continue to meet the robust demand from 
emerging economies. 
As  I  have  described,  every  country  and  every  region  in  the  world  has  its  own  challenges. 
Japan,  for  its  part,  needs  to  positively  tackle  its  challenges  without  falling  into  pessimism. 
The  biggest  challenge  for  Japan  is  to  raise  its  growth  potential.  As  the  working-age 
population is declining, future generations cannot maintain the current high standard of living 
unless labor productivity is improved. As you may know, labor productivity is added value, or 
the  sum  of  wages  and  profits,  divided  by  labor  input.  Based  on  this  definition,  productivity 
growth is made possible by providing goods and services for which people are willing to pay. 
Without such efforts, economic growth cannot be achieved. 
Japan can be called an “advanced country” in the sense that it has faced various challenges 
ahead  of  other  countries.  That  is  why  Japan,  if  it  explores  visionary  solutions  to  address 
natural environment problems, energy constraints, and the declining and aging population, 
will be able to contribute to the advancement  of the global economy  as well as determine 
new growth strategies for itself. In the Kansai region, there are many firms whose advanced 
technologies  have  a  large  global  market  share  in  various  areas  such  as  the  natural 
environment and energy, medical and nursing care, high-tech manufacturing, and high-end 
materials.  The  region  also  offers  a  number  of  tourist  attractions;  for  example,  five  World 
Heritage  sites  designated  by  the  United  Nations  Educational,  Scientific  and  Cultural 
Organization  (UNESCO).  In  addition,  the  region  is  easily  accessed  from  other  Asian 
countries.  There  are  new  initiatives  that  convey  the  region’s  abundant  spirit  in  tackling 
challenges, such as the broad-based collaboration between industry and academia across 
prefectural boarders. The Bank places its hope in and will provide support for the region’s 
efforts so that innovations as well as business models created in the region will help activate 
Japan’s economy. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   9
 10 
   BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   11
   12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
 BIS central bankers’ speeches 
   13
