Andrew G Haldane: Control rights (and wrongs) 
Text of the Wincott Annual Memorial Lecture by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, 
Financial Stability, of the Bank of England, Westminster, London, 24 October 2011. 
 The views are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or the Financial Policy Committee. I would like to 
thank Evangelos Benos, Fergus Cumming, Jonathan Grant, Sam Harrington, John Lane, Iryna Kaminska, Priya 
Kothari,  Fiona  Mann,  Vasileios  Madouros,  Roland  Meeks,  Joseph  Noss,  Peter  Richardson,  Victoria  Saporta, 
Rhiannon Sowerbutts, Mervyn Tang, Matthew Willison and Peter Zimmerman for comments and contributions. 
Introduction 
It is a great pleasure and privilege to be presenting this year’s Wincott lecture.  
Banks  are  special.  That  has  long  been  recognised  in  the  design  of  their  ownership, 
governance  and  regulation.  This  special  status  can  have  strange  consequences.  The 
historical  distribution  of  risks  and  returns  in  banking  is  one.  For  a  century,  both  risks  and 
returns have been high. But while the risks have typically been borne by wider society, the 
returns have been harvested by bank shareholders and managers.  
The experience of the past two decades illustrates well this imbalance. In 1989, the CEOs of 
the  seven  largest  banks  in  the  United  States  earned  on  average  $2.8  million.  That  was 
almost  100  times  the  median  US  household  income.  By  2007,  at  the  height  of  the  boom, 
CEO compensation among the largest US banks had risen almost tenfold to $26 million. That 
was  over  500  times  the  median  US  household  income.1  Those  are  high  returns  by  any 
measure. 
But so, subsequently, have been the risks. The fall in the share prices of global banks means 
they  are  scarcely  different  in  real  terms  today  than  in  the  early  1990s.  And  it  is  not  just 
investors  licking  their  wounds.  So  too  is  the  global  economy.  Temporary  support  for  the 
global  banking  system  during  the  crisis  peaked  at  around  a  quarter  of  global  GDP.  The 
permanent  damage  to  world  GDP  from  the  crisis  is  still  being  counted,  but  is  likely  to  be 
several multiples of that.  
These  oddities  in  the  distribution  of  risk  and  return  are  deep-rooted  and  long-lived.  They 
have grown in waves over a 150-year period, originating in a set of reforms in the mid-19th 
century aimed at lowering the cost of capital. They were swelled during the 20th century by 
the  emergence  of  institutions  too  big  to  fail.  And  during  the  21st  century  investor  and 
managerial  short-termism  resulted  in  these  waves  reaching  tsunami  proportions.  In  2007, 
this wave broke with devastating consequences still being felt today. 
This century-long evolution in banking occurred for understandable reasons; it was no-one’s 
“fault”. But it has also unearthed a governance fault-line. Ownership and control rights are 
exercised  by  shareholders.  But  for  banks,  equity  is  a  vanishingly  small  fraction  of  their 
balance sheet. Worse still, equity-holders often have risk-taking incentives out of line with the 
interests of other bank stakeholders, much less society. This fault-line lies at the heart of the 
imbalance between privatised returns and socialised risks. Only in banking do control rights 
and incentive wrongs combine so uncomfortably.  
That calls for fundamental reform. Post-crisis that has been recognised, as regulatory reform 
has come thick and fast. These reforms are unquestionably a step in the right direction. But if 
they are not to reappear, deep-rooted incentive problems in banking need to be tackled at 
                                                 
1  US Treasury (2011). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
source.  I  wish  to  argue  there  is  unfinished  business  before  these  incentives  are  properly 
aligned with the public good.  
Limited liability 
In the first half of the 19th century, the business and governance of banking was relatively 
simple. By the mid-19th century, the United Kingdom had around 500 banks and 700 building 
societies.  Most  of  the  former  operated  as  unlimited  liability  partnerships,  the  latter  as 
mutually-owned co-operatives.2 Financial sector assets represented less than 50% of annual 
GDP and the largest banks had assets of less than 5% of GDP.  
Bank balance sheets were heavily cushioned. Equity capital often accounted for as much as 
a half of all liabilities, while cash and liquid securities frequently accounted for as much as 
30%  of  banks’  assets.  Banking  was  a  low-concentration,  low-leverage,  high-liquidity 
business. A broadly-similar pattern was evident across banking systems in the United States 
and in Europe.  
This  governance  and  balance  sheet  structure  was  mutually  compatible.  Due  to  unlimited 
liability, control rights were exercised by investors whose personal wealth was literally on the 
line. That generated potent incentives to be prudent with depositors’ money. Nowhere was 
this better illustrated than in the asset and liability make-up of the balance sheet. The market, 
amorphously but effectively, exercised discipline. 
It was given a helping hand by market-based prudential safeguards. Directors of a bank had 
the  capacity  to  vet  share  transfers,  excluding  owners  without  sufficiently  deep  pockets  to 
bear  the  risk.  Shareholders  also  maintained  their  liability  after  the  transfer  of  their  shares. 
This put shareholders firmly on the hook, a hook they then used to hold in check managers. 
Managers monitored shareholders and shareholders managers. In this way, the 19th century 
banking model aligned risk-taking incentives. 
But  the  global  environment  was  changing.  During  the  first  half  of  the  19th  century,  rich 
countries were becoming hungry for capital to finance investment in infrastructure, including 
railways. As long as capital in banks was restricted to a small number of unlimited liability 
partners,  credit  was  constricted.  In  1826,  the  6-partner  restriction  on  UK  banks  was  lifted, 
allowing  banks  to  operate  as  joint-stock  companies.  No  longer  was  ownership  and  control 
vested in a single agent.  
But pressures were building to liberalise further. Unlimited liability became the next target. In 
the words of British parliamentarian William Clay, “unlimited liability has a tendency to deter 
persons  of  fortune,  intelligence  and  respectability  from  becoming  partners  or  managers”.3 
Shareholder  discipline  was  proving  rather  too  effective  as  a  brake  on  risk-taking.  One 
obvious solution was to limit shareholder liability. This, it was felt, could broaden and deepen 
the pockets of the investor base, freeing up bank capital and credit. 
The  United  States  had  been  an  early-adopter,  with  Connecticut  and  Massachusetts 
permitting limited liability from 1817. Neighbouring states had quickly followed suit. Although 
limited liability had existed in parts of Europe from the 17th century, it  was only during the 
second half of the 19th century that its tentacles spread widely.4 In the UK, wholesale change 
came with the Limited Liability Act and Joint Stock Companies Acts of 1855 and 1856.  
Interestingly, banking was slow off the mark. Limited liability status was at first not taken up 
enthusiastically. Bankers appeared to prize unlimited liability. It served as a safety certificate 
                                                 
2  Cleary (1965), Collins (1988). 
3  Turner (2009). 
4  Hickson and Turner (2005). 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
for  depositors,  a  badge  of  prudence.  “A  depositor  would  be  much  more  likely  to  trust  his 
money with a bank whose shareholders he knew must yield up to him the uttermost farthing”. 
This from the lips of a banking expert of the day.5 
But  unlimited  liability  in  banking  remained  under  attack.  Walter  Bagehot  believed  its  risk 
benefits  were  illusory  as  many  shareholders  did  not  possess  so  much  as  the  “uttermost 
farthing”.  Bagehot  believed  unlimited  liability  generated  its  own  incentive  problem:  the 
wealthy  assumed  too  much  risk  for  the  control  they  could  exercise,  dissuading  them  from 
investing (Bagehot (1873)). 
The  collapse  of  the  City  of  Glasgow  bank  in  1878  shifted  the  debate  decisively  Bagehot’s 
way. In one sense, this failure was evidence of the power of unlimited liability: no depositor 
lost  a  penny.  But  80%  of  the  bank’s  shareholders  were  bankrupted  and  many  made 
destitute. As the Economist observed at the time, “the share lists of most of our banks exhibit 
a very large – almost an incredible – number of spinsters and widows”.6 Bagehot’s incentive 
problem was real. Public and parliamentary opinion quickly shifted. 
The Companies Act 1879 facilitated conversion to limited liability. Between 1849 and 1889, 
the number of unlimited liability British banks fell to just 2.7 Even then, some of the incentive 
benefits of unlimited liability were preserved. Shareholder vetting remained in bank deeds. 
And in place of unlimited liability, UK banks moved to a regime of extended liability. This was 
the contingent capital regime of its day. 
Extended  liability  typically  had  two  elements  –  reserve  liability  and  uncalled  capital.  Under 
reserve  liability,  existing  shareholders  were  liable  for  additional  capital  in  the  event  of 
bankruptcy. By 1884, British banks had reserve liability of around three times their paid-up 
capital.8 This placed them on a similar footing to US banks, which had adopted a system of 
double liability in 1863.9  
Reserve  capital  was  augmented  by  a  pool  of  uncalled  capital.  This  could  be  tapped  pre-
insolvency at the discretion of bank management. On average between 1878 and 1913, UK 
banks  had  uncalled  capital  larger  than  their  called  capital  (Grossman  and  Imai  (2011)). 
Together,  reserve  and  uncalled  capital  made  for  a  deep  contingent  capital  pool  for  even 
limited liability banks, amounting to as much as 50% of banks’ liabilities.  
With big money on the line, extended liability kept bank shareholders and managers on their 
toes. Risk monitoring incentives remained sharp and risk appetites blunt. In the US, banks in 
states  with  higher-multiple  extended  liability  regimes  typically  assumed  less  balance  sheet 
risk (Grossman (2001)). The same was true of UK banks with high proportions of uncalled 
capital (Grossman and Imai (2011)).  
For a time, extended liability seemed to strike a reasonable risk-taking balance. But entering 
the 20th century, that balance was again about to tilt. Consolidation was underway in banking. 
Between  1825  and  1913,  the  number  of  English  and  Welsh  banks  fell  from  over  600  to 
around 70.10 As the industrial structure of banking adapted, vetting of shareholders became 
impractical. In an echo of today, it was argued that these larger institutions were better able 
to diversify away their risk. 
                                                 
5  Turner (mimeo). 
6  Economist (1879). 
7  Acheson et al (2010). 
8  Acheson et al (2010). 
9  Macey and Miller (1992). 
10  Collins (1988). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
Extended  liability  had  also  shown  itself  to  be  ineffective  in  dealing  with  banking  failure.  In 
crisis, exercising the capital option had heightened panic, not diminished it. As the Bank of 
England’s  Deputy  Governor  remarked,  “today  a  bank  could  not  in  a  crisis  make  a  call  on 
shareholders without aggravating the crisis” (Turner (2009)). By the end of the 1930s, there 
were only six British banks left with reserve liability.  
In  the  US,  a  similar  process  was  underway.  Systemic  bank  failure  during  the  Great 
Depression  was  taken  as  evidence  of  the  inadequacy  of  extended  liability  in  protecting 
depositors. As in the UK, making a call on shareholders was deemed likely to make a bad 
situation worse. It was quickly replaced with Federal deposit insurance in 1934. With reserve 
liability gone, so too did the rationale for shareholder vetting. 
So by the 1930s the governance and balance sheet structure of banks was unrecognisable 
from  a  century  earlier.  Ownership  and  control  were  amicably  divorced.  Ownership  was 
vested  in  a  widely  dispersed  set  of  shareholders,  unvetted  and  anonymous.  Their  upside 
payoffs remained unlimited, but their downside risks were now capped by limited liability. The 
pool of reserve capital had largely evaporated. 
Later in the 20th century, these governance and balance sheet features spread across the 
financial system. During the 1990s, many of the larger global investment banks abandoned 
their  private  partnership  status  to  become  limited  liability  public  companies.  In  the  UK,  a 
number of mutually-owned building societies followed suit and turned public. The rationale 
was familiar from a century earlier – the desire to break their balance sheet chains. By the 
end of the 20th century, joint stock banking was pre-eminent. 
What impact did these governance changes have on banks’ risk-taking incentives? Finance 
theory  here  is  admirably  clear.  In  particular,  we  can  draw  on  a  framework  developed  a 
century  after  the  introduction  of  limited  liability  –  the  contingent  claims  model  of  Nobel 
Laureate Robert Merton (1974). This tells us that the equity of a limited liability company can 
be valued as a call option on its assets, with a strike price equal to the value of its liabilities.  
Figure 1 demonstrates this option-like payoff profile to holding a hypothetical bank’s equity. 
The  beta  of  a  firm  is  measure  of  how  its  value  varies  with  the  market  as  a  whole. 
Arithmetically, the beta of a bank’s equity is the product of its leverage and the beta of its 
assets.11 So assuming an asset beta of 0.1 and a leverage ratio of 10, the bank’s equity beta 
will be equal to one. The returns on bank equity and the return on the market will then lie on 
a 45 degree line, provided returns are positive. When market returns are negative, however, 
returns  on  bank  equity  will  not  follow  them  south.  Instead  they  will  be  capped  by  limited 
liability. 
This  asymmetric  payoff  schedule  generates  interesting  incentives.  The  value  of  the  equity 
option  is  enhanced  by  rises  in  the  volatility  of  the  bank’s  assets.  Why?  Because  volatility 
increases the upside return without affecting the downside risk. If banks seek to maximise 
shareholder  value,  they  will  seek  bigger  and  riskier  bets.  Joint  stock  banking  with  limited 
liability puts ownership in the hands of a volatility junkie.  
How has the junkie responded to these incentives? Chart 1 plots the distribution of the ratio 
of  UK  bank  assets  to  nominal  GDP  since  1880,  broken  down  into  sub-samples.  Over  this 
period, this ratio has risen roughly tenfold. It has increased particularly strongly over the past 
30 years, peaking at well over 500% of GDP. Other developed countries have experienced a 
similar,  if less  dramatic,  pattern.  This  is  the  “bigger  bet”  strategy  in  practice,  as  a  route  to 
higher equity returns. 
Historically, there is also evidence of the “riskier bet” strategy having been deployed to boost 
returns. Chart 2 plots the distribution of returns on banks’ assets, again broken down by sub-
                                                 
11  Assuming the beta of its debt is zero – say, because of deposit insurance. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
sample. The mean return on bank assets lies in a range of 0.5–1% per year. But the variation 
in returns has risen dramatically. Asset returns were two and a half times more volatile at the 
end of the 20th century than at the beginning. 
This  evidence  is  no  more  than  circumstantial.  But  it  does  point  clearly  to  banks  having 
assumed greater risk in greater size as the disciplines of unlimited liability were progressively 
relaxed.  In  other  words,  the  historical  evolution  of  banking  is  entirely  consistent  with  the 
predictions of Merton’s theoretical model. 
Debt and taxes 
There is a second, and simpler, route to boosting equity returns. That is by gearing-up the 
balance  sheet.  Increased  leverage  acts  directly  on  a  bank’s  equity  beta.  For  example, 
doubling leverage from 10 to 20 generates a new, steeper payoff profile of returns (Figure 2). 
These  are  then  even  more  asymmetric.  Leverage  allows  shareholders  to  profit  more 
significantly when the market turns up, while still avoiding the downside when it turns down. 
From Merton, this strategy enhances shareholder value.  
Looking  over  a  sweep  of  history,  there  is  evidence  of  banks  pursuing  just  this  leverage 
strategy. Chart 3 plots the distribution of UK banks’ leverage since 1880. As unlimited liability 
was phased out, leverage rose from around 3–4 in the middle of the 19th century to around 
5–6 at its close. As extended liability was removed, leverage continued its upward trend into 
the 20th century, by its close reaching over 20. Seven years into the 21st century, at its high-
water mark, leverage hit 30 or more. 
This leverage strategy can be seen even more vividly in the distribution of returns to bank 
equity over the past century. As Chart 4 illustrates, having begun the 20th century in modest 
single figures, equity returns were averaging close to 20% by its end. At the height of the 
boom,  equity  returns  touched  30%.  Arithmetically,  virtually  all  of  this  increase  in  equity 
returns can be explained by increased leverage. 
And  it  has  come  at  an  obvious  cost  –  greater  risk.  That,  too,  is  clear  from  the  empirical 
distributions.  Over  the  past  century,  the  variability  of  returns  on  bank  equity  has  risen 
between  six  and  sevenfold.  The  lower  tail  of  equity  returns  has  also  been  fattening. 
Consistent  with  the  predictions  of  Merton’s  model,  a  leverage  strategy  has  simultaneously 
boosted risks and returns to holding bank equity. 
Chart 5 summarises this strategic evolution in banking over the past century of so. It is based 
on a simple calibration of the Merton model. Leverage is shown along the x-axis and return 
on equity along the y-axis. The lines are iso-volatility contours, drawn for different levels of 
underlying asset volatility. Banking has migrated in a North-Easterly direction, as banks have 
assumed greater asset risk and higher leverage. In the Merton framework these strategies 
raise equity returns, precisely as we observe in practice. 
There  is  a  second,  largely  silent,  factor  that  contributed  to  this  century-long  rise  in  bank 
leverage – tax. Debt interest costs tend to be tax-deductible from profits in most developed 
countries.  But  the  cost  of  equity  financing  is  not  typically  tax-deductible.  This  biases 
corporate financing towards debt and away from equity. 
This  tax  non-neutrality  is  hardly  new.  In  the  UK,  it  dates  back  more  than  a  century.  Tax 
legislation for interest and dividends was first established in the UK in 1803. Throughout the 
19th century, however, neither dividends nor debt interest were automatically deducted from 
profits  when  calculating  company  tax.  Payments  to  debt-holders  and  shareholders  were 
made net of tax and, roughly-speaking, treated equally.  
This equal treatment was justified on the grounds that the profit of a business should not be 
affected by its method of financing. In Anglo-Continental Guano Works v Bell (Surveyor of 
Taxes), Mr Justice Cave summed up thus: “It seems to me... that the gains of the trade are 
quite independent of the question of how the capital money is found… [One] cannot take into 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
consideration the fact that the firm or trader has to borrow some portion of the money which 
is employed in the business... If you did that it would land you in very extraordinary results”.12 
Indeed, it might land you in the guano. 
But banking was about to buck this trend. In  Farmer (Surveyor of Taxes) v Scottish North 
American Trust, Limited, Lord Atkinson referring to the Anglo-Continental case concluded: “It 
does  not  appear  to  me  that  the  reasoning  on  which  this  decision  is  based  can  apply  to  a 
bank  whose  business  is  the  borrowing  and  lending  of  money”.13  From  early  in  the 
20th century,  debt  interest  became  a  legitimate  deductible  from  bank  profits.  Where  banks 
led, non-financial firms followed. This debt bias has persisted in the century since.14 
The scale of tax-induced debt bias is generally greater the higher the rate of corporation tax 
and the lower the rate of personal taxation of equity. The IMF (2009) has recently estimated 
the scale of debt bias in a selection of developed countries. For low or tax-exempt investors, 
such as pension funds and non-residents, debt is typically between 30–40% cheaper than 
(new or retained) equity.15 For high-tax investors, the biases are smaller but still significant. 
Differences on this scale provide strong tax-based incentives to increase leverage. They also 
generate strong incentives to simultaneously avoid tax and arbitrage regulation. One recent 
example  was  hybrid  bank  capital  instruments.  These  counted  as  capital  for  regulatory 
purposes, but benefitted from interest deductibility for tax purposes. In short, they were win-
win. The UK hybrids market grew to around $100 billion between 2000 and 2007. By then, 
they accounted for around 25% of UK banks’ tier 1 capital.  
Up until the 1990s, empirical evidence had tended to find little effect of tax on firm leverage 
(Graham  (2008)).  But  a  raft  of  recent  studies  has  found tax  effects  on  corporate  financing 
behaviour which are both statistically and economically significant. Pooling the results from 
existing studies, de Mooij (2011) finds a marginal tax elasticity of 0.28. In other words, a fall 
in the tax shield by 10 percentage points would lower the debt-to-asset ratio of a typical firm 
by 2.8 percentage points.  
This elasticity is based on a range of firms with an average debt-to-asset ratio of 0.5. Banks 
rely much more heavily on debt, which provides closer to 95% of their financing. That would 
imply  a  marginal  tax  elasticity  closer  to  0.5  –  double  that  for  non-financial  firms.  At  these 
levels,  tax  biases  are  likely  to  have  had  a  material  amplifying  effect  on  bank  incentives  to 
increase leverage. 
Debt and discipline 
In principle, these balance sheets risks (higher asset volatility and leverage) ought to have 
had a natural counterweight – the disciplining effect of debt. Although they are second in the 
risk-bearing  queue,  debt-holders  as  well  as  equity-holders would  be  expected  to  shoulder, 
and hence price, this balance sheet risk. This could be done either by raising its cost or by 
restricting  its  quantity.  Either  way,  debt  would  then  serve  as  a  restraining  device  on  risk-
hungry, rent-seeking shareholders.  
In  theory,  this  debtor  discipline  mechanism  ought  to  work  like  a  dream.  Under  the 
assumptions of Modigliani and Miller (1963) (MM), the pricing of risk by debt-holders ought to 
neutralise  fully  any  effect  of  increased  leverage  on  the  value  of  the  firm.  Provided 
                                                 
12  Anglo-Continental Guano Works v Bell (Surveyor of Taxes) (1894) 3 TC 239. 
13  Farmer (Surveyor of Taxes) v Scottish North American Trust, Ltd (1912), AC 118. 
14  For example, the introduction of a separate corporate tax  schedule  in the UK in  1965 led for a time to the 
double taxation of equity. 
15  These investors account for perhaps half of the US equity market and two-thirds of the UK equity market. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
shareholders maximise firm value, and the world behaves according to MM, debtor discipline 
ought to defuse completely incentives to gear-up.  
Figure 3 illustrates the point diagrammatically, showing payoffs to debt and equity. They are 
a mirror-image. The downside risk avoided by equity is assumed by debt and vice-versa for 
upside returns. In principle, then, combining debt and equity would lead to offsetting payoffs, 
neutralising risk-taking incentives.  
During the 19th century, debt appears to have played just this role. Depositor flight and bank 
runs came thick and fast, operating as an effective disciplining device on shareholders and 
managers.  That  is  why  unlimited  liability  remained  a  prize  asset  until  the  end  of  the 
19th century.  This  quasi-disciplining  role  of  debt  persisted  up  to  the  Great  Depression. 
Calomiris  and  Mason  (1997)  find  that  debt  and  equity  prices  did  a  reasonable  job  of 
distinguishing good and bad banks during the Chicago banking panic of 1932. Indeed, they 
signalled distress fully six months prior to banks’ failure.  
As  the  20th  century  progressed,  however,  evidence  of  debt  disciplining  became  patchier. 
Studies in the 1980s typically failed to find balance sheet risk having a significant impact on 
banks’ subordinated debt spreads (Gorton and Santomero (1990)). Evidence from the 1990s 
was more encouraging (Flannery and Sorescu (1996), Morgan and Stiroh (1999)). But even 
then the link was weaker among larger banks, with little evidence of market prices influencing 
banks’ risk decisions (Bliss and Flannery (2002)). 
Nowhere was the ineffectiveness of debtor discipline better illustrated than in the run-up to 
the recent financial crisis. Chart 6 plots CDS premia for a sample of 33 large international 
banks  over  the  period  2002  to  2011.  It  partitions  the  sample  into  “crisis”  and  “no  crisis” 
banks, where the former are institutions subject to government intervention during the crisis.  
CDS premia for all banks fell dramatically between 2002 and 2007, on average by around 
three-quarters. Market perceptions of risk were falling at precisely the time risk in the system 
was building. There was also little market differentiation between the spreads of “crisis” and 
“no-crisis” banks: their average pre-crisis spread difference was a mere 8 basis points. 
The extent of risk mispricing is clear from the movements in CDS premia as the crisis broke. 
Average spreads rose by a factor of over 50 for “no crisis” banks. For crisis banks, they rose 
by  a  factor  closer  to  70.  Adjustments  on  that  scale  are  a  decisive  rejection  of  the  debt 
disciplining  hypothesis.  Debtors  were  meant  to  act  as  a  brake  on  risk-taking  incentives. 
Instead they had served as an accelerator.  
Why?  The  answer  again  lies  in  incentives  –  the  incentives  of  bank  managers  and  policy 
authorities.  These  incentives  matter  most  at  crisis  time.  Then,  it  may  no  longer  be  in  the 
interests of either bank management or the authorities to have debtors bear risk. Doing so 
may run the risk of making a bad crisis situation worse. As much as bank management and 
the  authorities  may  pre-commit  to  debtor’s  bearing  risk  ex-ante,  they  may  be  tempted  to 
capitulate ex-post.  
Economists call this a time-consistency problem. Agents cannot credibly commit to stick to 
their  guns  in  the  midst  of  war.  Private  contracts  for  bank  debt  and  public  policies  towards 
bank  debt  suffer  from  a  severe  case  of  this  time-inconsistency  problem.  Having  debtors 
assume  pain  is  fine  on  paper.  But  crisis  wars  are  not  waged  on  paper.  And  if  debtors 
recognise that risks in contracts will not be enforced, they will no longer have incentives to 
price risk and exercise discipline themselves. So it has been for well over a century. 
There  are  many  examples  of  time-inconsistencies  in  the  private  debt  contracts  issued  by 
banks. Uncalled capital and reserve liability were banks’ loss-absorbing contract of choice in 
the late 19th and early 20th centuries. They ultimately proved ineffective and were abolished. 
Why? Because managers feared that invoking these instruments, at precisely the time they 
were most needed, might make a bad situation worse. This is time-inconsistency writ large. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
A  century  on,  hybrid  bank  debt  instruments  fell  into  the  same  trap.  They  gave  bank 
management the option to rollover debt automatically in the event of stress. In principle, this 
option  had  insurance  value  in  a  situation  of  liquidity  stress.  In  practice,  facing  the  liquidity 
crunch  of  2008,  banks failed  to  exercise  this option  at just  the  point it  was  most  valuable. 
Why? Because they too feared scaring creditors and making a bad liquidity situation worse. 
Hybrid debt, too, was time-inconsistent. 
Time-inconsistencies  in  public  policies  regarding  bank  debt  have  been  every  bit  as  acute. 
Both liquidity and deposit insurance have a long and revealing history. Liquidity insurance by 
the central bank was firmly established in the UK by the end of the 19th century and spread to 
all major central banks during the course of the 20th century. Deposit insurance started life 
later in the US in 1934, but has since spread to most major developed countries.  
The  recent  financial  crisis  illustrates  perfectly  the  time-consistency  problems  both  policies 
face. Pre-crisis, deposit and liquidity insurance were enshrined in a well-defined regime. But 
in the teeth of crisis, these regimes were abandoned. Liquidity and deposit insurance was 
offered  in  close  to  unlimited  amounts  in  most countries  to  protect  confidence  among  bank 
creditors,  whether  retail  or  wholesale.  Prior  policy  commitments  proved  time-inconsistent. 
This is a pattern familiar for well over a century (Alessandri and Haldane (2009)). 
These  time-inconsistency  problems,  private  and  public,  have  been  made  more  acute  by  a 
dramatic structural shift in the industrial organisation of banking over that period. This has 
seen the emergence of leviathan institutions too-big-to-fail. At the start of the 20th century, the 
UK’s  largest  3  banks’  assets  accounted  for  7%  of  GDP  (Chart  7).  By  the  middle  of  the 
century they had reached 27%. By its end, they had reached 75%. By 2007, assets of the big 
3 banks had risen to 200% of GDP. Other countries tell a similar tale. Size and concentration 
in banking has hit the roof.  
Too-big-to-fail heightens the time-consistency dilemma for managers and policymakers. Big, 
connected  firms  increase  the  chances  of  a  bad  situation  turning  not  just  worse  but 
catastrophic. Knowing the authorities will shoulder that tail risk, debt-holders will not price it 
for  themselves.  That  is  doubly  unfortunate,  as  it  means  debtor  discipline  will  be  weakest 
among institutions for whom society would wish it to be strongest. Worse than that, bigger 
banks will then benefit from an implicit state subsidy, for cheaper debt means fatter profits. 
That might itself encourage further risk-taking. 
There  has  been  considerable  recent  interest  in  the  scale  of  this  too-big-to-fail  subsidy. 
Indeed, eliminating this subsidy has been taken as a bellwether of the authorities’ success in 
tackling  the  too-big-to-fail  problem  (Treasury  Committee  (2010)).  Various  attempts  have 
been  made  to  quantify  this  subsidy  (Oxera  (2011),  New  Economics  Foundation  (2011), 
Haldane  (2010)).  The  two  most  popular  approaches  use  credit  ratings  or  option-implied 
distributions. 
The ratings-based approach looks at the difference between the standalone (“no support”) 
and “support” ratings of a set of banks. It uses this difference to determine how much higher 
funding costs would have been in the absence of support (Haldane (2010), New Economics 
Foundation 
framework 
(Kou (2004)). A distribution is fitted to banks’ assets. Whenever assets fall below a certain 
threshold, the probability of government support can be estimated.  
Table 1 looks at some empirical estimates of the implicit subsidy using the two methods, for 
a sample of the four largest UK banks and 22 large international banks. The estimates are 
shown over the period 2007–2010. For UK banks, under either measure, the implicit subsidy 
amounts to at least tens of billions of pounds per year, often stretching to three figures. For 
the  global  banks,  the  subsidy  is  worth  at  least  hundreds  of  billions  of  dollars  per  year,  on 
occasions four figures.  
These  numbers  are  eye-popping.  To  give  some  context,  they  are  a  large  chunk,  and 
sometimes  exceed,  the  measured  valued-added  of  the  financial  sector  to  annual  GDP. 
(2011)).  The  options-based  approach  builds  on  Merton’s 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Recent revisions to support ratings do little to make a dent in them. Because they measure 
risk mispricing by bank debtors, they capture the extent of dilution in debtor discipline arising 
from time-inconsistency. The scale of subsidy suggests there is a considerable distance to 
travel before debtor discipline could be fully effective in checking risk-taking.  
Short-termism and performance targets 
The story so far. Ownership and control rights for banks are vested in agents comprising less 
than 5% of the balance sheet. To boost equity returns, there are strong incentives for owners 
to  increase  volatility.  Those  risk-taking  flames  have  been  fanned  by  tax  and  state  aid.  As 
stories go, this one sounds grim. 
But this story also contains a puzzle. Long-term shareholders in banks have not obviously 
reaped the benefits of these distortions. The purchaser of a portfolio of global banking stocks 
in the early 1990s is today sitting on a real loss. So who exactly is it extracting value from 
these  incentive  distortions?  The  answer  is  twofold:  shorter-term  investors  and  bank 
management. 
It  is  not  difficult  to  see  why  shorter-term  investors  in  bank  equities  stand  to  gain  from 
volatility. Institutional investors in equities are typically structurally long. They gain and lose 
symmetrically as returns rise and fall. Many shorter-term investors face no such restrictions. 
If their timing is right, they can win on both the upswings (when long) and the downswings 
(when short). For them, the road to riches is a bumpy one – and the bigger the bumps the 
better. As in Merton’s model, all volatility is good volatility. 
Perhaps  reflecting  that,  there  is  evidence  of  the  balance  of  shareholding  having  become 
increasingly short-term over recent years. Chart 8 shows the average duration of holdings of 
US, UK and European bank shares. Average holding periods for US and UK banks fell from 
around  3  years  in  1998  to  around  3  months  by  2008.  Banking  became,  quite  literally, 
quarterly capitalism. Today, the average bank is owned by an investor with a time-horizon 
considerably less than a year.  
A second piece of evidence on equity short-termism, which is specific to banks, comes from 
trends in banks’ capital planning. Since the late 1990s, there has been increasing focus on 
return  on  equity  (ROE)  as  a  performance  target.  Indeed,  major  banks  have  recently  set 
explicit  numerical  targets  for  ROE  as  a  guidepost  for  shareholders  and  managers.  These 
targets are revealing about investor and managerial incentives. 
ROE is an entirely equity-focussed concept. As such, ROE targets provide strong incentives 
for  banks  to  increase  equity  returns,  either  by  boosting  asset  volatility  or  gearing  up  their 
balance sheet. ROE targets hard-wire in the North-Easterly drift evident in Chart 5. Instead of 
adjusting for risk, ROE is flattered by it. This is fine for short-term investors who thrive on the 
bumps. But for longer-term investors they are a road to nowhere, as recent experience has 
shown.  
What we have, then, is a set of mutually-reinforcing risk incentives. Investors shorten their 
horizons.  They  set  ROE  targets  for  management  to  boost  their  short-term  stake.  These 
targets  in  turn  encourage  short-term  risk-taking  behaviour.  That  benefits  the  short-term 
investor at the expense of the long-term, generating incentives to shorten further horizons. 
And so the myopia loop continues. 
These incentive problems do not stop with owners. Under joint stock banking, ownership and 
control  are  divorced.  This  generates  what  economists  call  a  principal-agent  problem: 
managers  (agents)  may  not  do  what  owners  (principals)  wish.  In  an  attempt  to  solve  it, 
shareholders have sought over recent years to align managerial incentives with their own. 
That  has  meant  remunerating  managers  in  equity  or  using  equity-based  metrics  such  as 
ROE.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
These trends were all too apparent in the pre-crisis data. The wealth of the average US bank 
CEO increased by $24 for every $1000 created for shareholders in 2006 (Fahlenbrach and 
Stulz  (2011)).  The  typical  bank  CEO  pocketed  over  $1  million  for  every  1%  increase  the 
value of their firm. These are rather potent pecuniary incentives on bank managers to keep 
shareholders sweet. 
These facts also help explain the evolution of large US banks’ CEO pay between 1990 and 
2007. Imagine that in 1990 bank CEO pay had been indexed to bank ROE. By 2007, CEO 
compensation  would  have  reached  $26  million.  That  is  precisely  in  line  with  their  actual 
payouts. 
If you believed ROE were a reliable performance metric, US bank CEOs would have had a 
watertight defence back in 2007. Indeed, it was the L’Oreal defence: because we’re worth it. 
But experience since suggests this performance was cosmetic. ROE flattered returns, and 
hence  compensation,  in  the  upswing.  That  is  hardly  surprising  since  it  puts  risk  ahead  of 
return and short-term ahead of long-term performance.  
When  the  downswing  came,  the  volatility  of  equity  returns  sent  many  banks  to  the  wall. 
Equity-based incentive contracts helped propel them there. Firm-level evidence could not be 
clearer. In 2006, the top 5 equity stakes of US bank CEOs ran as follows: Dick Fuld (Lehman 
Brothers),  James  Cayne  (Bear  Stearns),  Stan  O’Neal  (Merrill  Lynch),  John  Mack 
(Morgan Stanley)  and  Angelo  Mozilo  (Countrywide)  (Fahlenbrach  and  Stulz  (2011)).  We 
know how these disaster movies ended. 
So  having  been  divorced  for  almost  two  hundred  years,  ownership  and  control  have  been 
reunited. But they are an odd couple. Their marriage contract encourages both partners to 
behave  in  a  volatile,  short-term  fashion.  The  marriage  itself  is  destined  to  last  less  than  a 
year. In the mid-19th century, unlimited liability was said to be deterring investors of “fortune, 
intelligence and respectability”. For very different reasons, today’s governance arrangements 
might be suffering the same fate.  
Banking and public policy 
The previous sections identified four forces which have shaped risk-taking incentives for over 
a century. Each will have tended to boost bank risk appetite above its socially optimal level. 
While satisfying the short-term demands of shareholders and managers, this structure has 
left many others short-changed. These distortions make a case for policy intervention. These 
interventions are best directed at incentives themselves. Otherwise risk-taking is likely to be 
simply displaced, rather than curbed, by reform efforts.  
(a) Higher equity capital 
Perhaps the most obvious means of tackling equity-led incentive problems would be simply 
to augment banks’ equity base. This would act on at least three of the underlying incentive 
frictions (Hellwig (2010), Admati et al (2010)). It would put more skin in the game for equity-
holders, thereby reducing their incentives to extract option value. It would reduce leverage 
directly, thereby reducing banks’ capacity to risk-up. And it would increase banks’ capacity to 
absorb loss, thereby reducing the probability of official intervention. 
Over the past few years, regulatory reform internationally has responded to those messages. 
Under  so-called  Basel  III,  the  minimum  equity  capital  ratio  will  quintuple  over  the  next 
decade, rising from 2% to close to 10% of banks’ risk-weighted assets for the largest global 
banks. That is a material shift. The policy question is whether, while necessary, it is likely to 
prove sufficient.  
There  is  a  genuine  debate  underway  here.  It  is  long  overdue.  For  the  better  part  of  thirty 
years, the international regulatory community stuck, limpet-like, to a target bank capital ratio 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
of 8%. That had no scientific basis whatsoever (Goodhart (2011)). It just happened to be the 
prevailing capital ratio among US banks at the time the first Basel capital accord was struck.  
More  recently,  the  Basel  Committee  has  explored  the  costs  and  benefits  of  higher  capital 
ratios  (Basel  Committee  (2010a)).  Using  conservative  estimates  of  the  benefits,  that  study 
suggests  an  optimal  capital  ratio  in  the  region  of  13–14%.  One  area  of  conspicuous 
conservatism is the study’s assumption that higher capital will not lower banks’ equity and 
debt-servicing costs. Reworking the arithmetic to include these and other effects, Miles et al 
(2011) calculate an optimal capital ratio closer to 20%.  
These studies are technically complex. A simpler way of posing the question is to ask what it 
might take to avoid a repeat crisis performance under the new rules. The average risk weight 
for  a  global  bank  is  40%.  This  means  that  a  10%  capital  ratio  in  risk-weighted  terms 
translates  into  bank  leverage  of  25  times  equity.  So  even  once  Basel  III  is  in  place,  an 
unexpected loss in the value of a bank’s assets of 4% will be sufficient to render it insolvent; 
much less than that to render it illiquid.  
For  me,  that  argues  for  bolstering  further  banks’  capital  defences  over  the  medium  term. 
Basel III is a good starting point, but may not be the right finishing line. Leaning against that 
are  those  arguing  “equity  is  expensive”.  They  seem  to  me  to  have  two  unassailable 
arguments  on  their  side.  One  is  tax.  The  other  is  state  subsidies.  But  these  are  good 
arguments  only  for  those  in  receipt  of  the  tax  rebates  or  the  state  subsidies.  As  a  policy 
matter,  they  are  distortions  to  risk-taking.  Using  them  to  support  lower  capital  ratios  is  to 
argue that three wrongs make a right.  
Even without further regulatory reform, a case could be made for reconsidering risk-taking 
distortions  directly,  such  as  the  tax  advantage  of  debt.  The  effects  of  removing  that  tax 
subsidy  could  be  potent.  Basel  III  will  lower  banks’  required  debt-to-asset  ratio  by  around 
3 percentage points. Given estimated tax elasticities, a similar change could be achieved by 
lowering the tax shield on debt by as little as 5 percentage points. 
There  are  two  ways  in  which  the  playing  field  between  debt  and  equity  could  be  levelled: 
removing  the  tax  deductibility  of  debt  interest  –  for  example,  through  a  system  of 
comprehensive business taxation; or allowing firms to deduct from profits an allowance for 
corporate equity – for example, as recently proposed in the Mirrlees Report (2011). The latter 
approach already operates in Belgium, Brazil and Latvia. 
There is of course a third way – do both. That would tilt the financing playing field through its 
axis, favouring equity over debt. In public finance theory, a non-neutral tax system can be 
justified when externalities are at play. Bank leverage has negative externality-like properties 
because of the deadweight costs of default and the growth-sapping effects of debt overhang. 
Both  these  externalities  have  been  evident  recently.  If  these  externalities  are  large,  and  if 
equity avoids them, there is an economic case for tax non-neutrality.  
In  the  19th  century,  subsidising  debt  to  finance  investment,  including  through  tax,  was  a 
sensible growth strategy. A century on, the opposite is true. Today’s debt ratios, both private 
and  public,  are  at  levels  which  are  likely  to  damage  medium-term  growth  (Reinhart  and 
Rogoff (2009), Cecchetti et al (2011)). There may have never been a better time in history to 
consider re-tilting the fiscal scales. 
(b) Equity-like liabilities 
No  amount  of  additional  equity  removes  the  asymmetry  of  payoffs  under  limited  liability. 
Indeed,  some  have  argued  that  materially  higher  levels  of  equity  capital  could  even 
encourage tail risk-taking (Perotti, Ratnovski and Vlahu (2011)). Nor, by itself, would higher 
equity guarantee discipline by debt-holders. So are there non-equity means of reshaping risk 
incentives on the part of debt-holders and shareholders? 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 11
One possibility would be to use financial instruments which explicitly combine the incentive 
features of debt and equity – so-called contingent convertible securities or CoCos (Flannery 
(2010), Calomiris (2011)). These instruments are debt in good times, but convert to equity in 
bad. As Figure 3 illustrates, they would result in a combined payoff schedule which mirrors 
unlimited  liability,  without  its  obvious  practical  drawbacks.  In  other  words,  CoCos  could 
generate better risk incentives than either debt or equity in isolation. 
To  play  this  role,  however,  these  instruments  would  need  to  be  time-consistent.  In  this 
respect, earlier experience with contingent instruments suggests two contractual features are 
likely to be key. First, no discretion on the part of bank management or the authorities about 
when  and  how  conversion  takes  place.  Such  discretion  undermined  the  effectiveness  of 
uncalled capital in the 20th century and hybrids in the 21st.  
Second,  conversion  needs  to  take  place  well  ahead  of  bankruptcy.  Doing  so  avoids  the 
deadweight costs of default which, for too-big-to-fail institutions, are likely to be too large to 
be tolerable by the authorities. That is what undermined reserve liability in the 20th century. It 
is also what risks jeopardising the effectiveness of so-called bail-in debt in the 21st.  
To satisfy these two conditions, contingent securities would need a trigger which was both 
early and non-discretionary. That rules out triggers activated on a discretionary basis by the 
regulator. It should also make us sceptical of triggers based on regulatory ratios, as these 
embody a great deal of management discretion. The trigger would need also to be set well 
ahead of default to avoid its deadweight costs. Pulling the trigger needs to be an early health 
scare for a bank, not the last rites. 
One  trigger  satisfying  those  criteria  would  be  market-based  measures  of  capital  adequacy 
(Haldane (2011), Calomiris and Herring (2011)). Unlike subordinated debt, equity prices did a 
good job of signalling distress among institutions during the recent crisis, fully six months or 
more  ahead  of  failure.  Chart  9  illustrates  this  for  the  set  of  “crisis”  and  “no-crisis”  banks. 
Equity  prices  called  the  crisis  early  and  differentiated  the  sick  from  the  sound.  Market 
discipline worked.  
Had  CoCos  with  market-based  triggers  been  in  place,  the  crisis  may  just  have  played  out 
differently. Pre-emptive recapitalisation of failing institutions would have occurred, either due 
to  automatic  CoCo  conversion  or  remedial  action  by  managers  under  pressure  from 
(potentially  converting)  debt-  and  (potentially  diluting)  shareholders.  CoCos  could  have 
operated as a contractual prompt corrective action mechanism. 
This  market-based  contractual  approach  has  the  advantage  of  turning  poacher  into 
gamekeeper.  It  uses  the  risk-taking  incentives  embedded  in  equities  to  sharpen  market 
discipline.  A  market  problem  is  turned  into  a  market  solution.  With  less  discretion  and 
bankruptcy,  these  contracts  would  stand  a  greater  chance  of  proving  time-consistent  in  a 
crisis. Historically, that has been the hardest nut to crack. 
(c) Control rights 
A  third  set  of  potential  structural  solutions  would  be  to  address  governance  and  control 
problems  at  source.  Post-crisis,  a  number  of  proposals  have  already  been  put  forward  to 
strengthen  bank  governance.  These  include  increasing  board  expertise  and  performance 
and  upping  the  power  of  bank  risk  committees  (Walker (2009),  Basel  (2010b),  OECD 
(2010)). These are steps in the right direction. But looking down the star-studded cast of non-
executive directors on the boards of failed financial institutions during the crisis, to wish for 
better is to wish upon a star. 
So what else might be done? In banking, the two prevailing ownership and control models 
are  the  public  limited  company  and  the  mutually-owned  co-operative.  Under  the  first, 
ownership and control are vested in a small minority of the liability-holders, with voting rights 
assigned  according  to  portfolio  weights  –  an  equity  dictatorship.  Under  the  second, 
12 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
ownership and control are vested in a much wider set of liability-holders, with voting rights 
unrelated to portfolio weights – a liability democracy. 
These  are  very  different  governance  models.  Both  face  their  own  principal-agent  problem. 
For  the  first,  this  manifests  itself  as  risk  and  rent-seeking  by  the  equity  minority  at  the 
potential  expense  of  the  majority.  For  the  second,  it  manifests  itself  as  inertia  due  to  the 
misalignment  between  voting  rights  and  financial  stakes  –  the  same  governance  problem 
Bagehot identified in the 19th century. 
It is possible to conceive of voting models which guard against these downsides. To give one 
example,  voting  rights  could  be  extended  across  a  wider  set  of  liability  stake-holders  in  a 
bank. These rights need not be allocated on an equivalent basis to equity-holders, given that 
equity  has  a  junior  claim.  For  example,  holders  of  CoCos  might  have  voting  rights  which 
were some fraction of their equity equivalents and depositors likewise. 
The advantage is that governance and control would then be distributed across the whole 
balance sheet. Some of the rent-seeking incentives of the equity-dictatorship model would be 
curbed. At the same time, voting rights would still be weighted in line with portfolio stakes to 
avoid the inertia of mutuality. Bank governance would be a wealth-weighted democracy, a 
hybrid of the mutual and joint-stock models. This would help put risk incentives in the right 
place, while enhancing diversity within the financial system.16 
(d) Performance and remuneration 
The  behaviour  of  the  financial  system  would  be  improved  by  an  alternative  set  of 
performance  metrics.  The  ideal  metric  would  be  less  focussed  on  a  narrow  subset  of  the 
balance  sheet  (such  as  equity)  and  do  a  better  job  of  adjusting  for  risk  (than  ROE).  One 
metric  satisfying  those  criteria  would  be  return  on  assets  (ROA).  This  covers  the  whole 
balance sheet and, because it is not flattered by leverage, does a better job of adjusting for 
risk.  
It  would  be  a  relatively  small  step  for  banks  to  switch  from  ROE  to  ROA  targets  in  their 
capital planning and compensation. Yet the effects on risk-taking and remuneration could be 
large. Imagine if the CEOs of the seven largest US banks had in 1989 agreed to index their 
salaries not to ROE, but to ROA. By 2007, their compensation would not have grown tenfold. 
Instead it would have risen from $2.8 million to $3.4 million. Rather than rising to 500 times 
median US household income, it would have fallen to around 68 times.17 
Conclusion 
The  words  “bank”  and  “bankrupt”  have  common  etymological  roots,  dating  from  the 
13th century.  In  the  13th  century,  it  was  bankers  bankrupting  banks.  In  the  21st  century, 
bankers  are  still  bankrupting  banks.  But  it  is  no  longer  just  banks.  In  England  and  Wales 
alone, over half a million individuals and nearly 100,000 businesses have found themselves 
in insolvency since 2007. Internationally, a growing number of sovereign states face a similar 
fate. 
This tells us that the risks from banking have been widely spread socially. But the returns to 
bankers have been narrowly kept privately. That risk/return imbalance has grown over the 
                                                 
16  Further refinement of voting rights might be possible. For example, some have argued that voting rights could 
be  made  conditional  on  the  holding  period  of  an  investor  (Aspen  Institute  (2009)).  This  would  lean  against 
short-termist tendencies which encourage rent-seeking. 
17  An  alternative  way  of  aligning  managerial  and  system-wide  incentives  is  to  remunerate  managers  not  in 
shares  or  cash,  but  in  CoCos  (Haldane  (2011)).  This  would  sharpen  managerial  incentives  to  keep  equity 
away from conversion and the “wolf away from the door”. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 13
past  century.  Shareholder  incentives  lie  at  its  heart.  It  is  the  ultimate  irony  that  an  asset 
calling  itself  equity  could  have  contributed  to  such  inequity.  Righting  that  wrong  needs 
investors, bankers and regulators to act on wonky risk-taking incentives at source.  
 
14 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
References 
Acheson,  G  G,  Hickson,  C  R  and  Turner,  J  D  (2010),  “Does  Limited  Liability  Matter? 
Evidence from nineteenth-century British Banking”,  Review of Law and Economics, Vol. 6, 
Issue 2, Article 6. 
Admati,  A  and  Pfeiderer,  P  (2010),  “Increased-Liability  Equity:  A  Proposal  to  Improve 
Capital  Regulation  of  Large  Financial  Institutions”,  Graduate  School  of  Business,  Stanford 
University. 
Alessandri, P and Haldane, A G (2009), “Banking on the State”, Bank of England, available 
at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech409.pdf 
Anglo-Continental Guano Works v Bell (Surveyor of Taxes) (1894) 3 TC 239. 
Aspen  Institute  (2009),  “Overcoming  Short-termism:  A  Call  for  a  More  Responsible 
Approach  to  Investment  and  Business  Management”,  The  Aspen  Institute  Business  and 
Society Program, September 9. 
Bagehot,  W  (1873),  “Lombard  Street:  A  Description  of  the  Money  Market”,  History  of 
Economic Thought Books, McMaster University Archive for the History of Economic Thought. 
Bankers’ Magazine (1951–68).  
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (2010a),  “An  assessment  of  the  long-term 
economic  impact  of  stronger  capital  and  liquidity  requirements”,  Bank  for  International 
Settlements. 
Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (2010b),  “Principles  for  enhancing  corporate 
governance”, Bank for International Settlements. 
Bliss,  R  R  and  Flannery,  M  J  (2002),  “Market  discipline  in  the  governance  of  US  bank 
holding  companies:  monitoring  vs.  influencing”,  European  Finance  Review,  Vol.6,  pages 
361–395.  
Calomiris, C W (2011), “Incentive-Robust Financial Reform”, The Cato Journal, Vol. 31 No. 
3 (Fall 2011), pages 561–589. 
Calomiris, C W and Gorton, G (1991), “The Origins of Banking Panics: Models, Facts, and 
Bank Regulation”, in “Financial Markets and Financial Crises”, NBER, pages 109–174.  
Calomiris, C W and Herring, R (2011), “Why and How To Design an Effective Contingent 
Capital Requirement”, Columbia Business School Working Paper, February. 
Calomiris,  C  W  and  Mason,  J  R  (1997),  “Contagion  and  Bank  Failures  during  the  Great 
Depression: The June 1932 Chicago Banking Panic”, American Economic Review, American 
Economic Association, vol. 87(5), pages 863–83, December. 
Cecchetti, S, Mohanty, M and Zampolli, F (2011), “The real effects of debt”, BIS Working 
Papers 352, Bank for International Settlements. 
Cleary, E J (1965), “The building society movement”, Elek Books. 
Collins, M (1998), “Money and banking in the UK: a history”, Croom Helm. 
de  Mooij,  R  A  (2011),  “The  Tax  Elasticity  of  Corporate  Debt:  A  Synthesis  of  Size  and 
Variations”, IMF Working Paper Fiscal Affairs Department, WP/11/95. 
Economist (1879), October 25, page 1224. 
Fahlenbrach, R and Stulz, R M (2011), “Bank CEO incentives and the credit crisis”, Journal 
of Financial Economics, Elsevier, vol. 99(1), pages 11–26, January. 
Farmer (Surveyor of Taxes) v Scottish North American Trust, Ltd (1912) AC 118. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 15
Flannery,  M  J  (2010),  “Stabilizing  Large  Financial  Institutions  with  Contingent  Capital 
Certificates”, CAREFIN Research Paper, No. 04/2010. 
Flannery, M J and Sorescu, S M (1996), “Evidence of bank market discipline in subordinated 
debenture yields: 1983–1991”, Journal of Finance, Vol.51, No.4, pages 1347–1377. 
Goodhart, C (2011), “The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision”, Cambridge University 
Press.  
Gorton,  G  and  Santomero,  A  M  (1990),  “Market  discipline  and  bank  subordinated  debt”, 
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol.22(1), pages 119–128. 
Graham  (2008)  Handbook  of  Corporate  Finance:  Empirical  Corporate  Finance,  Volume  2 
(Handbooks in Finance Series, Elsevier/North-Holland), Chapter 11. 
Grossman, R (2001), “Contingent capital and bank risk-taking among British Banks before 
World War 1”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 33(2), pages 143–59. 
Grossman, R and Imai,  M (2011), “Contingent capital and bank risk-taking among British 
banks before World War 1”, Wesleyan Economics Working Papers, 2011–003. 
Haldane,  A  G  (2011),  “Capital  Discipline”,  remarks  given  at  the  American  Economic 
Association,  Denver  on  9  January  2011,  available  at  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/ 
publications/speeches/2011/speech484.pdf 
Haldane, A G (2010), “The $100 Billion Question” speech given at the Institute of Regulation 
&  Risk,  North  Asia  (IRRNA),  available  at  http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/ 
speeches/2010/speech433.pdf  
Hellwig, M (2010), “Capital Regulation after the Crisis: Business as Usual?” Ifo Institute for 
Economic Research, University of Munich, vol. 8(2), pages 40–46. 
International  Monetary  Fund  (2009),  “Debt  Bias  and  Other  Distortions:  Crisis-Related 
Issues in Tax Policy”, available at www.imf.org/external/np/pp/eng/2009/061209.pdf 
Kou,  S  G  (2002),  “A  jump  diffusion  model  for  option  pricing”,  Management  Science,  48:8, 
pages 1086–01. 
Macey  and  Miller  (1992),  “Double  liability  of  bank  shareholders,  history  and  implications”, 
Wake Forest Law Review, page 36.  
Merton,  R  C  (1974),  “On  the  Pricing  of  Corporate  Debt:  The  Risk  Structure  of  Interest 
Rates”, Journal of Finance, Vol. 29, No. 2, (May), pages 449–470. 
Miles, D, Yang, J and Marcheggiano, G (2011), “Optimal bank capital”, Bank of England 
External MPC Unit Discussion Paper No. 31, April. 
Mirrlees,  J  (2011),  “Reforming  the  tax  system  for  the  21st  century”,  Institute  for  Fiscal 
Studies. 
Modigliani, F and Miller, M (1963), “The Cost of Capital, Corporate Finance and the Theory 
of Investment”, American Economic Review, Vol. 48, No. 3, June 1958, pp. 261–297.  
Morgan, D P and Stiroh, K J (1999), “Bond market discipline of banks: is the market tough 
enough?”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No.95.  
New  Economics  Foundation  (2011),  “Quid  Pro  Quo:  Redressing  the  privileges  of  the 
banking industry”.  
Organisation 
“Corporate 
Governance and the Financial Crisis: Conclusions on emerging good practices to enhance 
implementation  of 
the  Principles”  available  at  http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/53/62/ 
44679170.pdf 
Oxera (2011), “Assessing state support to the UK banking sector”, Oxera Consulting Limited. 
for  Economic  Co-operation  and  Development 
(2010), 
16 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Perotti, E C, Ratnovski, L and Vlahu, R (2011), “Capital Regulation and Tail Risk”, Centre 
for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper, No. 8526. 
Reinhart,  C  M  and  Rogoff,  K  S  (2009),  “The  Aftermath  of  Financial  Crises”,  American 
Economic Review, vol. 99(2), pages 466–72, May. 
Hickson,  C  R  and  Turner,  J  D  (2005),  “Corporation  or  Limited  Liability  Company”, 
Encyclopedia of World Trade since 1450, Macmillan. 
House of Commons Treasury Committee (2010), “Too important to fail – too important to 
ignore”, Ninth Report of Session 2009–10, House of Commons 261-i. 
Turner, J D, “Liability Regimes, Shareholder Capital, and the Genesis of Bank Regulation in 
Britain”, Mimeo. 
Turner,  J  D  (2009),  “ ‘The  last  acre  and  sixpence’:  views  on  bank  liability  regimes  in 
nineteenth-century Britain”, Financial History Review Vol. 16, Issue 2, pages 111–127.  
US Treasury (2011), “Financial Stability Oversight Council 2011 Annual Report” available at 
http://www.treasury.gov/initiatives/fsoc/Documents/FSOCAR2011.pdf 
Walker,  D  (2009),  “A  review  of  corporate  governance  in  UK  banks  and  other  financial 
industry entities”, available at http://www.hm-treasury.gov.uk/d/walker_review_261109.pdf 
 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 17
Figure 1: 
Payoff profile for bank equity 
Figure 2: 
Payoff profile for bank equity with higher leverage 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches
 18 
 Figure 3:  
Payout profiles for bank equity and debt 
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 19
Estimated distribution of UK banks’ assets to GDP 
Chart 1:  
 Source: Sheppard, D.K (1971) and Bank of England. 
(a)  Data  before  1974  are  from  Sheppard,  D.K  (1971).  The 
definition of UK banking sector assets is broader after 1966, but 
using  a  narrower  definition  throughout  gives  the  same  growth 
profile. 
(b)  Data  after  1974  include  total  assets  of  UK  resident  banks 
from  Bank  of  England  data.  Assets  of  the  Bank  of  England’s 
Issue department and Asset Purchase Facility are excluded. 
Notes:  The  density  estimates  are  based  on  a  normal  kernel 
function and a number of observations in each subsample. 
Estimated distribution of UK banks’ return on assets 
Chart 2:  
Source:  Capie,  F  and  Billing,  M  (2004),  BBA  and  Bank 
calculations. 
Notes:  The  density  estimates  are  based  on  a  normal  kernel 
function  and  a  number  of  observations  in  each  subsample. 
There  is  a  definitional  change  in  the  sample  in  1967  and 
again in 2010.  
 20 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 3:  
Estimated distribution of UK banks’ leverage 
Source: Capie, F and Billing, M (2004), BBA, Bank of England 
and Bank calculations.  
Notes:  The  density  estimates  are  based  on  a  normal  kernel 
function and a number of observations in each subsample. 
 Estimated distribution of UK banks’ return on equity 
Chart 4:  
Source:  Capie,  F  and  Billing,  M  (2004),  BBA  and  Bank 
calculations. 
Notes:  The  density  estimates  are  based  on  a  normal  kernel 
function  and  a  number  of  observations  in  each  subsample. 
There is a definitional change in the sample in 1967 and again 
in 2010.  
  BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 21
Chart 5:  
Variation in expected and actual return on  
equity and leverage(a) 
Source:  Capie,  F  and  Billing,  M  (2004),  BBA  and  Bank 
calculations. 
(a)  Illustration  using  the  Merton  (1974)  model.  Chart 
shows how the implied expected rate of return on equity is 
increasing in leverage for different asset volatilities, even 
when  the  expected  rate  of  return  on  assets  is  fixed  at 
zero. 
(b) Ratio of equity to assets. 
Chart 6:  
CDS premia for crisis and “no-crisis” banks 
  Source: Thomson Reuters Datastream and Bank calculations. 
 22 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Chart 7:  
Concentration of UK banking system  
(per cent of GDP) 
Source:  Bankers  Magazine,  Sheppard,  D.K  (1971)  and 
Bank of England. 
(a) Total assets of the largest 3 banks are identified from 
copies  of 
the  Bankers’  Magazine  before  1940. 
Observations  are  taken  every  10  years  and  are  linearly 
interpolated between. 
(b)  From  1940–1974  the  total  assets  of  the  3  largest 
clearing banks are used from the Bankers’ Magazine and 
banks’ published accounts. Bank observations are linearly 
interpolated between observations. 
(c) Total UK assets of the three largest UK owned banks 
are used after 1974 from Bank of England data. 
Chart 8:  
Holding periods in bank equities 
  Source: Bloomberg and Bank calculations. 
Notes:  Average  holding  period  of  equities  for  a  sample  of 
30 banks. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 23
Chart 9:  
Market-based measures of capital ratios(a)(b)(c)(d) 
 Sources: Capital IQ and Bank calculations 
(a) “Crisis” banks are a set of major financial institutions which 
in  autumn  2008  either  failed,  required  government  capital  or 
were taken over in distressed circumstances. These are RBS, 
HBOS,  Lloyds  TSB,  Bradford  &  Bingley,  Alliance  &  Leicester, 
Citigroup,  Washington  Mutual,  Wachovia,  Merrill  Lynch, 
Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae, Goldman Sachs, ING Group, Dexia 
and  Commerzbank.  The  chart  shows  an  unweighted  average 
for those institutions in the sample for which data are available 
on the given day. 
(b)  The  “no  crisis”  institutions  are  HSBC,  Barclays,  Wells 
Fargo,  JP  Morgan,  Santander,  BNP  Paribas,  Deutsche  Bank, 
Crédit  Agricole,  Société  Générale,  BBVA,  Banco  Popular, 
Banco  Sabadell,  Unicredit,  Banca  Popolare  di  Milano,  Royal 
Bank  of  Canada,  National  Australia  Bank,  Commonwealth 
Bank of Australia and ANZ Banking Group. The chart shows an 
unweighted  average  for  those  banks  in  the  sample  for  which 
data are available on the given day. 
(c)  The  dotted  black  line  is  a  suggested  trigger  level  for 
contingent  capital  calibrated  by  minimising  a  loss  function 
which takes into account both Type I and Type II errors. Type I 
error  is  the  probability  that  conversion  occurs  despite  capital 
not  being  required.  Type  II  error  is  the  event  that  conversion 
does not occur despite capital being required. The loss function 
places  greater  weight  on  Type  II  errors.  Note  that  the  loss 
function takes into account the full range of banks, not just the 
average score for each set. 
(d) 30-day moving average of market capitalisation. 
 24 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Table 1:  
Estimated subsidy for UK and global banks ($bn) 
Contingent claims / Kou(a) 
Ratings(b) 
  2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
    134 
354 
622 
250 
    UK 
  2007–
2010 
average 
 340 
 Global 
496 
1,308 
2,294 
924 
1,256 
 2007 
2008 
2009 
2010 
 
9 
 
33 
 
51 
 
 178 
  
58 
 
211 
528 
197 
2007–
2010 
average 
 
74 
 
242 
a) Calculated using an extension to the Merton (1977) model developed by Kou (2002). It models changes in 
banks’  assets  as  being  normally  distributed  with  upward  and  downward  “jumps”  designed  to  reflect  the 
possibility of extreme movements in asset values, and “fatten the tails” of the resulting distribution. This model 
is fitted to the prices of options written on the four largest UK banks’ equities. This is the same methodology 
as Oxera (2011) with a downward adjustment for the risk free rate to the nominal yield on 1-year UK gilts and 
considers that support can be realised at any time during the year. The figure for global banks is an estimate 
based on the UK figures. 
(b) Calculated  by comparing the  difference  in funding costs calculated  as an annual  average for  individual 
banks, based  on the difference in the average funding cost of benchmark financial institutions rated  at the 
support  rating  and  the  average  funding  cost  for  financial  institutions  rated  at  the  standalone  rating.  This 
difference is then multiplied by the rating-sensitive liabilities of the bank or building society. Data availability 
for non-UK banks is less granular.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 25
