Yandraduth Googoolye: Security and risk regarding the use of cards in 
Mauritius 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Yandraduth  Googoolye,  First  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius,  at  the  launch  event  of  Visa  Card  Security  Week  2011,  Port-Louis,  11  October 
2011. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is an honour for me to be invited to this audience this morning to share my views on the 
security and risk environment regarding the use of cards in Mauritius. 
Electronic money is projected to take over from physical cash for a large part of small-value 
payments,  and  continues  to  evoke  considerable  interest  both  among  the  public  and  the 
various authorities concerned, including central banks. The electronic money developments 
raise policy issues for central banks as regards the possible implications for their revenues, 
implementation of monetary policy and payment system oversight role. Indeed, it is by virtue 
of this very last role – maintaining the clearing, payment and settlement system that we take 
an interest in cards, in the broader context of maintaining financial stability. 
Mauritians  increasingly  use  cards  to  make  payments.  In  recent  years  plastic  cards  (credit, 
debit and other cards) have gained wide acceptance and their use has become popular in 
the  country.  The  total  number  of  cards  issued  by  banks  and  outstanding  increased  from 
700,000 as at end-June 2001 to 1.3 million as at end-June 2011. Likewise, the actual usage 
has registered increases both in terms of volume and value i.e. from 1.6 million transactions 
amounting  to  Rs 2.4  billion  at  end-June  2001  to  4.1  million  transactions  aggregating 
Rs 7.7 billion at end-June 2011. These figures are expected to increase even further with the 
initiative  of  some  banks  to  provide  prepaid  cards  to  an  even  more  sophisticated  and 
demanding  clientèle.  In  view  of  such  a  widespread  use  of  cards,  issues  relating  to  the 
regulation  of  this  payment  mode  as  well  as  those  relating  to  customer  protection  assume 
considerable  importance.  The  functioning  of  the  card  payment  system  should  not  present 
any risks to the payment and settlement systems in particular and to the country’s financial 
system in general. 
The use of cards is so entrenched in the habits of the population that a serious disruption 
that  affects  the  entire  card  system,  or  large  parts  of  the  system,  would  have  serious 
consequences for the ability of people to make payments. If card payments do not work, then 
the entire payment system will be disrupted. The Bank’s responsibility for a safe and efficient 
payment  system  therefore  means  that  we  also  have  an  interest  in  ensuring  that  card 
payments work safely and efficiently. 
The popularity of cards is that such a means of payment is perceived as being convenient. 
People who prefer cards attribute it to the fact that they do not like to walk around with cash. 
There  is  also  a  generational  aspect  to  the  choice  of  means  of  payment.  An  increasing 
number of young persons feel a greater sense of security when using cards than the older 
age groups and are more than willing to use their cards to make small payments. 
It goes without saying that the use of cards exposes stakeholders to risks - but how do we 
manage these risks while respecting competition and innovation? This calls for collaboration 
of all those concerned. It is the combination of measures, together with the rigour with which 
they  are  implemented  and  administered,  that  will  serve  to  reduce  risks  most  effectively  – 
there  is  no  single  security  measure  or  set  of  measures  that  can  be  said  to  provide  a 
guarantee of complete protection. 
We,  at  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  require  banks  to  have  robust  internal  control  systems,  with 
appropriate oversight by their board of directors, to ensure that their systems are not used by 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
fraudsters for illicit purposes. Indeed, in today’s IT-enabled banking environment, it has to be 
recognised that fraud possibilities have assumed international dimensions. It is therefore not 
only  essential  to  set  up  a  safe  platform,  but  also  to  ensure  that  the  so-called  “Safety”  is 
continuously benchmarked against international standards. 
With  respect  to  cards,  there  are  3  issues  relating  to  information  security  that  assume 
immense  importance,  namely  confidentiality,  integrity  and  availability  at  all  the  relevant 
stages of entry, storage, and transaction. The threats which bother every one of us in this 
context  are  multifold,  and  range  from  password  hacking,  card  copying/cloning  to  data  and 
identity  theft  at  various  levels  of  transaction,  information  storage  as  well  as  transmission 
stage. Allow me to digress a bit here to underscore the importance of proper screening of 
staff  at  all  levels,  as  frauds  are  very  often  perpetrated  by  employees  themselves.  Indeed, 
financial institutions are not only exposed to outside threats, but they are now faced with a 
new threat, inside violations. Today’s employees are able to easily export sensitive files and 
information  via  email  or  by  copying  data  to  portable  media.  It  is  imperative  that  financial 
institutions have control over their sensitive information, how it is used, and who obtains it. 
The real challenge in this environment goes beyond merely providing additional technology 
solutions and increasingly complex security layers. 
Another trend that we have observed of late is the outsourcing of credit and other payment 
card services to specialist third parties. This is mainly done to benefit from the expertise of 
the  third  party  which  may  not  be  available  in-house  and/or  as  cost-cutting  measure. 
However, there is very often over-reliance and inadequate diligence on the service providers. 
Our licensees are required to strictly follow the risk management principles enunciated in the 
Guideline  on  Outsourcing  for  Financial  Institutions  issued  by  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  and 
address the risks inherent in outsourcing. Outsourcing of those activities would have to be 
approved  by  the  board  of  directors  of  the  financial  institution  in  the  first  instance  and 
subsequently  by  the  Bank  of  Mauritius.  In  addition,  the  outsourcing  of  such  services  is 
contingent upon the third party service providers agreeing that their services are subject to 
regulation and examination by the Bank of Mauritius to the same extent as if such services 
were being performed in-house. 
So  much  for  the  role  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  in  ensuring  that  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions have  systems  in  place  that  deter card-related  fraud.  But  the  fight  against  fraud 
calls for the active involvement of other stakeholders. Customers, on their part, have to act in 
a responsible manner. Simple things like following the recommended fraud prevention advice 
– which is quick and simple to follow – can considerably reduce the chances of falling prey to 
fraudsters. It is however essential that card issuing banks and card associations regularly run 
awareness campaigns for the benefit of consumers. 
An ancillary issue relates to customer grievances in respect of credit cards. In this context, 
I make an appeal to banks for greater transparency and disclosure, since there is often an 
asymmetry  of  information,  both  written  and  oral,  between  the  card-issuing  bank  who  has 
complete information and the card holders who very often do not have complete information 
on  their  rights.  In  particular,  we  have  observed  that  card  issuing  banks  provide  enormous 
information to their customers but the language used is legal terminology which is not easily 
understandable to ordinary customers. In addition, the written information is often printed in 
very small print which hinders easy readability, and important information is buried with other 
information. There are no standards in this regard among the card issuing banks. I take this 
opportunity  to  encourage  card  issuing  banks  to  adopt  a  more  customer-friendly  approach 
with clear terms and conditions for card issue and usage, in simple language comprehensible 
to a layman, prominently displayed, easily readable and, most importantly, the crucial items 
highlighted.  The  card  issuing  banks  may  continue  to  send  the  document  containing  the 
normal terms and conditions as is being done now. 
It is widely recognised that traditional credit cards are most prone to frauds – the problem 
with  the  black  magnetic  stripe  on  the  back  of  a  credit  card  is  that  it’s  about  as  secure  as 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
writing account information on a postcard: everything is in the clear and can be copied. Card 
fraud and the measures taken to prevent it, cost merchants, banks and consumers billions 
each  year  across  the  globe.  In  contrast,  smart  chip  cards  can’t  be  copied,  which  greatly 
reduces the potential for fraud. Smart cards with built-in chips are the equivalent of a safe – 
the information contained therein can only be unlocked with the right key, which means that 
the cards can not be replicated. 
One of our banks introduced the smart cards a few years back. Let me take this opportunity 
to encourage other banks to follow suit. This will entail in some cases complete upgrading of 
ATM  terminals  to  support  chip-based  ATM  cards,  but  the  long-run  benefits  of  such  an 
upgrade will accrue to all stakeholders. 
We believe that a smoothly operating infrastructure can greatly enhance financial security. 
This concept includes the payment system, the technological infrastructure, as well as the 
regulatory and supervisory framework.  
An important function of the Central Bank is to oversee the payments system as inability to 
make  payments  in  an  economy  would  have  a  far  reaching  and  widespread  bearing  on 
society. 
Technological  infrastructure  is  perhaps  the  most  important  component  to  secure  financial 
operations.  Financial  systems  continuously  need  to  adapt  themselves  to  the  rapidly 
increasing  technological  innovations.  This  includes  new  products,  necessitating  increased 
awareness by the users and supervisors of the risks and benefits inherent in them. On this 
front,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  took  proactive  steps  way  before  the  financial  crisis  in  2007  to 
re-structure the Payment Systems and market infrastructures area and to endow the country 
with a modern and innovative payment system. The world is rapidly moving towards a real 
time  economy  where  all  types  of  transactions  are  digital,  automatically  generated  and 
completed in real time. Payment systems, being one of the most inter-related sectors of the 
modern economy, the call for innovation sounded, even more urgent for all its operators.  
The  new  software  for  the  Mauritius  Automated  Clearing  and  Settlement  System  (MACSS) 
was the step in this direction with which, we have been able to provide extended services in 
multi currency – a premiere in Africa. 
In  the  course  of  this  year  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  came  forward  with  a  series  of  innovative 
projects – Bulk Clearing System, the Cheque Truncation and On-line Auctioning of bills – that 
will change the payments landscape of the country. Bulk clearing system is a new payment 
mechanism where low value inter bank payments are electronically cleared and settled in the 
MACSS. This system will cater for recurrent payments such as salary, direct debits etc. and 
will  help  banks  better  manage  their  liquidity  requirements  for  the  day.  It  will  contribute 
towards lowering the cost of payments. Both systems went live on 6 September 2011.  
Closely coupled payment and securities systems contribute towards maintaining the stability 
of  the  financial  system.  In  order  to  provide  strict  delivery  versus  payment  for  Government 
securities,  the  Bank  of  Mauritius  has  already  tested  on  a  pilot  basis,  a  system  for  on  line 
auctioning of bills. The first phase of this system was rolled out on 7 October 2011.  
Finally, I would like to thank the organiser, Visa, in bringing together the main players in the 
card business chain, the cooperation among which is vital for resolving the various security, 
risk and fraud issues facing the card payment systems.  
I wish you plenty of success for the Visa Card Security Week 2011. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
