Ric Battellino: Economic and financial developments 
Address  by  Mr  Ric  Battellino,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  Citi’s 
3rd Annual Australian & New Zealand Investment Conference, Sydney, 25 October 2011. 
 Introduction 
2011 has been a frustrating year for the world economy. The recovery in most of the large 
advanced economies lost momentum in the first half of the year and financial market volatility 
and concerns about sovereign debt posed renewed threats in the second half. This led the 
IMF in September to note that the world economy had “entered a dangerous new phase”. In 
many ways, these difficulties can be seen as the continuing after-effects of the financial crisis 
that gripped the North Atlantic economies in 2008. 
Australia, as with most of Asia, has to date been relatively shielded from the events in the 
North Atlantic countries. Nonetheless, the local economy has not been as buoyant as had 
been expected at the start of the year and downside risks stemming from further weakness in 
the major overseas economies or financial market volatility cannot be ruled out. The situation 
in Europe is particularly disturbing since the authorities need to agree on policies that deal 
simultaneously  with  excessive  government  debt,  weak  banking  systems,  soft  economic 
activity and sharp differences in competitiveness among European countries. 
The situation is not all gloom, however. Economic data in the United States over the past 
month  or  two  have,  more  often  than  not,  surprised  on  the  upside,  Asia  is  also  generally 
continuing to do well, and some of the local economic news has also been more positive of 
late. 
Let me run through some of these issues in more detail. I will start with the world economy. 
The world economy 
As you know, 2010 had been a very strong year for the world economy. Growth was a little 
over 5 per cent, which is about as fast as the world economy ever grows. The strong growth 
was  not  surprising,  as  most  countries  were  applying  unprecedented  amounts  of  monetary 
and fiscal stimulus as they sought to recover from the 2008/09 recession. 
It was always expected that economic growth in 2011 would not be as strong. Early in 2011, 
most  forecasters  were  expecting  growth  for  the  year  of  about  4½ per cent;  while  this  was 
less than 2010, it was still a very good figure. 
By the second quarter,  however, economic outcomes were  beginning to disappoint. In the 
United  States,  consumer  confidence  and  spending  weakened,  possibly  due  to  the  strong 
increases  in  oil  prices  that  had  taken  place;  US  industrial  production  was  affected  by  the 
disruptions  to  global  supply  chains  caused  by  the  Japanese  earthquake  in  March; 
employment growth slowed; and jobless claims, which had been gradually declining, started 
to rise again. 
Growth in Europe also faltered in the second quarter, with confidence being eroded by the 
escalating  concerns  about  sovereign  debt  in  several  European  countries.  And,  of  course, 
Japanese economic activity was severely disrupted by the after-effects of the earthquake. 
Elsewhere in the world, however, economic activity remained robust. In fact, through most of 
Asia and Latin America the concern was that the strength of economic activity was putting 
upward  pressure  on  inflation,  and  the  authorities  in  many  countries  in  these  regions  were 
tightening monetary policy. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Overall,  forecasts  for  global  growth  in  2011  were  scaled  back  around  mid  year  to  around 
4¼ per cent, due mainly to the softer outlook for the major developed economies. 
Subsequent to this, the marked increase in financial market volatility that occurred in the third 
quarter caused analysts to expect further weakening in the global economy, due to the sharp 
falls in consumer and business sentiment that occurred in most countries and the significant 
reduction in wealth caused by the falls in share prices. 
The  reductions  in  growth  forecasts  were  again  most  pronounced  for  the  developed 
economies. IMF forecasts for growth in the United States and the euro area in 2011 were 
reduced to around 1½ per cent. Although growth forecasts for Asia and Latin America were 
also  revised  down  somewhat,  the  forecast  outcomes  for  these  countries  remained  quite 
robust. 
While  the  forecast  for  overall  growth  for  the  world  economy  in  2011  was  reduced  to 
4 per cent, that figure is still a healthy outcome. It is broadly in line with trend. The disparate 
outcomes between the advanced economies and the emerging economies, however, mean 
that the growth is very unbalanced and there is a sense that the forecast is fragile because of 
possible severe downside risks. 
While forecasts have been revised down since the recent period of financial volatility, the run 
of  actual  economic  data  that  has  become  available  over  that  period,  at  least  for  countries 
outside  Europe,  has  generally  been  better  than  might  have  been  expected.  This  is 
particularly  the  case  in  the  United  States.  It  seems  that,  before  the  onset  of  the  financial 
volatility, the US economy was starting to recover from the first half slowdown and that, so far 
at least, despite the fall in confidence, real economic activity has held up. Recently, analysts 
have been revising up their estimates of annualised US GDP growth for the third quarter, and 
the consensus is now for a figure of around 2½–3 per cent. 
Japan  also  seems  to  be  continuing  to  recover  gradually  from  the  economic  effects  of  the 
earthquake. 
Elsewhere in Asia, recent data have been mixed, though broadly consistent with the modest 
slowdown  that  authorities  in  the  region  have  been  trying  to  achieve  in  order  to  contain 
inflationary  pressures.  India  perhaps  has  been  the  country  pursuing  this  approach  most 
vigorously, and seems to be the country where growth has slowed most noticeably. Overall, 
however, growth in the region remains solid. Growth in Chinese GDP over the year to the 
September quarter was 9.1 per cent, and recent monthly data for retail sales and industrial 
production  have  been  robust.  The  latest  data  available  to  the  Bank  on  shipments  of 
Australian coal and iron ore to China (these are up to September) suggest that shipments 
have held up, though the weakening in iron ore prices over the past couple of weeks may be 
pointing to some softening ahead. 
The Australian economy 
Here in Australia, 2011 got off to a shaky start, despite the bright prospects offered by the 
second phase of the resources boom. A lot of this was due to the weather, as cyclones and 
floods disrupted economic activity, and coal production in particular. As you know, GDP fell 
noticeably in the first quarter of the year. 
GDP recovered in the second quarter but, overall, measured economic output in the first half 
of  the  year  was  pretty  flat.  As  well  as  the  weather-related  disruptions,  there  remained  a 
generally cautious mood among households and businesses. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As the Bank has pointed out before, in recent years there has been a structural change in 
household  spending  and  financing  in  Australia.1  After  a  10–15 year  period  during  which 
households increased their gearing and reduced their rate of saving, they have returned to a 
more  conservative,  and  traditional,  pattern  of  financial  behaviour.  Household  credit  growth 
has slowed to a rate in keeping with, or slightly below, the growth in household incomes; the 
saving rate has increased to a level that is more normal based on history; and household 
spending  growth  has  slowed  from  a  rate  that  substantially  exceeded  household  income 
growth, to one that, over the past year, has been broadly in line with income growth. Within 
total consumer spending, there appears to have been a shift away from spending on goods 
in stores to spending on services, particularly services such as overseas travel, eating out 
and entertainment. As a result, retail sales have been particularly weak. 
This adjustment in consumer behaviour has created a difficult trading environment for some 
businesses, coming as it has after a prolonged boom. But the adjustment in Australia has 
been  benign  compared  with  the  adjustments  in  household  finances  and  housing  markets 
elsewhere  in  the  world,  and  it  has  put  household  spending  and  financing  on  a  more 
sustainable path. This will ultimately benefit the health of the economy. 
In  the  case  of  business  investment,  there  is  a  clear  dichotomy  between  the  resource  and 
non-resource sectors of the economy. Investment by the former is very high at present, and 
much  more  lies  ahead.  Outside  the  resources  sector,  however,  business  investment  is 
relatively  flat.  In  some  cases  this  is  due  to  the dampening  influence  of  the  high  exchange 
rate,  with  the  manufacturing  and  tourism  industries  particularly  affected.  In  the  case  of 
tourism, the problem is not so much that foreign tourists have stopped coming to Australia 
but  that  many  more  Australians  are  going  overseas.  Overseas  trips  by  Australians  are 
running about 60 per cent higher than five years ago. Given the increase in overseas travel, 
it  is  not  surprising  that  the  traditional  holiday  destinations  in  Australia,  such  as  the  Gold 
Coast  and  North  Queensland,  are  currently  among  the  weaker  parts  of  the  Australian 
economy. In other sectors, such as commercial property, the weakness is mainly the result of 
investors and lenders having to deal with the consequences of over-gearing in the pre-2008 
period.  When  too  much  borrowing  and  lending  occurs,  as  it  did  in  this  sector,  it  can  take 
many years for the excesses to be unwound. Some large adjustments have already taken 
place in the commercial property sector but the process probably still has further to run. 
While  the  sectoral  composition  of  business  investment  is  uneven,  the  overall  growth  of 
investment  has  been  very  solid,  with  a  rise  of  6 per  cent  in  the  first  half  of  2011.  Overall, 
private  demand  is  rising  solidly,  and  taking  the  place  of  public  spending,  which  is  now 
growing more slowly as earlier fiscal stimulus is unwound. 
Total final demand grew by 3.4 per cent over the year to June, which is about in line with 
past trends. That, however, has not translated to trend growth in GDP, as the high exchange 
rate  and  the  high  import  content  of  some  mining  investment  have  seen  an  increased 
proportion of demand being met from imports, rather than domestic production. The weather-
related disruptions to coal exports added to the shortfall in production. In this environment, 
employment growth slowed noticeably in the first half of the year, and around the middle of 
the year there was some rise in unemployment. 
At the same time, inflationary pressures, which had declined through 2010, appeared to pick 
up  noticeably  in  the  first  half  of  2011  and  the  prospects  were  that  inflation  would  rise  to 
above the target range of 2–3 per cent over the next couple of years. That created a difficult 
environment  for  monetary  policy.  As  the  Bank  noted  after  the  October  Board  meeting, 
however, the downward revisions to recent estimates of underlying inflation and the softer 
global economic outlook have made the outlook for inflation less concerning, providing scope 
                                                 
1  See  Stevens  G  (2011),  “The  Cautious  Consumer”,  Address  to  The  Anika  Foundation  Luncheon,  Sydney, 
26 July. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
for monetary policy to be supportive of economic activity, if needed. Tomorrow’s CPI data will 
provide further information in this regard. 
It  remains  to  be  seen  how  the  Australian  economy  will  respond  to  the  recent  financial 
volatility and the consequent fall in confidence and the loss of wealth. To date, however, as 
in the United States, the flow of monthly data in Australia has been a little better than might 
have been expected given the volatile financial environment. Retail sales have picked up a 
little,  housing  loan  approvals  also  seem  to  be  picking  up  somewhat,  most  measures  of 
business  conditions  remain  around  average  levels  and  the  most  recent  employment  data 
have been more positive after a number of weak months. Nonetheless, job vacancies and 
advertisements are lower than their peak around the start of the year, overall credit growth 
remains subdued and the housing market remains soft. 
Recently,  there  has  been  some  easing  in  financial  conditions  following  the  fall  in  market 
interest  rates  that  has  accompanied  the  financial  volatility.  Banks  have  passed  through  to 
borrowers notable declines in interest rates on term housing loans and some business loans, 
as their cost of funds has declined. Increased competition among banks in response to the 
increased availability of deposits and relatively subdued demand for loans, has also resulted 
in some shaving of interest rates on standard variable mortgage loans for new borrowers. As 
a result, the interest rates on new loans are now around 10–15 basis points lower than they 
were early in the year. The modest net fall in the exchange rate in recent months has also, to 
some extent, reduced pressures on some sectors of the economy. 
Looking ahead 
As I have noted, as yet there have not been signs outside Europe that the rate of growth of 
economic activity has taken another step down since the recent bout of financial volatility. It 
is, however, still too soon to conclude that this will not happen. As we have seen from last 
weekend’s events in Europe, much still needs to be done to deal with the challenges these 
countries  are  facing,  and  further  market  volatility  is  therefore  to  be  expected.  The  United 
States also has challenges to deal with in the areas of fiscal policy and housing, so it would 
be  optimistic  to  assume  that  the  US economy  will  resume  robust  growth  any  time  soon. 
Economic activity in large parts of the developed world is therefore likely to remain subdued 
in the period ahead. 
The question is whether this will flow through in due course to the large emerging economies 
that have been the main force driving global GDP growth in recent years. Some flow-on is, of 
course, to be expected, even if the situation in the advanced economies does not deteriorate 
further.  However,  so  far  at  least,  there  has  not  been  the  debilitating  freezing  up  of  trade 
finance that damaged Asian economies in 2008. 
More  generally,  domestic  demand  in  these  economies  has  considerable  momentum  and, 
should  it  slow  more  than  the  authorities  desire,  they  have  considerable  scope  to  provide 
support  via  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  unlike  in  many  advanced  economies.  The  fact  that 
inflationary pressures in many of these economies seem to be peaking may provide room to 
do so. 
Overall, while it is possible that the global economic situation might take a sharp turn for the 
worse, at this stage the Bank’s central scenario is that global GDP growth will be broadly in 
line with its long-run average over the period ahead. That would create a reasonably benign 
environment for the Australian economy. The global situation remains fragile, however, and 
will require careful monitoring. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
