Jan F Qvigstad: On managing wealth 
Speech by Mr Jan F Qvigstad, Deputy Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), 
at the Norwegian Academy of Science and Letters, Oslo, 8 November 2011. 
The  text  below  may  differ  from  the  actual  presentation.  This  speech  does  not  contain  assessments  of  the 
economic situation or current interest rate setting. 
 I would like to thank Amund Holmsen, Marie Norum  Lerbak and Øystein Sjølie for their valuable assistance in 
preparing  the  speech.  Thanks  also  to  Ola  Peter  Krohn  Gjessing,  Espen  Henriksen  and  Pål  Winje  for  useful 
comments. I would also like to thank Helle Snellingen for her contribution to the translation of the Norwegian text 
into English. 
Introduction 
From  Norges  Bank  we  can  see  the  corner  of  the  two  streets  Tollbugaten  and  Kirkegaten. 
This is where the Collett building was situated until 1939 when it was dismantled and moved 
to the Norwegian Museum of Cultural History at Bygdøy. By then, the Collett family had not 
occupied the building for years and their wealth was long gone. 
Around the end of the 18th century, John Collett made a large fortune in the timber industry. 
He also ran the great Ullevål farm and by the time of his death in 1810 he was managing one 
of  the  country’s  largest  wealth  portfolios.  Collett  was  also  known  to  spend  extravagant 
amounts on lavish parties. The Napoleonic Wars and the English blockade took a heavy toll 
on the family business. After his death, Collett’s heirs insisted on maintaining an extravagant 
lifestyle as if the income was still intact. Their wealth rapidly withered away and in 1829 the 
coffers were empty. The farm was taken over by the state.1 
The time it took Collett to make a fortune is about the same as it took Norway to build up its 
oil-based financial wealth. Nearly 40 years after Phillips Petroleum discovered commercially 
viable oil reserves in the Ekofisk field2, we have an oil-based sovereign wealth fund worth 
more than NOK 3 trillion. Few other countries are sitting on such huge financial reserves. But 
our wealth primarily comes from other sources than the oil fund, now called the Government 
Pension Fund Global. The value of our current and future labour resources is more than ten 
times  as  great  as  the  value  of  our  oil  and  the  oil  fund  combined.3  The  oil  fund  would  be 
depleted in three years if government tax revenues were to disappear entirely. 
Our economic future depends above all on our capacity to produce goods and services that 
others  value.  But  the  visible  oil  revenues  may  give  the  impression  that  we  have  a  huge 
treasure trove at our disposal. Sound wealth management is therefore first and foremost a 
question of maintaining and developing the value of our productive resources, particularly our 
labour resources. 
A nation that comes into a large fortune must make a number of choices and trade-offs. They 
can  be  considered  from  a  legal,  ethical  or  financial  standpoint.  In  my  speech  today,  I  will 
                                                 
1  Alf Collet (1915): Familien Collett og Christianialiv i gamle dage (The Collett family and life in Christiania in 
olden days), Cappelen, Kristiania. 
2  See Facts 2011 – The Norwegian petroleum sector, Ministry of Petroleum and Energy: http://www.npd.no/en/ 
Publications/Facts/Facts-2011/ 
3  Report 
to 
the  Storting  on  Long-Term  Perspectives 
for 
the  Norwegian  Economy,  Section  4.5: 
http://www.regjeringen.no/en/dep/fin/press-center/press-releases/2009/long-term-perspectives-for-the-
norwegian.html?id=542381 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
discuss in particular what sound management entails from an economic viewpoint. I will also 
touch upon how we practice oil wealth management in Norges Bank. 
Intergenerational saving 
The first question that must be answered is: Who owns the oil wealth? Does it belong to the 
present generation of Norwegians? Does it also belong to future generations?4  
Even though I will be speaking from an economic vantage point, I will borrow a point made 
by the philosopher Henrik Syse. He asks whether we have the right in the course of a single 
generation to expend resources that it has taken nature millions of years to produce. 
But there are also counter arguments. The next generations are likely to be wealthier than us 
in any case. Should we save for them? 
Saving  for  the  future  can  also  be  supported  with  vicarious  arguments  by  those  who  are 
worried about their own upcoming pension payments. Today’s pension obligations are under-
funded but can be more easily met if oil revenues are saved. Is this the “68 generation” that 
first went on a spending spree and is now arguing in favour of saving to secure their own 
pensions?5 
Moreover,  all  we  have  to  do  is  read  today’s  press  to  understand  that  it  is  not  a  matter  of 
course that economic growth will maintain its current pace. It is not a given that our children 
will be that wealthy. 
For those with roots in agriculture, it is second-nature to leave the farm in at least as good 
shape as when it was taken over. A policy of high and rising spending, which would crowd 
out  internationally  exposed  industries  and  lead  to  unsustainable  public  expenditure  levels, 
would be a heavy legacy to leave behind. The next generations would have to increase taxes 
substantially because of our consumption. If we, as a nation, set money aside instead, our 
wealth will grow and contribute to improving prosperity for our children. 
Spending and saving are mutually exclusive actions. The definition of saving is quite simply 
to abstain from spending. But with Norway’s huge oil revenues and the return on the portion 
saved  we  can  increase  spending  while  accumulating  considerable  savings.  But  spending 
must be adapted to the return on the portion saved. 
Sound  and  long-term  management  of  oil  wealth  also  requires  separating  saving  decisions 
from  spending  decisions.  The  fiscal  rule  sets  an  important  cap.6  The  rule  states  that 
petroleum revenues are to be saved, while the government may spend the return on the oil 
fund. Once the cap has been set, expenditures across worthy public programmes must be 
made according to priorities – not by lifting the cap. If the ability to prioritise fails us and the 
cap is lifted, the long-term margin of manoeuvre will be reduced fairly quickly. Less will be left 
to our children. 
                                                 
4  The  intergenerational  perspective  was  not  mentioned  in  the  first  public  document  to  contain  a  broad 
discussion of the role of oil in Norwegian society, Report no. 25 to the Storting of 1974. The focus was on how 
the  government  would  spend  the  revenues  from  the  oil  sector  to  create  a  “qualitatively  better  society”  – 
immediately. The oil deposits were not discussed as they are today as wealth to be invested. See Report no. 
25 to the Storting (1973–74): “Petroleumsvirksomhetens plass i det norske samfunn” [The role of petroleum 
activity in Norwegian society], Ministry of Finance. 
In 1985, Professor Steinar Strøm wrote that it was an understandable human reaction to celebrate Norway’s 
new  oil  wealth  with  a  spending  spree.  At  the  same  time,  Strøm  pointed  out  that  as  oil  revenues  became 
substantial, money could be set aside in a fund abroad. Steinar Strøm (1985): “Oljemilliardene – Pengegalopp 
til sorg eller glede?” [Norway’s oil billions – curse or blessing?], Sosialøkonomen, 1, p. 246. 
5 
6  Report no. 29 to the Storting (2000–2001): “Guidelines for economic policy”, Ministry of Finance. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
As long as the North Sea generates revenues, the value of the fund will rise, laying the basis 
for a sustainable rise in petroleum revenue spending.7 
Institutional challenges 
Oil converted into money entails institutional challenges. A crucial question that arose when 
we discovered oil was whether we had the discipline to refrain from spending all the money 
at once. In 1983, the Committee on the Future of Petroleum Activity was chaired by former 
central bank governor Hermod Skånland. He was of the view that it would not be possible to 
set aside a share of the oil revenues in a fund: 
“In  the  light  of  the  prevailing  attitudes  among  both  politicians  and  the  wider 
population,  it  is  difficult  to  imagine  that  hundreds  of  billions  will  be  invested  in 
foreign assets while there are domestic needs that have not been met (...).” 
8 
For Skånland the solution was simple. If the political system did not manage to set aside the 
revenues, the oil taps had to be opened very slowly. Wealth management could be carried 
out by portioning exploration sites in the North Sea. Oil that had not been discovered would 
burn a hole in the pockets of politicians to a lesser extent than money flowing into the state 
coffers. 
Skånland’s scepticism was well founded. Future oil revenues were used as an argument for 
allowing the central government to run a budget deficit. Moreover, it would transpire that the 
actual  pace  of  oil  extraction  –  and  oil-revenue  spending  –  increased much  faster  than  the 
committee had recommended. 
In the first 25 years, Skånland’s prediction was right on the mark. All the oil revenues were 
spent. But in the past 15 years, petroleum revenues have risen at such a fast pace that a 
portion has been set aside. If we look at the period of oil revenues in its entirety, close to half 
of the oil-based revenues have been spent.9 
In  1994,  the  economists  Bye,  Cappelen,  Eika,  Gjelsvik  and  Øystein  Olsen  of  Statistics 
Norway estimated that government petroleum revenue spending came to about 10 per cent 
of  overall  public  expenditure  at  that  time.  Tax  income  from  the  petroleum  sector  and 
petroleum sales revenue – current petroleum revenues – were spent over the government 
budget.  The  economists  at  Statistics  Norway  expressed  concern  regarding  Norway’s  oil 
dependence.10 
These  economists  can  now  rest  assured  knowing  that  around  10  per  cent  of  public 
expenditure is still financed by oil money, but with one important difference from 1994: The 
source of these revenues is now the return earned on the oil fund – not current petroleum 
revenues.  We  have  thus  succeeded  in  replacing  oil  revenues  with  a  permanent  flow  of 
income. We can draw on a perpetual source rather than from a well that is being depleted. 
                                                 
7 
In  1977  the  Canadian  economist  John  Hartwick  described  the  principles  for  the  management  of  a  natural 
resource in order to produce permanent income. See John M. Hartwick (1977): “Intergenerational Equity and 
the  Investment  of  Rents  from  Exhaustible  Resources”,  American  Economic  Review,  67,  December,  
pp. 972–974. 
8  NOU  (Official  Norwegian  Report)  1983:27  “Petroleumsvirksomhetens  framtid”  [The  future  of  petroleum 
activity], p. 90. 
9  See  Ministry  of  Finance  calculations  (Norwegian  only):  http://www.regjeringen.no/nb/dep/fin/tema/norsk_ 
okonomi/bruk-av-oljepenger-/hvor-mye-oljepenger-har-vi-brukt-sa-lang.html?id=450461 
10  Torstein Bye, Ådne Cappelen, Torbjørn Eika, Eystein Gjelsvik and Øystein Olsen (1994): “Noen konsekvenser 
av  petroleumsvirksomheten  for  norsk  økonomi”  [Some  of  the  consequences  of  petroleum  activity  for  the 
Norwegian economy], Statistics Norway Rapporter 94/1, p.36 (Norwegian only). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
It may be that the oil fund has exceeded a critical value so that the ambition of a perpetual 
fund will be achieved. But history remains to be written. The story of John Collett might also 
have been written with a different pen when his wealth was at its peak. 
Within a few years, as much as 15–20 per cent of the welfare state could be financed by the 
return on the oil fund. But if we squander the capital in the fund, we will either have to match 
the shortfall with tax increases or make substantial cuts in government welfare. The gains – 
not only the costs – of building up an oil fund have thus been made visible. This also attracts 
its defenders. 
Large  fortunes  nevertheless  give  rise  to  concerns.  As  a  minimum  requirement,  the 
management  of  oil  wealth  must  not  impair  the  productivity  of  labour  and  real  capital.  This 
may seem to be a modest goal, but is not a trivial one. 
People of my generation may remember the German Gunter Sachs, one of the heirs to the 
Opel  fortune.  He  was  known  for  saying  that  he  had  not  worked  a  day  in  his  life.11  Sachs 
could  live  off  his  fortune  and  his  spending  was  not  confined  to  only  useful  things.  For 
example, he lavished thousands of red roses on Brigitte Bardot, strewn over her home from a 
helicopter. There is no shortage of examples of individuals who have spent large portions of 
their wealth on an opulent lifestyle. But nations do not have the possibility of living off wealth 
alone. A nation thrives on each other’s labour, as Finance Minister Erik Brofoss stated in his 
address on the state of economy to the Storting (Norwegian parliament). 
The  economists  Jeffrey  Sachs  and  Andrew  Warner12  have  shown  that  countries  with 
abundant  natural  resources  have  generally  experienced  weaker  growth  than  otherwise 
comparable  countries.  Perhaps  this  is  not  so  strange.  Sudden  wealth  in  one  sector  of  the 
economy also results in higher wages and cost levels in other sectors. Such visible wealth 
can also weaken and crowd out internationally exposed business. Economists refer to this 
phenomenon  as  the  “Dutch  disease”  after  the  Netherlands  pursued  an  expansionary 
economic policy based on huge revenues from gas sales in the 1960s. When gas production 
declined, a period of harsh economic restructuring followed. The sheltered sector had to be 
reduced  and  the  internationally  exposed  sector  increased.  There  were  too  few  left  in  the 
business sector to bear the welfare state. 
The  resource  curse  also  increases  rent-seeking  at  the  expense  of  value  creation,  as  the 
economist  Trygve  Haavelmo  noted.  Many  countries  that  have  experienced  a  windfall  of 
wealth have been victims of this curse. 
The  state  of  Alaska  has  chosen  its  own  institutional  solution  to  avoid  rent-seeking  among 
special-interest groups. Once the real value of Alaska’s oil fund, the Alaska Permanent Fund, 
is secured, dividends are distributed to the owners. Each resident receives an annual cheque 
that  can  be  spent  as  desired13,  providing  a  strong  incentive  to  protect  the  capital  in  the 
fund.14 
The choice of building up a sovereign wealth fund must also be seen in connection with the 
state’s substantial pension obligations under Norway’s National Insurance Scheme. For the 
Norwegian  state  it  would  not  have  made  sense  to  choose  a  solution  like  the  Alaska  fund 
without also addressing the issue of pension obligations. 
                                                 
11  See  for  example  the  obituary  “Gunter  Sachs”,  in  The  Telegraph,  9  May  2011:  http://www.telegraph.co.uk/ 
news/obituaries/8503379/Gunter-Sachs.html 
12  Jeffrey  Sachs  and  Andrew  Warner  (1995):  “Natural  Resource  Abundance  and  Economic  Growth”,  NBER 
Working Paper 5398. 
13  See for example the Alaska Permanent Fund website: http://www.apfc.org/home/Content/dividend/dividend.cfm 
14  This would be comparable to using the return on the fund as tax relief. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
So far our system has worked well, but the success of the system depends on broad-based 
support for government spending programmes and the framework for saving oil revenues – 
the cap. 
If  the  system  fails  and  our  wealth  is  spent  on  welfare  schemes  to  the  detriment  of  future 
labour income, our petroleum wealth may quickly become a bane. For example, if we were to 
slack off – intoxicated by the vast new oil fields Avaldsnes and Aldous Major in the North Sea – 
and reduce our work effort by extending our lunch break by five minutes every day, the sum 
of  our  future  labour  income  will  be  reduced  by  as  much  as  the  value  of  our  latest  oil 
discovery. 
Investments in Norway 
How should oil revenues be saved? 
An  apt  comparison  is  a  family  that  wins  a  million  kroner  in  the  lottery.  The  family  has  to 
decide how to manage the newly found wealth. 
• 
• 
• 
• 
One option is of course to give it away or share the wealth. 
The family must then decide how much to spend and how much to save. 
The money can be spent on a long holiday or purchases for the home. 
If the family instead chooses to save the money, it will be faced with new choices.  
– 
– 
– 
Should the money be invested in a family-owned business? 
In a neighbour’s business? 
Or should it be deposited in a bank or lent through another channel? 
Even before discovering oil, the state had long been a substantial direct owner of Norwegian 
companies.  The  value  of  state  investment  in  Norwegian  companies  is  more  than 
NOK 600 billion.15 The state owns more shares in Norway than in the US where the oil fund 
has its largest investments.16 
But  will  substantial  investment  in  one’s  own  business  –  or  one’s  own  nation  –  guarantee 
growth and prosperity? 
Many  OPEC  countries  received  enormous  income  after  the  oil  price  shocks  in  the  1970s. 
They later not only experienced low growth, but negative growth.17 Professor Ragnar Torvik 
writes that one of the main reasons behind the decline was that such a large portion of the 
additional income was invested domestically. Politicians invested in projects that may have 
brought political gains – but resulted in economic loss.18 
We can also draw on Norway’s historical experience. In the post-war period, the Norwegian 
economy was to be reconstructed through a large-scale investment programme. 
                                                 
15  Report no. 13 to the Storting (2010–2011) Aktivt eierskap – norsk statlig eierskap i en global økonomi [Active 
ownership – Norwegian state ownership in a global economy], Ministry of Trade and Industry (in Norwegian 
only):  http://www.regjeringen.no/pages/16193771/PDFS/STM201020110013000DDDPDFS.pdf)  and 
the 
annual reports of the Government Pension Fund Norway and the Government Pension Fund Global. 
16  For fund holdings, see the NBIM website: http://www.nbim.no/en/Investments/holdings-/ 
17  National  income  in  OPEC  countries  decreased  on  average  by  1.3  per  cent  annually  in  the  period  between 
1965 and 1998 while OPEC oil production increased. 
18  See  “Globalisering,  olje  og  pensjonsfondet”  [Globalisation,  oil  and  the  pension  fund]  by  Ragnar  Torvik, 
available  on  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  Affairs  website  (Norwegian  only):  http://www.regjeringen.no/nb/dep/ 
ud/kampanjer/refleks/innspill/oekonomi.html?id=491448 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
Over several decades, the investment share of GDP19 was close to 30 per cent, markedly 
higher20 than in other western economies. But the Norwegian economy still expanded at a 
slower  pace  than  nearby  countries.  A  more  efficient  use  of  capital  could  have  boosted 
consumption without negatively affecting economic growth. 
The high investment level entailed human costs in that consumption of important goods were 
rationed.  A  visible  cost  was  limited  imports  of  fruit.  As  I  recall,  the  selection  of  fruit  and 
vegetables at that time would have made the recommended “5 a day” serving of fruit and 
vegetables far more difficult to follow than today. 
In  recent  years,  15–20  per  cent  of  GDP  has  been  invested  in  the  mainland  economy,  or 
about  the  same  percentage  as  our  neighbouring  countries.  But  we  are  always  faced  with 
demands for more investment, which is perhaps not that surprising. All of us have probably 
been stuck in a traffic jam and felt irritation over poor road conditions. It is easy to agree that 
investment  in  knowledge  is  sensible  and  of  benefit  for  the  future.  But  funding  these 
investments  by  lifting  the  cap  on  petroleum  revenue  spending  is  a  certain  recipe  for  lean 
times.  Many  of  us  have  perhaps  driven  along  lightly  trafficked  roads  of  a  strikingly  high 
standard.  Norway  is  already  among  the  countries  that  invests  most  in  education,  without 
achieving  particularly  impressive  results.21  Norwegian  companies  that  want  to  invest  in 
profitable  projects  have  access  to  a  well  functioning  capital  market,  both  at  home  and 
abroad. 
An  absolute  precondition  for  ensuring  the  sound  management  of  our  oil  wealth  is  that 
investments in areas such as roads, education, cultural centres, hospitals and sports centres 
are prioritised within the NOK 1 trillion allocated through the central government budget each 
year.22  
In order to maximise the return on the substantial financial wealth owned by the government 
today, the oil fund must be invested abroad. But this gives rise to new trade-offs between 
risk, return and ethical considerations. 
Moderate risk 
First, let me look at the trade-off between risk and return. How should we invest our wealth 
without taking on excessive risk? When the oil fund is invested in other countries that are not 
as commodity-dependent as Norway, our overall national wealth will become more robust to 
oil price fluctuations. 
Diversifying wealth does not of course insulate us from upturns and downturns. In autumn 
2008, stock markets plummeted worldwide. There was nowhere to hide and the value of the 
fund fell by close to 25 per cent. But the oil remaining under the North Sea lost even more of 
its value when oil prices fell from USD 150 to USD 40 in the course of a half year. 
On the other hand, oil prices may show a more favourable tendency than equity prices. The 
slide in equity prices over the past quarter has not been accompanied by weaker oil prices. 
Norges Bank has been delegated the responsibility for managing the Government Pension 
Fund Global and hence has an independent responsibility for limiting and managing risk. We 
                                                 
19  See  national  accounts  data  from  Statistics  Norway:  http://www.ssb.no/histstat/aarbok/ht-0901-355.html  and 
historical  data  on  the  Norges  Bank  website  http://www.norges-bank.no/en/price-stability/historical-monetary-
statistics/ 
20  See, for example, World Bank data on www.databank.worldbank.org 
21  For the results of the Pisa survey, see: http://www.pisa.no/english/index.html 
22  http://www.statsbudsjettet.no/Statsbudsjettet-2012/English/ 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
have  therefore  reduced  the  fund’s  holdings  of  southern  European  government  bonds  in 
recent months. We have also reduced counterparty exposures to European banks. 
Maximising returns 
As a long-term investor, Norges Bank seeks not only to minimise the risk of losing wealth, 
but to maximise the return on the fund’s capital within the risk limits set by the fund’s owner. 
But how can we manage our wealth to promote capital growth? 
Many have probably wondered as does the poet Jan Erik Vold when he writes: 
“You put  
as the advert says 
20 000 kroner into a high-interest savings account 
in one of our largest banks. After six years 
you can go back to the bank and take out 
35 532 kroner. The question is: From whom have they taken 
15 532 Norwegian kroner?”23  
Vold has called this: 
“Capitalism’s fundamental mystique – how a krone, by lying idle for a period of time, gives 
birth to a 10-øre coin”. 
The poem is of course a few years old – both 10-øre coins and an interest rate of 10 per cent 
(the rate in the poem) belong to the past. 
A krone that yields a return does not lie idle, however. It represents resources used to build 
production capacity. The 10 øre is value added generated when capital is put to work. 
When  our  oil  revenues  are  invested  as  financial  assets  abroad,  we  are  buying  a  share  of 
future global value added, which can subsequently be brought home  and put to  good use 
here. 
As an investor, the oil fund in principle faces two alternatives: Should the fund be an owner 
by  investing  in  equities,  or  provide  loans  to  companies  and  governments  by  investing  in 
bonds? The return in both cases essentially depends on developments in global trade and 
industry,  on  the  world’s  economic  future.  Even  our  loans  to  governments  depend  on  the 
success or failure of businesses since governments rely on tax revenues. 
When we provide loans – by buying bonds – the  borrower is obliged to pay us interest at 
fixed intervals and repay the principal at maturity. If the payment obligations are met by the 
borrower, the amount borrowed is recovered. In the event of a bankruptcy, bondholders are 
given higher priority than shareholders. 
Holding shares therefore carries higher risk. Shareholders are last in line when a company’s 
earnings  are  distributed.  On  the  other  hand,  if  the  company  thrives,  potential  gains  are 
unlimited. This is why equity prices fluctuate relatively widely. We reduce the risk associated 
with  equity  exposures  by  spreading  our  ownership.  We  own  equities  in  more  than  8000 
companies. 
                                                 
23  The poem “Kapitalismens grunnleggende mystikk” [Capitalism’s fundamental mystique] is from Jan Erik Vold 
(1989): Elg, Gyldendal Norsk Forlag. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
To compensate for the higher risk, shareholders demand a higher expected rate of return. 
Over  the  past  110  years,  returns  have  been  on  average  4  percentage  points higher  for 
shareholders than for bondholders every year.24  
If  returns  on  equities  are  higher  than  on  bonds,  perhaps  as  much  of  the  fund  as  possible 
should  be  invested  in  equities.25  Bond  prices  tend  to  fluctuate  less  than  equity  prices  and 
tend  to  rise  when  equity  prices  fall.  A  good  mix  of  equities  and  bonds  can  improve  the 
relationship between risk and return. 
The  Ministry  of  Finance  has  assessed  the  trade-off  between  risk  and  return  and  decided, 
with  the  approval  of  the  Storting,  that  60  per  cent  of  the  oil  fund  should  be  allocated  to 
equities. The choice of equity allocation determines to a large extent the fund’s return and 
risk,  and  is  therefore  one  of  the  most  important  decisions  concerning  fund  management. 
Almost 40 per cent is invested in bonds, including government and corporate bonds, and a 
small portion is invested in real estate.26  
Government bonds in particular were long regarded as safe investments. This was also the 
thinking  behind  Statens  Reservefond  (Government  Reserve  Fund),  established  in  1904  to 
provide  for  investment  in  “first-class”  foreign  securities,  primarily  French,  German  and  UK 
government bonds. High inflation in the wake of World War I reduced the real value of the 
fund by half, and the fund was discontinued in 1925.27 Some would argue that investment in 
government bonds provides “risk-free returns”. In the context of current developments in the 
euro area, it might be more accurate to refer to this form of investment as “return-free risk”, to 
quote Yngve Slyngstad, the CEO of Norges Bank Investment Management. 
A third form of investment is the oil fund’s direct purchases of real estate, so far in London 
and Paris. We buy large stakes – usually between 25 and 75 per cent – in large real estate 
projects.28 As a long-term investor, we hope to reap returns in this market as well. 
A large investor with a long-term perspective 
When we buy interests in a company both ethical and economic considerations come into 
play. There are companies in which we do not invest. Companies that produce weapons in 
violation  of  fundamental  humanitarian  principles  and  companies  that  produce  tobacco  are 
excluded.  Corruption  or  contributing  to  severe  environmental  damage  may  also  lead  to 
exclusion. About 50 companies are excluded.29 There is often the dilemma of  whether we 
should withdraw entirely from a company or enter into dialogue. If we withdraw, we lose a 
channel of influence. 
                                                 
24  See  Credit  Suisse  Global 
_customtags/download_tracker.cfm?dom=infocus.credit-suisse.com&doc=/data/_product_documents/_shop/ 
300847/credit_suisse_global_investment_yearbook_2011.pdf&ts=20110326172226 
Investment  Returns  Yearbook  2011:  https://infocus.credit-suisse.com/app/ 
25  Private investors, with shorter investment horizons, should have lower allocations to equities. 
26  For  more  about  the  Government  Pension  Fund  Global’s  investment  strategy,  see  the  NBIM  website: 
http://www.nbim.no/en/Investments/ 
27  Aanund  Hylland  (2005):  “Statens  reservefond  1904–25.  Et  forsøk  på  å  binde  politisk  handlefrihet?  [The 
government  reserve  fund  1904-25.  An  attempt  to  bind  the  political  room  for  manoeuvre?]”,  Norges  Bank 
Penger og Kreditt, no. 3, p. 182 (Norwegian only). 
28  For more on the fund’s real estate investments, see the  NBIM  website: http://www.nbim.no/en/Investments/ 
asset-mix/Real-estate/ 
29  The Ministry of Finance decides which companies to exclude. For more on exclusion from the Government 
Pension  Fund  Global,  see  website:  http://www.regjeringen.no/en/dep/fin/Selected-topics/the-government-
pension-fund/responsible-investments/negative-screening-and-exclusion.html?id=447009 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
We  now  own  shares  in  more  than  8  000  companies  worldwide.  As  shareholders,  we  are 
entitled to vote when important decisions are made about companies in which we have an 
ownership stake. Should we actively seek to influence developments or should we remain 
passive observers? Many large funds choose the latter. It requires time and effort to consider 
the issues to be addressed at company AGMs, and not least: We may be confronted with 
uncomfortable questions. 
The fund now owns around 1 per cent of the world’s listed companies. This is both a lot and 
a little. For less than 0.1 per cent of the global population to own 1 per cent of global equities 
is a lot. But 1 per cent may seem too little to exert ownership influence. 
Nonetheless, we have chosen to exercise our voting rights. In many companies, ownership is 
spread across many shareholders, in which case even a 1 per cent interest is a large stake. 
The fund also has larger holdings – up to 10 per cent – in a number of companies, which 
gives us the opportunity to steer companies in what we consider to be the right direction. 
Voting is governed by a few main principles.30 As a minority shareholder, equal treatment of 
shareholders and board accountability are two key elements of our long-term management. 
In  addition,  as  the  fund  is  invested  in  a  wide  range  of  companies  with  a  long  investment 
horizon,  our  concerns  must  go  beyond  the  purely  business-related.  A  manufacturing 
enterprise that emits pollutants and harms neighbouring enterprises may not be of concern to 
the  enterprise  itself.  But  it  is  of  concern  to  us  because  we  own  shares  in  the  enterprises 
affected  by  the  pollution.  Water  management  and  climate  change  are  two  of  our  strategic 
focus areas. 
In  addition  to  voting,  we  engage  in  dialogue  with  management  teams  in  a  number  of 
companies.  We  must  remember  that  when  we  point  a  finger  at  a  company,  we  are  also 
pointing a finger at the laws, regulations and practices of the countries where the company 
legally operates. We make demands, yet we are at the same time a guest in our neighbour’s 
house. 
Excessive  activism  in  other  countries  may  defeat  its  own  purpose.  Scepticism  towards 
foreign  investors,  and  in  particular  towards  large  sovereign  funds,  is  not  an  unfamiliar 
phenomenon.  We  could  risk  being  perceived  as  a  political  fund  rather  than  a  financial 
investor. We have therefore chosen ethical guidelines and corporate governance principles 
that are based on OECD and UN principles.31  
Our  experience  is  that  the  fund  is  perceived  as  a  welcome  financial  investor  –  not  as  a 
political  player.  Former  South  African  central  bank  governor  Tito  Mboweni  told  me  he 
preferred investments by the oil fund to development assistance. “Assistance means you feel 
sorry for us,” he said to me, “investment means you believe in us.” 
32  
Conclusion 
The  larger  the  visible  wealth  is,  the  greater  becomes  the  risk  that  sound  management 
principles  are  relegated  to  the  background.  Both  John  Collett  and  Gunter  Sachs  had 
considerable  wealth,  and  spent  it  generously  all  their  lives.  At  the  same  time,  both  were 
interested  in  developing  more  permanent  values  through  research.  Sachs  established  an 
                                                 
30  For  more  on  ownership  strategies,  see  the  NBIM  website:  http://www.nbim.no/en/Investments/ownership-
strategies/ 
31  For more about the UN guidelines, see “Global Compact”: http://www.unglobalcompact.org/. For more on the 
OECD guidelines, see: http://www.oecd.org/topic/0,3699,en_2649_37439_1_1_1_1_37439,00.html 
32  South Africa received NOK 149.5 million in development assistance from Norway in 2010. See Norad website 
http://www.norad.no/en/tools-and-publications/norwegian-aid-statistics 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
institute  where  advanced  mathematical  methods  were  applied  to  study  the  relationship 
between the position of the stars and the fates of human beings.33 Collett was more down-to-
earth. He studied new methods of crop cultivation and was a keen supporter of the cultivation 
of  potatoes  here  in  South-Eastern  Norway.34  As  a  contributor  to  sustainable  growth,  we 
would have to say that Collett was closer to the mark than Sachs. 
Norway’s proximity to valuable natural resources has created substantial opportunities. New 
technology and new oil finds are still increasing the value of our oil wealth. 
Two North Sea fields where oil and gas were recently discovered, Galtvort (Hogwarts) and 
Gygrid (Hagrid), have been given names from the Norwegian version of Harry Potter. One of 
the books features the lucky potion Felix Felicis. This magical potion is difficult to make. The 
consequences  can  be  catastrophic  if  the  ingredients  are  mixed  incorrectly.  But  if  mixed 
correctly, the drinker will succeed in all that he undertakes. The potion also has some highly 
detrimental  side-effects.  If  taken  in  excess,  it  may  cause  giddiness,  recklessness  and 
dangerous overconfidence.35  
The economic policy choices made by the authorities and Norges Bank as manager of the 
Government  Pension  Fund  Global  must  have  legitimacy  and  credibility.  Without  long-term 
thinking, the management of our wealth will not be a success story. So far, it would seem 
that we have managed to mix and drink an adequate dose of Felix Felicis, but we must not 
let down our guard. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
                                                 
33  See  for  example  the  obituary  “Gunter  Sachs”,  in  The  Telegraph,  9  May  2011:  http://www.telegraph.co.uk/ 
news/obituaries/8503379/Gunter-Sachs.html 
34  Sigurd Høst (1936): Norges historie: med viktigere avsnitt av Danmarks og Sveriges historie. For middelskoler 
og ungdomsskole [History of Norway], in Norwegian only, Gyldendal Norsk Forlag, Oslo. 
35  J. K. Rowling (2006): Harry Potter and the half-blood prince, London : Bloomsbury. 
10 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
