Njuguna Ndung’u: Financial stability and financial inclusion 
Keynote address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the 
5th  Joint  CMA/CBK/RBA/IRA  Board  Members  retreat  on  collaboration  among  domestic 
financial sector regulators, Mombasa, 13 October 2011. 
 Chairpersons here present;  
Board Members of Financial Sector Regulators here present;  
Chief Executive Officers;  
Colleagues;  
Ladies and Gentlemen:  
I am honoured by the invitation to address this gathering on financial inclusion and financial 
stability,  an  increasingly  topical  issue.  At  the  outset,  I  would  like  to  thank  the  Retirement 
Benefits  Authority  for  hosting  this  5th  Joint  Retreat  for  the  Board  Members  of  Domestic 
Financial Sector Regulators.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: At a time like this, a pertinent question begs an answer: what does 
financial stability entail? While the concept cannot be easily captured in a single word, a few 
attributes need to be demonstrated for a given system to be described as financially stable. 
These  include:  public confidence  and  trust  in  the  institutional  framework  –  owing  to  sound 
design  of  the  infrastructure;  predictability;  efficiency;  sound  ethical  behavior  by  market 
participants and competence of financial authorities, among others. To paraphrase, financial 
stability may be said to be present in an economy when the financial system functions as it is 
supposed to.  
Financial  stability  in  a  given  jurisdiction  serves  to  instill  confidence  in  users  of  financial 
services. It encourages and facilitates productive economic activities and thereby contributes 
to  a  society’s  overall  well-being  and  progress.  The  role  of  regulators,  in  this  regard,  has 
historically  been  to  oversee  financial  stability  using  traditional  performance  indicators  as  a 
guide. These indicators include conventional performance measures such as the quality of 
assets in institutions, earnings and performance, liquidity and capitalization.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  In  our  country’s  history,  the  Kenyan  financial  sector  has  on  a 
number of occasions undergone severe tests of its stability, involving failure of systemically 
important financial institutions, that have dented market confidence in our financial system. 
As regulators, we have a fiduciary role to maintain public confidence in the financial sector by 
addressing all factors that would undermine the sector’s long-term stability, without which it 
would  lose  its  long-term  relevance  as  a  medium  of  economic  interaction  and  payments 
system.  Maintaining  public  confidence  entails  ensuring  that  the  sector  keeps  up  with  all 
pertinent global developments to ensure it remains relevant to the needs of the public from 
which it derives its mandate.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Alongside  financial  stability  comes  another  topical  issue  in 
development  debates  across  the  globe,  financial  inclusion.  For  the  financial  system  to  be 
relevant  to  society,  it  needs  to  ensure  that  as  much  of  the  eligible  target  population  has 
opportunity  to  access  a  variety  of  financial  services  ranging  from  credit,  savings  and 
payments,  transfers,  pensions,  capital  markets  and  insurance  services.  Inclusion  is  an 
essential  pre-condition  to  enhancing  wealth  creation  and  poverty  reduction  and  ultimately 
broad  based  economic  development.  The  Consultative  Group  to  Assist  the  Poor  (CGAP) 
defines  financial  inclusion  as  a  “state  in  which  all  people  who  can  are  able  to  have 
access to a full suite of quality financial services, provided at affordable prices, in a 
convenient  manner,  and  with  dignity  for  the  clients”.  These  financial  services  are 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
delivered by a range of providers, most of them private, and reach everyone who can use 
them, including disabled, poor, rural, and other excluded populations.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  Why  should  we,  as  regulators,  be  concerned  about  the  levels  of 
financial  inclusion  in  our  respective  jurisdictions?  Individuals  and  households  lacking 
adequate  access  to  a  full  range  of  responsibly  delivered,  affordably  priced,  convenient, 
formal financial services would be severely constrained in participating fully in the economy. 
As an entity, the financial sector would also face bleak prospects in terms of expansion and 
longevity, which holds back overall economic  development. But more  importantly,  financial 
inclusion is supported by financial stability.  
In Kenya, the proportion of the population totally excluded from formal financial services, as 
revealed by the Finaccess 2006 and 2009 surveys, stood at 38.3% and 32.7% respectively. 
The proportionate reduction between the years is largely attributable to the advent of mobile-
based  financial  services  which  have  indeed  revolutionized  the  provision  of  formal  financial 
services and availed these to the market affordably and conveniently. For us to bring costs of 
financial services down, we need full inclusion.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: Given the statistics above, as financial sector regulators, we share 
common  aspirations  of  making  the  financial  sector  more  stable,  efficient  and  accessible. 
Though  these  objectives  may  at  times  appear  competing,  they  are  for  the  most  part 
complementary.  Stability  is  a  pre-requisite  for  efficiency,  while  both  are  in  turn  required  to 
raise  inclusion.  In  cognizance  of  this,  the  Central  Bank,  jointly  with  other  players,  has 
undertaken several initiatives and reforms aimed at boosting overall inclusion. These include:  
Licensing of Deposit Taking Microfinance Institutions (DTMs), focusing on the 
 
lower  end  of  the  market  concentrated  in  rural  and  peri-urban  areas.  The  licensed 
DTMs had 57 branches, 1.5 million deposit accounts valued at Ksh.9 billion (USD90 
million)  and  0.53  million  loan  accounts  with  an  outstanding  loan  portfolio  of 
Ksh.15 billion (USD150,000) as at the end of August 2011.  
Rolling out Agency Banking, with over 8,000 agents being contracted by 7 banks 
countrywide and more than Ksh.17 billion worth of transactions conducted through 
agents as at the end of August 2011 since roll-out in July 2010.  
Implementation of Credit Information Sharing, with more than 900,000 reports on 
customers  on  credit  applicants  being  requested  by  banks  as  at  31st  August  2011 
since roll out just a year ago.  
Introduction  of  Sharia  Compliant  Banking,  with  two  institutions  so  far  offering 
exclusive Sharia products, with a growing market footprint.  
Mobile-Based  Financial  Services,  utilizing  technological  platforms  to  enable  the 
provision  of  innovative  financial  services.  In  just  over  5  years,  over  15  million 
Kenyans  have  been  integrated  into  the  financial  system  through  this  innovative 
channel.  
Financial  Education  Initiatives  under  the  Financial  Education  and  Consumer 
Protection  Partnership  (FEPP),  which  has  commissioned  four  pilot  financial 
education  projects  through  Equity  Bank,  Faulu  Kenya,  Plan  International  and 
Mediae. These pilot projects aim to establish the feasibility of different approaches 
to  financial  education  in  Kenya  in  order  to  inform  the  development  of  a  national 
strategy for financial education.  
     Owing  to  the  above,  there  have  been  notable  improvements  in  financial  access  especially 
among the lower population segments, including the growth of bank deposit accounts from 
2.5 million to close to 14 million to date.  
Ladies and Gentlemen: Beyond the local scene, the Central Bank has also been active in 
international forums with a view to learning from others’ experiences. The Bank has been an 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
active member of the Alliance for Financial Inclusion (AFI), a global member-based network 
which  provides  an  international  platform  for  policymakers  in  developing  countries  to  learn 
and  share  knowledge  towards  enhancing  access  to  basic  financial  services  for  their  un-
banked and under-banked populace. AFI has a membership from 81 developing countries in 
Africa, Asia and Latin America.  
Through  its  membership  of  AFI,  CBK  was  appointed  as  a  non-G20  member  of  the  Global 
Partnership  for  Financial  Inclusion  (GPFI)  in  December  2010.  GPFI  is  a  G20  initiative  to 
propel  financial  inclusion  through  peer  learning,  knowledge  sharing,  policy  advocacy  and 
coordination.  Now  that  AFI  is  opening  its  membership  to  associate  members,  I  take  this 
opportunity to urge fellow financial sector regulators to consider joining this worthwhile forum, 
in order to facilitate joint contributions towards greater inclusion in our local sector.  
In the same vein, I am pleased to note that both the CBK and CMA were recently invited, and 
accepted  to  join  the  Regional  Consultative  Group  for  Sub-Saharan  Africa  of  the  Financial 
Stability  Board  (FSB).  FSB  is  a  global  association  established  to  coordinate  at  the 
international level the work of national financial authorities and international standard setting 
bodies and to develop and promote the implementation of effective regulatory, supervisory 
and other financial sector policies in the interests of financial stability. The Association brings 
together  national  authorities  responsible 
in  24  countries  and 
jurisdictions, including regulators and supervisors.  
Membership in the consultative forum will provide both the CBK and CMA with an opportunity 
to  contribute  in  key  decision  making  and  policy  formulation  from  a  regional  and  global 
perspective  for  the  benefit  of  our  entire  financial  sector.  It  will  also  create  an  avenue  to 
contribute in shaping the development and implementation of financial sector policies aimed 
at realizing financial stability. I am sure that both the CBK and CMA will carry the voices of 
the other domestic financial sector regulators.  
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  continuous  evolution  of  the  financial  sector  towards  greater 
sophistication and value provision requires the regulators to move ahead in surveillance and 
vigilance to maintain the requisite stability and efficiency. For regulators to remain effective in 
their  mandate,  they  need  to  remain  in  step  with  the  financial  services  industry  and  its 
operating  environment.  For  this  reason,  continuous  capacity  building  is  necessary,  as  is 
sustained cooperation between the different regulators to ensure coordinated efforts towards 
financial stability and financial inclusion.  
Thank you for your attention. 
financial  stability 
for 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
