Manuel Sánchez: The strengths and challenges of Mexico’s financial 
system 
Remarks  by  Mr  Manuel  Sánchez,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mexico,  at  the  Mexico 
Financial Day 2011, CEO Roundtable, New York, 8 November 2011. 
 It  is  a  great  pleasure  to  be  in  New York  to  speak  at  the  Mexico  Financial  Day  2011  CEO 
Roundtable. I would like to thank the organizers of this conference for their kind invitation to 
be with you today.  
As business leaders and investors, you are aware of the sharp asset price corrections and 
volatility  that  have  characterized  international  financial  markets  during recent  months.  Two 
central  concerns  fueling  the  observed  higher  risk  aversion  seem  to  be  the  possibility  of  a 
catastrophic  event  in  the  European  Monetary  Union  (EMU)  and  the  fear  of  a  global 
recession.  
To  a  large  extent,  these  worries  reveal  underlying  problems  stemming  from  the  global 
financial crisis that began in 2007. The sequel to the crisis includes a protracted stagnation of 
the housing and credit markets in the United States, the failure and weakening of important 
financial  institutions,  and  significant  fiscal  burdens  in  many  countries.  Also,  sovereign  and 
financial  risks  feed  on  each  other  in  some  nations  in  the  euro  zone,  threatening  to  affect 
financial participants in other parts of the world. 
It  is  fortunate  that,  this  time,  many  emerging  market  economies  do  not  exhibit  notable 
intrinsic financial or fiscal fragilities. In particular, I would like to argue that the soundness of 
Mexico’s financial system, along with its healthy fiscal position and low inflation, constitutes a 
fundamental  strength  of  the  economy,  especially  in  the  current  adverse  environment. 
However, in order to make a greater contribution to long-term economic growth, this system 
needs to develop further. Finally, Mexico’s economic outlook is one of moderate growth with 
the main risks related to the evolution of the world economy. As always, my comments are 
entirely my own responsibility and do not necessarily reflect the views of the Bank of Mexico. 
The strength of the financial system 
To  function  properly,  any  economy  requires  an  efficient  financial  system  with  a  fully 
operational  infrastructure,  developed  markets,  and  competitive  intermediaries.  Because  of 
their  large  role  within  the  Mexican  economy  and  notwithstanding  the  importance  of  other 
intermediaries,  today  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  commercial  banks.  As  you  know,  the 
mission  of  these  institutions  is  to  attract  savings,  channel  those  resources  to  the  most 
productive  uses,  and  contribute  to  the  supply  of  efficient  payment  systems.  Their 
intermediation  role  is  based  on  trust,  which,  in  turn,  requires  that  they  manage  risk 
adequately and hold sufficient levels of capital, provisions, and liquidity to absorb potential 
losses and respond to changes in the composition and duration of depositors’ desired asset 
portfolios.  
Mexico’s banking system has performed these activities satisfactorily in recent years, and it 
fared notably well during the global financial crisis. In particular, the economic downturn of 
2009  resulted  in  a  contraction  of  lending,  some  deterioration  of  the  quality  of  the  loan 
portfolio,  and  additional  provisioning  needs.  Yet  past-due  loan  ratios  stayed  relatively  low, 
perhaps  with  the  exception  of  that  of  consumer  loans.  More  importantly,  banks  remained 
profitable and well capitalized during the crisis and at all times exhibited adequate levels of 
liquidly and ample access to funding sources, which, by and large, are based on fairly stable 
retail deposits.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
As  economic  recovery  has  taken  hold,  lending  activity  has  resumed  and  the  quality  of  the 
loan  portfolio  has  improved.  Bank  solvency  indicators  remain  strong,  as  reflected  by 
capitalization  levels,  the  significant  proportion  of  Tier-1  capital  within  net  capital,  and  high 
ratios of loan-loss reserves to past-due loans.1 
The  strong  position  of  the  banking  system  has  been  the  result  of  improvements  to  the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  framework,  including  stricter  capital  requirements  and  rules  for 
provisioning  of  reserves  based  on  expected  rather  than  realized  losses.  It  is  also  a 
consequence  of  lessons  derived  from  experience.  In  particular,  the  financial  crisis  of  1995 
dramatically revealed the need for banks to maintain appropriate levels of high-quality capital 
potentially able to absorb losses on an ongoing basis. It also taught the importance of well-
developed  and  liquid  financial  markets  in  which  economic  agents  can  hedge  and  diversify 
their risks.  
The  reforms  put  in  place  during  the  last  few  years  have  helped  Mexico  fortify  its  financial 
system, revamp its supervisory practices, and develop its financial markets. The attainment 
of  low  inflation  has  allowed  the  emergence  of  long-term  contracts,  which  include  longer 
tenors for public and private debt in pesos at fixed nominal interest rates.  
Hence,  in  marked  contrast  to  the  widespread  practice  in  Mexico  prior  to  1995  and  in  the 
United  States  before  2008,  mortgage  products  are  mostly  based  on  fixed  nominal  interest 
rates  and  do  not  allow  for  negative  amortization.  In  addition,  since  banks  enjoy  highly 
profitable  domestic  opportunities  in  traditional  lending,  they  were  not  attracted  to  taking 
exposures to the derivative instruments that became the amplifying vehicles of instability in 
the recent great financial crisis.  
The soundness of Mexico’s banking system represents an economic strength in the face of 
external  shocks,  but  not  because  it  could  potentially  shield  the  country  against  external 
financial  volatility.  In  fact,  asset  price  fluctuations,  independently  of  their  origin  and  extent, 
convey  useful  information  to  investors  and  market  participants.  For  the  exchange  rate, 
flexibility helps prevent the build-up of unsustainable balance-of-payments disequilibria which 
in  the  past  were  common  causes  of  currency  and  banking  crises.  In  any  case,  hedge 
products are available for those who are less willing to bear risk.  
The fundamental contribution of a sound banking system, especially in times of crisis, is that 
it does not magnify financial instability. Also, rather than acting as a drag on the economy, 
through  continued  intermediation  and  within  limits,  it  can  buttress  the  pace  of  economic 
expansion. In the case of Mexico, this support has been further reinforced by the continued 
health of public finances and low inflation. 
The negative effects of weak financial systems interacting with unsustainable public debt and 
escalating  inflation  can  hardly  be  exaggerated.2  These  three  elements  were  behind  the 
Mexican  crisis  of  1995.  Also,  the  negative  feedback  loop  between  the  fiscal  problems  of 
some EMU member countries and the risk exposures of significant financial institutions are 
prominent  causes  of  the  current  maladies  in  that  region,  which  are  threatening  to  further 
affect the rest of the world. 
                                                 
1  For  total  commercial  bank  lending  to  the  private  non-financial  sector,  the  past-due  loan  ratio  fell  from 
4.4 percent  at  the  peak  of  the  crisis  to  3.2  percent  in  September  2011.  The  capitalization  ratio  was 
16.2 percent  of  which  87  percent  was  Tier-1  capital  in  August  2011,  the  average  coefficient  of  liquidity 
coverage  has  been  above  100  percent  in  the  course  of  2011,  and  the  reserve  coverage  ratio  of  
non-performing loans was 181.2 percent in August 2011. 
2  This  point  has  been  extensively  documented  by  Reinhart,  C.  M.  and  K.  S.  Rogoff  (2009),  This  Time  is 
Different: Eight Centuries of Financial Folly, Princeton University Press. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Challenges for the financial system 
Beyond  its  key  role  of  contributing  to  economic  stability,  Mexico’s  banking  system  faces 
challenges  in  order  to  more  deeply  contribute  to  long-term  economic  growth.  Perhaps  the 
most crucial task for the system is to increase its scale and scope, as standard indicators of 
penetration, such as bank loans to GDP, are low compared to those of other economies. It is 
well documented that financing and economic growth are positively correlated, and causation 
seems to run from the former to the latter.3 
But  credit  expansion  may  not  necessarily  be  desirable  unless  it  is  done  prudently.  In 
particular,  risk  management  should  not  be  traded  away  for  size,  as  the  impetus  could  be 
short-lived  and  the  banks’  contribution  to  stability  and  growth  could  easily  evaporate  or 
become negative. For example, the ratio of bank loans to GDP in 1994 reached levels more 
than twice as high as the current ones, but poor origination and servicing led to disastrous 
consequences.4 
Also,  the  development  of  the  banking  system  should  be  carried  out  at  the  initiative  of  the 
participating  financial  firms  in  a  highly  competitive  environment.  In  particular,  it  should  not 
depend  on  credit  targets  set  under  the  influence  of  government  authorities.  Such  an 
approach proved to be a contributor to the excessive risk-taking in mortgage lending to the 
crisis in the United States.  
Moreover,  competition  has  its  own  benefits,  including  a  wider  variety  of  financial  products 
and  services  at  lower  prices.  A  larger  scope  of  competitive  activities  can  be  expected  to 
cover broader geographic areas, incorporating underserved communities or remote and low-
income  communities  not  served  at  all.  The  different  types  of  non-bank  banks  and  niche 
financial  intermediaries  that  Mexican  regulation  currently  allows,  such  as  multiple-purpose 
financial 
(sofipos)  play  a 
complementary  role  by  contributing  to  making  basic  financial  services  accessible  to 
previously unbanked regions and families. 
Two additional recent developments promise to be an important means of financial inclusion 
in Mexico. One is the incorporation of retail stores as bank agent premises. Retail stores can 
facilitate  the  population’s  access  to  basic  financial  transactions,  such  as  deposits, 
withdrawals and bill payments. In fact, using them is an efficient way to expand the banks’ 
distribution channels to communities in which it is not profitable to open a branch or even to 
maintain  an  ATM.  Agent  premises  have  already  equated  in  size  the  commercial  banks’ 
branch network. 
A  second  emerging  development  is  mobile  banking  using  cell  phones  to  conduct  basic 
transactions.  Cell  phones  in  Mexico  are  a  common  means  of  communication  for  rich  and 
poor alike and have seen an exponential rate of expansion. As of August 2011, the number 
of mobile phones reached almost five times that of fixed telephone lines in the country.5 
In any case, the future progress of banking activities will have to occur within an efficient and 
well-balanced regulatory and supervisory framework for financial institutions. This is all the 
more  important  given  the  extreme  complications  the  world  economy  is  suffering  from  the 
(sofomes)  and  popular 
institutions 
institutions 
financial 
                                                 
3  See  Levine,  R.  (2005),  “Finance  and  Growth:  Theory  and  Evidence”,  in  P.  Aghion  and  S.  Durlauf  (eds.), 
Handbook  of  Economic  Growth,  edition  1,  volume  1,  chapter  12,  p.p  865–934,  The  Netherlands:  North 
Holland. 
4  Commercial  bank  credit  to  the  non-financial  private  sector  as  a  proportion  of  GDP  was  30.4  percent  in 
December 1994 and 13.9 percent in September 2011. 
5  As  of  August  2011,  the  number  of  commercial  bank  branches  was  11,552,  while  the  number  of  banking 
agents was 12,260; a total of 41 percent of municipalities, accounting for 5.4 percent of the total population, 
still did not have bank branches, ATMs or banking agents; Mexico counted 96.4 million mobile phones and 
19.2 million fixed telephone lines.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
financial excesses that led to the global financial crisis. At the same time, regulation should 
not inhibit the innovation and flexibility necessary for the banking system to accomplish its 
mission.  
As  I  said,  Mexico  has  made  substantial  improvements  on  regulation  and  supervision. 
However, the agenda for financial authorities needs to embrace the further enhancement of 
micro-prudential  standards  for  banks,  such  as  capitalization  and  liquidity  requirements; 
macro-prudential  measures  to  detect  early  systemic  risk  factors  and  counteract  them;  and 
the design of an expedient bank resolution mechanism.6 
Economic outlook 
During  the  third  quarter  of  2011,  the  Mexican  economy  continued  the process  of  recovery 
that  began  two  years  earlier.  In  particular,  during  July  and  August,  the  latest  months  for 
which full production data are available, the General Indicator of Economic Activity (IGAE), a 
monthly GDP proxy, exhibited a year-on-year average rate of growth of 3.8 percent, slightly 
higher than the corresponding figure in the previous quarter.  
Even  though  in  August  the  level  of  the  IGAE  surpassed  that  of  June,  different  economic 
indicators suggest that the rebound is losing steam. For example, the increase in activity in 
July  was  followed  by  a  contraction  in  August.  This  fall  occurred  both  in  the  industrial  and 
service sectors, which account for approximately 95 percent of total output. The lower activity 
was partly compensated for by a significant rise in agricultural production, mainly as a result 
of government support programs for re-sowing land after harvest losses due to bad weather 
in the first quarter of 2011. 
Deceleration was clearer in industrial production, which seems to reflect a quarterly reduction 
of manufacturing exports to the United States, the destination of almost 80 percent of total 
non-oil  exports.  The  contraction  of  shipments 
to  Mexico’s  northern  neighbor  was 
concentrated  in  non-automotive  products,  although  automotive  sales  to  that  market  saw 
growth that was somewhat attenuated.  
Additionally,  domestic  demand  growth  has  apparently  begun  to  slow  down.  Retail  sales 
during July and August suggest that consumption probably increased at a declining rate. On 
the other hand, although gross fixed investment in July continued expanding at a significant 
pace, imports of capital goods during the third quarter fell.  
In all, third-quarter GDP quarterly growth was probably similar to or a little lower than that of 
the  preceding  three  months.  However,  slowing  could  become  more  evident  in  the  coming 
quarters,  should  consensus  forecasts  turn  out  to  be  correct,  at  least  approximately.  For 
example, in the October survey of analysts’ expectations conducted by the Bank of Mexico, 
annual GDP growth is forecast to decline from 3.7 percent in 2011 to 3.2 percent in 2012. 
Relative to what was forecast a year earlier, expected growth is slightly higher for 2011 but 
almost a full percentage point lower for 2012.  
It  is  worth  noting  that,  although  less  than  ideal  from  the  point  of  view  of  social  wellbeing, 
projected  growth  for  2012  is  not  negligible.  In  fact,  it  surpasses  the  expected  growth  of 
advanced economies as well as the somewhat disappointing, average yearly expansion of 
the  Mexican  economy  during  the  last  decade,  even  after  excluding  the  2001  and  2009 
recessions.  
                                                 
6  The  Bank  of  Mexico  has  performed  stress  tests  for  short-term  macroeconomic  shocks  affecting  financial 
variables  and  for  a  long-term  credit  stress  shock.  These  exercises  show  the  banking  system  is  resilient  to 
extreme  disturbances.  For  further  details,  see  Bank  of  Mexico,  Reporte  sobre  el  Sistema  Financiero, 
October, 2011. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Certain currently positive factors, such as the strong upturn in formal employment and bank 
lending  to  the  private  sector,  particularly  to  the  consumer  and  small-  and  medium-sized 
enterprises,  may  be  expected  to  continue  supporting  domestic  demand  in  the  coming 
months. However, since the downward revision in growth prospects for 2012 was mainly a 
reflection  of  substantial  cuts  in  the  forecasts  for  U.S.  industrial  production,  a  deeper-than-
expected  deceleration  in  that  country  would  necessarily  translate  into  further  downward 
adjustments for Mexico’s growth forecasts. 
Finally, monetary policy continued to be oriented toward the 3 percent annual inflation target, 
which the Bank of Mexico established at the end of 2003. As you know, the policy overnight 
interest rate has been maintained at 4.5 percent since August 2009. This stance has proved 
adequate,  as  inflation  has  been  gradually  converging  to  the  central  bank’s  objective.  In 
particular,  during  2011,  inflation  has  remained  substantially  close  to  albeit  above  this 
benchmark, averaging 3.4 percent.  
In the future, the Bank of Mexico will have to continue monitoring the various risks that may 
potentially impede further progress in the consolidation of price stability. This commitment is 
its  main  contribution  to  economic  certainty,  which  is  of  paramount  importance,  especially 
during these times of financial turbulence.  
In  an  inflation-targeting  regime,  what  really  matters  for  the  guidance  of  monetary  policy  is 
future inflation and how this relates to the policy objective.7 In this sense, I believe that the 
main  risk  to  the  consolidation  of  price  stability  is  the  stickiness  that  various  measures  of 
expected inflation have persistently shown. On the basis of some analysts’ surveys, average 
expected inflation for several time horizons, including medium- to long-term, continue to be 
above  the  target.  Also,  the  break-even  inflation  implicit  in  the  bond  market  has  remained 
close to 4 percent.  
The  anchoring  of  these  expectations  around  the  inflation  target  remains  an  important 
challenge  to  monetary  policy.  I  expect  that  this  anchoring  will  be  achieved  through  the 
maintenance of a consistent monetary policy, and that the Mexican economy will continue on 
the convergence path to the inflation target in an environment of economic growth.  
Concluding remarks 
Mexico’s financial system, along with its healthy fiscal position and low inflation, constitutes a 
fundamental  strength  for  the  economy  in  the  face  of  adverse  external  conditions.  This 
strength has been the result of improvements in the regulatory and supervisory framework as 
well  as  in  firms’  management  models.  On  the  other  hand,  the  banking  system  faces 
important  challenges  in  order  to  more  deeply  contribute  to  long-term  economic  growth. 
Perhaps the most important endeavor is for the system to prudently increase its scale and 
scope within a competitive environment.  
Mexico’s  economic  outlook  is  one  of  moderate  growth  at  a  rate  that  surpasses  that  of 
advanced nations but with the main risks coming from those economies. Inflation is likely to 
remain  subdued,  sustaining 
target. 
Nevertheless, the Bank of Mexico will have to continue monitoring the risks that may hinder 
progress toward the consolidation of price stability. 
the  permanent  3  percent 
its  convergence 
to 
                                                 
7  For a seminal exposition of inflation targeting, see Bernanke, B.S., T. Laubach, F. S. Mishkin and A.S. Posen, 
(1999),  Inflation  targeting:  lessons  from  the  international  experience,  Princeton,  N.J.:  Princeton  University 
Press. Taylor, J. B. (1993) exposes a simple interest rate rule for price stability, see “Discretion versus Policy 
Rules in Practice”, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 39, p.p. 195–214. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
