Peter Praet: The state of the global economy 
Speech by Mr Peter Praet, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, at 
the 4th World Policy Conference, Vienna, 9 December 2011. 
 I would like to thank for John Hutchinson and Arnaud Mehl for their contributions in the preparation of this speech. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  real  pleasure  to  be  here  in  Vienna  to  exchange  views  on  the  future  of  global 
governance. Vienna is certainly a city with a long tradition of discussing issues with a global 
dimension. Following my invitation to speak at this conference, I remembered that,  almost 
200  years  ago,  it  was  here  that  the  famous  Congress  of  Vienna  attempted  to  forge  what 
came  to  be  known  as  the  “Concert  of  Europe”.  This  marked  the  creation  of  a  new  global 
order and a major turning point in world history. 
The global economy today is also at a turning point. What we have been observing since the 
unprecedented financial market tensions in mid-2007, is not merely the unfolding of a global 
financial and economic crisis. We have been observing the emergence of a new global order, 
which is occurring at a faster pace than was anticipated prior to the crisis. 
The exact form this new world will take is unclear. But the need for sound global governance, 
which  we  will  discuss  today  and  tomorrow,  is  becoming  ever  more  apparent.  On  the 
economic front, several important changes have already occurred. The G20 has replaced the 
G7 as prime forum for international economic cooperation. The Financial Stability Board has 
been established to address vulnerabilities and develop regulatory and supervisory policies 
conducive to global financial stability. Bodies based at the Bank for International Settlements 
in  Basel,  which  are  of  keen  interest  to  the  central  banking  community,  have  also  been 
reformed and their membership enlarged to relevant emerging market players. 
In assessing the state of the global economy today, I would like to emphasise that we are at 
a crossroads. In this respect, I would like to make three specific points. Firstly, I will describe 
the outlook and risks for the global economy and euro area. I will then discuss the interplay 
between the current prospects and key policy challenges: namely global real and financial 
imbalances  as  well  as  liquidity  and  capital  flow  volatility.  Finally,  I  will  briefly  comment  on 
major governance challenges in the Eurozone. 
* 
Let me commence by depicting how I see the outlook and key risks for the global economy 
and  euro  area  at  this  juncture.  Against  a  background  of  heightened  uncertainty  and  rising 
stresses in financial markets, global sentiment has further deteriorated in recent months. It 
now  appears  that  some  of  the  downside  risks  which  had  been  previously  identified  have 
materialised. Looking ahead, short-term indicators as well as the latest survey data suggest 
that global growth is expected to remain sluggish. 
However,  looking  at  the  global  economy  as  a  whole  masks  the  considerable  degree  of 
heterogeneity which prevails. Indeed, a key characteristic of the global economy relates to 
the  divergence  in  global  growth  patterns  not  only  between  advanced  and  emerging 
economies but also within these country groupings. In advanced economies, growth sapping 
headwinds  persist  with  annual  GDP  growth  expected  below  potential.  In  particular,  these 
headwinds relate to the continued need for public and private sector deleveraging as well as 
the  persistent  weaknesses  in  labour  and  housing  markets  in  some  advanced  economies. 
These  factors,  combined  with  the  ongoing  tensions  in  financial  markets,  are  expected  to 
restrain global growth over the medium term.  
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
Conversely,  in  emerging  economies,  growth  has  remained  relatively  robust.  While  growth 
has recently experienced some moderation, largely on account of weaker external demand., 
this  should  assist  in  alleviating  some  of  the  overheating  pressures.  The  resilience  of 
emerging  economies  throughout  the  crisis  has  been  impressive.  However,  emerging 
economies are not immune to developments in other parts of the globe. 
More  than  four  years  after  the  beginning  of  the  financial  crisis,  uncertainty  continues  to 
remain  high,  with  substantial  downside  risk  to  the  economic  outlook  notably  for  the  euro 
area. Downside risks in particular relate to a further intensification of tensions in euro area 
financial  markets  and  their  potential  spillover  into  the  real  economy.  Additional  downside 
risks also relate to the global economy, which may turn out to be weaker than expected, as 
well  as  protectionist  pressures  and  the  possibility  of  a  disorderly  correction  of  global 
imbalances.  
* 
I would like to focus now on key global policy challenges confronting the global economy.  
The first of these challenges is the persistence of large real and financial imbalances at the 
global  level,  which  is  a  key  source  of  vulnerability  in  the  medium  term.  A  few  figures  are 
worth recalling. Combined together, the current account deficits and surpluses of the main 
systemic economies are projected to stand at roughly 2% of world GDP over the next five 
years. This is less than before the crisis (3% of world GDP in 2007), but twice as much as in 
the late 1990s. A large share of the adjustment in external imbalances since the crisis has 
been cyclical, not structural According to the IMF, the US current account deficit is projected 
to  reach  about  3%  of  GDP  in  2011,  against  surpluses  of  roughly  5%  and  9%  of  GDP  for 
China and oil exporters respectively. They are a source of tensions that could ultimately lead 
to  protectionist  pressures.  However,  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  has  a  balanced  current 
account position. 
Global fiscal imbalances remain significant, with a marked degree of heterogeneity between 
advanced and emerging economies. Consolidation efforts required to bring public finances to 
a sustainable path are a key priority for advanced countries. 
Efforts  made  to  adjust  these  imbalances  remain  clearly  insufficient.  This  raises  the  risk, 
which I referred to earlier, of a disorderly unwinding down the line, with significant potential 
fallouts for global financial markets and the global economy. 
At their Cannes Summit on 3–4 November 2011, G20 Leaders agreed on an Action Plan to 
lay the foundations for strong, sustainable and balanced global growth in the medium-term. 
This is welcomed. All G20 members made commitments, but they are sometimes imprecise. 
It is often unclear as to how these commitments can genuinely contribute to a rebalancing of 
global demand patterns. For instance, only a few of the G20 members explicitly reaffirmed 
their support to the solemn pledge by their Leaders in Toronto last year to halve fiscal deficits 
by 2013 and stabilise public debt ratios by 2016. Large emerging markets have announced 
that they would enhance the flexibility of their exchange rate regime, but without indicating a 
specific  time-frame  when  this  would  occur.  Europe  is  doing  its  share  in  committing  to 
accelerate and further deepen the Single Market. 
More  decisive  policy  measures  to  rebalance  global  demand  patterns  are  still  required,  in 
particular  to  raise  savings  in  deficit  economies  and  increase  domestic  demand  in  surplus 
economies.  All  systemic  economies  could  benefit  from  effective  multilateral  surveillance 
along with their international responsibilities. Now is not the time to lose sight of the need to 
correct imbalances globally although our attention is – for good reasons – more focused on 
immediate challenges! 
* 
The  second  and  related  key  global  policy  challenge  relates  to  how  best  to  address  global 
liquidity  conditions  and  volatile  capital  flow  constellations.  Ample  global  liquidity  conditions 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
have the potential to push volatile capital flows into emerging economies. If they respond by 
accumulating  reserves  to  cap  exchange  rate  appreciation,  this  widens  global  imbalances. 
While  this is  an  issue which  was  already  discussed  before  the  crisis,  some  argue  it  might 
have been exacerbated as a result of policy responses to the crisis. 
Indeed, some of the policy responses have been sub-optimal from a global vantage point. 
Many  countries  have  continued  to  accumulate  large  reserve  holdings  to  limit  currency 
appreciation.  For  instance,  China’s  reserve  holdings  now  exceed  USD  3  trillion;  those  of 
Russia  USD  400  billion;  those  of  Brazil,  Korea  or  Taiwan  USD  300  billion.  Others  have 
adopted  capital  flow  management  measures,  including  higher  reserve  requirements  and  
–  sometimes  –  outright  controls  on  capital  inflows.  Some  observers  have  claimed  that 
“currency wars” might break out. 
This is why the efforts from the international community to better understand global liquidity 
developments,  as  well  as  how  to  deal  with  global  liquidity  shortages,  in  particular  during 
crises,  by  the  G20,  the  IMF  and  by  the  central  banking  community  at  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements  in  Basel  are  valuable  undertakings.  The  agreement  by  G20 
Leaders  on  actions  and  principles  that  could  help  reaffirm  the  benefits  from  financial 
integration  and  increase  resilience  against  volatile  capital  flows  is  commendable.  This 
agreement provides coherent conclusions to guide countries in the management of capital 
flows. 
The  first  line  of  defence  against  excessive  capital  flow  volatility  should  comprise  sound 
domestic macroeconomic policy frameworks and institutions as well as appropriate exchange 
rate  regimes,  financial  regulation  and  supervision.  Capital  control  measures  should  be 
temporary in nature and only used as a last resort, given that they may delay the necessary 
domestic policy implementation and distort the distribution of capital flows across countries. 
* 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
When delegates to the Congress of Vienna first met in 1814, the new world that was about to 
emerge  and  which  would  last  for  almost  another  century  was  only  barely  discernible.  The 
outbreak of the global economic and financial crisis is putting us in a similar situation today. 
Throughout the world, citizens call upon policy-makers to act decisively to resolve the crisis 
and  help  the  global  economy  turn  a  corner.  All  relevant  authorities  have  to  take  their 
responsibilities. 
To ensure that this crisis can be fully addressed will require an ambitious strengthening of 
economic governance. Significant reforms in this direction are taking place in Europe. The 
EU Council and European Parliament have agreed on a legislative package that significantly 
limits the discretion of national authorities. This includes a framework for monitoring a wide 
range of macroeconomic imbalances, also backed by sanctions. Countries are expected to 
anchor fiscal prudence in national rules. All these measures were unthinkable four years ago. 
Today,  Euro  area  Heads  of  States  or  Government  agreed  in  Brussels  to  move  towards  a 
stronger  economic  union.  This  implies  measures  in  two  directions,  namely:  a  new  fiscal 
compact  and  strengthened  economic  policy  coordination  and  the  development  of  the  euro 
area  stabilisation  tools  to  face  short  term  challenges.  In  the  view  of  the  ECB’s  Governing 
Council,  a  new  fiscal  compact  comprising  a  fundamental  restatement  of  the  fiscal  rules, 
together  with  the  fiscal  commitments  that  euro  area  governments  have  made,  is  the  most 
important  precondition  for  restoring  the  normal  functioning  of  financial  markets.  To 
accompany  fiscal  consolidation,  bold  and  ambitious  structural  reforms  are  essential.  They 
should be immediately carried out to help the euro area countries improve competitiveness, 
increase the flexibility of their economies and enhance their longer-term growth potential. 
We  at  the  ECB  take  our  responsibilities.  Monetary  policy  in  the  euro  area  will  remain 
dedicated  to  our  mandate,  which  is  to  maintain  price  stability  over  the  medium  term.  The 
policy  measures  taken  by  the  ECB  have  resulted  in  the  Governing  Council’s  outstanding 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
record  during  the  past  13  years  in  terms  of  price  stability  and  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations.  
The ECB will continue to remain an anchor of confidence and stability, in a global economy 
characterised by marked uncertainties. This is the central contribution we can make to foster 
sustainable growth, job creation and financial stability in the euro area as whole. 
Thank you for your attention and I wish you all a fruitful and enriching conference.  
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
