Vítor Constâncio: Challenges to monetary policy in 2012 
Speech  by  Mr  Vítor  Constâncio,  Vice-President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
26th International Conference on Interest Rates, Frankfurt am Main, 8 December 2011. 
 I would like to acknowledge the substantial contributions to the preparation of this speech by Marco Catenaro, 
Philipp Hartmann, Oreste Tristani, Giovanni Vitale, and Guido Wolswijk. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Since  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  our  common  currency,  times  have  never  been  as 
challenging as at present. Despite ongoing efforts by policy makers, the sovereign debt crisis 
is  still  ongoing,  putting  growth  and  welfare  of  our  citizens  at  risk.  In  this  context  the 
Governing  Council of the ECB  met this morning and, as you know,  decided to reduce the 
monetary policy rate by 25 basis points and take a series of measures to improve liquidity 
provision to the banking sector, thereby enhancing the operation of the credit channel. 
I  was  asked  to  focus  my  address  to  you  on  challenges  to  monetary  policy  for  next  year, 
2012. I decided to fulfil this request by covering three related areas. First, I will review the 
current conjuncture and outlook for 2012, as the Governing Council sees it at present. I will 
also take the opportunity to recall the fundamental principles that guide our monetary policy 
in  general.  Second,  I  will  discuss  how  we  can  use  separately  standard  and  non-standard 
monetary  policy  measures  in  order  to  fulfil  our  price  stability  mandate  in  a  context  of 
continued high uncertainty as regards economic growth, fiscal sustainability and the stability 
of the financial sector. Third, I will describe some non-standard monetary policy measures 
we took in greater detail, elaborating on how they help correcting distortions in the monetary 
transmission mechanism induced by financial contagion. 
The quest for price stability and the outlook for 2012 
1. 
Let me start with the conjunctural situation and the outlook for 2012 in the context of general 
key  principles  of  sound  central  banking  that  are  of  particular  importance  at  the  current 
juncture. The ECB has the clear and unambiguous mandate to maintain price stability in the 
euro area. More precisely, we aim at maintaining inflation rates in the euro area below, but 
close to, 2% over the medium term. Having a clear and overriding objective of maintaining 
price stability is one of the key principles of “sound” central banking. This principle has been 
supported by a growing and ever more refined wealth of research.1 Overall, although not the 
exclusive objective of central banks, maintaining price stability is ultimately the responsibility 
of monetary policy. It is therefore the necessary and central contribution that monetary policy 
can make to the economic welfare of our citizens. This is why the Treaty enshrines it as the 
ECB’s primary objective. 
With inflation averaging about 2% in the euro area since 1999, and thus better than what was 
achieved  in  individual  euro  area  countries  before  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  we  have 
witnessed  a  period  of  relatively  stable  prices  since  the  start  of  monetary  union.  Inflation 
expectations  have  been,  and  remain,  well  anchored  at  levels  in  line  with  our  quantitative 
                                                 
1  For a broad review, please see Herrero, A, Gaspar, V. Hoogduin, L Morgan, J. and Winkler, B. (eds.) (2001), 
“Why price stability”, first ECB Central Banking Conference, June. The importance of price stability has long 
been clear to economists: see e.g. Le Blanc, F. (1690), Traité Historique des Monnaies de France, Paris, and 
Keynes, J.M. (1919), The economic consequences of peace, London, chapter 6. On the costs of inflation, see 
Fischer, S. (1995), “Modern central banking”, in F. Capie, C. Goodhart, N. Schnadt and S. Fischer, eds., The 
future of central banking, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp. 262–308; Fischer, S (1996), “Why are 
central banks pursuing long-run price stability”, Jackson Hole Symposium. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
definition  of  price  stability,  despite  several  shocks  that  euro  area  economies  have  been 
confronted with over this period – most notably the current financial and economic crisis. This 
is first of all so because the ECB has – from its start – credibly delivered upon its primary 
mandate, price stability.  
In fact, by anchoring inflation expectations, a kind of “automatic stabiliser” is implemented. 
Changes in nominal yields induced by monetary policy decisions are reflected into changes 
in  real  yields,  so  as  to  dampen  the  destabilising  effects  of  excessive  uncertainty,  both  on 
financial markets and the real economy. This is true also in normal circumstances, but it is 
especially  important  when  there  are  risks  of  deflation.  During  the  crisis,  well  anchored 
inflation expectations helped to avoid deflationary spirals and allowed the ECB to effectively 
reduce short-term real interest rates by acting on the nominal, policy rate. 
Our robust and medium-term oriented monetary policy strategy has been crucial in credibly 
anchoring inflation expectations. Using the same framework for internal analysis and external 
communication has helped the ECB to conduct its monetary policy in a credible, consistent 
and effective manner.  
This brings me to today’s monetary policy decision. The Governing Council decided to lower 
the  key  ECB  interest  rates  by  25  basis  points,  following  the  25  basis  point  decrease  on 
3 November 2011. Inflation is likely to stay above 2% for several months to come, but it will 
decline to below 2% during 2012. The intensified financial market tensions are continuing to 
dampen  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  and  the  outlook  remains  subject  to  high 
uncertainty  and  substantial  downside  risks.  In  such  an  environment,  cost,  wage  and  price 
pressures  in  the  euro  area  should  remain  modest  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon.  At  the 
same  time,  the  underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion  remains  moderate.  Overall,  it  is 
essential  for  monetary  policy  to  maintain  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  thereby 
ensuring  a  firm  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  in  line  with  our  aim  of 
maintaining inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. Such anchoring is 
a  prerequisite  for  monetary  policy  to  make  its  contribution  towards  supporting  economic 
growth  and  job  creation  in  the  euro  area.  This  assessment  is  also  reflected  in  the 
December 2011  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic  projections  for  the  euro  area,  which 
foresee annual real GDP growth in a range between 1.5% and 1.7% in 2011, between –0.4% 
and 1.0% in 2012 and between 0.3% and 2.3% in 2013. Compared with the September 2011 
ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections,  there  is  a  narrowing  of  the  range  of  the  real  GDP 
growth projection for 2011 and a significant downward revision of the range for 2012. 
The  Governing  Council  continues  to  view  the  risks  to  the  medium-term  outlook  for  price 
developments as broadly balanced. On the upside, the main risks relate to further increases 
in  indirect  taxes  and  administered  prices,  owing  to  the  need  for  fiscal  consolidation  in  the 
coming years. The main downside risks relate to the impact of weaker than expected growth 
in the euro area and globally. In our assessment, substantial downside risks for the economic 
outlook  for  the  euro  area  exist  in  an  environment  of  high  uncertainty.  Nevertheless,  the 
modelled probability of a deflationary episode is still very small indeed, even if it has recently 
slightly increased.  
The  ECB’s  institutional  and  operational  independence2  is  fundamental  when  designing  the 
appropriate responses to the challenges posed by the crisis. The implications for the risk to 
                                                 
2  The  issue  of  central  bank  independence  has  been  the  subject  of  important  academic  work,  following  the 
seminal paper by Kenneth Rogoff(1985) on “The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary 
Target”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 100 (4), 1169–89. See for example Waller, Christopher J., and 
Carl  E.  Walsh  (1996).  “Central-Bank  Independence,  Economic  Behavior,  and  Optimal  Term  Lengths”, 
American  Economic  Review,  vol.  86  (5),  1139–53.  Some  academics  have  even  proposed  quantitative 
indicators to measure central bank independence; see for example Grilli, Masciandaro and Tabellini (1991): 
“Political and Monetary Institutions and Public Financial Policies in the Industrial Countries”, Economic Policy, 
13, 341–92; and Cukierman, Webb and Neyapti (1992): “Measuring the Independence of Central Banks and 
its Effect on Policy Outcomes”, World Bank Economic Review 6(3) : 358–98. 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
price  stability  of  the  turbulent  gyrations  in  financial  markets’  sentiment  led  central  banks  
– including the ECB – to bring interest rates down to unprecedented levels and to engage in 
a  number  of  non-standard  monetary  policy  measures.  When  entering  these  “uncharted 
waters”  it  was  and  very  much  remains  of  paramount  importance  for  the  central  bank’s 
measures to be effective that market participants never doubt about their consistency with 
the  overall  policy  framework.  It  is  precisely  because  measures  were  taken  in  such 
consistency and in full independence that market participants have never come to doubt the 
ECB commitment to maintain price stability over the medium-term. Ultimately, independence 
reinforces credibility, maximising the effectiveness of the measures implemented during the 
crisis. Let me therefore dedicate most of the remainder of this speech to our non-standard 
monetary policy and how it relates to standard interest rate policy.  
Monetary policy, financial stability and the separation principle 
2. 
The ECB was one of the first central banks to react with large liquidity injections, when the 
financial market turmoil erupted in August 2007. This “prelude” was followed by a series of 
non-standard monetary policy measures spanning our Enhanced Credit Support that started 
after  the  demise  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008  and  our  Securities  Markets 
Programme when the financial crisis turned into a sovereign debt crisis in May 2010. I wish 
to  discuss  two  fundamental  issues  related  to  such  non-standard  monetary  policy  before  I 
give a more detailed account of several of the adopted measures.  
I  have  just  emphasised  that  inflation  expectations  have  remained  well  anchored  over  the 
crisis period, in line with our objective of price stability. At the same time, we expect inflation 
to return below 2% in the course of 2012. The first question is then, how do non-standard 
monetary policy measure help fulfil this objective?  
The second general issue that I wish to discuss is related to the unprecedented nature of 
non-standard  policies.  The  novelty  of  these  tools  implies  that  we  have  no  track  record  on 
their  broader  economic  effects.  Could  non-standard  measures  have  unintended 
consequences  on  the  monetary  policy  stance  –  consequences  which  may  ultimately 
endanger the ECB’s ability to maintain price stability? 
Regarding  the  first  issue,  it  is  straightforward  to  recognise  that  non-standard  measures 
ultimately serve our primary objective, once the medium term orientation of our strategy is 
recognised. The medium-term orientation acknowledges the futility of attempting to fine-tune 
price developments over very short periods of time This is due to long and variable lags in 
monetary policy transmission and to inevitable price shocks. From the very outset, the ECB’s 
monetary policy strategy acknowledged that it is neither feasible nor desirable for inflation to 
be  targeted  on  a  short  term  basis.  While  anchoring  longer-term  inflation  expectations  at 
levels consistent with price stability, it explicitly recognised the need to avoid excess volatility 
in other variables – notably output and nominal interest rates.3 
The desire to avoid excess macroeconomic volatility, however, is not limited to output and 
nominal  interest  rates.  For  example,  it  can  be  used  to  contain  imbalances  in  financial 
markets and asset prices, if their slow accumulation poses a threat to macroeconomic and 
price stability over the longer term.  
Along these lines, financial stability enters the horizon of the central bank, naturally and on a 
permanent basis. When the accumulation of financial imbalances that are accompanied by 
excessive monetary and credit growth endangers our ability to  maintain stable prices over 
the medium term, we have the obligation to take appropriate action. When, as is clearly the 
case at present, financial instability in some market segments prevents a normal functioning 
                                                 
3  ECB (1999), “The stability-oriented monetary policy strategy of the Eurosystem”, Monthly Bulletin (January). 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
of the economy and of the monetary policy transmission mechanism, we must intervene to 
restore our capacity to ensure price stability over the medium term.  
The  ECB  interventions  during  the  crisis  have  therefore  been  entirely  consistent  with  the 
principles of our monetary policy strategy and its medium-term orientation. The provision of 
liquidity  to  prevent  a  collapse  of  sound  financial  institutions  during  a  liquidity  crisis  is  also 
consistent with the broader ESCB’s responsibility to contribute to financial stability. This is in 
line  with  the  provisions  in  the  Treaty,  which  gives  the  ESCB  the  competence,  without 
prejudice to the primary objective of price stability and to the ECB independence, to support 
the general policies of the European Union and notably to contribute to the smooth conduct 
of  policies  pursued  by  the  competent  authorities  relating  to  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system.4 Most central banks have performed such a role as financial lender of last resort to 
the banking sector in history when severe crises struck.5 
Nevertheless, the second fundamental issue comes to the fore, raising the question about 
the possible risk that the non-standard monetary policy measures may produce unintended 
consequences for the monetary policy stance. 
This concern has been in the mind of the Governing Council from the outset of the crisis. It 
has  led  to  the  adoption  of  a  clear  guiding  principle  in  the  implementation  of  non-standard 
measures: the separation principle. 
The separation principle is the acknowledgement that standard and non-standard monetary 
policy  instruments  have  different  purposes.  A  decision  by  the  Governing  Council  on  the 
interest rates aims to signal to financial market participants its assessment of the monetary 
policy  stance.  Changes  in  the  key  ECB  rates  ultimately  affect  inflation  trough  changes  in 
bank lending rates, credit conditions and aggregate demand. Under normal financial market 
conditions, this transmission mechanism from standard policy decisions to prices is effective. 
An appropriate setting of the rate on the main refinancing operations, or MRO rate, allows us 
to signal the policy intentions of the Governing Council and thereby maintain price stability 
over the medium term and ensure a firm anchoring of inflation expectations. Under normal 
financial market conditions, non-standard monetary policy measures are unnecessary. 
However,  exceptional  circumstances  require  extraordinary  measures.  The  scope  of  non-
standard  measures  that  the  ECB  has  used  so  far  has  to  be  explained  as  they  are  clearly 
delimited:  they  aim  to  ensure  that  dysfunctions  in  some  financial  market  segments  do  not 
lead  to  severe  disruptions  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism,  which  could 
compromise our capacity to ultimately affect prices through our interest rate decisions. From 
this  perspective,  non-standard  measures  are  a  complement,  rather  than  a  substitute,  of 
standard interest rate decisions: they help ensure that standard policy produces its intended 
effects,  rather  than  aiming  to  impart  additional  relaxation  to  the  overall  monetary  policy 
stance.  
This feature distinguishes the non-standard monetary policy measures the ECB used so far 
from  quantitative  easing  policies  as  pursued  by  other  major  central  banks,  because 
quantitative easing is designed as a substitute for standard interest rate policy when central 
bank  rates  have  reached  levels  close  to  their  zero  lower  bound  and  cannot  be  lowered 
further. This feature also illustrates that the introduction of non-standard measures does not 
imply the need for the ECB to manage a trade-off between short run inflation volatility and 
price stability in the longer run. The non-standard monetary policy measures that we have 
                                                 
4  See article 127(5) TFEU. 
5  See, for example, Thornton, H. (1802), An Enquiry into the Nature and Effects of Paper Credit of Great Britain, 
Bordo,  M.D.  (1990),  The  lender  of  last  resort:  Alternative  views  and  historical  experience,  Federal  Reserve 
Bank  of  Richmond  Economic  Review,  January/February,  or  Freixas,  X.,  C.  Giannini,  G.  Hoggarth  and 
F. Soussa (2002), Lender of last resort: A review of the literature, in Goodhart, C.A.E., and G. Illing (eds.), 
Financial Contagion, Crises and the Lender of Last Resort – A Reader, Oxford University Press. 
4 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
used so far are rather the means to ensure that standard ECB decisions can be effective at 
all horizons.  
There  should  therefore  be  no  concern  that  our  non-standard  measures  may  produce 
spillovers on the ECB’s ability to maintain price stability. Thanks to the possibility to separate 
standard  and  non-standard  monetary  policy  actions,  our  non-standard  measures  do  not 
restrict in any way our capacity to tighten the monetary policy stance when necessary. This 
has  been  clearly  demonstrated  by  the  Governing  Council’s  repeated  decisions  to  change 
interest rates over the course of this year, while maintaining its non-standard monetary policy 
measures. In turn, our non-standard measures are temporary in both their nature and scope. 
Once  the  impairments  to  the  transmission  process  disappear  they  can  be  phased  out, 
whereas  the  standard  interest  rate  policy  remains.  In  fact,  many  of  our  non-standard 
monetary  policy  measures  phase  out  automatically,  for  example  long-term  refinancing 
operations at fixed rates at extended maturities, if they are not explicitly renewed.  
In spite of the separation principle, however, some commentators have raised concerns that 
the large amount of liquidity currently available to euro area banks will turn into broad money 
and  credit,  and  eventually  into  a  source  of  inflationary  pressure.  Non-standard  measures 
have indeed resulted in a sizable expansion of the ECB balance sheet. In the more of four 
years between mid-2007 and end 2011, the Eurosystem balance sheet relating to monetary 
policy  assets6  grew  from  438  EUR  billion  euros  to  a  temporary  peak  on  25  June  2010  of 
985 billion  euros,  and  has  decreased  since  then  to  currently  923  billion  euros.  This 
corresponds to a rate of growth of close to 110%. 
However, it should also be noted that the rate of growth of total Eurosystem balance sheet 
between end-November 2007 and end-November 2011 was 88%, whereas for the Federal 
Reserve’s was 219% and for the Bank of England was 191%. 
Central bank reserves are held by banks and are not part of money held by the non-financial 
sector,  hence  not,  per  se,  an  inflationary  type  of  liquidity.  There  is  no  acceptable  theory 
linking  in  a  necessary  way  the  monetary  base  created  by  central  banks  to  inflation. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  argued  by  some  that  financial  institutions  would  be  free  to  instantly 
transform their loans from the central bank into credit to the non-financial sector. This fits into 
the old theoretical view about the credit multiplier according to which the sequence of money 
creation  goes  from  the  primary  liquidity  created  by  central  banks  to  total  money  supply 
created  by  banks  via  their  credit  decisions.  In  reality  the  sequence  works  more  in  the 
opposite  direction  with  banks  taking  first  their  credit  decisions  and  then  looking  for  the 
necessary funding and reserves of central bank money. As Claudio Borio and Disyatat from 
the BIS put it: “In fact, the level of reserves hardly figures in banks’ lending decisions. The 
amount of credit outstanding is determined by banks’ willingness to supply loans, based on 
perceived  risk-return  trade-offs  and  by  the  demand  for  those  loans.”7  In  modern  banking 
sectors, credit decisions precede the availability of reserves in the central bank. As Charles 
Goodhart pointedly argued, it would be more appropriate talking about a “Credit divisor” than 
about a “Credit multiplier”.8 
One can obviously monitor developments in monetary and credit aggregates to check if the 
concern regarding inflationary risks is justified. The ECB does this on a regular basis through 
its monetary analysis, so we are well positioned to react to any signs of excessive money 
and credit growth which may pose risk to price stability over the medium term.  
                                                 
6  The balance sheet items related to monetary policy operations include: Main refinancing operations, Longer-
term refinancing operations,  Fine-tuning reverse operations, Structural reverse operations, Marginal lending 
facility, Credits related to margin calls and Securities held for monetary policy purposes. 
7  Borio,  Claudio  and  P.  Disyatat  2009)  “Unconventional  monetary  policies:  an  appraisal”  BIS  Working  Paper 
no. 292. 
8  Goodhart, Charles (1995) “Central Banks and the financial system” Mit Press. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 5
If we look at broad money, however, it becomes clear that the underlying pace of monetary 
expansion  remains  moderate.  At  the  end  of  2008  –  the  period  of  the  maximum  rate  of 
increase in the ECB balance sheet – the rate of M3 growth fell rapidly. From a peak of over 
10% over 2007, the annual growth rate in M3 slowed down to zero at the end of 2009, before 
turning positive again, though around moderate levels, during 2010 and 2011. From January 
to October 2011 in relation to the same period last year M3 has increased just by 2.2% and 
in  the  month  of  October  M3  has  even  decreased  by  59  billion  euros  in  absolute  terms. 
Hence, while close scrutiny of future developments remains warranted, the evolution of M3 is 
not suggestive of any undesirable spillovers from non-standard monetary policy measures on 
the  prospects  for  price  stability.  This  confirms  that  the  availability  of  central  bank  liquidity 
worked mainly, as intended, as a means to offset underlying funding tensions for banks. The 
large expansion of the ECB balance sheet was therefore instrumental in preventing a larger 
decline in M3. It is conceivable that, in the absence of non-standard measures, broad money 
growth  could  have  fallen  much  further  –  possibly  to  the  large,  negative  levels  observed 
during the 1930´s Great Depression in the United States.9 
3. 
Contagion, the monetary transmission mechanism and non-standard 
monetary policy 
Let me now turn to a more detailed discussion of the non-standard measures implemented 
by the ECB. These measures must be tailored to the specific market segment, and to the 
specific disruption, which may prevail at a certain point in time. Therefore, there cannot be a 
single non-standard policy tool: different tools must be activated depending on the particular 
impediment to the transmission of changes in the standard policy rate to the economy. Two 
months  ago  I  argued  that  financial  contagion  –  both  between  debt  markets  of  different 
sovereigns and between sovereigns and banks – is one major force at work that impairs the 
functioning of the monetary policy transmission mechanism.10 This is still the case today; if 
anything contagion dynamics have worsened rather than eased.  
Contagion  already  played  an  important  role  at  the  beginning  of  the  financial crisis,  then  in 
terms  of  the  propagation  of  illiquidity  in  interbank  markets.  The  measures  implemented 
starting  in  September  2008  had  the  specific  objective  of  addressing  the  evaporation  of 
liquidity in the money market, which seriously impaired a key source of funding for banks and 
thus  their  ability  to  continue  lending  to  households  and  businesses.  The  money  market 
“freeze” and liquidity contagion was, at least in large part, due to asymmetric information on 
other  banks’  creditworthiness  –  in  turn  related  to  their  exposure  to  toxic  asset  backed 
securities. As such, it could not have been cured by a reduction in key ECB rates. The latter 
could have dealt with a possible increase in interbank rates due to larger counterparty risk 
premia,  but  not  to  a  situation  of  liquidity  hoarding  and  market  breakdown.11  Moreover,  a 
sharp reduction in key ECB rates aimed at reducing banks’ cost of funding would also have 
had unwarranted repercussions on the overall monetary policy stance.  
                                                 
9  See Friedman, M., and A.J. Schwartz (1963), A Monetary History of the United States, 1867–1960, Princeton 
University Press or, more recently, Christiano, L., R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2003), “The Great Depression 
and the Friedman-Schwartz hypothesis”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 35, pp. 1119–1197. 
10  Keynote  lecture  on  “Contagion  and  the  European  debt  crisis”  at  the  Bocconi  University/Intesa  Sanpaolo 
conference on “Bank Competitiveness in the Post-crisis World”, Milan, 10 October 2011. 
11  For a formal analysis of the possible breakdown of the interbank market in the presence of counterparty risk, 
see  Heider,  Hoerova  and  Holthausen,  “Liquidity  hoarding  and  interbank  market  spreads:  the  role  of 
counterparty  risk”,  ECB  Working  paper  No.  1126.  See  also  Allen,  F.,  E.  Carletti,  and  D.  Gale  (2009), 
“Interbank  Market  Liquidity  and  Central  Bank  Intervention”,  Journal  of  Monetary  Economics  56,  639–652; 
Bruche,  M.  and  J.  Suarez  (2010),  “Deposit  Insurance  and  Money  Market  Freezes”,  Journal  of  Monetary 
Economics 57, 45–61. 
6 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
In contrast, the ECB decision addressed banks’ funding problems directly. In the aftermath of 
the failure of Lehman Brothers, the ECB launched its policy of “enhanced credit support”, a 
series of measures to enhance the flow of credit above and beyond what could be achieved 
through policy interest rate reductions alone. These measures include the unlimited provision 
of  liquidity  through  “fixed  rate  tenders  with  full  allotment”;  the  provision  of  liquidity  at 
lengthened  maturities  of  up  to  one  year;  and  the  provision  of  more  liquidity  in  foreign 
currencies to euro area banks and of euro liquidity to other central banks for them to provide 
to their local banks; and a programme of purchases of covered bonds. As banks can only 
make  use  of  the  ECB  liquidity-providing  facilities  if  they  have  sufficient  collateral,  the  ECB 
also extended the list of assets it accepts as collateral, subject to appropriate haircuts. As it 
had been the case in the years before the crisis, we also adjusted collateral eligibility criteria 
in  view  of  market  developments  in  order  to  remedy  evolving  inconsistencies  and  avoid 
possible abuses. The total value of eligible marketable collateral is very large. It equals about 
EUR 13 trillion,12 which amounts to about 140 percent of euro area GDP. From this total, the 
euro  area  banks  have  in  their  balance  sheets  about  EUR  4  trillion  with  EUR  1.8  trillion 
already  approved  for  utilisation  and  creates  the  necessary  room  for  manoeuvre  in  our 
liquidity provision that right now amounts to just EUR 650 million.  
Thanks  to  the  enhanced  credit  support,  banks  with  funding  needs  could  simply  obtain 
liquidity  from  the  ECB  and  continue  operating almost  “as  if”  the  money  market  freeze  had 
never occurred. Clearly, the full allotment decision could have been taken, and would have 
been equally effective, even in the absence of any changes in key ECB rates. The fact that 
interest  rates  were  also  cut  rapidly  over  the  period  after  September  2008  is  due  to  the 
contemporaneous deterioration of the outlook for price stability. The non-standard measure 
implemented in 2008, however, prevented at source any severe disruption in the monetary 
policy  transmission  mechanism  and  thus  ensured  that  the  policy  easing  could  produce  its 
intended effects. 
This  example  illustrates  that,  as  I  have  argued  before,  once  non-standard  measures  are 
appropriately implemented, they can be thought of as being independent from the process of 
interest rate setting. There is however a prerequisite for such independence: an appropriate 
operational framework involving the remuneration of banks’ reserves. This feature ensures 
that banks can hold increasingly large amounts of liquidity without suffering an increasingly 
hefty opportunity cost. A full allotment procedure such as that applied by the ECB could thus 
completely  offset  the  effects  of  the  money  market  freeze.  If  reserves  had  not  been 
remunerated,  however,  banks  under  financial  distress  would  have  had  to  go  above  the 
minimum  reserves  to  build  appropriate  liquidity  buffers  with  the  ensuing  increase  in  their 
opportunity cost. The ECB could have induced banks to satisfy their demand for liquidity only 
through a contemporaneous reduction of the opportunity cost of reserves, which is the policy 
interest rate. The separation principle would have been broken.13 
A similar application of the separation principle has been made with the more recent SMP, 
which  the  ECB  introduced  in  response  to  the  repercussions  of  the  euro  area  government 
debt  crisis.  Under  the  SMP  the  Eurosystem  buys  securities  in  dysfunctional  debt  market 
segments in order to safeguard the transmission of monetary policy. 
This framework has enabled the ECB to quickly respond to the market tensions resurfacing 
over  the  summer  of  2011.  Let  me  briefly  recapitulate  the  most  recent  measures.  On 
10 August,  the  ECB  has  again  provided  liquidity  at  a  maturity  of  six  months.  On 
15 September, the ECB has announced three additional US dollar operations with a maturity 
of  about  three  months,  which  cover  the  end  of  the  year.  Importantly,  the  ECB  has,  in 
                                                 
12  ECB (2010), Annual Report. 
13  For  a  formal  discussion  of  these  different  dimensions  of  monetary  policy,  see  Cúrdia  and  Woodford,  “The 
Central-Bank Balance Sheet as an Instrument of monetary policy”, mimeo, April 2010. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 7
response to disorderly conditions in euro area debt securities markets, resumed the active 
implementation of the SMP on 8 August to buy debt securities, though only in the secondary 
government  bond  market.  The  SMP  aims  to  create  a  better  functioning  transmission 
mechanism  of monetary policy to all parts of the monetary  union and is in full compliance 
with the prohibition of monetary financing. The relative size of the programme, representing 
just 1.9% of the euro area GDP against 13.7% of GDP that has been bought by the Bank of 
England  or  the  11.4%  purchased  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  makes  it  easier  to  be  fully 
sterilised.  
Furthermore, at the recent October 6 meeting, the ECB decided to conduct two further one-
year  long-term  refinancing  operations;  to  continue  to  apply  fixed  rate  full  allotment 
procedures in all monetary policy liquidity-providing operations for as long as needed and at 
least until the middle of 2012; and to conduct a second Covered Bond Purchase Programme 
(CBPP2) with an intended purchase amount of EUR 40 billion and over a period of one year, 
which  started  last  month.  On  30  November,  the  ECB  announced  coordinated  actions  with 
other central banks to enhance the capacity to provide liquidity support to the global financial 
system.  
Today, the Governing  Council also decided to adopt further non-standard measures. They 
include  the  conduct  of  two  longer-term  refinancing  operations  (LTROs)  with  a  maturity  of 
3 years  as  fixed  rate  tender  procedures  with  full  allotment,  and  with  the  option  of  early 
repayment after one year; to increase collateral availability by reducing the rating threshold 
for  certain  asset-backed  securities  (ABS);  to  grant  eligibility  for  Eurosystem  operations  to 
ABS having a second best rating of at least “single A” in the Eurosystem harmonised credit 
scale  at  issuance,  and  at  all  times  subsequently,  and  the  underlying  assets  of  which 
comprise residential mortgages and loans to small and medium-sized enterprises; to allow 
national  central  banks  to  accept  as  collateral  additional  performing  credit  claims  (namely 
bank loans) that satisfy broadly revised eligibility criteria; to reduce the reserve ratio, which is 
currently  2%,  to  1%;  and  to  discontinue  for  the  time  being,  as  of  the  maintenance  period 
starting on 14 December 2011, the fine-tuning operations carried out on the last day of each 
maintenance period. 
These  measures  should  ensure  enhanced  access  of  the  banking  sector  to  liquidity  and 
facilitate the functioning of the euro area money market. They are expected to support the 
provision  of  credit  to  households  and  non-financial  corporations.  All  the  non-standard 
monetary policy measures are, by construction, temporary in nature. 
If  we  look  at  the  past  experience,  the  ECB’s  measures  have  enabled  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism to continue operating relatively well at the level of the euro area, 
containing also contagion, although it should be recognised that the transmission mechanism 
remains severely disrupted in some euro area countries.  
In  sum,  our  actions  –  standard  and  non-standard  –  were  fast,  targeted  and  decisive;  and 
clearly  within  the  ECB’s  mandate.  But  the  main  responsibility  for  solving  the  European 
sovereign debt crisis and the continuing financial crisis rests with EU authorities and Member 
States’ governments. All these authorities have to live up to their responsibilities, comply with 
previous  commitments  and  swiftly  implement  agreed  reforms.  It  is  now  of  particular 
importance that all parties move ahead of financial markets, rather than sticking to a purely 
reactive  approach.  Under  no  circumstances  can  authorities  relax  efforts  under  the 
assumption that the ECB could alone compensate for the lack of action of others. 
Concluding remarks 
4. 
Let me conclude by emphasising the key messages I wanted to convey today. 
First, based on the information available today, we expect to see inflation to stay above 2% 
for several months to come, but it will decline to below 2% during 2012. 
8 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
Second, our determination to maintain price stability for the euro area as a whole over the 
medium term has made it necessary for us to intervene in dysfunctional market segments, 
thereby also contributing to the stability of the euro. We have already done a lot in this regard 
and we are ready to continue doing so, while remaining completely committed to our primary 
objective. The ECB is also open-minded to extending its non-standard monetary policy within 
its  mandate,  when  circumstances  require,  as  we  have  shown  today.  Overall,  we  have  the 
available tools.  
Third, in setting our monetary policy for the euro area we take full advantage of the principle 
of separation between standard and non-standard monetary policy. This principle suggests 
that actions on both sides can be taken independently. Moreover, our  non-standard policy 
measures, for example taken in order to remedy adverse effects of financial contagion on the 
monetary transmission mechanism, are fully aligned with the ECB’s mandate and monetary 
policy strategy.  
Fourth,  the  ECB  is  able  and  willing  to  continue  fulfilling  central  banks’  classical  role  as 
financial  lender  of  last  resort,  handling  liquidity  problems  in  the  financial  system  without 
endangering price stability.  
I thank you for your kind attention. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 9
