Mugur Isărescu: Challenges to economic growth in the European Union 
– reforms for the future of Europe 
Opening speech by Mr Mugur Isărescu, Governor of the National Bank of Romania, at the 
Conference “Challenges to economic growth in the European Union. Reforms for the future 
of Europe”, organized by the National Bank of Romania and the British Embassy, Bucharest, 
29 September 2011. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Distinguished audience, 
It is with great pleasure that I welcome you all here, at the National Bank of Romania, which 
tonight  hosts  a  conference  on  a  particularly  interesting  and  up-to-the-minute  topic: 
“Challenges  to  Economic  Growth  in  the  European  Union.  Reforms  for  the  Future  of 
Europe”, an event benefiting from the extraordinary support of the Embassy of the United 
Kingdom in Bucharest. 
I am honoured to salute very dearly Mr. Vincent Cable, the British Minister for Business and 
Innovation. I also wish to extend my greetings to Mr. Martin Harris, the British Ambassador to 
Bucharest, and to the other diplomats. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Sustainable  economic  growth  of  both  Romania  and  the  entire  European  Union  hinges 
decisively  on  economic  policy  consistency.  Moreover,  the  global  economic  and  financial 
crisis  has  proved  to  us  yet  again  that  there  is  no  valid  substitute  for  consistent  economic 
policies. 
The correction of economic policy errors is, for all countries in the world, painful, often difficult 
to comprehend by the public at large and inherently delayed, but it is absolutely necessary. 
I will now tell you from my own expertise that denying the need for adjustment is not a viable 
option.  It  is  nevertheless  true  that  ensuring  fiscal  sustainability  without  jeopardising  the 
prospects for economic growth is a major challenge to decision-makers. 
No doubt the recent heated debates within the European Union and heightening fears about 
the euro and the euro area could not make things easier. Economic and financial conditions 
have  tightened  worldwide,  but  we,  here  in  Romania,  have  already  grown  accustomed  that 
our European dream has to pass exceedingly rigorous and tough exams. I realised a long 
time  ago  that  the  European  Union  would  not  bring  forth  roses  on  our  way  there.  Even 
countries  with  robust  economies,  the  old  EU  Member  States,  face  major  difficulties  to 
integrate into the monetary and fiscal mechanisms, and some are even compelled to seek 
international support. 
However, the great benefits that the establishment and enlargement of the European Union 
has brought about should neither be forgotten, nor denied. The European Union has made 
Europe a robust economy at global level and, just to quote Romano Prodi, has brought the 
much-desired  peace  after  centuries  of  conflicts.  Boundaries  have  gradually  been  removed 
and people began to feel they belong to a much larger space than their own country, i.e. an 
area characterised by peace and democracy. From this perspective, one can say without the 
risk of being wrong that the history of Europe has moved in a virtuous direction. 
No matter how hard times the European Union is going through and no matter how many 
challenges  must  be  adequately  dealt  with,  an  in-depth  analysis  shows  that  political, 
economic  and  social  interests  converging  towards  the  continuation  of  this  great  project, 
namely  the  strengthening  of  the  European  Union,  are  stronger  and  more  motivated  than 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
those  stemming  from  rather  circumstantial  fears,  arising  out  of  the  difficulties  and 
vulnerabilities brought along by the global crisis. 
In  order  to  stick  to  the  virtuous  direction  that  I  have  referred  to  –  or  to  return  to  it  –,  I 
personally think that in these difficult times for the European Union, we should not forget to 
put things into perspective. This means that short-term policies must be harmonised with the 
long-term vision and policies. 
Romania’s stance is to consistently support EU-wide economic and institutional reforms. We 
believe  that  efforts  to  strengthen  governance  in  the  European  Union  and  the  euro  area 
should be made without delay, and they should be understood and supported by all Member 
States. 
At  the  same  time,  particular  attention  should  also  be  paid to  the  small-  and  medium-sized 
enterprises.  In  any  country  of  the  European  Union,  small-  and  medium-sized  enterprises 
generate  most  of  the  turnover  and  provide  jobs  for  most  employees.  Romania  is  no 
exception  to  this  rule.  However,  beyond  any  quantitative  arguments,  small-  and  medium-
sized enterprises are an engine of economic growth, especially due to the fact that they are 
characterised by dynamism, flexibility and innovative power, which makes them able not only 
to adjust to the changes in the economy and quickly grasp market trends, but also to open up 
new  avenues  to  economic  and  technological  progress,  as  they  are  seen  as  tireless 
promoters of change. This is, in fact, the very essence of entrepreneurship. 
Last  but  not  least,  we  should  all  be  aware  that  some  of  the  best-performing  small-  and 
medium-sized enterprises today will turn into the large companies of the future (as was the 
case  of  Mobexpert  and  Dedeman,  two  successful  Romanian  companies  that  currently 
provide  thousands  of  jobs  after  starting  in  the  early  1990s  as  small-  and  medium-sized 
enterprises,  with  only  a  handful  of  employees).  Romania  and  Europe  need  small-  and 
medium-sized  enterprises  not  as  survivors  of  the  crisis,  but  as  drivers  of  innovation,  the 
catalyst for economic growth. 
Let me conclude by emphasising that good economic governance – based on four essential 
pillars:  transparency,  accountability,  predictability  and  participation  –  is  an  important 
ingredient of economic growth. In-depth reform of economic governance at EU level and at 
global level is the way to go if we truly wish to achieve sustainable economic growth and job 
creation. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Now  let  me  call  on  Mr.  Vincent  Cable  to  share  with  you  his  opinions  on  growth  recovery 
across the European Union and the reforms for the future of Europe. 
Minister, you have the floor! 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
