William C Dudley: What the euro crisis means for taxpayers and the 
US economy 
Testimony  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  before  the  Subcommittee  on  TARP,  Financial  Services  and 
Bailouts of Public and Private Programs, Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, 
US House of Representatives, Washington DC, 15 December 2011. 
 Introduction 
I. 
Chairman McHenry, Ranking Member Quigley, other members of the Subcommittee, it is an 
honor  to  testify  before  you  today  to  discuss  the  economic  and  fiscal  challenges  facing 
Europe and the potential implications for the United States. My name is Bill Dudley, and I am 
president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. 
Let  me  preface  these  remarks  by  stating  that  the  views  expressed  in  my  written  and  oral 
testimony  are  solely  my  own  and  do  not  represent  official  views  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
Board,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  or  any  other  part  of  the  Federal 
Reserve System. Additionally, because I am precluded by law from discussing confidential 
supervisory  information,  I  will  not  be  able  to  speak  to  the  financial  condition  or  regulatory 
treatment or rating of any individual financial institution. 
The Federal Reserve seeks to promote financial stability in order to enable U.S. businesses 
and households to maintain their access to credit and to ensure sustained economic growth. 
Although the U.S. economy is currently expanding at a moderate pace, we face significant 
downside  risks,  mostly  relating 
in  Europe.  Because 
developments in Europe will have an important bearing on the prospects for growth and jobs 
here in the U.S., the Federal Reserve is monitoring the situation there closely. This is also 
why we have taken special steps, in cooperation with other central banks, to support the flow 
of credit to households and businesses. I welcome the opportunity to testify on these matters 
today. 
the  sovereign  debt  crisis 
to 
Europe 
II. 
Within the European Union, seventeen countries share a common currency, the euro. The 
situation  in  the  euro  area  is  very  unsettled,  with  pressure  on  sovereign  debt  markets  and 
local  banking  systems.  The  euro  area  has  the  capacity,  including  the  fiscal  capacity,  to 
overcome its challenges. However, the politics are very difficult, both because the problem 
has many dimensions, and because many different countries and institutions in the euro area 
have to coordinate their actions in order to achieve a coherent and effective policy response. 
Europe’s  leadership  has  affirmed  its  commitment  to  the  European  Union  and  its  single 
currency monetary union on numerous occasions. And the leadership is working to achieve 
greater policy coordination in areas such as fiscal policy. Putting all the countries using the 
euro  on  a  clearly  sustainable  fiscal  path  would  help  restore  market  confidence.  Assuming 
that Europe ultimately succeeds in managing this situation, a stronger union will emerge that 
will be viewed as more robust and resilient. This would be a welcome development for the 
U.S. 
If,  in  contrast,  Europe  were  not  to  be  fully  successful  in  charting  an  effective  course,  this 
could  have  a  number  of  negative  implications  for  the  U.S.  In  particular,  there  are  three 
possibilities that I would like to highlight for the Subcommittee today. 
First, if the European situation were to deteriorate, then the euro area would face even more 
serious  fiscal  and  economic  challenges.  As  a  result,  growth  within  the  euro  zone  would 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 1
weaken and this would lead to less demand for U.S. goods and services that are exported to 
Europe from companies and workers here. This would hurt growth here in the United States 
and  would  have  a  negative  impact  on  U.S.  jobs.  It  is  important  to  recognize  that  the  euro 
area is the world’s second largest economy after the U.S. and an important trading partner 
for us. Also, Europe is a significant investor in the U.S. economy, and vice versa. Thus, what 
happens in Europe has significant implications for our economy. 
Second,  if  the  European  situation  were  to  deteriorate,  this  could  put  pressure  on  the 
U.S. banking system. The good news is that U.S. banks are much more robust and resilient 
than they were a few years ago. U.S. banks have bolstered their capital significantly, built up 
their  loan  loss  reserves  and  have  significantly  larger  liquidity  buffers.  Also,  the  direct 
exposures of U.S. banks to the countries in Europe that are facing the most intense fiscal 
challenges are actually quite modest. 
The  bad  news  is  that  the  exposures  of  the  U.S.  banks  climb  quite  sharply  when  one  also 
considers the exposures to the core European countries and to the overall European banking 
system.  This  means  that  if  the  crisis  were  to  broaden  further  and  intensify,  this  could  put 
greater pressure on U.S. banks’ capital and liquidity buffers. 
Third,  if  the  European  situation  were  to  deteriorate  further,  financial  markets  would  likely 
become more stressed. This could tighten the availability of credit to U.S. households and 
businesses. It could also cause equity prices to fall and this would have a negative impact on 
Americans’  pension  and  401(k)  holdings.  This  tightening  of  financial  conditions  would 
damage the U.S. recovery and result in slower output growth and less job creation. At a time 
that  U.S.  unemployment  is  very  high,  this  is  a  particularly  unacceptable  outcome.  In  the 
extreme, U.S. financial markets could become so impaired that this would dry up the flow of 
credit to households and businesses. 
U.S. dollar swaps 
III. 
In terms of what actions the official sector in the United States has taken or could take with 
regard to Europe, I wish to emphasize that any and all such actions pursued by the Federal 
Reserve  are  motivated  by  the  mandates  Congress  has  given  to  the  Federal  Reserve  to 
promote price stability and maximum sustainable employment here in the United States. 
When  the  Federal  Reserve  System  was  created  by  Congress  in  1913,  it  was  given  the 
responsibility of providing liquidity to the financial system in times of stress in order to shield 
the  economy,  to  the  extent  possible,  from  the  severe  effects  of  financial  instability  on 
economic activity and jobs. While the economy and the markets have evolved substantially in 
the century since then, this basic principle continues to guide our efforts today. Central banks 
around the world have an important lender of last resort role. This role is important in order to 
protect the economy against financial instability. 
In  today’s  globally  integrated  economy,  banks  headquartered  outside  of  the  U.S.  play  an 
important role in providing credit and other financial services in the U.S. – providing a total of 
about $900 billion in overall financing within the U.S. For these banks to provide U.S. dollar 
loans, they have to maintain access to U.S. dollar funding. At a time when it is already hard 
enough for American families and firms to get the credit they need, we have a strong interest 
in making sure that these banks can continue to be active in the U.S. dollar markets. 
Banks  headquartered  outside  the  U.S.,  like  banks  that  are  headquartered  here,  make 
extensive use of dollars in their financing activities. In part, this is due to the fact that the U.S. 
dollar is the world’s number one currency – a status that brings with it many benefits for our 
country. It is in the U.S. national interest to make sure that non-U.S. banks that are judged to 
be sound by their central bank are able to access the U.S. dollar funding they need in order 
to be able to continue to finance their U.S. dollar assets. If the access to dollar funding were 
severely impaired, this could necessitate the abrupt, forced sales of dollar assets by these 
2 
 BIS central bankers’ speeches
banks,  which  could  seriously  disrupt  U.S.  markets  and  adversely  affect  U.S.  businesses, 
consumers and jobs. 
One way we can help to support the availability of dollar funding is by engaging in currency 
swaps with other central banks. This has been used as a policy tool dating back to 1962. 
Recently,  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  decided  to  re-launch  this  tool,  cooperating 
with  five  other  central  banks.  Our  intention  is  to  create  a  credible  backstop  to  –  but  not 
supplant  –  private  markets.  Banks  with  surplus  dollars  are  more  likely  to  lend  to  banks  in 
need of dollars if they know that the borrowing bank will be able to obtain the dollars it needs 
to repay the loan, if necessary, from its central bank. 
This  action  is  designed  to  support  financial  stability,  avoid  an  unnecessary  tightening  in 
financial conditions and support economic activity and jobs in the United States. In particular, 
by reducing the cost of dollar funding via the swap lines last month, we reduced the pressure 
on banks in Europe to abruptly liquidate their U.S. dollar assets. Thus, this step will help to 
insulate U.S. markets from the pressures in Europe and support the availability of credit to 
U.S. households and businesses. European banks are particularly active in areas such as 
trade finance, project finance, energy lending and municipal finance – a sharp contraction of 
the financing they provide would be harmful for the U.S. economy as a whole including for 
U.S.  exporters,  firms  working  on  infrastructure  projects,  the  energy  industry  and  hard-
pressed state and local governments across the country. 
U.S.  financial  institutions  currently  do  not  face  difficulty  obtaining  liquidity  in  short-term 
funding markets. However, were conditions to deteriorate, the Federal Reserve has a range 
of  tools  available  to  provide  an  effective  liquidity  backstop  for  such  institutions  and  is 
prepared  to  use  these  tools  as  needed  to  support  financial  stability  and  to  promote  the 
extension of credit to U.S. households and businesses. 
In sum, I am hopeful that Europe can effectively address its current fiscal challenges. The 
Federal Reserve is actively and carefully assessing this situation and the potential impact on 
the  U.S.  economy.  At  this  time,  although  I  do  not  anticipate  further  efforts  by  the  Federal 
Reserve  to  address  the  potential  spillover  effects  of  Europe  on  the  United  States,  we  will 
continue to monitor the situation closely. 
Thank you for your invitation to testify today, and I look forward to your questions. 
BIS central bankers’ speeches 
 3
