Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Spanish financial institutions in the face of 
the new competitive scenario  
Opening address by Mr Miguel Fernández Ordóñez, Governor of the Bank of Spain, of the 
XVI Financial Sector Meeting “Spanish financial institutions in the face of the new competitive 
scenario”, ABC-Deloitte Forum, Madrid, 21 April 2009. 
 Thank  you  very  much  for  inviting  me  to  participate  in  this  meeting  which  will  address  a 
subject  –Spanish  institutions  in  the  face  of  the  new  competitive  scenario  –  of  the  utmost 
importance at the current juncture. 
The highly exceptional difficulties besetting the global financial system and economy require 
decisive  action  from  all  of  us  who,  in  one  way  or  another,  have  responsibilities  in  these 
matters.  The  public  authorities  of  different  countries,  including  those  in  Spain,  are  taking 
measures which in many cases are unprecedented. But their efforts cannot and should not 
be restricted to this area: the managers of financial institutions must reorganise and adapt 
their  business  models  to  the  new  competitive  environment,  actively  seeking  out  levers 
permitting  this  process  of  change.  I  will  devote  the  bulk  of  my  address  to  this  issue,  not 
without briefly describing the situation of the Spanish banking system as a whole set against 
the international outlook. 
The  external  environment  remains  hugely  complex.  This  is  because,  on  one  hand,  acute 
uncertainty and instability continue to plague international financial markets, while the freeze 
persists in what were the key funding markets until 2007; and, on the other, the real economy 
has  entered  a  sharp  downturn  manifest  in  a  widespread  synchronised  recession  affecting 
both developed and emerging countries. 
The global dimension of this crisis and the interaction of the difficulties assailing the financial 
system with those of the real economy are shaping an outlook of unprecedented complexity. 
Accordingly, there is the risk of entering a vicious circle in which the difficulties of one sector 
feed back into those of another, aggravating problems and making them harder to resolve. 
The seriousness of the situation has compelled economic and monetary authorities in many 
countries  to  adopt  some  extraordinary  measures,  including  bailing  out  what  are  often  very 
large financial institutions. International difficulties remain in this field and the disclosure of 
further losses related to complex structured products cannot be ruled out. This is forestalling 
any end to the climate of uncertainty and lack of confidence. 
In recent months, central banks have adopted a wide range of measures, some of which are 
unconventional. Particular emphasis was placed on supplying the system with the necessary 
liquidity for it to continue to function. In the case of the ECB, this took the form, among other 
initiatives, of its decision in October 2008 to extend its commitment to satisfy all demands for 
liquidity at a fixed rate with full allotment, in such amounts as necessary, and at least until the 
beginning of 2010. 
These actions of central banks have been complemented by others by governments, which 
have set up guarantee systems for the debt issues of financial institutions so that the latter 
can access the wholesale funding markets, which had been closed even to institutions with 
the best credit ratings. 
This type of measure, which averted a total collapse of the financial system, enabled certain 
markets  to  show  signs  of  a  slight  improvement  in  relation  to  their  situation  in  September 
2008. Such is the case, for example, of the money markets, where there has been a slight 
correction  of  risk  premia.  The  public-sector  guarantees  for  financial  institutions’  issues 
boosted the volumes issued on primary fixed-income markets. 
BIS Review 52/2009 
 1
However, as mentioned above, normality has not returned to the markets where institutions 
are  looking  for  funding,  and  difficulties  persist  in  terms  of  amounts,  prices  and  maturities. 
Some of those markets, which had played a very important role prior to the summer of 2007, 
simply  remain  closed.  This  applies,  for  example,  to  securitisation  and  mortgage  covered 
bond  markets.  There  is  no  doubt  that  this  poses  a  difficult  challenge  for  credit  institutions 
previously used to practically unlimited liquidity. 
The recent forecasts by various international organisations indicate that, in fact, we are in a 
very  serious  worldwide  recession,  from  which  neither  the  euro  area  nor  the  Spanish 
economy have been spared. In general, according to the available forecasts for developed 
countries,  the  problems  will  be  acute  in  2009,  although  it  is  expected  that  at  some  point 
during 2010, taking into account the current high uncertainty any forecasting exercise entails, 
an incipient recovery may become discernible. 
The Spanish banking system, as is inevitable when faced with a global financial crisis, has 
not been immune. Nevertheless, the impact has been no less than in other banking systems, 
where public authorities have had to take control of very large institutions, as I have said. 
This  better  relative  performance  can  be  explained  by  at  least  two  factors.  Firstly,  the 
business  model  of  Spanish  credit  institutions  is  based  on  traditional  retail  banking  and  is 
founded on long-term relationships with customers and creditors. This type of banking model 
has enabled credit institutions to acquire in-depth knowledge of their customers, reducing the 
perverse effects linked to asymmetrical information present in any banking business model. 
Similarly, since it does not use asset securitisation as a risk transfer mechanism but only as 
a means of obtaining liquidity, the origination and acquisition of complex structured products 
has  been  avoided,  which  have  proved  to  be  substantially  opaque  and  the  cause  of  hefty 
losses for many institutions in various countries. 
This retail banking model was under debate before the financial crisis broke out in summer 
2007, and many analysts considered it obsolete. However, it has proved to be more resilient 
in the current situation than the originate-to-distribute model which was used intensively in 
certain banking systems, and lies in fact at the heart of the crisis. Other considerations aside, 
since the institutions hold on to the risks originated, the perverse incentives associated with 
the originate-to-distribute model have not been generated in the extension of credit and in its 
subsequent monitoring. 
A  second  factor  why  the  international  financial  crisis  did  not  directly  impact  the  Spanish 
banking system has been the Banco de España’s prudent regulation and supervision. I can 
offer two widely known and acknowledged examples. The first refers to supervision of credit 
institutions. The broad scope of this supervision acted as a deterrent for the creation and use 
of  certain  off-balance  sheet  vehicles.  The  second  example  refers  to  the  area  of  regulation 
and, in particular, a system of provisions characterised by very demanding specific-purpose 
provisions and, especially, dynamic provisions. Under this latter type of provisioning, which 
has been in force in our system since mid-2000, latent risks and losses in upturns must be 
recognised,  with  the  result  that  their  build-up  on  banks'  balance  sheets  has  an  immediate 
effect on institutions’ income statements. 
Obviously,  the  above-mentioned  measures  have  not  been  sufficient  to  isolate  Spanish 
institutions  from  the  financial  crisis.  These  institutions  have  been  hit  in  particular  by  the 
closure of various wholesale funding markets which they had turned to in previous years to 
finance part of the growth of their lending activity. 
The  ability  of  Spanish  institutions  to  step  up  deposit-taking,  as  an  alternative  source  of 
financing  to  wholesale  funding  markets,  and  the  ECB  and  governments’  measures  have 
alleviated the liquidity shortage. However, time deposits cannot grow indefinitely at rates of 
above 20% and, in fact, this source of funding will foreseeably peter out. Similarly, it cannot 
be  assumed  either  that  the  measures  adopted  to  facilitate  liquidity  in  the  system  and  the 
structural  characteristics  of  the  Spanish  banking  system,  which  I  referred  to  before,  are  a 
foolproof guarantee that there will not be any problems.  
2 
 BIS Review 52/2009
In  fact,  the  turmoil  generated  by  the  international  crisis  has  fed  through  to  the  Spanish 
economy and impacted it at a time when it was beginning to adjust the imbalances which had 
built up during fifteen years of continuous high economic growth.  
All these factors led Spain into an economic recession which is reflected most significantly in 
the sharp rise in unemployment. This, together with high corporate and household debt, in 
the framework of what had been excessively lax financing conditions, has now resulted in a 
weakening of households’ and firms’ spending capacity and of their financial position. And 
the consequence has been a rise in bad debts in the Spanish banking system. 
Although the recent trend in interest rates is a considerable relief for many debtors, the rise 
in  bad  debts,  which  will  continue  over  the  next  few  quarters,  poses  a  risk  which  deposit 
institutions must manage with great caution. 
This results in the gradual weakening of the income statements of credit institutions, which 
requires them to react decisively. Thus, it is of paramount importance that business models 
and income statements are in step with the new reality. 
In simple terms, in order for Spanish deposit institutions to remain in a sound position, they 
will  have  to  face  the  new  challenges  of  the  current  situation  by  finding  levers  for  change 
which  allow  them  to  counter  the  adverse  developments  currently  putting  pressure  on  their 
income statements, and incorporating such levers into their business models. 
Let me give you some figures on the recent trend in income statements. The consolidated 
profit of Spanish deposit institutions fell at a rate of approximately 20% in December 2008 
with respect to December 2007, while in June 2008 it had declined by slightly less than 3% 
on June 2007. 
Two  general  remarks  can  be  made  about  these  figures.  First,  comparison  with  the  results 
posted  by  institutions  in  other  banking  systems  in  developed  countries  is  favourable  for 
Spanish institutions; practically all of them continued to post positive results, mainly due to 
the factors I mentioned earlier. The complex and rather opaque products that caused notable 
losses at institutions in other countries were avoided. At the same time, the banking model in 
Spain  is  less  reliant  on  developments  in  financial  markets  and  on  investment  banking 
activities. 
Second,  the  data  mentioned  previously  show  that  Spanish  institutions’  income  statements 
have  been  affected  by  the  gradual  deterioration  of  the  economic  situation.  Although  it  is 
natural  to  some  extent  that,  in  more  adverse  conditions,  results  and  profitability  have  not 
increased as notably as in recent years, there is a clear and pressing need for resolute action 
by managers aimed at countering these pressures. 
I would like to briefly describe the developments in the main income statement captions and 
then identify the courses of action available. 
The net interest margin performed well in 2008 and its growth of around 14% over the same 
period  of  the  previous  year  was  higher  than  that  of  activity.  This  favourable  performance, 
despite representing a slowdown with respect to other years, reflects highly recurrent core 
income  from  banking  activity,  a  characteristic  of  the  Spanish  banking  system.  Also,  net 
interest margin growth was favoured by the high percentage of lending granted at variable 
rates, which allowed institutions to progressively raise interest rates in the first half of 2008. 
However, financial costs also grew strongly, and may continue to do so in the future. The 
higher  pressure  from  funding  costs  has  three  sources.  First,  the  notable  increase  in  risk 
premia, in a very sharp pendulum swing, has surely over-corrected the abnormally low levels 
reached in summer 2007, so these levels will foreseeably not be regained when conditions in 
the  international  financial  markets  return  to  normal.  Second,  the  persistent  difficulties  in 
obtaining  funding  on  the  wholesale  markets,  which  are  also  unlikely  to  regain  the  rate  of 
expansion  seen  in  the  past,  have  led  to  notably  heightened  competition  for  new  deposits, 
particularly time deposits, the cost of which is higher than that of other alternative sources of 
BIS Review 52/2009 
 3
to 
their  customers,  which  has  generated  significant 
funding. Lastly, it should be recalled that in a setting of low interest rates, the cost of bank 
deposits has a floor, and this also contributes to the narrowing of margins. 
For these reasons, the net interest margin will foreseeably come under downward pressure 
in an environment in which it is not, and will not conceivably be, offset by increases in the 
volume of activity. 
Fees  and  commissions  fell  slightly  in  absolute  terms.  Firstly,  analysis  of  the  various 
components  of  fee  and  commission  income  shows  that  those  directly  related  to  more 
traditional  banking  activity  have,  in  line  with  their  lower  rate  of  expansion,  grown  more 
moderately. 
Secondly, Spanish deposit institutions have been marketing non-bank financial products and 
securities  services 
fees  and 
commissions.  However,  the  data  for  December  2008  reflect  a  fall  in  fee  and  commission 
income from business of this type. This is because the difficulties besetting financial markets 
have  made  these  products  less  attractive  to  customers  and  because  institutions  have 
changed  their  product  mix.  It  thus  seems  that  their  customer  sales  focus  has  moved  from 
fee-generating  products  which  they  themselves  market,  such  as  pension  and  investment 
funds,  certain  insurance  products,  etc.  towards  deposits.  This  has  unquestionably  helped 
traditional  fund  raising  at  a  time  like  the  present,  but  at  the  cost,  irrespective  of  other 
considerations, of lower fee and commission income in profit and loss accounts. 
Another area in which institutions' income statements have come under pressure is in gains 
on financial transactions, which decreased significantly in 2008, largely due to the difficulties 
besetting financial markets, which have adversely affected trading book gains. In any event, 
as  mentioned  above,  in  the  Spanish  banking  model  the  weight  of  income  from  financial 
transactions is low compared with that in the originate-to-distribute model. 
Operating expenses grew moderately, albeit still at a rate similar to that of activity. This was 
the result of changes in their two main components: personnel costs, which, with a weight of 
nearly 60% of the total, grew by nearly 7%, and administrative expenses, which increased by 
9%. These rises, which can be considered high in the current circumstances, meant that both 
the  relative  weight  of  operating  expenses  in  average  total  assets  and  the  efficiency  ratio 
showed signs of stagnation in 2008, after having improved continuously over recent years. 
Finally, loan loss provisioning expenses increased sharply against a backdrop of rapid and 
significant  rises  in  bad  debts.  Higher  bad  debts  mean  higher  specific  provisions,  which, 
however, were partly offset by general provisions, since some institutions began to use the 
provision which had been set up for this purpose at a favourable time in the business cycle. 
In  addition,  the  rise  in  loan  loss  provisions  was  because  some  institutions  decided  to 
increase their provisions to help them face this more uncertain and troubled period, since the 
system in place in Spain sets an obligatory minimum but permits larger amounts to be set 
aside when there are signs of problems. 
In short, analysis of the data for 2008 shows that, although the results of Spanish institutions 
compare favourably with those of their counterparts in banking systems in other developed 
countries, income statements have begun to come under downward pressure. This situation, 
which may persist in the medium-term, is due to a broad range of factors mentioned earlier: 
narrower net interest margins, smaller fees, lower gains on financial transactions and higher 
loan loss provisions. 
Given this complex situation, what courses of action are available? 
First, it does not now seem reasonable to expect that the narrowing of margins can be offset 
by increased volumes of activity. Banking activity, particularly lending, has gone from growth 
rates of more than twice nominal GDP growth before the crisis to rates currently around 5%. 
It  cannot  be  ruled  out  that  the  slowdown  of  this  variable  will  continue,  or  even  that  it  will 
record  zero  or  negative  growth  rates.  From  a  medium-term  perspective,  and  even  when 
conditions are established that will free up the flow of credit from the banking sector to the 
4 
 BIS Review 52/2009
real economy, it cannot be expected that rates of expansion will rise again to the heights of 
recent  years.  The  de-leveraging  process  underway  in  the  banking  sector,  and  in  the 
economy in general, is not a passing fad, but rather a means of achieving lower and more 
sustainable debt positions. 
One  way  of  making  up  for  the  lower  rates  of  credit  expansion,  and  thus  countering  the 
foreseeable narrowing of net interest margins, would be to diversify banking activity into new 
business segments. In principle, diversification is a positive thing, but it must be undertaken 
with  caution.  Experience  shows  that  both  in  Spain  and  internationally,  only  on  limited 
occasions can an institution's sound knowledge of its core business be directly transferred to 
activities  that  lie  further  afield.  Accordingly,  those  in  charge  of  institutions  should  show 
prudence  and  avoid  what  can  be  termed  contrived  diversification  processes  and  carefully 
assess their entry into unfamiliar market segments in which they lack experience. 
Second,  in  the  short  term  bad  debts  will  keep  rising  and  so  the  pressure  on  loan  loss 
provisions will continue to be high. It is true that the reduction in interest rates will bring relief 
for  households  and  firms  and  help  to  limit  the  impact  of  the  rise  in  bad  debts,  but  the 
contractionary phase of the cycle will foreseeably last some quarters. In this respect, from 
the  standpoint  of  income  statements,  credit  institutions  have  limited  room  for  manoeuvre. 
Nevertheless, they should avoid imposing indiscriminate rules on customers when they grant 
new  loans;  further,  they  should  select  borrowers  more  cautiously  and  appropriately 
differentiate the interest rates applied to each of them. 
Against this background of moderate lending growth and higher loan loss provisions, it does 
not seem that fees or gains on financial transactions can offset the pressure on the income 
statement. First, as I just mentioned, because it is unlikely that growth rates will be very high 
in this more sluggish economic environment in which financial market difficulties persist. And 
second,  because,  even  if  they  are,  given  the  weight  of  these  items  in  income  statements, 
they  would  be  unlikely  to  act  as  offsetting  mechanisms  because  of  the  sheer  size  of  the 
pressures mentioned earlier. 
The  most  effective  course  of  action,  and  that  on  which  institutions'  efforts  should  focus,  is 
operating  expenses.  And  homing  in  on  operating  expenses  means  not  only  limiting  their 
growth, but should also lead to reducing those expenses which, because of their nature, are 
more  variable.  It  is  essential  to  exercise  utmost  care  in  taking  on  overheads,  which  are 
difficult to reverse. At a time like the present, it is preferable to have flexible cost structures 
which enable greater room for manoeuvre. 
The  effort  needed  is  formidable,  and  will  undoubtedly  require  operating  structures  to  be 
accommodated to the new competitive reality of the sector. In regard to, for example, bank 
offices, institutions should reconsider their scale and probably reduce their number, as well 
as promoting the productivity of those which remain operational. It is true that the proximity to 
customers  has  afforded  significant  competitive  advantages  to  the  Spanish  banking  model. 
But  it  is  equally  true  that  the  potential  advantages  of  a  larger  scale  and  proximity  to 
customers can turn into overhead costs which are burdensome in a crisis and can weaken 
income statements already under downward pressure due to other factors which are hard to 
deal with. 
Having  said  this,  my  words  cannot  and  must  not  be  taken  to  mean  that  stricter  cost 
management will be the cure-all enabling all institutions to circumvent the potential difficulties 
for their income statements. From the standpoint of business model redesign and adaptation 
to a new reality, it is evident that appropriate cost management is essential. But it may not be 
enough. I am sure that institutions are not going to disregard restructuring processes which 
will enable them to resize while harnessing synergies and economies of scale. Indeed, in the 
past,  Spain  has  seen  numerous  processes  of  this  type  which  have  resulted  in  highly 
successful business models. 
Let me sum up. 
BIS Review 52/2009 
 5
The complexity of the international financial crisis and of the synchronised weakening of the 
real  economy  in  numerous  countries  puts  banking  systems  in  a  complex  and  exceptional 
position. 
In these circumstances, the firm adoption of measures to overcome the crisis is not only the 
responsibility  of  the  public  authorities  –  a  task  to  which  a  strong  commitment  was  shown 
following the last G20 summit – but also of those responsible for managing and designing the 
business models of credit institutions. 
Spanish  institutions,  which  so  far  have  handled  the  difficulties  comparatively  better  than 
those  of  banking  systems  in  other  developed  countries,  have  to  actively  seek  solutions  to 
adapt  their  business  model  to  the  new  realities  of  the  banking  sector  both  in  Spain  and 
internationally.  They  have  to  seek  out  the  levers  for  change  which  will  allow  them  to 
strengthen  their  business  model  and  thus  their  income  statements.  Among  the  available 
options,  that  of  redesigning  their  operating  cost  structure,  at  this  point  in  time,  seems 
unavoidable. However, this action alone will not be enough to overcome the pressures which 
affect and will continue to affect their income statements. At times it will be necessary and 
appropriate  to  turn  to  processes  which  take  a  step  further  and  help  institutions  to  exploit 
synergies and economies of scale. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 52/2009
