Donald L Kohn: Federal Reserve independence 
Testimony  by  Mr  Donald  L  Kohn,  Vice  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US 
Federal  Reserve  System,  before  the  Subcommittee  on  Domestic  Monetary  Policy  and 
Technology,  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives,  Washington 
DC, 9 July 2009. 
 Chairman  Watt,  Ranking  Member  Paul,  and  other  members  of  the  Subcommittee,  I 
appreciate the opportunity to discuss with you the important public policy reasons why the 
Congress  has  long  given  the  Federal  Reserve  a  substantial  degree  of  independence  to 
conduct monetary policy while ensuring that we remain accountable to the Congress and to 
the American people. In addition, I will explain why an extension of the Federal Reserve’s 
supervisory and regulatory responsibilities as part of a broader initiative to address systemic 
risks would be compatible with the pursuit of our statutory monetary policy objectives. I also 
will  discuss  the  significant  steps  the  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  recently  to  improve  our 
transparency and maintain accountability.  
Independence and accountability 
A  well-designed  framework  for  monetary  policy  includes  a  careful  balance  between 
independence and accountability. A balance of this type conforms to our general inclination 
as a nation to have clearly drawn lines of authority, limited powers, and appropriate checks 
and balances within our government; such a balance also is conducive to sound monetary 
policy. 
The Federal Reserve derives much of the authority under which it operates from the Federal 
Reserve  Act.  The  act  specifies  and  limits  the  Federal  Reserve’s  powers.  In  1977,  the 
Congress amended the act by establishing maximum employment and price stability as our 
monetary  policy  objectives;  the  Federal  Reserve  has  no  authority  to  establish  different 
objectives. At the same time, the Congress has – correctly, in my view – given the Federal 
Reserve  considerable  scope  to  design  and  implement  the  best  approaches  to  achieving 
those statutory objectives. Moreover, as I will discuss in detail later, the independence that is 
granted to the Federal Reserve is subject to a well-calibrated system of checks and balances 
in the form of transparency and accountability to the public and the Congress.  
The latitude for the Federal Reserve to pursue its statutory objectives is expressed in several 
important ways. For example, the Congress determined that Federal Reserve policymakers 
cannot be removed from their positions merely because others in the government disagree 
with their views on policy issues. In addition, to guard against indirect pressures, the Federal 
Reserve  determines  its  budget  and  staff,  subject  to  congressional  oversight.  Thus,  the 
system  has 
the  Congress, 
independence to pursue those legislated objectives as efficiently and effectively as possible, 
and accountability to the Congress through a range of vehicles. 
three  essential  components:  broad  objectives  set  by 
Benefits of independence to conduct policy in pursuit of legislated objectives 
The  insulation  from  short-term  political  pressures  –  within  a  framework  of  legislated 
objectives and accountability and transparency – that the Congress has established for the 
Federal  Reserve  has  come  to  be  widely  emulated  around  the  world.  Considerable 
experience  shows  that  this  type  of  approach  tends  to  yield  a  monetary  policy  that  best 
promotes  economic  growth  and  price  stability.  Operational  independence  –  that  is, 
independence to pursue legislated goals – reduces the odds on two types of policy errors 
that  result  in  inflation  and  economic  instability.  First,  it  prevents  governments  from 
BIS Review 87/2009 
 1
succumbing  to  the  temptation  to  use  the  central  bank  to  fund  budget  deficits.  Second,  it 
enables  policymakers  to  look  beyond  the  short  term  as  they  weigh  the  effects  of  their 
monetary policy actions on price stability and employment.  
History  provides  numerous  examples  of  non-independent  central  banks  being  forced  to 
finance  large  government  budget  deficits.  Such  episodes  invariably  lead  to  high  inflation. 
Given  the  current  outlook  for  large  federal  budget  deficits  in  the  United  States,  this 
consideration  is  especially  important.  Any  substantial  erosion  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
monetary  independence  likely  would  lead  to  higher  long-term  interest  rates  as  investors 
begin  to  fear  future  inflation.  Moreover,  the  bond  rating  agencies  view  operational 
independence  of  a  country’s  central  bank  as  an  important  factor  in  determining  sovereign 
credit ratings, suggesting that a threat to the Federal Reserve’s independence could lower 
the  Treasury’s  debt  rating  and  thus  raise  its  cost  of  borrowing.1  Higher  long-term  interest 
rates  would  further  increase  the  burden  of  the  national  debt  on  current  and  future 
generations.2
The  second  way  in  which  political  interference  with  monetary  policy  can  damage  the 
economy  is  by  promoting  an  undue  focus  on  the  short  term.  Because  excessively  easy 
monetary policy tends to boost economic activity temporarily before the destabilizing effects 
of higher inflation are felt, policymakers with a relatively short-term outlook may be tempted 
to  ease  monetary  policy  too  much.  The  eventual  result  is  higher  inflation  without  any 
permanent  benefit  in  terms  of  employment,  an  outcome  that  is  inconsistent  with  the  dual 
mandate for maximum employment and price stability. Thus the increase in inflation must be 
followed  by  policies  to  bring  inflation  back  down  –  policies  that  have  the  side  effect  of 
temporarily  reducing output and employment. The fixed, lengthy, and overlapping terms of 
Federal  Reserve  Board  members,  in  combination  with  the  other  elements  of  operational 
independence, help ensure that the Federal Reserve appropriately considers both the short-
term and long-term effects of its policy decisions.  
Statistical  studies  have  confirmed  that  countries  with  more  independent  central  banks 
experience  lower  and  more  stable  rates  of  inflation  with  no  sacrifice  of  jobs  or  income.3 
Moreover, low and stable rates of inflation help to deliver strong economic growth and high 
rates  of  employment.  The  benefits  of  central  bank  independence  appear  to  be  a  major 
explanation for the trend I mentioned earlier of countries moving to establish or to enhance 
the independence of their central banks. It is surely no coincidence that countries around the 
world  have  experienced  sustained  declines  in  the  level  and  variability  of  inflation  as  they 
have moved to grant their central banks greater operational independence. 
Monetary policy independence and the mitigation of systemic risk 
Is monetary policy independence threatened by giving a central bank other responsibilities, 
such  as  supervisory  and  regulatory  authority  for  some  parts  of  the  financial  system?  Are 
                                                 
1   Standard & Poor's (2004), "Sovereign Credit Ratings: A Primer," March 15, 
www2.standardandpoors.com/spf/pdf/products/SovRatingsPrimer_sov.pdf. 
2   The beneficial effects of central bank independence on a government's borrowing costs have been observed 
even  when  budget  deficits  are  not  unusually  large.  For  example,  on  May  6,  1997,  the  U.K.  government 
announced that the Bank of England would be given considerable operational independence. The yield on 10-
year U.K. government bonds fell 30 basis points that day, even though the government made no change to 
the Bank of England's policy objectives and there was no other prominent economic or policy news. Market 
participants  widely  attributed  the  decline  in  long-term  interest  rates  to  the  surprise  announcement  of 
independence and the consequent increased confidence in future price stability. 
3   See,  for  example,  the  survey  in  Alex  Cukierman  (2008),  "Central  Bank  Independence  and  Monetary 
Policymaking  Institutions  –  Past,  Present,  and  Future,"      European  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  vol.  24 
(December), pp. 722-36. 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2009
important 
for  overseeing  systemically 
there  potential  conflicts  between  a  high  degree  of  independence  for  monetary  policy  and 
accountability in supervisory and regulatory policy? I believe that U.S. and foreign experience 
shows  that  monetary  policy  independence  and  supervisory  and  regulatory  authority  are 
mutually compatible and even have beneficial synergies. 
The current financial crisis has clearly demonstrated the need for the United States to have a 
comprehensive  and  multifaceted  approach  to  containing  systemic  risk.  The  Administration 
recently released a proposal for strengthening the financial system that would provide new or 
enhanced  responsibilities  to  a  number  of  federal  agencies,  including  the  Securities  and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission with respect 
to over-the-counter derivatives, the SEC with respect to hedge funds and their advisers, and 
several  agencies,  including  the  Treasury,  the  Federal  Deposit  Insurance  Corporation,  the 
Federal Reserve Board, and the SEC with respect to the resolution of systemically important 
failing  nonbank  financial  institutions.  In  addition,  the  proposal  would  provide  the  Federal 
Reserve  certain  new  responsibilities 
financial 
institutions and payment, clearing, and settlement arrangements.  
These  incremental  new  responsibilities  are  a  natural  outgrowth  of  the  Federal  Reserve’s 
existing  supervisory  and  regulatory  responsibilities.  Through  our  role  as  consolidated 
supervisor  of  all  bank  holding  companies  (BHCs),  the  Federal  Reserve  has  long  been 
responsible for supervising many of the most important U.S. financial organizations, and in 
the  current  crisis  several  more  large  complex  financial  firms  –  including  Goldman  Sachs, 
Morgan Stanley, and American Express – have become bank holding companies. And the 
expanded  regulatory  authority  of  the  Federal  Reserve  with  respect  to  payment  and 
settlement  systems  builds  upon  our  existing  responsibilities  for  supervising  certain  critical 
payment, clearing, and settlement systems, such as the Depository Trust Company and CLS 
Bank, as well as our historical efforts to reduce risk in such systems through, for example, 
our Payment System Risk Policy.4  
The  authorities  that  the  Administration’s  proposal  would  provide  the  Federal  Reserve  with 
respect  to  systemically  important  non-BHC  financial  firms  and  payment,  clearing  and 
settlement  systems  also  are  similar  in  many  respects  to  the  authorities  that  the  Federal 
Reserve currently has with respect to bank holding companies and payment, clearing, and 
settlement  systems  under  our  supervision.  The  Administration’s  proposal  does  call  for  a 
more macro-prudential approach to the supervision and regulation of systemically important 
financial firms and payment, clearing, and settlement systems, including the establishment of 
higher capital, liquidity, and risk-management requirements for systemically important firms. 
The  Federal  Reserve  already  has  been  moving  to  incorporate  a  more  macro-prudential 
approach  to  our  supervisory  and  regulatory  programs,  as  evidenced  by  the  recently 
completed  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment  Program.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  also  long 
been  a  leader  in  the  development  of  strong  international  risk-management  standards  for 
payment,  clearing,  and  settlement  systems  and  has  implemented  these  standards  for  the 
systems it supervises. 
In our supervision of bank holding companies and our oversight of some payment systems, 
we already work closely with other federal and state agencies and participate in groups of 
regulators  and  supervisors  such  as  the  Federal  Financial  Institutions  Examination  Council 
and the President’s Working Group on Financial Markets. These responsibilities and close 
working relationships have not impinged on our monetary policy independence, and we do 
not believe that the enhancements proposed by the Administration to the Federal Reserve’s 
supervisory and regulatory authority would undermine the Federal Reserve’s ability to pursue 
our monetary policy objectives effectively and independently. 
                                                 
4   The Federal Reserve's Payment System Risk Policy can be found at 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/paymentsystems/psr/default.htm. 
BIS Review 87/2009 
 3
Indeed,  these  enhancements  would  complement  the  Federal  Reserve’s  monetary  policy 
responsibilities. The Federal Reserve and other central banks have always been involved in 
issues  of  systemic  risk,  most  notably  because  central  banks  act  as  lenders  of  last  resort. 
Central  banks,  which  operate  in  markets  daily  and  have  macroeconomic  responsibilities, 
bring a broad and unique perspective to analysis  of developments in the financial system. 
And, as we have seen over the past two years, threats to the stability of the financial system 
can have major implications for employment and price stability. Thus, the Federal Reserve’s 
monetary policy objectives are closely aligned with those of minimizing systemic risk. To the 
extent  that  the  proposed  new  regulatory  framework  would  contribute  to  greater  financial 
stability,  it  should  improve  the  ability  of  monetary  policy  to  achieve  maximum  employment 
and stable prices.  
in 
Accountability and transparency 
In a democracy, any significant degree of independence by a government agency must be 
accompanied by substantial accountability and transparency. The Congress and the Federal 
Reserve have established a number of policies and procedures to ensure that the Federal 
Reserve  continues  to  use  its  operational  independence  in  a  manner  that  promotes  the 
nation’s  well-being.  The  Federal  Reserve  reports  on  its  experience  toward  achieving  its 
statutory  objectives 
the  semiannual  Monetary  Policy  Reports  and  associated 
congressional  testimony.  The  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  releases  a 
statement immediately after each regularly scheduled meeting and detailed minutes of each 
meeting on a timely basis. We also publish summaries of the economic forecasts of FOMC 
participants four times a year. In addition, Federal Reserve officials frequently testify before 
the  Congress  and  deliver  speeches  to  the  public  on  a  wide  range  of  topics,  including 
economic and financial conditions and monetary and regulatory policy.  
Our  financial  controls  are  examined  by  an  external  auditor,  and  Reserve  Bank  operations 
and controls are reviewed by each Reserve Bank’s independent internal audit function and 
by Board staff who oversee Reserve Bank activities. We provide the public and the Congress 
with detailed annual reports on the consolidated financial activities of the Federal Reserve 
System  that  are  audited  by  an  independent  public  accounting  firm.  We  also  publish  a 
detailed balance sheet on a weekly basis. 
The  Federal  Reserve  recognizes  that  the  new  programs  we  have  instituted  to  combat  the 
financial crisis must be accompanied by additional transparency. Americans have a right to 
know how the Federal Reserve is using taxpayer resources and they need to be assured that 
we are acting in a responsible manner that minimizes risk and maintains the integrity of our 
operations. We have increased the transparency of our actions while safeguarding our ability 
to achieve our public policy goals of fostering financial and economic stability. This year we 
expanded  our  website  to  include  considerable  background  information  on  our  financial 
condition and our policy programs. Recently, we initiated a monthly report to the Congress 
and the public on Federal Reserve liquidity programs that provides even more information on 
our lending, the associated collateral, and other facets of programs established to address 
the financial crisis. These steps should help the public understand the considerable efforts 
we have taken to minimize the risk of loss as we provide liquidity to the financial system in 
our role as lender of last resort. Altogether, we now provide a higher degree of transparency 
than at any other time in the history of the Federal Reserve System. Because of the large 
volume  of  information  we  publish,  the  Federal  Reserve  is  among  the  most  transparent 
central banks in the world. 
Federal Reserve policymakers are highly accountable and answerable to the government of 
the  United  States  and  to  the  American  people.  The  seven  members  of  the  Board  of 
Governors of the Federal Reserve System are appointed by the President and confirmed by 
the Senate after a thorough process of public examination. The key positions of Chairman 
and Vice Chairman are subject to presidential and congressional review every four years, a 
4 
 BIS Review 87/2009
separate and shorter schedule than the 14-year terms of Board members. The members of 
the  Board  of  Governors  account  for  seven  seats  on  the  FOMC.  By  statute,  the  other  five 
members  of  the  FOMC  are  drawn  from  the  presidents  of  the  12  Federal  Reserve  Banks. 
District  presidents  are  appointed  through  a  process  involving  a  broad  search  of  qualified 
individuals by local boards of directors; the choice must then be approved by the Board of 
Governors. In creating the Federal Reserve System, the Congress combined a Washington-
based Board with strong regional representation to carefully balance the variety of interests 
of  a  diverse  nation.  The  Federal  Reserve  Banks  strengthen  our  policy  deliberations  by 
bringing  real-time  information  about  the  economy  from  their  district  contacts  and  by  their 
diverse perspectives.  
Oversight by the Government Accountability Office 
On the topic of Federal Reserve accountability and transparency, the possibility of expanding 
the audit authority of the Government Accountability Office (GAO) over the Federal Reserve 
has recently been discussed. As you know, the Federal Reserve is subject to frequent audits 
by the GAO on a broad range of our functions.  
For example, the supervisory and regulatory functions of the Federal Reserve are subject to 
audit by the GAO to the same extent as the supervisory and regulatory functions of the other 
federal banking agencies. Thus, the GAO has full authority to – and does in fact – audit the 
manner in which the Federal Reserve supervises and regulates bank holding companies on 
a consolidated basis. Moreover, if the Congress were to provide the Federal Reserve with 
responsibility  for  serving  as  the  consolidated  supervisor  of  systemically  important  financial 
firms  that  are  not  bank  holding  companies,  the  GAO  would,  under  existing  law,  have  full 
authority to audit the Federal Reserve’s supervision and regulation of such firms as well. We 
would expect the GAO to actively use that authority, as it does today. Indeed, as of June 29, 
2009, the GAO had 19 engagements under way involving the Federal Reserve, including 14 
that were initiated at the request of the Congress. In addition, since the beginning of 2008, 
the  GAO  has  completed  26  engagements  involving  the  Federal  Reserve,  including 
engagements related to the Basel II capital framework, risk-management oversight, the Bank 
Secrecy Act, and the Board’s Regulation B, which implements the Equal Credit Opportunity 
Act. 
The  Congress  also  recently  clarified  the  GAO’s  ability  to  audit  the  Term  Asset-Backed 
Securities  Loan  Facility  (TALF),  a  joint  Treasury-Federal  Reserve  initiative,  in  conjunction 
with  the  GAO’s  reviews  of  the  performance  of  Treasury’s  Troubled  Asset  Relief  Program 
(TARP). The Federal Reserve has been working closely with the GAO to provide that agency 
with  access  to  information  and  personnel  to  permit  it  to  fully  understand  the  terms, 
conditions,  and  operations  of  the  TALF  so  that  the  TARP  can  be  properly  audited.  At  the 
same  time,  the  Congress  granted  the  GAO  new  authority  to  conduct  audits  of  the  credit 
facilities  extended  by  the  Federal  Reserve  to  “single  and  specific”  companies  under  the 
authority provided by section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act, including the loan facilities 
provided to, or created for, American International Group and Bear Stearns. These facilities 
are  markedly  different  from  the  widely  available  credit  facilities  –  such  as  the  discount 
window  access  for  depository  institutions,  the  Primary  Dealer  Credit  Facility,  and  the 
Commercial Paper Funding Facility – that the Federal Reserve either has historically used or 
has recently established to address broad credit and liquidity issues in the financial system. 
For this reason, the Federal Reserve did not object to granting the GAO audit authority over 
these institution-specific, emergency credit facilities.  
The Congress, however, has purposefully – and for good reason – excluded from the scope 
of potential GAO audits monetary policy deliberations and operations, including open market 
and discount window operations, and transactions with or for foreign central banks, foreign 
governments, and public international financing organizations. By excluding these areas, the 
Congress  has  carefully  balanced  the  need  for  public  accountability  with  the  strong  public 
BIS Review 87/2009 
 5
to 
to  monetary  policy 
policy benefits that flow from maintaining the independence of the central bank’s monetary 
policy functions and avoiding disruption to the nation’s foreign and international relationships.  
The  same  public  policy  reasons  that  supported  the  creation  of  these  exclusions  in  1978 
remain valid today. The Federal Reserve strongly believes that removing the statutory limits 
on GAO audits of monetary policy matters would be contrary to the public interest by tending 
to undermine the independence and efficacy of monetary policy in several ways. First, the 
GAO  serves  as  the  investigative  arm  of  the  Congress  and,  by  law,  must  conduct  an 
investigation  and  prepare  a  report  whenever  requested  by  the  House  or  Senate  or  a 
committee  with  jurisdiction  of  either  body.  Through  its  investigations  and  audits,  the  GAO 
typically  makes  its  own  judgments  about  policy  actions  and  the  manner  in  which  they  are 
implemented,  as  well  as  recommendations  to the  audited agency  and  to  the  Congress  for 
changes or future actions. Accordingly, financial markets likely would see the grant of audit 
authority  with  respect 
the  GAO  as  undermining  monetary 
independence – with the adverse consequences discussed previously – particularly because 
GAO audits, or the threat of a GAO audit, could be used to try to influence monetary policy 
decisions.  
Permitting  GAO  audits  of  monetary  policy  also  could  cast  a  chill  on  monetary  policy 
deliberations through another channel. Although Federal Reserve officials regularly explain 
the  rationale  for  their  policy  decisions  in  public  venues,  the  process  of  vetting  ideas  and 
proposals, many of which are never incorporated into policy decisions, could suffer from the 
threat of public disclosure. If policymakers believed that GAO audits would result in published 
analyses of their policy discussions, they might be less willing to engage in the unfettered 
and  wide-ranging  internal  debates  that  are  essential  to  identifying  the  best  possible  policy 
options.  Moreover,  the  publication  of  the  results  of  GAO  audits  related  to  monetary  policy 
actions  and  deliberations  could  complicate  and  interfere  with  the  communication  of  the 
FOMC’s  intentions  regarding  monetary  policy  to  financial  markets  and  the  public  more 
broadly.  Households,  firms,  and  financial  market  participants  might  be  uncertain  about  the 
implications  of  the  GAO’s  findings  for  future  decisions  of  the  FOMC,  thereby  increasing 
market volatility and weakening the ability of monetary policy actions to achieve their desired 
effects.  
These  concerns  extend  to  the  policy  decisions  to  implement  the  discount  window  and 
broadly  available  credit  facilities.  These  facilities  are  extensions  of  our  responsibility  for 
promoting  financial  stability,  maximum  employment  and  price  stability.  Indeed,  unlike  the 
institution-specific  loans  that  the  Federal  Reserve  has  made  that  now  are  subject  to  GAO 
audit, these broader market facilities are designed to unfreeze financial markets and lower 
interest rate spreads in concert with our other monetary policy actions. It is important that, 
like  other  monetary  policy  decisions,  the  Federal  Reserve  remain  independent  in  making 
policy decisions regarding these facilities.  
An additional concern is that permitting GAO audits of the broad liquidity facilities the Federal 
Reserve uses to affect credit conditions could reduce the effectiveness of these facilities in 
helping promote financial stability, maximum employment, and price stability. For example, 
even  if  strong  confidentiality  restrictions  were  established,  individual  banks  might  be  more 
reluctant  to  borrow  from  the  discount  window  if  they  knew  that  their  identity  and  other 
sensitive information about their borrowings could be disclosed to the GAO. Rumors that a 
bank may have used the discount window can cause a damaging loss of confidence even to 
a  fundamentally  sound  institution.  Experience,  including  experience  in the  current  financial 
crisis,  shows  that  banks’  unwillingness  to  use  the  discount  window  can  result  in  high  and 
volatile short-term interest rates and limit the effectiveness of the discount window as a tool 
to enhance financial stability. 
Overall, the Federal Reserve believes that removing the remaining statutory limits on GAO 
audits of monetary policy and discount window functions would tend to undermine public and 
investor confidence in monetary policy by raising concerns that monetary policy judgments in 
6 
 BIS Review 87/2009
pursuit  of  our  legislated  objectives  would  become  subject  to  political  considerations.  As  a 
result, such an action would increase inflation fears and market interest rates and, ultimately, 
damage economic stability and job creation. 
Thank you for inviting me to present the Board’s views on this very important subject. I look 
forward to answering any questions you may have. 
BIS Review 87/2009 
 7
