Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Central banking in the 21st century – implications of 
economic and financial globalisation  
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Zeti  Akhtar  Aziz,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia,  at 
Central  Bank  of  Malaysia’s  High  Level  Conference  2009  “Central  Banking  in  the  21st 
Century: Implications of Economic and Financial Globalisation”, Kuala Lumpur, 10 February 
2009. 
 Honourable Governors, 
Distinguished guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  my  pleasure  to  welcome  you  to  the  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  Conference  on  "Central 
Banking  in  the  21st  Century:  Implications  of  Economic  and  Financial  Globalisation"  that  is 
being held in conjunction with the 50th Anniversary of Bank Negara Malaysia. Indeed, the 
conference  takes  place  at  a  time  when  we  need  to  reflect  on  the  many  issues  that  are 
emerging from the current global financial and economic crisis and the new challenges and 
lessons it brings to central banks. 
We are most honoured by the presence of central banks from more than 50 countries who 
have come to be with us on the occasion of our 50th Anniversary. This gathering has also 
brought  together  distinguished  speakers  not  only  from  the  central  banking  community  but 
also outstanding scholars and senior practitioners from the financial services industry. It is 
hoped  that  this  conference  will  contribute  to  a  greater  understanding  to  the  issues 
confronting central banks in the 21st century. 
Indeed, we are now in a world that is fundamentally different, a world that calls for a greater 
appreciation  of  the  changes  that  need  to  be  made  to  the  systems  and  structures,  to  the 
institutional arrangements and mechanisms, and to the manner in which we operate in this 
new  environment.  The  international  dimension  of  these  changes  calls  for  an  outcome  in 
which the international financial system is less prone to disruptions and failures and in which 
economic progress is a shared prosperity among nations. 
Globalisation has had a deep impact on the way modern economies function. The benefits of 
globalisation have accrued to diverse communities and regions but it has also brought with it 
significant risks. While the Asian Crisis showed the effects of globalisation, it also showed 
that  Asia  was  able  to  rapidly  rebound  and  continue  to  benefit  from  increased  international 
trade  and  financial  flows.  The  rapid  restoration  of  stability  and  resumption  of  growth  had 
confined the crisis to Asia. 
As the current financial crisis is translated into an economic crisis, its repercussions are now 
being felt on a global scale. While the turmoil had its origins in the developed economies, its 
continued escalation has extended the effects of the crisis to the rest of the world. 
Economic and financial globalisation thus not only calls for policy responses at the national 
level  but  also  at  the  international  level.  It  also  calls  for  the  consideration  that  such  policy 
responses  may  have  implications  that  extend  beyond  the  domestic  borders,  Benefits  may 
also be derived from cross border coordination of policy responses to increase the prospects 
of achieving the desired outcomes. 
Our conference today focuses on the impact of economic and financial globalisation on the 
role  of  central  banks,  as  well  as  to  assess how  central  banks  can  effectively  contribute  to 
promote  stability  in  this  environment.  In  particular,  the  conference  will  be  looking  at  the 
implications and challenges that globalisation brings to the mandate of the central banks in 
preserving  monetary  and  financial  stability.  The  pace  and  nature  of  globalisation  has  also 
BIS Review 20/2009 
 1
brought significant stress to the international financial architecture. The current financial crisis 
has  highlighted  the  vulnerabilities  in  the  international  financial  architecture,  leading  to 
renewed thinking about the reform of the global financial system. Tonight, Joseph Stiglitz will 
be speaking on "Strong Institutions for Growth and Crisis Management". 
Tomorrow, we will address some of the specific management challenges central banks face 
in  a  globalised  environment.  We  will  discuss  some  recent  developments  of  central  banks' 
cooperation and the areas for reform of the international financial architecture. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The crisis presents an opportunity for us to re-evaluate, promote and embrace sustainable 
long terms solutions. Our focus is for the discussion to contribute to the means through which 
central  banks  can  contribute  more  effectively  in  promoting  stability  and  economic  growth. 
This conference will provide an opportunity to reassess our traditional views on many of the 
issues before us. On this note, I wish you a very engaging and substantive conference. 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2009
