L Wilson Kamit: Financial sector reforms in Papua New Guinea 
Speech  by  Mr  L  Wilson  Kamit,  CBE,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea,  at  the 
opening of new the ANZ Harbour City Head Office, PNG, Port Moresby, 24 July 2009. 
 Mr Garry Tunstall, ANZ Managing Director North West Pacific, Mr Vishnu Mohan, Incoming 
ANZ Managing Director North West Pacific, 
Thank you, University of Music – Kaugere 
Thank you for the invitation to officiate at the opening of ANZ’s new head office and branch. I 
wish to make some comments on the banking and financial system before we start on the 
existing part of the programme. 
Legislative and policy changes 
At  the  turn  of  this  decade,  PNG  embarked  on  a  comprehensive  structural  reform  process, 
which  was  supported  by  the  international  multilateral  financial  institutions  and  the  bilateral 
friends of PNG. One aspect of the reform program was to broaden the scope and improve 
the effectiveness of financial sector regulation, drawing on international best practices. The 
reforms: 
• 
Gave full responsibility to the Central Bank for licensing and supervising authorised 
deposit  taking  institutions,  superannuation  funds,  fund  managers,  life  insurance 
companies and life insurance brokers; 
Strengthened information gathering and investigative powers; 
Enables and instills good governance, transparency and accountability of institutions; 
Enables vetting of directors and senior managers of authorised financial institutions; 
and 
Effectively  prohibits  pyramid  schemes  which  have  been  a  major  problem  in  recent 
times. 
  There is an “open invitation” for opening up banks and financial institutions in Papua New 
Guinea as long as one observes the licencing requirements. In essence, an applicant must: 
• 
Have sufficient capital and have ready access to shareholders funds and resources if 
needed. It is NOT sufficient to wait for funds from the shareholder when an institution 
comes under stress. 
Management experience in banking and finance. 
The applicant and its affiliates must be solvent. 
Have  the  plan  to  offer  financial  services  including  opening  up  of  branches  and 
agencies. 
 These licencing requirements are essential to enable the entry into the financial system of 
Papua New Guinea of the serious, the committed and the resilient development parties who 
are prepared to continue to invest and expand in Papua New Guinea. 
These licencing requirements are essential to “keep out” the inept and inept practices that 
will threaten the soundness of the banking and financial system. Our own experiences of the 
lost decade “the 1990’s” attests to this stance. Under the reforms, the Bank of PNG had to 
shut down a major bank, liquidate 86 savings and loan societies and oversee a number of 
financial institutions manage and trade themselves back into business. The process is still 
BIS Review 113/2009 
 1
continuing  with  a  small  number  of  institutions  still  under  Statutory  Management  or  In 
Liquidation. 
The financial sector 
The reformation of the financial sector created the foundation for financial stability which has 
led to rapid economic growth unprecedented in PNG. The financial sector has seen major 
transformation in asset size since 2000. Total assets of the financial system grew from under 
K4.0 billion in 2000 to over K20.0 billion as at end of March in 2009, with the banking system 
maintaining  65.2  percent  of  the  market  share,  authorized  superannuation  funds  (ASFs) 
account  for  26.4  percent,  savings  and  loans  societies  4.1  percent,  licenced  financial 
institutions  (LFIs)  of  3.2  percent,  and  life  insurance  companies  (LICs)  of  1.1  percent. 
Consistent with the rapid increase in asset size, return on assets and equity of the banking 
sector increased significantly following the reforms. Banks in PNG remain one of the most 
profitable in the region. 
The financial sector reforms assisted significantly in preventing the domestic banking system 
from the adverse effects of the global financial crises. The successful aversion was also due 
to the following factors: 
• 
Lending by the commercial banks virtually funded domestically by deposits from the 
public; 
The banking system is well funded with ample liquidity and has a stable interest rate 
environment; 
Effective 
the 
maintenance of capital adequacy, low level of non performing loans, good corporate 
governance and management gave confidence to the economy; and 
Sound  fiscal  management  by  the  government,  including  debt  retirement  program 
provide private sector confidence; 
framework  which  emphasis  on 
financial  system  supervisory 
   Improvement in the sovereign risk rating of PNG from BB to BB+. 
The above factors reflect that an effective regulatory framework, sound fiscal and monetary 
policies  and  adherence  to  basic  principles  of  banking  can  safeguard  the  financial  system 
from the adverse effects of external banking or financial crises. 
Papua New Guinean economy 
The fast pace of private sector credit growth and the development of the LNG have changed 
the landscape of risk profile in PNG. The following are risks which are most likely to affect the 
banking system in the short and medium term. 
Despite the global financial crises, the PNG economy has performed relatively well in the last 
5  years  on  the  back  of  high  international  commodity  prices,  and  prudent  management  of 
fiscal  and monetary  policies.  The  economy  grew  at  an  average  rate  of  5-6  percent  in  real 
GDP  terms  between  2004  and  2008,  leading  to  an  improvement  in  balance  of  payments 
position  and  record  international  reserves  adequate  for  9-11  months  of  import  cover. 
However, there are challenges we still have to face: 
1. 
A  significant  decline  in  commodity  prices  can  have  an  adverse  impact  on  the 
economy through a fall in producer incomes, increase fiscal deficit, lower investments 
and  increase  public  borrowing.  Decline  in  incomes  can  lead  to  an  increase  in  non 
performing loans in those sectors and undermine soundness of the financial system; 
The possibility of a delay in the development of the LNG project can result in asset 
quality issues of the banking system. 
BIS Review 113/2009
2. 
2 
 3. 
4. 
Financial  institutions  can  introduce  risk  in  their  operations  through  imprudent 
management  practices.  These  include  credit,  operations,  and  market  risks.  Credit 
Risk is the threat of default by borrowers and transactional counterparties as well as 
the loss of value of assets due to deterioration in credit quality. Operational risk is the 
threat  of  loss  resulting  from  inadequate  or  failed  internal  processes,  people  and 
systems or from external events, including legal risk, while market risk is the threat of 
loss due to movement in prices on the holding of interest bearing securities, equities, 
foreign exchange, commodities and derivative instruments. 
The Central Bank must ensure that it maintains supervision standards that will ensure 
a  continuing  sound  financial  system.  There  is  no  room  for  complacency  or  special 
dispensation for participants in the financial system. 
Opportunities 
Despite the risks, the financial sector reforms have created the foundation for stability and 
growth,  which  provides  an  opportunity  for  the  financial  sector  to  introduce  new  financial 
products. The new area of banking that has been successful in several developing countries 
is electronic or mobile banking. Electronic banking products have enabled banks to capture 
the  un-banked  population,  provide  financial  literacy  and  significantly  reduce  the  cost  of 
banking.  Mobile  phone  banking  and  branchless  banks  operating  through  agents  have 
become a norm in many countries to bring banking services to the rural areas. 
The rugged terrain, remoteness of many communities and the fragmented characteristics of 
the  PNG  economy  suggest  that  mobile  money  or  electronic  banking  is the  way  forward  to 
provide financial services to the mass in the rural areas. 
The  rapid  economic  growth  in  the  last  five  years  has  created  opportunities  for  bank 
expansion.  The  increase  in  business  activities  requires  commercial  bank  presence  in 
respective  regions  of  the  country.  The  presence  of  a  fully  licensed  bank  can  increase  the 
efficiency  of  the  financial  intermediation  process  and  promote  economic  development. 
However, these financial innovations will only succeed if: 
• 
Infrastructure  is  in  place  for  investors  to  build  on.  Mobile  banking  and  branchless 
banking  requires  transport,  power,  and  communication  infrastructure.  Eg.  The 
Namatanai  sub-branch  of  a  bank  closed  down  due  to  communication  and  power 
problems  despite  transport  linkages  (road  and  sea).  There  is  no  communication 
between  Dogura  and  Alotau  for  an  ordinary  mobile  phone  call,  so  how  can  one 
undertake mobile (branchless) banking without communication infrastructure. 
Law and Order/Security issues are a serious concern. The law and order problems 
have caused the banks to reduce the size of their representations throughout PNG. 
Over  the  years,  banks  had  to  close  down  in  provincial  centres.  The  closure  of 
branches in Popondetta twice in the last few years is a topical illustration. 
An alarming law & order issue is the threat to staff of financial institutions. Officers 
and  families  of  staff  employed  in  the  financial  system  should  not  be  placed  in 
situations of psychological stress and anxiety caused by unsavoury elements of our 
society. 
The  cases  of  kidnapping  and  threatening  staff  and  their  families  is  a  problem  that 
must stop. Bank staff must be allowed to contribute to the development of our nation 
without threat or intimidation whilst carrying out their duties. 
  Ladies and Gentlemen, let me spend a few moments on the ANZ Bank. The reason why we 
are here today. ANZ bank is a significant corporate citizen contributing to the development of 
Papua New Guinea (PNG). It employs Papua New Guineans, it pays its taxes and meets the 
Bank  of  Papua  New  Guinea  requirements.  The  opening  of  the  new  office  complex  is  an 
apparent reflection of determination of ANZ bank to take on the banking challenges offered in 
BIS Review 113/2009 
 3
the advent of global financial crises, the fast pace of private lending growth, development of 
the LNG project and a changed risk landscape of PNG. 
In an environment where many banks and financial institutions around the world affected by 
the global financial crises are contracting, it is pleasing to note that we in Papua New Guinea 
are still expanding. 
The opening of the new office complex reminds us that the ANZ Bank is here to stay and 
take on those challenges in providing efficient and affordable banking services. It has been a 
partner  in  development  in  the  past,  and  on  hindsight  stands  ready  to  take  on  new 
opportunities that are available in PNG. 
I would like to congratulate ANZ bank on this achievement. I particularly wish to acknowledge 
the contributions made by Mr Garry Tunstall to the banking and financial system, and to the 
PNG Institute of Banking & Business Management and PNG to which he is a codirector. I 
also acknowledge the great contribution by Mrs Desley Tunstall for her tireless assistance to 
the  under  privilege  in  the  community  especially  the  Children’s  Ward  at  the  Port  Moresby 
General Hospital. I also welcome the new Managing Director Mr Vishnu Mohan and his wife 
Mrs Bubby Mohan. I wish everyone at ANZ Bank all the very best here in their new Harbour 
City home. 
It now gives me great pleasure to cut the ribbon and officially open ANZ Harbour City. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 113/2009
