Shyamala Gopinath: Addressing the regulatory perimeter issues – Indian 
experience 
Remarks by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Ninth Annual International Seminar on Policy Challenges for the Financial Sector, co-hosted 
by The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, The IMF, and The World Bank 
on  “Emerging  from  the  Crisis  –  Building  a  Stronger  International  Financial  System”, 
Washington DC, 3-5 June 2009. 
 The  regulatory  perimeter  or  boundary  issue  has  been  engaging  the  attention  of  policy 
makers internationally for quite some time but it was not a central issue associated with the 
current  crisis.  Paradoxically  the  origins  as  well  the  severity  of  impact  of  the  crisis  were 
concentrated in the most heavily regulated institutions. However, in my view, the real issue 
lay  in  not  recognizing  and  addressing  the  dynamic  inter-connectedness  between  entities 
across  regulated,  unregulated  and  lightly  regulated  domains  perpetuated  through  high 
leverage. It was a systemic crisis and attributing it to any single component of the system 
would only be an incomplete assessment. 
Borrowing  from  the  field  of  natural  ecosystems,  sustainability  of  a  complex  flow  system 
depends on the optimal balance between efficiency and resilience of its network. While the 
financial  system  was  considered  to  be  very  efficient,  the  inherent  elements  for  ensuring 
resilience  were  obviously  inadequate.  At  the  heart  of  this  self-feeding  financial  ecosystem 
were  entities  which  had  access  to  liquidity,  the  banks,  which  acted  as  the  fulcrum  around 
which the system moved. It is therefore not surprising that the system collapsed once this 
fulcrum became vulnerable. The peripheral entities, though, were as much an integral part of 
the system and need to be recognized as such. 
The  basic  premise  that  I  will  be  elaborating  upon  in  my  remarks  today  is  that  as  far  as 
systemic stability is concerned, it is more important to focus on the interconnected linkages 
amongst  all  major  entities  within  the  system,  whether  regulated  or  unregulated.  Extending 
regulatory  boundary  is a  very  valid  issue  to  be  examined  for  its  own sake,  to  address  the 
specific  contextual  concerns.  But  once  having  decided  the  perimeter,  it  is  extremely 
important to have a framework for hardwiring the perimeter. This is important as regulation 
creates incentives for certain activities to move beyond the boundary. 
One  of  the  issues  with  just  focusing  on  extending  the  perimeter,  apart  from  issues  clearly 
enunciated  in  the  literature,  relates  to  heterogeneity  of  regulatory  foci  across  various 
segments. The boundary itself varies for different regulatory clusters – the focus of a banking 
regulator  would  be  entirely  different  from  that  of  a  securities  regulator,  from  that  of  an 
insurance  regulator  etc.  and  all  of  which  may  be  different  from  the  focus  required  for 
regulation  of  markets.  If  the  entire  financial  system  is  looked  as  a  single  ecosystem,  then 
inspite of the inherent differences between the various market players, it should be possible 
to identify the macro drivers of the whole system, the network flows. Using this perspective, it 
becomes  evident  that  just  focusing  only  on  the  perimeter  would  be  missing  an  integral 
component that may need regulatory attention. 
Current crisis – perimeter issues 
As  mentioned  earlier,  the  origins  of  the  current  crisis  lay  within  the  heavily  regulated 
institutions.  The 
the  crisis,  however,  was  exacerbated  by  dynamic 
interconnectedness  between  entities  across  regulated,  unregulated  and  lightly  regulated 
impact  of 
BIS Review 75/2009 
 1
sectors. As some of the recent reports have pointed out, the two concerns relating to “outside 
perimeter” entities that contributed to the current crisis were: (i) maturity transformation being 
undertaken by these entities, which traditionally used to be a function of banks; and (ii) the 
systemic  leverage  resulting  out  of  the  hugely  leveraged  positions  of  these  entities,  either 
through direct borrowing from banks or through the funding markets. 
The central issue in both the above is the interaction between the unregulated entities and 
the formal regulated funding channels, essentially banks and money markets. The maturity 
transformation  primarily  entailed  heavy  reliance  by  these  entities  on  short  term  funds  for 
funding long term assets. The prudential framework for banks placed a significant reliance on 
management  of  these  ALM  mismatches  but  the  unregulated  entities,  such  as  SIVs  didn’t 
have  any  oversight  and  as  a  business  model,  ran  huge  ALM  mismatches.  The  model  just 
broke down when the funding markets started seizing. 
Many of the entities, like hedge funds, were consciously left unregulated because of the fact 
that they managed only private capital pools where the issue of investor protection was not 
relevant.  However,  what  was  not  appreciated  was  the  systemic  risks  these  entities  were 
posing  on  account  of  the  huge  leverage  positions  these  were  carrying  through  either  the 
formal  banking  channel  or  the  funding  markets,  particularly  repo  markets.  The  seamless 
efficiency  thought  to  be  provided  by  close  integration  of  the  underlying  asset  markets  and 
repo  markets  proved  to  be  just  a  chimera.  The  disaggregated  exposures  of  the  regulated 
clusters at any point of time to the unregulated entities were not available and as the markets 
collapsed, such exposures became evident. 
Another  critical  aspect  which  was  again  brought  forth  during  this  crisis  was  the  market 
behaviour and impact of entities, some of them unregulated, having huge trading books and 
dynamically  hedging  their  huge  portfolios.  The  market  makers  in  the  derivative  and 
structured product markets need to normally hedge their portfolio risks, which has a direct 
impact on the underlying markets. In normal times, such individual action does not have a 
systemic  impact.  However,  in  times  of  crisis  when  the  views  become  absolutely  uni-
dimensional, a large number of such big players tend to hit the market on the same side and 
the  resultant  impact  on  the  underlying  market  is  huge.  It  could,  thus,  be  argued  that  the 
efficient  markets  enabled  the  unregulated  cluster  to  acquire  systemic  proportions  and 
reinforced its connectedness with the regulated cluster. 
The Indian experience 
India is unique in this regard as it has a formalized structure for generic non bank finance 
sector  with  heterogeneous  sub-segments.  There  some  13000  non  banking  finance 
companies  (NBFCs)  whose  assets  comprise  around  one-tenth  of  the  banking  sector.  The 
NBFCs  in  India  comprises  heterogenous  types  of  financial  institutions  including  All-India 
financial institutions, development finance institutions, non banking finance companies, etc, 
with each one of them having its roots at a particular stage of development of the financial 
sector.  All-India  financial  institutions  (AIFIs),  and  development  finance  institutions  (DFIs), 
which were largely an offshoot of development planning in India, were created for long-term 
financing with some of them having sectoral/regional focus. Non-banking financial companies 
(NBFCs), on the other hand, are mostly private sector institutions, which have carved their 
niche in the Indian financial system. 
The basic regulatory framework 
The Indian financial system is a predominantly bank intermediated system and accordingly 
regulation  over  banks  has  worked  as  the  basic  systemic  lever.  The  non-banking  space 
comprises of heterogeneous entities but not all are regulated by the RBI. Broadly speaking, 
the  RBI  regulates  all  such  companies  taking  public  deposits  and  those  non-deposit  taking 
entities  involved  in  asset  financing,  providing  loans  and  investments.  Other  non-banking 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2009
entities  such  as  housing  finance  companies,  mutual  funds,  insurance  companies,  stock 
broking companies, merchant banking companies, venture capital funds etc. are regulated by 
the respective sectoral regulator and are exempted from the NBFC regulations. 
Regulation  of  Non-Banking  Finance  Companies  in  India  was  considered  necessary  as  far 
back  as  the  sixties  as  an  adjunct  to  the  monetary  and  credit  policy  of  the  country  and 
protection of depositors' interest. The emphasis of regulation was on protection of the interest 
of  depositors  and  as such  directions  issued  by  RBI  dealt with  acceptance  of deposits  and 
matters  relating  thereto.  The  unfettered  growth  of  deposits  and  institutions  accepting  them 
outside banking system in the nineties was a matter of concern. Further in the absence of 
any prudential norms or ceilings, several non-bank finance companies made poor investment 
choices, leading to high level of NPAs, liquidity crunch and consequent significant default in 
repayment  of  deposits.  Therefore,  some  further  regulatory  action  was  taken  including 
registration  of  these  companies,  for  which  the  statutory  powers  were  given  to  the  RBI 
through the RBI (Amendment) Act in January 1997. The Act provided for registration of all 
NBFCs;  nevertheless  the  RBI  focused  mainly  on  depositor  protection  and  put  in  place 
stringent regulatory requirements for these entities. 
With  the  growth  of  the  financial  system,  it  gradually  came  to  be  realized  that  even  non-
deposit taking entities, which were mostly in asset financing and loan business, could pose 
systemic  risks  on  account  of  their  interactions  with  the  formal  banking  system  and  market 
based  financing.  Moreover,  many  such  entities  in  this  lightly  regulated  segment  were 
essentially  indulging  in  regulatory  arbitrage  –  what  was  not  permitted  for  banks  was 
happening through this channel. It was therefore decided in 2006 to put in place an elaborate 
prudential framework for such identified entities having systemic implications. 
A  gradually  calibrated  regulatory  framework  was  created  to  address  the  issue  of  systemic 
risk, which included prudential capital requirements, exposure norms, liquidity management, 
asset  liability  management,  creation  of  entity  profile  and  reporting  requirements,  corporate 
governance  and  disclosure  norms 
finance  companies  defined  as 
systemically important. 
It  was  recognized  early  on  that  mere  acceptance  of  public  deposits  would  not capture  the 
systemic importance of the entities and hence the focus was shifted to acceptance of public 
funds in any form. So, any entity that is accessing public funds, whether through deposits, 
inter  corporate  deposits,  debt  instruments  such  as  NCDs  or  CPs,  or  bank  loans,  was 
considered  interconnected  entity  and  hence  treated  as  a  source  of  potential  risk.  The 
ultimate objective was that such interconnectedness should not result in transmission of risk 
to banks or the payment and settlement system. 
In  the  Indian  context,  what  has  provided  a  huge  systemic  advantage  is  the  fact  that  the 
regulation  of  key  financial  markets  –  money  market,  Government  securities  market,  forex 
market and credit market – vests with the banking regulator i.e. the RBI. Thus the channels 
of interconnectedness between banks and other financial sector entities are not beyond the 
regulatory purview. From a financial stability perspective, the above framework has proved to 
be a sound model. 
Some of the specific provisions which illustrate the effectiveness of the above framework in 
addressing the inter-connected linkages are briefly mentioned below: 
• 
Prudential  limits  on  bank  exposures  (funded  and  non-funded)  to  non-bank  finance 
companies – individual as well as aggregate;  
Restrictions  on  bank  financing  to  non-bank  finance  companies  against  collateral  of 
shares or for on-lending to capital market intermediaries;  
Prudential  limits  on  bank  exposures  to  equity  markets  includes  exposure  to  capital 
market intermediaries such as brokers;  
Prudential regulations on inter-bank exposures of banks to reduce systemic risk;  
for  non  banking 
   BIS Review 75/2009 
 3
   Participation in the overnight unsecured money market limited to banks and primary 
dealers;  
Lending/borrowing by non-banks in the overnight market allowed only through repos 
or against collateral of government bonds;  
Securitisation guidelines issued to banks in 2006 which provided for, inter alia, credit 
enhancements to be deducted from capital, profit/premium from sale to be amortised 
over  the  life  of  the  securities  issued,  liquidity  support  to  attract  100  per  cent  risk 
weight.  
Addressing the inter-connectedness – few pipeline issues 
The  securities  firms/investment  banks  are  regulated  by  the  securities  regulator,  the 
Securities  and  Exchange  Board  of  India  (SEBI)  but  such  regulation  primarily  focuses  on 
transparency and discipline in market practices. As these entities are normally not doing fund 
based  business  which would  require  prudential  regulation,  a  decision had  been  taken  that 
entities registered with SEBI need not normally be registered with RBI. While these entities 
form  part  of  a  separate  regulatory  cluster,  their  inter-linkages  with  the  other  regulated 
clusters or other unregulated entities may need to be examined particularly if such entities 
also  undertake  fund  based  business.  Therefore  a  constant  evaluation  is  required  of  the 
functioning of institutions under different regulators to address regulatory gaps. 
While mutual funds are regulated from investor protection angle by the securities regulator, 
the systemic implications of the inert-linkages became apparent in the post-Lehman scenario 
of severe risk aversion and liquidity crunch. RBI had to announce a special 14 day repo at for 
a notified amount of Rs.20,000 crore to enable banks to meet the liquidity requirements of 
Mutual Funds. The real issue was the over reliance of the money market mutual funds on 
short term funds placed by the large corporates and banks with redemption facilities on par 
with current accounts of banks. It has now been decided to jointly work with the securities 
regulator  to  identify  and  address  the  macro-prudential  concerns  arising  from  the  current 
framework. 
Private Equity/venture capital activity is not a regulated activity per se. However, the issue of 
bank  involvement  with  such  funds  has  come  into  focus  recently  in  India.  The  G30 
recommends  the  large  systemically  important  banking  institutions  should  be  restricted  in 
undertaking  proprietary  activities  that  present  high  risks  and  serious  conflicts  of  interest. 
Sponsorship  and  management  of  co-mingled  private  pools  of  capital  should  ordinarily  be 
prohibited  and  large  proprietary  trading  should  be  limited  by  strict  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements. Keeping in view the reputational risk involved in such activities, the Reserve 
Bank had mandated maintenance of certain level of economic capital in some of the cases 
approved in the recent past. Importantly, all exposures of a bank to a venture capital fund are 
treated as capital market exposure and counted for the regulatory limit. 
A revised regulatory framework – key considerations 
The broad features of a possible framework to capture the above inter-linkages are outlined 
below.  
(i) 
Specification of the nature of connectedness between entities that may be considered 
inducing vulnerabilities in the system; 
Identification,  from  the  haze  of  the  unregulated  cluster,  the  class  of  entities 
considered  to  be  either  having  significant  direct  connectedness  with  the  regulated 
clusters  or  having  a  significant  presence  in  any  market  segment  where  regulated 
entities are also present; 
(ii) 
4 
 BIS Review 75/2009
(iii) 
(iv) 
(v) 
(vi) 
Putting  in  place  a  reporting  system  to  capture  the  interconnected  flows  within  the 
identified  sub-system  –  the  regulated  clusters  and  the  unregulated  entities  on  a 
regular basis; 
Prescription  of  a  prudential  framework  –  and  this  is  the  key  –  for  the  regulated 
clusters to contain the risks arising from this connectedness. 
For  the  unregulated  entities,  the  most  significant  aspect  would  be  to  contain  their 
leveraging  capability  in  general  across  major  market  segments,  particularly  the 
funding markets. A simple quantitative limit would be the best suited. 
Some  systemically  significant  entities,  though,  may  still  need  a  formal  prudential 
regulatory structure, including capital adequacy requirement. 
From  a  policy  perspective,  the  critical  points  would  be  the  last  two  –  having  effective 
regulation  over  the  regulated  entities,  while  restraining  leverage  capabilities  of  the 
unregulated/lightly  regulated  entities.  In  our  case,  it  proved  to  be  an  effective  combination 
since banks’ exposure to such entities could be regulated through absolute exposure norms 
or even tweaking the risk weights applicable to such exposures. 
I realize the problem would be much more involved in predominantly market based financial 
systems where direct bank linkages are not very obvious. But even in such regimes, as has 
been clearly demonstrated, the indirect linkages of banks were enmeshed in the maze. That 
is  why  it  would  be  important  to  ensure  that  the  markets  too  should  not  provide  leverage 
capabilities to such entities beyond a limit. 
Contingency liquidity provision 
The recent crisis has again brought to the fore the role of a lender of last resort (LOLR), the 
extent  of  central  bank  intervention  and  the  entities  to  which  such  intervention  can  be 
extended.  The  question  as  to  under  what  circumstances  and  to  what  extent  should  safety 
nets be extended to non-deposit taking institutions has been widely debated.  
The basic underpinning of the LOLR philosophy internationally has been that any institution 
whose  failure  is  conclusively  decided  to  cause  broader  systemic  instability  needs  to  be 
supported  in  the  interregnum.  As  long  as  banks  were  the  only  institutions  fulfilling  this 
criterion,  the  case  was  straightforward.  However,  with  the  development  of  global  financial 
markets  and  growth  on  non-banks  as  alternate  media  of  financial  intermediation,  the 
decisions were not so simple as the recent experience has clearly shown.  
In India, while there is no provision for the Reserve Bank of India to lend directly to any non-
bank entities, except a few specified ones, there have been specific instances of workable 
arrangements being devised in the interest of broader stability to provide liquidity support to 
some institutions/sectors indirectly. In respect of non-banking finance companies, in the post-
Lehman fallout there was severe systemic liquidity crunch and even the non-banking finance 
sector were stressed. It was apprehended that in a scenario of asymmetrical information and 
general  risk  aversion  of  banks,  the  strains  in  non-banking  finance  sector  could  eventually 
pose a systemic risk. It was then decided to provide liquidity to those systemically important 
NBFCs  facing  temporary  liquidity  mismatches  through  an  SPV.  The  key  part  was  that  the 
liquidity  was  provided  to  the  SPV  by  the  RBI  through  purchase  of  fully  government 
guaranteed  bonds.  Further,  this  facility  was  only  meant  to  tide  over  temporary  liquidity 
mismatches and not for balance sheet expansion. The aggregate quantum for the facility was 
around Rs. 200 billion (USD 4 billion) and the interest rate was the LOLR rate for banks. 
Similarly in case of mutual funds, who were faced with severe redemption pressures, it was 
decided to have a facility for lending to banks through a 14-day repo to enable the banks to 
meet the temporary liquidity needs of mutual funds.  
BIS Review 75/2009 
 5
As  regards  protection  of  depositor  interests,  a  comprehensive  prudential  framework  is 
already in place for all deposit taking companies. Stringent capital adequacy and leverage 
requirements, exposure norms, and disclosure have been prescribed as part of a structured 
regulatory framework. Statutorily, such companies are required to invest at least 10 per cent 
of their outstanding deposits in unencumbered Government bonds. Further, NBFCs have to 
ensure that at all times there is full cover for public deposits maintained by them. All such 
companies accepting/ holding public deposits are required to create a floating charge on their 
statutory liquid assets in favour of their depositors through the mechanism of “Trust Deed”. 
Conclusion 
The issue of extending the regulatory perimeter has to be a balancing act and it needs to be 
carefully nuanced in terms of intended objectives. The thrust of regulation may need to be 
borne  by  the  regulated  clusters  –  particularly  deposit  taking  institutions.  However,  for  the 
unregulated cluster, the key issues would be to contain their ability for systemic leverage – 
both directly through banks or indirectly through funding markets and to subject them to an 
effective  reporting  arrangement  for  their  inter-linkages  with  the  regulated  clusters.  From  a 
systemic  stability  perspective,  it  would  be  equally,  if  not  more,  important  to  focus  on  the 
interconnectedness of the regulated and unregulated/lightly regulated entities. 
6 
 BIS Review 75/2009
