Ben S Bernanke: Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress 
Testimony by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs, US Senate, 
Washington, DC, 24 February 2009. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 Chairman  Dodd,  Senator  Shelby,  and  members  of  the  Committee,  I  appreciate  the 
opportunity to discuss monetary policy and the economic situation and to present the Federal 
Reserve's Monetary Policy Report to the Congress. 
Recent economic and financial developments and the policy responses 
As you are aware, the U.S. economy is undergoing a severe contraction. Employment has 
fallen steeply since last autumn, and the unemployment rate has moved up to 7.6 percent. 
The  deteriorating  job  market,  considerable  losses  of  equity  and  housing  wealth,  and  tight 
lending  conditions  have  weighed  down  consumer  sentiment  and  spending.  In  addition, 
businesses have cut back capital outlays in response to the softening outlook for sales as 
well as the difficulty of obtaining credit. In contrast to the first half of last year, when robust 
foreign demand for U.S. goods and services provided some offset to weakness in domestic 
spending, exports slumped in the second half as our major trading partners fell into recession 
and some measures of global growth turned negative for the first time in more than 25 years. 
In all, U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) declined slightly in the third quarter of 2008, 
and  that  decline  steepened  considerably  in  the  fourth  quarter.  The  sharp  contraction  in 
economic activity appears to have continued into the first quarter of 2009. 
The  substantial  declines  in  the  prices  of  energy  and  other  commodities  last  year  and  the 
growing  margin  of  economic  slack  have  contributed  to  a  substantial  lessening  of  inflation 
pressures. Indeed, overall consumer price inflation measured on a 12-month basis was close 
to zero last month. Core inflation, which excludes the direct effects of food and energy prices, 
also has declined significantly. 
The principal cause of the economic slowdown was the collapse of the global credit boom 
and  the  ensuing  financial  crisis,  which  has  affected  asset  values,  credit  conditions,  and 
consumer and business confidence around the world. The immediate trigger of the crisis was 
the  end  of  housing  booms  in  the  United  States  and  other  countries  and  the  associated 
problems in mortgage markets, notably the collapse of the U.S. subprime mortgage market. 
Conditions  in  housing  and  mortgage  markets  have  proved  a  serious  drag  on  the  broader 
economy both directly, through their impact on residential construction and related industries 
and on household wealth, and indirectly, through the effects of rising mortgage delinquencies 
on  the  health  of  financial  institutions.  Recent  data  show  that  residential  construction  and 
sales continue to be very weak, house prices continue to fall, and foreclosure starts remain 
at very high levels. 
The  financial  crisis  intensified  significantly  in  September  and  October.  In  September,  the 
Treasury  and  the  Federal  Housing  Finance  Agency  placed  the  government-sponsored 
enterprises,  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac,  into  conservatorship,  and  Lehman  Brothers 
Holdings filed for bankruptcy. In the following weeks, several other large financial institutions 
failed,  came  to  the  brink  of  failure,  or  were  acquired  by  competitors  under  distressed 
circumstances. Losses at a prominent money market mutual fund prompted investors, who 
had traditionally considered money market mutual funds to be virtually risk-free, to withdraw 
large amounts from such funds. The resulting outflows threatened the stability of short-term 
funding  markets,  particularly  the  commercial  paper  market,  upon  which  corporations  rely 
BIS Review 22/2009 
 1
their 
through 
financial 
including 
institutions, 
large-scale  capital 
heavily  for  their  short-term  borrowing  needs.  Concerns  about  potential  losses  also 
undermined  confidence  in  wholesale  bank  funding  markets,  leading  to  further  increases  in 
bank borrowing costs and a tightening of credit availability from banks. 
Recognizing the critical importance of the provision of credit to businesses and households 
from financial institutions, the Congress passed the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act 
last fall. Under the authority granted by this act, the Treasury purchased preferred shares in 
a broad range of depository institutions to shore up their capital bases. During this period, the 
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) introduced its Temporary Liquidity Guarantee 
Program,  which  expanded  its  guarantees  of  bank  liabilities  to  include  selected  senior 
unsecured  obligations  and  all  non-interest-bearing  transactions  deposits.  The  Treasury--in 
concert with the Federal Reserve and the FDIC--provided packages of loans and guarantees 
to ensure the continued stability of Citigroup and Bank of America, two of the world's largest 
banks.  Over  this  period,  governments  in  many  foreign  countries  also  announced  plans  to 
stabilize 
injections, 
expansions of deposit insurance, and guarantees of some forms of bank debt. 
Faced  with  the  significant  deterioration  in  financial  market  conditions  and  a  substantial 
worsening of the economic outlook, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) continued 
to  ease  monetary  policy  aggressively  in  the  final  months  of  2008,  including  a  rate  cut 
coordinated with five other major central banks. In December the FOMC brought its target for 
the federal funds rate to a historically low range of 0 to 1/4 percent, where it remains today. 
The FOMC anticipates that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels 
of the federal funds rate for some time. 
With the federal funds rate near its floor, the Federal Reserve has taken additional steps to 
ease credit conditions. To support housing markets and economic activity more broadly, and 
to improve mortgage market functioning, the Federal Reserve has begun to purchase large 
amounts of agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities. Since the announcement 
of  this  program  last  November,  the  conforming  fixed  mortgage  rate  has  fallen  nearly  1 
percentage point. The Federal Reserve also established new lending facilities and expanded 
existing facilities to enhance the flow of credit to businesses and households. In response to 
heightened  stress  in  bank  funding  markets,  we  increased  the  size  of  the  Term  Auction 
Facility to help ensure that banks could obtain the funds they need to provide credit to their 
customers, and we expanded our network of swap lines with foreign central banks to ease 
conditions  in  interconnected  dollar  funding  markets  at  home  and  abroad.  We  also 
established new lending facilities to support the functioning of the commercial paper market 
and to ease pressures on money market mutual funds. In an effort to restart securitization 
markets  to  support  the  extension  of  credit  to  consumers  and  small  businesses,  we  joined 
with the Treasury to announce the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF). The 
TALF is expected to begin extending loans soon. 
The  measures  taken  by  the  Federal  Reserve,  other  U.S.  government  entities,  and  foreign 
governments since September have helped to restore a degree of stability to some financial 
markets. In particular, strains in short-term funding markets have eased notably since the fall, 
and  London  interbank  offered  rates  (Libor)--upon  which  borrowing  costs  for  many 
households  and  businesses  are  based--have  decreased  sharply.  Conditions  in  the 
commercial paper market also have improved, even for lower-rated borrowers, and the sharp 
outflows from money market mutual funds seen in September have been replaced by modest 
inflows.  Corporate  risk  spreads  have  declined  somewhat  from  extraordinarily  high  levels, 
although  these  spreads  remain  elevated  by  historical  standards.  Likely  spurred  by  the 
improvements  in  pricing  and  liquidity,  issuance  of  investment-grade  corporate  bonds  has 
been strong, and speculative-grade issuance, which was near zero in the fourth quarter, has 
picked up somewhat. As I mentioned earlier, conforming fixed mortgage rates for households 
have  declined.  Nevertheless,  despite  these  favorable  developments,  significant  stresses 
persist in many markets. Notably, most securitization markets remain shut, other than that for 
conforming mortgages, and some financial institutions remain under pressure. 
2 
 BIS Review 22/2009
In  light  of  ongoing  concerns  over  the  health  of  financial  institutions,  the  Secretary  of  the 
Treasury  recently  announced  a  plan  for  further  actions.  This  plan  includes  four  principal 
elements: First, a new capital assistance program will be established to ensure that banks 
have adequate buffers of high-quality capital, based on the results of comprehensive stress 
tests to be conducted by the financial regulators, including the Federal Reserve. Second is a 
public-private investment fund in which private capital will be leveraged with public funds to 
purchase legacy assets from financial institutions. Third, the Federal Reserve, using capital 
provided  by  the  Treasury,  plans  to  expand  the  size  and  scope  of  the  TALF  to  include 
securities  backed  by  commercial  real  estate  loans  and  potentially  other  types  of  asset-
backed  securities  as  well.  Fourth,  the  plan  includes  a  range  of  measures  to  help  prevent 
unnecessary  foreclosures.  Together,  over  time  these  initiatives  should  further  stabilize  our 
financial  institutions  and  markets,  improving  confidence  and  helping  to  restore  the  flow  of 
credit needed to promote economic recovery.  
Federal Reserve transparency 
The Federal Reserve is committed to keeping the Congress and the public informed about its 
lending  programs  and  balance  sheet.  For  example,  we  continue  to  add  to  the  information 
shown  in  the  Fed's  H.4.1  statistical  release,  which  provides  weekly  detail  on  the  balance 
sheet  and  the  amounts  outstanding  for  each  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  lending  facilities. 
Extensive  additional  information  about  each  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  lending  programs  is 
available  online.1  The  Fed  also  provides  bimonthly  reports  to  the  Congress  on  each  of  its 
programs that rely on the section 13(3) authorities. Generally, our disclosure policies reflect 
the current best practices of major central banks around the world. In addition, the Federal 
Reserve's  internal  controls  and  management  practices  are  closely  monitored  by  an 
independent  inspector  general,  outside  private-sector  auditors,  and  internal  management 
and  operations  divisions,  and  through  periodic  reviews  by  the  Government  Accountability 
Office.  
All that said, we recognize that recent developments have led to a substantial increase in the 
public's  interest  in  the  Fed's  programs  and  balance  sheet.  For  this  reason,  we  at  the  Fed 
have  begun  a  thorough  review  of  our  disclosure  policies  and  the  effectiveness  of  our 
communication. Today I would like to highlight two initiatives. 
First,  to  improve  public  access  to  information  concerning  Fed  policies  and  programs,  we 
recently  unveiled  a  new  section  of  our  website  that  brings  together  in  a  systematic  and 
comprehensive  way  the  full  range  of  information  that  the  Federal  Reserve  already  makes 
available,  supplemented  by  explanations,  discussions,  and  analyses.2  We  will  use  that 
website  as  one  means  of  keeping  the  public  and  the  Congress  fully  informed  about  Fed 
programs. 
Second, at my request, Board Vice Chairman Donald Kohn is leading a committee that will 
review  our  current  publications  and  disclosure  policies  relating  to  the  Fed's  balance  sheet 
and lending policies. The presumption of the committee will be that the public has a right to 
know,  and  that  the  nondisclosure  of  information  must  be  affirmatively  justified  by  clearly 
articulated criteria for confidentiality, based on factors such as reasonable claims to privacy, 
the  confidentiality  of  supervisory  information,  and  the  need  to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of 
policy.  
                                                 
1  
For links and references, see Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "Federal Reserve Programs to Strengthen Credit 
Markets  and  the  Economy,"  testimony  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  U.S.  House  of 
Representatives, February 10. 
2  
The website is located at http.//www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst.htm. 
BIS Review 22/2009 
 3
The economic outlook and the FOMC's quarterly projections 
In  their  economic  projections  for  the  January  FOMC  meeting,  monetary  policy  makers 
substantially marked down their forecasts for real GDP this year relative to the forecasts they 
had prepared in October. The central tendency of their most recent projections for real GDP 
implies  a  decline  of  1/2  percent  to  1-1/4  percent  over  the  four  quarters  of  2009.  These 
projections reflect an expected significant contraction in the first half of this year combined 
with an anticipated gradual resumption of growth in the second half. The central tendency for 
the  unemployment  rate  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2009  was  marked  up  to  a  range  of  8-1/2 
percent  to  8-3/4  percent.  Federal  Reserve  policymakers  continued  to  expect  moderate 
expansion next year, with a central tendency of 2-1/2 percent to 3-1/4 percent growth in real 
GDP and a decline in the unemployment rate by the end of 2010 to a central tendency of 8 
percent  to  8-1/4  percent.  FOMC  participants  marked  down  their  projections  for  overall 
inflation  in  2009  to  a  central  tendency  of  1/4  percent  to  1  percent,  reflecting  expected 
weakness in commodity prices and the disinflationary effects of significant economic slack. 
The projections for core inflation also were marked down, to a central tendency bracketing 1 
percent. Both overall and core inflation are expected to remain low over the next two years.  
This outlook for economic activity is subject to considerable uncertainty, and I believe that, 
overall, the downside risks probably outweigh those on the upside. One risk arises from the 
global  nature  of  the  slowdown,  which  could  adversely  affect  U.S.  exports  and  financial 
conditions to an even greater degree than currently expected. Another risk derives from the 
destructive power of the so-called adverse feedback loop, in which weakening economic and 
financial conditions become mutually reinforcing. To break the adverse feedback loop, it is 
essential  that  we  continue  to  complement  fiscal  stimulus  with  strong  government  action  to 
stabilize financial institutions and financial markets. If actions taken by the Administration, the 
Congress, and the Federal Reserve are successful in restoring some measure of financial 
stability--and  only  if  that  is  the  case,  in  my  view--there  is  a  reasonable  prospect  that  the 
current  recession  will  end  in  2009  and  that  2010  will  be  a  year  of  recovery.  If  financial 
conditions  improve,  the  economy  will  be  increasingly  supported  by  fiscal  and  monetary 
stimulus, the salutary effects of the steep decline in energy prices since last summer, and the 
better alignment of business inventories and final sales, as well as the increased availability 
of credit.   
To further increase the information conveyed by the quarterly projections, FOMC participants 
agreed in January to begin publishing their estimates of the values to which they expect key 
economic variables to converge over the longer run (say, at a horizon of five or six years), 
under the assumption of appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of new shocks to 
the economy. The central tendency for the participants' estimates of the longer-run growth 
rate of real GDP is 2-1/2 percent to 2-3/4 percent; the central tendency for the longer-run rate 
of unemployment is 4-3/4 percent to 5 percent; and the central tendency for the longer-run 
rate of inflation is 1-3/4 percent to 2 percent, with the majority of participants looking for 2 
percent  inflation  in  the  long  run.  These  values  are  all  notably  different  from  the  central 
tendencies of the projections for 2010 and 2011, reflecting the view of policymakers that a 
full  recovery  of  the  economy  from  the  current  recession  is  likely  to  take  more  than  two  or 
three years.  
The longer-run projections for output growth and unemployment may be interpreted as the 
Committee's estimates of the rate of growth of output and the unemployment rate that are 
sustainable in the long run in the United States, taking into account important influences such 
as  the  trend  growth  rates  of  productivity  and  the  labor  force,  improvements  in  worker 
education  and  skills,  the  efficiency  of  the  labor  market  at  matching  workers  and  jobs, 
government  policies  affecting  technological  development  or  the  labor  market,  and  other 
factors.  The  longer-run  projections  of  inflation  may  be  interpreted,  in  turn,  as  the  rate  of 
inflation that FOMC participants see as most consistent with the dual mandate given to it by 
the Congress--that is, the rate of inflation that promotes maximum sustainable employment 
while  also  delivering  reasonable  price  stability.  This  further  extension  of  the  quarterly 
4 
 BIS Review 22/2009
projections  should  provide  the  public  a  clearer  picture  of  the  FOMC's  policy  strategy  for 
promoting maximum employment and price stability over time. Also, increased clarity about 
the  FOMC's  views  regarding  longer-run  inflation  should  help  to  better stabilize  the  public's 
inflation  expectations,  thus  contributing  to  keeping  actual  inflation  from  rising  too  high  or 
falling too low.  
At the time of our last Monetary Policy Report, the Federal Reserve was confronted with both 
high inflation and rising unemployment. Since that report, however, inflation pressures have 
receded dramatically while the rise in the unemployment rate has accelerated and financial 
conditions  have  deteriorated.  In  light  of  these  developments,  the  Federal  Reserve  is 
committed to using all available tools to stimulate economic activity and to improve financial 
market functioning. Toward that end, we have reduced the target for the federal funds rate 
close to zero and we have established a number of programs to increase the flow of credit to 
key sectors of the economy. We believe that these actions, combined with the broad range of 
other fiscal and financial measures being put in place, will contribute to a gradual resumption 
of economic growth and improvement in labor market conditions in a context of low inflation. 
We will continue to work closely with the Congress and the Administration to explore means 
of fulfilling our mission of promoting maximum employment and price stability. 
BIS Review 22/2009 
 5
