Shyamala Gopinath: Some reflections on the recent global financial 
turmoil – an Indian perspective 
Keynote address by Ms Shyamala Gopinath, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, 
at  the  Annual  Conference  of  the  Foreign  Exchange  Dealers’  Association  of  India  (FEDAI), 
Kolkata, 10 January 2009. 
Assistance of Mr. Vaibhav Chaturvedi in preparation of the remarks is gratefully acknowledged. 
 Every  year,  this  forum  provides  an  opportunity  to  collectively  review  and  analyse  the 
developments  of  the  past  year  in  the  forex  market.  But  the  past  year  has  been  like  never 
before and now the focus is on the impact of the financial crisis on the real economy. The 
financial  meltdown  has  resulted  in  effective  nationalisation  of  major  financial  institutions  in 
the US, UK and Eurozone. So far global banks, mortgage lenders and insurance firms have 
announced  write  downs  of  over  US$  800  billion.  There  has  been  a  massive  increase  in 
central  bank  lending  to  the  banking  system  and  rescue  packages  totalling  almost  US$3 
trillion have been announced by governments around the world. Monetary policy has been 
eased aggressively but given the lagged impact attention has shifted to fiscal policy. From 
this  side,  I  can  say  that  the  past  year  has  indeed  been  a  challenging  one  which  has 
reinforced the futility of finding clean corner solutions to evolving situations and each decision 
necessarily involves managing different objectives while finding the immediate focus points 
without dissipating the gains of reforms undertaken. 
Forex markets in India – recent developments 
2. As far as the Indian foreign exchange market is concerned, during the last five years the 
sources of supply and demand have changed significantly with large transactions emanating 
from  capital  account  unlike  in  the  past  when  current  account  transactions  dominated  the 
foreign exchange market. The behaviour as well as the incentive structure of the participants 
who  use  the  forex  market  for  undertaking  current  account  transactions  differ  significantly 
from  those  who  use  the  market  for  capital  account  transactions.  Therefore  managing  the 
capital  account,  particularly  debt  flows,  even  while  we  are  getting  more  integrated  is  an 
important  instrument  in  our  overall  macroeconomic  management.  In  the  last  few  years  we 
had to address the challenge of large capital inflows and had therefore in consultation with 
Government  taken  certain  measures  to  calibrate  these  flows  by  requiring  external 
commercial  borrowings  (ECB)  to  be  used  for  foreign  currency  expenditure.  Measures  to 
liberalise outflows for resident individuals, mutual funds, and corporates were also pursued. 
The global financial crisis and deleveraging have now led to reversal and / or modulation of 
capital flows particularly foreign institutional investor flows, ECBs and trade credit.  
3. In response to the emerging global developments, the RBI has taken a series of measures 
to  augment  forex  and  domestic  liquidity.  Some  of  the  measures  taken  to  augment  forex 
liquidity are: 
• 
USD  dollar  swap  lines  of  up  to  USD10  billion  for  Indian  banks  with  overseas 
branches  and  subsidiaries.  The  actual  utilisation,  as  of  January  7,  2009  is  only 
USD 247 million.  
Increasing interest rate ceilings for FCNR(B) and NRE deposits to LIBOR / SWAP 
rates  plus  100  basis  points  and  LIBOR  /  SWAP  rates  plus  175  basis  points 
respectively.  
ECB  policy,  which  is  an  instrument  of  capital  account  management,  has  been 
liberalised to revert to the pre-May 2007 period. It may be recalled that due to large 
  BIS Review 4/2009 
 1
capital  flows,  the  end  use  of  ECB  proceeds  was  limited  to  foreign  currency 
expenditures. Further liberalisation in terms of expanding eligible borrowers and end 
use has also been undertaken viz:  
o 
Housing Finance Companies, registered with National Housing Bank (NHB) 
have been permitted to raise short-term foreign currency borrowings  
NBFCs,  which  are  exclusively  involved  in  financing  of  the  infrastructure 
sector, may avail of ECBs from  multilateral / regional financial institutions 
and Government owned development financial institutions for on-lending to 
the borrowers in the infrastructure sector under the Approval route.  
Payment for obtaining license/permit for 3G Spectrum will be considered an 
eligible end-use for the purpose of ECB.  
The  corporates  in  the  Hotels,  Hospitals  and  Software  sectors  to  avail  of 
ECB up to USD 100 million per financial year, under the Automatic Route, 
for foreign currency and / or Rupee capital expenditure for permissible end-
use.  
Spreads  on  ECBs  and  trade  credits  were  increased  and  the  all-in-cost 
ceilings on ECBs were dispensed with under the Approval route.  
o 
o 
o 
o 
    Limit  on  overseas  borrowings  by  banks  was  enhanced  from  25  percent  to  50 
percent of unimpaired Tier I capital. Overseas borrowings for on-lending to exporters 
continue to remain outside the ceiling.  
In order to enable EXIM bank to continue to offer buyers credit against lines of credit 
as well as preshipment and post shipment finance, RBI has extended a line of credit 
of Rs 5000 crore.  
EXIM is also eligible to avail of swap facility up to USD 1 billion under the facility 
permitted for banks. 
The  FII  limit  for  investment  in  corporate  bonds  has  been  hiked  to  USD  15  billion 
from USD 6 billion.  
4. The Indian foreign exchange market has grown significantly in the last several years. The 
daily average turnover has gone up from about USD 5 billion per day in 1998 to more than 
USD  50  billion  per  day  in  2008.  There  is  also  evidence  of  growing  merchant  turnover 
reflecting the huge increase in external transactions. The bid offer spreads are also narrow. 
 
5. The spot foreign exchange market remains the most important segment but the derivative 
segment has also grown. In the derivative market foreign exchange swaps account for the 
largest share of the total turnover of derivatives in India followed by forwards and options. 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2009
Significant milestones in the development of derivatives market have been (i) permission to 
banks  to  undertake  cross  currency  derivative  transactions  subject  to  certain  conditions 
(1996) (ii) allowing corporates to undertake long term foreign currency swaps that contributed 
to  the  development  of  the  term  currency  swap  market  (1997)  (iii)  allowing  dollar  rupee 
options (2003) and (iv) introduction of currency futures (2008). I would like to emphasise that 
currency swaps allowed companies with ECBs to swap their foreign currency liabilities into 
rupees.  However,  since  banks  could  not  carry  open  positions  the  risk  was  allowed  to  be 
transferred  to  any  other  resident  corporate.  Normally  such  risks  should  be  taken  by 
corporates who have natural hedge or have potential foreign exchange earnings. But often 
corporate assume these risks due to interest rate differentials and views on currencies. 
This  period  has  also  witnessed  several  relaxations  in  regulations  relating  to  forex  markets 
and  also  greater  liberalisation  in  capital  account  regulations  leading  to  greater  integration 
with the global economy. 
6.  Cash  settled  exchange  traded  currency  futures  have  made  foreign  currency  a  separate 
asset class that can be traded without any underlying need or exposure and on a leveraged 
basis  on  the  recognized  stock  exchanges  with  credit  risks  being  assumed  by  the  central 
counterparty.  Since  the  commencement  of  trading  of  currency  futures  in  all  the  three 
exchanges, the value of the trades has gone up steadily from Rs 17,429 crores in October 
2008  to  Rs  45,803  crores  in  December  2008.  The  average  daily  turnover  in  all  the 
exchanges  has  also  increased  from  Rs  871  crores  to  Rs  2,181  crores  during  the  same 
period. The turnover in the currency futures market is in line with the international scenario, 
where I understand the share of futures market ranges between 2-3 per cent.  
The broader theme 
7. In my remarks today I thought it would be appropriate and relevant to touch upon the big 
picture and underline some lessons that we can draw from the crisis relevant to regulation, 
financial markets and the market infrastructure and reflect on these. We will continue to learn 
from the lessons as the crisis is still evolving but these are certain topical issues.  
(i) 
As  was  to  be  expected,  the  financial  sector  turmoil  has  triggered  a  reassessment 
internationally  of  the  existing  theoretics  and  metrics  about  the  financial  sector 
developments of the past two decades and the simultaneous evolution of the global 
regulatory framework enshrined in the Basel framework. Questions are being asked 
and  answers  being  sought  to  some  of  the  key  issues  regarding  leverage, 
transparency, and liquidity underlying at the heart of the crisis.  
What the current crisis has done is to question the very fundamentals of the entire 
financial framework. What is the role of the financial system in an economy vis-à-vis 
the  real  sector?  If  the  financial  sector  exists,  as  traditionally  conceived  to 
intermediate  financial  resources  for  optimal  channelisation  to  productive  sectors, 
then over the last few years the script has gone terribly bad. The world of finance, as 
had  come  to  be  epitomized  in  the  market  volumes  and  turnovers  and  derivative 
outstandings got disconnected by far from the real sector. 
The  importance  of  containing  systemic  leverage  has  been  underlined.  While 
obviously  there  can’t  be  market  stops  and  starts  for  this  purpose  but  the  whole 
incentive structure built in the public policy framework needs to be aligned with the 
objective  of  disincentivising  leverage  beyond  a  point.  Any  future  financial  market 
reform measure and introduction of new innovations/products must be preceded by 
an assessment of the resultant leverage for the system in quantifiable terms.  
Financial sector entities need to be seen and regulated as risk repositories in the 
system  –  any  notion  of  their  risks  being  dissipated  into  or  outside  the  system  is 
inherently  flawed.  There  is  therefore  need  for  limits,  prudential  safeguards  and 
adequate  capital  to  support  the  risks.  It  is  also  necessary  to  understand  the 
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
BIS Review 4/2009 
 3
(v) 
(vi) 
(vii) 
substance of a product and not merely the nomenclature.1 Once this understanding 
is there the income recognition and accounting treatment becomes clear. Receipt of 
premia/fees for assuming a contingent liability will then not be treated as income but 
as funds for meeting potential future liabilities.  
It  is  now  recognised  that  the  current  microeconomic-driven  prudential  regulatory 
framework,  including  Basel  II  is  procyclical  which  further  worsens  the  impact  of 
crises on institutions. In 2000, the Bank of Spain introduced a dynamic, rules-based 
loan-loss provisioning system in which provisions increase in periods of higher credit 
growth and economic expansion, and decrease in times of low or negative growth, 
thereby contributing to smooth income and capital over time. RBI also did something 
similar  when  we  increased  the  risk  weight  as  also  the  general  provisioning 
requirement  on  exposures  to  sectors  which  showed  high  credit  growth.  This  was 
reduced recently when growth moderated.  
The increasing focus on holistic approach towards regulation of financial entities is a 
welcome change from the view that allowed a growing proportion of products and 
participants to go unregulated on the grounds that they had no systematic impact. 
This approach resulted in the shadow banking system made up of unregulated SIVs 
and conduits distributing opaque structured products containing risky assets with the 
active marketing of rating agencies.  
In India also, one view used to be that only deposit taking NBFCs need regulation to 
protect the interest of depositors and that the non-deposit taking NBFCs do not pose 
any such risk and therefore need not be regulated. It was, however, realised that the 
inter-linkages  of  these  NBFCs  with  the  other  components  of  the  financial  system 
have grown over the years and their growing presence in various financial markets 
could,  in  the  absence  of  regulatory  steps  lead  to  risk  transfers  which  could  have 
systemic implications. You are well aware how in the recent past, through a gradual 
non-disruptive process, an attempt has been made to bring systemically important 
non-deposit  taking  NBFCs  under  a  more  harmonised  regulatory  framework, 
including the capital adequacy norms and exposure norms. These measures have 
reduced the unlimited leverage possibilities available to NBFCs. 
Another  important  aspect  has  been  the  treatment  of  off  balance  sheet  exposures 
and  consolidation  of  off  balance  sheet  vehicles  and  conduits.  While  applying 
prudential norms, there is need to treat off-balance sheet transactions similar to on 
balance  sheet  transactions  for  the  purpose  of  capital  adequacy  norms  and  risk 
management. In the case of off balance sheet vehicles a broader view needs to be 
taken from a prudential point of view on consolidation. The critical issue should be 
not merely the ownership but where the risk resides. In this context, a review of the 
current conversion factors and risk weights for off balance sheet items is necessary. 
Similarly it is recognized that the potential liquidity risks also need to be captured.  
Pursuant to the announcement in the Annual Policy Statement of April 2008, the RBI 
over  a  period  and  after  consultations  with  market  participants  has  announced  the 
following measures: 
o 
Strengthening  of  the  capital  adequacy  norms  for  off  balance  sheet 
transactions  covering  foreign  exchange  and  interest  rate  exposures.  It 
                                                 
1   For instance, in the context of CDS, the Superintendent of the New York State Insurance Department Mr. Eric 
Dinallo recently mentioned in his deposition before the Hearing of a US Senate Committee on “The Role of 
Financial Derivatives in Current Financial Crisis” that “The Insurance Department has determined that covered 
credit default swaps are insurance and therefore potentially subject to state regulation... Our goal is to ensure 
the terms of credit default swaps are written as a mechanism for protecting buyers against actual losses and 
not for betting on the credit quality of a third party.” 
4 
 BIS Review 4/2009
mandated  use  of  current  exposure  method  for  measuring  the  credit 
equivalent  amount  i.e.  the  exposures  had  to  be  marked  to  market,  and 
prescribed provisioning requirement for the exposure amount as applicable 
to standard assets of the concerned counterparty. Credit conversion factors 
were also increased across maturities.  
In  regard  to  asset  classification  it  was  clarified  that  the  amount  due  on  a 
derivative contract will be treated as NPA if not received within 90 days. In 
that  case  all  other  funded  facilities  granted  to  the  client  will  also  be 
classified as non-performing asset following the principle of borrower-wise 
classification as per the existing asset classification norms. However, in the 
case of complex derivative contracts that were entered into between April 
2007 and June 2008, the RBI suggested that the unpaid amounts may be 
parked  in  a  separate  account  and  borrower  wise  classification  will  not 
apply.  
In cases where a derivative contract is restructured, the MTM value of the 
contract on the date of the restructuring should be cash settled.  
o 
o 
(viii)  While  the  factors  responsible  for  the  crisis  are  many,  one  that  is  being  debated 
widely  is  the  contribution  of  fair  value  accounting  framework  for  complex  and 
conventional  financial  instruments  in  amplifying  the  crisis.  The  problem  lies  in  the 
procyclical nature of the standard and the difficulty in valuing financial instruments 
when markets are illiquid or in distressed conditions.  
Although fair value may increase transparency of the company accounts, it may not 
always  reflect  the  true  intrinsic  value  in  both  upswings  and  under  excessively 
stressed  market  conditions.  There  is  a  need  to  distinguish  the  basic  financial  and 
prudential analysis from a purely “financial” accounting framework.  
There is also need to clearly appreciate that the accounting reporting has a role as a 
source  of  information  and  as  such  will  indicate  the  value  of  the  company  at  the 
moment  of  the  statement  of  accounts.  Fair  value  for  prudential  purposes  is  more 
forward  looking  in  its  approach  as  it  includes  not  only  incurred  losses  but  also 
expected  losses.  This  tension  can be  addressed  by  the  regulators  addressing  the 
regulatory and prudential aspects in the case of banks. Keeping in view the systemic 
implications  of  the  standards,  regulators  will  have  to  carry  out  an  indepth 
assessment of the concepts and tools relating to valuation.  
Great emphasis is now being laid on implementing a central counterparty for OTC 
derivatives particularly for credit default swaps. Well regulated counterparties reduce 
potential for disruption in financial markets and promote operational efficiencies and 
transparency.  
In India as early as in 2001, the Clearing Corporation of India was set up to settle 
interbank  spot  forex  transactions  and  all  outright  and  repo  transactions  in 
government  securities  whether  negotiated  or  order  driven  systems.  CCIl  has  also 
introduced  a  collateralised  money  market  instrument  called  CBLO  which  is  also 
settled through the CCP. CCIL has also commenced non-guaranteed settlement of 
OTC trades in interest rate swaps on 27 November 2008. Guaranteed settlement of 
these trades will commence later once we clarify the exposure requirements. In the 
near  future  it  will  also  act  as  central  counterparty  for  forward  contracts  which  will 
mitigate risks releasing counterparty exposure limits. The margins are in the form of 
cash  and  government  bonds  ensuring  the  quality  and  liquidity  of  the  settlement 
guarantee fund 
Recent developments will also pave the way for more effective regulation rather than 
reliance  on  self  regulation,  credit  rating  agencies  assessments  or  setting  of 
standards by industry participants.  
(ix) 
(x) 
BIS Review 4/2009 
 5
(xi) 
Lastly,  on  the  issue  of  selling  of  complex  products,  we  have  to  collectively  work 
towards  a  viable  framework.  What  is  the  solution?  In  this  context  I  would  like  to 
recount the application of a surprisingly simple idea to the realm of public policy that 
has  received  tremendous  attention  after  being  advocated  by  Richard  Thaler  and 
Cass  Sunstein  in  their  international  bestseller  “Nudge”.  The  authors  advocate  the 
use of "choice architecture" by businesses or governments to influence choices in 
ways that encourage choosers to make decisions in their best interest. They call it 
"libertarian  paternalism".  This  involves  utilizing  "nudges"  such  as  the  wording  of 
choices in ways that influence individual actions, designing default choices (in the 
absence of action) that do not penalize individuals, limiting choices to those that are 
more  comprehensible,  taxing  detrimental  choices,  and  providing  full  disclosure  to 
better inform decision-makers. Can we take a cue?  
I will urge FEDAI to take it up as a special assignment and suggest a framework that 
is  both  practical  and  implementable  while  ensuring  the  best  interests  of  all 
stakeholders.  
8. The experience and lessons of the present crisis will be extremely useful for us in going 
forward with the process of financial market liberalisation. While there is not and should not 
be  any  stifling  of  innovations  in  the  financial  sector,  it  is  important  to  distinguish  financial 
innovation from conventional product, service or process innovation in terms of the systemic 
costs  these  entail.  Socially  useful  as  it  is,  financial  innovation  should  not  be  allowed  to 
outpace  its  understanding  by  the  multitude  of  market  participants  and  stake  holders  –  a 
process  facilitated  by  appropriate  reporting,  accounting  and  governance  standards  and 
enforced by regulatory and supervisory regime. 
9.  FEDAI  plays  a  special  role  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  for  ensuring  smooth  and 
speedy growth of the market in all its aspects. All authorised dealers are required to become 
members of the FEDAI and execute an undertaking to the effect that they would abide by the 
terms and conditions stipulated by the FEDAI for transacting foreign exchange business. As 
the forex market grows in the spot and derivative segments including currency futures, the 
FEDAI  as  a  self  regulatory  organisation  needs  to  focus  on  supporting  orderly  growth, 
promoting market integrity and sound practices with the ultimate objective of supporting the 
real economy. I wish the conference all success.  
6 
 BIS Review 4/2009
