William C Dudley: Lessons learned from the financial crisis  
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of New York, at the Eighth Annual BIS Conference, Basel, 3 July 2009. 
 In  assessing  the  lessons  of  the  past  two  years,  I  will  focus  on  five  broad  themes  that  are 
interrelated: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
As always, my views are my own and may not necessarily reflect those of the FOMC or the 
Federal Reserve System. 
Interconnectedness of the financial system  
System dynamics – How does the system respond to shocks?  
Incentives – Can we improve outcomes by changing incentives?  
Transparency  
How should central banks respond to asset bubbles?  
Interconnectedness 
This financial crisis has exposed how important the interconnections are among the banking 
system, capital markets, and payment and settlement systems. Focus on only one part of the 
financial system can obscure vulnerabilities that may prove very important. For example, the 
disruption of the securitization markets caused by the poor performance of highly-rated debt 
securities,  led  to  significant  problems  for  major  financial  institutions.  Banks  had  to  take 
assets  back  on  their  books;  backstop  lines  of  credit  were  triggered;  and  banks  could  no 
longer securitize loans, increasing the pressure on their balance sheets. This reduced credit 
availability,  which  increased  the  downward  pressure  on  economic  activity,  which  caused 
asset values to decline further, increasing the degree of stress in the financial system. 
The  high  degree  of  interconnectedness  across  the  financial  system  has  a  number  of 
implications. First, supervision must not just be vertical – firm by firm, or region by region, but 
also horizontal – looking broadly across banks, securities firms, markets and geographies. 
Second,  this  means  that  supervisory  practices  need  to  be  revamped.  They  need  to  be 
coordinated and multi-disciplinary. I think the U.S. Treasury is right in proposing a systemic 
risk regulator as part of their regulatory reform plan. But, we shouldn’t kid ourselves about 
how difficult this will be to execute. You will need a flexible and dynamic governance process 
to be able to identify the important elements of systemic risk, to elevate those concerns to 
the appropriate level and then to act on those concerns in a timely manner. It will take the 
right people, with the right skill sets, operating in a system with the right culture and legal 
framework. I don’t believe creating this oversight process will be an easy task. Consider, for 
example,  subprime  lending.  There  were  obvious  excesses  in  terms  of  underwriting 
standards,  product  design  and  risk  management.  But  addressing  those  issues  during  the 
boom  would  have  required  the  supervisor  to  absorb  attacks  that  reining  in  some  of  these 
practices  would  make  it  more  difficult  for  some  low-  and  moderate-income  households  to 
become homeowners for the first time. 
System dynamics 
In thinking about interconnectedness, we also need to focus on system dynamics. By system 
dynamics, I mean how the different parts of the system interact. Do they interact in a way 
that  dampens  a  shock  or  in  a  way  that  intensifies  it?  To  the  extent  that  the  system  has 
BIS Review 83/2009 
 1
important reinforcing rather than dampening mechanisms, then it may need to be modified. 
That may require significant re-engineering. 
Let me give you some examples of reinforcing and dampening mechanisms: 
Capital. When firms have incentives to continue to pay dividends to show they are strong that 
is  a  reinforcing  or  amplifying  mechanism.  The  paying  of  the  dividends  depletes  capital, 
making  the  firms  weaker.  In  contrast,  when  firms  have  incentives  (or  are  forced)  to  cut 
dividends quickly to conserve capital, that is a dampening mechanism. 
Foreign  exchange.  When  the  debts  of  a  country  held  by  foreigners  are  denominated 
predominantly in the home currency, currency  depreciation reduces the net debt  burden – 
the  value  of  foreign  assets  climbs  relative  to  the  asset  claims  of  foreigners.  The  U.S. 
operates  in  a  dampening  regime  in  this  respect.  In  contrast,  when  the  debts  of  the  home 
country are denominated in foreign currency, currency depreciation increases the net debt 
burden. Some of the Baltic countries are wrestling with this dilemma currently. 
Some reinforcing mechanisms that we might want to engineer out of the financial system: 
• 
Collateral tied to credit ratings. Credit downgrades lead to increased collateral calls 
which drains liquidity, leads to forced asset sales, further weakening the firm subject 
to the collateral calls. I don’t have any great ideas on how to address this, but it is a 
problem that needs to be fixed.  
Collateral and haircuts. When volatility rises and that leads to increased haircuts, the 
result  can  be  a  vicious  cycle  of  forced  asset  sales,  higher  volatility  and  still  higher 
haircuts.  
Compensation 
long-term 
profitability over the cycle. This causes risk-takers to take on too much risk because 
they are compensated on the upside. This extends the boom.  
to  short-term  revenue  generation,  rather 
  than 
tied 
Incentives 
Incentives  may  be  very  important  in  determining  whether  we  have  a  system  that  is 
dampening rather than amplifying. I think bad outcomes are not just about bad luck, they are 
also about bad incentives. The problem with incentives may be due to faulty compensation 
schemes, poor risk management or the fact that participants do not bear the full costs of their 
actions. 
One problem that we had in the U.S. banking system over the past year was a reluctance of 
banks to raise sufficient capital to be able to withstand bad states of nature. They didn’t want 
to  do  this  because  this  might  unnecessarily  dilute  their  shareholders.  As  a  result,  many 
banks  did  not  hold  sufficient  capital  and  market  participants  knew  this.  This  led  to  tighter 
financial and credit conditions, which made the bad state of the world more likely. This is an 
example of both bad incentives and an amplifying mechanism. 
The  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment  Program  (SCAP)  exercise  that  we  undertook  in  the 
United  States  leaned  against  this.  By  forcing  all  the  banks  to  have  sufficient  capital  to 
withstand a stress environment, we increased the likelihood that all the big banks would be 
able to survive a stress environment. This generated an improvement in confidence and a 
willingness of banks to engage with each other. This also made it easier for banks to be able 
to tap the capital markets. The SCAP exercise made a bad state of the world outcome less 
likely, helping to create a virtuous circle rather than a vicious one. The SCAP exercise was 
conducted  on  an  ad  hoc  basis.  It  probably  would  be  much  better  to  figure  out  how  to  do 
these types of exercises on a systematic basis. Such exercises may need to be hardwired 
into the oversight of the financial system. 
Capital  requirements  are  one  area  where  I  think  we  could  adjust  the  rules  in  a  way  to 
improve  incentives.  For  example,  imagine  that  we  mandated  that  banks  had  to  hold  more 
2 
 BIS Review 83/2009
capital,  but  that  the  added  capital  could  be  in  the  form  of  a  debt  instrument  that  only 
converted into equity if the share price fell dramatically. What would this do? It would change 
management’s  incentives.  Not  only  would  management  focus  on  generating  higher  stock 
prices, but they would also worry about risks that could cause share prices to fall sharply, 
resulting in dilution of their share holdings. 
Debt  convertible  into  equity  on  the  downside  would  also  be  helpful  in  that  it  would  be  a 
dampening mechanism – equity capital would be automatically replenished, but only when 
this was needed. 
Transparency 
There  were  many  areas  where  a lack  of  transparency  contributed  to a  loss  of confidence, 
which intensified the crisis. One particular area was the case of over-the-counter securities 
such as ABS, CMBS, RMBS and CDOs and their associated derivatives. 
There was a lack of transparency in a number of different dimensions.  
A. 
Valuation. CDOs and other securitized obligations were complex and difficult to value. 
This reduced liquidity, pushed down prices and created increased uncertainty about 
the solvency of institutions holding these assets. 
Prices. The lack of pricing information led to a loss of confidence about accounting 
marks.  Sometimes  identical  securities  were  valued  differently  at  different  financial 
institutions.  
Concentration of risk. Because there was no detailed reporting of exposures, market 
participants  did  not  know  much  about  the  concentration  of  risk.  This  led  to  a 
reluctance  to  engage  with  counterparties,  which,  in  turn,  pushed  up  spreads  and 
reduced liquidity further.  
B. 
C. 
The  SCAP  exercise  was  an  example  where  increased  transparency  helped  to  generate  a 
better  outcome.  We  disclosed  our  stress  test  methodology  and  the  results  for  each  of  the 
nineteen largest bank holding companies. This transparency increased confidence and made 
it easier for the banks to raise more capital.  
Monetary policy and asset bubbles 
In my opinion, this crisis should lead to a critical reevaluation of the view that central banks 
cannot identify or prevent asset bubbles, they can only clean up after asset bubbles burst.  
As I wrote in 2006, this orthodoxy can be summarized by three propositions: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
Asset bubbles are hard to identify. 
Monetary policy is not well-suited to respond to bubbles. 
Thus, the cost/benefit tradeoff of “leaning against the wind” against asset bubbles is 
unfavorable. 
From these propositions, the two important policy implications directly follow: 
1. 
The central bank should only take asset bubbles into consideration in the conduct of 
monetary  policy  to  the  extent  that  these  asset  bubbles  affect  the  growth/inflation 
outlook. 
The  monetary  authorities  should  be  there  to  “clean-up”  after  bubbles  burst,  both  to 
prevent systemic problems and undesired downward pressure on economic activity 
and/or inflation. 
2. 
Relative to this, I would argue that: 
BIS Review 83/2009 
 3
1. 
2. 
3. 
Asset bubbles may not be that hard to identify – especially large ones. For example, 
the housing bubble in the United States had been identified by many by 2005, and 
the  compressed  nature  of  risk  spreads  and  the  increased  leverage  in  the  financial 
system was very well known going into 2007.  
If  one  means  by  monetary  policy  the  instrument  of  short-term  interest  rates,  then  I 
agree  that  monetary  policy  is  not  well-suited  to  deal  with  asset  bubbles.  But  this 
suggests that it might be better for central bankers to examine the efficacy of other 
instruments  in  their  toolbox,  rather  than  simply  ignoring  the  development  of  asset 
bubbles.  
If existing tools are judged inadequate, then central banks should work on developing 
additional policy instruments.  
Let’s take the housing bubble as an example. Housing prices rose far faster than income. As 
a result, underwriting standards deteriorated. If regulators had forced mortgage originators to 
tighten up their standards or had forced the originators and securities issuers to keep “skin in 
the game”, I think the housing bubble might not have been so big.  
I think that this crisis has demonstrated that the cost of waiting to clean up asset bubbles 
after they burst can be very high. That suggests we should explore how to respond earlier.  
Harkening back to my earlier themes, I think we can respond in a number of ways: 
• 
First,  we  can  do  a  better  job  understanding  interconnectedness.  This  means 
changing how we oversee and supervise financial intermediaries.  
Second, we can change the system so that it is more self-dampening.  
Third, we can improve incentives.  
Fourth, we can increase transparency.  
Fifth,  we  can  develop  additional  policy  instruments.  For  example,  we  might  give  a 
systemic  risk  regulator  the  authority  to  establish  overall  leverage  limits  or  collateral 
and collateral haircut requirements across the system. This would give the financial 
authorities the ability to limit leverage and more directly influence risk premia and this 
might prove useful in limiting the size of future asset bubbles. 
 4 
 BIS Review 83/2009
