Caleb M Fundanga: The effects of the crisis on Africa 
Remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  African 
Economic Research Consortium Senior Policy Seminar (SPS XI), Lusaka, 6 April 2009. 
 The Executive Director, African Economic Research Consortium; 
Government and Central Bank Officials present; 
Distinguished Participants; 
Members of the Africa Economic Research Consortium; 
Ladies and Gentlemen. 
It is with great joy and gratitude that I welcome you all to Zambia and to this seminar. I wish 
to extend a warm welcome to all the international participants. I hope you will have a good 
stay in our beautiful and friendly city of Lusaka. I feel particularly honoured and grateful to 
officiate at this important seminar organized by the Institution I am proud to be associated 
with, the Africa Economic Research Consortium (AERC). 
Chairperson,  let  me  begin  by  thanking  you  and  AERC  for  choosing  Zambia  to  host  this 
important seminar. I am aware that since its establishment in 1988, the AERC has played a 
pivotal role in developing and harnessing resources in Africa both informational and human 
capital. Research, workshops and seminars such as this one have helped to strengthen the 
capacity of undertaking policy–relevant research into the problems facing the management of 
economies  in  sub-Saharan  Africa.  It  has,  through  these  interventions,  undoubtedly 
contributed  to  the  positive  strides  African  economies  have  scored  in  the  last  decade  with 
regard to economic governance and development. 
AERC’s  devotion  to  advanced  policy  research  and  training  in  the  field  of  economics  in 
Africahas built capacity in many institutions of economic management and academia in many 
of  our  countries.  Today,  there  is  no  major  economic  and  financial  institution  in  Africa  that 
does  not  boast  of  an  AERC  alumni.  This  could  not  have  been  possible  if  individual 
institutions across Africa were to pursue training on their own accord. This goes to show how 
important collaboration is in leveraging capabilities and realising the set objectives for African 
countries. 
Once again AERC is showing its valuable existence by bringing together a panel of experts 
from all over the world to come and share ideas on how to address the causes of the global 
financial  crisis,  short,  medium  and  long  term  consequences  for  the  global  economy,  the 
impact  of  the  crisis  on  African  economies,  implications  for  growth  and  development  of  the 
continent’s financial sector as well as policy options. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  this  seminar  could  not  have  come  at  a  more  opportune  time  than 
when  all  our  economies  are  faced  with  the  challenges  emanating  from  the  impact  of  the 
global  financial  and  economic  crisis.  This  seminar  is  unique  in  the  sense  that  it  has  been 
organised  to  specifically  address  the  effects  of  the  crisis.  We  feel  particularly  honoured  to 
host this important event. 
Chairperson, the ongoing economic crisis is not of Africa’s making but arose from advanced 
economies like the United States of America and United Kingdom. However, there is a risk 
that African countries could become the biggest casualties of a crisis they did not create. The 
impact is already severe and has dealt a huge shock to our continent while posing a great 
threat of reversal to the hard earned social and economic gains that most of our economies 
had achieved in the recent past. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  for  more  than  a  decade,  most  African  countries  had  continued  to 
register unprecedented economic growth rates averaging 5% and above. We saw a rise in 
income  levels  and  a  reduction  in  poverty  among  our  peoples  with  improved  education, 
BIS Review 44/2009 
 1
health,  water  and  infrastructure  development.  The  continent  also  experienced  a  surge  in 
investment  flows  in  many  sectors  including  mining,  manufacturing,  tourism,  transport  and 
construction. Progress in governance and accountability had also been noted in most African 
countries. 
Mr Chairman, allow me without pre-empting the deliberations to mention some problems the 
global  financial  crisis  has  created  for  most  African  economies.  Commodity  exporting 
countries  have  experienced  a  decline  in  their  export  receipts.  This  has  been  due  to  the 
decline in commodity prices reflecting the weak demand of such commodities arising from 
the scaled down output in industrialised and emerging market countries. The declining export 
earnings as well as changing investor sentiment toward investing in emerging markets, which 
has been reflected in the reversal of investment flows, have been exerting pressure on the 
exchange  rates.  The  depreciation  of  the  local  currencies  is  creating  additional  inflationary 
pressures  while  fiscal  operations  have  not  been  spared  as  the  tax  revenue  from  export 
earnings has been adversely affected. 
Furthermore,  the  effects  have  quickly  extended  to  the  real  economy,  with  serious 
consequences on jobs. In particular, manufacturing has been adversely affected because of 
its support to the primary industries on the continent. As extractive industries on the continent 
face  depressed  commodity  prices,  the  demand  for  manufactured  goods  will  continue  to 
decline. This is expected to negatively affect Africa’s manufacturing sector. The decline in the 
demand for finished goods in the advanced economies is also adversely affecting exports of 
our  manufactured  goods  and  thereby  slowing  down  the  manufacturing  sector  on  our 
continent.  Tourism  is  also  adversely  affected  as  many  foreign  tourists  postpone  or 
reschedule their visits to our continent as they grapple with severe economic conditions in 
their home countries. 
Chairperson, an additional adverse effect of the global financial crisis on our economies has 
been  on  direct  foreign  investment  s  as  many  projects  have  either  been  suspended  or 
cancelled.  This  has  been  due  to  a  failure  by  many  investors  to  raise  funds  as  a  result  of 
unfavourable  conditions  in  international  financial  markets.  Other  investors  are  pulling  out 
their  interests  from  Africa  in  a  bid  to  save  money  and  improve  their  liquidity  for  working 
capital purposes back home where liquidity has been a serious issue.  
In  Zambia,  the  effects  of  the  global  financial  crisis  have  been  generally  felt  in  our  mining 
industry,  securities  market,  and  the  external  sector  of  the  economy.  The  drop  in  copper 
prices has led some mines closing while other have been placed on care and maintenance 
with massive job losses while the mining subsectors and mining related industries have also 
seen loss of jobs. The tourism industry is adversely affected with low occupancy rates while 
the horticulture industry has also recorded losses due to low export volumes as result of low 
demand and low commodity prices of vegetables and fresh flowers in European markets. 
The  exchange  rate  has  also  come  under  severe  pressure  as  foreign  exchange  inflows 
declined  reflecting  the  deterioration  in  the  balance  of  payments  position.  This  is  partly  a 
consequence of reduced earnings from copper exports arising from the fall in copper prices. 
Further, the weakness of the local currency is a consequence of increased risk aversion to 
emerging and developing economy financial assets. 
Chairperson, the challenges arising from the global financial and economic crisis are huge 
but  surmountable.  Major  economies  of  the  world  are  putting  in  place  various  stimulus 
packages, which are expected to take the world economy out of the crisis. Without doubt, 
these measures will benefit emerging and developing economies as well, provided that were 
main committed to pursuing strong socio-economic policies. I urge all of us here present to 
be  part  of  the  solution  and  contribute  to  the  economic  recovery  and  prosperity  of  this 
continent. It is also important that we incorporate policy issues arising from this seminar in 
our  domestic  policy  processes  and  thereby  enrich  such  processes  by  taking  into 
consideration regional perspectives. 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2009
The  challenge  going  forward  is  how  to  maintain  and  sustain  the  economic  gains  and 
macroeconomic  stability  in  our  countries.  There  is  need  to  encourage  diversification  and 
enhance  competitiveness  by  increasing  expenditure  on  infrastructure  and  social  services. 
We need to continue to encourage investment in our economies that will lead to a diversified 
export  base  and  a  greater  local  value  addition.  For  monetary  authorities,  there  is  need  to 
continue to closely monitor global developments and always stand ready to take appropriate 
measures in the local financial markets to ensure that confidence in the financial systems is 
maintained and any systemic risk is avoided. Such actions will facilitate maintenance of the 
macroeconomic gains achieved thus far. This is a necessary ingredient for economic growth 
and  poverty  alleviation,  even  against  the  unfolding  adverse  effects  of  the  global  financial 
crisis. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, let me end by urging all of us present here today to deliberate on 
issues that will help us face the future in a much more confident way. Let us use this unique 
opportunity to have a discourse on how to protect and sustain the recent achievements of 
higher income levels and reduced poverty. African countries need to find ways and means of 
coming  up  with  a  response  framework  to  reverse  the  effects  of  the  crisis.  Our  financial 
systems regulatory frameworks should be enhanced to ensure that what has happened else 
where does not visit us in the near future. 
Thank you and I wish you successful deliberations. 
BIS Review 44/2009 
 3
