Lars E O Svensson: Flexible inflation targeting – lessons from the 
financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Lars  E  O  Svensson,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  the 
workshop  “Towards  a  new  framework  for  monetary  policy?  Lessons  from  the  crisis”, 
organized by the Netherlands Bank, Amsterdam, 21 September 2009. 
I am grateful to Claes Berg, Ylva Hedén, Jonas Niemeyer, Virginia Queijo von Heideken, Annika Svensson, Ulf 
Söderström, Staffan Viotti, Anders Vredin, Karl Walentin and, especially, Björn Lagerwall, for comments and help 
with  the  speech.  The  views  presented  here  are  my  own  and  not  necessarily  those  of  other  members  of  the 
Riksbank’s executive board or staff. 
 Introduction 
1.  
The financial crisis has raised some questions regarding monetary policy and how it should 
be  conducted  in  relation  to  financial  conditions  such  as  credit  growth,  asset  prices, 
imbalances, the risk of creating bubbles and so on. I will discuss two particular questions: 
Has  monetary  policy  contributed  to  the  conditions  for  the  crisis?  Do  the  lessons  from  the 
crisis justify any changes in the way best-practice monetary policy should be conducted? 
I will lay out my pre-crisis view of best-practice monetary policy – flexible inflation targeting – 
and its relation to financial stability and asset prices, discuss the role of monetary policy in 
possibly  contributing  to  the  current  financial  crisis  and,  finally,  present  my  conclusions  on 
whether flexible inflation targeting needs to be modified in the light of the crisis.  
Flexible inflation targeting 
2.  
The  Riksbank  and  all  the  other  inflation-targeting  central  banks  conduct  flexible  inflation 
targeting rather than strict inflation targeting. Flexible inflation targeting means that monetary 
policy  aims  at  stabilizing  both  inflation  around  the  inflation  target  and  the  real  economy, 
whereas  strict  inflation  targeting  aims  at  stabilizing  inflation  only,  without  regard  to  the 
stability of the real economy, what Mervyn King (1997) has described as being an “inflation 
nutter”.  By  stabilizing  the  real  economy  I  mean  stabilizing  resource  utilization  around  a 
normal  level,  keeping  in  mind  that  monetary  policy  cannot  affect  the  long-term  level  of 
resource utilization. 
Because of the time lags between monetary-policy actions and their effect on inflation and 
the real economy, effective flexible inflation targeting has to rely on forecasts of inflation and 
the real economy. Flexible inflation targeting can be described as “forecast targeting”: The 
central  bank  chooses  a  policy-rate  path  so  that  the  forecast  of  inflation  and  resource 
utilization  “looks  good.”  By  a  forecast  that  looks  good  I  mean  a  forecast  either  in  which 
inflation is already on target and resource utilization is already normal, or in which inflation is 
approaching  the  target  and  resource  utilization  is  approaching  a  normal  level  at  an 
appropriate  pace.  More  precisely,  it  means  a  forecast  for  inflation  and  resource  utilization 
that  as  effectively  as  possible  stabilizes  inflation  around  the  inflation  target  and  resource 
utilization  around  its  normal  level.  In  the  event  of  conflicting  objectives,  it  achieves  a 
reasonable  compromise  between  the  stability  of  inflation  and  the  stability  of  resource 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 1
utilization.1 Different central banks express this in slightly different words. The Riksbank has 
often used the term “well-balanced” monetary policy.2
The  forecasts  of  inflation  and  the  real  economy  are  then  conditional on  the  central  bank’s 
view of the transmission mechanism, an estimate of the current state of the economy and a 
forecast  of  important  exogenous  variables.  The  central  bank  uses  all  relevant  information 
that has an impact on the forecast of inflation and the real economy. In this framework, the 
central  bank  takes  financial  conditions  such  as  credit  growth,  asset  prices,  imbalances, 
potential bubbles and so on into account only to the extent that they have an impact on the 
forecast  of  inflation  and  resource  utilization.  Inflation  and  resource  utilization  are  target 
variables here, that is, variables that are arguments of the central bank’s loss function. 
Hence, financial conditions are not target variables. Instead, they are only indicators, as they 
provide  information  about  the  state  of  the  economy,  the  transmission  mechanism  and 
exogenous shocks to the central bank. Financial conditions then affect policy rates only to 
the extent that they have an impact on the forecast of inflation and resource utilization.3
Financial stability as a rarely binding constraint – a pre-crisis view 
3.  
What  is  the  role  of  financial  stability  in  a  pre-crisis  view  of  flexible  inflation  targeting? 
Maintaining  financial  stability,  including  a  well-functioning  payment  system,  is,  explicitly  or 
implicitly, an important objective for central banks. In my overview of best-practice monetary 
policy  in  Svensson  (2002),  long  before  the  crisis  but  during  an  ongoing  debate  about 
monetary  policy  and  asset  prices,  I  briefly  discussed  how  this  objective  can  be  reconciled 
with flexible inflation targeting, how conflicts can arise and how they could be handled.4
One question is whether financial stability belongs in the loss function for the central bank, 
together  with  inflation  and  resource  utilization.  I  argued  that  a  good  way  of  handling  this 
additional  objective  is  as  a  constraint  on  monetary  policy  rather  than  as  a  separate  target 
variable  that  appears  in  the  loss  function.  The  idea  is  that  financial  stability  is  normally 
pursued with different instruments, such as supervision and regulation, and is normally not a 
concern for monetary policy. 
Under  normal  circumstances,  at  least  in  industrialized  countries,  financial  stability  is  good 
and does not impose any constraints on monetary policy. Only rarely, when financial crises 
occur,  does  financial  stability  impose  constraints  on  monetary  policy  and  force  the  central 
bank to modify its decisions. 
The  typical  constraint  that  I  had  in  mind  was  that  monetary  policy  would  have  to  be 
temporarily modified in a more expansionary direction, for instance, in order to improve the 
situation for a fragile financial sector, perhaps winning some time for a financial sector clean-
                                                 
1 
2   The idea that inflation targeting implies that the inflation forecast can be seen as an intermediate target was 
introduced in King (1994). The term “inflation-forecast targeting” was introduced in Svensson (1997), and the 
term “forecast targeting” in Svensson (2005). See Woodford (2007a, b) for more discussion and analysis of 
forecast targeting. 
3   Several  central  banks  who  do  not  call  themselves  inflation  targeters  effectively  do  conduct  flexible  inflation 
targeting, although they may not be quite as transparent about their inflation target, the role of stability of the 
real economy, etc. 
4   See Goodfriend (2007) for a presentation of the conventional wisdom about pre-crisis monetary policy. See 
Bean  (2003)  for  a  more  detailed  pre-crisis  discussion  of  inflation  targeting,  financial  imbalances  and  asset 
prices. 
 2 
 BIS Review 112/2009
up and reform. Interestingly and paradoxically, the constraints financial stability has imposed 
on  monetary  policy  recently  have  rather  been  in  the  opposite  direction  to  the  one  I 
anticipated and have prevented the central banks from lowering the policy rate all the way to 
zero, or even below, because of concerns about the financial sector. 
The financial crisis and the deep recession that has followed it have motivated large cuts in 
the  policy  rate.  At  the  same  time,  concerns  about  the  possible  problems  for  the  financial 
market apparently made the Bank of England decide to go no lower than 50 basis points and 
initially, in April 2009, prevented the Riksbank from going below 50 basis points, although the 
Riksbank later in July lowered the policy rate to 25 basis points.5
How does the central bank know whether the constraint binds or not? I thought that it would 
know by continually monitoring the state of the financial sector. In some countries, the central 
bank  publishes  a  regular  Financial  Stability  Report  of  the  type  pioneered  by  the  Bank  of 
England and the Riksbank. These reports include an analysis of indicators of the state of the 
financial sector, in particular early-warning indicators of potential future problems. They serve 
to  assure  the  general  public  and  economic  agents  that  everything  is  well  in  the  financial 
sector when this is the case. They also serve as early warnings of the agents' concerns and 
for the financial-regulation authorities when problems show up on the horizon. Early action 
could then prevent any financial instability from materializing, thus limiting the probability of 
future threats to financial stability and future binding constraints on monetary policy. 
The idea of considering financial stability as a possible constraint on monetary policy rather 
than a target is consistent with the general idea of seeing financial stability, from a monetary-
policy point of view, as an aspect of the transmission mechanism of monetary policy, where a 
reduction  in  financial  stability  typically  changes  the  transmission  mechanism  and  makes  it 
less efficient. 
Asset prices and bubbles 
The previous discussion has focused on what the central bank should do when it faces an 
ongoing crisis, or receives signals that a crisis is underway. A related issue is to what extent 
the central bank should take account of asset prices and, in particular, potential asset-price 
bubbles. In the forecast targeting framework described above, asset prices will affect policy 
to the extent they are deemed to affect the forecasts of the central bank's target variables, 
that is, inflation and resource utilization. 
Suppose, however, that a large asset-price increase is deemed to be fragile and a possible 
bubble, with a significant risk for a future collapse. Suppose further that a future collapse is 
deemed to have undesirable consequences for future inflation and resource utilization. Then 
the bank faces a delicate situation. It is possible that a policy-rate path with a higher policy-
rate in the near future will be deemed to dampen asset-price increases in the near future and 
also reduce the risk or size of a collapse in the more distant future, thus undershooting the 
inflation  target  in  the  near  term  but  providing  a  more  stable  development  of  inflation  and 
resource utilization in the medium and longer term. These are examples of situations when 
the central bank may choose to respond to asset-price developments. However, the reason 
for these responses is that the central bank is concerned with the repercussions for inflation 
and resource utilization, not with the asset prices as such. That is, asset prices are not target 
variables; they do not enter the loss function. 
It goes without saying that in most realistic situations it will be very difficult to judge whether a 
particular asset-price movement is a bubble or is grounded in expectations about reasonable 
                                                 
5   See the box “Monetary Policy at Low Interest Rates” in the February 2009 Inflation Report (Bank of England 
2009, p. 44). My own view is that the “zero interest-rate mystique” may have been somewhat exaggerated, 
see the discussion in the Riksbank’s minutes of its September 2009 policy meeting (Sveriges Riksbank 2009). 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 3
fundamentals, and whether there are repercussions on inflation and resource utilization that 
motivate adjustment of the policy-rate path.6 This is obviously an area where good judgment 
is crucial. There is no scope for any mechanical adjustment of asset prices or bubbles. The 
central bank's reaction will not be stable but shift with its judgment and, counter to substantial 
parts of the literature, I do not believe that it is productive to discuss these issues directly in 
terms of the central bank's reaction function, for instance as modifications of a Taylor rule 
(Svensson 2003b, 2005). 
Asset-price movements and asset-price bubbles may directly threaten financial stability and 
cause  the  financial-stability  constraints  on  monetary  policy  to  bind.  Thus,  the  central  bank 
may want to respond to asset price developments that increase the risk of financial instability 
in the future. Again, in many realistic situations, the difficulty in making such judgments will 
be very great and there will be insufficient information for taking such preemptive action in 
many cases. 
Now, is there any reason to modify this view of monetary policy and financial stability given 
the experience of the financial crisis so far? Let me approach this question by asking what 
the causes of the financial crisis are, what the role of monetary policy is in causing the crisis 
and whether a different monetary policy was warranted and could have prevented or reduced 
the size of the crisis. 
The role of monetary policy in the financial crisis 
4.  
As I see it, the crisis was mainly caused by conditions that had very little to do with monetary 
policy  and  were  mostly  due  to  regulatory  failures  and,  to  some  extent,  to  specific 
circumstances, including the U.S. housing policy to support home ownership for low-income 
households.7 The macro conditions preceding the crisis included low world real interest rates 
due to global imbalances, as well as the Great Moderation with a long period of very stable 
growth and stable low inflation, which led to a systematic underestimation of risk and very 
low  risk  premia  in  financial  markets.  There  were  distorted  incentives  for  commercial  and 
investment  banks  to  increase  leverage  that  were  made  possible  by  lax  regulation  and 
supervision  and  the  lack  of  an  appropriate  bank  resolution  regime,  as  well  as  distorted 
incentives to exercise less due diligence in loan origination because of securitisation and to 
conduct  regulatory  arbitrage  by  setting  up  off-balance-sheet  entities  which  for  various 
specific reasons ended up still effectively remaining on the balance sheet. There were also 
distorted incentives for traders and fund managers to take excessive risks because of myopic 
and  asymmetric  remuneration  contracts.  There  were  eventually  enormous  information 
problems in assessing the risks of extremely complex asset-backed securities, and there was 
a huge underestimation of the potential for correlated systemic risks. None of these causes 
had anything to do with monetary policy, except that monetary policy may have contributed 
to the Great Moderation. 
So  what  was  the  potential  role  of  monetary  policy  in  contributing  to  the  crisis?  The  main 
argument blaming monetary policy for the crisis is that policy rates in the U.S. were kept too 
                                                 
6   Kohn (2006, 2008) specifies three conditions that should be fulfilled for central banks to take “extra action” to 
deal  with  a  possible  asset-price  bubble:  “First,  policymakers  must  be  able  to  identify  bubbles  in  a  timely 
fashion with reasonable confidence. Second, a somewhat tighter monetary policy must have a high probability 
that it will help to check at least some of the speculative activity. And third, the expected improvement in future 
economic  performance  that  would  result  from  the  curtailment  of  the  bubble  must  be  sufficiently  great.”  He 
concludes, also in 2008 and after thorough considerations, that those conditions would rarely be met. 
7   See Bean (2009) for an extensive and excellent discussion of the crisis, including the credit expansion and 
housing  boom,  the  macroeconomic  antecedents,  the  distorted  incentives,  the  information  problems,  the 
amplification  and  propagation  of  the  crisis  into  the  real  economy,  the  policy  responses  and  the  lessons  for 
monetary policy and economics generally. 
4 
 BIS Review 112/2009
low during the period 2001-2005, which would have contributed to the build-up of excessive 
credit growth and a house-price bubble (Taylor 2007). There are two relevant questions in 
this  context  about  U.S.  monetary  policy  during  2001-2005.  First,  was  the  low  interest  rate 
reasonable given the information available at the time? Second, could a different monetary 
policy with higher interest rates have prevented the crisis? 
The  first  question,  whether  the  low  interest  rate  was  reasonable  given  the  available 
information,  is  the  relevant  one  when  evaluating  monetary  policy.  It  is  more  relevant  to 
evaluate policy taking into account the information available ex ante to the policymaker rather 
than  information  ex  post  that  was  unknown  to  the  policymaker  (see  Svensson  2009  on 
evaluating  monetary  policy  ex  ante  and  ex  post).8  During  this  time,  given  the  information 
available, there was a genuine and well-motivated fear of the U.S. falling into a Japanese-
style  deflationary  liquidity  trap,  and  the  optimal  policy  in  such  a  situation  is  a  very 
expansionary  monetary  policy.9  It  may  be  that,  in  retrospect,  the  risk  of  deflation  was 
exaggerated, but it was impossible to know this ex ante. Hence, I consider the expansionary 
policy very appropriate and, adding some ex post evaluation, one can note that it did not lead 
ex post to very high inflation and an overheated economy. 
The second question, whether a different monetary policy could have prevented the crisis, is 
relevant  when  assessing  to  what  extent  monetary  policy  can  be  blamed  for  causing  the 
crisis, notwithstanding if it was reasonable from an exante perspective. The credit growth and 
the  housing  boom  in  the  U.S.  and  elsewhere  were  very  powerful.  However,  I  believe  that 
somewhat higher interest rates would have made little or no difference. In order to stop the 
credit growth and housing boom, interest rates would probably have had to be raised very 
high so as to cause considerable damage to the real economy. They could have thrown the 
U.S.  right  into  Japanese-style  deflation  and  eventually  a  liquidity  trap.  Certainly  higher 
interest rates would have had no impact on the regulatory problems, distorted incentives and 
information  problems  mentioned  above  (although  they  could  have  ended  the  Great 
Moderation with a deep recession and deflation).10
However, perhaps it is possible that the Fed’s emphasis on its readiness to relax monetary 
policy aggressively in the wake of a sharp fall in asset prices (Greenspan 2002) may have 
induced expectations of a floor under future asset prices and contributed to the asset-price 
boom (the “Greenspan Put”; see Miller, Weller and Zhang, 2002). Arguably, this is more a 
communication issue rather than one of actual policy, and less emphasis on the readiness to 
clean up after a sharp fall in asset prices might have been a preferable alternative. 
5.  
Conclusion: does flexible inflation targeting need to be modified in light of the 
crisis? 
What conclusions can we draw from the financial crisis so far about the conduct of monetary 
policy and any need to modify the framework of flexible inflation targeting? 
                                                 
8  
I remember this period very vividly, because I was fortunate to have the opportunity to discuss and debate the 
problems of current monetary policy, deflation and liquidity traps in a group of great economists at Princeton 
University that included Ben Bernanke (before he left to be a Governor at the Federal Reserve Board), Alan 
Blinder, Paul Krugman, Chris Sims and Michael Woodford. 
9   See Svensson (2003a) for a discussion of policy options before and in a liquidity trap. 
10   Kohn (2008), after extensive discussion, concludes that there is insufficient evidence that low interest rates 
would have contributed much to the house-price boom and that higher interest rates would have had much 
dampening effect on it. Del Negro, Marco, and Christopher Otrok (2007) find small effects of Fed monetary 
policy  on  house  prices  during  2001-2005,  whereas  Iacoviello,  Matteo,  and  Stefano  Neri  (2008)  find  larger 
effects, although their including the Regulation-Q period in their sample may increase the apparent monetary 
policy effect on housing. 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 5
In  many  countries, 
including  appropriate  bank  resolution  regimes. 
One  obvious  conclusion  is  that  price  stability  is  not  enough  to  achieve  financial  stability 
(Carney  2009,  White  2006).  Good  flexible  inflation  targeting  by  itself  does  not  achieve 
financial stability, if anyone ever believed that. Specific policies and instruments are needed 
to ensure financial stability. 
Another  conclusion  is  that  interest-rate  policy  is  not  enough  to  achieve  financial  stability. 
Interest  rates  are  too  blunt  an  instrument  for  that,  and  attempts  to  use  interest  rates  for 
financial stability purposes would cause considerable collateral damage to inflation and the 
real economy. Instead, the best instruments to achieve financial stability are supervision and 
regulation, 
the 
responsibility  for  these  instruments  rests  on  other  authorities  than  the  central  bank. 
Generally, to the extent financial instability depends on specific distortions, good regulation 
should  aim  to  attack  these  distortions  as  close  to  the  source  as  possible.  To  counter  the 
observed procyclicality of existing regulation, macro-prudential regulation that is contingent 
on  the  business  cycle and  financial  indicators may  need  to  be  introduced  to  induce  better 
financial stability. Possible macro-prudential regulation includes variable capital, margin, and 
equity/loan  requirements.  As  expressed  by  Bean  (2009),  “the  best  approach  is  likely  to 
involve a portfolio of instruments”. 
What are the specific conclusions for flexible inflation targeting? One old conclusion is that 
consideration  of  the  impact  of  financial  factors  on  the  forecast  of  inflation  and  resource 
utilization  may  require  longer  forecast  horizons.  Several  inflation-targeting  central  banks 
(including  the  Bank  of  England,  Norges  Bank  and  the  Riksbank)  have  for  other  reasons 
already  extended  their  forecast  horizon  from  the  previously  common  two  years  to  three 
years.  There  is  nothing  that  in  principle  prevents  an  inflation  targeter  from  considering 
forecasts beyond a three-year horizon, but in practice there is usually little information about 
anything at longer horizons except the tendency to revert to the long-term average. 
What about “leaning against the wind” (as advocated by, for instance, Borio and White, 2003, 
and Cecchetti, Genberg and Wadhwani, 2002), the idea that central banks should raise the 
interest rate more than what appears to be warranted by inflation and resource utilization to 
counter rapid credit growth and rising asset prices? It has sometimes not been quite clear 
whether  advocates  of  leaning  against  the  wind  mean  that  credit  growth  and  asset  prices 
should  be  considered  targets  and  enter  the  explicit  or  implicit  loss  functions  alongside 
inflation and resource utilization, or whether they mean that credit growth and asset prices 
should still be considered just indicators and are emphasized only because credit growth and 
asset  prices  may  have  potential  negative  effects  on  inflation  and  resource  utilization  at  a 
longer horizon. In the latter case, leaning against the wind is a way to improve the stability of 
inflation  and  resource  utilization  in  the  longer  run.  Then  it  is  completely  consistent  with 
flexible inflation targeting. 
However, in line with the previous discussion, other instruments than interest rates are likely 
to be much more effective in avoiding excessive credit growth and asset-price booms, since 
interest  rates  that  are  high  enough to  have  a  noticeable  effect  on  credit  growth  and  asset 
prices may have strong negative effects on inflation and resource utilization, and a central 
bank will probably rarely have sufficient information about the likely beneficial longer-horizon 
effects on inflation and resource utilization for the trade-off to be worthwhile and motivated. 
One important lesson from the financial crisis is that financial factors may have a very strong 
and deteriorating effect on the transmission mechanism, making standard interest-rate policy 
much less effective. This motivates more research on how to incorporate financial factors in 
the  standard  models  of  the  transmission  mechanism  used  by  central  banks,  and  a  rapidly 
increasing volume of such research is now being produced by academic and central-bank 
researchers and presented at an increasing number of conferences on financial factors and 
monetary policy. Important questions include how potential output and neutral real interest 
rates are affected by financial factors and financial distortions (Curdia and Woodford 2009, 
Walsh  2009),  and  what  impact  financial  factors  have  on  the  general  equilibrium  effects  of 
6 
 BIS Review 112/2009
alternative  policy-rate  paths  on  inflation  and  resource  utilization  forecasts.11  Before  such 
extensions  to  the  modelling  framework  are  operational,  policymakers  and  staff  have  to 
improvise and apply unusual amounts of judgment on the effects of the financial crisis on the 
transmission mechanism. Even with much better analytical foundations concerning the role 
of  financial  factors  in  the  transmission  mechanism,  there  will  of  course,  as  always,  be 
considerable scope for the application of good judgment in monetary policy. 
In the end, my main conclusion so far from the crisis is that flexible inflation targeting, applied 
in the right way and using all the information about financial factors that is relevant for the 
forecast  of  inflation  and  resource  utilization  at  any  horizon,  remains  the  best-practice 
monetary  policy  before,  during,  and  after  the  financial  crisis.  But  a  better  theoretical, 
empirical  and  operational  understanding  of  the  role  of  financial  factors  in  the  transmission 
mechanism  is  urgently  required  and  needs  much  work,  work  that  is  already  underway  in 
academia and in central banks. 
The outcome might very well be that financial factors are considered to have a larger role in 
affecting  the  transmission  mechanism  and  as  indicators  of  future  inflation  and  resource 
utilization. If so, central banks would end up responding more to financial indicators, in the 
sense of adjusting the policy rate and policyrate path more to a given change in a financial 
indicator. However, this would not mean that financial factors and indicators have become 
independent targets besides inflation and resource utilization in the explicit or implicit central-
bank  loss  function.  Instead,  it  would  be  a  matter  of  responding  appropriately  to  financial 
indicators in order to over time best stabilize inflation around the inflation target and resource 
utilization around a normal level.12
References 
Bank of England (2009), Inflation Report, February 2009, www.bankofengland.co.uk. 
Bean,  Charles  R.  (2003),  “Asset  Prices,  Financial  Imbalances  and  Monetary  Policy:  Are 
Inflation  Targets  Enough?’  in  Richards,  A.,  and  T.  Robinson,  eds.,  Asset  Prices  and 
Monetary Policy, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, 48-76. 
Bean,  Charles  R.  (2009),  “The  Great  Moderation,  the  Great  Panic  and  the  Great 
Contraction”, Schumpeter Lecture, Annual Congress of the European Economic Association, 
www.bankofengland.co.uk. 
Borio, Claudio and White, William R. (2003), “Whither Monetary and Financial Stability? The 
Implications of Evolving Policy Regimes”, in Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a 
Changing Economy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium, 131-
212. 
                                                 
11   Walsh (2009) points out that when financial factors cause distortions, these distortions will in general introduce 
corresponding terms in a loss function for monetary policy that is a second-order approximation to household 
welfare.  Curdia  and  Woodford  (2009)  present  a  model  where  the  second-order  welfare  approximation  is  a 
standard quadratic loss function of inflation and the output gap between output and potential output, but where 
potential output is affected by financial factors. Then inflation and the output gap remain the target variables, 
with and without financial factors. The neutral rate in the model, that is, the real rate consistent with output 
equal to potential output, is then also affected by financial factors. 
12   See Svensson (2003b) for further discussion of the important distinction between the response variables in the 
policy reaction function (the variables that the central bank responds to) and the target variables in the loss 
function (the variables that the central bank “targets” and wants to stabilize at their target levels). The optimal 
policy consists of responding to the determinants of the forecasts of the target variables, not necessarily to the 
target variables themselves (unless they happen to be main determinants of future realizations of themselves). 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 7
Carney, Mark (2009), “Some Considerations on Using Monetary Policy to Stabilize Economic 
Activity”, in Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas 
City Jackson Hole Symposium. 
Cecchetti, Stephen, Hans Genberg, and Sushil Wadhwani (2002), “Asset Prices in a Flexible 
Inflation Targeting Framework”, in Hunter, W., G. Kaufman, and M. Pomerleano, eds., Asset 
Price  Bubbles:  The  Implications  for  Monetary,  Regulatory  and  International  Policies, 
Cambridge, 427-444. 
Curdia,  Vasco,  and  Michael  Woodford  (2009),  “Credit  Frictions  and  Optimal  Monetary 
Policy”, working paper, 
Del Negro, Marco, and Christopher Otrok (2007), “99 Luftballons: Monetary Policy and the 
House Price Boom across U.S. States,” Journal of Monetary Economics 54, 1962-1985. 
Goodfriend,  Marvin  (2007),  “How  the  World  Achieved  Consensus  on  Monetary  Policy”, 
Journal of Economic Perspectives 21(4): 47-68. 
Greenspan,  Alan  (2002)  “Opening  Remarks”,  in  Rethinking  Stabilization  Policy,  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium, 1-10. 
Iacoviello,  Matteo,  and  Stefano  Neri  (2008)  “Housing  Market  Spillovers:  Evidence  from  an 
Estimated DSGE Model,” working paper, Boston College. 
King,  Mervyn,  (1997),  “Changes  in  UK  Monetary  Policy:  Rules  and  Discretion  in Practice”, 
Journal of Monetary Economics 39, 81-97. 
Kohn,  Donald  L.  (2006),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Asset  Prices,”  speech  on  March  16,  2006, 
www.federalreserve.gov. 
Kohn, Donald L. (2008), “Monetary Policy and Asset Prices Revisited,” speech on November 
19, 2008, www.federalreserve.gov. 
Miller, Marcus H., Paul A. Weller, and Lei Zhang (2002), “Moral Hazard and the U.S. Stock 
Market: Analysing the Greenspan Put”, Economic Journal. 112, C171-C186. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (1997),  “Inflation  Forecast  Targeting:  Implementing  and  Monitoring 
Inflation Targets”, European Economic Review 41, 1111-1146. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2002),  “Monetary  Policy  and  Real  Stabilization”,  in  Rethinking 
Stabilization Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium, 261-
312 
Svensson, Lars E.O. (2003a), “Escaping from a Liquidity Trap and Deflation: The Foolproof 
Way and Others”, Journal of Economic Perspectives 17(4), 145-166. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2003b),  “What  Is  Wrong  with  Taylor  Rules?  Using  Judgment  in 
Monetary Policy through Targeting Rules”, Journal of Economic Literature 41, 426-477. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2005),  “Monetary  Policy  with  Judgment:  Forecast  Targeting”, 
International Journal of Central Banking 1(1), 1-54. 
Svensson,  Lars  E.O.  (2009),  “Evaluating  Monetary  Policy”,  in  Koenig,  Evan,  and  Robert 
Leeson,  eds.,  From  the  Great  Moderation  to  the  Great  Deviation:  A  Round-Trip  Journey 
Based on the Work of John B. Taylor, forthcoming, www.larseosvensson.net. 
Sveriges Riksbank (2009), “Minutes of the Executive Board’s monetary policy meeting on 2 
September 2009”, www.riksbank.se. 
Taylor,  John  B.  (2007),  “Housing  and  Monetary  Policy”,  in  Housing,  Housing  Finance  and 
Monetary Policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole Symposium, 463-476. 
Walsh,  Carl  E.  (2009), “Using  Monetary  Policy  to  Stabilize  Economic Activity”,  in  Financial 
Stability  and  Macroeconomic  Policy,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City  Jackson  Hole 
Symposium. 
8 
 BIS Review 112/2009
White,  William  R.  (2006),  “Is  Price  Stability  Enough?”,  BIS  Working  Paper  No.  205, 
www.bis.org.Woodford,  Michael  (2007a),  “The  Case  for  Forecast  Targeting  as  a  Monetary 
Policy Strategy”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2007. 
Woodford,  Michael  (2007a),  “The  Case  for  Forecast  Targeting  as  a  Monetary  Policy 
Strategy”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, Fall 2007. 
Woodford, Michael (2007b), “Forecast Targeting as a Monetary Policy Strategy: Policy Rules 
in Practice”, in Koenig, Evan, and Robert Leeson, eds., From the Great Moderation to the 
Great Deviation: A Round-Trip Journey Based on the Work of John B. Taylor, forthcoming. 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 9
