Tarisa Watanagase: Rethinking monetary policy in a globalized world – 
coping with current challenges and beyond 
Remarks by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at the Central Bank of 
Malaysia High Level Conference 2009, Kuala Lumpur, 10 February 2009. 
 Introduction 
1. 
I  would  like  to  congratulate  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  on  its  50th  anniversary,  and  the 
magnificent job the Bank has done both in the domestic and international arenas. I wish the 
Bank continued success in the next 50 years and beyond. 
Thank  you  for  the  opportunity  to  address  this  distinguished  audience  on  a  topic  that  is  a 
current concern for all central bankers during these turbulent times. 
I would like to raise a number of issues which have challenged the traditional thinking behind 
monetary policy as a consequence of globalization and the current turmoil. In some others I 
hope  to  propose  solutions  –  some  new,  and  some  old.  In  many  cases  I  will  address  the 
challenges  and  the  blind  spots  which  we  face  as  monetary  policy  makers,  and  raise 
questions to which I myself do not yet know the answer. 
The developments that globalization has brought about has tested the limits of conventional 
monetary  policy,  both  in  terms  of  the  current  thinking  about  how  monetary  policy  is 
conducted,  as  well  as  the  effectiveness  of  the  current  approach  to  monetary  policy.  I  will 
discuss these points in detail in a moment. But first of all, let me briefly outline what exactly 
have  been  the  challenges  in  recent  decades  that  have  required  us  to  rethink  the  way  we 
conduct policy. 
Globalization  has  been  a  long  and  drawn  out  process.  Countries  have  jumped  at  the 
opportunity to reap the benefits of globalization, with advanced countries leading the pack. 
Jumps in technology in recent decades, particularly in information and communications, have 
ensured  that  services  –  particularly  financial  services  –  have  become  truly  borderless  for 
advanced and developing countries alike, in a much shorter period of time. 
Challenges to traditional monetary policy under globalization 
2.  
We are all familiar with the benefits of globalization, with the past few decades seeing cheap 
exports  from  emerging  markets  fueling  global  trade  and  growth,  albeit  with  some  hiccups 
along the way. China’s accession to the WTO and the subsequent flux of Chinese exports to 
the  rest  of  the  world,  as  well  as  oil  exports  from  the  Middle-East,  helped  to  create  an 
environment of prolonged low global prices and low global inflation. 
We are all familiar with this episode and have given it a few names: the great moderation, the 
Goldilocks’ economy – not too warm and not too cold, and stable disequilibrium. This is an 
episode in our history where variability of growth in real output has declined along with the 
variability in inflation. 
Along  the  way,  imbalances  in  the  global  economy  began  to  build  up.  The  imbalances 
manifested  themselves  in  huge  trade  surpluses  and  an  accumulation  of  foreign  exchange 
reserves  in  the  countries  which  relied  on  export-oriented  growth  –  including  those  in  the 
Asian region. They were reflected in the dollar revenue which was subsequently reinvested 
in  US  financial  markets  –  which  in turn  helped to  finance  the  US  saving  deficit,  permitting 
these  imbalances  to  remain  uncorrected  for  a  prolonged  period  of  time.  And  as  a  result, 
asset price bubbles were also allowed to persist for a prolonged period as well. 
BIS Review 33/2009 
 1
All was well as long as everyone continued to grow. However, as emerging markets opened 
up, global demand, and particularly demand from growing economies like China and India, 
drove up the prices of oil and other global commodities. Many economists began to predict a 
structural shift in global demand and changing dynamics of global inflation which would effect 
domestic prices and make inflation higher and more persistent. 
Coping with the global financial crisis 
3.  
At the same time, problems were brewing on the financial side in the advanced economies. I 
will  not  lay  out  the  causes  of  the  financial  crisis  here,  as  that  has  been  discussed  widely 
elsewhere.  In  a  nutshell,  the  slowdown  in  the  US  housing  market,  coupled  with  a  mix  of 
troubled  banking  practices,  regulatory  blind  spots,  and  absolute  faith  in  the  market 
mechanism,  among  other  things,  led  to  a  financial  crisis  in  advanced  economies.  But  the 
important  point  here  is  that  financial  innovations,  coupled  with  technological  advances  in 
communications,  helped  to  link  financial  markets  across  the  globe.  This  globalization  of 
financial services allowed the collapse of major financial centers to spread to the rest of the 
globe so efficiently. In fact, these very financial instruments which had been earlier used to 
diversify risks turned out to be the very means for spreading contagion. 
The  spread  of  the  impact  of  the  financial  crisis  onto  the  global  real  economy  through  the 
trade  channel  changed  the  world’s  economic  outlook  rapidly  and  dramatically.  This  had  a 
drastic impact on the inflation outlook, and the threat of inflation has rapidly shifted to one of 
possible deflation.  At  the  same  time,  central  banks  are  running  out  of  traditional monetary 
policy ammunition to fight the slowdown in growth and potential deflation – namely cutting 
interest rates. 
Given  the  increasing  influence  of  external  factors  on  global  inflation  dynamics,  traditional 
monetary policy which focuses on domestic dynamics of inflation needs to be reconsidered. 
As  a  result  of  globalization,  the  prices  of  important  commodities  and  goods  tend  to  move 
together, making external price shocks a more and more important determinant of domestic 
inflation. Fluctuations in oil prices and other commodity prices, or even a sustained period of 
cheaper  or  dearer  exports,  can  change  global  inflation  dynamics.  The  spike  in  oil  and 
commodity  prices  last  year,  which  initially  appeared  as  a  supply  shock  at  the  individual 
country  level,  in  fact  represented  economic  overheating  at  the  global  scale,  and  domestic 
monetary  policy  tightening  may  not  have  been  the  most  effective  way  to  deal  with  this 
situation in the global context. 
In  addition,  at  the  present  juncture,  the  unprecedented  and  contagious  slowdown  in  each 
country’s economies as a result of global linkages means that monetary policy now needs to 
respond  to  the  monetary  policy  stance  in  other  countries.  This  has  added  an  extra 
international dimension to policy making, in addition to previous considerations such as the 
impact via capital flows and trading partners’ economies. 
Testing the limits of monetary policy under globalization 
4.  
But  what  exactly  are  these  changes  that  globalization  has  brought  about  to  traditional 
monetary policy? And in particular, how have these changes affected central banks? 
The  first  aspect  has  been  the  challenge  to  the  basis  of  our  traditional  monetary  policy 
decision-making process. 
Traditional  conduct  of  monetary  policy  would  rely  on  the  accuracy  of  our  forecasts  of  the 
economy, of inflation dynamics, and of our understanding of how the economy works. With 
globalization, making accurate economic forecasts become more difficult. 
The recent economic cycle has demonstrated that shocks to the economy and the price level 
have  been  both  rapid  and  frequent.  This  is  most  clearly  demonstrated  by  the  volatility  in 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2009
inflation in the past year. In the case of Thailand, headline inflation peaked at 9.2% in July 
last year, but has fallen dramatically to -0.4% in January. 
While it is natural for forecasts to be revised in light of new developments and information, a 
concern  arises  that  globalization  is  likely  to  have  changed  the  various  relationships  in  the 
economy.  This  is  particularly  timely  now,  when  fear  and  uncertainty  takes  over  rational 
behaviour.  And  if  our  models  are  still  based  on  assumptions  which  have  not  incorporated 
these changing relationships, then we are likely to make systematic errors in our forecasts. 
As  a  result  of  this  volatility  in  inflation  and  the  marked  slowdown  in  global  output,  many 
central  banks  have  had  to  reverse  their  tightening  cycles  –  originally  conducted  to  tackle 
inflationary pressures, while others have pursued an aggressive easing of monetary policy to 
shore up growth and fight off prospects of deflation. Many countries, including Thailand, had 
to do both. 
This in turn, also becomes a concern for the central bank if frequent revisions or the abrupt 
reversal of the central bank’s monetary policy stance affects the public’s perception of the 
central bank’s credibility. 
As  a  result  of  the  speed  and  magnitude  of  deterioration  in  economic  conditions,  central 
banks across the globe have pursued extremely aggressive monetary policy easing, with the 
intent of actively supporting their domestic economies against the global slowdown. 
This situation has led us to the second challenge to monetary policy – namely the challenge 
to its effectiveness. Given current economic conditions, all the usual transmission channels 
have been clogged up. What happens when interest rates cannot be lowered any further? 
This is the challenge already faced in the US and the UK, and this challenge may need to be 
addressed by other countries in the near future. 
The  US  and  the  UK  have  begun  to  explore  “unconventional  measures”  now  that  the 
traditional  ammunition  of  lowering  interest  rates  has  been  exhausted.  This  has  included 
tackling 
rates  directly.  The 
“unconventional”  approach  taken  by  Japan  in  earlier  decades  –  namely  purchasing  of 
medium-  and  longer-term  government  bonds,  is  also  an  option,  although  the  Japanese 
experience  has  shown  that  this  has  led  to  an  increase  in  base  money  but  did  little  to 
stimulate  lending,  as commercial  banks  have  increased  short-term  liabilities  and  too  many 
illiquid and undervalued long-term assets on their balance sheets. On the other hand, recent 
easing,  as  in  the  case  of  the  US,  has  resulted  in  a  more  targeted,  direct  lending  to 
businesses  through  purchases  of  commercial  paper,  and  indirectly  to  households  through 
purchases of mortgage-backed securities. 
the  spread  between  commercial  and  government 
Lessons from the current crisis: where do we go from here? 
5.  
So what are we to do going forward on this issue of monetary policy in a globalized world? 
I  believe  that  there  are  a  few  issues  that  need  our  immediate  attention  amid  the 
unprecedented crisis that we are in. 
First, recent monetary policy actions around the globe have included the aggressive, and in 
many cases unprecedented easing of policy interest rates, as well as measures to extend 
and  improve  banks’  access  to  long-term  liquidity,  limit  systemic  risk,  and  increase  banks’ 
willingness to lend. 
But  the  use  of  these  unconventional  measures  remains  in  unchartered  territory,  and  few 
countries have had actual experience with their use, or to identify which ones are the most 
effective.  Therefore,  we  need  to  significantly  improve  our  understanding  about  how  these 
measures  might  or  might  not  work,  what  the  conditions  or  indicators  are  that  they  aim  to 
achieve, such as a pickup in growth or inflation, or a narrowing of short- and long-term bond 
spreads, for instance. 
BIS Review 33/2009 
 3
that 
important  so 
they  understand  what 
the  public  and  investors  are 
Second, given that such measures are relatively new and unconventional, communications 
with 
these 
unconventional measures mean in terms of monetary policy stance and when to expect an 
exit  once  these  conditions  or  indicators  are  met.  Clear  understanding  will  improve 
confidence, which we need to restore as soon as possible. 
Third,  the  feasibility  of  unconventional  measures  such  as  credit  easing  may  be  limited  in 
emerging markets, where the stock of such assets for purchase is limited. What then, are the 
alternatives should emerging economies run out of interest rate ammunition, and are there 
other options before the traditional ammunition runs out? 
Fourth, taking a longer term perspective, beyond the current crisis, we need to continue to 
improve  our  understanding  of  monetary  policy  in  a  globalized  world.  What  other  important 
ingredients need to be considered when implementing monetary policy or when forecasting 
growth and inflation ahead? The role of external shocks is likely to become more important 
and needs to be considered more carefully. We need to find ways to anticipate these shocks 
including the future financial architecture and improve upon limitations in our foresight and in 
the forecasting ability of our models. 
Fifth,  the  role  of  policy  makers  in  other  countries  which  will  add  to  these  external  shocks 
opens up room for greater policy coordination and cooperation at the international level. Like 
other previous crises, the current crisis is likely to be followed by discussion about intensive 
reforms at the international level. We should grab this opportunity to highlight the need for 
international  cooperation  in  monetary  policy  in  maintaining  global  financial  stability.  I  don’t 
need to point out that international cooperation in the area of supervision is far ahead, both in 
normal times and in time of crisis. 
In order to secure international cooperation in monetary policy, we need more research and 
dialogues  on  how  to  make  early  warning  and  surveillance  really  work  at  a  global  level.  In 
addition, coordination may not be enough; a redesign of global financial architecture may be 
necessary, and we need to work on this area as well. 
One last point before I end, I believe that most of us now agree that central banks need to 
maintain financial stability in addition to price stability. Therefore, we also need to improve 
our  understanding  of  the  implications  of  globalization  on  financial  stability,  as  well  as  the 
tools to conduct monetary policy in addition to the interest rate tool for stability purposes. 
4 
 BIS Review 33/2009
