Axel A Weber: Moral hazard, market discipline and self-regulation – what 
have we learnt? 
Speech  by  Professor  Axel  A  Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank,  at  the 
Ceremony for the 50th Anniversary of Bank Negara Malaysia: "50 Years of Central Banking – 
Stability and Sustainability", Kuala Lumpur, 10 February 2009. 
 1  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen 
I would like to congratulate the Bank Negara Malaysia on its 50th anniversary. 50 years of 
central banking is a time span which allows a central bank to gain experience and to learn 
from  the  various  challenges  it  is  confronted  with.  Anniversary  celebrations  are  usually  an 
opportunity  to  look  back  on  this  period,  to  honour  the  achievements  and  remember  what 
might have been done better. However, given the global financial crisis, it is impossible to 
confine oneself to this retrospective view. We have to find ways of how to respond to today’s 
financial  market  challenges.  This  is  exactly  what  the  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  doing  by 
hosting this conference on Central Banking in the 21st century and I am very glad to have 
been invited to contribute to the discussion by talking about moral hazard, market discipline 
and self-regulation. 
These issues take centre-stage in global talks on crisis prevention. As the current financial 
crisis  dramatically  shows,  neither  market  participants  nor  the  global  regulatory  framework 
have kept pace with the expansion and innovative forces of the global financial markets. At 
present, regulators, central bankers, and market participants all over the world are trying to 
identify the causes of the crisis and search for lessons to be learnt from it. While resolute 
political decisions are indispensable when it comes to immediate crisis management, it will 
take much more time and effort to identify and remedy the causes of the financial turmoil. For 
this  reason,  I  will  not  present  you  complete  formulas  today  but  I  will  try  to  highlight  some 
critical  issues  that  need  further  attention.  But  first,  let  me  briefly  outline  the  theoretical 
concepts of moral hazard, market discipline and self-regulation. 
Theoretical overview 
2  
Moral hazard – In order to illustrate the concept of moral hazard, I would like to look at the 
process  of  credit  risk  transfer  in  the  form  of  securitisation,  which  played  a  key  role  in  the 
events  leading  to  the  current  financial  crisis.  Principally,  credit  risk  transfer  is  a  very 
beneficial means of allocating risk in the financial market as it disconnects the originator of a 
risky  asset  from  the  ultimate  risk-taker.  The  downside  of  this  separation  is,  however,  that 
once the credit risk is forwarded there is no incentive for the originator to monitor the debtor. 
This is what we call moral hazard and what has ultimately resulted in an erosion of credit 
standards not only in US subprime but also in other credit market segments. In general, the 
ultimate  risk-taker  does  not  have  the  necessary  information  to  monitor  the  debtor  and  the 
transfer  process  unnecessarily  complicates  the  default  risk  assessment  of  the  securitised 
assets. 
Market discipline – Market discipline describes a mechanism in which market participants 
have an incentive to monitor the risk behaviour of counterparties with the aim of readjusting 
their investment decisions accordingly. In the aforementioned case of securitisation, the risk-
taker might be penalised by its share holders and other counterparties if a lack of monitoring 
impairs his ability to assess credit risk properly. Hence, market discipline has the potential to 
correct  inefficiencies  arising  from  credit  risk  transfer.  However,  there  is  a  very  important 
prerequisite for market discipline: transparency. Only if the market participants recognise that 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 1
a  moral  hazard  problem  is  arising  will  they  have  the  option  of  adjusting  their  investment 
decisions accordingly. While transparency is a necessary condition for market discipline, it is 
by no means sufficient on its own. In addition, market participants must have the ability and 
incentive to use the information. Especially in times of economic expansion, the incentive to 
acquire and use the information might be low as the general default risk remains relatively 
muted  as  long  as  the  upward  trend  continues.  A  restraining  effect  via  market  discipline  is 
rather  unlikely  in  this  case.  Therefore,  transparency  and  market  discipline  can  sustain 
financial stability but they should not replace market regulation. In addition, market regulation 
itself is necessary for enhancing transparency. 
Self-regulation – In general, there are two possible paths that can be followed with regard to 
market  regulation.  Regulation  can  either  be  imposed  on  the  relevant  institutions  in  the 
financial  sector  by  regulator  agencies  or  the  institutions  themselves  can  willingly  agree  on 
regulation. In the second case, we are talking about self-regulation. Self-regulation has the 
advantage that market participants tend to identify with the self-imposed rules, which should 
result  in  a  higher  acceptance  of  the  regulation.  Moreover,  market  participants  might  have 
better knowledge of the market, leading to more flexible and less costly solutions. However, 
as the current financial crisis underscores, self-regulation bears the risk that regulation will 
remain too lax or that the market participants will not comply with the self-imposed rules. This 
is  an  example  of  the  well-known  problem  of  collective  action.  Consequently,  it  has  to  be 
decided carefully whether self-regulation can be sufficient for a well-defined field of finance. 
What have we learnt? 
3  
Let me now turn to some specific aspects that I consider to be crucial in the learning process 
that  we  are  currently  undergoing.  First,  I  would  like  to  talk  about  some  regulatory  issues, 
asking how we can enhance transparency and market discipline in the securitisation market, 
financial institutions and hedge funds. Then, I would like to focus on the role that monetary 
policy can play in preventing future financial crises. 
Regulation 
3.1  
Securitisation  –  The  securitisation  market  has  played  a  critical  role  in  the  financial  crisis. 
Prior to the crisis, a lack of transparency in this market aggravated wrong incentives in the 
originate-to-distribute  business  model.  As  credit  risk  was  well  hidden  in  highly  structured 
products,  it  was  easily  transferred  to  other  market  participants.  This  in  turn  increased  the 
incentive to originate credit risk. Consequently, credit standards deteriorated, contributing to 
overheating phenomena such as those seen on the American housing and loan market. The 
fact that market participants often relied solely on credit ratings and that these ratings did not 
always  capture  the  credit  risk  adequately  aggravated  the  situation.  Once  the  crisis  had 
begun,  the  lack  of  information  on  the  risk  profile  and  profitability  of  the  highly  structured 
products  increased  the  distrust  among  market  participants,  thus  aggravating  the  financial 
turmoil. 
In  order  to  revive  this  largely  beneficial  market,  a  necessary  condition  is  to  restore 
confidence among market participants by enhancing market transparency. The transparency 
and  quality  of  credit  ratings  is  definitely  one  starting  point  in  this  process.  I  would  like  to 
stress that credit ratings should never replace the investor’s responsibility to evaluate the risk 
of a financial product. But transparency in the rating process – especially in the segment of 
often  opaque  and  multilayered  structured  credit  –  is  a  prerequisite  for investors  to  behave 
responsibly. Only a sufficiently transparent rating process that represents negative incentive 
effects for rating agencies will enable the investors to make informed judgements about the 
product  characteristics  as  well  as  the  quality  of  the  rating  process  itself.  It  should  be 
mentioned  in  this  context  that  initiatives  led  by  IOSCO,  the  international  organisation  of 
securities  supervisors,  point  in  the  right  direction.  In  the  course  of  this  month,  IOSCO  is 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2009
expected  to  report  on  improvements  of  transparency  provisions  in  individual  Codes  of 
Conducts of credit rating agencies. 
Another issue at stake is the lack of market standards in the securitisation market. Market 
participants must have easy access – for example, via a central data portal – to information 
on  transactions  in  the  securitisation  market,  the  underlying  asset  portfolio  and  further 
transformation  of  the  securitisation.  The  information  provided  should  include,  among  other 
things, details about any retention of a share of securitised products on the balance sheet of 
the originator. This would reveal the originator’s incentive structure and thus unveil possible 
moral hazard problems. In addition, there is strong need for international harmonisation of 
common terminology as well as disclosure requirements. 
At  present,  there  seems  to  be  a  consensus  among  regulating  institutions  and  market 
participants  about  the  necessity  of  these  standards.  The  Institute  of  International  Finance 
(IIF), a global association of financial institutions, has stressed in its final report on market 
best  practices  the  need  for  common  information  standards  in  the  market  for  securitised 
products.  Their  package  of  measures  is  largely  consistent  with  the  aforementioned 
requirements. Moreover, there are initiatives underway from both the American Securitization 
Forum  (ASF)  and  the  European  Securitisation  Forum  (ESF)  to  develop  disclosure 
requirements for securitisations. 
The Bundesbank welcomes these initiatives and is watching the process carefully. We hope 
that market participants in the securitisation market will agree on and abide by strong self-
regulation. Otherwise, legal disclosure requirements will have to be implemented globally. 
Financial  institutions  –  Another  important  starting  point  for  transparency-enhancing 
regulation  is  the  treatment  of  special  purpose  vehicles  founded  by  financial  institutions  in 
order  to  transfer  their  credit  risk  off  their  balance  sheets.  In  the  course  of  the  crisis,  a 
significant loss of confidence in the money market resulted from the construction of these off-
balance-sheet  vehicles.  As  their  business  model  is  built  on  maturity  transformation,  they 
have  run  into  liquidity  problems  when  money  market  froze  during  the  crisis  and,  owing  to 
reputation concerns, the banks had to take them back onto their balance sheets. Thus, huge 
risks  that  had  previously  been  invisible  suddenly  reappeared  on  the  balance  sheets  of 
financial institutions, revealing a severe case of insufficient transparency. 
Transparency  requirements  for  financial  institutions  arise  from  accounting  standards’ 
disclosure requirements as well as from prudential rules for banking supervision. With regard 
to  accounting  standards,  international  and  national  ambitions  are  to  change  the  legal 
framework such that financial institutions must consolidate their off-balance-sheet vehicles. 
For  both  the  international  financial  reporting  standards  (IFRS)  and  for  German  accounting 
rules  in  accordance  with  the  Commercial  Code  (HGB),  legislation  amendments  are 
underway.  Additionally,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  recently  proposed 
revisions  to  the  existing  pillar  3  requirements  of  Basel  II,  which  aim  at  helping  market 
participants  to  better  understand  a  bank's  overall  risk  profile,  comprising,  for  example, 
requirements to disclose involvement in off-balance-sheet vehicles. In my view, these steps 
are essential for enhancing transparency in the financial markets. 
Hedge funds – Let me now come to a branch that has not been the core of the financial 
turmoil but has still played a significant role in the course of the crisis: hedge funds. Although 
the  direct  credit  exposure  of  financial  institutions  to  hedge  funds  seems  to  have  been 
relatively  modest,  hedge  funds’  activities,  such  as  sudden  large  scale  liquidation  and  the 
influence on market price dynamics and market liquidity, have posed an indirect risk to core 
financial institutions and the broader financial system. Furthermore, the strong growth in the 
hedge  fund  sector  has  been  one  manifestation  of  the  “shadow  banking  system”  that  has 
contributed to the overall high leverage and the vulnerability of the global financial system. 
Hedge  funds  are  prone  to  price  and  liquidity  shocks  due  to  their  usual  combination  of 
leveraged positions and short-term financing. This underlines the relevance of initiatives for 
containing stability risks resulting from the failure or the collective behaviour of hedge funds. 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 3
There  are  two  basic  channels  for  reducing  potential  macroprudential  risks  associated  with 
hedge funds if direct regulation is still regarded as an inappropriate measure. The first is to 
strengthen the risk management of the prime broker, which has been recommended as the 
main instrument over the past few years. However, recent events have clearly demonstrated 
that authorities should not rely solely on the risk management of the prime brokers to contain 
potential risks. Therefore, this indirect approach should be combined with a second channel: 
strengthening  market  discipline  through  higher  levels  of  transparency  and  disclosure.  The 
Bundesbank has been calling for progress in these areas for some time. 
As hedge funds operate in global financial markets, only a global initiative will effectively deal 
with the international dimension of this issue. Therefore, the Bundesbank greatly appreciates 
the fact that the G20 has explicitly asked the hedge fund industry to bring forward proposals 
for a set of unified, self-regulatory best practices building on several initiatives launched in 
2007 and 2008. I am convinced that this is a suitable way to strengthen transparency and 
market  discipline  as  well  as  the  internal  management  procedures  of  the  hedge  funds 
themselves. However, the devil is in the detail and I believe the following points to be crucial. 
The  best  practices  should  include  an  adequate  disclosure  framework,  particularly  vis-à-vis 
counterparties and investors, which includes adequate and regular qualitative and quantitive 
risk-related information. In addition, they should include the requirement to comply with rules 
aimed  at  safeguarding  the  integrity  of  the  market  as  well  as  a  transparent  and  effective 
process to enforce the standards and to assess compliance. In particular, an obligation for 
hedge  funds  to  submit  themselves  to  third-party  reviews  of  compliance  to  best  practice 
standards  would  be  appropriate.  Furthermore,  in  order  to  enhance  the  forces  of  market 
discipline, regulated institutional investors should only be allowed to invest in those hedge 
funds  that  comply  with  best  practices.  Finally,  an  improvement  in  the  insight  of  authorities 
into the hedge fund industry is urgently needed in order to better assess vulnerabilities in the 
broader financial system. 
Monetary policy 
3.2  
So far, I have focused on regulatory issues that are relevant for the stability of the financial 
system. I would now like to turn to the part that monetary policy plays in this respect. In order 
to  identify  this  contribution,  an  analysis  of  the  monetary  policy  in  the  years  preceding  the 
crisis  is  essential.  Different  analytical  methods  –  such  as  a  comparison  of  central  bank 
interest rates with the forecast of a Taylor rule – point to the fact that monetary policy in most 
industrialised countries has followed a rather expansionary stance in the second half of this 
decade. This was particularly the case in the USA after the New Economy bubble had burst. 
However, in the euro area, too, interest-based as well as money and credit-based indicators 
have signalled a long phase of expansionary monetary policy. 
Boom-bust  cycles  in  the  financial  markets  cannot  form  independently  of  monetary  policy. 
According to empirical results, low long-term interest rates tend to increase the risk appetite 
of  financial  market  participants  and  thus  contribute  to  a  dynamic  worldwide  growth  in 
aggregate credit. Why is this the case? Two aspects should be mentioned here. First, low 
long-term interest rates – which may indeed be justified from a monetary policy perspective – 
are equivalent to low financing costs in the financial markets and therefore promote highly 
leveraged business models. Second, in the event that the target rate of returns of financial 
market participants does not take into account that the level of the risk-free interest rate has 
dropped, a “search for yield” process starts to trigger an increase in risky business activities. 
This process may come to an end very abruptly when market participants become aware of 
their high risk positions, for example, after monetary policy puts an end to the phase of low 
interest  rates.  Consequently,  a  whole  generation  of  business  models  will  be  brought  into 
question. Moreover, low short-term rates have supported business models that heavily relied 
on maturity mismatches. These models have run into severe problems when short-term rates 
rose. 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2009
The influence of monetary policy on the behaviour of financial market participants might be 
especially strong in the event that the central bank follows an asymmetric monetary policy 
that is lowering rates aggressively in the face of macroeconomic downturns but increasing 
rates only gradually when downside risks have vanished. Contrary to this approach, there is 
the idea of a symmetrical monetary policy, which would not consider the boom-bust phases 
in the financial markets as isolated events, but would try to look through the financial cycle 
and  stabilise  monetary  policy.  Moreover,  a  symmetrical  monetary  policy  would  consider  a 
higher key interest rate in the event of an increase in risk in the financial markets, even in the 
absence  of  inflationary  risk  or  macroeconomic  risks  within  the  usual  time  horizon  for 
monetary policy. This does not mean that the central bank would abandon its primary goal of 
price stability in favour of other intentions. The central bank would rather take a longer-term 
perspective  and  include  the  future  consequences  of  unfavourable  trends  in  the  financial 
markets in its analysis. 
Without a doubt, a symmetrical monetary policy will not be able to eliminate future financial 
crises. But I am convinced that a more symmetrical approach to monetary policy will better 
alleviate  the  negative  effects  of  the  financial  cycle  than  a  monetary  policy  approach  that 
solely  tries  to  limit  the  damage  in  times  of  a  financial  downturn  by  aggressively  lowering 
interest rates. This is even more the case when one assumes that the higher moments of 
financial cycles are met exogenous to the monetary policy strategy chosen by central banks. 
In this respect, the Eurosystem has a very valuable analytical tool for the medium to long-run 
perspective: monetary analysis. This tool forces us to extend the analytical horizon beyond 
the usual time span of two years and to include the low frequency movements of monetary 
and  credit  aggregates  in  monetary  analysis  and  the  decision-making  process.  Hence,  the 
Eurosystem  already  has  an  important  stabilising  element  that  enables  us  to  counteract 
procyclical trends in our monetary decision-making. In future, this aspect of monetary policy 
will need to gain in importance. 
Conclusion 
4  
With  this  request,  I  would  like  to  close  my  speech.  In  my  view,  the  highlighted  issues  are 
crucial  in  the  ongoing  analysis  and  learning  process  of  the  financial  crisis.  I  think  it  has 
become  clear  that  many  promising  international  initiatives  have  already  been  launched. 
However,  further  effort  is  strongly  needed  in  order  to  enhance  transparency,  market 
discipline and financial stability. 
Obviously,  financial  regulation  is  currently  being  improved  on  in  other  aspects  as  well,  in 
particular  as  regards  banking  regulation.  But  getting  into  these  details  would  surely  go 
beyond the scope of my speech. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 5
