Svein Gjedrem: The outlook for the Norwegian economy 
Address  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  for 
Norges Bank’s regional network, Region East, Oslo, 25 September 2009. 
 Please note that the text below may differ slightly from the actual presentation. The speech is 
based  on  the  assessments  presented  at  Norges  Bank’s  press  conference  following  the 
Executive  Board’s  monetary  policy  meeting  on  23  September  and  Monetary  Policy  Report 
2/09. 
It  has  been  a  year  since  financial  turbulence  developed  into  a  full-blown  crisis.  The  result 
was  the  most  severe  downturn  in  the  global  economy  since  the  Second  World  War.  Key 
rates were set at historically low levels both in Norway and abroad. Government spending 
has increased considerably to support demand for goods and services.  
Global economic activity is now picking up, albeit from a very low level, and unemployment is 
high.  Financial  market  conditions  have  improved,  although  liquidity  remains  tight  in  many 
markets.  
The  financial  crisis  eroded  confidence  in  banks,  counterparties  and  contractual  partners. 
Access to export credit came to a halt, international trade slowed sharply and manufacturing 
sales stalled.  
With  financial  markets  improving  over  the  past  six  months  and  an  increase  in  the  credit 
supply, global trade is now picking up slightly. Manufacturing output has recently increased in 
the US, the UK, Japan and many emerging economies, while it continues to fall – albeit at a 
slower pace – in Sweden and the euro area.  
Growth  in  public  demand,  stronger  confidence  in  financial  markets  and  low  key  rates  are 
fuelling investment abroad. Even though the global economic situation now seems to have 
stabilised, there is still a risk of continued low growth for a fairly long period ahead.  
The severe downturn and fall in commodity prices has led to very low or negative consumer 
price  inflation  in  many  countries.  Inflation  is  still  moving  down  and  is  now  negative  in  for 
instance the US, the euro area, Sweden, Japan and China. Core inflation is more stable, but 
has  also  shown  a  slight  decline  recently.  The  current  low  level  of  activity  and  high 
unemployment will also act as a brake on inflation in the period ahead.  
One  characteristic  of  the  crisis  was  the  substantial  increase  in  money  market  rates. 
Confidence between banks evaporated. Banks reacted by raising interest rates on loans to 
businesses and households. They started to turn off the lending tap.  
Measures implemented by central banks and governments have had a stabilising effect. The 
most important markets have also gradually become less disorderly, with less distrust among 
participants. The risk that issuers of credit will go bankrupt has diminished. Activity in money 
and bond markets has picked up and fluctuations are less pronounced.  
The  situation  in  the  interbank  market  has  improved.  The  spread  between  money  market 
rates and expected key rates, which is an indicator of risk premiums in the money market, 
has decreased. Money market premiums in Norway have also fallen.  
Equity  markets  have  risen  since  early  2009.  Fluctuations  in  equity  markets  are  less 
pronounced but are still wider than before the market turbulence began. Expected corporate 
earnings have not changed substantially since March 2009. It is likely that the recovery in 
equity markets primarily reflects a reduction in uncertainty and lower risk premiums. 
Oil prices have doubled since the trough in December 2008, reflecting OPEC production cuts 
and concerns in non-OPEC countries about supply further ahead. In addition, a number of 
BIS Review 115/2009 
 1
market  participants  expect  that  oil  demand  ahead  will  increase  at  a  more  rapid  pace  than 
assumed as global economic activity picks up. Expectations of future economic growth are 
pushing up oil futures prices. 
Oil consumption is now rising in China but has been very low in western economies. OPEC 
spare production capacity is still increasing and oil inventories in advanced economies are 
high.  Oil  prices  have  nonetheless held  up.  Keeping  large inventories  is  profitable when  oil 
futures  prices  are  high.  However,  the  scales  are  easily  tipped.  If  expectations  of  higher 
demand deteriorate, futures prices will fall and, in turn, prices for immediate delivery. Large 
oil inventories may then push down prices even further.  
The krone is floating and fluctuates somewhat. The krone tends to appreciate in good times 
and depreciate when negative shocks occur in the Norwegian economy. Fiscal policy and the 
petroleum fund mechanism, however, contribute to maintaining the stability of the krone. This 
is  clearly  evident  when  we  compare  developments  in  the  krone  in  recent  years  with  the 
currencies of other open economies that are major commodity exporters, such as Australia 
and New Zealand.  
In  recent  months,  exchange  rate  fluctuations  have  moderated  and  risk  appetite  among 
market  participants  has 
increased  somewhat.  The  Norwegian  krone  depreciated 
considerably in the second half of last year, but has appreciated somewhat since then. 
The cost level in the Norwegian business sector, measured by relative wages in a common 
currency, is now 10 per cent higher than the average in the period we can refer to as the oil 
age.  The  level  will  rise  ahead,  even  if  the  nominal  krone  exchange  rate  should  remain 
unchanged, because wage growth is higher in Norway than abroad. The real exchange rate, 
measured  by  developments  in  consumer  prices  in  a  common  currency,  is  in  line  with  a 
historical  average,  but  may  rise  ahead  as  a  result  of  higher  inflation  in  Norway  relative  to 
other countries.  
Key rates are now close to zero in many countries. Key rate expectations abroad have fallen. 
Market participants expect a rise in key rates in a number of countries after the turn of the 
year.  
Monetary  policy  in  Norway  is  oriented  towards  maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation.  The 
operational target is annual consumer price inflation of close to 2.5 per cent over time. The 
inflation target is an anchor for inflation expectations in the foreign exchange market, for the 
social partners in connection with wage settlements and for those setting prices for goods 
and services. In recent years, average inflation has been fairly close to, but somewhat lower 
than, the target of 2.5 per cent. 
Consumer  price  inflation  peaked  in  October  2008  and  has  since  receded.  In  the  year  to 
August 2009, CPI inflation was 1.9 per cent. Inflation measured by the CPI varies somewhat 
from month to month, primarily reflecting wide fluctuations in energy prices.  
CPIXE inflation shows developments in the consumer price index adjusted for tax changes 
and excluding temporary changes in energy prices. This indicator provides a more accurate 
picture of underlying inflation. By this measure, underlying inflation peaked at 3 per cent last 
autumn, but has since slowed somewhat and was 2.3 per cent in August. Underlying inflation 
is now below the inflation target. Inflation is slowing as a result of the decline in output and 
wage growth last year and the beginning of this year and is expected to fall to below 2 per 
cent in early 2010. 
Inflation ahead will depend on how quickly capacity utilisation picks up and by developments 
in  the  krone  exchange  rate.  Activity  in  the  Norwegian  economy  has  held  up  better  than 
expected just a few months ago. Higher capacity utilisation and low productivity growth may 
result  in  stronger-than-expected  upward  pressure  on  costs  and  point  towards  somewhat 
higher inflation in the medium term.  
2 
 BIS Review 115/2009
The financial crisis and the global economic recession have had a substantial impact on the 
Norwegian  economy,  and  a  range  of  measures  have  been  implemented  to  mitigate  the 
effects  of  the  crisis.  These  measures  prevented  the  liquidity  crisis  from  developing  into  a 
solvency crisis in the banking sector and a crisis in the real economy in Norway.  
Norges  Bank  has  supplied  additional  liquidity  to  banks  and  eased  collateral  requirements. 
The Bank has provided loans with longer maturities, used foreign exchange swaps for both 
USD  and  EUR  to  supply  krone  liquidity  and  provided  loans  to  Norwegian  banks  in  USD, 
which  Norges  Bank  can  now  procure  from  the  Federal  Reserve.  The  key  policy  rate  has 
been  reduced  by  4.50  percentage  points  since  15  October  last  year  to  1.25  per  cent.  To 
facilitate banks’ funding, the government has given banks access to liquid government paper 
in exchange for mortgage-backed securities issued by the banks’ mortgage companies. The 
Government  has  also  provided  increased  loans  and  guarantees  to  Norwegian  export 
industries, and has raised lending limits for state banks. Folketrygdfondet (the Government 
Pension Fund – Norway) has also been permitted to increase its purchases of bonds. The 
authorities have arranged to supply risk capital to Norwegian banks through the Norwegian 
State  Finance  Fund  to  strengthen  banks’  solidity.  In  order  to  curb  the  fall  in  activity  in  the 
Norwegian  economy,  government  expenditure  will  increase  by  more  than  10  per  cent  in 
2009. 
The measures implemented by Norges Bank were tailored to a situation in which financial 
markets no longer functioned. Now, banks and companies are again able to obtain funding in 
the  market.  The  arrangement  whereby  banks  can  exchange  covered  bonds  (OMF)  for 
government securities has made a substantial contribution to securing long-term funding for 
banks.  The  first  signs  that  the  covered  bond  market  was  beginning  to  reopen  became 
evident  in  spring.  The  minimum  price  in  the  swap  arrangement  is  therefore  now  being 
adjusted to the interest rate that seems to be forming in the market. The arrangement can 
then be phased out in the course of the autumn.  
Over the past year, there has been a substantial need to provide liquidity to banks.  
In  addition,  underlying  structural  liquidity  in  the  banking  system,  i.e.  liquidity  excluding 
Norges Bank’s liquidity operations, has been negative in recent years.  
Structural  liquidity  is  influenced  by  ingoing  and  outgoing  payments  to  and  from  the 
Government’s account in Norges Bank and is expected to increase ahead, primarily because 
the Government largely finances lending to state banks, payments to the Norwegian State 
Bond  Fund  and  the  Norwegian  State  Finance  Fund  by  drawing  down  deposits  in  Norges 
Bank. Banking system demand for loans from Norges Bank will then decrease considerably. 
In  most  countries,  the  financial  crisis  led  to  a  crisis  in  the  real  economy.  Fiscal  policy 
measures were gradually implemented as it became clear how strongly the financial crisis 
was  affecting  economic  activity  levels.  Many  governments  have  accumulated  substantial 
debt. With few exceptions, all the advanced economies were already in a net debt position 
and  many  are  now  facing  funding  problems  related  to  an  aging  population.  If  the  global 
economy is to recover from the crisis, government debt must be stabilised fairly soon in order 
to  prevent  a  string  of  crises  in  state  finances.  Norway  is  in  a  unique  position  due  to 
government petroleum revenues.  
Monetary and fiscal policy have stimulated domestic demand and output. Growth in mainland 
GDP was higher in the second quarter than projected in the June Monetary Policy Report. 
Household consumption seems to be picking up again.  
Petroleum  industry  activity  has  also  had  a  stabilising  effect  on  the  Norwegian  economy. 
There are plans to develop a number of oil fields on the Norwegian continental shelf in the 
years ahead, but it is likely that these investments will require an oil price of more than USD 
60–70 per barrel to be profitable.  
BIS Review 115/2009 
 3
through 
It  appears 
the  downturn. 
in  Norway  has  held  up  well 
The  events  of  September  2009  spread  rapidly  to  the  firms  in  Norges  Bank’s  regional 
network. In August 2009, manufacturing enterprises reported that growth would hold up. In 
November, the turnaround was described as a “heart attack”.  
Norges Bank established its regional network in 2002. Regular interviews provide information 
about  enterprises’  assessment  of  the  economic  outlook  before  other  official  statistics  are 
available. This information is therefore an important part of the decision-making basis in the 
formulation of monetary policy.  
Statistics Norway’s quarterly national accounts are available about 50 days after the end of 
the quarter. The regional network provides figures for the same quarter far earlier. In 2008, 
the regional network was able to provide clear evidence that mainland output fell markedly in 
the fourth quarter as early as December of the same year. National accounts figures for the 
fourth quarter were published more than two months later, on 19 February 2009. 
Employment 
that 
unemployment  will  be  considerably  lower  than  expected.  Seasonally  adjusted  registered 
unemployment was 2.9 per cent in August. Over the past year, the level of unemployment 
has risen most in the counties of Aust-Agder, Sør-Trøndelag, Østfold and Vestfold and least 
in  Sogn,  Akershus  and  Finnmark.  Unemployment  is  highest  in  Oslo,  at  3.9  per  cent  in 
August. Unemployment may be low because firms have chosen to retain their employees. 
Perhaps firms are opting to keep a certain labour reserve because of recruitment problems 
and  high  costs  experienced  during  the  previous  cyclical  turnaround.  Higher  government 
expenditure  has  contributed  to  holding  up  public  sector  employment.  Unemployment  may 
move up if global developments deteriorate and have a stronger impact on output in Norway.  
Between 1000 and 2000 new jobseekers from other countries are still being registered each 
month,  even  though  work  permits  were  no  longer  required  for  nationals  from  new  EU 
countries as of 1 May for work lasting less than three months. The level of registered work 
permits, however, seems to have stabilised over the past year. 
Inward migration flows are lower than in the period to summer 2008, but have not come to a 
complete halt.  
In 2009, the loss of confidence among banks also affected household mortgage financing. 
Banks no longer provided bridging loans. Housing turnover fell, but has now picked up again.  
House  prices  are  rising  after  a  sharp  fall  in  the  second  half  of  2008.  Last  autumn  it  was 
important  to  restart  the  housing  market,  which  will  also  gradually  provide  the  basis  for  a 
potential recovery in residential construction. However, the revival in house prices is not a 
positive development. The level of house prices in Norway is very high and the additional rise 
that has now occurred will only increase the potential fall.  
Developments  in  Norway,  and  to  an  even  greater  extent  in  other  countries,  show  that 
economic  policy  instruments  are  not  perfect.  The  interplay  between  credit  and  property 
prices in particular poses challenges. 
Interest  rate  setting  influences  this  interplay  only  indirectly.  The  interest  rate  rises  in  good 
times when inflation is expected to increase and falls when growth and inflation moderate. 
The interest rate is an approximate instrument, which can be used to keep inflation in check 
over time and thereby stabilise output and employment.  
In a small, open economy such as Norway’s, the exchange rate is important for inflation and 
the level of activity. There is therefore little leeway for setting the interest rate specifically with 
a view to influencing property markets and credit growth. Attempts to tighten monetary policy 
in the growth period from 2003 to 2008 would, for example, have resulted in higher capital 
inflows,  a  noticeably  stronger  krone  and  a  decline  in  manufacturing,  even  lower  inflation, 
higher growth in real wages and more foreign currency loans to households and enterprises. 
The rise in credit and house prices would probably not have been affected to any extent. In 
4 
 BIS Review 115/2009
addition  to  housing  market  euphoria,  the  Norwegian  krone  would  have  been  considerably 
overvalued for a period. 
According to Norge Bank’s bank lending survey, banks continued to tighten credit standards 
for enterprises while credit standards for households remained virtually unchanged in 2009 
Q2.  Banks  expect  approximately  unchanged  credit  standards  for  both  enterprises  and 
households in 2009 Q3. 
Banks reported a further fall in credit demand among non-financial corporations in 2009 Q2. 
Credit  demand  in  the  enterprise  sector  is  expected  to  stabilise  in  Q3.  Household  credit 
demand  was  approximately  unchanged  in  Q2,  while  banks  expect  increased  household 
credit demand ahead. 
Financial  market  turbulence  since  summer  2007  resulted  in  a  sharp  increase  in  interest 
rates, reaching a peak in 2009 Q1. Premiums have decreased substantially since then, but 
are perhaps not yet fully normalised.  
Bank lending rates on loans to enterprises averaged 8 per cent at their highest in 2008 and 
have now moved down to 4¾ per cent, although margins have also increased here.  
Norges  Bank’s  Executive  Board  decided  in  June  that  the  key  policy  rate  should  be  in  the 
interval ¾-1¾ per cent in the period to the publication of the next Monetary Policy Report on 
28 October 2009, unless the Norwegian economy is exposed to new major shocks.  
In the assessment forming the basis for its monetary policy decision of 23 September, the 
Executive  Board  placed  emphasis  on  underlying  inflation,  which  is  now  below  the  inflation 
target.  The  krone  has  appreciated  and  will,  in  conjunction  with  continued  low  imported 
inflation, contribute to keeping inflation below target in the year ahead. This suggests that the 
key policy rate should be kept low for a period ahead.  
Growth in the Norwegian economy has picked up at a more rapid pace than was expected a 
few  months  ago.  High  activity  in  the  oil  industry  and  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  measures 
have contributed to supporting demand for goods and services. Employment is stable and it 
appears that unemployment will be considerably lower than expected, despite the decline in 
manufacturing and the building and construction industry. Low interest rates are contributing 
to renewed growth in household consumption. Higher capacity utilisation and low productivity 
growth may increase upward pressure on costs, pointing towards somewhat higher inflation 
and suggesting that the key policy rate should be raised earlier than projected in the June 
Monetary Policy Report. 
On  balance,  it  was  appropriate  to  keep  the  key  policy  rate  unchanged  at  this  meeting, 
although the Executive Board considered the alternative of increasing the key policy rate. 
Thank you for your attention. 
 
 
 
 
BIS Review 115/2009 
 5
 6 
   BIS Review 115/2009
 BIS Review 115/2009 
   7
 8 
   BIS Review 115/2009
 BIS Review 115/2009 
   9
 10 
   BIS Review 115/2009
 BIS Review 115/2009 
   11
 12 
   BIS Review 115/2009
 BIS Review 115/2009 
   13
 14 
   BIS Review 115/2009
 BIS Review 115/2009 
   15
 16 
   BIS Review 115/2009
 BIS Review 115/2009 
   17
 18 
  BIS Review 115/2009
