Elizabeth A Duke: A framework for analyzing bank lending 
Speech  by  Ms  Elizabeth  A  Duke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve System, at the 13th Annual University of North Carolina Banking Institute, Charlotte, 
North Carolina, 30 March 2009. 
The original speech, which contains figures and various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the 
US Federal Reserve System’s website. 
 In  August  2008  I  joined  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  leaving 
behind a 30-year career as a commercial banker to become a central banker. My time as a 
commercial  banker  spanned  numerous  business  cycles.  It also  encompassed  at least  one 
severe financial system crisis, in the late 1980s through the early 1990s, albeit one that was 
not  as  severe  as  the  current  one.  From  my  time  as  a  commercial  banker,  I  already 
understood the factors considered by bankers in the initial lending decision as well as those 
in  loss  mitigation  when  collecting  those  same  loans.  As  a  central  banker,  I  have  come  to 
appreciate even more fully the role of credit in our economic well-being. So I thought it would 
be appropriate for me to provide my perspective on credit conditions in our economy and the 
current crisis.  
Today, I would like to discuss a three-dimensional view of the flow of credit to households 
and businesses and describe the evolving role of banks in the U.S. economy. I will begin by 
taking a look at recent trends in aggregate borrowing by households and by the nonfinancial 
business  sector.  These  trends  will  be  placed  in  a  historical  context  by  looking  back  at 
previous booms and busts in the credit cycle. One might call this the "macroeconomic view" 
of credit. When looking at aggregate borrowing, it is important to remember that a change in 
debt  outstanding  can  be  driven  by  any  one  of  three  factors  or,  more  commonly,  a 
combination of all three. In the macroeconomic view of credit, I will discuss indicators related 
to changes in demand for credit. I will also examine two determinants of the supply of credit. 
The  first  determinant  relates  to  lenders'  assessment  of  the  creditworthiness  of  borrowers 
given  future  economic  conditions.  The  second  relates  to  credit  constraints  caused  by  the 
financial  condition  of  the  lenders.  Although  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  that  improve 
macroeconomic  conditions  will  also  boost  the  demand  for  credit  and  improve  the 
creditworthiness  of  borrowers,  if  credit  is  constrained  by  the  balance  sheets  of  the  banks, 
only  programs  to  relieve  such  strain  will  improve  credit  availability.  This  condition  is  the 
reason for the injections of capital into banks through the Troubled Asset Relief Program, or 
TARP, and the financing provisions offered through the Public-Private Investment Program, 
or PPIP, as well as the expansion of Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) deposit 
and nondeposit guarantee programs. 
Next, I will consider the providers of credit. Using the Federal Reserve's flow of funds data, I 
will look at the evolution from 1950 to 2008 in the market shares of financial intermediation 
for  banks,  thrifts,  insurance  companies,  and  "other"  firms,  which  range  from  finance 
companies  to  the  entities  that  issue  asset-backed  securities  (ABS).  Although  these  data 
could suggest that the importance of banks has significantly diminished, I will argue that it 
matters how we measure what banks have been doing. In particular, it is important to take 
into  account  the  off-balance-sheet  activities  of  banks  when  securitization  became  more 
pervasive and when it abruptly stopped. This "financial intermediation view" of credit, in my 
opinion,  illustrates  the  importance  of  supporting  the  availability  of  all  forms  of  lending, 
whether it be on-balance-sheet lending by banks, credit originated by banks and securitized 
and sold to investors, or credit supplied by nonbank lenders.  
The Federal Reserve has long served as a lender to banks, providing them with liquidity to 
maintain  lending  in  times  of  stress.  Over  the  past  year  and  a  half,  however,  the  Federal 
Reserve has greatly expanded its provision of liquidity, establishing facilities under which we 
BIS Review 40/2009 
 1
auction term funding to banks on a secured basis, provide liquidity to primary dealers and 
money market mutual funds, and supply credit to issuers of commercial paper. In addition, 
through our purchases of agency debt and mortgage-backed securities, the Federal Reserve 
is lowering the cost of borrowing for mortgages as well as creating an outlet for loans that are 
originated  by  banks  and  nonbanks  and  securitized  by  the  agencies.1  Most  recently,  the 
Federal Reserve, in conjunction with the Treasury, has established the Term Asset-Backed 
Securities Loan Facility, or TALF, which uses capital provided by the Treasury in combination 
with  liquidity  provided  by  the  Federal  Reserve  to  enhance  the  availability  of  credit  to 
households and businesses.  
Because  banks  remain  central  to  financial  intermediation,  they  deserve  a  closer  look, 
particularly during this time of financial-sector turmoil. In my discussion of the "banking view" 
of credit, I will summarize the current state of the banking industry. As you know, banks play 
a  special  role  in  just  about  every  economy  in  the  world,  and  the  United  States  is  no 
exception.  Banks'  liabilities  are  generally  more  liquid  than  their  assets.  They  are  also  the 
main  repositories  of  deposits,  which  provide  immediately  available  liquidity  to  households 
and businesses and are used to undertake transactions for goods and services. In addition, 
banks  provide  intermediation  between  borrowers  and  savers.  Indeed,  banks  remain  the 
principal  source  of  finance  for  a  large  part  of  the  economy.  Given  these  important  and 
distinctive functions, it is, perhaps, obvious that adverse shocks to the financial system and 
the banking industry can have detrimental effects on economic activity. The current financial 
turbulence,  like  several  similar  events  in  the  past,  has  placed  severe  strains  on  the  U.S. 
banking system with serious repercussions for the economy as a whole.  
The "macroeconomic view" of credit 
Looking back over the past 50 years or so, credit extended to households and businesses 
has  almost  always  declined  just  before,  and  during,  economic  downturns.  And  almost  as 
often, a debate has ensued about whether the nation was in a "credit crunch."2 According to 
the White House Council of Economic Advisers, "a credit crunch occurs when the supply of 
credit is restricted below the range usually identified with prevailing market interest rates and 
the profitability of investment projects."3 Judging whether a credit crunch is happening in real 
time is not easy. It is extremely difficult to sort out the relative importance on the flow of credit 
of  reduced  demand  due  to  weaker  economic  activity,  reduced  supply  because  borrowers 
appear  less  creditworthy,  or  reduced  supply  because  lenders  face  pressures,  such  as  a 
shortage of capital, that restrain them from extending credit. In other words, while demand 
considerations could certainly result in a decline in credit flows, a reduction in the supply of 
credit – caused either by bank balance sheet pressures or by banks reluctant to lend to less-
creditworthy borrowers – could produce the same result.  
Figure 1 presents annualized quarterly percent changes in debt growth for home mortgages 
in  the  United  States  from  1952  to  2008,  with  shaded  areas  denoting  National  Bureau  of 
Economic  Research  recession  periods.  Strikingly,  the  quarterly  rate  of  growth  for  home 
mortgage debt, which includes mortgages and drawn-upon home equity lines, has typically 
declined  before  and  during  each  recession  and  then  picked  up  when  economic  conditions 
improved. What is different this time around is the runoff in home mortgage debt: It declined 
                                                 
1   Agency debt means debt issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and the Federal Home Loan Banks. 
2   Kaufman (1991) cites credit crunches that occurred in 1959, 1969-70, the mid-1970s, 1981-82, and 1990-91. 
See Henry Kaufman (1991), "Credit Crunches: The Deregulators Were Wrong," Wall Street Journal, October 
9.  See  also  Albert  Wojnilower  (1980),  "The  Central  Role  of  Credit  Crunches  in  Recent  Financial  History," 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol. 2, pp. 277-326. 
3   Council of Economic Advisers (1992), Economic Report of the President (Washington: Government Printing 
Office), p. 46. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2009
in the fourth quarter for the first time in more than 50 years. The recent decline in mortgage 
debt was likely partly driven by weaker demand for housing amid rising unemployment and 
rapidly falling home prices.  
It  is  equally  likely  that  supply-side  considerations  have  played  a  role.  First,  the  run-up  in 
mortgage delinquency rates and the higher loss rates associated with reductions in collateral 
values  indicate  that  the  creditworthiness  of  borrowers  has  declined.  The  unprecedented 
increase in mortgage defaults has resulted in more foreclosures and tighter mortgage lending 
terms,  which  are  shown  from  1990  onward  in  figure  2.  Although  the  net  fraction  of  banks 
tightening  lending  standards  on  mortgage  loans  was  about  50  percent  in  our  most  recent 
Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, it should be noted that most 
banks  had  already  tightened  their  lending  standards  substantially  in  2008.  Second,  the 
shutdown of the private mortgage-backed securities market has placed greater pressures on 
bank balance sheets not only to provide credit to borrowers with damaged credit histories, 
but also to provide so-called jumbo mortgages that are originated in amounts that are over 
the  conforming  loan  limits  applicable  to  loans  sold  to  or  guaranteed  by  the  government-
sponsored enterprises (GSEs) Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and by Ginnie Mae. Of course, 
credit  provision  to  some  borrowers  was  helped  through  mortgage  insurance  programs 
offered  by  the  Federal  Housing  Administration,  which  were  recently  expanded  by  the 
Congress through increases in coverage levels. Similarly, other borrowers have been able to 
qualify  for  mortgages  that  became  eligible  for  securitizations  by  the  GSEs  because  of 
increases  in  conforming  loan  limits.  Indeed,  as  the  non-agency  mortgage-backed  security 
market  contracted  by  roughly  15  percent  in  2008,  Ginnie  Mae  increased  its  outstanding 
supply  of  single-family  mortgage-backed  securities  by  roughly  33  percent.  Even  with  the 
growth of such securitizations, banks still needed to expend some balance sheet capacity to 
warehouse loans on their books prior to securitization.4  
In  response  to  these  supply-side  developments,  the  Treasury,  the  FDIC,  and  the  Federal 
Reserve  have  encouraged  banks  to  work  with  existing  borrowers  to  avoid  preventable 
foreclosures.5 The Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies also have encouraged 
banking  organizations  to  participate  in  the  Treasury's  Home  Affordable  Modification 
Program.6 Doing so should help to stem the runoff in mortgage debt and to damp the added 
downward  pressure  on  house  prices  that  can  occur  when  neighborhoods  have  clusters  of 
foreclosed  properties.  In  addition,  the  Treasury's  Capital  Assistance  Program,  the  FDIC's 
Temporary  Liquidity  Guarantee  Program,  and  the  Federal  Reserve's  programs  to  provide 
liquidity  are  intended  to  help  ease  the  funding  and  balance  sheet  pressures  banking 
organizations  face,  thereby  allowing  them  to  undertake  responsible  lending  activities, 
including new mortgage originations.  
I will now turn to nonmortgage consumer credit, which is shown in figure 3. The growth rate 
for  consumer  credit  has  been  trending  down,  on  balance,  for  years,  but  it  remained  quite 
robust until the latter half of last year. Indeed, consumer credit fell quite sharply in the fourth 
quarter.  Looking  back  over  the  past  50  years,  nonmortgage  consumer  credit  typically 
weakens  throughout  a  recession  as  labor  markets  deteriorate  and  often  turns  down  even 
after the recession ends. Thus, history suggests that consumer credit growth will likely slow 
                                                 
4   See Inside Mortgage Finance Publications (2009), "Mortgage Securities Market Continued to Shrink in Late 
2008 despite Agency Growth," Inside MBS & ABS, March 20, p.7. 
5   Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  FDIC,  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  and 
Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," 
joint press release, November 12. 
6   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, FDIC, National Credit Union Administration, Office of the 
Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2009), "Federal Financial Regulatory Agencies 
Issue Statement in Support of the Making Home Affordable Loan Modification Program," joint press release, 
March 4. 
BIS Review 40/2009 
 3
further  in  the  near  term;  in  addition,  many  banks  have  tightened  terms  and  standards  for 
nonmortgage consumer loans. 
Turning to the business sector, and in particular the corporate sector, the major components 
of  borrowing  are  bonds,  commercial  paper,  commercial  mortgages,  and  commercial  and 
industrial  bank  loans.  As  shown  in  the  left  panel  of  figure  4,  gross  bond  issuance  for 
investment-grade  firms  increased  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year  from  a  very  weak  third 
quarter and seems to have increased further in the first quarter of this year as firms appear to 
have  strengthened  their  balance  sheets  by  shifting  toward  longer-term  debt.  In  contrast, 
speculative-grade bond issuance has remained sluggish.  
In September 2008, nonfinancial corporations' commercial paper outstanding contracted (the 
black  solid  line  in  the  right  panel  of  figure  4),  as  money  market  mutual  funds  –  ordinarily 
major investors in commercial paper – faced significant strains. Losses on Lehman Brothers 
paper  led  one  prominent  fund  to  "break  the  buck"  –  that is,  to  fail  to  maintain  a net  asset 
value of $1.00 a share – which undermined investor confidence in such funds and triggered 
significant withdrawals from funds that typically invest in private-sector debt. In response, the 
Treasury established an insurance program for money market mutual fund investors, and the 
Federal  Reserve  introduced  new  programs  to  provide  liquidity  to  money  market  mutual 
funds. In addition, the Federal Reserve authorized the Commercial Paper Funding Facility to 
provide a liquidity backstop for U.S. issuers of commercial paper.7 These programs helped to 
restore  confidence  in  money  market  mutual  funds  and  improve  the  functioning  of  the 
commercial paper market. By early this year, the strains in the commercial paper market had 
eased notably.  
The volume of bank lending in 2008 mirrored developments in the commercial paper market. 
In the fall, bank commercial and industrial lending surged for a time (the red dotted line in the 
right panel of figure 4), reportedly reflecting, in part, substantial draws on previously existing 
long-term  lending  commitments;  then  such  lending  contracted  sharply  as  access  to  other 
sources  of  funding,  such  as  commercial  paper,  improved.  In  this  manner,  bank  loans 
provided  at  least  a  partial  substitute  for  market-based  funding  until  market  functioning 
improved. That said, the growth rate for debt of nonfinancial businesses decreased sharply in 
2008. 
As shown in figure 5, debt growth for nonfinancial corporate businesses reached almost 15 
percent at the peak of the business cycle in December 2007, but it was less than 3 percent 
by the end of 2008. Looking back, it is apparent that debt growth for nonfinancial corporate 
businesses can, and often does, decline sharply as the economy slows. During recessions, 
which  are  indicated  in  the  figure  by  shading,  debt  growth  has  typically  decreased  and 
sometimes  even  become  negative,  such  as during  1990-91.  In  part,  such  declines  in  debt 
growth  are  derived  from  declines  in  demand  for  the  goods  and  services  produced  by 
nonfinancial  firms.  In  addition,  such  declines  reflect  the  ongoing  tightening  of  lending 
standards that can result from the deterioration of the fundamentals that support lending. 
Turning to commercial mortgage growth, figure 6 presents such data from the 1950s through 
2008.  As  with  the  debt  series  plotted  in  previous  charts,  commercial  mortgage  growth 
typically drops off during a recession as retail sales slow and less office space is needed for 
workers.  Especially  striking 
in  commercial  mortgages 
outstanding  after  the  1990-91  recession.  Since  the  peak  of  the  recent  business  cycle, 
commercial mortgage growth has slowed with each passing quarter. By the fourth quarter of 
2008, its annualized growth was only about 1 percent. 
the  prolonged  contraction 
is 
                                                 
7   Under the Commercial Paper Funding Facility, authorized on October 7, 2008, the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New  York  finances  the  purchase  of  unsecured  and  asset-backed  commercial  paper  from  eligible  issuers 
through  its  primary  dealers.  Only  highly  rated,  U.S.  dollar-denominated,  three-month  commercial  paper  is 
eligible for financing. 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2009
The "financial intermediation view" of credit 
The commercial paper market example, which I briefly described earlier, highlights the fact 
that financial intermediaries can play an important safety-valve role for the financial system. 
When the commercial paper market suddenly dried up, financial intermediaries were able to 
fund  firms  that  had  unused  lines  of  credit  or  other  commitments.8  Moreover,  the  Federal 
Reserve, through its lending programs, contributed to improved conditions in the commercial 
paper market so that issuance of these short-term funding instruments could resume.  
In today's economy, much of the flow of credit comes from lending that occurs outside of the 
banking system. Here again, it is useful to take a historical look at financial intermediation to 
better  understand  the  potential  effect  on  the  availability  of  credit  to  households  and 
businesses from the recent shutdowns in the securitization and commercial paper markets 
and to get a first glimpse at how financial intermediation markets responded. 
Consider,  for  example,  the  shares  of  commercial  mortgages  outstanding  –  funded  by 
depositories,  insurance  companies,  other  financial  institution,  and  commercial  mortgage-
backed securities (CMBS) – presented in figure 7. The share funded by CMBS (the orange 
line) increased from almost nothing in 1990 to almost 30 percent in 2008. In an accounting 
sense,  most  of  this  increase  in  funding  from  the  capital  markets  came  at  the  expense  of 
direct  holdings  of  whole  loans  by  insurance  companies  (the  dashed  green  line)  and  other 
intermediaries (the black line), whose funding shares fell by half between 2000 and 2008. In 
contrast,  depositories'  share  of  commercial  mortgages  outstanding  (the  purple  line)  held 
steady from 1990 through 2007. In 2008, the decrease in the commercial mortgages funded 
by  CMBS  –  the  downtick  of  the  orange  line  at  the  end  of  the  sample  –  was  offset  by  an 
increase  in  commercial  mortgages  funded  by  depositories  –  the  uptick  of  the  purple  line. 
These  data  suggest  that  depositories  increased  their  share  of  commercial  mortgages  as 
securitization  markets  stalled  in  2008.  Again,  banks  and  other  depositories  served  an 
important safety-valve function for the commercial mortgage market. 
In figure 8, Federal Reserve flow of funds data are used to construct market shares of all 
financial  intermediation  provided  by  four  major  classes  of  institutions:  banks,  thrifts, 
insurance  companies,  and  "other  financial  intermediaries,"  which  range  from  finance 
companies to the entities that issue ABS.9 In 1950, banks' share of financial intermediation 
(the red line) was about 50 percent; it declined and then rose to about 48 percent in the mid-
1970s, then it trended down to about 33 percent at the turn of the century. From the fourth 
quarter of 2007 to the fourth quarter of 2008, this measure of total financial intermediation 
grew by about 5 percent. At the same time, the banking system's share increased from 32.8 
percent  to  33.4  percent  –  a  0.6  percentage  point  increase  in  market  share.  Thrifts  and 
insurance companies – represented by the blue solid and green dashed lines, respectively – 
had declines in their market shares in the fourth quarter of 2008. 
In  figure  9,  the  shares  for  banks  and  thrifts  are  combined  so  that  there  is  a  depositories' 
share of this measure of U.S. financial intermediation (the purple line). Comparing the purple 
line for the depositories' share with the black line for other financial intermediaries' share, it is 
                                                 
8   Bank's ability to hedge against marketwide liquidity shocks as they did last fall has been documented in the 
academic  banking  literature;  see  Evan  Gatev  and  Philip  E.  Strahan  (2006),  "Banks'  Advantage  in  Hedging 
Liquidity Risk: Theory and Evidence from the Commercial Paper Market," Journal of Finance, vol. 61 (April), 
pp. 867-892. 
9   Figure 8 and figure 10 update those in Ron J. Feldman and Mark Lueck (2007), "Are Banks Really Dying This 
Time?" Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis,  The Region (September),  pp. 6-9 and 42-51. These authors 
kindly updated their analysis for these remarks. See also John H. Boyd and Mark Gertler (1994), "Are Banks 
Dead? Or Are the Reports Greatly Exaggerated?" Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Quarterly Review, 
vol. 18 (Summer), pp. 2-14. In both cases, "other financial intermediaries" include mutual funds; closed-end 
funds;  exchange-traded  funds;  ABS  issuers;  finance  companies;  real  estate  investment  trusts,  or  REITs; 
brokers and dealers; and funding corporations; but exclude the GSEs. 
BIS Review 40/2009 
 5
apparent  that  these  lines  mirror  one  another.  Although  both  of  these  shares  equaled  40 
percent in 2001, by the end of 2008, the other financial intermediaries' share had increased 
to  45  percent,  but  the  depositories'  share  had  decreased  to  38  percent.  Interestingly,  the 
shares  for  other  financial  intermediaries  and  for  depositories  continued  their  respective 
upward and downward trends despite the disruptions in securitization and financial markets 
during 2008. 
Turning  back  to  banks,  the  standard  market  shares  of  financial  intermediation  reported  in 
figures  8  and  9  neglect 
their  off-balance-sheet  activities.  Such  off-balance-sheet 
intermediation has generated considerable earnings for banks. For example, banks receive 
fees for lines of credit regardless of whether borrowers use the lines of credit. In addition, 
securitization activities have provided many benefits to banks. Even  when banks have not 
securitized the loans, such as when mortgages were securitized by the GSEs, banks often 
originated and serviced the loans that were pooled and have earned fees in the process. If 
one adjusts the financial intermediation data for banks to include "credit equivalents" for the 
off-balance-sheet  activities  of  banks, 
financial 
intermediation for banks would remain above 40 percent in recent years.10 These adjusted 
financial  intermediation  data  are  shown  using  the  red  dashed  line  in  figure  10.11  With  the 
near  shutdown  in  securitization  markets,  adjusted  bank  assets  declined  from  almost  45 
percent in fourth quarter 2007 to 42 percent in fourth quarter 2008. Even with this decline, 
however, banks' adjusted share of financial intermediation would be in the higher end of the 
range observed since the 1980s.  
These adjusted financial intermediation data, however, do not tell the full story. Ideally, we 
also would want to adjust the data for all of the other financial intermediaries to include credit 
equivalents for their off-balance-sheet activities. Unfortunately, the data do not exist to make 
such an adjustment. Nor do the data generally exist to convert the fee income that financial 
intermediaries generate by off-balance-sheet activities into balance-sheet equivalents. That 
said, the adjusted flow of funds data suggest that banks have remained important financial 
intermediaries despite the growth (and disruption) in securitization activities and the arrival of 
new competitors.  
the  adjusted  market  share  of 
then 
The "banking view" of credit 
Even though the total provision of financial intermediation services by banks remained high 
relative to other financial intermediaries and their on-balance-sheet financial intermediation 
services increased in the fourth quarter of 2008, it must be recognized that there are many 
types of banks in the United States with different specializations, geographic concentrations, 
and comparative advantages. Consequently, the extraordinary stress in the financial system, 
the  downturn  in  the  U.S.  and  global  economies,  and  the  associated  reductions  in  asset 
values have affected each bank differently. 
Much attention has been focused on the negative loan growth of the largest five bank holding 
companies in the fourth quarter of 2008 – about negative 16 percent at an annual rate on a 
merger-adjusted basis. The next 20 largest bank holding companies had a notably smaller 
decrease in loans over the same period – about a negative 4-1/4 percent rate of decline – 
and  other  (smaller)  bank  holding  companies  increased  their  lending  at  about  a  5  percent 
                                                 
10   The  financial  intermediation  data  were  adjusted  for  banks'  off-balance-sheet  activities  using  techniques 
described in Feldman and Lueck (2007) and Boyd and Gertler (1994) (see note 9). 
11   Exposures include the following types of off-balance-sheet activities: standby letters of credit, participation in 
bankers'  acceptances,  retained  recourse  on  assets  sold,  securities  lend,  derivatives  and  unused  loan 
commitments.  Bank supervisors  weight the volume  of these activities  by a conversion  factor to obtain their 
credit  equivalent.  Because  of  modifications  to  Call  Reports,  the  off-balance-sheet  activities  with  available 
credit equivalents have changed over time. 
6 
 BIS Review 40/2009
pace. This loan growth may reflect that smaller banks in strong financial condition are finding 
that they can gain creditworthy customers – even in the current economic environment – as 
other banks cut back on lending to conserve capital and liquidity. Smaller banks may also be 
finding opportunities to reclaim consumer and business customers from nonbank competitors 
who have pulled back as the securitization markets have dried up.  
A  decomposition  of  changes  in  loans  held  on  bank  balance  sheets  across  banking 
organizations  in  the  three  size  groups  provides  a  glimpse  into  how  diverse  the  portfolio 
changes were across banks in the fourth quarter of 2008.12 Figure 11 presents balance sheet 
changes for loans held by the banking organizations in all three size groups. The heights of 
the  red  bars  indicate  declines  in  loan  categories  measured  in  billions  of  dollars,  and  the 
heights of the blue bars indicate increases in loan categories, also measured in billions of 
dollars. For each bank-size group, the bars within the panel add up as one looks from left to 
right, so that the total dollar-value change in lending is measured either by the bottom of the 
bar  (if  loan growth,  on  net,  is  negative)  or  by  the  top  of  the  bar  (if  loan  growth,  on  net,  is 
positive).  The  number  at  the  bottom  (or  top)  of  each  bar  provides  the  net  decrease  (or 
increase)  in  loan  amounts  as  one  adds  the  changes  from  left  to  right  within  a  bank-size 
category.13  
The left panel of figure 11 contains changes in loans (on a merger-adjusted and seasonally 
adjusted  basis)  held  on  the  books  of  the  largest  bank  holding  companies,  which  together 
ended the quarter with $6.4 trillion of balance sheet assets. These firms reduced their loan 
holdings by about $119 billion, which is indicated at the bottom of the right-most bar in the 
left  panel.  Declines  were  substantial  in  commercial  and  industrial  loans  ($19  billion),  real 
estate loans ($47 billion), and consumer loans ($13 billion). 
The  middle  panel  of  figure  11  contains  loan  changes  for  the  next  20  largest  banking 
organizations,  which  together  ended  the  quarter  with  about  $5.2  trillion  of  balance  sheet 
assets. Together, these organizations increased their commercial and industrial loans (by $3 
billion), real estate loans (by $7 billion), and consumer loans (by $4 billion) as of year-end 
2008. That said, the category of “other loans and leases" fell by more than enough to offset 
those increases. Total loans held on the balance sheets of banks in this group decreased by 
about $9 billion over the fourth quarter. 
The right panel of figure 11 presents the increases in loans held by banking organizations not 
included in the largest 25. These organizations ended the quarter with $3.3 trillion of balance 
sheet assets. These entities increased their holdings of commercial and industrial loans (by 
$4 billion), real estate loans (by $17 billion), and consumer loans (by $9 billion). On net, bank 
holding companies and banks in this size class increased their lending by about $27 billion – 
far less than the reductions in lending at banks in the larger-size groups.  
Within  real  estate  loans,  residential  mortgage  holdings  by  banking  organizations  declined 
sharply  over  the  second  half  of  2008.  In  part,  this  decline  reflected  a  slower  pace  of 
originations  owing  to  tighter  lending  standards  and  weaker  demand.  But  this  decline  also 
reflected the fact that banks continued to originate and sell mortgages to the GSEs as this 
securitization mechanism has continued to function. In contrast, home equity loan growth has 
recently been brisk as borrowers tapped their existing lines of credit. Unlike mortgage loans, 
home equity loans tended to remain on bank balance sheets. Abstracting from a couple of 
                                                 
12   Bank subsidiaries were rolled up to the bank holding company level. 
13   The  category  labeled  "other  loans"  in  figure  11  includes  loans  to  finance  agricultural  production,  loans  to 
foreign governments and official institutions, interbank loans, obligations of states and political subdivisions, as 
well  as  lease  financing  receivables.  The  most  important  of  these  subcategories  varies  across  banks  of 
different sizes. For example, over the last five years, the largest category of other loans was interbank loans 
for  the  5  largest  banks,  lease  financing  receivables  for  the  6  to  25  largest  banks,  and  loans  to  finance 
agricultural production for the remaining banks. 
BIS Review 40/2009 
 7
bank  restructuring  events,  growth  in  consumer  loans  –  the  other  category  of  household 
lending – was weak in the fourth quarter, in line with lackluster retail sales and declines in 
consumer confidence. Originations may pick up as the TALF gains traction and ABS can be 
issued that are collateralized with such loans.14  
Turning  to  business  lending,  commercial  and  industrial  lending,  which,  as  previously 
discussed, had surged during the period of particularly acute financial stress in September 
and October, was very weak during the fourth quarter, and commercial mortgage holdings 
remained flat.  
Changes in the liabilities of banks were equally diverse across the three banking organization 
size  groups.  Figure  12  has  the  same  format  as  figure  11,  with  each  red  bar  indicating  a 
decline in a liability type and each blue bar indicating an increase in a liability type. As with 
figure  11,  the  data  are  merger-adjusted  and  seasonally  adjusted.  The  figure  presents 
changes in core deposits; large time deposits, which are deposits in denominations greater 
than  $100,000;  other  managed  liabilities;  and  other  liabilities.  Other  managed  liabilities 
mostly  consist  of  foreign-booked  deposits,  demand  notes  issued  to  the  Treasury,  other 
borrowed  money,  and  federal  funds  purchased  and  securities  sold  under  repurchase 
agreements.  Other  liabilities  are  noninterest  earning  liabilities  such  as  trading  liabilities. 
Numbers  at  the  top  and  bottom  of  each  bar  within  a  panel  represent  the  sum  of  liability 
changes as one looks from left to right. As with lending growth, the growth in core deposits at 
U.S.  banking  organizations  was  likely  influenced  by  both  demand-side  and  supply-side 
considerations  as  well  as  by  government  policies  implemented  to  improve  financial 
conditions.  
Core deposits, which consist of the sum of transaction deposits, savings deposits (including 
money market deposit accounts), and small time deposits issued in denominations of less 
than $100,000, expanded at banking organizations of all sizes in the fourth quarter. In part, 
this deposit growth reflected lower opportunity costs of holding monetary assets as declines 
in  market  rates  outpaced  those  on  core  deposits.  In  addition,  this  growth  was  likely 
influenced by the increases in deposit insurance coverage that were announced in October 
2008.15
Deposit  growth  also  likely  reflected  bank-led  initiatives  to  increase  their  deposit  funding  in 
order  to  reduce  their  reliance  on  managed  liabilities,  such  as  large  time  deposits  and 
borrowings  from  the  Federal  Home  Loan  Banks,  and  also  to  fund  future  lending 
opportunities.  This  substitution  of  deposits 
liabilities  was  particularly 
pronounced at the 25 largest banking organizations: These banking organizations reduced 
the  category  of  "other  managed  liabilities"  by  about  $120  billion.  In  contrast,  banking 
organizations not included among the largest 25 increased their other managed liabilities by 
$30  billion  (although  managed  liabilities  are,  in  general,  a  smaller  fraction  of  these  banks' 
overall liabilities).  
for  managed 
Conclusion 
Today,  we  have  taken  a  three-dimensional  view  of  the  flow  of  credit  to  households  and 
businesses  and  described  the  evolving  role  of  banks  in  the  U.S.  economy.  The 
                                                 
14   The TALF will help market participants meet the credit needs of households and businesses by supporting the 
issuance of ABS. This support is in the form of nonrecourse loans provided by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York and capital support provided by Treasury under the TARP. 
15   The Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of October 3, 2008 temporarily raised the maximum coverage on 
all deposits at depositories to $250,000 from $100,000. On October 14, the FDIC announced its temporary 
Transaction  Account  Guarantee  Program  that  provides  depositors  with  unlimited  coverage  for  noninterest-
bearing transactions accounts if their bank is a participant in the FDIC program. This program is scheduled to 
end on December 31, 2009.  
8 
 BIS Review 40/2009
macroeconomic  view  of  credit  highlighted  the  importance  for  the  flow  of  credit  of  reduced 
demand  due  to  weaker  economic  activity,  reduced  supply  because  borrowers  appear  less 
creditworthy,  and  reduced  supply  because  lenders  face  pressures  that  restrain  them  from 
extending  credit.  The  financial  intermediation  view  of  credit  highlighted  that  banks  have 
remained  important  financial  intermediaries  long  after  the  originate-to-distribute  model  for 
funding credit became the dominant model and can play an important safety-valve role for 
the  financial  system.  Finally,  the  banking  view  of  credit  emphasized  that  there  are  many 
types of banks in the United States, and the extraordinary stress in the financial system, the 
downturn in the U.S. and global economies, and the associated reductions in asset values 
have  affected  each  bank  differently.  As  such,  some  banks  have  likely  fulfilled  the  credit 
needs  of  consumers  and  businesses  that  had  been  turned  away  by  their  peers.  For  all  of 
these reasons, the Federal Reserve is committed to employing all available tools to promote 
economic recovery and to preserve price stability.  
 
 
  BIS Review 40/2009 
 9
    10 
 BIS Review 40/2009
   BIS Review 40/2009 
 11
    12 
 BIS Review 40/2009
    BIS Review 40/2009 
 13
   14 
 BIS Review 40/2009
 BIS Review 40/2009 
 15
