Njuguna Ndung’u: Taming of inflation and food security 
Opening  remarks  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  and 
Chairman of the Monetary Policy Committee, during the Monetary Policy Committee Seminar 
on “Taming inflation and food security”, The Kenya School of Monetary Studies, Nairobi, 14 
August 2009. 
 Permanent Secretaries: Ministry of Finance; Ministry of Planning, National Development and 
Vision 2030; Ministry of Agriculture; Ministry of Trade; Ministry of Special Programmes; 
Representatives of our Development Partners; 
Chairmen and Heads of Government Parastatals; 
Representatives of the Private Sector; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
It gives me great pleasure to be with you today during this important seminar on “Taming 
Inflation  and  Food  Security”.  Let  me  take  this  opportunity  from  the  onset  to  warmly 
welcome you all to the Kenya School of Monetary Studies (KSMS). 
As  you  may  all  be  aware,  the  Bank’s  principal  objective  is  to  formulate  and  implement 
monetary policy directed at achieving and maintaining stability in the general level of prices, 
as  well  as  supporting  the  economic  policy  of  the  Government  including  its  objectives  of 
growth and employment. Price stability is an important signal to the economy and provides a 
stable  planning  horizon  to  predict  future  prices  and  perhaps  returns.  Most  coordination 
failures occur due to the inability to forecast future prices or calculate, for example, return on 
investment. 
This seminar comes at a time when the country is just recovering from the effects of high 
inflation arising from supply side factors caused by several shocks. These shocks have an 
international  as  well  as  domestic  dimension.  They  include  volatile  oil  prices,  commodity 
prices and drought conditions which continue to pose a challenge to the achievement of the 
Bank’s core mandate of price stability. 
Given these outcomes – that shocks tend to affect domestic prices upwards and domestic 
output downwards, simultaneously – we have to rethink the appropriate measure of inflation 
and how to target or contain it.  
But  also,  appropriately  computing  and  reporting  inflation  becomes  very  critical  –  the 
information processed from the reported numbers on inflation leads directly to cost of living 
adjustment (COLA) requests even at CBK! 
Usually,  the  CBK  must  have  some  inflation  target.  But  also  this  has  to  be  consistent  with 
inflation  experience  or  profile  for  the  general  public  as  well  as  create  the  required 
consistency of the monetary framework and economic growth profile. 
This workshop should help in defining the appropriate inflation indicator. 
The emphasis that seems to converge is to come up with a single measure of inflation that 
can be easily explained, analyzed and related to economic outcomes. But of course different 
economic constituencies will understand this in terms of how it affects them. 
Alternatively we may want to focus on measures that will say exactly what they mean. These 
include: 
a) 
b) 
c) 
Food inflation. 
“Core” inflation – (define what is core). 
Inflation (takes care of all the above) – National inflation indicator. 
BIS Review 109/2009 
 1
d) 
e) 
For CBK, we would prefer a non-tradable goods price index to compute our inflation 
index  that  responds  or  is  affected  by  monetary  policy  directly  and  also  links  to  the 
exchange rate and the issues of competitiveness. For your information, Ladies and 
Gentleman,  many  countries  are  currently  publishing  statistics  on  tradable  and  non-
tradable  inflation  as  part  of  their  dissemination  of  inflation  data.  This  allows  central 
banks to easily compute the profile of real exchange rate. 
Finally,  we  want  an  inflation  index  that  comes  close  to  measuring  or  reflecting  the 
cost of living. The question is, how can this be done and at least cost by KNBS and 
how other players in this process can partner. 
But why do we want several indicators of inflation to be developed? At the outset, money or 
the demand side is just one factor or driving force on inflation. The other one is on the supply 
side. Monetary policy becomes passive when supply side factors drive the domestic prices 
and so inflation. This means that several indicators can also bring in a wealth of information 
to be processed. 
The experience; the achievement of the inflation target has been constrained by increased 
volatility  in  food  prices  and  other  exogenous  shocks.  In  particular,  the  overall  month-on-
month inflation increased from 9.67 percent in January 2007 to 11.1 percent in June 2007, 
and to 31.5 percent in May 2008 before declining gradually to 17.79 percent in July 2009. On 
the other hand, CBK underlying inflation declined from 5.15 percent in January 2007 to 4.90 
percent in June 2007 before rising to 7.90 percent in July 2009. The issues and questions 
raised by such volatility in one measure of inflation thus attract policy debate and action. 
It  is  important  to  note  that  the  rising  overall  inflation  rate  during  the  period  was  attributed 
mainly  to  food  prices  which  account  for  50.5  percent  of  the  overall  consumer  price  index 
basket. The rising food prices have been attributed mainly to drought, supply constraints and 
lack of cultivation by farmers in Kenya’s grain basket in the Rift Valley who were displaced 
following the post poll crisis in January 2008. 
Food inflation has been quite volatile and erratic since January 2007, increasing from 11.8 
percent to 15.9 percent in December 2007, 44.2 percent in May 2008 and declining to 24.4 
percent  in  July  2009.  The  volatility  of  food  inflation  was  the  highest  during  the  period  and 
using  a  measure  of  volatility  stood at  10.72  percent  compared  with  8.98  percent and  6.19 
percent for fuel and transport & communication inflation rates, respectively. 
The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  of  the  Bank  is  concerned  that  the  prevailing  famine  and 
drought in the country will result in a spike in inflation and so an appropriate policy response 
is required. 
The  solution;  most  studies  have  advocated  for  improved  agricultural  productivity  as  the 
most effective way of addressing food crises associated with higher international prices and 
food  security  concerns.  But  this  has  to  be  supported  by  an  appropriate  infrastructure  for 
processing, storage and transportation of food. 
In this regard, it is our hope that this seminar will seek to achieve the following objectives: 
a) 
b) 
Agree on how best to report inflation. 
Review  the  sources,  magnitude  and  structure  of  inflation  in  Kenya,  to  gain  a 
better understanding of its dynamics. 
Come up with feasible solutions to the food supply problem. 
Deliberate on possible action plans among key stakeholders to keep inflation 
low and stable. 
c) 
d) 
This seminar is therefore expected to come up with resolutions that would form a basis for a 
long  term  policy  on  domestic  prices  and  food  security  in  Kenya.  We  still  have  to  contend 
ourselves with a three-dimensional solution: food production; food processing; food storage 
and transportation. 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2009
Let  me  underscore  the  important  role  of  partnership  between  the  stakeholder-institutions 
represented  here  today  in  addressing  the  challenges  of  inflation.  It  is  my  hope  that  such 
partnerships  will  involve  regular  consultations,  sharing  information  and  strategies  geared 
towards  seeking  solutions  to  supply  constraints  or  challenges  to  food  production  and 
distribution  with  the  overall  objective  of  achieving  price  stability.  This  workshop  should  re-
define and strengthen future partnership and the responsibility for each institution. 
On behalf of the Central Bank of Kenya and the Monetary Policy Committee, let me express 
my sincere gratitude to the presenters, discussants and all participants who responded to our 
invitation and have graced us with their presence at this seminar. I am sure they will provide 
a good platform to share information and discuss feasible solutions. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I now take this opportunity to declare this seminar officially open. 
I wish you all fruitful deliberations. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 109/2009 
 3
