Nils Bernstein: Recent economic and financial developments in Denmark  
Speech  by  Mr  Nils  Bernstein,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Denmark,  at  the  Annual 
Meeting of the Danish Mortgage Banks' Federation, Copenhagen, 31 March 2009. 
The spoken version is the final version. 
 Thank you for inviting me to speak here today. 
The economic outlook in still deteriorating. Global output is now expected to decline by more 
than ½ per cent this year. That may not sound so bad. But, in comparison, global growth was 
5 per cent in the boom years. In Denmark, a decline in the range of 1½ per cent is expected 
for  the  second  year  running.  International  growth  estimates  are  regularly  adjusted 
downwards. There is a high degree of uncertainty, and it is impossible to say when the tide 
will turn. A few very recent indicators, mainly for the USA, are slightly more positive than they 
have been for some time, but it is still too early to talk of an economic spring. 
All over the world, economic policies have been eased significantly. Policy interest rates are 
historically low in many countries, and fiscal policies are highly expansionary. This is also the 
case in Denmark. 
The fiscal-policy initiatives taken in Denmark amount to kr. 20 billion in both 2009 and 2010. 
Relative to the size of the economy they are in line with those taken by many other OECD 
countries,  but  do  not  forget  that  unemployment  in  Denmark  is  one  third  of  the  OECD 
average.  Government  finances  in  Denmark  are  also  more  sensitive  to  cyclical  fluctuations 
than  they  are  in  other  countries,  so  that  public  expenditure  and  revenue  automatically 
stimulate the economy more in a recession. 
Nevertheless, unemployment is expected to rise for some time yet. Initially it is a question of 
restoring financial market confidence. That will have a positive effect on the real economy, 
including consumption, and then unemployment figures will probably begin to go down. We 
do not believe that unemployment will peak until early 2011. The economy must grow by 1-2 
per cent to prevent a further increase. 
The government balance showed a surplus of kr. 50 billion last year. Next year, a deficit of 
the same magnitude is expected. This is equivalent to a reversal of 5½ per cent of GDP. Just 
over half of the deterioration is attributable to the automatic stabilisers, while the rest is the 
result  of  the  decisions  made.  The  government  budget  deficit  means  that  there  will,  once 
again, be a need for net issuance of government bonds, following a period of debt reduction. 
The expansionary economic policy is reflected in household finances. For those who do not 
lose  their  jobs,  real  disposable  incomes  will  grow  considerably  in  the  current  and  coming 
year thanks to sizeable wage increases and tax cuts in 2009 and, particularly, in 2010. In 
addition,  consumer  prices  are  rising  at  a  moderate  pace,  interest  rates  are  receding, 
especially  at  the  short  end  of  the  curve,  and  this  year  Special  Pension  savings  will  be 
released at a reduced tax rate. 
Falling cash prices, rising disposable incomes and lower interest rates all ease the financial 
burden  of  buying  a  home.  At  the  national  level,  the  price  of  an  average  house  as  a 
percentage  of  disposable  income  has  been  falling  over  the  past  18  months.  This 
development will accelerate in 2009, and by year-end housing costs as a ratio of disposable 
income  is  estimated  to  be  some  3-6  per  cent  lower  than  in  2008.  The  largest  falls  will  be 
seen in the Copenhagen area and for short-term financing. 
Under normal circumstances, rising income and falling interest rates exert upward pressure 
on housing prices. But the current situation is not "normal". The housing market has almost 
frozen with many homes for sale, slow sales and business volumes at a long-time low. The 
BIS Review 40/2009 
 1
initially  affected  are  people  whose  social  circumstances  change  due 
market is driven by negative expectations that overshadow the positive trend in the private 
finances of most Danes. 
Expectations that cash prices will fall further can be self-fulfilling if people are hesitant to buy, 
and this pattern that can be difficult to break. Especially if unemployment is rising. 
Those 
to 
unemployment, illness, divorce or similar. Such events are often at the root of the observed 
rise in enforced sales. Nevertheless, the level remains low. Although the number of enforced 
sales  can  be  expected  to  rise  further  in  the  near  future,  the  current  outlook  for  household 
finances does not point to an increase to the level seen in the early 1990s. 
Combined  with  falling  stock  indices,  lower  housing  prices  have  led  to  a  reversal  of  the 
prolonged  upward  trend  in  household  wealth,  and  a  fall  was  seen  last year.  All  the  same, 
household wealth is still strong. The value of both assets and liabilities has increased over 
time,  but  what  matters  when  it  comes  to  the  soundness  of  household  finances  is  the 
difference between the two. 
Last year, total wealth – i.e. the value of all assets, including pension savings, less the value 
of all liabilities – was 3½ times the disposable income. That is kr. 1.2 million per household 
on average, which is high in a long-term perspective and higher than before 2003, when the 
most recent upswing began. Owner-occupied housing accounts for approximately half of all 
household  wealth,  while  shares  make  up  an  estimated  15-20  per  cent,  including  shares 
owned indirectly by way of pension savings. 
Overall, the finances of Danish households are therefore still sound, not only because of the 
capital gains reaped during the upswing, but also because net savings have been positive for 
a  long  time  –  in  the  range  of  5-10  per  cent  of  annual  disposable  incomes.  This  prudence 
pays off now that the economy is moving in the opposite direction. 
But the fact remains that some people may find themselves in a fix. The fall in housing prices 
means that an estimated 110,000 Danes have debt-to-value ratios exceeding 100 per cent – 
they  are  "technically  insolvent"  and  thus  at  risk  if  incomes  go  down  or  they  are  otherwise 
forced to sell their homes. 
 Let me now turn to the financial markets. 
All European markets for mortgage bonds were affected by the financial turmoil after Lehman 
Brothers had filed for Chapter 11 in September last year. Attention suddenly focused on the 
credit risk on mortgage bonds. The yield spread between mortgage and government bonds 
widened in Denmark and in comparable countries. 
The initiatives taken to support the Danish pension sector at the end of October curbed the 
widening of the yield spread between mortgage and government bonds, which returned to 
the level just before the Lehman Brothers episode. 
Adjustable-rate loans account for a large part of the Danish mortgage market. For the lion's 
share of these loans, the rate of interest is fixed in December. The financial turmoil in the 
autumn demonstrated all too clearly that there is a considerable risk for both borrowers and 
issuers if  interest  rates are  fixed  only  once  a  year.  Danmarks  Nationalbank  is  in  favour  of 
spreading issuance of adjustable-rate loans to other months than December. 
 Developments  in  September  and  October  2008  showed  that  at  times  it  is  necessary  to 
intervene to support the krone. In such situations, the foreign exchange reserve serves as a 
buffer  that  allows  Danmarks  Nationalbank  to  maintain  a  fixed  exchange  rate  against  the 
euro. 
2 
 BIS Review 40/2009
In addition to intervening in the foreign-exchange market, Danmarks Nationalbank raised its 
policy interest rates. At the time, risk aversion in the markets was high, so a given increase in 
interest rates had a smaller impact than it would normally have. 
On the basis of the lessons learned from the crisis we believe that we will need to maintain a 
larger foreign-exchange reserve than in recent years. 
Nevertheless, it should be borne in mind that our target is to keep the exchange rate stable. 
The  foreign-exchange  reserve  is  one  of  the  tools  for  observing  this  target,  and  its  size 
depends very much on its buffer function. The foreign-exchange reserve has to some extent 
been increased by raising sovereign loans in foreign currency, but market conditions have 
also allowed Danmarks Nationalbank to buy foreign exchange. 
 Later this year, the legislation on covered bonds – or SDOs, as we call them in Danish – will 
be reviewed on the basis of the experience gained. It is important to take into account what 
the financial crisis has taught us and to perform a thorough analysis. It is still to early to draw 
any firm conclusions as regards potential amendments. 
In  this  context,  it  may  be  useful  to  outline  some  of  the  preliminary  observations  from  the 
financial crisis that seem to be particularly relevant. 
Firstly, access to capital may be limited when the need is greatest.  
Secondly,  house  prices  may  fluctuate  strongly  and  have  to  some  extent  been  driven  by 
innovation in the mortgage market.  
Thirdly,  if  the  problems  reach  a  systemic  level,  they  no  longer  affect  only  lenders  and 
borrowers, but become problems to society as a whole. 
In  its  2007  consultation  response  concerning  SDO  legislation,  Danmarks  Nationalbank 
indicated that it preferred a robust and simple model and that the upper loan-to-value limit for 
residential properties was set at 70 per cent at the time that the loan was granted and not 
subsequently raised. Since the loan-to-value ratio may not exceed 80 per cent, a substantial 
buffer  is  required.  Experience  with  a  scarce  supply  of  capital  when  the  need  is  greatest, 
combined with the drop in property prices, may warrant an even greater margin. 
The  launch  of  covered  bonds  means  that  credit  institutions  must  restore  the  underlying 
collateral if house prices fall. This has introduced a risk in the Danish mortgage system that 
did not exist previously – a risk that has been accentuated by the financial crisis. Danmarks 
Nationalbank  finds  it  important  to  consider  this  aspect  carefully  when  reviewing  SDO 
legislation. After all, government guarantees do not last forever. 
Late in the SDO legislation process a deal was struck whereby SDO loans can be redeemed 
at par. This provision has limited the scope for product development, and as such it is worth 
preserving. Under the traditional Danish mortgage system, mortgage loans are redeemable 
at around par. This is a good arrangement, which safeguards consumers against unpleasant 
surprises. A sound mortgage system must have a high degree of consumer protection. It is 
good  to  know  that  Danish  consumers  have  not  been  offered  loans  with  an  artificially  low 
initial rate of interest and a correspondingly higher rate later on. 
 The fact that capital may be most difficult to obtain when you really need it is something that 
the financial sector should keep in mind now that the government is offering a supply of risk 
capital. It would be wise to have extra large buffers against losses and to employ the capital 
received in a sufficiently flexible manner. The financial sector should remember that society 
has  now  lent  it  a  hand  twice.  The  reason  is  that  this  sector  is  not  just  another  business 
sector,  it  also  fulfils  an  important  role  in  society.  This  role  should  be  at  the  core  of  any 
decisions on capital injections in the near future. The way the sector has acted – both before 
BIS Review 40/2009 
 3
and  during  the  financial  crisis  –  must  naturally  be  a  key  consideration  when  the  new 
regulatory regime is laid down. 
 We  are  living  in  turbulent  times.  We  have  yet  to  reap  the  benefits  of  the  financial  sector 
rescue  packages  launched  all  over  the  world,  and  the  real  economic  prospects  are  bleak. 
Nevertheless,  I  think  we  can  say  that  the  Danish  system  for  financing  real  property  has 
steered  through  the  crisis  fairly  well  when  we  look  at  the  situation  in  other  countries. 
Throughout the rough period it has been possible to obtain mortgage loans. True, conditions 
have been tightened, but the mortgage system has risen to the challenge. There are many 
good reasons for this, but I will not go further into that. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 40/2009
