Barbro Wickman-Parak: What can monetary policy achieve? 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at  a 
meeting, Karlstad, 27 March 2009. 
 Economic  policy  can  be  divided  up  into  two  areas:  fiscal  policy  and  monetary  policy.  In 
Sweden and all other countries with independent central banks, there is as we all know a 
distinct difference between these two policy areas. The Government is responsible for fiscal 
policy and the central bank for monetary policy. The central bank is not allowed to receive 
instructions from any other party when carrying out its monetary policy tasks – it is to conduct 
its  monetary  policy  in  an  independent  manner.  So  what  is  the  range  of  the  policy  area 
delegated to an independent central bank; that is, what can we expect a central bank to be 
able to achieve? This question is the theme of my speech today.  
Economic  policy  ultimately  concerns  creating  the  best  possible  conditions  for  long-term 
growth and thereby a high level of welfare for the population. The given limit for growth is set 
by  developments  in  the  labour  force  and  in  productivity.  To  attain  long-term  growth  the 
policies  must  be  aimed  at,  for  instance,  educating  the  labour  force,  creating  an  incentive 
structure  that  stimulates  people  to  work,  creating  a  good  innovation  climate  that  promotes 
technological  developments  and  so  on.  This  is  all  common  knowledge,  but  may  be  worth 
saying sometimes. And the reason I am doing so now is that it may be a good starting point 
for distinguishing what monetary policy may achieve in the short and long run. We can note 
already that the policy areas I recently mentioned concern politics in a broad sense and not 
monetary  policy.  It  is  thus  not  monetary  policy  that  can  affect  these  most  fundamental 
conditions for long-term growth.  
One illustration of monetary policy’s limited potential to affect employment in the long term is 
the disparate regional developments in one and the same country. In Sweden, for instance, 
there are large regional differences in employment levels, despite monetary policy being the 
same for all regions. These differences appear to be lasting, which might indicate that they 
are due to underlying, structural factors that are beyond the control of monetary policy.  
However,  monetary  policy  can  affect  the  conditions  for  long-term  growth  on  one  very 
essential  point,  namely  by  keeping  inflation  close  to  the  target  and  inflation  expectations 
anchored  around  the  target.  If  inflation  deviates  from  the  target  the  Riksbank’s  aim  is 
normally  to  bring  it  back  on  target  within  a  couple  of  years.  Depending  on  how  large  the 
deviation  is  and  its  cause,  the  time  horizon  may  be  extended.  This  flexibility  makes  it 
possible  for  the  Riksbank  to  take  into  account  developments  in  the  real  economy  in  its 
monetary policy considerations.  
In the short term, monetary policy can contribute to reducing the fluctuations in production 
and employment that arise during an economic cycle. As I will discuss today, however, the 
possibility of achieving this type of stabilisation is also dependent on inflation expectations 
being reasonably stabile. If inflation expectations are stable, a change in the policy rate will 
have a direct effect on the real interest rate, which corresponds to the nominal interest rate 
minus expected inflation. As it is the real interest rate that determines aggregate demand, 
monetary policy may in the short term have an impact on the real economy. 
Today I shall take up the question of what monetary policy can affect in the short and long 
run. I shall use some examples to illustrate the balance that must be attained between the 
inflation target and developments in the real economy. 
Functioning  financial  markets  are  of  vital  significance  for  the  functioning  of  the  whole 
economy. The Riksbank’s other main task, beside monetary policy, is to safeguard financial 
stability. During the current financial crisis the Riksbank has taken a number of measures to 
safeguard  financial  stability.  This  has  been  parallel  to  taking  monetary  policy  measures. 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 1
Monetary policy and financial stability are closely linked. The possibility to conduct efficient 
monetary  policy  depends  on  the  transmission mechanism  functioning. I  shall  return  to  this 
question later in my speech. Finally, I shall make some concluding comments.  
The influence of monetary policy in the short and long run – research  
At the end of the 1950s the economist A. W. Phillips found a negative relationship between 
unemployment  and  inflation  by  studying  data  from  the  UK  for  the  period  1861-19571,  a 
relationship  that  is  usually  referred  to  as  the  Phillips  curve.  This  shows  that  higher 
employment can be achieved at the cost of higher inflation. It was thus long believed that one 
could "buy” long-term lower unemployment by pushing up inflation. However this relationship 
was  empirically  proved  not  to  hold  in  the  long  run.  In  the  1970s,  for  instance,  there  were 
periods with both high unemployment and high inflation, what is known as stagflation.  
The relationship was also tackled from a theoretical angle. In a famous article from the late 
1960s Milton Friedman discussed what monetary policy can and cannot achieve.2 His view 
was that in the long run monetary policy is unable to affect real economic variables such as 
unemployment and GDP. However, it can affect nominal variables such as the exchange rate 
and price level. In the long run there is a "natural” level of unemployment that is dependent 
on the functioning of the labour market. If monetary policy tries to push down unemployment 
below this "natural" level, it will only result in higher inflation. Monetary policy therefore risks 
becoming a disturbing factor in the economy. According to Friedman, it is therefore best for 
monetary  policy  to  create  the  right  conditions  for  a  stable  price  level  and  to  focus  on  the 
variables that a central bank can control, such as the money supply.  
In the 1970s and 1980s a number of countries applied a monetary policy regime that was 
based on steering the money supply. However, research has shown that there is no stable 
relationship between the money supply and inflation. The rapid financial developments and 
the use of new, alternative methods of payment have contributed to the money supply not 
functioning well as a target variable for monetary policy in our present society. Nor is the rate 
of circulation of money constant; it can vary substantially. It is therefore more natural to focus 
on trying to directly steer inflation and allow the money supply to remain one indicator among 
many.  
The  past  few  decades’  research  has  pointed  to  the  importance  of  inflation  expectations. 
Although  there  is  a  relationship  in  the  short  run  between  unemployment  and  inflation,  the 
central  bank  cannot  make  use  of  this  in  the  long  run,  as  companies  and  individuals  will 
realise  what  policy  is  being  conducted  and  adapt  their  expectations  accordingly.  For 
example,  wage-earners  may  demand  higher  wages  as  compensation  for  coming  inflation. 
This will in turn have a negative effect on employment. Monetary policy thus cannot have a 
lasting influence on real economic variables. But it can have a stabilising effect in the short 
run,  particularly  if  inflation  expectations  are  well-anchored  so  that  temporary  changes  in 
inflation are not perceived as permanent.  
However,  this  means  that  a  conflict  may  arise  between  the  short  run  and  the  long  run.  A 
central bank prefers inflation expectations to be stable and low, as this is best in the long run. 
The central bank may then prefer to conduct a policy that is perceived as sufficiently tight for 
inflation  to  remain  low,  as  this  creates  low  inflation  expectations.  But  once  inflation 
expectations  are  low,  it  may  be  tempting  to  allow  the  market  to  be  ”surprised”  by  a  more 
                                                 
1   Phillips  actually  studied  the  relationship  between  wages  and  unemployment,  but  later  studies  indicated  a 
similar  relationship  between  inflation  and  unemployment,  Phillips,  A.  W,  (1958)  “The  relationship  between 
unemployment and the rate of change of money wages in the United Kingdom, 1861-1957”, Economica, 25, s. 
283-299. 
2   Friedman, M, (1968). “The role of monetary policy”, American Economic Review, p. 58, 1–17. 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2009
expansionary  policy  that  leads  to  lower  unemployment,  as  it  takes  time  before  individuals 
and  companies  adapt  their  behaviour.  In  this  way  the  central  bank  risks  finding  itself  in  a 
vicious circle of periods where inflation is allowed to soar, followed by periods where inflation 
expectations have to be brought down again at a large cost to the real economy. 
Independent central bank, inflation target and openness 
This  time  inconsistency  problem  which  affects  economic  policy  was  first  noted  by  Finn 
Kydland  and  Edward  Prescott  in  the  late  1970s.3  One  proposal  that  was  put  forward  to 
address this problem was to introduce independent central banks which build up credibility 
by  succeeding  in  maintaining  low  inflation  and  having  realistic  ambitions  with  regard  to 
stabilising resource utilisation. To do this, the central banks must be able to take quick and 
sometimes  unpopular  decisions.  If  a  central  bank  succeeds  in  attaining  credibility  so  that 
inflation  expectations  are  stable,  there  is  some  scope  for  also  taking  into  account 
developments in the real economy.4 It is thus also important from a stability perspective to 
find a means of attaining credibility and stable inflation expectations.  
As one of the steps to achieving this many central banks, including the Riksbank, introduced 
explicit  inflation  targets  in  the  1990s.  In  practice,  most  central  banks  now  conduct  flexible 
inflation  targeting  to  attain  the  inflation  target  and  also  stabilise  resource  utilisation.  This 
means that the central bank is not prepared to attain the inflation target in the short run at 
any  cost.  The  Riksbank’s  aim  is  that  if  inflation  deviates  from  target  it  shall  normally  be 
brought back on target within a couple of years. In the case of large deviations it may take 
longer before the target is attained so that the effects on the real economy are not excessive. 
Because monetary policy works with a lag, the decisions must be based on forecasts. It is 
therefore  important  to  publish  forecasts  for  inflation  and  the  real  economy,  which  the 
Riksbank does. We will never live in a world where it is possible to fully predict the future. 
Moreover, our knowledge of how the transmission mechanism works, that is, how an interest 
rate change works its way through the economy, is far from perfect. But given the available 
information and with the knowledge available we shall make the best possible forecasts and 
it shall be possible to evaluate our forecasts. When inflation deviates from the target it shall 
be possible to understand why this happened and to assess the deliberations that were held.  
To publish a forecast for the repo rate on top of all this, which is something few central banks 
do, makes it easier for us to find the most reasonable balance between attaining the inflation 
target and stabilising the real economy. It also helps us explain our policy. We also do this by 
presenting  a  number  of  alternative  scenarios  for  the  economy  and  showing  what 
consequences these would have for monetary policy. 
Popular and unpopular interest rate decisions 
In the long run it is the actual "delivery” of low and stable inflation that creates confidence in 
long-term stable prices. But the economy can be subjected to unforeseen shocks that affect 
inflation  and  monetary  policy  cannot  have  the  precision  required  to  constantly  maintain 
inflation at the target level. Deviations from the inflation target have happened before and will 
happen again. The important thing is that they are temporary. The route back to the target 
must  be  consistent  and  credible.  This  is  a  necessary  condition  for  inflation  expectations 
remaining stable and in line with the target, which in turn provides us with greater opportunity 
to also take into account developments in production and employment.  
                                                 
3   Kydland, F. E. and Prescott, E. C. (1977). ”Rules rather than discretion: The inconsistency of optimal plans”. 
Journal of Political Economy, 85, pp. 473-492. 
4   For  a  more  detailed  discussion  of  this,  see  Woodford,  M,  (2007).”The  case  for  forecast  targeting  as  a 
monetary strategy”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21:4. pp. 3-24. 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 3
This brings me to the point that we as the central bank must be prepared to make unpopular 
decisions.  We  have  recently  cut  the  repo  rate  by  an  unusually  large  amount  and  in  an 
unusually short time. Cutting interest rates is a popular decision that is welcomed by most. 
But the condition for these decisions has been that they do not clash with the inflation target. 
On the contrary, we have needed to make these decisions so that inflation would not be too 
low in relation to the target over a long period of time.  
We are counting on the repo rate remaining at a low level over the whole of this year. But 
sooner or later we will need to begin raising the repo rate again. In this situation it is possible 
that unemployment will still be high, as changes in employment often occur somewhat later 
in the economic cycle than changes in other variables, such as growth. This is illustrated in 
our forecasts for the repo rate and unemployment presented in the February Monetary Policy 
Report. It is important to remember in such a situation that monetary policy is forward-looking 
and  that  its  primary  task  is  to  create  good  long-term  conditions  for  the  economy  by 
maintaining price stability. Let me illustrate this by means of two monetary policy episodes.  
”Too low” versus "too high” inflation 
The last time the repo rate was very low, with a lowest point of 1.5 per cent, was in 2005. 
Inflation was then below target and the Riksbank received criticism from various parties for 
not cutting the repo rate further. Sweden was on its way into an economic upturn, but the 
labour  market  was  nevertheless  relatively  weak.  There  was  a  lot  of  talk  about  "jobless 
growth”, that is, growth that does not create employment. Some said that the reason more 
jobs were not created was that monetary policy was too tight. The Riksbank made a different 
assessment.  The  view  of  the  Executive  Board  was  that  it  was  underlying  factors  on  the 
supply  side,  such  as  productivity,  increased  competition  in  the  food  sector  and  low-price 
imports from emerging economies that were decisive for the low inflation and employment. 
None of these factors would have been affected by a repo rate cut. The Executive Board’s 
assessment  was  that  monetary  policy  was  sufficiently  expansionary  given  the  demand 
situation and they pointed to the fact that credit volumes and house prices were increasing at 
a rate that was not sustainable in the long run. They therefore began to raise the interest rate 
in January 2006, a little sooner than if they had merely given consideration to the inflation 
target. The Riksbank had no target for either credit volumes or house prices. But these were 
variables that might be expected to affect inflation and the real economy. If the credit volume 
and  house  prices  had  continued  to  rise  rapidly  this  would  have  risked  triggering  larger 
adjustments further ahead. 
One reflection that can be made here is that if the interest rate had been cut even further in 
2005, which was suggested by several outside of the Bank, the current situation might have 
been worse. There would probably have been a larger credit expansion and higher house 
prices that would have needed to be adjusted later. This could have put our economy in a 
much more vulnerable position and thereby worsened the current economic downturn.  
Another  experience  is  from  autumn  2007,  when  energy  and  food  prices  increased 
considerably, which contributed to pushing up inflation. It is also an example of a supply side 
shock, as these prices are set in the world market. Swedish monetary policy cannot affect 
them. But at the same time, domestic cost pressures were relatively high. Productivity growth 
had slowed down, while wage costs were rising. We had experienced a long period of growth 
and the labour market had begun to tighten. Growth was still good, but we saw a slowdown 
coming, although it appeared that it might be fairly mild. We were facing a situation where the 
risk that high energy and food price increases would spread to other prices must be weighed 
against the risk of a weak real economy. There was much talk of the risk of stagflation, that 
is, a combination of an economic slowdown and rising inflation. 
We faced a situation in which reaching a decision became ever more difficult. This became 
clear  when  we  Executive  Board  members  made  slightly  different  assessments  in  summer 
and  early  autumn  2008  of  what  kind  of  interest  rate  policy  was  required.  However,  the 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2009
economic downturn was much quicker and deeper than we had expected, partly as a result 
of  the  financial  crisis  which  came  to  affect  us  more  tangibly  in  the  autumn.  This  was 
unfortunate for the economy, but it simplified our decision-making. We could see ahead of us 
that inflation would be far below the target for a period of time, and we wanted to avoid this 
period from being a long one. We have been able to cut the repo rate by 3.75 percentage 
points in less than six months, which means that the repo rate is now at a historically low 
level. Our forecasts show a substantial fall in demand and the lower interest rate policy is 
intended to contribute to softening the fall. When the circumstances have suddenly changed, 
monetary policy has been rapidly adapted to the new situation. The two cases I have taken 
up show the flexibility inherent in our monetary policy and which we have made good use of.  
What is the driving force behind inflation? A fundamental question 
As  monetary  policy’s  ability  to  influence  inflation  and  ultimately  economic  developments 
depends  on  the  type  of  shock  to  which  the  economy  is  subjected,  we  must  analyse  the 
driving  forces  behind  inflation.5  When  inflation  is  governed  by  supply  factors  that  push  up 
inflation, as in 2007-2008 when for instance energy prices rose, the initial effect cannot be 
prevented by monetary policy. When inflation became too low in relation to the target around 
2005, this was largely because productivity rose more than expected. This is essentially a 
positive development that neither should nor can be prevented by monetary policy. However, 
it provided a possibility to hold the interest rate at a low level and to allow a higher level of 
demand  than  would  otherwise  have  been  the  case.  But  the  effects  on  employment  were 
limited by the underlying productivity growth. However, the Riksbank might have needed to 
cut the repo rate further if one had at the same time observed a deterioration in demand or 
that  the  more  long-term  inflation  expectations  were  far  below  the  target.  This  was  not  the 
case; inflation expectations in the slightly longer term were fairly well anchored around 2 per 
cent. At the same time, the Riksbank’s forecasts showed that economic activity would remain 
strong. This period illustrates how important it is for monetary policy to analyse the driving 
forces behind inflation and for the policy to be forward-looking.  
When inflation rose last year, this was also largely due to supply factors, such as the price of 
oil and other commodities, which could not be checked even in the short term by monetary 
policy. However, in the background was a long period of high growth and increased tightness 
in the labour market. At the same time, productivity growth was declining and wages were 
rising. This entailed increased cost pressures, which justified a higher interest rate. Monetary 
policy  continued  to  tighten  even  when  signs  of  weakening  in  economic  activity  began  to 
appear.  
When we look ahead we can see that prices measured in terms of the CPI will fall this year 
and inflation will thus deviate substantially from the target. The primary cause of this is that 
mortgage  rates  and  energy  prices  are  falling  rapidly  when  calculated  as  an  annual 
percentage change. If we exclude the effect of our own interest rate cuts and the effects of 
falling  energy  prices,  prices  are  not  expected  to  fall.6  I  shall  not  go  further  into  this,  but 
merely wish to point out once again how important it is to analyse the driving forces behind 
inflation to be able to explain the monetary policy conducted. This means that we from time 
to  time  highlight  different  measures  of  inflation.  In  the  current  stage  it  is  thus  important  to 
distinguish  the  effects  of  our  own  measures  which  we  have  implemented  to  alleviate  the 
effects of the financial crisis on international growth and thus on growth in Sweden.  
                                                 
5   For  a  detailed  discussion  of  this,  see  “Should  monetary  policy  stabilise  resource  utilisation?”  Economic 
Commentary No. 1 2008, Sveriges Riksbank. 
Inflation measured in terms of the CPIF, which disregards changes in mortgage rates, is around 1.6 per cent 
on average in 2009. If one also excludes energy costs, the average for 2009 is 2.2 per cent. 
6  
BIS Review 38/2009 
 5
Monetary policy is dependent on a functioning transmission mechanism 
Inflation is affected by the Riksbank’s changes in the repo rate through what is usually known 
as the transmission mechanism. This influence goes through several different channels, such 
as short and long real interest rates, the exchange rate and the supply of credit. The impact 
occurs with different degrees of delay.  
The repo rate is the interest rate the banks pay when they borrow from or deposit money in 
the  Riksbank  for  one  week  against  collateral.  Under  normal  circumstances  there  is  a 
relatively stable relationship between the level of the repo rate and the level of the rates that 
companies and households face, as well as between interest rates and access to loans. The 
financial crisis affected these relationships. When, for example, the Riksbank cut the interest 
rate  at  the  beginning  of  October  the  short  market  rates  did  not  fall.  The  risk  premiums 
increased as a result of the uncertainty and turmoil that followed in the wake of the financial 
crisis,  so  that  the  difference  between  the  repo  rate  and  the  short  market  rates  expanded. 
This  meant  that  the  interest  rate  cut  did  not  have  a  full  impact  on  interest  rates  paid  by 
households  and  companies.  Market  rates  thus  became  higher  than  would  normally  have 
been justified by the level of the repo rate.  
Since the financial crisis worsened last autumn, the Riksbank, like many other central banks, 
has  implemented  a  number  of  measures  to  safeguard  financial  stability.  These  measures 
have largely concerned the provision of liquidity to the banking system. This has improved 
the  functioning  of  the  short  term  markets  and  risk  premiums  have  fallen.  The  interest  rate 
channel  in  the  transmission  mechanism  has  thus  begun  to  function  more  normally.  The 
primary  purpose  of  the  Riksbank’s  measures  has  been  to  safeguard  financial  stability,  but 
they have also lead to monetary policy functioning more efficiently. The Riksbank’s two main 
tasks, managing monetary policy and safeguarding financial stability, are thus closely linked 
to one another. This has been clearly illustrated by the financial crisis.  
There is concern that these measures, which also lead to an expansion in the central banks' 
balance sheets, entail an increased risk that inflation in future will be too high. The question 
is  thus  whether  the  economy  will  have  a  surplus  of  liquidity  when  the  situation  begins  to 
normalise,  and  whether  this  could  lead  to  increased  inflationary  pressures.  The  answer  to 
that  question  is  no.  The  measures  taken  by  the  central  banks  now  can  be  regarded  as  a 
response to the tightening on the market. One can simplify and say that the central banks are 
trying to counteract or neutralise the markets' tightening so that the transmission channel can 
begin functioning more normally.  
These  measures  will  only  continue  as  long  as  the  markets  cannot  function  on  their  own. 
Once  the  financial  crisis  has  waned,  the  Riksbank  will  not  renew  the  special  measures 
required during the crisis. Our loans are relatively short-term, with maturities of between 3 
and 12 months. The loans will therefore mature gradually when the special lending facilities 
are  phased  out.  When  the  economy  then  recovers,  monetary  policy  will  be  adjusted 
according to the circumstances prevailing at the time. The policy rate can be raised in large 
steps if this were to prove necessary. In the most recent Monetary Policy Report you can see 
that  we  are  expecting  a  relatively  rapid  increase  in  the  repo  rate  towards  the  end  of  the 
forecast period.  
Concluding comments 
We have a historically low repo rate at the moment. Given the gloomy economic prospects, I 
and the other Executive Board members considered in February that a substantial repo rate 
cut  was  needed.  We  were  expecting  a  rapid  deterioration  in  the  labour  market  situation, 
which  together  with  rapidly  falling  energy  prices  meant  that  inflationary  pressures  had 
declined. In this situation there was thus nothing to prevent monetary policy being used in a 
forceful manner to alleviate the effects of the fall in demand that came in the wake of the 
financial  crisis.  On  the  contrary,  the  interest  rate  cut  was  necessary  to  attain  the  inflation 
6 
 BIS Review 38/2009
target in the long run. If the situation were to deteriorate, a first measure would be to cut the 
interest rate further. If the repo rate were to be cut to zero, or close to zero, and this was still 
not sufficient, other types of measure would be necessary. We are prepared to implement 
the measures that are necessary. If inflationary pressures were instead to increase, it may be 
necessary to raise the repo rate more quickly than we have assumed. 
A few years ago the Riksbank was criticised for not giving sufficient consideration to other 
variables  than  inflation,  such  as  unemployment,  for  instance.  Economic  theory  and 
experiences show, however, that monetary policy has only a very limited ability to lastingly 
affect  real  economic  variables.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Riksbank  tries  to  achieve  a 
reasonable balance between attaining the inflation target and stabilising the real economy. 
But  as  it  normally  takes  a  while  before  an  upturn  in  economic  activity  has  an  impact  on 
employment, it is very possible that the Riksbank will need to raise the repo rate in a situation 
where unemployment is still high. This is also something we are assuming in our most recent 
forecast.  There  is  then  a  risk  that  unreasonable  requirements  will  be  made  of  monetary 
policy. It will then be important to bear in mind that the primary objective of monetary policy is 
to create good long-term conditions for all participants in the economy.  
It  is  important  that  we  have  an  active  discussion  of  the  Riksbank’s  policy.  But  for  the 
discussion to be fruitful it must be based on realistic expectations of what monetary policy 
can and cannot achieve. Sweden is a small, export-dependent economy and when economic 
activity abroad suddenly falls, monetary policy cannot prevent negative effects from this on 
our economy. But we can alleviate these effects. As the financial markets are integrated, we 
cannot prevent an international financial crisis having effects here, too. Then we must use 
other tools, parallel to our interest rate policy, to make the financial system function in the 
best  possible  way  given  the  circumstances.  This  is  what  we  have  done  throughout  the 
autumn and we will continue to do this as long as is necessary.  
BIS Review 38/2009 
 7
