Jean-Claude Trichet: (Under-)pricing of risks in the financial sector 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Coface 
Country Risk Conference 2009, Paris, 19 January 2009. 
 Introduction 
I.  
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The  current  juncture  presents  us  with  a  particularly  important  moment  to  conduct  a  deep 
analysis of the pricing of risk – and the mis-pricing of risk – in the financial sector. It is no 
exaggeration to say that, for several decades, there has been no more relevant moment for 
this topic than today.  
In my view, the appropriate identification, assessment and handling of risks in the financial 
sector  are  the  key  issue  to  be  considered  most  carefully  amid  the  current  global  financial 
turmoil. Looking back, the main factor that I would identify as underlying the turmoil is the 
broad-based under-appreciation of risk. This under-appreciation of risk has been observed 
across financial institutions, across markets and across economies. Looking ahead, the main 
lesson  I  believe  we  need  to  draw  is  therefore  for  the  financial  sector  to  establish  a  much 
more rigorous identification, assessment and handling of risk.  
Against  this  background,  I  am  very  pleased  to  participate  in  this  major  conference  on  risk 
analysis today. It brings together specialists from France and abroad from the banking and 
corporate sectors as well as from academia. In my remarks, I would like to share with you 
some  thoughts  on  three  areas:  the  fundamental  causes  of  the  financial  turmoil,  the  main 
avenues for financial sector reform and some of the broader lessons to conclude from the 
current episode.  
Under-pricing of risk 
II.  
Let me begin with the causes of the turmoil: in the four years to August 2007, macro-financial 
conditions were very favourable on the surface. Economic growth was exceptionally strong 
and stable, liquidity in capital markets was abundant and the financial sector was providing 
remarkable returns: profitability was high, many asset prices were rising, implied volatilities in 
equity  markets,  bond  markets,  credit  markets  and  foreign  exchange  markets  were  all  very 
low by historical standards, and finally: risk premia were extraordinarily small. At the same 
time, the world economy was growing vigorously, in an overall low inflation environment and 
stable macroeconomic environment as a whole. The only warning sign, which was brushed 
aside  by  many  economists,  consisted  of  the  significant  build-up  of  imbalances  at  various 
levels in the global economy and the global financial system.  
Against this apparently favourable economic background, innovation was rapidly taking place 
in financial markets. This was perceived by most observers as a positive development, on 
balance, because it enabled a better and wider distribution of risk. In fact, the diversification 
of risk appeared to be beneficial not just for the financial sector’s stability, but also for the real 
economy, since companies were able to more efficiently spread the risks they were bearing. 
This perception is likely to have encouraged risk-taking not only inside but also outside the 
financial sector. However, as the turmoil has since shown, there was a generalised tendency 
to  overestimate  the  true  degree  of  risk  spreading  and  diversification,  especially  in  credit 
markets.  
Warnings by the authorities about the possibility of an abrupt correction in financial markets 
date  back  to  2006.  Many  warnings  were  made  about  the  risks  associated  with  what  was 
essentially a “pricing for perfection” – which, put simply, meant that risk premia were not, or 
BIS Review 6/2009 
 1
hardly  pricing  in  the  possibility  of  anything  going  wrong.  Given  such  pricing,  even  a  small 
change in conditions had the capacity to severely disrupt financial markets. At the same time, 
a  number  of  financial stability  reports  –  including  from  the ECB,  the  Bank  for  International 
Settlements  (BIS),  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF)  and  other  organisations  –  analysed 
vulnerabilities  of  the  financial  sector  and  warned  of  emerging  weaknesses.1  In  particular, 
these  reports  often  emphasised  that  the  rapid  pace  of  innovation  in  financial  markets  and 
products coupled with the low level of risk premia called for investors to take greater care in 
understanding  and  managing  the  risks  they  were  exposed  to.  However,  while  it  was 
perceived that a storm was brewing, it was not known exactly what would trigger it, but that it 
would  be  appropriate  that  the  financial  sector  agents  should  prepare  for  it  so  that  the 
correction  would  be  as orderly  as  possible.  Both  the  underpricing  of  the  “unit  of  risk”  and, 
even more importantly in my view, the underestimation of the “quantity of risk” turned out to 
be at the core of the crisis. Let me explain further how I see these two concepts.  
Underpricing of the unit of risk 
The underpricing of the unit of risk related mainly to inadequate assumptions made about the 
distribution  of  returns  to  highly  complex,  new  financial  securities.  Let  me  mention  a  few 
examples. First, take the fact that, in calculating the probability of default of mortgages in a 
large economy, the possibility of a drop in real estate prices or the ongoing deterioration in 
lending  standards,  were  not  properly  factored  in,  or  even  totally  disregarded.  A  second 
example  relates  to  the  reliance  on  recent  data  to  estimate  parameters  of  probability 
distributions.  Statistical  models,  generally  using  data  based  on  the  recent  past,  tended  to 
produce  over-optimistic  estimates  due 
favourable  operating 
environment that preceded the eruption of the turmoil that I just described. The generalised 
“hunt-for-yield” in global financial markets was also likely to have contributed a great deal to 
the  distortion  of  the  price  of  the  unit  of  risk.  The  compression  of  spreads  and  risk  premia 
coupled  with  the  search  for  higher  returns  tended  to  lead  to  a  higher  level  of  investors’ 
appetite  for  risk.  This,  in  turn,  further  inflated  valuations  based  on  very  favourable 
expectations of future returns. Contributing to the underpricing of a unit of risk was also the 
opacity  and  complexity  of  structured  financial  products.  Not  even  sophisticated  investors 
were able to assess the risks embedded in these products properly.  
the  apparently  very 
to 
Underestimation of the quantity of risk 
But in my view, an even more astounding aspect was the generalised under-appreciation of 
the quantity of risk borne by market participants. In fact, as the turmoil unfolded, some large 
financial  institutions  revealed  a  massive  concentration  of  risk,  suggesting  that  risk 
management systems had failed to identify the quantity of risk that financial institutions were 
accumulating. A good example relates to the credit default swap (CDS) market. This market 
hardly existed in 2002 and grew at an incredible pace to reach a size of $58 billion in notional 
amounts  in  2007.  By  buying  protection  on  a  particular  bond,  market  participants  believed 
themselves  to  be  largely  insulated  against  the  risk  of  default  of  the  issuer.  However,  this 
protection  turned  out  to  be  defective  when  the  first  signs  of  financial  market  distress 
emerged. In fact, during its steady growth in the pre-turmoil phase, the performance of the 
                                                 
1   See,  ECB  Financial  Stability  Review  issues  of  2006  and  2007,  for  example  and  the  speech  given  by  J.-C. 
Trichet in Davos in January 2007 (see Financial Times, 29 January 2007 article entitled “Prepare for Asset 
Repricing, Warns Trichet ”Excerpts: “Current conditions in global financial markets look potentially unstable, 
suggesting that investors need to prepare themselves for a significant repricing of some assets, Jean-Claude 
Trichet, president of the European Central Bank, warned at the weekend in Davos. The recent explosion of 
structured financial products and derivatives had made it more difficult for regulators and investors to judge 
the current risks in the financial system, Mr Trichet said. We are currently seeing elements in global financial 
markets  which  are  not  necessarily  stable,  he  said,  pointing  to  the  low  level  of  rates,  spreads  and  risk 
premiums as factors that could trigger a repricing.”) 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2009
CDS market under stress had not been tested before. This market also brought home the 
importance of counterparty risk – a crucial notion in risk assessment – which, it seems, was 
not always fully understood and accounted for in market participants’ management of risks 
before the turmoil erupted. 
Another example refers to the failure of the same risk management systems to assess the 
systemic  consequences  arising  from  the  turmoil.  Take,  for  example,  the  risks  involved  in 
relying  excessively  on  short-term  debt  to  finance  long-term  assets,  both  by  financial 
intermediaries and the corporate sector. These risks were barely accounted for. In fact, the 
probability of a sudden closure of specific markets was assumed to be very close to, if not, 
zero. To put it in more general terms, cross-correlations across and between defaults on the 
one hand and the rest of the economy on the other hand were generally not properly factored 
in  when  calculating  probabilities  of  default.  The  limited  importance  given  to  risks  of  a 
systemic nature was thus responsible, to a large extent, for the massive underestimation of 
the quantity of risks borne by market players, as shown by the unfolding of the crisis.  
In general, the evaluation methodology of the quantity of risk and the price of a unit of risk 
has turned out highly inadequate in the light of the current experience. The dominant models 
rely  on  simplified  hypotheses,  consisting  of  laws  of  probabilities  about  future  events.  The 
periods of crisis bring to light the major shortcomings of the underlying mathematical models. 
In  these  periods  the  behaviour  of  markets  and  prices  does  not  appear  to  follow  any 
probabilistic model ex ante but rather reflects a more fundamental Knightian uncertainty in 
which even probabilities are unknown.  
Three main factors to be addressed 
III.  
After  reflecting  on  the  origins  of  the  crisis  and  the  initial  lessons  learnt  over  the  past  18 
months since the turmoil erupted, let me now turn to the future and the avenues for reform to 
be addressed in our response to the crisis. I would like to highlight three areas where, in my 
view, change is particularly needed. 
First,  there  is  the  need  to  address  short-termism,  i.e.  the  excessive  focus  on  short-term 
returns  in  the  financial sector,  part of  what  is  often  called  the  “bank-bonus  culture”.  Short-
termism may encourage excessive risk-taking, since less attention is paid to low-probability 
outcomes which might only crystallise over longer periods of time. More worrying is the fact 
that it can exacerbate the impact of conflicts of interest and perverse incentives at all levels 
within a financial institution. 
Considerable  thought  is  being  devoted  to  compensation-related  issues  both  by  the  official 
sector  (e.g.  the  Financial  Stability  Forum)  and  market  participants  themselves.  Sound  and 
reasonable  principles  for  compensation  schemes  at  large  financial  institutions,  including 
incentives for prudent long-term behaviour, and a real adjustment to risk are some important 
ways for reform. 
A second factor to be addressed in our response to the crisis relates to the enhancement of 
transparency  in  financial  markets.  As  the  turmoil  has  shown,  the  availability  of  aggregate 
information regarding the main risks to the financial system is of the essence. Information on 
institutions,  instruments  and  markets  that  are  currently  unregulated,  but  whose  risks  raise 
financial stability concerns on account of their potential systemic impact, proved to be crucial 
for effective financial stability monitoring and accurate risk assessment. One clear example 
of  some  first  steps  taken  in  the  right  direction  relate  to  the  initiative  to  establish  a  central 
counterparty clearing house for the CDS market, a move that I strongly welcome. This would 
be  a  first  important  contribution  to  increasing  transparency  in  over-the-counter  (OTC) 
derivatives  markets.  Increasing  the  number  of  standardised  securities  exchanged  on 
regulated markets would also make it easier to price these financial instruments, based on 
relevant public information and on traded prices. 
BIS Review 6/2009 
 3
Finally, a third factor that, in my view, needs to be addressed is the excessive pro-cyclicality 
of the financial system in its entirety, i.e., the tendency of the financial system to accumulate 
too much risk and leverage in good times, and to shed risks hastily in a downturn. We should 
endeavour  to  systematically  eliminate  wherever  possible  the  elements  that  reinforce  or 
amplify the spontaneous cyclicality of the financial economy. In particular, but not exclusively, 
we  have  to  reassess  from  this  point  of  view  capital  requirements,  valuation  and  leverage, 
provisioning regimes as well as banks’ compensation schemes. In this field, I also welcome 
the work being carried out under the auspices of the Financial Stability Forum. 
First lessons drawn from the current situation 
IV.  
We  are  going  through  an  exceptional  period  marked  by  a  recent  intensification  of  the 
financial  turmoil  since  last  September  and  by  a  major  slowdown  in  the  global  economy. 
Virtually all economies – both industrialised as well as emerging – have been moving in the 
same direction since the end of 2008, which has contributed to the magnitude of the overall 
current downswing.  
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  three  points,  which  I  consider  as 
important: 
First  of  all,  the  full-scale  test  to  which  the  global  financial  system  is  subject  reveals  an 
excessive fragility that the prevailing mathematical models had not anticipated. This fragility 
is unacceptable. The global market economy, in all its elements, including and especially in 
its  financial  component,  must  considerably  strengthen  its  resistance  to  shocks,  i.e.  its 
resilience.  This  calls  for  a  set  of  ambitious  reforms  aiming  to  introduce,  re-introduce  and 
reinforce  if  need  be  counter-cyclical  mechanisms  and  the  shock-absorbers  in  the  financial 
system.  Financial  and  economic  fluctuations  are  inevitable  and  necessary  in  a  market 
economy. It is up to us to ensure that we don’t amplify those shocks by our own making and 
our own rules, as is the case at the moment. Shocks, sometimes abrupt, are inevitable: they 
may come from technology and innovation, from structural transformations that characterise 
globalisation, from geostrategic risks and many other angles. 
It is up to us to deal with them as smoothly as possible, not only at the level of the economies 
concerned but also at global level. The corresponding reforms must be systematic without 
giving  the  least  privilege  to  any  entity  and  without  focusing  attention  either  on  a  few 
scapegoats. As a matter of fact, everything can and must be substantially improved. 
In  second  place,  we should  note  the  rapid  reaction  of the public authorities, central  banks 
and  governments  in  particular,  in  these  exceptional  circumstances.  Of  course,  I  am  not 
referring to the decisions taken since the start of the turbulence on 9 August 2007: you may 
remember that the ECB’s Executive Board decided to lend overnight at our refinancing rate 
€95  billion  to  the  commercial  banks  in  the  euro  area.  What  I  want  to  talk  about  are  the 
decisions of the European Central Bank and the other central banks after the crisis worsened 
in  September  concerning  the  organisation  of what  I  would  call  a line  of  defence  against  a 
systemic threat of illiquidity: those decisions have led us to expand the collateral framework 
and to commit to ourselves to refinancing without limit a fixed interest rate, at one week, one 
month, three months and six months. The governments themselves have set up a second 
line  of  defence  against  the  systemic  solvency  threat.  They  have  done  so  by  organising, 
whenever  necessary,  support  to  ailing  institutions  and  by  systematically  supporting  the 
banking sector by  means of guarantees and recapitalisation. The difficulties are still there, 
and in these circumstances there is no room for whatever form of complacency. We have to 
remain permanently ready to act.  
My third point concerns confidence. Confidence is the most precious ingredient today. It is 
also  the  ingredient  that is  lacking  most  in the  real  and  financial sphere  of  the  economy  at 
present. Having underestimated considerably the true underlying risks that were lying ahead 
in 2008 and 2009, it would be an error of equal magnitude for the actors of the private sector 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2009
to  now  overestimate  the  risks  that  are  lying  ahead  over  the  medium  term,  for  2010  and 
beyond.  The  year  2009  will  be  very  difficult,  as  I  mentioned  last  Thursday.  The  ECB’s 
Governing Council considers that economic growth in the global economy and in Europe will 
be substantially lower than projected in early December. However, I see at least four reasons 
to  have  confidence  in  a  recovery  of  the  global  economy  and  the  industrialised  economies 
over the medium term, after the trying year of 2009:  
• 
The  responsiveness  of  public  authorities,  central  banks  and  governments,  in  a 
difficult situation makes out of the current episode a unique period in economic and 
financial history. I do not consider that the scope of the actions by public authorities 
has been sufficiently taken into account by the private actors.  
The  growth  potential  of  the  large  and  emerging  economies  is  considerable:  the 
deceleration  of  their  growth  patterns  currently  observed  will  be  temporary;  for 
several  of  them  the  potential  growth  of  domestic  demand,  which  today  is 
suppressed, is enormous.  
Technological progress is remarkable and even accelerating in the current period: it 
will be the source of an important part of tomorrow’s economic growth.  
An important factor in the current slowdown has been the spike in oil and commodity 
prices.  This  spike  was  both  inflationary  and  contractionary.  The  current  sharp 
decline is, by consequence, both dis-inflationary and expansionary.  
   For all these reasons, which are not exhaustive, after an exceptionally difficult 2009, it seems 
to be a good working hypothesis to me to see 2010 as the year of rebound. The European 
Central  Bank  and  the  Eurosystem  will  for  their  part  continue  to  provide  a  solid  anchor  of 
stability  and  confidence  over  the  medium  and  long  term,  in  the  service  of  our  329  million 
citizens.  
BIS Review 6/2009 
 5
