Zhou Xiaochuan: Some observations and analyses on savings ratio  
Speech by Dr Zhou Xiaochuan, Governor of the People’s Bank of China, at the High Level 
Conference hosted by the Central Bank of Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, 10 February 2009. 
 Respected Governor Zeti, Ladies and Gentlemen, Good Morning!  
It is my great pleasure to attend this meeting, and I thank the colleagues at the Bank Negara 
Malaysia for their hospitality and considerate arrangements.  
While the impact of the financial crisis is still unfolding and further analysis is called for, the 
current situation reminds us of the Asian financial crisis ten years ago. It inflicted enormous 
impact on the East Asian countries, including Malaysia. During the crisis, Malaysia, through a 
series of macroeconomic measures, maintained the stability of the Ringgit, boosted market 
confidence  and  managed  a  quick  recovery  of  the  economy.  In  the  decade  thereafter,  with 
increasingly  adaptable  monetary  and  exchange  policies,  the  Bank  Negara  Malaysia 
successfully  phased  out  the  temporary  capital  restrictions,  and  facilitated  financial  market 
development and economic growth.  
The  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  celebrates  its  50th  anniversary  this  year.  China  and  Malaysia 
have a fair share of similarities. First, both countries are members of EMEAP and the BIS 
Asian  Consultative  Council  (ACC),  and  share  valuable  experience  in  working  together. 
Second,  both  are  emerging  market  economies  at  similar  stage  of  development.  Our 
governments and peoples weathered the 1997 Asian financial crisis and managed to ride out 
the  crisis  after  much  adversity.  Third,  in  July  2005,  our  two  countries  launched  significant 
reforms on the exchange rate formation mechanism and had much experience to share with 
each other. At present, many East Asian countries, including China and Malaysia, have high 
savings ratios and considerable foreign reserves. In this regard, there are a number of issues 
of common interest worth discussing.  
Today, the global economy is once again put to the test. The distinct feature of the current 
crisis is that it originated in the advanced economies and spilled over to the rest of the world. 
There have been intense discussions with diverse opinions as to the causes of the current 
crisis. Much concern has been shown to the high savings ratio in East Asia and oil-producing 
countries and the low household savings ratio in the U.S. Some believe that the high savings 
ratios  in  these  countries  are  one  of  the  major  reasons  behind  global  imbalance  and  the 
current  crisis.  At  the  same  time,  people  are  trying  to  find  out  which  policy  measures  are 
effective in meaningfully influencing the savings ratio.  
Attempts  to  pinpoint  any  factor  as  the  key  contribution  to  savings  ratio  have  been 
inconclusive. Some members of academia maintain that high savings is related to the level of 
wealth as measured by per capita GDP. Some analysts believe it is related to exchange rate, 
financial  intermediation,  the  development  of  capital  market,  national  tradition,  demographic 
structure, and the social security system.  
Opinions also diverge on whether exchange rate is correlated with savings ratio. They are 
correlated to some degree, but the coefficients are generally low and the correlation usually 
statistically insignificant. It therefore seems over simplistic to believe that adjusting exchange 
rate  may  influence  savings  ratio.  In  July  2005,  China  carried  out  the  reform  of  the  RMB 
exchange rate formation mechanism. Meanwhile, we emphasized the importance of shifting 
the  growth  pattern  to  increase  the  contribution  of  domestic  demand  to  growth.  A  series  of 
measures  have  been  adopted  to  stimulate  domestic  demand.  The  economic  restructuring 
package  underscored  encouraging  rural  consumption,  developing  the  services  sector, 
especially the cultural and recreational industry, and adjusting the consumption structure and 
pattern.  
BIS Review 31/2009 
 1
Identifying the key contribution to savings ratio is a major policy challenge for all countries 
concerned.  In  the  face  of  diverse  opinions,  it  is  important  that  we  truly  understand  the 
contribution  of  different  factors  to  savings  ratio  before  we  can  come  up  with  an  effective 
policy tool kit to adjust savings ratio.  
I.  
High savings ratio in East Asia and oil-producing countries can be attributed 
to a number of causes  
The generally high savings ratio in East Asia can be attributed to multiple causes:  
First,  national  tradition.  Influenced  by  Confucianism,  people  in  the  region  value  thrift,  self-
discipline, low profile, and are against extravagancy.  
Second,  culture.  We  may  be  able  to  trace  the  cultural  differences  from  a  large  number  of 
textbooks  and  classic  readings.  For  instance,  Latin  American  countries  are  comparable  to 
East Asian countries in terms of national wealth. However, savings ratios in these countries 
are  low,  and  this  can  be  attributed  to  the  cultural  differences  in  the  region,  where  people 
have a higher propensity of consumption and tend to quickly use up all their salaries.  
Third, family structure. In East Asian countries, families feature close bonds between family 
members,  and  the  society  relies  heavily  on  families,  which  are  given  great  social 
responsibilities. In China, for example, a typical family takes care of the old, raises children, 
and is responsible for children’s education (including overseas education) and skill training. 
In contrast, families in some developed countries shoulder fewer responsibilities, as the will 
to shoulder responsibility for each other between generations is less strong.  
Fourth,  demographic  factor  and  stage  of  development.  As  indicated  by  the  Life  Cycle 
Hypothesis  by  Frank  Modigliani,  as  the  share  of  working  age  population  increases, 
household savings will increase accordingly. When we look at the phase of economic growth, 
in  times  of  exceptionally  high  economic  growth,  most  of  the  incremental  income  will  be 
saved, resulting in an unusually high savings ratio. Therefore, it is understandable that China 
has a high savings ratio, as both conditions apply in China’s situation.  
A comparison between Japan and the U.S. can also serve to demonstrate the contribution of 
these factors in determining savings ratio. Similar to the U.S., Japan is a developed country 
with high per capita income. The social security system in the two countries each has its own 
weaknesses. However, Japan’s savings ratio is much higher than that in the U.S. This can 
be  largely  ascribed  to  cultural  elements,  family  value  and  demographic  feature  in  Japan, 
which are fairly similar to those in other East Asian countries.  
Some believe savings ratio is more closely related to the adequacy of social security system, 
arguing  that  an  inadequate  social  security  system  leads  to  high  savings  ratio.  Though 
intuitive,  this  argument  lacks  adequate  statistical  and  empirical  support.  It  is  based  on  the 
assumption that human behaviors are rational and people increase their savings for future 
healthcare and pension needs. This assumption, however, does not necessarily stand. The 
Central  Provident  Fund  (CPF)  system  in  Malaysia  and  Singapore  that  requires  mandatory 
savings  has  been  established  under  the  exact  opposite  assumption  that  people  do  not 
always behave rationally.  
High savings ratio in oil-producing countries has its natural reasons. Endowed with rich oil 
resources  that  far  exceed  their  normal  consumption  demand,  oil-producing  countries 
naturally accumulate their wealth in the form of savings. Chart 4 shows that trade surplus in 
oil-producing countries has been much larger than in East Asian countries since 2000.  
The elementary textbooks on economics always start with “supply and demand and prices”, 
which lead the readers to believe that certain prices, for instance, exchange rate or interest 
rate, determine the behavior of savings and consumption. However, things are much more 
complicated than what the textbook tells us. The level of savings ratio is influenced by a large 
number  of  factors,  and  it  is  over  simplistic  to  conclude  that  the  savings  ratio  can  be 
2 
 BIS Review 31/2009
meaningfully adjusted by adjusting nominal exchange rate. Factors such as national tradition, 
culture,  family  features,  demographic  structure  and  social  security  system  cannot  be 
changed in the short term. Even when some policies can be proved effective, they take a 
long time to do so. In this regard, there are still many issues that need in-depth and detailed 
studies.  
Implications of the Asian financial crisis for savings ratio in East Asia  
II.  
Savings  in  GDP  are  composed  of  household,  corporate  and  government  savings.  If  total 
savings exceed domestic investment, the surplus will take the form of foreign reserves. We 
notice  that  the  drastic  increase  of  imbalance  of  savings  and  trade  started  after  1997.  It  is 
therefore  worthwhile  looking  at  the  impact  of  the  Asian  financial  crisis  on  the  savings 
behavior of these countries.  
Asian countries were seriously shocked and alarmed by the Asian financial crisis. The attack 
of speculative capital led to plunging exchange rates and capital flight and nearly exhausted 
all  foreign  reserves,  leaving  a  great  sense  of  vigilance  for  East  Asian  countries  in 
macroeconomic  management.  In  the  years  that  followed,  countries  in  the  region  boosted 
exports, amassed trade surplus and accumulated large foreign reserves. It is fair to say that 
the high savings ratio and massive accumulation of foreign reserve in recent years in East 
Asian countries reflect the lessons learnt from, and the natural reaction to the Asian financial 
crisis.  
The  large  savings  and  foreign  reserves  of  these  countries  are  also  the  result  of 
defensive reactions against predatory speculation. At the time, large capital inflows and 
the  ensuing  sudden  stop  and  reversal  as  well  as  the  rampant  speculations  of  the  hedge 
funds exacerbated the situation. People were shocked and frustrated by these speculative 
behaviors.  At  the  onset  of  the  crisis,  Malaysia  saw  a  weakening  export,  plummeting  stock 
market  and  sharply  depreciating  currency.  Despite  criticism  from  some  countries  and 
international  institutions,  the  Malaysian  government  imposed  temporary  capital  restrictions 
and safeguarded currency stability. In Hong Kong SAR, which was also attacked by hedge 
funds, stock prices plunged, and its linked exchange rate regime was severely tested.  
The belief prevailed in the region that unregulated predatory speculation was an important 
factor  behind  the  crisis,  and  it  highlighted  tremendous  potential  risks  to  the  international 
financial  system.  It  was  hoped  that  the  international  community  would  bring  it  under 
necessary regulation. However, for some reason, the authorities of the countries concerned 
were  against  regulating  predatory  speculative  capital  flows,  and  failed  to  see  the  need  to 
adjust the regulatory frameworks. At the same time, international financial institutions failed 
to perform its regulatory responsibility over abnormal capital flows. East Asian countries are 
thus forced to amass foreign reserves to defend themselves.  
To  some  extent,  the  increase  of  savings  ratio  and  current  account  surplus  in  East 
Asian  countries  are  a  result  of  the  rescue  plan  of  the  international  financial 
institutions.  The  rescue  plan  kept  silent  on  international  speculative  capital  flows,  which 
otherwise  should  have  been  put  under  scrutiny. 
Instead,  excessive  and  stringent 
conditionalities were imposed, demanding that the crisis countries adopt stringent fiscal and 
monetary policies, raise interest rates, cut fiscal deficits and increase foreign reserves. In the 
decade  thereafter,  East  Asian  countries  have  learnt  the  lessons,  increased  savings  and 
foreign reserves and successfully enhanced their resilience to financial crisis.  
Of  course,  East  Asian  countries  had  their  own  problems.  Vulnerabilities  existed  in 
economic development patterns, foreign debt management as well as institutional capacity. 
Sweeping  structural  reforms  on  corporate  and  financial  sectors  have  been  launched  since 
the crisis.  
Meanwhile, a large number of countries improved their social security system, and reformed 
the education and healthcare systems. However, it takes time for these efforts to take effect.  
BIS Review 31/2009 
 3
Can China adjust its savings ratio effectively?  
III.  
During the Asian financial crisis, some western academia suggested devaluating yuan. Some 
others preferred a stable yuan, for the sake of preventing competitive devaluation. China, as 
a responsible large country, did not devalue and paid the price – a fairly slow recovery. The 
endeavor  of  the  Chinese  authorities  to  maintain  the  stability  of  RMB  against  all  odds 
contributed to stemming the spread of the financial crisis.  
After  the  crisis,  as  the  market-oriented  reform  deepened,  China  intensified  the  efforts  in 
reforming its corporate and government sectors. Profitability of enterprises, especially SOEs, 
increased; fiscal position improved and household income increased steadily. Savings ratio 
began to increase significantly from 2002. (Chart 1)  
 The policy intention of the Chinese authorities to lower savings ratio is clear, but in-
depth research is needed as for specific measures to take. Boosting domestic demand 
and  encouraging  consumption  have  been  important  components  of  the  national  economic 
policies since 2005. These policies would eventually bring down the savings ratio. However, 
in-depth and systematic analysis is needed to identify factors influencing the savings ratio, 
their elasticity, and the adjustment measures to take.  
The  surge  of  savings  ratio  since  2002  is  not  evenly  distributed  between  household 
savings and corporate savings, with the increase of corporate savings outpaced that 
of household savings. Corporate savings ratio increased to 49.9% in 2007 from 37.5% in 
1998. The disposable income of the corporate sector accounted for 13% of the total national 
disposable income. This ratio increased to 22.5% in 2007. During the same time period, the 
share of government disposable income to the total increased by only 2 percentage points.  
The  proportion  of  corporate  savings  to  GDP  in  China  is  high  compared  with  other 
countries in the world. This is closely related to the unsolved problem of cost/profit 
distortion  of  enterprises  during  China’s  economic  transition.  Under  the  planned 
economy,  housing,  healthcare,  and  pension  were  provided  by  the  enterprises  and  the 
government, diminishing the incentives to save. Savings were even considered “mandatory” 
as people queued up in the shops, but not being able to buy anything. After the reform of 
pension, housing and healthcare system in the 1990s, the “iron bowl” (lifelong secure job and 
welfare)  system  no  longer  existed  and  the  enterprises  stopped  providing  pension  and 
housing  for  free.  However,  effective  social  security  system  had  not  been  in  place  either. 
Households had to pay for the long-term expenditures, significantly increasing the incentive 
4 
 BIS Review 31/2009
for precautionary savings. On the other hand, the real cost of labor takes time to be reflected 
in the cost of the enterprises. As a result, the corporate sector increased their savings but 
decreased the contribution to social security. In other words, the extraordinary profits from 
cost distortion did not go to pension, healthcare and housing for employees, where it should 
go. This broadly explained the increase in household and corporate savings. This is also why 
some people suggested that part of the equities of state-owned listed companies should be 
designated to the social security fund.  
Chart 2  
 
Despite  China’s  commitment  and  endeavor,  the  reforms  in  some  areas  are  yet 
incomplete. Although private enterprises in China are already market-driven and free of cost 
distortion, market reform of the public sector was not complete and further breakthrough is 
called for.  
Considerable achievements have been made in the reform of SOEs. However, the lack of 
clearly-defined and fully monetized cost structure affect the adjustment of savings ratio. It is 
therefore  important  to  expedite  the  reform  of  the  public  sector  and  the  transition  of  the 
functions of the government.  
 Observations of low household savings ratio in the U.S.  
IV.  
Movement of U.S. savings ratio in recent years went through two phases (Chart 3): phase 
one, for a long time before the mid-1990s, the US household savings ratio ranged between 
7-10%;  phase  two,  after  1997,  savings  ratio  declined  remarkably  and  the  “twin  deficits” 
worsened  drastically,  especially  trade  deficit.  There  are  many  attempts  to  explain  this 
phenomenon, one of which attributed the low savings to the so-called “euphoria” on the U.S. 
economic performance since the mid-1990s. Specifically speaking, in late 1980s and early 
1990s,  after  the  collapse  of  the  central  planning  system  of  the  former  Soviet  Union  and 
Eastern  Europe,  growth  in  that  region  slipped  into  a  downward  trajectory;  the  Japanese 
economy,  in  the  1990s,  was  also  trapped  in  prolonged  stagnation;  EU’s  economic 
performance  was  lackluster  due  to  structural  problems  including  rigid  labor  market.  The 
United  States,  on  the other  hand,  boasted the  optimal  economic  system  in  the world.  The 
only remaining challenge, in terms of economic system, came from the Asian model. If you 
recall, Paul Krugman once criticized that Asian economic growth relied too much on factor 
BIS Review 31/2009 
 5
inputs  without  improvements  of  productivity.  After  the  crisis,  the  Asian  economy  suffered 
heavy  blows.  The  recipe  prescribed  by  the  IMF  corroborated  the  confidence  in  the  U.S. 
model.  
In contrast, the US economy showed strong flexibility and resilience, recovering rapidly from 
the 9.11 attack and the burst of IT bubble at the turn of the century. All these exacerbated the 
euphoria sentiment in the market, which in turn influenced the saving behavior of the U.S. 
households.  Given  the  unprecedented  magnitude  of  the  current  financial  crisis,  major 
adjustments to the euphoria sentiment can be expected. 
  6 
  BIS Review 31/2009
The  time  series  shows  that  this  round  of  low  savings  and  high  consumption  in  the  U.S. 
commenced in late 1990s. In contrast, the savings ratio of East Asian countries did not surge 
until after the Asian financial crisis. China’s savings ratio began to increase even later, after 
2002.  The  difference  in  time  distribution  indicates  that  there  is  no  significant  causal 
relationship between the two.  
 Options for savings ratio adjustment  
V.  
In sum, global savings imbalance exists and the causes are multiple. It seems inappropriate 
to conclude that savings ratio is only related to exchange rate. It is unrealistic to expect long-
term  features  to  change  in  the  short  run.  One  should,  instead,  adopt  a  broader  and  more 
comprehensive view in examining this issue.  
First, a composition of recipe is needed. The growth pattern of high consumption and low 
savings of some economies can hardly sustain, and must be reviewed. The current situation 
in the U.S., however, does not present itself as the optimal time to raise its savings ratio, and 
policy makers are expected to strike a balance between increasing savings and stimulating 
consumption to facilitate the economic recovery. On the other hand, to bring down savings 
ratio, East Asian nations should attend to various aspects including economic growth pattern, 
industrial  structure,  pricing  mechanism,  etc.,  carry  out  a  package  of  comprehensive 
adjustments and reforms, and strive for medium term effects. It cannot be denied that reform 
of the exchange rate formation mechanism is part of this recipe. When tackling the ongoing 
financial crisis and conducting economic adjustment, the Chinese government has focused 
on boosting domestic demand, aiming for robustness of the economic growth by stimulating 
consumption. The RMB 4-trillion yuan stimulus package, one of the largest in size globally, is 
tilted towards expenditure programs. The program underscores public welfare, job creation, 
and income growth for the rural areas and the underprivileged groups.  
Second,  countries  and  international  institutions  should  strengthen  their  cooperation 
and  intensify  the  regulation  of  the  cross-boarder  speculative  capital  flows.  Although 
cross-boarder hot money refrained somewhat from their usual aggressive approaches after 
the  LTCM  event,  and  relevant  regulatory  authorities  started  to  reassess  the  situation,  the 
current financial crisis underscores the importance of remaining vigilant against speculative 
capital  movement,  and  enhancing 
flows. 
transparency  of  cross-boarder  capital 
the 
BIS Review 31/2009 
 7
International financial institutions and countries concerned should help developing countries 
establish  a  robust  early-warning  system  and  guard  against  attacks  from  predatory 
speculation.  International  cooperation  should  be  strengthened  to  improve  the  rescue 
mechanism. In case of temporary BOP difficulties in emerging markets, international rescues 
should  be  fast,  and  conditionalities  should  be  kept  at  minimum.  This  would  encourage 
countries to lower savings and expand domestic demand.  
Third,  appropriate  measures  should  be  taken  to  channel  savings  into  developing 
countries and emerging markets. The U.S. and other advanced economies do not wish to 
see large inflows of global savings while these savings need an ideal destination. As a matter 
of fact, savings flowing from emerging markets to the advanced economies is neither rational 
nor  consistent  with  the  intention  of  the  advanced  economies  to  increase  their  domestic 
savings.  The  adjustment  of  savings  ratio  in  East  Asian  countries  will  not  see  immediate 
effects. Meanwhile, savings in oil-producing countries may remain at a high level so long as 
oil prices remain elevated. Therefore, global savings imbalance will remain for some time in 
the future. The top priority at present is to facilitate the rational flow of savings and improve 
its allocation efficiency around the world. One way to do so is to redirect surplus savings to 
other developing countries and emerging markets, those with abundant resources, low labor 
cost,  but  inadequate  capital  for  development.  These  economies  are  the  future  growth 
engines of the global economy.  
Finally, the reform of the international monetary system should be advanced. Currently, 
a bulk of international trade and financial transactions are priced and settled in U.S. dollar. It 
is  also  the  most  important  reserve  currency.  The  IMF  data  showed  that  foreign  reserves 
denominated in the U.S. dollar accounted for 63.9% of the total by the end of 2007. When 
countries increase savings and if these savings are in the form of dollar denominated foreign 
reserves,  capital  will  inevitably  flow  into  the  U.S..  The  deleveraging  process  may  call  for 
capital inflow to the U.S. in the short run, but over the long run, large capital inflows are not in 
the  interest  of  adjusting  the  economic  growth  model  of  the  U.S.  .  Moreover,  the  over-
concentration  of  foreign  assets  in  one  particular  currency  may  end  up  in  undesirable 
scenarios.  Therefore,  in  addition  to  closer  regulatory  cooperation,  and  efforts  for  more 
rational  allocation  of  savings  flow,  the  international  community  should  move  forward  in 
reforming  the  international  monetary  system.  Efforts  should  be  made  to  monitor  the 
economic  and  financial  policies  in  major  reserve  currency  countries  and  to  enhance  the 
status  of  SDR,  so  as  to  steadily  advance  the  international  monetary  system  towards 
diversification over the long run.  
Thank you!  
8 
 BIS Review 31/2009
