Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with the Wall Street Journal 
Interview of Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, with the Wall 
Street Journal, published on 23 March 2009. 
 WSJ: You’ve shown a bit of optimism recently, saying we could see a moderate recovery in 
2010. Where will recovery come from? 
Mr. Trichet: I have not been alone in mentioning that in Europe 2009 will be a very, very 
difficult year. As regards 2010, I always mentioned not only our own diagnosis, but the fact 
that an overwhelming majority of observers, economists and international institutions would 
say that in the course of next year there will be a progressive gradual recovery. It’s neither an 
optimistic vision nor a pessimistic vision. It’s the present, realistic vision. 
WSJ: Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke spoke recently about “green shoots” in the 
U.S. economy. Do you see similar green shoots in the euro-zone economy? 
Mr. Trichet: Again, we have to accept that in Europe as in the world 2009 is a difficult year 
and you have, in the present situation, elements that you could see as very negative. You 
have  some  that  are  a  little  bit  reassuring  on  both  sides  of  the  Atlantic.  But  all  taken  into 
account, we are still in a situation where the trend is downward.  
WSJ: What will turn the downward trend around?  
Mr. Trichet: I see four main possible factors behind a progressive gradual recovery in 2010: 
first  the  expansionary  effect  of  the  fall  in  the  price  of  oil  and  commodities;  second  the 
activation  of  the  economies  through  discretionary  fiscal  policies  and  automatic  stabilizers 
which are very substantial; third the extraordinary measures that have been taken to put the 
financial sector back on its feet: on this side of the Atlantic the commitments of the executive 
branches in the form of recapitalization, guarantees and other options represent around 23% 
of  the  GDP;  fourth  the  policies  of  the  central  banks:  as  an  example  for  the  ECB  and  the 
Eurosystem the size of the balance sheet represents now 16% of the GDP when it was 10% 
before the crisis, namely an increase of 600 billon euros (approximately 800 billon dollars).  
A  number  of  other  factors  are  also  very  important  in  the  perspective  of  a  medium-term 
recovery:  the  continued  surge  of  technology,  the  considerable  growth  potential  of  the 
emerging  economies.  But  as  regards  a  relatively  prompt  recovery  what  is  decisive  is  the 
confidence factor. What we are experiencing is a very sharp and abrupt disappearance of 
confidence. So it depends very much on us that 2010 could be, or not, a year of progressive 
gradual recovery. It depends on the capacity of authorities and private sector together, to re-
inject in the economy of the world these elements of confidence that have disappeared mid 
September 2008. 
WSJ: Do you think the criticism that European governments have not done enough, in terms 
of fiscal stimulus, is justified? 
Mr. Trichet: I think it’s not. After the recent meeting of ministers and governors of the Group 
of 20 in London, I had the conviction that both sides of the Atlantic had understood much 
better each others’ situations. There is a mutual understanding that when you take all into 
account, you see that on both sides of the Atlantic, what has been done on the fiscal side 
corresponds to the gravity of the situation. 
To  speak  more  directly  of  the  euro  area,  you  must  take  into  account  the  combination  of 
discretionary  decisions  that  have  been  taken  by  all  governments,  plus  the  automatic 
stabilizers  that  are  much  more  important  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic;  the  level  of  public 
spending as a proportion of GDP, which is much higher on this side of the Atlantic; and the 
BIS Review 34/2009 
 1
room  for  maneuver  for  each  particular  economy  that  existed  before  the  crisis  and  exists 
today.  
To  be  efficient  in  rebuilding  confidence,  you  have  to  demonstrate  that  you  are  doing, 
immediately and audaciously, what is necessary today. But at the same time, you have also 
to reassure your own people that you have an exit strategy, to reassure households that we 
are not putting in jeopardy the situation of the children, and to reassure businesses that what 
is  done  today  is  not  done  to  the  detriment  of  their  own  taxation  in  the  years  to  come. 
Activation of the economy depends crucially on confidence. And confidence today needs that 
we can prove to our own people that we have the right balance between the short-term and 
the medium- and long-term perspective.  
WSJ: What do you think are the most urgent requirements for enacting global policy now? 
There are a number of measures that have been announced and not enacted. Are you, for 
example, concerned at the pace at which the U.S. financial restructuring is going?  
Mr.  Trichet:  What  I  would  recommend  for  us  as  for  the  US  is  to,  now,  as  efficiently  and 
rapidly  as  possible,  do  what  has  been  decided.  Nothing  will  really  work  until  the  financial 
sector  is  back  on  track  and  ready  to  lend  on  a  sustainable  basis.  I  would  say  exactly  the 
same with the budget. Decisions have been taken; they are very important. Let’s do it! Quick 
implementation,  quick  disbursement  is  what  is  needed.  Not  embarking  on  useless  and 
counterproductive quarrels which fortunately are over now.  
WSJ: If recovery does not take hold gradually in 2010, does the Stability and Growth Pact 
give European governments room to do more? 
Mr.  Trichet:  The  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  has  been  revised  to  cope  with  exceptional 
circumstances. It is our way to maintain appropriate cohesion in a single market with a single 
currency and with no single federal budget. Respect of the procedures and provisions of the 
Stability and Growth Pact is of the essence. 
WSJ: Ireland expects an 6.5% decline in GDP this year. Their deficit is projected to be 10% 
of GDP and they’ll soon introduce a budget that will raise taxes. Is that really the appropriate 
response in the teeth of a deep recession? 
Mr. Trichet: I am not speaking of one country in particular. In each case you have to see 
what  your  own  room  for  maneuvering  is.  If  the  additional  deficits  are  costing  you  both,  a 
strong increase of the cost of your own refinancing and a loss of confidence of your people, 
you’re not better off! If your people have the sentiment that they will be not better off in an 
endless spiraling of deficits, they will not spend any money that you give them today!  
WSJ:  There  are  a  number  of  countries  that,  absent  the  euro  zone,  would  have  made  an 
adjustment in real wages through devaluation. How do you see adjustments in real wages 
now  being  made  in  the  euro  zone's  less-competitive  economies?  Isn’t  the  inevitable 
consequence in certain countries falls in real wages and deflation, even if that doesn't occur 
in the euro zone as a whole? 
Mr.  Trichet:  The  euro  zone  is  a  single  market  with  a  single  currency  and  the  various 
countries have to be considered exactly as the various States of the U.S.A. It goes without 
saying that the situation of the various States in the U.S.A. is not all alike. In a small number 
of euro-zone cases – this has nothing to do with the present crisis – there is a necessity to 
progressively catch up with a level of competitiveness which had been deteriorating over the 
past years. Germany is a good example of such adjustments: it entered the euro area with a 
level of relative competitiveness which was insufficient. It regained, in a very efficient fashion, 
competitiveness to offset its insufficient level in the entry.  
WSJ: A number of other central banks, in words and in deeds, have suggested the risk of 
deflation is rising. You have maintained the risk of deflation in the euro zone overall is low. 
Why would the euro zone be different than other major developed economies of the world? 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2009
Mr. Trichet: All the international institutions that are looking at the situation say there is no 
substantiation  of  a  significant  deflationary  risk in  the  euro area  at  the moment.  That  being 
said, we have to be alert and look at the risks permanently. We are certainly helped by our 
very clear definition of price stability, which is annual inflation at less than 2%, but close to 
2%.  
Surveys of medium-term euro-zone inflation expectations have oscillated between 1.7% and 
2%. When you look at what has been extracted from financial markets and compare with the 
U.S., you see we are benefiting from more solid anchoring of inflation expectations. I have 
also to take into account a number of figures that are till now, significantly over the zero level: 
for instance compensation per employee over 12 months is +3%, negotiated wages +3.5%, 
M3 +5.9%, M1 +5.2%. But as I said, we remain permanently alert.  
WSJ: If you saw the risk of deflation rising, would you still see difficulties with a policy rate 
near zero?  
Mr. Trichet: There are a number of drawbacks associated with policy rates deliberately put 
at a zero level by the decision of the central banks. That’s the reason we do not think it would 
be  appropriate.  But  what  counts  are  the  interest  rates  that  are  in  the  market  and  that  the 
public  gets.  I  will  surprise  you!  Taking  into  account  our  unlimited  supply  of  liquidity  at  our 
main policy rate and the fact that we have the deposit rate at 0.5%, we have, at the moment I 
am speaking, our six-month rates on the money market that are a little bit below U.S. six-
month rates, and our one-year rates that are 13 basis points below the U.S. money market 
one-year rate.  
WSJ:  You’ve  highlighted  recently  the  differences  in  the  euro-zone  financial  system  that 
underlie  the  differences  between  the  non-standard  steps  the  ECB  has  taken  and  those  of 
other central banks. 
Mr. Trichet: Yes indeed. We have 70% of the financing of the euro area which goes through 
commercial banks and 30% through securities other than stocks. And on the other side of the 
Atlantic, it’s exactly the contrary; it’s 30% or a little less for commercial bank financing and 70 
percent for securities other than stocks. That is the reason why we have concentrated our 
bold  non-standard  measures  –  eligibility  of  collateral,  unlimited  supply  of  liquidity  at  fixed 
rates – on the commercial bank channel.  
WSJ: Would that difference guide any future non-standard steps you might take?  
Mr. Trichet: We will certainly continue to do whatever we think optimizes our own situation. 
In the next decisions that we could take, it’s pretty possible that we would continue to be non-
conventional through the channel of bank financing. This channel remains for us essential.  
WSJ: What is your assessment of the adequacy of bank lending in the euro-zone?  
Mr.  Trichet:  I  will  continue  to  tell  our  banks  that  we  expect  them  to  pass  on  to  the  real 
economy what we have been doing ourselves in terms of reduction of interest rates and of 
supply  of  liquidity.  It’s  up  to  them,  being  the  main  channel  of  financing  of  the  European 
economy, to pass along the decisions we have been taking. If I am shipping this message, it 
is because we trust that this is not yet entirely done. We do not scapegoat at all our banks; 
we rely upon them. We are encouraging them as much as possible to do their job, and their 
job is to lend.  
WSJ: There’s been a concern in other economies about banks that are so weakened that 
they’re  zombie  institutions  that  exist  but  are  unable  or  unwilling  to  lend.  Is  that  a 
phenomenon reflected in Europe? 
Mr. Trichet: No. You have a large number of institutions in the euro area, which fortunately 
did not embark into massive toxic-assets investment, which were reasonably cautious and 
prudent and are continuing to be creditworthy without extraordinary help from authorities. We 
might have some quasi passive institutions, but it is not at all the generalized case. Again, in 
any case, putting the financial sector back on its feet and lending is the first priority.  
BIS Review 34/2009 
 3
WSJ: There remains a sentiment among some that the ECB is not as willing as other central 
banks to be as responsive to the economic downturn with its policy rate. 
Mr.  Trichet:  At  times,  I  see  some  observes  looking  at  central  banks  as  if  they  were 
participating in a race. Who is the first to do this or that? It is true that the ECB was the first 
central bank to act decisively at the start of the crisis on 9th of August 2007. We had our own 
good reasons, it was not a race! Today it is true that the size of the balance sheet (16% of 
GDP) is bigger in proportion than the size of the FED balance sheet. It might change after 
last week decisions. But it is not a race! Today our six-month and one year money market 
interest rates are lower than in the dollar or sterling money market because of our lower risk 
premia  and  liquidity  premia.  But  it  is  not  a  race!  We  are  all  doing  what  we  judge  optimal 
taking  into  account  the  different  characteristics  of  our  economies  and  our  common  will  to 
solidly anchor inflationary expectations and, in so doing, improve confidence. As regards the 
future rate of our main refinancing operations, presently at 1.5%, I said clearly that we could 
decrease it again. I also said that at 0.5% our deposit facility interest rate was already at a 
very, very low level.  
WSJ:  Are  there  any  obstacles  to  the  ECB  purchasing  government  assets,  which is  now a 
policy of central banks including the Fed and the Bank of England?  
Mr. Trichet: Two remarks: As regards the private papers, our collateral framework has been 
very  supportive  since  the  beginning  of  the  crisis:  I  have  also  noted  that  our  corporate 
securities markets behaved properly in terms of volume since January. As regards possible 
outright purchases of securities in general I said that we are not pre-committed for any new 
decisions. One  element  which  has  to  be  taken  into  account  is  that  the  risks  of  the  central 
banks  and  the  risks  of  the  governments  are,  in  the  euro  area,  clearly  separated  without 
combination of risks or blending of responsibilities. 
WSJ:  Are  you  suggesting  that  by  buying  government  assets,  there  would  be  a  blurring  of 
responsibility where there is so far a clear division, and that blurring would be undesirable? 
Mr. Trichet: It is an element which has to be taken into account.  
WSJ: There is also a debate about whether, with the house still burning down, as it were, 
longer-term  questions  about  the  new  global  financial  architecture  can  wait.  What  is  your 
view?  
Mr. Trichet: Confidence is of essence! If we want to succeed right now in this very grave 
crisis we have to take bold decisions now and be equally determined in reassuring our fellow 
citizens  in  the  medium  and  long  run.  We  have  to  fight  against  short-termism.  We  have  to 
improve transparency. And we have to eliminate pro-cyclicality. Fluctuations are normal in a 
market  economy.  We  have  to  accept  fluctuations,  otherwise  we  would  have  no  market 
economy – we would be in the Soviet Union. On the other hand, it is extremely clumsy to 
amplify  those  booms  and  busts.  We  have  to  concentrate  on  augmenting  the  resilience  of 
global  finance.  And  finally  we  have  also  to  improve  surveillance  of  the  macro  policies  of 
systemic economies in order to prevent the piling up of domestic and external imbalances. 
The Financial Stability Forum and the IMF have a decisive role to play in these respects.  
4 
 BIS Review 34/2009
