Caleb M Fundanga: Moderating the impact of the global meltdown on the 
Zambian financial system 
Speech by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official opening of 
Standard Chartered Bank Zambia Limited Ody’s Excel Centre, Lusaka, 22 April 2009. 
 The Chairman, Standard Chartered Bank Zambia Limited, Mr Michael Mundashi 
The Managing Director of Standard Chartered Bank Zambia Limited, Mrs Mizinga Melu 
Distinguished Guests 
Members of the Press 
And may I simply say Ladies and Gentlemen 
I am pleased to be here today at the official opening of the new Excel Centre of Standard 
Chartered Bank Zambia Limited. This event is taking place at a time when our economy is 
faced with challenges emanating from the impact of the global financial and economic crisis. 
Although  the  Zambian  financial  system  is  not  fully  integrated  with  the  world’s  financial 
markets, the impact of the crisis is already clear. 
Mr Chairman, the financial turmoil has resulted in a reduction in projected global economic 
growth and a decline in demand for commodities. As a commodity exporting country, Zambia 
has  experienced  a  decline  in  her  export  receipts  due  to  the  decline  in  commodity  prices 
reflecting  a  weak  demand  for  these  commodities.  The  declining  export  earnings  and 
reversals  in  portfolio  investments  have  been  reflected  in  the  depreciation  of  the  local 
currency and consequent inflationary pressures towards the end of 2008. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  the  financial  turmoil  facing  the  world  today  has  affected  all  of  us 
and we as regulators are trying to ensure stability in the financial markets. In this regard, the 
Bank of Zambia has put in place measures to moderate the impact of the global meltdown on 
the  Zambian  financial  system.  The  Government  also  remains  resolved  to  continue  with 
prudent  fiscal  policies  and  economic  management,  which  have  seen  a  buoyant  financial 
sector in Zambia, thereby resulting in the mushrooming of branches in different locations of 
the country, such as the one we are inaugurating today. 
In  spite  of  the  uncertainties  in  the  global  economy,  Distinguished  Guests,  we  remain 
confident  that  the  financial  sector  in  Zambia  will  rise  above  the  challenge  and  continue  to 
provide services to the communities where they operate. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I have stated at various fora that it is important for banks in Zambia 
to take actions which support the development of our economy: 
• 
Banks need to open more outlets such as this one, to increase our people’s access to 
banking services, thereby empowering our citizens 
Banks should provide more loans to the productive sector, such as Agriculture and 
SMEs. 
 In  striving  to  meet  these  demands,  banks  must  always  comply  with  the  regulations  as 
stipulated  in  the  Banking  and  Financial  Services  Act  to  ensure  the  safety  of  customers’ 
deposits. I am proud of the stability that has been exhibited by our economy. 
However, Mr Chairman, I am disappointed that the cost of borrowing has remained high in 
spite of the improvements in the fiscal management of our economy. As you know, the high 
cost of borrowing stifles the growth of the productive sector. 
BIS Review 52/2009 
 1
I  therefore  appeal  to  all  the  banks  operating  in  Zambia  to  show  more  commitment  to  the 
growth and development of our country by: 
• 
• 
• 
Opening more branches 
Providing more loans to increase the productivity of our economy, and 
Encouraging  more  Zambians  to  open  bank  accounts  through  provision  of  easily 
accessible and affordable products and services 
All this, ladies and gentlemen, will greatly contribute to the emergence of a middle class in 
Zambia, which will bring real economic development and lead to poverty reduction. 
I  am  pleased 
to  growth  and 
reinvestment.  You  will  all  agree  with  me,  however,  that  those  who  have  more  should  do 
more.  I  therefore  look  forward  to  seeing  more  from  Standard  Chartered  Bank  Zambia 
Limited, as it is one of the leading banks in this country. 
I thank you. 
to  observe  Standard  Chartered  Bank’s  commitment 
2 
 BIS Review 52/2009
