John Hurley: Restoring stability to the banking system 
Speech by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of 
Ireland, to ACI Ireland, Dublin, 10 June 2009. 
 Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me to speak to the Association again. When I last addressed the ACI it 
was  the  autumn  of  2007.  We  had  by  that  time  experienced  the  first  months  of  market 
volatility, which had started out as a problem centred on the US sub-prime market quickly 
followed by global problems of declining liquidity and a sharp re-pricing of risk.  
As we now are aware, we were, back then, only in the foothills of what has turned out to be a 
financial crisis of very major proportions; one that has demanded, and continues to require, 
an immense response from authorities worldwide. It is also a crisis with a particular domestic 
resonance here, coinciding as it did with the correction in our own property and construction-
related  sectors.  As  in  other  countries,  the  authorities  here  have  taken  extraordinary  and 
unprecedented measures to stabilise the banking system and the economy.  
My  address  tonight  will  focus  on  events  since  September  of  last  year  when  the  turmoil 
became a full-blown crisis and how authorities have responded since that time. It is clear that 
that this crisis will drive significant changes both in terms of the structure of banking systems 
as well as the regulatory regime and I will share some thoughts on these issues. Restoring 
stability to the banking system is a necessary but, on its own, not a sufficient condition for 
restoring  health  to  the  economy.  I  will  conclude  by  commenting  on  the  other  key  policy 
challenges of restoring competitiveness and stabilising the public finances.  
Financial market turbulence evolves into a crisis 
The events of last September, centring around the failure of Lehman Brothers, were seminal, 
after  which  governments  and  central  banks  everywhere  had 
in  an 
unprecedented  way  and  on  a  scale  that  was  not  conceivable  beforehand.  Beginning  in 
September,  global  interbank  markets  increasingly  seized  up,  even  at  the  very  shortest 
maturities. The severe shortage of liquidity impacted significantly on the operations of banks 
everywhere.  In  response,  policy  makers  across  the  world  have  taken  exceptional  steps 
through direct financial sector interventions, as well as monetary and fiscal policy responses. 
Recapitalisations,  deposit  guarantee  extensions,  the  provision  of  credit  and  liquidity,  and 
programmes  to  deal  with  distressed  assets  were  all  undertaken  to  support  financial 
institutions, while central banks cut policy rates to historically low levels and have introduced 
a range of non-conventional monetary policy measures. 
intervene 
to 
The response of public authorities in Ireland 
Notwithstanding  the  limited  exposure  to  structured  financial  products  of  Irish  banks,  the 
interaction of the global shock to financial markets with the pre-existing vulnerabilities in the 
domestic economy triggered systemic repercussions here. A particular vulnerability here was 
an overheated property market that had been financed through the banking sector, in large 
part  with  funds  raised  on  wholesale  markets  both  at  home  and  abroad.  The  immediate 
systemic  consequences  of  the  shortage  of  liquidity  for  the  domestic  banking  system  have 
been accompanied by the broader economic impact we are now experiencing.  
The principal motivation behind all of the decisions that have been taken subsequently with 
respect  to  the  banking  system  has  been  to  limit  damage  to  the  real  economy  from  the 
banking crisis. The banking sector plays a crucial role in the modern economy by acting as a 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 1
financial intermediary and ensuring that funds are distributed from those who wish to save to 
those who wish to borrow. When this vital function is impaired, it can have severe effects on 
economic  activity.  Downturns  that  are  preceded  by  episodes  of  financial  stress  tend  to  be 
longer  in  duration  and,  partly  because  of  this,  more  severe  than  those  caused  by  other 
factors. Furthermore, when the financial stress is related to the banking sector in particular, 
then the impact tends to be even more significant.  
The approach adopted here in response to the crisis is consistent with the general approach 
adopted by countries across the EU; namely, the initial introduction of a state guarantee for 
banks’ liabilities, followed by recapitalisation of banks to ensure viability and nationalisation 
where warranted, and most recently, measures to address banks’ non-performing property-
related  assets  through  the  establishment  of  the  National  Asset  Management  Agency 
(NAMA).  A  final  necessary  stage  must  address  the  optimum  shape  and  structure  of  the 
domestic banking sector that will be required to meet the needs of the economy in the years 
ahead. 
The State guarantee 
By end-September of last year, the severe shortage of liquidity in global money markets was 
impacting significantly on the operations of Irish banks. Funding pressures were exacerbated 
by negative international investor sentiment, related to Irish banks’ exposures to the property 
sector,  at  a  time  when  property  prices  and  transaction  volumes  were  declining following  a 
period  of  unprecedented  increases.  Daily  liquidity  reports  were  showing  that  the  situation 
was becoming increasingly strained.  
Events  came  to  a  head  on  Monday  29th  September  when  it  was  found  necessary  to 
introduce  a State  guarantee  for  a  range  of  domestic  banks’  liabilities.  The  objective  of  the 
guarantee  was  to  give  sufficient  time  for  our  banks  to  stabilise  their  funding  situation,  by 
providing  the  necessary  confidence  for  international  investors  that  would  enable  them  to 
continue  lending  to  Irish  banks  in  the  fraught  environment  at  that  time,  thereby  relieving 
short-term funding constraints and preventing a drain of liquidity. To maintain the confidence 
of  international  wholesale  markets  on  which  Irish  banks  are  heavily  dependent,  it  was 
essential  that  the  guarantee  be  pitched  at  a  level  that  ensured  success.  The  guarantee 
resulted in an immediate improvement in the liquidity situation. Subsequently, a large number 
of countries, including at least 14 other European countries, introduced guarantee schemes 
in order to obviate the same risks, although the type, and maturity, of liabilities covered has 
differed according to different circumstances and judgements made in individual countries.  
Recapitalisation 
It  was  recognised  at  the  time  that  the  guarantee  was  not  a  long-term  solution  and  that  it 
would still be necessary to determine if additional capital would be necessary for Irish banks. 
On  the  basis  of  supervisory  information,  Irish  banks  met  their  regulatory  requirements. 
Across  Europe,  however,  international  markets  were  expecting  higher  core  Tier  1  capital 
ratios  than before  the crisis.  A  number  of  countries,  including  Ireland, took  the  decision  to 
recapitalise  banks  on  this  basis.  A  further  consideration  in  the  Irish  case  was  market 
participants’ expectations of significant write-downs on property-related assets that would eat 
into  existing  capital.  The  severity  of  the  downturn  in  the  economy  was  also  a  factor  in 
recapitalisation  here.  While  Irish  banks,  unlike  many  of  their  international  peers,  were  not 
exposed to securities based on US subprime mortgages, the exposure that attracted concern 
in the Irish case was our system’s over-exposure to property-related loans. There was great 
uncertainty about the ultimate impact of the unwinding of an overheated property market on 
the  quality of  banks’  assets.  There  was  also concern  that  banks  might  attempt  to  improve 
their capital positions only by curtailing the supply of credit. Historical experience from other 
countries  shows  that  this  type  of  dynamic  would  potentially  have  had  severe  and  lasting 
negative repercussions for the economy and the financial sector and needed to be avoided 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2009
After consultation between all the relevant authorities, a decision was taken to recapitalise 
our largest domestic banks following due diligence on these banks’ exposures. The banks 
were also required to make a commitment to increase lending capacity to small and medium-
sized  firms  and  first-time  buyers.  Following  the  emergence  of  unacceptable  governance 
issues, Anglo Irish Bank was taken into public ownership to protect the stability of our wider 
financial system.  
Non-performing assets on banks’ balance sheets 
International commentators, such as the IMF in its Global Financial Stability Report, suggest 
that the challenge now for many countries is to address banks’ balance sheets – specifically, 
to identify and deal with impaired assets – as a necessary step in recovering from the crisis. 
Our  domestic  banks  have  substantial  exposures  to  land  and  development  loans,  which 
creates uncertainty about their capital positions and, ultimately, affects their ability to provide 
credit to the real economy.  
It  is  in  this  context  that  the  Government  has  decided  to  establish  the  National  Asset 
Management  Agency.  The  intention  is  to  transfer  the  land  and  development  books  and 
appropriate  associated  exposures  to  NAMA  in  return  for  government  bonds.  It  is  essential 
that  this  is  done;  it  is  a  critical  stage  in  the  process  to  renew  confidence  in  the  banking 
sector. The correct pricing of these assets is a most important issue and must balance value 
for  the  taxpayer  with  restoring  the  capacity  of  the  banking  sector  to  support  the  real 
economy.  
The Eurosystem response 
Alongside the various domestic initiatives outlined above, the Central Bank has continued to 
respond to the crisis as a member of the Eurosystem. The Governing Council of the ECB has 
reduced its key policy interest rate by 325 basis points cumulatively since last October. This 
has had a very significant effect in lowering borrowing costs for households and firms across 
the euro area, including in Ireland. There has been a pick-up in investor sentiment over the 
last  number  of  months  and  this  partly  reflects  economic  indicators,  which  have  been 
somewhat more positive both in Europe and globally. Nevertheless, this follows a very sharp 
contraction in euro area GDP in the first three months of the year and the more recent data, 
for the most part, point to a further – but smaller – decline in activity in the second quarter.  
The recovery is likely to be gradual and extended, however, given the nature and scale of the 
crisis we have experienced. As a result, monetary policy will have to remain accommodative 
for  as  long  as  is  required  and  will  only  be  adjusted  when  there  are  definite  signs  of  a 
significant improvement. As regards prices, euro area inflation is expected to turn temporarily 
negative for a period this year but to return to positive territory again thereafter. I would like to 
emphasise that, over the medium term, indicators of inflation expectations remain very much 
in line with the Governing Council’s definition of price stability. This reflects the Eurosystem’s 
credibility.  
The Governing Council’s response to the crisis has been exceptional and has also included 
innovative non-conventional measures, particularly in terms of liquidity provision. Banks are 
currently able to access unlimited liquidity against suitable collateral at a fixed rate for up to 
six months, and later this month they will be able to do so for an even longer period, up to 12 
months.  This  has  been  of  enormous  benefit  to  Irish  banks  and  to  the  euro  area  banking 
sector  in  general.  At  its  last  meeting,  the  Governing  Council  announced  the  details  of  a 
programme to purchase around €60 billion of euro-denominated covered bonds issued in the 
euro  area,  which  will  help  an  important  market,  and  again  will  be  of  benefit  to  banks  and 
support  credit  provision.  The  European  covered  bond  market  is  currently  stalled  and  the 
programme  will  help  stimulate  the  market,  as  it  increases  demand  for  the  instruments  in 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 3
question,  making  new  issuance  attractive  for  banks.  Covered  bonds  form  an  important 
funding channel for the main Irish banks.  
What does the future hold for banking systems generally? 
While it remains unclear when the crisis will end and what its ultimate effects will be, recent 
signs of recovery remind us that we need to look at the type of financial system that we want 
to see emerge when the crisis is over. This holds at national, EU and global levels.  
The ongoing crisis underlines the need to adopt a system-wide approach to regulation and 
supervision. The proposals of the de Larosière report are particularly pertinent on this point. 
A feature of the current crisis has been that, while the build-up of pressures at a macro, or 
system-wide, level was widely recognised when it was happening, the publication of these 
concerns,  which  was  the  internationally  accepted  way  for  central  banks  to  convey  their 
concerns,  was  not  effective.  This  was  the  case  both  internationally  and  in  Ireland.  It  is 
essential, therefore, that we bridge the gap between financial stability, or macro-prudential 
supervision, on the one hand and micro-prudential, or traditional supervision, on the other. In 
this context, the European Commission has proposed a new supervisory framework for the 
EU  based  on  the  de  Larosière  proposals.  The  proposal  for  new  structures  recognises 
explicitly  the  need  for  macro-prudential  risk  assessments  in  order  to  identify  emerging 
vulnerabilities in the financial system and issue risk warnings but also, crucially, the necessity 
to follow these with policy actions when appropriate. While the details of the proposed new 
EU  framework  still  need  to  be  ironed  out,  I  strongly  support  the  direction  proposed.  I 
welcome also the recent announcement here providing for full integration and co-ordination 
within  the  Central  Bank  of  responsibilities  for  both  financial  stability  and  micro-prudential 
supervision. These new domestic arrangements would fit  very well with the proposed new 
European framework.  
The current crisis has made it clear that risk management practices across all parts of the 
financial  sector  need  to  be  improved  significantly.  One  of  the  key  aspects  that  must  be 
addressed is ensuring that the regulatory framework does not magnify the cyclicality already 
inherent  in  the  financial  system,  as  it  has  during  the  current  crisis.  In  this  context,  it  is 
essential  that  we  develop  mechanisms  and  procedures  to  ensure  that  banks  accumulate 
resources  in  good  times  to  act  as  a  cushion  when  the  cycle  turns.  Clearly,  accounting 
standards play an important part here, and I welcome initiatives being undertaken both at the 
IASB  and  the  Basel  Committee  to  improve  reporting  in  order  to  reduce  cyclicality.  The 
restructuring  of  remuneration  packages 
to  risk 
management  practices,  and 
long-term 
sustainability above short-term profitability is necessary.  
issue  related 
to  prioritise 
the  re-alignment  of 
important 
incentives 
is  another 
Structure of Irish banking sector 
In  the  light  of  all  that  has  happened,  we  need  to  examine  the  structure  of  the  domestic 
banking system. When the crisis comes to an end the structure and shape of our banking 
system  will  be  different.  This  is  likely  to  be  an  international  trend.  In  Ireland,  the  very 
existence of NAMA will in itself be central to this. The banks that emerge from that process 
may  well  be  smaller  but  better  prepared  for  the  new  environment.  This  should  allow  for  a 
more focused and consolidated banking sector. We need to ensure that the banking system 
that emerges is one that is there to serve the future needs of the economy.  
The global financial services industry is going through a period of radical change as a result 
of  the  financial  crisis.  At  this  stage,  it  is  not  clear  what  will  be  the  ultimate  impact  on  the 
industry.  The  international  financial  sector  operating  in  Ireland  is  obviously  not  immune  to 
these global developments. However, there is a broad range of activities located in the IFSC, 
which as a whole has withstood the crisis reasonably well, and I am confident that the IFSC 
will continue to make a very significant contribution to the Irish economy.  
4 
 BIS Review 72/2009
Economic assessment 
While huge efforts have been put in to stabilising the financial sector, we also need to act to 
restore stability in other areas. More generally, it is vital that we act credibly and quickly to 
confront the very significant challenges that we face and chart a path that will in time ensure 
a  sustainable  recovery  in  economic  growth.  Over  the  past  two  decades,  Ireland  has 
demonstrated  a  strong  ability  to  exploit  its  advantages  –  in  the  form  of  flexible  markets,  a 
competitive economy and a highly-skilled and educated labour force – to generate growth. In 
more recent times, these strengths have come to be masked by increased costs and by the 
fact  that  economic  activity  had  become  unbalanced.  We  had  become  too  dependent  on 
largely construction-driven growth in domestic demand. Among other things, this pattern of 
growth  entailed  an  overdependence  on  property-related  transaction  taxes.  The  inevitable 
downturn  in  construction  activities  then  gave  rise  to  an  extremely  sharp  and  severe 
deterioration  in  the  public  finances,  the  scale  of  which  has  exceeded  even  that  of  the 
downturn  in  economic  growth.  The  importance  of  taking  effective  and  immediate  steps  to 
improve cost competitiveness and address fiscal imbalances cannot be overstated.  
Economy-wide  productivity  gains  have  been  very  modest  and  labour  costs  have  been 
relatively high in recent years compared to our main trading partners. This deterioration must 
be  addressed  if  we  are  to  return  to  a  sustainable  growth  path.  A  strategy  to  restore 
competitiveness must encompass action on a number of fronts including pay and non-pay 
costs,  infrastructure  improvements  which  support  productivity  growth,  the  enhancement  of 
competition in  sheltered  sectors,  continuing  to encourage  innovation  and  R&D  activity  and 
enhancing the skill levels of the labour force. 
In  particular,  a  flexible  approach  to  wage  developments  is  essential.  More  recently,  in  the 
face of the sharp contraction in economic activity, many firms have taken action to reduce 
their  costs  including  the  negotiation  of  reductions  in  wage  rates,  with  a  view  to  protecting 
employment. While this has undoubtedly been painful for those concerned, it nevertheless 
reflects encouraging evidence of the flexibility and realism that is needed if the economy is to 
maintain the maximum possible number of jobs in the short-term while placing Ireland in a 
favourable  position  to  benefit  from  an  eventual  recovery  in  world  demand.  This  type  of 
flexibility must embrace all sectors of the economy. 
The  deterioration  in  the  fiscal  position  has  been  a  cause  for  serious  concern.  The 
Government  has  agreed  with  the  European  Commission  to  correct  our  Excessive  Deficit 
position  by  2013.  The  Government’s  introduction  of  a  public  sector  pension  levy  and  the 
Supplementary Budget are steps they have taken to this end. It is important that the target 
agreed with the European Commission be met.  
Future  lower  medium-term  growth  potential  means  that  cyclical  recovery  will  not  solve  our 
fiscal  problems.  The  Commission  on  Taxation  and  the  Special  Group  on  Public  Service 
Numbers and Expenditure Programmes, which are currently underway, will have a key role 
to  play  in  identifying  measures  that  will  improve  the  budgetary  situation  in  coming  years, 
These  measures  are  necessary  to  restore  confidence,  deal  with  financing  concerns  and 
underpin the medium-term growth potential of the economy. 
Conclusions 
In summary, we remain in a very difficult and challenging environment. The very significant 
global  downturn,  as  evidenced  for  instance  by  the  IMF  in  their  latest  global  economic 
forecasts,  coupled  with  our  own  economic  difficulties,  is  impacting  significantly  on  Irish 
households and businesses. On a human level, the contraction in the economy is impacting 
directly  on  households’  incomes  and  resulting  in  very  significant  levels  of  unemployment. 
Sound economic management and timely decision making to deal with the unfolding situation 
are  therefore  essential.  In  this  context,  it  is  critical  that  continuing  action  is  taken  to  both 
improve the economy’s competitiveness and address the deterioration in the fiscal position. It 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 5
is also vital to ensure that stability is restored to the banking sector as quickly as possible 
and  I  have  outlined  the  actions  already  taken  in  this  regard.  If  we  address  all  these 
challenges head-on, the economy has the potential to grow solidly again in the medium term 
and the process of reducing our significant levels of unemployment can begin. 
6 
 BIS Review 72/2009
