V K Sharma: Genesis, diagnosis and prognosis of the current global 
financial crisis 
Address by Shri V K Sharma, Executive Director of the Reserve Bank of India, at the Senior 
Management Conference, Mumbai, 21 November 2008.  
The views expressed are those of the author and not of the Institution with which he is associated. 
 I heartily welcome you all to the Senior Management Conference 2008. As at the time of the 
last  Senior  Management  Conference,  the  now  14-month  old,  and  still  ongoing,  global 
financial  market  convulsion,  with  no  hint  even  now  of  its  cataclysmic  denouement,  and  its 
recent  direct  outcome,  the  widespread  global  economic  slowdown,  provide,  again,  the 
perfect backdrop, and contextual topicality, to this year's conference theme "Financial Sector 
Development in India: Agenda for RBI in the next 5 years". While in my address last year, I 
had  identified  broad  spectrum  and  generic  failure  of  an  inertial  regulatory  and  supervisory 
system as being the genesis of the crisis, this year, I propose to briefly review its evolution 
since, and make a modest attempt at the prognosis of, and lessons from, the crisis. 
As  we  are  aware,  since  the  onset  of  the  global  financial  crisis,  the  worst  since  the  Great 
Depression, the typical stock policy response has been to dramatically and aggressively cut 
interest rates and inject ever increasing doses of liquidity, giving the impression that the crisis 
was diagnosed to be liquidity-genic when, in fact, it was fundamentally, asset toxicity-genic. 
The  latest  data  indicate  that  the  Fed,  ECB,  the  Bank  of  England,  the  Bank  of  Japan  and 
Swiss  National  Bank  have  together  injected  USD  2.74  trillion  in  outstanding  amount  of 
liquidity.  It  may  not  be  entirely  fortuitous/coincidental  that  the  estimates  of  total  potential 
write-downs  and  losses  which  range  from  USD  1.5  to  2.5  trillion  also  roughly  match  the 
amount of central bank liquidity outstanding ! In this context, the popular refrain that banks 
are continuing to “hoard” liquidity borrowed from central banks, and which is why 3 month 
Libor–OIS spreads continue to remain elevated, is a myth for no bank will ever countenance 
a negative spread which will do no more than burn a bigger hole in its capital/balance sheet. 
Perhaps, the logical reason for this is that even after having written down a whopping USD 
965 bn. of assets, and having raised USD 825 bn. in new capital, banks are still having to 
continue  to  finance  huge  amount  of  illiquid/toxic  assets  on  their  balance  sheets.  In  other 
words, through their ever aggressive long-term rollover liquidity injection what central banks 
have done is enable banks to substitute ABCPs worth USD 1.6 trillion to USD 2 trillion and 
other more expensive liabilities and are thus effectively substituting what should be funded 
by shareholders! Thus, it is only after full recapitalization of capital-haemorrhaged banks is 
behind  us,  will  credit  and  money  markets  normalize  and  transmit  monetary  policy  to  the 
broader real economy by way of resumption of lending to businesses and households. 
There  is  significant  risk  that  the  current  monetary  policy  environment  of  very  low  interest 
rates and unprecedented deluge of liquidity may yet again engender another bubble in the 
not too distant future! Indeed, we almost had a commodity bubble which, to all intents and 
purposes, was caused by this very huge deluge of liquidity but burst due to the enveloping 
global economic downturn. Perhaps, if this swamp of liquidity and monetary easing are not 
unwound appropriately, and in an orderly and timely manner, the next crisis might well be a 
veritable "financial and economic nuclear winter"! 
The foregoing inevitably leads us to seek answers to questions such as what then are the 
lessons going forward on how to pre-empt such an apocalyptic event. In this context, it must 
be emphasized that even if global imbalances and accommodative monetary policy provided 
an enabling environment for excessive leverage and risk taking, it was still the responsibility 
of  regulators  and  supervisors  to  have  taken  appropriate  macro-prudential  measures,  pre-
emptively and proactively, rather than reactively. Significantly, Greenspan, in a congressional 
BIS Review 34/2009 
 1
hearing  in  October,  admitted  that  he  had  found  a  flaw  in  his  free  market  philosophy  that 
shunned financial regulation and expressed “shocked disbelief” that financial firms failed at 
all  to  self  regulate  and  exercise  sufficient  surveillance  over  their  trading  counterparties  to 
prevent losses. In contrast, as I had observed  in my address last year, the Reserve Bank 
pre-emptively and proactively delivered counter-cyclical prudential measures like increasing 
risk  weights  for  exposure  to  commercial  real  estate,  capital  market  and  systemically 
important  non-deposit  accepting  NBFCs  as  also  higher  provisions  on  certain  riskier 
categories of standard assets which were only recently rolled back again counter-cyclically to 
cushion the impact of tighter liquidity and slowing economic growth. This counter-cyclicality 
aspect  of  prudential  regulation  and  supervision,  which  requires  a  systemic  capital  charge 
based on overall asset growth in good times, and which can be rundown in bad times, has 
gained  international  acceptance  and  recognition  and  represents  a  significant  improvement 
over Basel II. The Spanish model in this regard is noteworthy and worth emulating. Besides, 
another  Basel  II  –  incongruent  prudential  capital  measure  that  has  compelled  attention  of 
international  regulators  and  supervisors  is  the  so  called  “leverage  ratio”  so  much  so  that 
Swiss regulators have required their biggest banks to introduce this measure of capital that 
does  not  allow  for  any  risk-weighting  of  assets.  Indeed,  American  lobbyists  failed  in  their 
campaign  for  an  absolute  leverage  ratio  before  the  crisis.  In  particular,  the  case  for  a 
maximum  leverage  ratio  has  become  incontrovertibly  compelling  after  fatal  consequences 
suffered  by  three  of  the  biggest  5  broker  dealers  in  the  USA.  It  is  significant  that  their 
combined gross leverage ratio exceeded 30 times (incidentally those of Fannie and Freddie 
exceeded 60 times) although they were very well capitalized on a risk-weighted basis as per 
the Basel II inspired rule change by SEC in 2004 permitting them to compute capital on a 
risk-weighted  basis.  Indeed,  because  of  this  high  leverage,  risk  perception  of  these  prime 
brokerages deteriorated to a point that their hedge fund clients came to eclectically decide 
which  investment  banks  they  will  deal  with  rather  than  the  other  way  round!  This  was 
because  hedge  funds  leverage  was  much  lower  at  about  10  to  15  times  in  comparison. 
Equally, according to a latest report in The Economist, the risk-weighted assets of two big 
European  banks  viz.,  Barclays  and  Deutsche  Bank  are  about  25%  of  their  total  assets 
underscoring a very high level of absolute leverage. The same report cites this high absolute 
leverage of Deutsche Bank to explain why it has the highest net amount of outstanding credit 
default swaps written on its debt of any corporate borrower. That suggests plenty of people 
think that in spite of being very well-capitalized on a risk-weighted basis, the bank is at risk of 
getting  into  trouble.  Therefore,  in  India  we  might  contemplate  stipulating  a  maximum 
leverage ratio in addition to the current CRAR prescription. 
Besides, the recent changes to international accounting rules mean that many more banks 
can reclassify assets so that they are not subject to mark-to-market accounting. Supporters 
of new rules argue that mark-to-market accounting forces banks into a vicious spiral of forced 
sales and more losses. But, avoiding write-downs will do little to restore trust to a financial 
system  that  is  sorely  lacking  it.  But  in  spite  of  this,  some  banks  like  France's  Société 
Générale refused to use the new rule. The trouble with the new rules is that they pretend that 
the problem is not there because you cannot see it anymore but given today's sophisticated 
and  efficient  financial  markets,  investors  will  take  their  own  call  and  incorporate  their  risk 
perception in the prices of equity and credit default swaps anyway.  
The credit crisis has also thrown into sharp relief a “strong connect” between “liquidity risk” 
and  “opaque  off-balance  sheet  exposures”  of  whatever  description.  The  appropriate 
supervisory  and  regulatory  response  to  these  risks  would,  therefore,  be  to  insist  on  full 
disclosure and transparency of off-balance sheet commitments/ exposures and supervisory 
insistence on an appropriate mix of “stored” and “purchased” liquidity and appropriate capital 
charge for liquidity risk; the higher the “purchased liquidity” component, the higher the capital 
charge and the higher the “stored liquidity” component, the lower the capital charge. Thus, 
banking  supervisors  and  regulators  need  to  be  more  hands-on  and  pro-active  in  focusing 
supervisory attention on this critical risk category than has been the case so far. (In fact, in 
India  the  Committee  on  Financial  Sector  Assessment  almost  presciently  focused  on  this 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2009
critical risk in the month of May itself, much before the liquidity and credit crunch of August 
2007). 
Given the serious question mark over the credibility of rating agencies, the Basel Committee 
need  to  revisit  the  primacy  of  role  assigned  to  ratings  of  such  agencies.  In  fact,  credit 
appraisal and measurement is the most basic function of intermediation performed by banks 
traditionally. In the light of this, ratings, if at all, may be meant for, and be relied upon, by 
unsophisticated and uninitiated retail and small investors, but not banks. Besides, given the 
fact  that  rating  agencies  generated  almost  40%  of  their  revenues  from  assigning  the  so-
called inflated ratings to CDOs tranches, backed by sub-prime mortgages and the obvious 
inherent conflict of interest involved, US Congress and regulators are investigating into the 
role and function of rating agencies. In view of this, Basel II needs to de-emphasise rating for 
assigning capital charge for credit risk by banks. Indeed, if anything, given the tremendous 
volumes and liquidity of credit derivatives in general and of CDSs (both single-names and 
indices-based), it would be more market-price discovery-driven for banks and supervisors to 
rely  on  prices  backed  out  from  these.  Indeed,  CDSs  price  credit  risks  almost  on  real-time 
basis  as  much  as  US  Treasury,  foreign  exchange,  stock  and  commodities,  markets  do. 
Credit Rating agencies, in comparison, are much more lagged. Significantly, as if to redeem 
their  lost  credibility  and  reputation,  all  the  three  Rating  Agencies  viz.,  Fitch,  Standard  & 
Poor's  and  Moody's,  have  now  started  a  new  service  which  provide  implied  credit  ratings 
backed out/derived from CDSs spreads! In view of the foregoing, there is a very strong case 
for kick starting a full fledged CDSs market in India. The popular refrain that the recent global 
financial crisis was caused or exacerbated by CDSs is again a myth in that CDSs which are 
simple  plain-vanilla  off-balance-sheet/non-fund  based  derivatives,  were  confused  with  the 
CDOs  (collateralized  debt  obligations)  which  are  on-balance-sheet  and  funded  securitized 
structured credit products. It was securitization/re-securitisation, involving CDOs, that played 
a seminal role in the crisis and no way the CDSs. In fact, it is also a myth that securitization 
through  CDOs  was  an  originate-to-distribute  model;  rather,  really  speaking,  it  was  an 
originate-to-distribute-back-to-originators model! This is because almost all CDOs originated 
came back to sit on the SIVs/conduits sponsored by originating banks themselves ! Besides, 
for  all  the  overdone  fears  about systemic  risks  from  the  so  called  unregulated  OTC  CDSs 
markets, remarkably orderly and non-disruptive auction-based settlement of CDSs claims in 
respect  of CDSs  written  on  Lehman  Bros.,  Icelandic  banks,  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac 
incontrovertibly attested to the resilience of CDSs markets! Indeed, if anything, CDSs can be 
an  effective  and  neat  answer,  and  substitute,  for  CDOs/securitization  as  it  is  less  messy, 
more  transparent  and  easily  monitorable.  Interestingly,  the  New  York  Fed  led  initiative  to 
improve  the  OTC  CDSs  markets  seeks  to  replicate  our  CCIL-model,  where  although  OTC 
foreign exchange transactions are bilaterally negotiated, they are cleared and settled through 
CCIL.  Today  CDSs  prices/spreads  are  by  far  the  most  closely  monitored  early  warning 
signals for real time changes in credit risk of an entity whether private or sovereign. This is 
because  CDSs  make  it  possible  to  back  out  an  implied  credit  price even  when  one  is  not 
discovered in the underlying cash market instruments like bonds or loans. Thus, CDS market 
has  tremendous  practical  application  as  a  reliable  diagnostic  tool  in  stress-testing  for 
supervisors  and  regulators.  Besides,  a  CDS  market  will  also  enable  efficient  hedging  and 
trading  of  credit  risk  and  synergise  development  of  active  and  liquid  corporate  bond  and 
Repo markets. Like equity, credit risk subsumes all other risks as it is a function of forex risk, 
interest  rate  risk,  leverage  risk,  liquidity  risk,  governance  risk  and  that  is  why  CDSs  and 
equity prices are, in equilibrium, almost perfectly negatively correlated.  
As  is  invariably  the  case  with  any  major  crisis,  the  ongoing  global  financial  crisis  has 
unleashed a passionate debate over the design of a new global financial architecture. The 
opinion  on  overarching  role  in  global  financial  surveillance  is  sharply  divided  between 
assigning it to Financial Stability Forum, on the one hand, and to IMF, on the other. However, 
the trouble has been not so much with the existing, inter-temporally evolved, global financial 
architecture  as  really  with  how  it  was  actually  worked  in  practice.  Recent  huge  losses  at 
global banks running to about USD 1 trillion are not because existing best practices failed but 
BIS Review 34/2009 
 3
because those responsible for implementing and enforcing them failed them! After all, of all 
risks to regulators and regulatees alike, human resources risk is by far the most serious as it 
is the source of all risks as confirmed by the ongoing financial cataclysm. The crux of the 
matter is what we need is not more or less regulation and governance but good regulation 
and  governance.  This  has  been  the  undoing  of  both  regulators/supervisors  and  financial 
firms/banks alike. In the way of example, in the USA, the traditionally very healthy AAA rated 
mono-line bond insurers MBIA and Ambac changed their business model from insuring only 
their  staple  municipal  bonds  to  insuring  CDOs  and  ABS.  While  this  went  unnoticed  by 
insurance  regulators,  Pershing  Square,  a  hedge  fund,  spotted  trouble and  started shorting 
both equity and credit risk of these two companies. But even after this, regulators failed to 
take  notice  and  corrective  action  with  the  two  companies  being  eventually  downgraded 
several notches. The same is true of financial firms and banks where independent directors 
on the boards, much less ask right questions, apparently didn't even understand the arcane 
world of modern finance and banking and according to a column in the Financial Times, after 
the  crisis,  one  leading  global  bank  ran  an  advertisement  inviting  applications  for  board 
positions from experienced professional bankers ! Besides, rather than take timely notice of, 
and  act  on,  early  warning  signals  coming  from  financial  markets,  like  stock  and  CDSs 
markets,  regulators  chose  instead  to  shut  themselves  to  these  early  warning  signals 
themselves  by  banning  short  selling  which  act  effectively  amounted  to  shooting  the 
messenger for the unpalatable message it had to convey!  
Against  a  global  financial  backdrop  as  sombre,  traumatic  portentous  and  sobering  as  the 
present one, it was only very sagacious on the part of the Hon'ble Finance Minister and the 
Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  to  have  set  up  the  Committee  on  Financial  Sector 
Assessment  under  the  very  able  stewardship  of  Dr.  Rakesh  Mohan,  Deputy  Governor, 
almost a year ahead of the outbreak of the crisis. This prescient action remarkably captured 
the spirit of the following adage from the Armed Forces : the more you sweat during peace, 
the less you bleed during war! As we will see in the course of the Conference, the Committee 
has  done  an  excellent  and  superb  job  of  its  mandate,  going  into  many  new  areas,  much 
beyond the scope of the standard FSAP framework. With these words, I close my address 
and  request  the  Governor  to  make  it  convenient  to  inaugurate  and  declare  open  the 
Conference. 
Thank you so very much. 
4 
 BIS Review 34/2009
