Svein Gjedrem: Economic perspectives 
Address by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at the 
meeting of the Supervisory Council of Norges Bank, Oslo, 12 February 2009. 
 Introduction 
The  poet  Øyvind  Rimbereid  from  Stavanger  –  his  works  already  awarded  a  place  in  the 
Norwegian  literary  canon1  –  has  been  nominated  for  this  year’s  Nordic  Council  Literature 
Prize for the collection of poems entitled Herbarium. The poem “Tulip” starts with the tulip 
bulb market bubble in the 1600s. A futures market for tulip bulbs had emerged in Holland 
when  growers  discovered  that  infecting  the  tulip  with  a  virus  could  produce  stripes  and 
beautiful colours. In a short time, bulbs were trading at 25 times the normal value before the 
market collapsed. A hundred years later, a tulip bulb cost less than one per cent of the price 
before the collapse.2  
In the words of Rimbereid: 
“ The year 1635  
and on pollen-yellow paper  
flutter tulip bulbs grown in places  
unknown to most.  
Or grown only in the signature  
on the bill of exchange  
of a seller who himself has bought  
a signature from a seller  
with money that itself exists  
only as a signature.”3  
Downturn in the global economy 
In September 2008, the turbulence in financial markets erupted into a full-blown global crisis. 
Just before, it had appeared that the US government rescue of the mortgage corporations 
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac would calm the markets. Then on 15 September, a major US 
investment bank, Lehman Brothers, with extensive operations in Europe and Asia as well as 
the US, filed for bankruptcy. The next day, money markets seized up. Confidence between 
banks  evaporated.  Liquidity  dried  up,  interest  rates  rose  sharply  and  equity  prices  fell. 
Exchange rate volatility – the daily fluctuations in the exchange rate – showed a marked rise. 
On  25  September,  a  major  US  savings  bank,  Washington  Mutual,  was  placed  into 
receivership and its creditors incurred losses. Bond markets in turn shut down.  
In  the  days  and  weeks  that  followed,  banks  tightened  credit  standards  on  new  loans  to 
households and enterprises. 
                                                 
1   Stig  Sæterbakken  and  Janike  Kampevold  Larsen  (Ed.)  (2008):  “Norsk  Litterær  Kanon  (Norwegian 
literary canon)”, Cappelen DAMM. 
2   For a further account of the tulip bubble in Holland, see NOU 1999:29 “Commodity derivatives”, p 53. 
3   Øyvind Rimbereid (2008): Herbarium, Gyldendal Norsk Forlag, p.38. (Unofficial translation by Norges Bank’s 
translators). 
BIS Review 16/2009 
 1
 
Global economic growth was already slowing, but the situation deteriorated in the last few 
months of 2008. The turnaround hit hard, with synchronised effects on virtually all financial 
and goods and services markets, not only in the US but also in Europe, Asia, Latin America 
and Oceania.  
  Iceland  was  more  vulnerable  than  most.  There  were  wide  swings  in  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations were not well anchored. As a result, the impact on the Icelandic krona was also 
considerable. The sharp depreciation of the krona left many borrowers with foreign currency 
loans facing higher debt. For a time, exchanging Icelandic krona for another currency was 
impossible. Nonetheless, the decisive factor was the collapse of Iceland’s oversized banks. 
Although  they  were  taken  over  by  the  Icelandic  authorities,  there  was  no  confidence  that 
Iceland’s finances would be able to cope with the accompanying high level of debt. Iceland 
was obliged to seek aid from other countries and from the International Monetary Fund (IMF). 
Output is now expected to fall by 10 per cent this year, and private consumption to drop by 
2 
 BIS Review 16/2009
35 per cent over the next three years. At the same time, the Icelandic state will be bearing a 
debt burden equivalent to more than NOK 1 million per family.  
The  global  crisis  soon  affected  Norway.  Our  banks  and  the  flow  of  credit  and  money  are 
closely interconnected with global markets. Banks’ foreign financing became expensive and 
almost came to a halt. Banks responded by raising interest rates on corporate and household 
loans and restricting lending. As the autumn progressed, an increasing number of business 
sector  segments  were  feeling  the  impact  of  contraction.  In  August  2008,  manufacturing 
enterprises  in  our  regional  network  reported  that  they  expected  growth  to  remain  high.  In 
November, they described the turnaround as a “heart attack”. Manufacturers of automotive 
parts in Farsund, Høyanger, Raufoss, Kongsvinger, Kongsberg, Hvittingfoss and Rollag felt 
the impact of the slump in car sales. The engineering industry began to doubt the quality of 
their order books. Prices for oil, gas, aluminium and ferro-alloys fell, as did freight rates. 
 The  fragility  of  the  Norwegian  krone  was  illustrated  when  investors  fled  the  currencies  of 
small  countries,  and  the  krone  weakened  considerably.  When  speculators  withdrew,  daily 
fluctuations increased and hedging against exchange rate volatility became more expensive. 
On Christmas Eve, the krone fell to its lowest level in ten years.  
We  are  now  in  the  deepest  downturn  in  OECD  countries  in  the  postwar  period.  The  US 
economy  may  already  have  shrunk  by  around  2½  per  cent  since  the  crisis  erupted  in 
September. Output has fallen at the same rate in many European countries, and perhaps by 
twice that rate in Japan and Korea. For a long period there were hopes that growth in China 
and  other  emerging  market  economies  would  hold  up.  But  they  are  also  now  severely 
affected by the crisis. 
Output is also contracting in Norway, but so far probably somewhat less so than abroad. 
What is happening now is more than a normal fluctuation in the business cycle. The world is 
facing  a  crisis  of  confidence,  with  faltering  faith  in  the  future  and  a  loss  of  confidence  in 
banks,  counterparties  and  contractual  partners.  The  authorities  have  taken  extraordinary 
action,  as  in  a  state  of  emergency,  deploying  a  wide  range  of  established  and  new  policy 
instruments.  
BIS Review 16/2009 
 3
Five different sets of measures have been implemented:  
First, central banks have supplied liquidity to banks on a much larger scale than usual and 
providing  loans  with  longer  maturities.  Central  banks  are  also  providing  foreign  currency 
loans to their banks.  
 Second, key rates have been aggressively cut. The US entered the downturn first and had 
already reduced the key rate in early autumn 2007. And as the crisis developed, the Federal 
Reserve continued to lower its key rate. Here in Europe, key rates rose up to summer 2008 
before being lowered substantially from October.  
Third,  credit  policy  instruments  have  been  introduced.  Several  countries  are  guaranteeing 
loans  to  banks.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  buying  mortgage-backed  securities,  asset-backed 
securities collateralised by student loans, credit card loans and loans to small businesses, as 
well as commercial paper issued directly by large businesses, a measure the central banks 
in Japan and the UK also intend to implement. The UK government has announced that they 
will guarantee loans to small and medium-sized firms.  
4 
 BIS Review 16/2009
 Fourth, the authorities in a number of countries felt compelled to supply risk capital to banks. 
Some  governments  have  assumed  ownership  of  financial  institutions.  In  the  UK,  the 
government is now a majority stakeholder in the Royal Bank of Scotland and owns over 40 
per  cent  of  Lloyds.  In  Germany,  the  government  is  increasing  its  stake  in  Commerzbank, 
which is acquiring Dresdner Bank. In the US, the authorities have provided capital in forms 
other than ordinary share capital, but in such a way that large banks are operating to a great 
extent for the government’s account and risk.  
Fifth,  to  cushion  the  fall  in  output  and  employment,  governments  are  increasing  their 
expenditure and lowering tax rates. The US government is preparing measures equivalent to 
almost  5  per  cent  of  gross  domestic  product.  Active  measures  in  Europe  are  not  as 
extensive. However, Europe’s taxes and the public safety net act as shock absorbers.  
A wide range of instruments is also being used in Norway. Banks have been provided with 
short  and  more  long-term  loans  by  Norges  Bank.  Banks  have  also  been  given  access  to 
 BIS Review 16/2009 
 5
liquid  government  paper  in  exchange  for  mortgage-backed  securities.  The  key  policy  rate 
has been lowered substantially.  
As  in  other  countries,  money  is  not  finding  its  way  to  businesses,  but  is  accumulating  in 
banks.  The  government  has  therefore  provided  increased  loans  and  guarantees  to 
Norwegian  export  industries,  has  raised  lending  limits  for  state  banks  and  is  allowing 
Folketrygdfondet (Government Pension Fund – Norway) to increase its purchases of bonds. 
The government is now also providing Norwegian banks with risk capital. In order to curb the 
fall in activity, the government has proposed an increase in government expenditure of over 
10 per cent in 2009.  
 What went wrong? 
The current downturn followed a period of very high global and domestic economic growth, 
supported by favourable trading conditions. Emerging market economies in Asia, Europe and 
Latin  America  have  accounted  for  an  increasing  share  of  global  output.  Several  hundred 
million people have been lifted out of poverty.  
So what went wrong? Or in the words of Rimbereid: 
“And the cause of the depression? 
Theories conflict, as if surrounding 
a virus not yet discovered. 
Was it due to the far too unrestricted life of share trading? 
Or was it because the hand of the state 
constantly interfered with its unnatural contagion? 
Or did the virus worm its way 
into the calculating machine itself?”4  
                                                 
4   Øyvind Rimbereid (2008): Herbarium, p.56. (Unofficial translation by Norges Bank’s translators). 
6 
 BIS Review 16/2009
 Substantial  trade  imbalances  developed  between  industrialised  countries,  particularly  the 
US, on the one hand and emerging market economies, particularly China, on the other. This 
is partly due to government budget deficits and low private saving in the US since the 1990s, 
and partly due to export-led growth in China, particularly over the past few years, combined 
with strong competitiveness and a managed exchange rate. In short, rich countries borrowed 
and developing countries saved. The imbalances grew when oil and other commodity prices 
rose  markedly.  Financial  market  participants  found  it  too  difficult  to  channel  capital.  Long-
term interest rates were too low, the search for yield too aggressive and compensation for 
risk-taking too meagre.  
With  long-term  loans  in  ample  supply,  demand  for  residential  and  other  property  became 
excessive in almost the entire western world. The first clear signs that these developments 
were not sustainable emerged in 2007 – in the US housing market, in the money market and 
in banks. 
BIS Review 16/2009 
  7
Few countries benefited more than Norway from the economic upturn, which drove up prices 
for oil, gas and other export commodities. At the same time, an increasing number of cheap 
consumer goods were imported from new EU countries and from Asia.  
In addition, EEA enlargement provided Norway with large inflows of labour, particularly from 
Poland.  Moreover,  Norwegian  firms  were  also  quick  to  make  use  of  new  technology  and 
organise their activities effectively. Norway’s disposable income increased by more than 50 
per cent from 2002 to 2007, more than that of any other western country. Not surprisingly, 
economic  agents  in  Norway  were  optimistic  about  the  future.  Saving  fell,  and  euphoria 
spread through the housing market. Household and corporate debt surged. 
Inflation slowed for a long period. Norges Bank reduced the key rate when inflation fell and 
approached zero in 2003 and 2004. Production capacity had increased markedly, providing 
scope for strong growth in demand for goods and services. Low interest rates underpinned 
the solid growth capacity of the economy. Well before inflation picked up, the Bank began to 
raise the key rate in 2005. The pace of the interest rate rise was gradually increased.  
 8 
  BIS Review 16/2009
The economic turnaround in Norway occurred just over a year ago. Growth in consumption 
came to a halt and house prices began to fall. Up to autumn 2008, it appeared that capacity 
utilisation  in  the  Norwegian  economy  would  most  likely  decline  to  a  normal  level,  inflation 
would  stabilise  around  2½  per  cent  and  the  key  rate  ahead  could  be  held  at  what  we 
consider to be a normal level – between 5 and 6 per cent. But the outlook was regarded as 
uncertain. Commodity prices rose and pushed up inflation in many countries. At the same 
time, wage growth in Norway had become high and productivity growth was slowing. On the 
other hand, the financial turbulence, if it gained momentum, could have a severe impact on 
the global economy and our exports. 
Then,  in  autumn  2008,  the  turbulence  led  to  a  synchronised  financial  and  real  economic 
crisis in virtually every country in the world. As a result, output and employment are falling, 
and Norway is no exception.  
The way forward 
Since  then,  the  authorities  in  many  countries  have  shown  that  they  are  prepared  to  use 
powerful  tools  to  fight  the  crisis,  but  financial  markets  are  still  under  stress.  The  crisis  of 
confidence  and  credit  rationing  are  leading  to  a  decline  in  output.  Corporate  earnings  are 
falling across the board and the number of unemployed is rising, prompting new rounds of 
losses on securities and in banks’ books. Every week there is a news story conveying the 
impression that the action being taken is not enough to stave off the downturn.  
But the measures being implemented are indeed having an effect. 
 The  flow  of  liquidity  has  improved  slightly,  and  interbank  rates  have  fallen.  In  the  US  and 
Europe, these rates were more than 2 percentage points above the key rate in October last 
year, but now the gap has been halved. As a result, the low rates set by central banks are 
having  a  greater  effect.  In  the  US,  mortgages  and  corporate  loans  have  become  cheaper 
after  the  Federal  Reserve  began  to  purchase  bonds  and  commercial  paper  issued  by 
mortgage  banks  and  firms.  In  Germany,  Sweden  and  Denmark,  mortgage  rates  have 
decreased markedly. And in Norway, borrowing rates have fallen and credit to homebuyers is 
flowing again. Equity and commodity prices are still fluctuating widely, but the decline is no 
longer steep.  
BIS Review 16/2009 
 9
Lower key rates, higher public expenditure and reduced taxes will push up demand for goods 
and  services,  gradually  stabilising  output  and  employment  and  preventing  inflation  from 
becoming too low.  
There  are  also  strong  self-regulating  mechanisms  in  market  economies  that  can  easily  be 
underestimated when times are at their bleakest.  
Corporate  profitability  is  being  squeezed,  but  the  rise  in  unemployment  will  result  in  lower 
wage growth, which will curb the impact on earnings. Investment is falling sharply, but there 
will  in  time  be  a  need  for  new  houses  and  commercial  buildings  and  to  replace  obsolete 
machinery. Households all over the world are now increasing their saving and reducing debt. 
When debt eventually reaches a sustainable level, consumption will pick up.  
Low interest rates curb the decline in investment and make it easier for households to repay 
debt. The change in behaviour can nevertheless take time and we cannot expect consumers 
in the US and Europe to drive a new upturn. The public sector will eventually have to rein in 
expenditure  and  increase  tax  revenues  to  prevent  debt  from  increasing.  If  growth  in  the 
global economy is to be sustained, public and private investment and consumption in China 
and  other  Asian  countries  will  probably  have  to  absorb  a  greater  share  of  output  in  these 
countries.  
 In many industrial countries, export prices have risen relative to import prices. Lower oil and 
commodity prices are easing the burden.  
But Norway’s terms of trade are deteriorating. Some of the gains of the past few years have 
now dissipated, and Norway’s disposable income might fall by close to 10 per cent in 2009. 
Norway will move down on the list of the world’s richest countries. (And perhaps this is not 
altogether a bad thing.) 
Norwegian firms are affected when households the world over buy fewer cars and furniture 
and fewer ships are built. Lower oil prices will probably also result in a fall in investment on 
the continental shelf in the years ahead. But let us not forget that petroleum prices are still 
higher than the industry dared hope just a few years ago. 
10 
 BIS Review 16/2009
The competitiveness of the Norwegian business sector declined during the upturn. Although 
the depreciation of the krone since September 2008 will redress the balance somewhat, we 
must nevertheless expect job losses in manufacturing. Indeed, recent years’ growth in this 
industry was an unexpected break in the long-term trend. 
 Norwegian households have built up debt over many years. In the mid-1990s, debt was one 
fifth higher than income. In 2008, debt was twice as high as income.  
We  have  no  clear  basis  for  determining  what  constitutes  sustainable  debt.  People  today 
spend less of their income on basic necessities and have more to spend on their homes and 
mortgages.  Changes  in  credit  markets  have  provided  greater  opportunities  to  spread 
consumption over a lifetime. The public safety net is also gradually being expanded, which 
may lead to lower saving.  
 BIS Review 16/2009 
 11
The experience of recent years nevertheless indicates that the level of debt is on the high 
side. Growth in private consumption slowed sharply when interest rates rose to more normal 
levels through 2007.  
Household debt is largely secured on residential property. When residential property falls in 
value – and we are probably not at the end of this road yet – consumers have less leeway. A 
larger number will want to reduce their debt, and banks will curtail lending. 
All in all, it must be expected that households will deleverage and be more cautious in their 
consumption and investment in the years ahead. 
It is easy to bury one’s head in the sand when the economic situation deteriorates. 
But  who  could  have  foreseen  in  1990  that  we  were  on  the  brink  of  a  golden  decade  that 
would see a boom in the IT and communications industry? And who would have imagined in 
2002 that Norwegian manufacturing would experience a new wave of growth? 
Fortunately, there are also many examples of innovation, particularly when times have been 
bad. Nokia managed to make the transition from rubber boots to new technology when the 
Finnish economy collapsed at the beginning of the 1990s. In Norway, the Norwegian telecom 
system was deregulated and Telenor developed into a large international company. During 
the  downturn  at  the  end  of  the  1980s,  Tandberg  started  developing  video  conferencing 
systems. 
In the industrial centres Mo i Rana, Raufoss and Kongsberg, rich technological communities 
emerged after the collapse of government enterprises in the 1980s. 
The merchants behind the grocery chains Rimi and Rema started business on a small scale 
during the downturn at the end of the 1970s. The furniture producer Stokke – makers of the 
world-famous  Tripp  Trapp  chair  for  children  – started  operations  in  western  Norway  in  the 
midst of the economic crisis in the 1930s.  
Economic policy 
The  measures  now  being  implemented  are  intended  to  provide  a  bridge  until  market 
economies generate new growth under their own steam. 
The authorities in many countries are now testing the boundaries of active economic policy. 
And some have overstepped them.  
12 
  BIS Review 16/2009
A number of countries have had their credit rating downgraded and have lost their economic 
room for manoeuvre, obliging them to seek support from neighbouring countries and the IMF. 
In the euro area, a number of states with high debt or large deficits are paying dearly for their 
credit.  
In monetary policy, the interest rate weapon is being deployed to the full. In the US, Japan 
and Switzerland, the interest rate is close to zero. 
But the instruments that are benefiting the economy now may weaken the growth potential 
further ahead. 
Large budget deficits must be reduced over time and growth in government debt preferably 
scaled back. 
Households may begin to save more in order to be prepared for higher taxes or lower state 
benefits  in  the  future.  This  will  weaken  the  current  and  future  effect  of  the  measures  now 
being implemented. 
Governments that have provided capital injections or loans to banks and firms are relieving 
owners of risk. This may foster the idea that the government will also pick up the tab next 
time. Risk may then again be priced too low, leading to a new round of debt accumulation.  
Norway is more fortunate than most. Government finances are sound, with substantial net 
wealth and a trade surplus. Unlike many other countries, our banks have not overexpanded. 
The  level  of  activity  in  the  Norwegian  economy  was  high  without  expectations  of  higher 
inflation when the downturn occurred. Inflation was low and stable. 
The state of our economy shows that the fiscal framework is sound. 
 BIS Review 16/2009 
 13
 From  2008  to  2009  –  during  the  downturn  –  the  government  budget  will  stimulate  the 
mainland  economy  by  the  equivalent  of  5  per  cent  of  GDP,  or  NOK  90  billion.  Half  will 
automatically be channelled through unemployment benefit, which will cushion the impact on 
purchasing power for those who lose their jobs, and through lower taxes for households and 
firms, without an attendant reduction in government expenditure. The remainder comprises 
active measures and the gradual increase in petroleum revenue spending. 
Credibility is enhanced when fiscal policy adheres to the same strategy over several years 
and when the automatic stabilisers are also allowed to operate when tax revenues are high. 
As  a  result,  the  Norwegian  government  can  spend  money  during  a  downturn  without 
prompting  a  rise  in  consumer  saving  in  order  to  meet  future  tax  expenses  and  without 
pushing up yields on government securities as a result. The government still has freedom of 
manoeuvre. 
The operational objective of monetary policy is low and stable inflation with annual consumer 
price  inflation  of  close  to  2.5  per  cent  over  time.  Over  the  past  ten  years,  inflation  has 
 14 
 BIS Review 16/2009
averaged 2 per cent, which is close to but somewhat lower than the target, and it fluctuates 
to a lesser extent than previously. In the recent period of expansion, inflation rose to 3 per 
cent in 2008, but was restrained without raising the key rate to a high level.5  
The  advantages  of  economic  agents  anticipating  low  and  stable  inflation  are  now  clearly 
evident.  They  can  be  quite  sure  that  inflation  over  time  will  be  close  to  2.5  per  cent.  This 
enables interest rate setting to be more effective. When the nominal interest rate is reduced, 
the real interest rate falls accordingly, and it is this rate that influences decisions made by 
households and enterprises.  
Interest rate setting still provides some scope for stimulus. 
When  inflation  is  anchored,  economic  agents  do  not  expect  inflation  to  accelerate  over  a 
period  in  Norway  even  if  the  krone  depreciates.  The  krone  can  then  decrease  in  value 
without  monetary  policy  having  to  be  tightened.  This  will  curb  the  decline  in  our  export 
industry.  In  bad  times,  a  marked  krone  depreciation  might  even  be  necessary  to  hold  up 
inflation close to 2.5 per cent. In the downturns in 1990 and 1998, the opposite action was 
taken: the interest rate had to be increased in order to stabilise the krone and keep inflation 
in check. 
Even though fiscal policy and monetary policy have had the intended effect, there have been 
fluctuations  in  output  and  employment.  We  have  experienced  a  period  of  strong  credit 
growth.  During  the  upturn,  the  housing  market  was  increasingly  marked  by  the  belief  that 
house  prices  would  always  rise.  Current  cyclical  developments  reflect  falling  house  prices 
and a necessary deleveraging among households and enterprises. 
Developments  in  Norway,  and  to  an  even  greater  extent  in  other  countries,  show  that 
economic  policy  instruments  are  not  perfect.  The  interplay  between  credit  and  property 
prices in particular poses a challenge. 
Interest  rate  setting  influences  this  interplay  only  indirectly.  The  interest  rate  rises  in  good 
times when inflation is expected to increase and falls when growth and inflation moderate. 
The interest rate is an approximate instrument, which can be used to keep inflation in check 
over  time  and  thereby  stabilise  output  and  employment.  The  instrument  must  not  be 
overburdened. 
Attempts to tighten monetary policy in the growth period from 2003 would, for example, have 
resulted in higher capital inflows, a noticeably stronger krone and a decline in manufacturing, 
even  lower  inflation,  higher  growth  in  real  wages  and  more  foreign  currency  loans  to 
households  and  enterprises.  The  rise  in  credit  and  house  prices  would  probably  not  have 
been affected to any extent and the current turnaround in the domestic economy would have 
been stronger and the fluctuations for our fragile krone even more pronounced. 
I  cannot  discuss  the  interaction  between  the  housing  market  and  household  debt  without 
touching  upon  housing  taxation.  Housing  capital  represents  a  large  share  of  household 
wealth. The taxable benefit for owner-occupied dwellings, which in any event was based on 
setting  the value  of  dwellings  at  a low  level,  was  removed  in  2005,  while  the deduction  in 
income  for  debt  interest  was  retained.  Owner-occupiers  can  thereby  deduct  expenses  in 
connection with earning income but are not taxed on the benefit. With this tax wedge, the 
interest rate level that is right for households is too high for firms. It shields borrowers from a 
higher interest rate in upturns and thus has a stronger impact on house prices. 
It  would  not  be  appropriate  to  increase  housing  taxation  now,  but  a  reform  is  to  be 
recommended when the turnaround occurs. 
                                                 
5   Different indicators of underlying inflation were close to 3 per cent in 2008, while the rise in total consumer 
prices was 3.8 per cent. 
BIS Review 16/2009 
 15
Economic  agents  can  be  myopic.  It  is  short-sighted  to  base  assessments  of  sustainable 
levels of debt on today’s variable interest rates. Long-term, fixed interest rates provide a far 
better guideline in this context. Homebuyers, and the banks providing their mortgages, must 
take into account that variable rates over time will be around 6 per cent, sometimes higher. 
There are also other sources of fluctuations in credit and property prices.  
Banking is procyclical. In upturns, loan losses are low, increasing banks’ profits. Access to 
equity capital is ample, providing the basis for strong lending growth. 
Losses increase in downturns, and the supply of equity capital can dry up, compelling banks 
to restrict their lending. The impact is stronger since the value of property used as collateral 
fluctuates  in  step  with  cyclical  developments.  At  the  same  time,  counterparties  and  rating 
agencies  may  require  higher  capital  levels.  When  credit  is  rationed  by  banks  with  large 
market shares, in regional or national terms, sound investment projects are also postponed. 
This results in an adverse feedback loop, with banks incurring higher loan losses and weaker 
earnings – as economic activity stalls. 
Banks operate with very low levels of equity capital. A manufacturing enterprise or a firm in 
the  service  sector  should  preferably  have  an  equity  ratio  of  between  30  and  70  per  cent, 
depending on the level of risk involved. Banks can operate with a far lower level of equity 
capital because they are supposed to diversify risk, have sound management systems and 
be well regulated and under supervision. 
 6
In Norway, banks’ equity capital makes up six per cent of their assets. Before the Second 
World  War,  the  ratio  was  over  10  per  cent,  falling  to  five  per  cent  in  the  postwar  period. 
Government  capital  injections  resulted  in  a  rise  in  equity  capital  at  the  beginning  of  the 
1990s, but the ratio has fallen again in recent years. 
                                                 
6   Figures for banks’ equity capital before 1918 are based on: Jan Tore Klovland (2007): “A reconstruction of the 
balance  sheets  of  savings  banks  in  Norway  1822-1875”  and  “A  reconstruction  of  the  balance  sheets  of 
commercial  banks in Norway 1848-1900” in Øyvind Eitrheim, Jan Tore Klovland and Jan F. Qvigstad  (Ed.) 
(2007): “Historical Monetary Statistics for Norway – Part II” Norges Bank’s Occasional Papers, No. 38, Oslo. 
Statistics Norway is the source for figures from 1919 to 1995. Norges Bank is the source for figures from 1996. 
16 
 BIS Review 16/2009
Equity capital in investment banks in the US and Europe was very low, as low as 2-3 per 
cent of total assets. Many of these banks have now collapsed. 
The  authorities  in  many  countries  are  working  to  enhance  financial  market  resilience.  For 
Norway, it would not be appropriate to return to the regulatory regime of the postwar period. 
Interest  rate  regulation,  credit  budgets,  a  wide  range  of  state  banks,  regulation  of  cross-
border capital movements and a fixed exchange rate are not the answer. 
Instead, new and higher capital requirements must be imposed on banks. 
Banks  calculate  how  much  capital  they  need  using  their  own  risk  models.  The  models 
capture losses and gains previously generated by lending. Equity capital requirements are 
determined  by  previous  experience  of  the  risk  exposure  of  investments.  One  drawback  is 
that the historical basis for the models, and hence for the risk assessments, is too limited. 
With  losses  now  rising,  as  a  result  of  the  abrupt  and  pronounced  turnaround,  banks  must 
increase equity capital. Thus the rules governing capital requirements amplify the economic 
cycle. 
Three changes are particularly relevant: 
First, for a given risk assessment, capital requirements must be higher. 
Second, banks must not be able to reduce capital below a minimum level even if they extend 
loans that, according to the models, seemingly involve low risk. 
Third, banks must build up strong capital buffers over and above the minimum requirement in 
normal  times.  Then  the  banks  would  not  have  to  increase  capital  when  the  turnaround 
occurs. On the contrary, they would be able to absorb losses, thereby avoiding the need to 
ration credit in bad times. 
Norwegian  banks  do  not  have  sufficient  buffers  today  to  safeguard  their  own,  their 
shareholders’ or the economy’s best interests. That is why the government is now supplying 
risk capital. There should be no doubt that banks have the capital they need. 
7
                                                 
7   Figures are taken from the sources in footnote 6 and Hege Imset Matre, H. I. (1992): Norske forretningsbanker 
1848-1990: En tilbakeføring av forretningsstatistikken (Norwegian commercial banks 1848-1990). Report No 
41 from the research programme Det nye pengesamfunnet. 
BIS Review 16/2009 
 17
In  addition,  banks’  funding  methods  make  them  vulnerable.  Earlier,  Norwegian  banks 
primarily  obtained  funds  through  deposits  by  households  and  enterprises.  In  recent  years, 
banks  have  borrowed  heavily  in  both  domestic and  foreign markets.  During  the  crisis,  this 
proved to involve high liquidity risk for banks. Long-term credit markets have now dried up. 
The government and Norges Bank have therefore taken on the role of lender. In the future, in 
regulations and  in  practice,  deposits  must  again  take  precedence  as  the  largest  source  of 
funding  for  banks.  Bonds  collateralised  by  high  quality  mortgages  will  probably  also  be 
important. 
Higher  capital  requirements  and  new  funding  terms  will  result  in  higher  costs  for  banks. 
Depositors and  borrowers  will  have  to  foot  the  bill,  and interest  margins  will  probably  rise. 
Banks’  competitiveness  will  also  deteriorate.  The  bond  market  and  other  markets  where 
there is direct contact between borrower and lender will gain a competitive advantage. New 
requirements for banks must also be followed up, again with improved regulation. 
The group comprising the twenty largest economies in the world8 are now discussing how to 
tackle the crisis and prevent it happening again. It will be important to avoid protectionism 
and trade wars. 
Moreover, the ambition is to establish a new and more sustainable financial architecture.  
Markets are integrated and banks are global, while the supervisory authorities are national 
and the application of rules varies. Supervisory authorities must be strengthened and adopt a 
uniform  approach  to  banks,  and  regulations  must  be  improved.  National  supervisory 
authorities have tended to be reluctant to impose stringent requirements on their banks for 
fear that their competitiveness will deteriorate. It is important to avoid such slippage in the 
rules towards an agreed minimum level that is too low. For Norway, it is essential that rules 
are applied stringently and uniformly in all the Nordic countries since banks based in Sweden 
and Denmark have large market shares in Norway and Norwegian banks have ambitions in 
Scandinavia. 
In  recent  years,  there  has  been  little  cooperation  across  countries  in  the  field  of 
macroeconomic policy. The view has been that all is well as long as each country keeps its 
own house in order. This is an important point of departure, but we have now presumably 
learned  that  imbalances  and  risk  arise  when  large  countries  do  not  sufficiently  take  into 
account that their own choices also influence those of others. 
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) must be given a more important role. The Fund must 
enhance  its  surveillance  activities  and  its  advice  must  be  acted  upon  to  a  greater  extent. 
However, this probably requires changes in the IMF’s governance structure. Countries that 
are  now  gaining  in  economic  strength  are  seeking  greater  influence.  The  IMF  must  also 
improve its reputation in these countries. 
Government wealth and saving 
International  capital  markets  have  been  a  boon  to  Norway.  We  drew  on  borrowing 
opportunities  abroad  when  the  petroleum  industry  was  being  built  up. We  did  the same  in 
order to expand welfare schemes and to finance the countercyclical policy of the mid-1970s 
and  the  early  1990s.  National  oil  and  gas  resources  are  now  converted  into  equities  and 
bonds abroad. 
Other  small  industrial  countries  are  also  making  active  use  of  global  capital  markets.  Our 
large  balance-of-payments  surpluses. 
neighbouring  country  Sweden  has 
recorded 
                                                 
8   G20: group comprising 19 countries and the EU. Member countries are among the world’s largest economies 
and include members of the G7. 
18 
 BIS Review 16/2009
Switzerland has a high level of saving and a recurring surplus. Australia, on the other hand, 
has been able to record a deficit since 1975. 
This year we are celebrating the works of the Nobel Prize-winning author Knut Hamsun. In 
the  small  community  of  Polden,  in  the  Hamsun  trilogy  August,  far  away  from  large  capital 
markets, the inhabitants live impoverished lives, subsisting on a little fishing and agriculture. 
But the community changes when wealth arrives in the form of a herring windfall. 
August says: “… you’re not to plant anything you can eat near your door. It doesn’t look right. 
I’ve got something better to put there – bushes, garden shrubs.”9  
Farming is abandoned, and then, a few years later, the herring disappears. 
The Norwegian government has not followed August’s advice, but has spread its wealth. It is 
partly invested in ownership interests in Norwegian companies, partly in infrastructure, partly 
in oil and gas and partly in equities and bonds abroad. When there are prospects of markedly 
slower growth, as is the case now, the value of all government assets falls. This also applies 
to buildings, roads, the power supply and other infrastructure where the government does not 
concern itself with regular valuations. 
Investments  abroad  by  the  Government  Pension  Fund  –  Global  are  also  spread  between 
equities and bonds from all over the world. The equity portion is now being increased from 40 
to 60 per cent. 
A  long-term  investor  receives  extra  compensation  because  the  value  of  equities  fluctuates 
considerably.  Many  are  now  incurring  losses  on  equities  and  corporate  bonds.  This 
experience will result in higher required returns in the future. 
Under  the  Fund’s  strategy,  more  equities  will  be  bought  when  equity  prices  fall  and  fewer 
when they rise. The Fund therefore purchased a large volume of equities from 2001 to 2003 
and is buying a considerable volume now. Of the equities now owned by the Fund, 40 per 
cent were purchased last year when prices were moving down.  
                                                  
9   Knut Hamsun (1976): August. In Samlede Verker 11, Gyldendal Norsk Forlag, p. 120. (Unofficial translation by 
Norges Bank’s translators). 
BIS Review 16/2009 
 19
As a result, ownership in the business sector in the US, Europe and Asia has increased – in 
companies’  human  capital,  in  their  machinery  and  equipment,  brands  and  organisation.  In 
the long run, and even though many companies have now folded, it may perhaps be at least 
as safe as extending loans. 
 Conclusion 
Let me conclude. 
At the moment, activity is falling in the Norwegian economy, as elsewhere. The source of the 
downturn is external. We cannot shield ourselves from its impact, but we can decide how we 
will  address  the  turnaround.  The  global  financial  highway  is  now  being  modernised  and 
overhauled. It is essential that traffic again flows smoothly. 
Rimbereid asks: 
“In which landscape  
Will we lay our next lucrative track?”10  
Norway has a credible and robust economic policy, and a business sector that is quick to 
adapt. This is a good point of departure. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
10   Øyvind Rimbereid, 2008: Herbarium, p.54. (Unofficial translation by Norges Bank’s translators). 
20 
 BIS Review 16/2009
