Mervyn King: Monetary policy developments 
Speech  by  Mr  Mervyn  King,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  England,  to  the  CBI  Dinner, 
Nottingham, 20 January 2009. 
 Certain truths are self-evident. One is that financial markets and the economic outlook can 
change quickly and in surprising ways. You in the Nottingham business community know that 
only  too  well.  In  line  with  businesses  across  the  United  Kingdom,  your  economic  fortunes 
have changed markedly over four months.  
Before  last September,  the  world  economy  was  slowing  and  at  home  the  Monetary  Policy 
Committee published a central projection of falling output in the United Kingdom in the third 
quarter.  Inflation,  though,  was  still  rising.  But  after  the  failure  of  the  American  investment 
bank  Lehman  Brothers,  there  was  a  widespread  collapse  of  confidence  in  the  banking 
systems  of  the  industrialised  world.  That  led  to  an  unprecedented  and  synchronised 
downturn in business and consumer confidence around the world. Our business contacts at 
home  and  abroad,  and  my  international  counterparts,  started  to  report  that  orders  and 
confidence had, in the same telling phrase, “fallen off a cliff”.  
Global equity prices fell more in the month following the failure of Lehman Brothers than in 
any but a handful of months in the Bank of England’s 300 year history. Chinese electricity 
production, having risen steadily at 15% a year, fell in November to a level 8% lower than a 
year  earlier  –  the  steepest  fall  on  record.  Car  sales  in  Brazil  contracted  by  a  quarter 
compared to a year earlier. In Japan, industrial production fell by 8.5% in just one month in 
November, and in Germany, the value of exports declined by over 10%. In the United States, 
over  a  million  jobs  were  lost  in  the  final  two  months  of  last  year  –  the  fastest  rate  of  job 
losses in over 60 years. And in the United Kingdom, manufacturing output contracted at its 
fastest  rate  since  1980.  Trade  was  badly  affected  –  the  Baltic  Dry  Index,  an  indicator  of 
demand to ship materials around the world – fell at the fastest pace on record in October. For 
the world economy as a whole, consensus forecasts of growth in 2009 have been revised 
down from 3% to just 1% since September.1  
                                                 
1   See charts below. 
  Sources: 
  Chart 1: Composite indices from Global Financial Database, comprising of: East Indies share for 1693; Bank 
of England and East Indies shares from 1694 to August 1711; Bank of England, East Indies and South Sea 
shares from September 1711 to January 1811; Rostow's Total Index of Share Prices from 1811 to 1867; the 
London and Cambridge Economic Service Index from 1867 to 1906; The Banker's Magazine Index from 1907 
to May 1933; the Actuaries General Index from June 1933 to April 1962; and the FTSE All-Share from April 
1962 onwards. Data are monthly until 1965, then weekly until 1968, and daily afterwards. 
  Chart 2: National Bureau of Statistics, China 
  Chart 3: Associação Nacional dos Fabricantes de Veículos Automotores, Brazil  
  Chart 4: Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, Japan 
  Chart 5: Bundesbank, Germany 
  Chart 6: Bureau of Labor Statistics, US 
  Chart 7: ONS 
  Chart 8: Baltic Exchange 
  Chart 9: Consensus Economics and Bank calculations 
BIS Review 8/2009 
 1
Governments and central banks around the world responded decisively and boldly with large 
fiscal injections and cuts in interest rates, and the provision of hundreds of billions of pounds 
in capital and funding to support banks. The scale and urgency of their actions embodied an 
audacity born out of pessimism.  
Tonight I want to ask: what went wrong? How can we limit the impact of the banking crisis on 
the  wider  economy?  And  can  we  design  a  better  approach  to  the  management  of  our 
economy and financial system in the future?  
So what went wrong? The origins of the crisis lie in the imbalances in the world economy 
which built up over a decade or more. The entry of the rapidly growing economies in Asia 
into the world trading and financial systems provided a huge new pool of savings. But their 
development  and  exchange  rate  strategies  meant  that  they  were  running  large  current 
account surpluses. In other words, their domestic saving was more than enough to finance 
investment  at  home.  Significant  amounts  were  channelled  into  foreign  financial  assets. 
Equally, the policies of the industrialised countries were aimed at ensuring a sufficient level 
of total demand to maintain stable inflation, and so desired levels of output and employment. 
That required policies to stimulate domestic demand and current account deficits to offset the 
surpluses  elsewhere.  The  perverse  result  was  huge  flows  of  capital  from  the  poorer 
developing economies to the richer mature economies.  
Large  amounts  of  savings  flowing  into  global  financial  markets  would  by  themselves  have 
pushed  down  real  interest  rates.  That,  together  with  the  success  of  central  banks  in  the 
industrialised  world  in  maintaining  low  and  stable  inflation  –  something  that  they  had  not 
been able to do in the preceding three decades – meant that nominal interest rates fell even 
further. As a result, nominal risk free returns fell to levels not seen in a generation. 
The combination of a fall in risk-free returns, and large amounts of capital looking for a home 
in  western  capital  markets,  created  a  demand  for  assets  offering  higher  returns  –  the  so-
called  search  for  yield.  Investors,  including  banks,  overlooked  the  fact  that  higher  returns 
could be generated only by taking higher risks. As a result, money was lent on easier terms. 
That helped to push up further asset prices that had already risen as real interest rates were 
falling.  
It also led to an explosion in the size of the financial sector as new instruments were created 
to satisfy the search for yield. As well as lending to households and businesses, banks lent to 
other banks which bought ever more exotic instruments created by the financial system itself. 
The effect was to replicate the original risky loans many times over. Over the past five years, 
the balance sheets of many of the world’s largest banks more than doubled.  
From the early 1990s to the start of the financial turmoil in 2007, total debt in the UK relative 
to GDP almost doubled. Around two-thirds of the increase in total debt was accounted for by 
lending  to  the  financial  sector.  A  marked  expansion  in  debt  of  the  financial  sector  also 
occurred in the United States and the euro area.  
The Bank did not stand idly by during this period. The Monetary Policy Committee set Bank 
Rate to achieve the inflation target. Monetary policy – here and in our major partners – was 
successful in controlling inflation and maintaining economic stability. From the early 1990s 
until the onset of financial turmoil in 2007, output growth, both here and in the industrialised 
world  in  general,  was  close  to  its  long-run  average.  Moreover,  through  our  regular 
publications and speeches on financial stability the Bank highlighted the dangers posed by 
the  growth  in  the  size  and  complexity  of  the  financial  sector.  Nevertheless,  it  is  clear  that 
policy did not succeed in preventing the development of an unsustainable position. 
Some have suggested as a result that Bank Rate be directed not only at meeting the inflation 
target but also at preventing excessive increases in debt and asset prices. Leaving to one 
side  the  feasibility  of  targeting  the  latter,  the  obvious  question  is  how  one  can  meet  two 
objectives with one instrument. The answer of course is by accepting a trade-off between the 
two objectives. But why should we accept unemployment or high inflation in order to reduce 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2009
financial imbalances? It would be more sensible to use Bank Rate for its traditional task of 
targeting inflation to maintain a balance between demand and supply in the economy, and to 
create a new instrument to limit the build up of debt.  
What  is  required  is  an  additional  policy  instrument  to  stabilise  the  growth  of  the  financial 
sector balance sheet. There is an active international debate as to the optimal design of such 
an  instrument,  but  one  way  or  another  it  must  provide  incentives  for  banks  to  reduce  the 
volatility of their balance sheet.  
It  is  also  clear  that  at  the  heart  of  the  crisis  was  the  problem  identified  but  not  solved  at 
Bretton Woods – the need to impose symmetric obligations on countries that run persistent 
current  account  surpluses  and  not  just  on  countries  that  run  deficits.  From  that  failure 
stemmed a chain of events, no one of which alone appeared to threaten stability, but which 
taken  together  led  to  the  worst  financial  crisis  any  of  us  can  recall.  For  several  years  the 
Bank of England and other UK participants in the international fora argued for a major reform 
of the international monetary system and the IMF in order to address this issue. 
The  gravity  of  the  present  crisis  demonstrates  the  urgency  of  rectifying  both  of  these 
deficiencies.  
In the past year the true scale of the risks taken by financial institutions has become painfully 
apparent. As losses mount it has become obvious that banks did not have sufficient capital to 
support their inflated balance sheets. Questions about the adequacy of liquidity have turned 
into questions about solvency. In response, banks have been trying to raise new capital and 
shrink their balance sheets. The banking system is in the throes of a difficult and prolonged 
adjustment to much smaller balance sheets relative to their equity capital – or leverage, as it 
is known. Leverage ratios of large banks remain at remarkably high levels, and the required 
adjustment will not happen quickly.  
I  know  that  bankers  around  the  world  realise  this.  The  incentives  they  face  to  adjust,  in 
whatever  way  they  can,  are  now  overwhelming.  With  fresh  capital  from  the  private  sector 
difficult to obtain, banks have opted to reduce their lending and that is why the flow of credit 
to all parts of the economy, here and abroad, has been heavily disrupted. And the credit that 
is still flowing is available only on  materially tighter terms and conditions. But the fact that 
much of the increase in debt occurred within the financial sector means that the necessary 
unwinding of balance sheets could and should take place primarily within the financial sector. 
That is why the Bank of England has been monitoring carefully the lending by banks to the 
non-financial  sector  –  businesses  and  households  –  and  why  the  lending  agreements 
announced  yesterday  which  will  be  negotiated  between  Government  and  individual  banks 
will focus on lending to those sectors. There is scope for a reduction in the leverage of banks 
without  restricting  lending  to  the  “real”  economy.  But  to  bring  that  about  much  of  the 
necessary  “netting”  of  exposures  would  be  cross-border,  demonstrating  that  almost  every 
aspect of the present crisis has an international dimension.  
What is the appropriate policy response in present circumstances? Some say that because 
the massive increase in indebtedness contributed to the crisis the right response is to save 
and repay debt. Others argue that the only way out of our present difficulties is to borrow and 
spend more. Who is right?  
Both are – up to a point. We cannot avoid the necessary long-term adjustment. To pretend 
otherwise would only store up problems for the future. But we can try to slow the pace of the 
adjustment to domestic demand in order to limit its impact on output and employment. So we 
need to take actions now that will dampen the adjustment in the short term while recognising 
that the adjustment will ultimately need to be made. This is the paradox of policy at present – 
almost  any  policy  measure  that  is  desirable  now  appears  diametrically  opposite  to  the 
direction in which we need to go in the long term. Spending now supports the economy, but 
in the long run we need to save more and borrow less. Public borrowing sustains spending, 
but in the long run needs to fall. Banks are encouraged to run down their capital to enable 
them  to  absorb  losses  while  continuing  to  lend,  but  in  the  long  run  they  will  need  more 
BIS Review 8/2009 
 3
capital. Interest rates have fallen to unprecedented levels, but in the long run will need to rise 
to more normal levels.  
In each area of policy it is important that there is a clear framework which guides both the 
short-term  response  to  the  current  downturn  and  the  exit  strategy  when  normal  conditions 
return. For monetary policy, the inflation target is that framework. Bank Rate is set to meet 
our target of 2% for the twelve-month rate of consumer price inflation.  
For a decade inflation and Bank Rate were remarkably stable. But in only four months, the 
MPC has cut Bank Rate by 3½ percentage points to its lowest ever level of 1½%. Does this 
mean we have changed our target? No. We have taken those actions precisely because the 
sudden  downturn  in  the  world  and  UK  economies  created  a  significant  risk  that  inflation 
would fall below the 2% target.  
Despite those big cuts, there remains a risk that inflation will fall below 2%. The disruption to 
the  banking  system  has  impaired  the  effectiveness  of  our  conventional  interest  rate 
instrument. And with Bank Rate already at its lowest level in the Bank’s history, it is sensible 
for the MPC to prepare for the possibility – and I stress that we are not there yet – that it may 
need  to  move  beyond  the  conventional  instrument  of  Bank  Rate  and  consider  a  range  of 
unconventional measures. They would take the form of purchases by the Bank of England of 
a range of financial assets in order to expand the amount of reserves held by commercial 
banks  and  to  increase  the  availability  of  credit  to  companies.  That  should  encourage  the 
banking system to expand the supply of broad money by lending to the private sector and 
also help companies to raise finance from capital markets.  
The  conventional  approach  to  such  unconventional  measures  is  to  buy  assets,  such  as 
government  securities  or  gilts,  which  are  traded  in  liquid  markets  to  boost  the  supply  of 
money. Provided the additional reserves are not simply hoarded by banks, as happened to 
some extent in Japan earlier in this decade, such asset purchases can increase the supply of 
broad money and credit and the liquidity of private sector portfolios, raising spending. The 
effectiveness of this approach is likely to be enhanced by the clear commitment by the MPC 
to take the measures necessary to meet the inflation target in the medium term.  
In  addition  to  these  conventional  unconventional  measures  there  are  also  unconventional 
unconventional measures. When credit markets are dysfunctional, as some are at present, 
targeted purchases by the Bank of England of assets may improve liquidity in markets for 
those  credit  instruments.  The  objective  of  such  purchases  would  be  not  only  to  boost  the 
supply of broad money but also to increase liquidity and trading activity in the markets for 
those  assets.  A  reduction  in  the  illiquidity  premium  for  a  particular  credit  instrument  might 
help  to  stimulate  issuance  by  corporate  borrowers  and  the  resumption  of  capital  market 
flows, thus reducing reliance on bank lending. It could also raise the values of assets that are 
currently under-priced because of high illiquidity premia, helping to strengthen the balance 
sheets of banks and other financial institutions.  
Yesterday  the  Government  authorised  the  Bank  of  England  to  conduct  such  operations, 
financed by the issue of Treasury Bills, in order to improve the flow of credit to companies. 
But at some point the Monetary Policy Committee might wish to adopt these unconventional 
measures as an instrument of monetary policy.  
In  conducting  such  operations,  it  is important  to  choose  the  markets  in  which  to  intervene 
extremely carefully. There is a fine dividing line between helping to oil the wheels in markets 
which  are  temporarily  impaired,  and  artificially  supporting  markets  in  which  there  is  no 
underlying demand. That is why, as Federal Reserve Chairman Bernanke said in London last 
week, central banks will look to intervene only in markets that “normally play major roles” in 
the functioning of the financial system. Therefore, the Bank will need to be satisfied that there 
is a genuine private demand for an asset in normal conditions before it would be eligible for 
the asset purchase facility. We are aiming to complement and stimulate private demand, not 
substitute for it.  
4 
 BIS Review 8/2009
The Bank is actively considering in which markets targeted purchases might stimulate new 
issuance.  One  example  is  the  corporate  bond  market.  Spreads  on  high  quality  corporate 
bonds have more than doubled since early September to an average of over 5 percentage 
points. Despite innovation in financial markets this is the highest spread since the mid-1970s. 
The Bank estimates that a significant element of this spread represents an illiquidity premium 
which  could  be  reduced  somewhat  by  increasing  activity  and  liquidity  in  the  market. 
Commercial  paper  is  another  case  where  purchases  might  help,  although  that  market  is 
considerably smaller in the United Kingdom than in the United States. In each case the Bank 
will  keep  the  market  fully  informed,  and  more  details  will  be  published  at  the  end  of  the 
month. It will be a matter of weeks not days before a programme of purchases can begin, but 
it will be weeks not months.  
There is another reason to tread carefully. Such asset purchases involve taking more credit 
risk onto the public sector balance sheet. That is why the Bank will consider purchasing only 
high quality assets.  
Despite the existence of a range of unconventional instruments, monetary policy is likely to 
be more effective when the banking system is working normally. So the first priority for policy 
is to fix the banking system so that it can resume its normal lending function. The contraction 
of  lending  to  ordinary  viable  businesses  –  your  businesses  –  is  threatening  to  drive  the 
economy  further  into  recession.  The  package  of  measures  announced  yesterday  by  the 
Chancellor are not designed to protect the banks as such. They are designed to protect the 
economy  from  the  banks.  In  particular,  the  Asset  Protection  Scheme  aims  to  remove  a 
degree  of  uncertainty  about  the  future  losses  banks  will  make.  It  also  has  the  effect  of 
reducing the amount of capital banks need to hold against their risky assets. Both effects will 
serve to strengthen and underpin banks' balance sheets and so support their lending to the 
real  economy.  To  be  clear,  the  scheme  does  not  mean  that  the  taxpayer  will  bear  the  full 
brunt  of  past  lending  mistakes  by  banks.  Rather,  there  is  sharing  of  losses  between 
shareholders  and  the  government  –  or  coinsurance  –  with  the  government  providing,  at  a 
price, insurance against only extreme outcomes for the banks. That can be to the advantage 
of all of us if banks help to underwrite the economy through the agreed lending targets and 
government underwrites the balance sheet of the banks. The insurance policy will be most 
cost-effective for taxpayers if all the major lenders sign up to lending targets. 
Nevertheless, the problems in the financial sector mean that 2009 will be a difficult year for 
all of us. A pronounced contraction in spending and output is underway. As expected, output 
in the UK economy fell in the third quarter of 2008, but the downward momentum intensified 
in the fourth quarter. Manufacturing output is falling, and the key service sector surveys have 
reached record low levels in recent months. Total output in the fourth quarter is expected to 
have fallen sharply. In the first half of this year, the rate of contraction is likely to continue to 
be marked, and our trading partners are experiencing similar problems. 
But  the  very  significant  policy  actions  taken  in  recent  months  will  eventually  stimulate  a 
recovery in demand, output and employment. Bank Rate has fallen from 5% to 1½%. And, as 
I  have  explained,  the  Monetary  Policy  Committee  has  a  range  of  options  to  stimulate  the 
economy further if required. Fiscal policy has been eased. The banking system is receiving 
massive support to cope with the need to restructure its balance sheet. That will take time, 
but time is a great healer, even of banks. Since the summer, the exchange rate has fallen by 
almost 20%; and oil prices have fallen by around two-thirds, both of which will boost demand. 
No one can know at what point the impact of all this stimulus will have a  visible effect on 
activity;  the  lags  in  economic  policy  are  notoriously  long  and  unpredictable.  But  well-
designed policies implemented within a consistent policy framework will eventually work.  
 
 
 
 
BIS Review 8/2009 
 5
 
 
1. Ten largest monthly falls in UK equity prices 
South Sea 
Black Monday 
South Sea 
 
10 Sep-10 O ct 2008
Oil shock & secondary bank crisis
Oil shock & secondary bank crisis
France fall to Germany 
Oil shock & secondary bank crisis 
Unexpected rate hike 
Oil shock & secondary bank crisis
-60
-40
-20
Percent change
 
 
3. Brazilian car sales 
Aug-Sep 1720
Oct-Nov 1987
Sep-Oct 1720
10 Sep-10 Oct 2008
Nov-Dec 1973
Jul-Aug 1974
Jun-Jul 1940
Feb-Mar 1974
Aug-Sep 1981
Nov-Dec 1974
0
 Percentage change on a year earlier
September 2008
40
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
-30
2. Chinese electricity production 
Percentage change on a year earlier
September 
2008
Jan 01
Jan 03
Jan 05
Jan 07
 
 
4. Japanese industrial production 
Percentage change on a month earlier
September 
2008
Jan 06
Jul 06
Jan 07
Jul 07
Jan 08
Jul 08
Jan 01
Jan 03
Jan 05
Jan 07
 
 
5. German export values 
Percentage change on a month earlier
September
2008
 8
4
0
-4
-8
-12
 
 
6. US Non-farm payrolls 
two monthly change, thousands
September 
2008
Jan 01
Jan 03
Jan 05
Jan 07
Jan 01
Jan 03
Jan 05
Jan 07
 6 
 BIS Review 8/2009
30
20
10
0
-10
-20
 4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
 1000
500
0
-500
-1000
-1500
 7. UK manufacturing output 
Percentage change, latest three months on
previous three months
September
2008
8. Baltic dry index (monthly averages) 
Percentage change on a month earlier
 September 
2008
80
60
40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80
3
2
1
0
-1
-2
-3
-4
Jan 01
Jan 03
Jan 05
Jan 07
Jan 01
Jan 03
Jan 05
Jan 07
Jan 09
 
9. Consensus forecast for world growth 
forecast for 2009 calendar year growth
September 2008
Jan-08 Mar-08 May-08
Jul-08
Sep-08 Nov-08
Survey dates
 5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
-0.5
-1.0
 BIS Review 8/2009 
 7
