Jürgen Stark: Economic prospects and the role of monetary policy in the 
current situation 
Speech by Mr Jürgen Stark, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, 
at the 5. Deutsch-Luxemburgische Wirtschaftskonferenz, Luxembourg, 9 March 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
Since  the  second  half  of  2008,  we  have  witnessed  the  deepest  economic  downturn  since 
World War II and the fastest deceleration in inflation since the launch of the euro. We have 
confronted  this  situation  with  unprecedented  decisions.  Unprecedented  has  been  the 
magnitude  and  size  of  interest  rate  cuts.  Since  October  2008,  we  have  reduced  key  ECB 
interest rates by 275 basis points. Unprecedented has been the scope of liquidity support we 
offer  to  the  financial  system.  But  central  banks  alone  are  not  in  a  position  to  resolve  the 
current financial crisis. Policy makers need to prevent a further deterioration in economic and 
financial  conditions.  To  this  end,  resolute  action  is  needed  to  restructure,  recapitalise  and 
consolidate the banking system. 
To be realistic, the year 2009 will be a very difficult year. 2009 will be the year of adjustments 
in the balance sheets of banks, firms and private households. These adjustments should lay 
the foundations for economic conditions to eventually stabilise and improve.  
Let  me  now  elaborate  in  greater  detail  on  where  we  stand  in  terms  of  economic  and 
monetary developments in the euro area and how this has affected the conduct of monetary 
policy.  I  will  subsequently  talk  about  how  we  have  adjusted  our  refinancing  operations  in 
response to the financial crisis. Finally, I will briefly discuss challenges in the resolution of the 
crisis. 
Economic prospects 
Global economic situation 
a.  
Let  me  start  with  the  economic  outlook.  The  world  economy  is  currently  undergoing  its 
deepest downturn since the second World War. The crisis started in summer 2007, as losses 
in the US sub-prime mortgage market, a relatively small segment of the US housing markets, 
triggered the ongoing financial turmoil. However, its impact on the global economy remained 
relatively limited until the summer of 2008.  
However,  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  last  September,  the  tensions  in  global 
financial markets escalated to a full-blown financial crisis and thereafter turned into a global 
economic crisis. The severe global economic downturn has now become more synchronised. 
The collapse in global trade has amplified the adverse impact from the financial turmoil and 
caused emerging market prospects to deteriorate drastically. In advanced economies, falling 
house prices, tumbling financial markets, collapsed household and business confidence, and 
the resulting need to restructure consumers’ and firms’ balance sheets have been curbing 
private  consumption  and  investment.  In  emerging  economies,  nosediving  global  trade  and 
the unwinding of both internal and external imbalances accrued in past years have led to a 
sharp decline or even negative GDP growth rates. 
According to most economic forecasts, the weak growth period is expected to last for some 
1 projects that the world GDP growth would decelerate to only ½ 
time. For example, the IMFF
                                                
 
1  
IMF WEO Update, 28 January 2009. 
BIS Review 28/2009 
 1
% in 2009 measured in terms of  purchasing power parity and even to turn negative when 
measured in terms of market exchange rates. For advanced countries this means a negative 
annual  growth  rate  of  -2%  in  2009.  For  emerging  economies  the  growth  is  projected  to 
remain  positive,  although  the  3.3%  growth  projection  is  just  half  of  the  pace  recorded  in 
2008.  
While  it  is  expected  that  the  world  economy  will  recover  in  2010,  risks  surrounding  the 
outlook are on the downside as the depth and length of the global economic downturn will 
crucially depend on the evolution of the financial crisis.  
The inflation outlook has also changed significantly. Global inflationary pressures are quickly 
diminishing. In the short term, this is mainly due to effects from lower commodity prices, but 
over time, weaker labour market conditions and sluggish global demand increasingly play a 
role.  
Euro area activity  
b.  
Let  me  now  come  to  the  euro  area.  Economic  activity  has  not  been  sheltered  from  the 
negative  impact  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  We  had  seen  already  a  moderation  in  the 
underlying  momentum  of  euro  area  economic  growth  before  the  crisis  got  worse.  This 
slowdown reflected the dampening effects from sharp increases in commodity prices before 
the  summer  2008  and  the  ongoing  correction  in  the  housing  market  in  some  euro  area 
countries.  
As  a  result  of  all  these  factors,  euro  area  activity  declined  markedly  in  the  second  half  of 
2008.  After  falling  moderately  in  the  second  and  third  quarters  of  2008,  euro  area  GDP 
growth contracted very sharply in the fourth quarter of the year, decreasing 1.5% quarter on 
quarter.  This  reflected  not  only  a  decrease  in  foreign  demand  for  euro  area  exports  but 
domestic  demand  was  also  adversely  affected  by  domestic  factors,  notably  very  low 
confidence and tight financing conditions. Annual growth in 2008, at 0.8%, was the weakest 
rate since the early 1990s. 
Indicators  for  the  first  months  of  this  year  suggest  a  further  large  contraction  in  activity  in 
early 2009. Consumer and business sentiment worsened further, falling to new all-time lows 
in  February.  Moreover,  labour  markets  have  deteriorated  which  does  not  bode  well  for 
consumer  spending.  In  this  context,  let  me  stress  that  we  in  the  ECB  Governing  Council 
anticipated  in  our  interest  rate  decisions  that  there  will  be  bad  news  to  come  for  the  first 
quarter  of  2009,  as  we  take  our  decisions  in  a  forward  looking  manner.  Once  these 
expectations of further weakness in growth are confirmed by official data, we will not to take 
it into account again – there is no double counting! 
Looking ahead, we expect a protracted period of further weakness in euro area activity. We 
have to face the truth that 2009 will be a very difficult year. It will be a year of balance sheet 
adjustments across banks, non-financial companies and private households. This could be a 
further drag on investment and consumer spending, already negatively affected by very low 
global demand, tight financing conditions and, in the case of private consumption, a further 
deterioration  in  labour  markets.  However,  these  corrections  are  inevitable  as  they  lay  the 
foundation  of  the  gradual  recovery.  This  is  also  reflected  in  the  March  2009  ECB  staff 
macroeconomic projections. The expected negative or very low annual GDP growth in 2009 
and  2010  somehow  masks  these  developments  as  it  is  affected  by  negative  carry-over 
effects  of  the  previous  year.  Looking  beyond  the  annual  growth  numbers,  the  underlying 
quarterly profile embodies expectations of increasingly positive quarterly rates of growth in 
real GDP over the course of 2010.  
Underlying  this  outlook  is  the  expectation  of  a  gradual  improvement  of  the  external 
environment  and  a  normalisation  in  financial  markets,  reflecting  the  extensive  policy 
measures that have been introduced to restore the functioning of the financial system, both 
inside and outside the euro area. This together with low inflation rates which strengthen real 
2 
 BIS Review 28/2009
incomes and the strong fiscal and monetary stimulus should support the gradual recovery in 
euro area activity. 
In our view, the economic outlook remains surrounded by uncertainty. The risks to economic 
growth  appear  now  to  be  more  balanced.  On  the  one  hand,  there  may  be  stronger  than 
anticipated  positive  effects,  also  on  confidence,  stemming 
the  extensive 
macroeconomic stimulus under way and reflecting other policy measures taken. On the other 
hand, concerns relate mainly to the  potential for the turmoil in financial markets to have a 
stronger  impact  on  the  real  economy,  as  well  as  to  the  emergence  and  intensification  of 
protectionist  pressures  and  to  possible  adverse  developments  in  the  world  economy 
stemming from a disorderly correction of global imbalances. 
from 
Euro area price developments 
c.  
Let  me  turn  to  price  developments.  Inflation  in  the  euro  area  has  declined  rapidly  since  it 
reached its highest level in over a decade in the summer of last year. According to Eurostat’s 
flash estimate, euro area annual HICP inflation was 1.2% in February 2009, well below the 
rate of 4.0% registered in July 2008. This decline primarily reflects the marked fall in global 
commodity prices, and in particular oil prices, over this period, owing mainly to weak global 
demand.  The  fall  in  commodity  prices  has  also  contributed  to  a  significant  diminishing  of 
supply chain pressures from very high levels as signalled by strong falls in survey measures 
on price setting indicators of companies and substantial declines in producer prices at early 
production stages.  
Looking ahead, HICP inflation is expected to fall further in the coming months. This mainly 
reflects  a  rather  technical  effect  which  is  called  “base  effect”.  Base  effects  are  important 
when  looking  at  developments  in  annual  inflation  rates,  i.e.  comparing  the  price  level  now 
with the one registered a year ago. The increases in energy and food prices, which led to the 
extended  inflation  hump  until  mid-last  year,  will  subsequently  drop  out  of  the  year-on-year 
comparison  in  the  coming  months.  These  base  effects  will  exert  significant  downward 
pressure  on  overall  inflation  and  there  is  a  high  likelihood  that  in  this  process  of  ongoing 
disinflation annual HICP inflation in the euro area will temporarily turn negative in the middle 
of 2009. It also cannot be excluded that we will see in some euro area countries negative 
inflation rates for a more extended period of time.  
However, this will mark most probably only a trough in inflation. The same factors pushing 
down  inflation  in  the  first  half  of  2009,  namely  base  effects  related  to  volatile  oil  and  food 
prices, will subsequently unwind and actually put upward pressure on prices, contributing to 
rising  inflation  rates  over  the  course  of  the  second  half  of  2009.  Overall,  the  ongoing 
disinflation process in the euro area is expected to imply sharp fluctuations in HICP inflation 
rates  during  2009  as  also  foreseen  by  the  ECB  staff  projections.  For  2010,  the  ECB  staff 
project HICP inflation at moderate rates.  
Let  me  emphasise  that  sharp  fluctuations  in  annual  inflation  rates  or  the  temporary 
emergence  of  negative  inflation  rates  is  a  normal  concomitant  of  any  disinflation  process, 
which by its very nature is temporary and thus should not be confused with another “d”-word, 
namely deflation. From a conceptual point of view, deflation is a completely different state. A 
deflationary  process  is  a  persistent,  broad-based  and  self-sustaining  decline  in  the  overall 
price level. It is reinforced by the anticipation that prices will decline further in the future. As a 
consequence, inflation expectations become unanchored and negative, with adverse effects 
on investment and consumption.  
By contrast, disinflation, which is linked to transitory movements in relative prices, is per se a 
welcome  development  because  it  helps  sustain  real  incomes,  provided  that  medium-term 
inflation  expectations  remain  well  anchored  at  levels  consistent  with  price  stability.  To  the 
extent that this is the case, short-term volatility in annual inflation rates, including negative 
inflation  rates,  is  not  relevant  from  the  medium-term  perspective  of  monetary  policy.  We 
expect that price stability is maintained at the medium-term. Moreover, available information 
BIS Review 28/2009 
 3
indicates  that  medium-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area  are  solidly  anchored  at 
levels consistent with the aim of the Governing Council of keeping inflation at rate of below, 
but close to, 2% over the medium term. Such a firm anchoring represents the strongest and 
most  reassuring  safeguard  against  any  risk  of  a  downward  spiral  of  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations. The fact that we have a clear mandate and a clear definition of price stability is 
helpful in anchoring inflation expectations.  
As  in  the  case  of  growth,  a  considerable  degree  of  uncertainty  surrounds  the  inflation 
projections of the ECB staff. Risks to these projections are broadly balanced. They relate in 
particular to the risks to the outlook for economic activity as well as to risks to commodity 
prices.  
Monetary and financing conditions 
d.  
Latest  money  and  credit  data  support  the  view  that  inflationary  pressures  have  been 
diminishing. Broad money growth decelerated in 2008, increasingly so at the turn of the year. 
In  particular,  it  brought  headline  M3  growth  back  to  levels  that  reflect  the  underlying 
monetary dynamics, which also decelerated.  
The financial turmoil and its intensification in September 2008 had a substantial impact on 
the  behaviour  of  market  participants  and  affected  money  and  credit  dynamics,  leading  to 
higher volatility in money and credit aggregates. On the money side, this relates in particular 
to marketable instruments, but also to the significant substitution that is taking place between 
different categories of deposits included in M3. On the credit side, the flow of bank loans to 
the  private  sector  around  the  turn  of  the  year  was  also  rather  volatile,  partly  reflecting  a 
possible  turn-of-the  year  effect.  But  discounting  this  effect,  latest  credit  developments 
confirms the decline in the growth of bank credit to households and firms observed during 
2008. 
This shows how important it is to look through short-term developments when assessing the 
underlying  pace  of  monetary  expansion  and  the  associated  indication  for  risks  to  price 
stability.  
Let me turn to the financing conditions in the euro area which have deteriorated further since 
September 2008. With plummeting equity valuations and soaring credit spreads, the overall 
cost of financing for euro area non-financial corporations has edged upwards. At the same 
time, bank lending rates have declined. In fact, it seems that the substantial past reduction in 
the  key  ECB  interest  rates  is  increasingly  being  passed  through  to  bank  lending  rates, 
indicating  that,  despite  the  tensions  in  financial  markets,  the  transmission  mechanism  of 
monetary policy is not significantly impaired in the euro area.  
Monetary policy  
Let me now turn to the second part of my speech, namely the role of monetary policy in the 
current situation.  
The financial crisis has contributed to a pace in disinflation and economic deceleration which 
has  been  unprecedented.  This  has  required  us  taking  unprecedented  decisions  to  contain 
adverse  spillover  effects  of  financial  market  tensions  on  the  real  economy  and  thereby  to 
maintain inflation over the medium term in line with price stability.  
In a coordinated move, the ECB and other major central banks announced reductions in their 
policy  interest  rates  on  8  October  2008.  Overall,  since  October  2008,  we  lowered  the  key 
ECB  interest  rates  by  275  basis  points.  The  overnight  money  market  rates  fell  even  more 
steeply over this period, as the ECB significantly enlarged its liquidity provision to euro area 
banks. Since October last year we have provided the banking sector with unlimited funds at 
maturities up to six months, against an expanded range of eligible collateral. These decisions 
4 
 BIS Review 28/2009
have  been  taken  in  a  timely  and  decisive  manner,  in  a  context  characterised  by  an 
exceptionally high level of uncertainty.  
To  better  understand  the  scale  of  our  interventions  in  the  interbank  money  market,  one 
needs  to  appreciate  its  importance  in  the  implementation  and  transmission  of  monetary 
policy. Money market interest rates, especially of short maturities mark the starting point in 
the transmission of monetary policy. They determine the marginal costs of refinancing of the 
banking  sector  and  thereby  act  through  the  bank  lending  channel.  Money  market  interest 
rates  are  a  key  factor  in  determining  the  entire  yield  curve  and  thereby  are  crucial  for  the 
expectations  channel  of  monetary  transmission.  Of  course,  longer-term  interest  rates  and 
bank  lending  rates  cannot  be  directly  controlled  by  the  central  bank,  but  expectations  of 
short-term money market rates are key in determining them. 
Contributing  to  the  functioning  of  the  money  market  and  preventing  a  liquidity  crunch 
therefore has been crucial to forestall a breakdown of the transmission of monetary policy 
and a systemic crisis. As a consequence of our measures, the Eurosystem’s consolidated 
balance sheet has grown by two thirds from summer 2007 until most recently, or by 6% of 
euro  area  nominal  GDP.  To  put  these  numbers  into  perspective,  the  size  of  our  balance 
sheet has grown from 13% of euro area nominal GDP in 2007 to over 20% most recently. By 
providing unlimited funds in our refinancing operations we have ensured that banks facing 
difficulties raising funds in the market are always able to fulfil their liquidity needs.  
But we need to be realistic about what we, as a central bank, can achieve. In my view, we 
cannot expect to see the money market functioning the way it did before August 2007. What 
is  certainly  encouraging  is  that  recently  the  volumes  allotted  in  our  refinancing  operations 
have  come  down  slightly.  The  same  is  true  for  the  number  of  banks participating  in  these 
operations.  Spreads  between  secured  and  unsecured  interest  rates  at  term  maturity  have 
gone down  somewhat.  But they have remained high. The turnover in unsecured interbank 
lending, especially at longer maturities, still remains low. To be clear: The problem is not a 
lack of liquidity in the market. It is the lack of trust among the banks themselves. Unless trust 
in the solvency of banks is re-established, there is hardly any chance that conditions in the 
money market will normalise.  
As  already  mentioned,  financing  conditions  have  not  eased  exactly  in  line  with  key  ECB 
interest rates. So will key ECB interest rates have to be cut to even lower levels? In principle, 
even after last Thursday’s decision the ECB could still contribute to easing credit conditions 
by cutting its key interest rates further. But this will not fundamentally solve the problems that 
have  caused  the  financial  crisis.  The  contrary  could  be  the  case.  If  maintained  for  an 
extended period of time, too low or very low interest rates might in fact aggravate them. They 
have  the  potential  to  weaken  the  incentives  for  banks  to  clean  up  their  balance  sheet  of 
troubled  assets  and  monitor  their  credit  risk  carefully.  This  in  turn  may  reinforce  the  very 
problems that currently impair the functioning of the financial system. Too low interest rates 
tend to foster lending to unprofitable business. This would harm the growth potential of the 
economy and thereby prepare the ground for anaemic growth. Or, as in the past, it could lay 
the  foundations  for  another  asset  price  bubble.  Finally,  very  low  interest  rates  hamper  the 
functioning of the money market: The lower interest rates in the money market, the lower the 
incentive  of  banks  to  trade  funds  in  the  market  rather  than  depositing  them  safely,  at  the 
same low return, with the central bank.  
So,  as  we  have  started  to  operate  at  very  low  interest  rates,  are  we  running  out  of 
ammunition to ease monetary conditions further if warranted? Do we need to take more non-
standard measures? 
Let  me  emphasise  that  what  we  have  implemented  so  far  has  already  been  rather 
unconventional.  But  in  considering  any  additional  action  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the 
financial  system  and  transmission  of  monetary  policy  we  need  to  be  mindful  of  our 
responsibilities and our mandate – i.e. to be conscious of what monetary policy can do and, 
even more importantly, what it cannot, and consequently should not do.  
BIS Review 28/2009 
 5
Central bank measures aimed at easing credit conditions have not been met with undivided 
enthusiasm.  Commentators  have  worried  about  a  host  of  issues.  Will  the  expansion  of 
central  bank  balance  sheets  ultimately  lead  to  inflation?  As  central  banks  are  seen  as 
switching attention from implementing monetary policy by steering short-term interest rates to 
targeting the composition and size of their balance sheets, have they lost their instrument? 
Have they  become intransparent and unpredictable? With the measures put in place, how 
are central banks going to preserve their financial and political independence which has been 
so hard to earn? Under what conditions and when are central banks going to unwind these 
measures?  
I can assure you, we have not lost sight of the principles that have successfully guided us in 
the  past.  The  measures  that  we  have  taken  and  any  additional  measures  we  might 
implement remain strictly consistent with our responsibilities. Accordingly they meet a whole 
range of criteria and they will continue to do so. 
Any  additional  measures  need  to  be  consistent  with  our  mandate  and  our  principles. 
Consequently, they can only be taken with the view to pursue price stability and to contribute 
to  the  preservation  of  financial  stability.  Pursuant  to  this  objective  and  the  Treaty 
requirements the measures must be compliant with the prohibition of monetary financing. In 
addition, the scope of such measures is limited by the need to contain the Eurosystems risk 
exposure so as to safeguard its financial independence, as otherwise the ECB will end up 
jeopardising its credibility. Furthermore, as conditions in the financial system will eventually 
improve  and  in  line  with  our  assessment  of  risks  to  price  stability  these  measures  will  be 
unwound. Accordingly, and finally, bearing also in mind that the health of the financial system 
cannot  be  made  the  ECB’s  responsibility,  one  needs  to  be  careful  not  to  blur  the 
responsibility of monetary and fiscal authorities in the euro area. 
Of course, we will do whatever we judge to be necessary and appropriate to maintain price 
stability and contribute to the preservation of financial stability. But we will strictly adhere to 
these principles. 
In considering further easing measures, these principles have obvious implications. Central 
banks can alleviate liquidity risks. But they cannot address the perceived solvency problems 
that impair the financial system. One could conceive measures to ease credit conditions by 
taking over some of the credit risk on commercial paper that banks currently hold. The ECB 
has  already  been  accepting  corporate  loans  as  part  of  collateral  in  its  regular  liquidity 
operations.  By  operating  through  the  banking  sector,  this  has  significantly  contributed  to 
providing funding to non-financial corporations – and thereby an easing of credit conditions. 
Buying corporate debt outright would circumvent the banking sector.  
We  have  a  responsibility  to  keep  the  Eurosystem  financially  sound.  This  concern  puts  a 
break on how much further we can expand our balance sheet.  
How to solve the crisis? 
Clearly,  the  challenges  for  resolving  the  current  crisis  remain  tremendous.  There  is  no 
panacea.  We  have  made  our  contribution  by  making  sure  that  longer-term  inflation 
expectations have remained anchored in line with price stability and by preventing a liquidity 
crunch.  It  remains  our  responsibility  to  continue  to  do  so.  But  one  cannot  rely  solely  on 
central bank policies to address all the consequences of the financial crisis and its fall-out on 
the economy.  
Resolute  action  is  needed  to  restructure,  consolidate  and  recapitalise  the  banking system. 
Specifically, action is needed to help banks support their balance sheet so as to sustain an 
adequate flow of credit to the non-financial sector.  
Since  last  autumn,  governments  have  provided  or  pledged  a  substantial  amount  in 
guarantees for new debt issuance by banks. In addition, they have recapitalised a number of 
6 
 BIS Review 28/2009
financial institutions. The commitments to provide support are already substantial. But it will 
take time for the measures to be completely implemented and to show their full effects. In 
case  these  measures  prove  to  be  insufficient,  they  need  to  be  complemented  by  further 
actions to address problems on the asset side of banks’ balance sheets.  
To be successful in resolving the financial crisis the asset support schemes need to meet a 
whole range of objectives. From the central bank perspective the overwhelming objective is 
to safeguard financial stability and restore the flow of credit from banks to the private sector. 
In addition, the measures taken will need to be implemented in a way so as to maintain a 
level playing field in the EU financial market and minimising the burden to public finances.  
In line with these objectives, the Eurosystem has issued a set of guiding principles for the 
design  and  implementation  of  asset  support  schemes  to  address  the  most  critical  issues. 
Apart from guidance on the types of assets and institutions that would be eligible to support, 
these guiding principles call for an adequate degree of risk sharing as a necessary element 
to  limit  the  cost  to  the  government,  to  provide  the  right  incentives  to  the  participating 
institutions and to maintain a level playing field across these institutions. They also mention 
that schemes with well-defined exit strategies should be favoured and that conditionality may 
be attached to such schemes. 
Conclusion 
Let me conclude. We face unprecedented challenges. At the ECB we have demonstrated a 
willingness and capacity to react rapidly to exceptional circumstances. We have cut interest 
rates  sharply  to  forestall  the  emergence  of  downside  risks  to  price  stability.  We  have 
provided unlimited liquidity support to the banking system so as ensure that liquidity risk does 
not lead to a systemic crisis. But, ultimately, we alone as central bankers cannot resolve the 
current  financial  crisis.  The  onus  is  now  on  governments,  supervisory  and  regulatory 
authorities,  and  the  financial  industry  itself,  to  cooperate  to  act  resolutely  to  restructure, 
recapitalise and consolidate the banking system. Such government measures are under way. 
On our side we will continue to do whatever we judge to be necessary and appropriate to 
maintain price stability and contribute to financial stability. And in doing so we will stick to the 
principles  that  have  served  us  well  in  the  pursuit  of  price  stability.  We  will  safeguard  our 
financial  independence.  We  will  be  transparent  and  accountable  for  our  actions.  Most 
importantly, we will remain faithful to our mandate and provide an anchor of confidence and 
stability in difficult times.  
BIS Review 28/2009 
 7
