Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Looking beyond the euro's first decade 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at “The euro’s second decade: status quo and perspectives”, British Embassy, Berlin, 
18 February 2009. 
 It is a great pleasure to be here today. The publication of David Marsh’s new book, shortly 
after the euro’s tenth anniversary, is a good opportunity to review the status of the currency 
and its prospects in the coming decade.  
It’s  a  real  “Marsh  book”  –  a  pleasure  to  read,  even  though  some  quotes  and  statements 
might sometimes be controversial. In any case, David Marsh seems to have taken to heart 
the  main  lesson  of  the  current  financial  crisis:  avoid  excessive  risk.  Indeed,  he  is  walking 
along a kind of tightrope, often quoting people or presenting views in such a way that they 
contradict or contrast with each other. That way, he is likely to come out on the right side of 
things, whatever happens. Let me give an example, by quoting the very last paragraph of the 
book, which looks forward to the next ten years:  
“The lesson of the first decade is there is no certainty that the single currency will survive the 
next  one unscathed.  Yet  if  the  Euro  overcomes  its  trials  and  becomes  a  durable success, 
that  accomplishment,  measured  by  all  that  has  gone  before,  will  truly  be  the  richest  of 
triumphs.” 
In other words, either it’s a real success, or…it’s a real disaster. Good hedging, indeed! 
I will not review all the themes addressed in the book, but would like to touch on a few key 
issues that can help us get a better understanding of what has happened over the last ten 
years and how the euro is likely to develop over the next ten.  
David  Marsh  is  cautious  when  assessing  the  euro’s  first  ten  years.  In  his  introduction,  he 
even sounds Solomonic, suggesting that: “It’s too early to say”. There is nothing wrong with 
such skepticism, and it’s always better to be prudent. Such prudence nevertheless reminds 
me  of  the  answer  that  Chinese  Premier  Zhou  Enlai  gave  in  the  mid  1970’s  to  a  question 
about the impact of the French revolution of 1789. He too remarked: “It’s too early to say”. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  start  by  presenting  some  facts  about  the  last  ten  years.  Then  I’ll 
consider the main hidden message of the book, which is that monetary union is a political 
union. Finally, I will try to give my own perspective on the next ten years.  
Facts of the last decade 
Any assessment of the first ten years of the euro should consider what the objectives were at 
the start of Monetary Union. In particular, we should avoid attributing to the euro merits or 
demerits it should not have or never aspired to. Let me consider some of the objectives of 
the euro and the expectations it gave rise to. 
The first, main objective of the euro was to create an area of monetary stability in Europe. 
This has been achieved. The average inflation rate between 1999 and 2008 was 2.2%, about 
1 percentage point less than in the 1990s. It is also lower than the best performing countries, 
like Germany, before the euro. Monetary stability has been reflected also in the low level of 
interest  rates,  which  is  also  an  improvement  compared  with  the  previous  decade.  This 
suggests that monetary stability is now well entrenched in expectations.  
A second objective was to ensure that this monetary stability was not attained at the expense 
of economic growth and stability. This too has been achieved. The GDP growth rate of the 
euro area over the last decade has been similar, by and large, to that of the previous decade, 
BIS Review 20/2009 
 1
both  in  absolute  and  in  per  capita  terms.  Unemployment  has  been  lower  on  average  and 
employment  growth  stronger.  All  this  has  been  achieved  in  spite  of  the  more  rigorous 
budgetary policies of the Member States, at least compared with the previous decade. This 
suggests  that  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  has  not  imposed  a  straightjacket  on  our 
economies. 
You could argue that other countries, in particular EU countries which do not have the euro, 
have performed even better than the euro area. The UK has had a higher average inflation 
rate than the euro area but also a higher growth rate; Sweden has a comparable inflation 
rate and higher growth. But then you have to compare like with like. In the euro area there 
are  countries  of  a  comparable  size  to  the  UK,  like  Spain,  which  have  had  even  stronger 
growth during these years. Others though have grown less.  
The euro area and the US are often compared, and these two monetary areas are of a size 
that can be compared. This type of comparison is often based on false impressions. Even 
David Marsh might have fallen into this trap, when he comments that “Measured against the 
world’s  largest  economy,  the  US,  Europe’s  performance  as  a  whole  has  stalled  since  the 
heyday of post-war reconstruction.” Looking carefully at the data, over the last decade the 
US has recorded higher average GDP growth than the euro area only because of its higher 
population growth. GDP per capita has increased at exactly the same pace in the two areas. 
You might have expected growth to have been stronger in the euro area, as the starting point 
was lower. But comparing levels is not so easy, and depends very much on the exchange 
rate used as well as other variables. 
As for employment growth over the last ten years, it has been stronger in the euro area than 
in the US, and the rate of unemployment has decreased to a substantially greater extent. Of 
course, the last few months of this decade have been different. I will come back to this issue 
later. Making assessments on the basis of long averages means that adjustments are made 
to  take  account  of  cyclical  and  temporary  shocks.  However,  this  might  lead  us  astray.  It 
would  be  incorrect  to  claim  that  the  strong  employment  results  achieved  over  the  last  ten 
years  are  exclusively  due  to  the  euro.  The  improvement  is  more  likely  to  stem  from  the 
structural reforms implemented in the Member States over the years. 
A third objective of the euro was to move forward the integration of the financial markets. The 
results  in  this  field  are  positive,  but  also  uneven,  depending  on  the  market  segment. 
Integration  is  more  advanced  in  the  areas  close  to  the  single  monetary  policy,  but  it  also 
depends on the degree of integration of the underlying market infrastructure. The euro area 
money market, the segment closest to the single monetary policy, reached a stage of “near 
perfect” integration almost immediately after the introduction of the euro. The malfunctioning 
of recent months is common to all currencies. On the other hand, short-term debt securities 
(i.e.  commercial  paper  and  certificates  of  deposit)  have  remained  much  more  fragmented. 
Financial  integration  has  been  fastest  in  the  government  bond  market,  where  yields  have 
converged  and  are  increasingly  driven  by  common  factors,  although  local  factors  and 
perceived  differences  in  credit  risk  continue  to  play  a  role.  Likewise,  the  corporate  bond 
segment  is  also  more  integrated  as  the  various  markets  have  merged  into  a  single,  yet 
diversified euro market. As a result, country-specific factors have become less important in 
determining  corporate  bond  prices  and  spreads.  Cross-border  holdings  of  long-term  debt 
securities of monetary financial institutions grew from about 15% in 1999 to nearly 40% in 
2007. Integration in the equity markets is less advanced but shows signs of improvement. 
Between 1997 and 2006, euro area investors doubled their holdings of equity issued in other 
euro area countries to 29% of their total portfolio of euro area equity assets.  
The  retail  banking  segment  has  remained  more  fragmented.  In  particular,  the  euro  area 
cross-country  dispersion  of  bank  interest  rates,  especially  of  interest  rates  on  consumer 
loans, has remained relatively high. This reflects different conditions in national economies 
(e.g.  credit  and  interest  rate  risk,  size  of  firms,  industrial  structure  and  degree  of  capital 
market  development), 
taxation,  regulation,  supervision  and 
factors  (e.g. 
institutional 
2 
 BIS Review 20/2009
consumer protection) and financial structures (e.g. degree of bank/capital market financing 
and competitiveness). It was probably overoptimistic to expect a faster convergence in this 
segment. 
The  creation  of  the  euro  also  gave  rise  to  expectations  of  a  broad  based  convergence  of 
underlying  economic  developments.  These  expectations  were  quite  varied,  in  fact.  Some 
people  expected  greater  divergence  as  a  consequence  of  specialisation.  Others  expected 
greater  convergence.  The  result  is  mixed.  Some  convergence  has  been  observed,  in 
particular in terms of business cycle and dispersion across countries, which is comparable 
with that among the US states. The degree of business cycle synchronisation has remained 
at  the  same  levels  reached  in  the  second  half  of  the  1990s.1  On  the  other  hand,  some 
underlying variables have diverged, in particular cost and price competitiveness, leading to 
an  accumulation  of  payments  imbalances  within  the  euro  area.  Some  countries  have 
accumulated large current account deficits, while others have growing surpluses. You could 
argue  that  imbalances  do  not  matter  in  a  monetary  union,  because  they  are  automatically 
financed. But such imbalances might make countries more vulnerable to external shocks and 
their  financing  might  become  more  difficult  in  the  midst  of  a  financial  crisis,  even  within  a 
monetary union.  
One of the disappointing aspects of the last ten years has been the Lisbon process and the 
slow pace of structural reform. What does this have to do with the euro? The Lisbon process 
is an EU initiative. It is voluntary, it imposes no constraints, and rightly so, since it involves 
policies  which  follow  the  principle  of  subsidiarity  and  remain  in  the  hands  of  the  Member 
States.  Would  the  Lisbon  process  have  been  more  effective  without  the  euro?  I  seriously 
doubt it. 
Overall,  I  believe  that  the  euro  has  largely  fulfilled  the  expectations.  Maybe  with  one 
exception: the cash changeover from national currencies to the euro in 2002, and the way it 
was  perceived  by  the  public.  I will  not  dwell  too  much  on  this.  Certainly  the  euro  has 
performed a role that nobody expected at the start, being the scapegoat for a whole series of 
negative  developments,  at  national  and  European  level.  For  several  years,  whenever 
problems occurred, ordinary people and even politicians found Europe and the euro a handy 
target.  One  of  the  very  few  benefits  of  the  financial  crisis  is  the  growing  awareness  that, 
without the euro, people in the euro area would have been affected much more.  
Monetary and political union 
An  important  –  maybe  unintentional  –  message  of  David  Marsh’s  book  is  that  Monetary 
Union is in fact a political union. This is reflected in his detailed historical account of events 
that led to Monetary Union. It’s all about political leaders discussing, negotiating, agreeing or 
disagreeing, taking decisions, committing their own countries. Even the non-decisions, or the 
decisions not to participate, were political decisions.  
Interestingly,  the  historical  chapters  omit  two  important  episodes,  which  have  also  had 
political consequences, even in a country like the UK, which is outside the euro area. The 
first is the Messina Conference in 1955, which laid the foundations for the European Union. 
The  conference  is  remembered,  among  other  things,  for  the  statement  made  by  the  UK 
diplomat  who  left  the  proceedings  stating:  “The  future  treaty  you  are  discussing  has  no 
chance of being agreed; if it was agreed, it would have no chance of being ratified; and if it 
was ratified, it would have no chance of being applied.” This remark seems to encapsulate 
Britain’s political ambivalence towards Europe and has permeated the country’s attitude to 
the EU ever since. 
                                                 
1   See the European Commission’s EMU@10 report. 
BIS Review 20/2009 
 3
The second episode is more recent and more personal: I was a young sherpa in the Italian 
delegation  to  the  European  Council  in  Rome  on  27-28  October  1990  which  called  for 
intergovernmental  conferences  on  Political  Union  and  on  Economic  and  Monetary  Union. 
The  Council  decided  on  the  start  of  the  second  phase  of  EMU,  1  January  1994,  and  the 
creation of an institution in charge of developing “the instruments and procedures needed for 
the  future  conduct  of  monetary  policy”.  It  was  also  decisive  for  one  of  the  Heads  of 
Government  who,  by  insisting  on  having  a  dissenting  voice,  inserted  in  a  footnote  to  the 
commonly agreed Conclusions, was unable to convince back home that such a footnote was 
in the country’s best interest. Lady Thatcher had in fact fully understood what the founding 
fathers had known for years, i.e. that monetary union was a political endeavour, and that the 
final goal was political union, albeit a different union from those we are used to studying in 
textbooks. Creating the euro, adopting it or not adopting it, are not mere technical decisions 
but key political choices, and have profound political implications, which are quite different 
from being a member of the European Union. This might not have been fully realised by all.  
Let me give an example. No opt-out clause was offered to the Member States which joined in 
2004, even though some of them might have been less enthusiastic about joining the euro 
area than joining the EU itself. A formalistic reading of the Treaty reveals that all countries 
except the UK and Denmark are committed to converging as soon as possible to the single 
currency,  even  in  those  countries  where  popular  support  for  it  seems  to  be  still  limited.  A 
strict interpretation of the Treaty indicates that Sweden should not have had a referendum on 
the  euro  in  2003.  Indeed,  by  ratifying  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  Sweden  committed  itself  to 
joining  the  euro  as  soon  as  possible.  In  practice,  nobody  complains  that  the  letter  of  the 
Treaty is being ignored, because a country cannot be forced into the euro if it is politically 
unready to join.  
Being part of a monetary union binds its members at different political levels, not all of which 
are easily visible.  
Take fiscal policy. The provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact are more stringent for the 
euro  area  than  the  EU.  This  is  not  only  a  formalistic  aspect.  It  is  also  substantive. 
Discussions within the Eurogroup are of a substantive nature, although from the outside it 
doesn’t  always  seem  so.  One  example  of  a  discussion  which  did  become  public  was  the 
decision  taken  by  the  Eurogroup,  by  a  qualified  majority,  on  the  evening  of  24  November 
2003 – or should I say in the early hours of 25 November – to vote against the Commission 
recommendation  to  open  an  excessive  deficit  procedure  against  France  and  Germany. 
Whether  right  or  wrong,  that  decision  was  undeniably  a  political  one,  and  had  deep 
implications for the budgetary policies of the two countries and for the relationship between 
European institutions. It was taken with the full involvement of the competent political bodies, 
at national and European level. This is not always fully understood, in particular across the 
Channel, where it is often thought – and reported – that joining the euro would put national 
fiscal policies under the control of bureaucrats in Brussels or Frankfurt. 
Political integration in the euro area is an evolutionary process. The special meeting of the 
Eurogroup, in the composition of Heads of State and Government, in Paris on 12 October 
last year was a first: it addressed the financial crisis, and in doing so the euro area showed 
its effectiveness and its capacity for leadership. It is an important precedent, which shows 
that  when  needed  the  euro  area  can  take  important  decisions  and  cooperate  swiftly.  The 
Eurogroup  probably  won't  need  to  meet  regularly  in  this  format  –  as  this  would  risk 
overshadowing the finance ministers’ meetings – but now at least it is an option, a feasible 
one.  
Let  me  give  you  another  example  of  ongoing  political  integration.  The  current  crisis  has 
shown the need to strengthen prudential supervision and, in particular, its links with central 
banking. This is a recommendation contained in various documents and reports, in particular 
that  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum’s  to  the  G7  Ministers  and  central  bank  governors. 
Several countries will be moving in this direction. In the US the Federal Reserve will receive 
4 
 BIS Review 20/2009
greater  responsibilities  for  macro-prudential  supervision.  The  euro  area  has  a  centralised 
decision-making process for monetary policy but a de-centralised system of supervision. The 
conclusion  is  obvious:  cooperation  between  supervisors  needs  to  be  much  stronger  within 
the euro area. This also implies that the ECB, which conducts the monetary policy for the 
euro  area,  should  be  entrusted  with  greater  supervisory  powers,  in  particular  concerning 
macro-prudential  supervision.  There  should  be  a  broad  consensus  on  such  a  proposal 
among  euro  area  members.  However,  this  can  be  implemented  only  by  activating  article 
105.6 of the EU Treaty, which requires unanimity of the EU member states. Will some non-
euro area members oppose this?  
A final word on political union. A superficial reading of David Marsh’s book might give the 
impression  that  political  integration  has  taken  place  over  the  years  as  a  result  of  some 
countries dominating others, distrust between political classes of different countries, threats, 
truces and fights, etc. It’s interesting to relate history in this way. But we should never forget 
that  the  creation  of  the  euro  has  been  the  result  of  an  unprecedented  democratic  and 
peaceful process in Europe, led over 50 years by leaders who have put the interests of the 
people of Europe ahead of any other objective.  
The next ten years 
Where  does  this  leave  us  in  the  next  ten  years?  As  the  euro  enters  its  second  decade, 
conditions aren’t exactly auspicious, as we are facing the most serious economic crisis since 
World War II. I’m sure the challenges ahead for the euro will be considerable.  
The global recession is a challenge not only for the euro area but for all countries. It has had 
and  will  have  serious  repercussions  on  our  economies  and  on  the  fabric  of  our  societies. 
They will be exposed to severe stresses and strains. The specialisation model of the past 
two decades might no longer be viable. I have the impression that some policy-makers think 
that  their  national  economies  will  return  to  the  state  of  balance  which  existed  before  the 
crisis. They don’t seem to realise that that was actually a state of imbalance, characterised 
by  excessive  borrowing  by  the  private  sector  and  excessive  leverage  by  the  financial 
institutions. This misperception might lead to inappropriate policy decisions. 
Unlike in previous crises, one difference on this occasion and in the years ahead is that the 
euro area countries will not be able to use the exchange rate as a policy instrument. This fact 
seems to excite many commentators. Some believe it will create further tensions within the 
euro  area,  and  may  lead  to  a  split-up.  Other  observers,  on  the  opposite,  foresee  a 
strengthening of other policy instruments to face up to the challenges.  
I won’t respond to such speculation, but will make a few points for you to consider. 
First,  one  reason  for  creating  the  euro  was  to  avoid  precisely  the  kind  of  turbulence  that 
occurred  in  Europe  when  we  had  a  large  number  of  currencies  with  adjustable  exchange 
rates. There is no doubt that the effects of the crisis would have been greater if the euro area 
members  still  had  their  own  currencies.  This  is  the  lesson  from  the  upheaval  of  1992-93, 
which is fully understood today. To use Chancellor Merkel’s words: “One of the lessons of 
this financial crisis is that, if we hadn’t had the euro, we would have had to invent it”. 
Second, the current crisis is bound to raise again the issue of whether a single market like 
the one we have among 27 countries in the EU can function smoothly when the exchange 
rate  of  some  of  the  members  is  allowed  –  or  even  encouraged  –  to  depreciate  sharply, 
possibly distorting competition. The integrity of the single market itself can be put at risk if the 
exchange rate is used – and seen to be used – as an instrument to gain competitiveness at 
the  detriment  of  the  others.  This  may  fuel  reaction  and  fuel  protectionist  pressures,  also 
within the EU. Little attention has been paid so far to the risks incurred by the single market 
in current times, as compared to the speculations about the single currency.  
BIS Review 20/2009 
 5
Third, some countries in the euro area have experienced a divergence in terms of growth, 
price dynamics and public finances. The divergence was partly a consequence of the strong 
economic  growth  over  the  last  few  years.  However,  this  convergence  might  have  been 
based, in part, on unsound fundamentals, so some correction was inevitable. Correction will 
be needed particularly in areas related to labour market functioning, public expenditures and 
financial  markets.  Some  observers  have  said  that  these  corrections  could  be  made  more 
easily  if  the  countries  in  question  were  outside  the  euro  area  and  could  devalue  their 
currencies.  This  conjecture  is  not  only  questionable  from  a  theoretical  viewpoint,  it  is 
irrelevant from a practical perspective.  
Conclusions 
The next ten years will be quite demanding for the euro, possibly more so than the first ten. 
Adolescence is generally a more tempestuous time than infancy. There is a saying in Italian: 
“Bambini  piccoli,  problemi  piccoli…”.  It  means  “small  children,  small  problems…”  implying 
that as children grow older the problems tend to increase. The founding fathers of the euro 
knew this. Yet, we know from psychology that the first seven years of a person’s life are the 
most important ones and critically influence how he or she will behave as an adult. Judging 
from  the  first  years  of  the  euro,  we  can  be  confident  that  our  currency  will  be  up  to  the 
challenge.  
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 20/2009
