Mark Carney: Rebuilding confidence in the global economy 
Remarks by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Northwest Territories 
Chamber  of  Commerce  and  Yellowknife  Chamber  of  Commerce,  Yellowknife,  Northwest 
Territories, 1 April 2009. 
 Good afternoon. These are very challenging times. The Canadian economy is in recession. 
The global economy is facing a crisis of confidence, triggered by the most severe financial 
meltdown since the Great Depression; fanned by sharp falls in trade, manufacturing output, 
and financial wealth; and intensified by steep increases in unemployment. In the throes of 
this  crisis,  fundamental  certainties  –  about  the  structure  of  the  financial  system,  the 
effectiveness of macro policy, and even the principles of capitalism – are being questioned. 
In this environment, Canadians from coast to coast to coast are more concerned about their 
economic future than they have been in decades. These concerns are understandable given 
the economic realities we face: unemployment has risen sharply, and the job market can be 
expected to deteriorate further before it recovers. The prices for our exports have fallen, our 
personal finances are under increasing strain, and our economy is currently shrinking. 
However, these concerns ought not be boundless. The Canadian economy has fundamental 
strengths, and has not been prone to the excesses that others have experienced. Moreover, 
globally and in Canada, policy-makers have mounted an aggressive three-pronged response 
to the current crisis. Monetary and fiscal policies have been eased substantially to support 
demand. Unprecedented measures have been taken to support the financial sector in order 
to keep credit flowing. And bold, longer-term reforms are being developed to create a more 
stable and efficient financial sector. If well executed, these measures will collectively begin to 
restore confidence and, with it, promote sustainable economic growth. 
My  message  today  is  simple:  there  is  a  plan  to  restore  confidence  and  growth,  we  are 
implementing it, and it will work. The impact of these policies will build over time and will be 
significant.  For  maximum  effect,  it  is  critical  that  measures  be  grounded  in  robust  and 
principled frameworks: the objectives should be transparent; indicators of success clear; and 
entry  and  exit  criteria  well  articulated.  Citizens  must  be  able  to  hold  their  policy-makers 
accountable. Policymakers must rise to the occasion. 
Canadians  can  have  confidence  that  the  right  policies  are  being  put  in  place.  They  can 
manage their affairs in expectation – rather than hope – of a recovery. They can also expect 
that, once the global recovery begins, the Canadian economy will recover faster than many 
other industrialized economies. 
Unfortunately,  the  exact  timing  of  the  recovery  is  uncertain,  and  the  global  recovery  itself 
may be more muted than usual. Since these factors depend to a great degree on measures 
taken outside our borders, the Bank is working intensively with our international colleagues to 
re-establish confidence in the global financial system. At home, our priorities are to cushion 
the blow of the global recession on the Canadian economy and to preserve our advantages 
so that we remain well positioned for the recovery when it occurs. 
Current global outlook: synchronized and deep global recession 
Global  economic  activity  is  currently  falling  at  the  sharpest  rate  since  World  War  II.  What 
began  as  a  relatively  controlled  slowdown  has  become  a  synchronized  and  deep  global 
recession.  The  proximate  cause  was  the  intensification  of  the  global  financial  crisis  that 
resulted  from  the  failures  of  several  prominent  global  financial  institutions  and  from  the 
growing realization that this was a solvency rather than a liquidity crisis. The recession that 
BIS Review 41/2009 
 1
originated in the United  States has spread around the world through confidence, financial, 
and trade channels. 
The  consequent  drop  in  global  demand  can  be  seen  in  sharp  relief  in  recent  industrial 
production  figures,  which  have  –  to  use  a  too-familiar  phrase  –  “fallen  off  a  cliff.”  U.S. 
industrial production is down 11 per cent from its peak – with a majority of the losses in motor 
vehicle production. This is the worst performance since the oil shock of 1973-75, when large 
swathes  of U.S.  manufacturing  capacity  were  rendered  uncompetitive.  The  picture  is  even 
worse  in  Japan,  where  industrial  production  has  fallen  by  30  per  cent  over  the  last  year. 
Indeed,  across  the  G-7  countries  excluding  Canada,  industrial  production  has  fallen  an 
average of roughly 16 percent since its peak about a year ago. To put this into perspective, if 
Canadian industrial production had fallen by the same proportion, our GDP would have been 
3 percentage points lower at year-end. 
These declines have highlighted the fundamental interconnectedness of the global economy. 
For example, the reverberations of contracting U.S. consumer demand are spreading rapidly 
via global supply chains. World trade fell 5 per cent in the fourth quarter and will have fallen 
further still in the first quarter. The drop-off has been particularly severe across countries that 
supply goods to China. These economies are now suffering from China’s leverage to U.S. 
consumers.1
The  sharp  fall  in  industrial  demand  has  had  a  direct  impact  on  the  prices  of  most  major 
commodities. The Bank of Canada's commodity price index declined by roughly 50 per cent 
in  the  second  half  of  last  year,  helping  to  fuel a  16  per  cent  decline  in  Canada's  terms  of 
trade over the same period. 
The  nature of  the  U.S. recession, with  very  weak  auto  and  housing  sectors, is  particularly 
challenging for Canada. The U.S. household sector is very depressed, with sentiment at its 
lowest point in 30 years. Housing construction continues to be a major drag on U.S. growth, 
with housing starts now well below replacement rates. U.S. motor vehicle sales have fallen 
almost 40 per cent from their average monthly sales value reported between 2000 and 2007. 
With  similar  declines  in  Europe  and  Asia,  there  is  a  global  auto  crisis,  with  significant 
multiplier effects on global growth. 
We expect that the eventual U.S. recovery will be much slower than usual. In our January 
Monetary Policy Report Update, we projected that it will take at least two and half years from 
the onset of the recession for U.S. GDP to return to its pre-recession level. This sluggishness 
reflects the lingering effects of the crisis on the U.S. financial system, the traditional lags in 
the impact of policy, and the expected slow recovery of domestic consumption owing to the 
magnitude of wealth effects and the deterioration in the labour market. 
Major secular shifts 
It is increasingly apparent that the current downturn represents more than a cyclical shock. It 
also marks the advent of three major secular shifts, which any credible policy response must 
take into account. 
First,  the  correction  of  unsustainably  large  current  account  imbalances  in  several  major 
economies  is  now  under  way.  The  rapid  spillover  of  declining  consumer  demand  in  the 
United States on Asian trade and output demonstrates the tight relationship between these 
two economic areas. That which was symbiotic is now virulent. In the very short term, these 
                                                 
1   Chinese exports fell by 26 per cent in February of this year, compared with the same time last year. Over the 
same period, Taiwanese exports were off 25 per cent year-on-year in February, Japan's fell 46 per cent, and 
Korea's  18  per  cent  (versus  an  average  growth  of  18  per  cent  over  the  past  five  years  in  these  four 
economies). 
2 
 BIS Review 41/2009
imbalances will narrow dramatically. For example, the Bank currently expects that the U.S. 
current account deficit will fall to around 3 per cent of GDP toward the end of 2009, or about 
one-half  of  its  size  in  2006.  However,  adjustment  through  a  collapse  in  demand  is  hardly 
desirable. The sustainable rebalancing of domestic demand from deficit countries, such as 
the  United  States  and  the  United  Kingdom,  toward  surplus  countries,  such  as  China  and 
Germany,  will  take  some  time  and  is  likely  to  dampen  the  pace  of  growth  in  the  global 
economy during that period. 
Second, the crisis marks a watershed for the design and use of financial services. For three 
decades,  major  economies  have  undergone  a  process  of  financial  deepening,  whereby 
people and firms were able to borrow more readily and efficiently to finance investments and 
to  smooth  consumption  over  time.  People  also  took  increasing  control  of  their  retirement 
planning  and  became  steadily  more  active  in  financial  markets.  With  these  changes,  the 
importance of financial markets relative to banks – and of the financial sector relative to other 
sectors of the economy – increased. During this process, the level of household debt relative 
to GDP rose sharply. These trends were at their most extreme in the United Kingdom and 
the United States. 
The reversal of these trends began with the current financial crisis and will be encouraged by 
changes  both  to  the  structure  of  the  financial  services  industry  and  in  the  portfolio 
preferences of individuals. As a result, we can now expect a period of financial shallowing – 
characterized  by  reintermediation  of  transactions  onto  bank  balance  sheets,  a  relative 
decline  in  market-based  finance,  and  a  decrease  in  cross-border  financial  flows.  In  the 
process, financial leverage will fall. There has already been considerable deleveraging of the 
non-regulated  financial  sector  (hedge  funds,  structured  investment  vehicles  (SIVs)  and 
captive finance companies of major industrial companies). However, there is still much to be 
done on the regulated side. The Bank of Canada estimates that for foreign banks to delever 
to Canadian levels, they will need to raise about US$1 trillion in capital prior to any additional 
write-downs incurred. 
Third and most fundamentally, it would appear likely that the global economy is entering a 
period of lower potential growth. It is now readily apparent that there was substantial capital 
misallocation in the boom years, including heavy investment in non-tradable real estate and 
a  global  auto  industry  geared  to  outmoded  demand  patterns.  It  will  take  time  to  reorient, 
since household savings are likely to rise substantially in many industrialized countries. One 
of the lessons of Japan’s “lost decade” is that an economy cannot really have sustainable 
growth until past excesses have been worked off. 
In the meantime, frictions are rising that could reduce the efficiency of the global economy. 
Financial nationalism is emerging, not only because of a rise in home bias, but also because 
of  the  recognition  that  financial  institutions  are  global  in  life  but  national  in  death.2 
Regrettably,  the  designs  of  some  rescue  packages  and  reforms  are  creating  barriers  to 
cross-border capital flows. This could gather momentum, which would be most ominous if it 
were to accompany a return to trade protectionism. 
Canadian outlook 
The global downturn and declining demand for our exports will make this a very difficult year 
for Canada’s economy. The first half of the year will be particularly challenging, with deep 
drops  in  activity  and  considerable  increases  in  unemployment.  The  contraction  in  the  first 
quarter now looks likely to be the worst on record since 1961. This reflects an exceptionally 
unfavourable  combination  of  factors:  further  negative  growth  in  the  world  economy  that 
                                                 
2   T. Huertas, “The Rationale For and Limits Of Bank Supervision.” (Speech to the London Financial Regulation 
Seminar, London, England, 19 January 2009). 
BIS Review 41/2009 
 3
greatly depressed our exports and terms of trade; the beginning of a substantial inventory 
correction; worsening labour market conditions combined with falling income and declining 
household net worth, causing a further decline in household spending; and increasing spare 
capacity and reduced cash flows that further discouraged business investment. 
The  global  recession  has  meant  a  significant  decline  in  external  demand  for  Canadian 
products.  The  U.S.  auto  crisis is  forcing  a  wrenching  adjustment  to our  industry.  The  U.S. 
housing  crisis  and  the  stresses  faced  by  print  media  are  conspiring  to  create  intense 
challenges for our forestry sector. The drop in our terms of trade since July will translate into 
a significant reduction in Canadian incomes and thus in our ability to sustain real domestic 
spending in the economy.3
Domestic  demand  in  Canada  is  softening  for  other  reasons  as  well.  Rising  unemployment 
means  less  income  and  lower  consumer  spending.  Losses  experienced  by  Canadians  on 
their  financial  holdings,  either  directly  or  via  their  pension  funds,  and  concerns  about  the 
employment  outlook  will  also  restrain  domestic  consumption  this  year.  In  addition, 
uncertainty  about  the  economic  outlook  and  strained  financial  conditions  will  likely  lead  to 
declines in investment spending this year. 
Given these factors, the Canadian economy could continue to contract into the second half of 
this year. As noted in our March interest rate decision, the Bank now expects the output gap 
will be considerably wider than before, and we do not expect it to begin to close until the first 
quarter of next year, at the earliest. 
The Bank will provide a full update of its outlook for the Canadian economy on 23 April when 
it publishes its Monetary Policy Report. 
Prospects for recovery: restoring global confidence 
The timing of the global and Canadian recoveries depends crucially on two related factors: 
the  stabilization  of  the  global  financial  system  and  the  restoration  of  confidence  among 
households and businesses. 
Across the world, the paradox of thrift is now in full force. Firms are postponing investment 
projects and building cash reserves. Households are delaying purchases and increasing their 
savings.  Banks  are  curtailing  lending  and  hoarding  capital.  These  decisions,  even  if 
individually  rational,  are  collectively  damaging  to  our  economic  prospects  –  and  are 
ultimately self-defeating. 
Once this dynamic has been set in motion, it will only be broken by decisive measures to 
restore confidence. This will not happen overnight. To quote Montek Singh Ahluwalia, deputy 
chairman of India’s Planning Commission, “Confidence grows at the rate that a coconut tree 
grows, but confidence falls at the rate that the coconut falls.” 
To restore confidence, policy initiatives must be sizable, forward looking, and credible. That 
is, they should be scaled to the severity of the shocks, take into account the secular shifts 
just  outlined,  and  incorporate  an  exit  strategy.  Most  fundamentally,  policies  must  be  fully 
consistent with well-articulated frameworks that support sustainable economic growth. 
As  the  Bank  has  consistently  emphasized,  stabilization  of  the  global  financial  system  is  a 
precondition for economic recovery, globally and in Canada. In this regard, there are three 
requirements:  1)  keep  the  system  functioning;  2)  address  legacy  or  toxic  assets;  and  3) 
develop more fundamental reforms. 
                                                 
3   This terms-of-trade shock can be expected to materially  lower profits for our producers, reduce  wages and 
employment for workers in our resource sectors, impair orders from related industries and services, and lower 
revenues for governments. 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2009
In  order  to  keep  the  system  functioning,  central  banks  have  responded  aggressively  and 
creatively  to  supply  liquidity.  These  efforts  have  been  largely  successful  with  interbank 
lending  rates  narrowing  substantially  since  the  worst  periods  last  fall.  Reflecting  both  the 
strength  of  our  financial  system  and  the  timeliness  of  the  Bank  of  Canada’s  response, 
Canadian spreads have been the best performing of the major economies. 
Conditions have been slower to improve in other markets. The issuance of commercial paper 
(CP) and asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) has stabilized, but spreads remain wide 
and  maturities  relatively  short.  Corporate  bond  issuance  has  improved,  though  activity 
remains  below  trend,  and  spreads  appear  to  incorporate  unusually  high  liquidity  premia. 
There are also concerns over possible crowding out of private finance by large-scale public 
debt issuance. Sovereign debt issuance – excluding guarantees – will rise threefold this year. 
In this context, some central banks have taken direct measures to improve the flow of credit; 
and governments will need to be prudent when considering additional borrowing. 
Keeping  the  system  functioning  also  requires  action  to  mitigate  the  dramatic  reversal  in 
cross-border capital flows. The Institute of International Finance estimates that net flows from 
private creditors to emerging markets, which topped US$630 billion in 2007, will be negative 
this year. 
The scale of these declines means that there is an urgent need for additional IMF resources. 
In  addition,  a  sharp  decline  in  the  availability  of  trade  finance  has  exacerbated  the  fall  in 
international trade. G-20 countries could address this by providing additional export credits 
and trade insurance, as Canada has done. The G-20 summit beginning today could make 
substantial progress on these issues. 
Second, the timely implementation of ambitious plans in the United States and other major 
economies  to  address  toxic  assets  and  re-capitalize  financial  institutions  will  be  critical  to 
stabilizing the global financial sector. Two weeks ago in Horsham, England, the G-20 agreed 
on principles for addressing such assets; the issue now is implementation. 
Throughout  this  process  of  restructuring  the  financial  system,  policy-makers  have  made  it 
clear that systemically important institutions will not be allowed to fail. G-20 finance ministers 
and governors reiterated that commitment earlier this month in Horsham. Moreover, no one 
should  be  in  any  doubt  that  G-20  countries  can  afford  their  banking  sectors.  The  Bank 
calculates  that  even  in  the  worst-case  scenario,  recapitalizing  the  banking  system  in  an 
individual G-20 country would cost less than 20 per cent of GDP – a considerable, but still 
manageable, sum. 
Third, G-20 nations need to move decisively to define the priorities for the new international 
financial  architecture.  In  this  regard,  measures  to  improve  transparency  and  integrity,  to 
implement  a  macroprudential  approach  to  regulation,  and  to  widen  the  perimeter  of 
regulation are vital. 
If these national and multilateral measures are not timely, bold, and well executed, Canada’s 
economic recovery will be both attenuated and delayed. The reality is that the financial crisis 
and subsequent recession originated beyond our borders, and the necessary triggers for a 
sustained recovery must be found there as well. Canada has much to offer, which is why we 
are working closely and tirelessly with our international colleagues. 
Managing demand 
Stabilizing  the  global  financial  system  is  the  top  priority.  However,  success  in  this  regard 
alone will not necessarily mark an immediate return to global economic growth. Exuberance 
– of any type – has been in short supply for some time. Confidence will be slow to return, and 
the rebalancing of global demand will take some time. In short, the global economy faces a 
period of deficient demand. Both monetary and fiscal policy can help address this shortfall. 
BIS Review 41/2009 
 5
The  scale  and  appropriate  mix  of  the  response  will  vary  by  country  and  will  depend 
importantly on the credibility of the policy frameworks. 
Reflecting  the  seriousness  of  the  shock,  the  global  macroeconomic  policy  response  has 
been unprecedented. 
Fiscal  policy  initiatives  have  been  robust,  with  the  world  well  on  its  way  to  spending  an 
average  of  2  per  cent  of  global  GDP  in  discretionary  fiscal  measures.  Simultaneous  fiscal 
action is not only more powerful than measures taken in isolation, but also has the potential 
to  provide  some  support  for  commodity  prices.  This  is  because  government  infrastructure 
spending is relatively commodity-intensive. 
With  respect  to  monetary  policy,  target  interest  rates  have  been  substantially  and  rapidly 
reduced  in  major  economies.4  The  Bank  of  Canada  has  lowered  our  policy  rate  by  a 
cumulative  400  basis  points  since  December  2007.  Consistent  with  returning  total  CPI 
inflation to 2 per cent, the target for our overnight rate can be expected to remain at this level 
or lower at least until there are clear signs that excess supply in the economy is being taken 
up.  It  is  important  to  recognize  that  central  banks  do  not  necessarily  need  to  keep  cutting 
interest rates to provide additional monetary easing. Duration matters. By keeping rates low 
for longer, additional stimulus can be provided. 
The effects of the recent aggressive monetary and fiscal policy actions in Canada and other 
major economies will begin to be felt in the second half of this year and will build through 
2010. Once the global financial system stabilizes and global economic growth recovers, the 
underlying  strength  of  the  Canadian  economy  and  financial  sector  should  ensure  a  more 
rapid  recovery  in  Canada  than  in  most  other  industrialized  economies.  However,  as  we 
highlighted in our last Monetary Policy Report Update, the global recovery will likely be more 
muted  than  usual,  owing  not  least  to  the  weight  of  past  excesses  in  the  United  States 
economy. 
In the coming months, there may be pressure for policy to do more. Such decisions must be 
taken carefully with an eye to the scale of what has already been done, the traditional lags to 
policy, and the paramount need to retain the credibility of fiscal and monetary frameworks. 
Canada  is  well  served  in  this  regard,  since  inflation  targeting  gives  us  an  important 
advantage  in  focus  and  communications.  Our  monetary  policy  mandate  is  clear:  conduct 
policy in order to achieve our target of 2 per cent CPI inflation over the medium term. Low, 
stable  and  predictable  inflation  is  the  best  contribution  monetary  policy  can  make  to  the 
economic and financial welfare of Canadians. 
It is in this context that we will outline later this month a framework for the possible use of 
unconventional  monetary  policy  measures,  including  credit  easing  and  quantitative  easing. 
As  the  overnight  rate  approaches  zero,  it  is  important  that  Canadians  understand  that  the 
Bank retains a considerable number of policy options to achieve its mandate. Moreover, it is 
essential  that  these  alternatives  are  outlined  in  a  comprehensive  fashion:  with  clear 
indicators  of  success  identified,  and  transparent  principles  for  both  entry  and  exit.  To  be 
absolutely clear, outlining a framework does not necessarily imply that these policy options 
will be deployed. Their use will be a function of the outlook for output and inflation and of the 
relative effectiveness of the instruments in achieving the inflation target. 
                                                 
4   The G-20 policy rate has fallen to 2.14 per cent from 4.27 per cent in August 2008. 
6 
 BIS Review 41/2009
Conclusion 
A deep and synchronized global recession is currently under way. It is being fed by a crisis of 
confidence. Reversing this will take concerted short-term macro measures, long-term micro 
reforms, and time. 
Stabilization of the global financial system is a pre-condition for economic recovery. In this 
regard,  implementation  of  recently  announced  plans  to  address  toxic  assets  in  banking 
systems outside Canada will be critical. In addition, this week’s G-20 summit should provide 
the road map for a more stable and effective international financial system. 
In  the  meantime,  the  freefall  in  domestic  demand  and  an  atmosphere  of  exceptional 
uncertainty  has  created  an  intense  need  for  massive,  credible  policy  action.  This  need  is 
being met – there has been an unprecedented monetary and fiscal response. The effects of 
these policies will build over time and will be felt with full force next year. 
Decisions  to  provide  additional  stimulus  must  be  carefully  considered.  It  is  paramount  to 
retain the credibility of fiscal and monetary policy frameworks. While considerable options for 
further monetary stimulus remain, their use is not preordained and will solely be determined 
by their appropriateness in achieving the inflation target. 
BIS Review 41/2009 
 7
