Mario Draghi: The global recession 
Address by Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy, at the 15th Congress of the AIAF 
– ASSIOM – ATIC FOREX, Milan, 21 February 2009.  
 The  risks  to  the  world  economy,  which  until  last  summer  were  only  feared,  have  now 
materialized.  Economic  activity  is  falling  sharply  in  all  the  main  countries.  The  crisis  of 
confidence is the worst since the Second World War.  
The  forecasts  for  2009  have  been  revised  repeatedly  downwards.  The  International 
Monetary Fund now predicts a contraction of 1.6 per cent in output in the United States, 2 
per cent in the euro area and 2.6 per cent in Japan. Recently released GDP data for the last 
quarter of 2008 and the latest economic indicators presage further downward revisions. The 
crisis  has  spread  to  the  emerging  economies,  which  have  been  affected  by  the  fall-off  in 
global demand and the drying up of net capital inflows.  
In  Europe  and  in  Italy  the  contraction  began  in  the  second  quarter.  For  2008  as  a  whole 
output  rose  by  0.7  per  cent  in  the  euro  area;  in  Italy  it  fell  by  almost  1  per  cent.  The 
deterioration  in  exports  and  investment,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  weak  household  spending, 
were contributory factors. 
For Italy the data on orders, stocks, capacity utilization and the labour market all point to the 
protraction  of  the  economic  downswing  in  the  coming  quarters.  The  repercussions  on 
employment have yet to emerge fully. The indicators available for recent months prefigure a 
marked  deterioration.  The  fall  in  output  has  been  accompanied  by  a  sharp  increase  in 
recourse to the Wage Supplementation Fund. Businesses expect job losses in the months to 
come. 
The  contraction  in  demand  can  hit  society’s  poorest  and  most  vulnerable  –  precarious 
workers,  the  young,  and  low-income  households  –  particularly  badly.  For  more  than  ten 
years Italian employment increased at a sustained pace. Between 1995 and 2008 three and 
a  half  million  jobs  were  created,  thanks  above  all  to  wage  moderation  and  greater  labour 
flexibility. Temporary positions have more than doubled. In the third quarter of 2008 fixed-
term,  temporary  and  project  workers  numbered  almost  three  million.  Almost  four-fifths  of 
these workers’ contracts expire within one year; they are subject to especially severe risk. 
Economic policy initiatives  
To break the grip of recession is the task of economic policies. There is general awareness 
of  the  need  for  sweeping  interventions  at  global  level,  the  more  closely  coordinated  the 
better. Action must focus simultaneously on the three pillars of fiscal, monetary and financial 
stability  policies.  The  sooner  confidence  is  restored  in  the  prospects  for  employment  and 
income, a return to balanced growth and the soundness of the financial system, the faster 
the exit from recession will be.  
Fiscal policies 
Fiscal  policy  has  become  strongly  expansionary  in  the  main  countries,  with  measures  to 
support  demand  coming  on  top  of  those  taken  to  safeguard  the  banking  and  financial 
system.  The  United  States  has  approved  interventions  of  almost  $800  billion,  with  an 
aggregate impact on the deficit in 2009-11 of 5 per cent of one year’s GDP. In Japan the 
measures  for  2009-10  amount  to  2  per  cent  of  GDP;  in  Canada,  3  per  cent.  In  Europe, 
BIS Review 22/2009 
 1
Germany  approved  a  stimulus  package  amounting  to  over  3  points  of  GDP  for  2009  and 
2010; Spain, a little less than 2 points for one year; the United Kingdom almost 1.5 points; 
France around 0.75 points.  
The increases in expenditure and reductions in revenue approved in Italy for countercyclical 
objectives  amount  to  around  0.5  per  cent  of  GDP,  funded  by  measures  of  opposite  sign. 
Additional measures are aimed at reassigning already appropriated resources to uses that 
will  effectively  stimulate  aggregate  demand.  The  structure  of  the  measures  reflects  the 
prudence needed in view of the size of the public debt 
The  choice  of  the  forms  that  public  measures  in  support  of  demand  can  take  is  no  less 
important than their size. While these vary depending on the specific effects of the recession 
and  the  state  of  the  public  finances,  they  must  support  consumption  among  the  weakest 
sectors and enhance the economy’s capacity for investment growth. 
The Government has rightly extended temporary eligibility for social benefits to most of the 
workers  who  have  atypical  employment  contracts.  The  funding  of  these  programmes  has 
recently been increased thanks to an agreement between regions and the state. The need 
remains for a comprehensive reform to cover all workers against the risk of unemployment 
and facilitate their return to productive activity.  
Firms’  trade  receivables  with  general  government  in  relation  to  extensions  and  delays  in 
payment of goods and services are very large: about 2.5 per cent of GDP, more than 30 per 
cent  of  annual  general  government  spending  on  consumption  and  investment.  Faster 
payments would help support firms without any structural drag on the public finances.  
In countries like Italy, where the level of private savings and public debt is high, fast-acting 
short-term  interventions  should  be  offset  by  structural  measures  that  immediately  confer 
certainty on the rebalancing of the budget in the medium term. It is essential to look further 
ahead:  the  long-term  sustainability  of  the  public  finances  is  fundamental  to  ensure  the 
effectiveness of policies in the short term as well. 
Monetary policies 
The  central  banks  have  made  a  prompt  and  coordinated  response  to  the  crisis.  Official 
interest  rates  have  been  lowered  rapidly;  in  many  countries  they  are  near  zero.  Worrying 
about getting too close to the lower limit for nominal interest rates cannot be a reason for 
inaction.  The  experience  of  the  United  States  in  the  1930s  and  of  Japan  in  the  1990s 
suggests that in the initial stages of the crisis it is necessary to counter the tendency of real 
interest rates to increase. Rapid disinflation must not be allowed to turn into deflation. 
The ECB has reduced its reference rate by 225 basis points since last October. In the euro 
area  the  real  short-term  rate  is  now  below  1  per  cent;  if  official  rates  had  not  been  cut,  it 
would  have  risen  considerably  because  of  the  fall  in  inflation.  The  Governing  Council  is 
keeping a close watch on the real cost of money.  
The  main  central  banks  have  injected  liquidity  in  unprecedented  quantities.  They  have 
extended the range of their own instruments for action. In some cases, they have intervened 
directly  by  buying  corporate  debt,  reactivating  the  circulation  of  credit  where  it  had  been 
blocked, helping to finance the private sector. They can act to influence long-term interest 
rates. To date, the judgement on the effectiveness of these measures is favourable.1  
When  macroeconomic  conditions  return  to  normal,  the  liquidity  pumped  into  the  economy 
should be rapidly drained. The adoption of a strategy to return to normality is premature until 
                                                 
1  See  Ben  S.  Bernanke’s  testimony  to  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of  Representatives, 
Washington, D.C., 10 February 2009.  
2 
 BIS Review 22/2009
output  and  employment  have  stopped  falling:  but,  as  with  fiscal  policy,  it  is  important  to 
provide  for  it  from  today  to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  the  monetary  expansion,  firmly 
anchoring  long-term  inflation  expectations  and  countering  any  speculative  bubbles  in  the 
prices of financial and real assets. 
Policies for financial system stability and the revival of credit 
Reactivating financial intermediation remains essential to get over the recession and return 
to lasting growth. The surrogate role played by central banks can only be temporary. 
Interventions in the United States and Europe last autumn (guarantees on deposits and bank 
securities) affected the liability side of bank balance sheets. They prevented the collapse of 
the system, reviving some markets. Their usefulness is steadily declining, however; it is now 
urgent  to  proceed  to  new  recapitalizations  aimed  at  growth  and  interventions  to  support 
banks’ assets. 
The International Monetary Fund is now estimating that the losses of the world’s banks and 
other  financial  institutions  total  $2.2  trillion;  just  five  months  ago,  the  estimate  was  $1.4 
trillion.  Worldwide,  the  losses  recorded  so  far  by  banks  come  to  more  than  $800  billion; 
intervention to reconstitute their capital has been approximately equivalent, almost half of it 
deriving from state funding.  
It is clear that intermediaries’ capital requirements cannot be satisfied by state intervention 
alone: the private capital market must be reactivated. The condition for this is the absolute 
transparency  of  banks’  assets.  Investors  and  markets  remain  sceptical  about  the  balance 
sheets  of  many  financial  institutions,  and  as  a  consequence  the  flow  of  capital  into  the 
banking  industry  has  dwindled  to  a  trickle,  the  level  of  capital  that  the  market  requires  of 
banks  has  risen,  and  banks  are  under  pressure  to  reduce  their  assets.  Internationally 
coordinated  action  by  supervisors  in  the  principal  financial  centres  is  needed  to  produce 
uniform  valuations  of  banks’  assets  in  order  to  enhance  the  credibility  and  reliability  of 
financial statements. The measures announced by various countries in recent weeks, such 
as ring-fencing the most problematic securities in banks’ balance sheets or transferring them 
to separate entities (bad banks), are welcome in that they encourage the emergence of the 
riskiest securities. 
However, especially in the banking systems that are only marginally burdened by the legacy 
of the past, the conditions for future growth need to be recreated. Along the lines of what has 
been done in some countries for existing “toxic” securities, consideration could be given to 
public  guarantees  for  senior  tranches  of  new  credit  pools.  Retaining  part  of  the  risk 
themselves,  the  banks  could  place  these  securities  more  readily,  reviving  a  substantial 
channel of finance that is inactive today.  
Keeping the markets open 
Between the third and fourth quarters of 2008 world trade declined, on an annual basis, by 
around 20 per cent; the IMF forecasts a drop of around 3 per cent this year, the first since 
1982. The contraction of trade, which represents one third of the value of global output, has 
serious repercussions on growth.  
The siren song of protectionism is powerfully alluring in times of crisis. In the very short term 
it  may  bring  some  benefits  and  mitigate  situations  of  real  social  hardship.  In  the  medium 
term, though, it will certainly prove illusory and destructive, as indeed it did in the 1930s. 
In November, the G20 countries vowed to keep their markets open, a commitment that was 
reaffirmed at the meeting of G7 ministers and central bank governors in Rome a few days 
ago. However, some worrying signs have appeared in recent months. In December, attempts 
to  reach  an  agreement  to  conclude  the  Doha  Round  of  multilateral  trade  liberalization 
negotiations  failed.  Some  emerging  countries  have  raised  customs  duties  or  initiated  anti-
BIS Review 22/2009 
 3
dumping actions. So far, such interventions have been limited and for the most part within 
the range permitted by multilateral regulations. A proliferation of such measures could prove 
deleterious, setting in motion a cycle of trade reprisals.  
It is important for the new US Administration to take a firm stand against demands for trade 
restrictions, and crucial that appeals for free trade should not be contradicted by action within 
the  European  Union  itself.  The  European  Commission  and  the  ECB  are  working  with  the 
Ecofin Council to draw up agreed policies in the field of financial intermediation and in other 
sectors receiving government aid.  
Revising the regulatory framework 
I have spoken at other gatherings about the progress we have made in revising the global 
regulatory framework, progress that would have been unthinkable just months ago. Today, I 
want  to  mention  the  work  under  way  in  international  fora  to  build  a  system  of  macro-
prudential supervision to flank the traditional oversight of individual institutions.  
This new perspective carries significant consequences for the extension and application of 
the regulations. Among these: every financial institution capable of creating systemic risk will 
be subject to supervision; the authorities will insist on knowing both the correlations between 
the  exposures  of  the  various  financial  institutions  and  the  way  in  which  risk  is  transferred 
over time and space; consideration will be given to the possibility of creating new capital and 
liquidity buffers that expand in times of growth and contract in the downward phases of the 
cycle and to the establishment of a leverage ratio that limits the growth in financial leverage; 
and measures will be taken to reduce the risks attached to OTC products by creating central 
counterparties. 
The announcement of banks’ participation in the construction of a central platform for trading 
in  credit  default  swaps  is  a  step  in  this  direction.  The  new  platform  will  bring  clarity  in  a 
market which, because of its size and opacity, is currently regarded as potentially capable of 
amplifying the crisis. 
It is envisaged that, at international level, the governance of financial institutions, executive 
compensation,  and  the  special  duties  of  intermediaries  to  protect  retail  investors  will  be 
subject  to  explicit  supervision.  Further,  the  formation  of  supervisory  colleges  for  major 
international intermediaries will be generalized.  
Italian banks 
Eighteen months after the world financial crisis erupted Italy’s banks are in better shape than 
the  largest  international  banks.  They  have  been  protected  by  a  low  level  of  financial 
leverage, a business model firmly based on traditional lending and rooted in the relationship 
with household and business customers, and a prudent regulatory framework and system of 
supervision. 
In 2008 the major international financial centres were the scene of the sudden collapse of 
leading institutions and repeated, large-scale government bail-outs. The financial turmoil has 
affected the financial conditions of our banks, but to a fairly limited extent: from the onset of 
the  phase  of  financial  instability  to  the  third  quarter  of  2008,  the  last  period  for  which  the 
consolidated  quarterly  reports  have  been  released,  the  leading  Italian  groups  made 
writedowns of some €4.5 billion as a result of the crisis, a substantial amount but less than 
for major foreign banks. Profits declined, but were still positive in the first nine months of the 
year.  
Overall,  capital  has  remained  above  minimum  requirements.  The  capital  ratios  of  Italian 
banking groups are calculated on the basis of stricter prudential criteria than are applied in 
other systems.  
4 
 BIS Review 22/2009
Above all, after the collapse of Lehman Brothers the greatest short-term risk for the stability 
of  the  international  financial  system has  been  the  liquidity  shortage.  Italy  has  not  escaped 
this.  In  the  unsecured  interbank  market,  turnover  fell  for  all  maturities  and  virtually 
disappeared for those beyond one week. Risk premiums jumped. 
At  present,  liquidity  conditions  have  eased.  The  spread  between  unsecured  and  secured 
three-month  interbank  rates,  which  had  widened  to  185  basis  points  on  10  October,  has 
progressively  narrowed,  reaching  90  basis  points  in  the  last  few  days.  Trading  in  slightly 
longer maturities has resumed. Some channels of finance that had been clogged appear to 
be  opening  up  again,  even  beyond  the  short  term;  in  January,  the  corporate  bond  market 
showed signs of revival, an important development in a phase when bonds issued by banks 
in recent years are maturing. But the recovery is fragile and highly uncertain. 
To provide the banking system with liquidity, so as to prevent any interruption of the flow of 
credit  and  payments,  has  been  the  principal  concern  of  the  authorities  for  many  weeks. 
Central banks have acted rapidly and in coordinated fashion; the Eurosystem has been one 
of the key actors. The guarantees introduced by the Italian government and the Bank of Italy 
have sustained confidence in the banking system and assisted the recovery of the interbank 
market; we have reported on this on several occasions. 
On the second of February, in collaboration with the Italian Banking Association and e-MID 
S.p.A.,  we  launched  the  Collateralized  Interbank  Market,  which  allows  banks  to  trade 
interbank funds anonymously and with a guarantee against the risks of counterparty illiquidity 
and  insolvency.  The  interest  rates  in  this  market  have  been  lower  than  those  on  the 
uncollateralized market and in the Euribor fixing, reflecting the containment of risk premiums. 
The  Collateralized  Interbank  Market  is  open  not  only  to  Italian  banks  but  also  to  other 
European  banks  that  meet  the  same  requirements,  subject  to  agreement  with  their  home 
central banks. 
Complacency about the danger we have avoided so far is of no help, we must look ahead. 
The recession in Europe will inevitably end up by  weighing on the accounts of our banks. 
Credit  risks  are  emerging  both  in  the  traditional  sectors  of  activity  and  in  the  emerging 
economies;  our  banking  system,  like  those  of  others,  is  exposed  to  deterioration  in  the 
latter’s performance. The increase in provisions for loan losses will hurt the banks’ results for 
this year. The market has discounted this in its valuations. 
It is necessary to take action to strengthen the prudential defences against the worsening of 
the  cyclical  situation  and  at  the  same  time  to  create  conditions  that  will  guarantee  an 
adequate  flow  of  credit,  so  as  to  avoid  a  downward  spiral  of  tight  credit  and  economic 
contraction. Beyond the short term, recovery of the real economy is a necessary condition for 
banks’ solidity. 
Credit 
Lending by the Italian banking system, which was still growing fast in the first part of 2008, 
slowed  down  over  the  year;  the  deceleration  became  sharp  in  the  last  few  months.  In  the 
fourth quarter the growth in credit to the private sector fell to 4.2 per cent on an annual basis, 
half  as  great  as  in  the  three  previous  months.  In  2008  the  stock  grew  by  7.4  per  cent,  a 
slowdown  of  more  than  3  percentage  points  compared  with  2007.  According  to  the 
provisional  data  referring  to  the  sample  of  banks  that  provide  10-day  reports,  the  stock  of 
total credit stagnated in January. If this is confirmed, this would imply a fall in just one month 
of about half a percentage point in the twelve-month rate of growth. 
The slowdown is common to the other major European countries and has affected all parts of 
the country and all categories of borrowers. 
The  growth  rate  was  modest  particularly  for  small  enterprises  and  manufacturing  industry; 
construction recorded an especially large slowdown. The fall in production and the uncertain 
BIS Review 22/2009 
 5
cyclical  outlook  have  depressed  the  demand  for  funds  for  fixed  investment  and  working 
capital. 
Households’ demand for loans reflected the fall in housing market activity and purchases of 
durable goods. In 2008 lending to the sector grew by 6 per cent, compared with increases of 
more than 10 per cent in the previous years. Personal loans continue to expand at a lively 
pace. 
The outcome for credit was also influenced by the more cautious lending policies adopted by 
banks  in  response  to  the  increase  in  the  cost  of  fund-raising,  the  partial  closure  of 
international  sources,  the  deterioration  in  customers’  creditworthiness  and  the  need  to 
improve  capital  ratios  to  cope  with  the  pressure  exerted  by  the  markets  at  a  time  of 
pronounced uncertainty. 
In 2008 resources obtained from foreign banks and money market funds fell by about 10 per 
cent.  They  had  risen  by  20  per  cent  in  2007  and  34  per  cent  in  2006,  when  they  had 
contributed  nearly  half  the  growth  in  fund-raising.  Banks  have  responded  to  the  smaller 
inflow from abroad by increasing the funds they raise from Italian households, above all with 
bonds. In 2008 the average cost of total fund-raising rose by 40 basis points compared with 
the  previous  year;  since  October  it  has  started  to  fall  following  the  reductions  in  official 
interest rates and the partial normalization of the interbank market. 
Loan quality is being affected by the recession. Since the third quarter of last year the flow of 
new bad debts has been increasing rapidly, and in the last quarter of 2008 the ratio to total 
outstanding loans was the highest since 1999 (not counting the peak in the fourth quarter of 
2003 due to the failure of Parmalat). The deterioration continued in January, when the total 
debt of newly insolvent customers was 70 per cent greater than in January 2008. 
The system has a major strength – private-sector debt is considerably lower in Italy than in 
other countries. Corporate financial debt amounts to 75 per cent of GDP, around 12 points 
lower  than  the  European  average.  The  leverage  of  Italian  firms  is  now  seven  points  lower 
than at the turn of the 1990s, on the eve of the last recession, and the percentage of financial 
costs covered by internally generated funds is higher. For households, though financial debt 
is  greater  than  in  the  past,  it  is  still  no  more  than  49  per  cent  of  disposable  income,  as 
against over 90 per cent in the euro area as a whole and 150 per cent in the United Kingdom 
and the United States. 
The most recent data indicate that in the third quarter of 2008, allocations to provisions and 
value  adjustments  absorbed  30  per  cent  of  the  operating  profit  of  Italy’s  largest  banking 
groups.  This  ratio,  though  still  far  below  the  level  recorded  in  the  United  States,  is  rising 
rapidly; it is worth recalling that at the end of the much less severe recession in the 1990s it 
exceeded 70 per cent. 
Just as banks have been asked to shed full light on the troubled assets that have been on 
their books since the onset of the crisis, it is equally important that they conduct a realistic, 
unflinching estimate of the loan losses that they are bound to incur in the months to come; 
and  that  this  estimate  serve  as  the  basis  for  conducting  balance-sheet  management  and 
determining capital injections, dividend policy and executive compensation. 
Strengthening the banks in order to sustain the economy 
Guaranteeing  a  sufficient  supply  of  credit  while  at  the  same  time  maintaining  sound  and 
prudent lending standards – this is the challenge that faces the banking system in 2009. A 
credit squeeze would aggravate the recession; a reduction in prudence could jeopardize the 
banks’ stability,  with  serious  consequences  for  their  medium-term  lending  capacity  and  for 
the economy. The objective of making funds available to the economy must not be pursued 
by relaxing standards of creditworthiness but by strengthening the capital base, in order to 
overcome undue constraints on asset growth. 
6 
 BIS Review 22/2009
I have had occasion, elsewhere, to remark that the approach to capital strengthening must 
be  pragmatic.  Banks  must  take  all  necessary  measures  and  seize  all  opportunities.  Some 
groups have already begun to move by disposing of non-essential assets, retaining earnings 
and going to the market. 
With the finalization of the implementing measures, the public funds provided by Law 2/2009 
will  soon  be  available.  Thanks  in  part  to  a  fruitful  dialogue  with  the  banking  system,  the 
instruments  offered  by  the  state  have  been  refined,  within  the  limits  of  EU  regulations,  to 
provide a range of flexible possibilities that can be adapted to the needs of the various banks 
and banking groups. 
If the funds made available by the state are adequate and the accompanying conditions are 
reasonable and practical, designed to attain the objective without administrative interference 
in business decisions, they should be used.  
It  is  also  desirable  to  revise  the  tax  treatment  of  loan  losses.  In  Italy,  banks  and  other 
financial intermediaries may only deduct loan writedowns up to 0.3 per cent of total lending. 
Writedowns  above  that  amount  are  deductible  over  18  years.  France,  Germany  and  the 
United Kingdom, by contrast, allow the full and immediate deduction of all value adjustments 
entered in the accounts. The Italian rules have a procyclical effect: if bad debts increase, the 
costs to the financial system are aggravated, because the volume of non-deductible losses 
increases. They are particularly onerous in the present phase of the cycle. 
Banks’ reputation, an underpinning of stability 
Always, but especially at times of crisis, a bank’s good name is its most valuable asset, the 
basis  of  a  solid  relationship  with  customers.  Safeguarding  and  enhancing  the  banking 
system’s reputation equally requires irreproachable conduct and rigorous rules. 
The  correctness  of  banks’  conduct  is  important  for  the  Bank  of  Italy  because  it  is  a 
precondition for stability. This is especially true at times like the present, when recourse to 
customers’  savings  has  proved  essential  to  enable  the  banking  system  to  compensate, 
swiftly and substantially, for the contraction in other sources of funding. 
Overseeing the transparency and correct conduct of those who offer financial products and 
investment services is the responsibility of Consob. For typical banking transactions, the law 
entrusts  such  supervision  to  the  Bank  of  Italy.  Within  a  few  weeks  we  will  hold  a  public 
consultation  on  new  rules,  which  are  being  drafted  in  cooperation  with  the  associations  of 
banks,  other  intermediaries  and  consumers.  We  will  make  the  documents  for  customers 
clearer,  more  concise  and  comparable.  We  will  use  especially  incisive  instruments  for  the 
most widely used products, mortgage loans and current accounts. We will ask that attention 
to customers’ needs be at the centre of every phase of the production process. 
Transparency  of  corporate  governance  and  openness  of  ownership  structures  are  also 
preconditions  for  the  good  name  and  efficiency  of  banks.  Formerly,  the  banking  system, 
constricted by extensive public ownership and a web of rules that conditioned all its activity, 
had  a  concentrated  and  closed  ownership  structure  and  its  conduct  was  scarcely 
competitive.  Enormous  progress  has  been  made  in  recent  decades.  The  system  of  public 
banks  has  been  dismantled.  Consolidation  has  revolutionized  the  industry’s  ownership 
structures.  Banking 
foundations,  having  given  up  control  almost  everywhere,  have 
transformed themselves into investors attentive to long-run prospects. 
The  Antitrust  Authority  recently  drew  attention  to  some  structural  issues  concerning  the 
system:  concentration  of  ownership,  cross-shareholdings  and  interlocking  directorships. 
These  aspects  deserve  attention.  However,  it  should  be  noted  that  concentration  of 
ownership, a common characteristic of listed Italian companies, is less pronounced for banks 
than  for  companies  in  other  sectors.  The  incidence  of  cross-shareholdings  between  the 
leading banks appears to be lower than in other countries of continental Europe. As regards 
interlocking directorships, a matter within the competence of the Antitrust Authority insofar as 
BIS Review 22/2009 
 7
it concerns competition, it is first of all up to the Government and Parliament, to which the 
Authority addresses its reports, to evaluate whether action is needed and what measures to 
adopt. 
 When the channels of capital allocation are clogged, the normal operation of the economy 
becomes  jammed  and  growth  is  impeded.  It  is  necessary  to  restore  confidence  in  the 
financial  system,  in  the  solidity  of  banks  and  markets.  Society  expects  banks,  monetary 
authorities  and  governments  to  offer  decisive  support  in  order  to  come  through  the  storm 
while not losing sight of the shore. 
Readiness to act immediately must be accompanied by a strong long-run strategy. 
Banks are asked to demonstrate clarity and prudence, but also the foresight needed not to 
withhold  credit  from  deserving  customers.  The  monetary  authorities  are  responsible  for 
ensuring that sufficient liquidity is created and spread through the most suitable channels to 
the financial systems in which they operate, but they are also charged with firmly anchoring 
medium-term inflation expectations. 
Governments are called upon to take prompt, vigorous action to support the economy. It is 
an  opportunity  for  structural  reforms  that  will  enable  our country  to  enjoy  faster  and  better 
growth  in  the  future.  The  margins  for  a  countercyclical  fiscal  policy  must  be  created  by 
intervening  resolutely  on  the  basic  mechanisms  of  expenditure,  by  credibly  ensuring  the 
sustainability of the public finances in the long and very long term. 
At  global  level,  the  resources  and  capabilities  of  the  international  financial  institutions, 
especially the IMF and the World Bank, will have to be mobilized. In the European Union, 
there  are  the  instruments  and  institutions  needed  to  give  concrete  support  to  some 
neighbouring countries that look to the EU as an anchor of stability. 
There is no reason to give in to discouragement. Rather, it is an opportunity for the country, 
all  of  us,  to  demonstrate  our  ability  to  protect  the  weakest,  to  open  up  new  paths  for  the 
future.  
8 
 BIS Review 22/2009
