Jean-Claude Trichet: Europe – cultural identity – cultural diversity 
Speech  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the  CFS 
Presidential Lecture, Center for Financial Studies, Frankfurt am Main, 16 March 2009. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
 Introduction 
I.  
I was very touched by the invitation sent to me by the President of the Center for Financial 
Studies. He proposed that I give a lecture on “Europe – Cultural Identity – Cultural Diversity”. 
I was particularly moved for three reasons. 
First, because it was an invitation from Prof. Otmar Issing, my dear friend, good companion 
and former colleague on the Executive Board of the European Central Bank. Together with 
the other members of the Executive Board, we have always been united in steering the bank 
towards  price  stability,  in  compliance  with  the  Maastricht  Treaty,  and  in  an  environment 
which was exceptionally demanding. And it still is – to say the least! These close working 
relationships form the remarkable team spirit which exists within the Executive Board.  
But,  and  that  is  perhaps  less  well  known,  from  time  to  time  Otmar  and  I  talked  about 
Goethe’s poems, Heine’s “Lorelei” and about literature and poetry in general. He must have 
been  thinking  about  these  intense,  even  though  short,  poetry  discussions  when  he  rather 
unconventionally asked me, a fellow central banker, to give a lecture on European cultural 
diversity. 
The  second  reason  for  being  moved  by  the  invitation  is  that  the  ECB  regards  Europe’s 
cultural  diversity  –  which  is  fully  reflected  in  the  multinational  character  of  its  members  of 
staff, who come from all 27 EU Member States – as a major asset. The ECB actively raises 
awareness of the cultural diversity of the European Union as one of the main elements of 
Europe’s cultural unity. It is the main purpose of the “Cultural Days”, which the ECB has been 
organising with great success for several years. 
My  third  reason  for  welcoming  the  invitation  to  speak  is  because  I  am  convinced  that 
economic and cultural affairs, that money and literature and poetry, are much more closely 
linked than many people believe. There are a number of examples; let me give you three. 
Firstly,  we  should  recall  that  writing  came  into  being  in  Sumer,  the  cradle  of  civilisation 
between  the  Tigris  and  Euphrates  rivers,  6000  years  ago.  Sumer’s  administrators  made  a 
record of everyday items, of quantities, of transactions, on clay tablets. By recording these 
economic activities, these “proto-accountants” created the first documents in human history 
and paved the way for all of the world’s written literature.  
Secondly,  there  is  a  relationship  between  poetry  and  money  which  has  always  struck  me. 
Poems, like gold coins, are meant to last, to keep their integrity, sustained by their rhythm, 
rhymes and metaphors. In that sense, they are like money – they are a “store of value” over 
the  long  term.  They  are  both  aspiring  to  inalterability,  whilst  they  are  both  destined  to 
circulate from hand to hand and from mind to mind. 
And thirdly, both culture and money, poems and coins belong to the people. Our currency 
belongs  to  the  people  of  Europe  in  a  very  deep  sense:  it  is  their  own  confidence  in  their 
currency  which  makes  it  a  successful  medium  of  exchange,  unit  of  account  and  store  of 
value.  Our  culture  is  the  wealth  of literature  and  art  that  the  confidence  of  the  people  has 
decided to select and preserve over time. 
BIS Review 30/2009 
 1
Today, I would like to reflect on Europe’s cultural identity first by exploring a central concept, 
a spiritual core; then I’ll review the remarkable diversity of its national cultures; and finally I’ll 
consider how European cultural identity aspires to universality. 
The search for a central concept in Europe’s cultural identity 
II.  
One way of shedding light on the cultural identity of Europe is to search for a central concept, 
a  “heart”  of  Europe,  which  would  simultaneously  be  both  its  source  and  summary.  Two 
references are particularly enlightening in this respect: the vision of Paul Valéry, the poet and 
essayist, and that of Edmund Husserl, the philosopher. 
Paul Valéry, in his essay “The European” [“L’Européen”], wrote in 1924: “Partout où les noms 
de César, de Gaius, de Trajan et de Virgile, partout où les noms de Moïse et de St Paul, 
partout où les noms d’Aristote, de Platon et d’Euclide ont eu une signification et une autorité 
simultanées,  Là  est  l’Europe.”  Translated  into  English,  this  means:  “Wherever  the  names 
Caesar,  Gaius,  Trajan  and  Virgil,  wherever  the  names  Moses  and  St.  Paul,  wherever  the 
names Aristotle, Plato and Euclid have a significance and carry weight, that is where Europe 
is.”  
Valéry  insists  on  the  spiritual  character  of  Europe  by  adding:  “Il  est  remarquable  que 
l’homme d’Europe n’est pas défini par la race, ni par la langue, ni par les coutumes mais par 
les  désirs  et  par  l’amplitude  de  la  volonté  (…).  “In  other  words,  “It  is  remarkable  that  the 
people of Europe are not defined by race, nor by language or customs, but by desires and 
breadth of will (…)”. 
We  can  indeed  imagine,  like  Valéry,  the  cultural  identity  of  Europe  as  being  a  remarkable 
expansion of the union, achieved under the Roman Empire, of Greek thought, Roman law 
and of the Bible, which has given rise to three monotheistic religions.  
We  could  still  go  further  in  our  search  for  Europe’s  conceptual  heart.  It  is  what  Husserl 
proposes  in  his  famous  Vienna  lecture  of  May  1935  entitled  “Philosophy  and  the  Crisis  of 
European Humanity”. He sees the origin of the spiritual idea of Europe as being in Greece, 
where a handful of men initiated a radical conversion of all cultural life in their own nation and 
among their neighbours.  
Let me quote Husserl in the original German version: “Es ist nun auch ersichtlich, dass von 
hier  aus  eine  Übernationalität  völlig  neuer  Art  entspringen  konnte.  Ich  meine  natürlich  die 
geistige Gestalt Europas. Es ist nicht mehr ein Nebeneinander verschiedener Nationen, die 
sich nur durch Handel- und Machtkämpfe beeinflussen, sondern: Es ist ein neuer Geist, von 
Philosophie  und  ihren  Sonderwissenschaften  herstammend;  ein  Geist,  freier  Kritik  und 
Normierung auf unendliche Aufgaben hin, er durchherrscht das Menschentum, schafft neue, 
unendliche Ideale!”  
I would translate this into English as follows: “One can also see that it’s the starting point of a 
new  kind  of  community,  one  which  extends  beyond  nations.  I  am  referring,  of  course,  to 
Europe in a spiritual form. It is now no longer a number of different nations living alongside 
each  other  and  only  influencing  each  other  through  commercial  competition  or  power 
struggles, but it is: a new spirit – stemming from philosophy and the sciences based on it – a 
spirit of free criticism, providing norms for infinite tasks, and it dominates mankind, creating 
new, infinite ideals.” 
Husserl  says  that  Europe  fully  identifies  with  its  Greek  origins,  in  the  spirit  of  philosophy. 
Thus, Europe’s “crisis” comes from the apparent failure of rationalism. And he concludes his 
lecture, delivered in 1935, in a pointed, visionary way, without even naming totalitarianism, 
fascism or nazism: “Europe’s existential crisis can end in only one of two ways: in its demise, 
alienated from its own rational sense of life, and lapsing into a hatred of the spirit and into 
barbarism; or in its rebirth from the spirit of philosophy, through a heroism of reason (…)”.  
2 
 BIS Review 30/2009
Such returns to the sources of the “spiritual form of Europe” are necessary and enlightening. 
They give us powerful threads of the cultural identity of Europe across two millennia. That all 
the national cultures draw mainly – but not exclusively – on the same original sources largely 
explains  the  cultural  unity  of  Europe  over  the  course  of  time.  But  they  can  and  must  be 
complemented by an analysis of European national cultures themselves and of the close and 
complex relationships between these highly diverse cultures which ensure the cultural unity 
of Europe.  
Cultural  identity  and  unity  amid  the  diversity  of  national  cultures  does  not  amount  to  the 
simple indefinite expansion of an original cultural core. I see Europe’s cultural identity as a 
tightly  woven  fabric.  This  fabric  consists  on  the  one  hand  of  a  warp  thread  carefully 
stretched, which corresponds to the many strong national cultures, which themselves have 
their own identity and find their origins in a distant past; on the other hand, there is the weft 
thread,  which  represents  the  interwoven  transnational  bedazzlement  and  admiration,  the 
reciprocal  influences  crossing  the  frontiers  between  cultures  and  between  languages.  I 
imagine this literary, artistic, linguistic, European cultural fabric as drawing its beauty, its unity 
and its solidity from the sheer number and diversity of its threads. 
The remarkable network of transfrontier cultural admiration and influence 
III.  
To illustrate this, I would like to give you some striking examples, some moving testimonies 
of this admiration and of these “transfrontier” discoveries. 
It  will  come  as  no  surprise  to  you  that,  as  I  have  been  invited  by  the  Center  for  Financial 
Studies  of  Frankfurt  University,  I’ll  mention  Goethe.  He  writes  in  “Dichtung  und  Wahrheit” 
about  his  discovery  of  Shakespeare:  “Und  so  wirkte  in  unserer  Straßburger  Sozietät 
Shakespeare,  übersetzt  und  im  Original,  stückweise  und  im  ganzen,  […]  dergestalt,  dass, 
wie man bibelfeste Männer hat, wir uns nach und nach in Shakespeare festigten. Mehr und 
mehr bildeten wir die Tugenden und Mängel seiner Zeit, mit denen er uns bekannt macht, in 
unseren  Gesprächen  nach  […].  Das  freudige  Bekennen,  dass  etwas  Höheres  über  mir 
schwebte, war ansteckend für meine Freunde, die sich alle dieser Sinnesart hingaben.“ 
Translated into English, he says that “Shakespeare, both in translation and the original, in 
excerpts and as a whole, became so great a force within our Strasbourg coterie that, just as 
some  men  are  very  well  versed  in  Scripture,  we  gradually  became  well  versed  in 
Shakespeare. In our speech we imitated the virtues and vices of our time that he had shown 
us  […].  The  joyful  revelation  that  something  sublime  was  hovering  above  me  proved 
contagious to my friends, who all adopted my sentiment”.  
Goethe translates Voltaire’s “Mahomet” and “Tancrède”, as well as “Rameau’s Nephew” by 
Diderot, which Schiller had passed on to him. In a letter to Schiller, Goethe says of Diderot’s 
work: “Die Bombe dieses Gesprächs platzt gerade in der Mitte der französischen Literatur.” 
In English, “This dialogue explodes like a bomb right at the very heart of French literature”. 
Because of Goethe, “Rameau’s Nephew” is famous in Germany long before it is in France! 
Goethe’s  influence  on  other  cultures  is  itself  extraordinary.  The  publication  of  “Werther” 
turned  Europe  upside  down.  It  was  one  of  the  books  Bonaparte  took  with  him  on  his 
expedition  to  Egypt,  and  when  he  meets  Goethe  he  wants  to  talk  about  it.  Eckermann 
subsequently  asks  Goethe  about  that  conversation  with  Bonaparte  and  says:  “Napoléon 
pointed out to you a passage in “Werther” which, it appeared to him, would not withstand a 
thorough examination, and you say he’s right. I would like to know which passage he meant. 
–“Raten Sie!” [“Guess!”], said Goethe, with a mysterious smile.1
                                                 
1   Goethe’s conversations with Eckermann (2 January 1824). 
BIS Review 30/2009 
 3
Eckermann,  having  suggested  the  passage  in  which  Charlotte  sends  a  pistol  to  Werther, 
notes  that  Goethe  replies  to  him:  “Ihre  Bemerkung,  ist  freilich  nicht  schlecht.  Ob  aber 
Napoleon dieselbe Stelle gemeint hat oder eine andere, halte ich nicht für gut zu verraten.” 
[“Your remark certainly isn’t bad (…) but I don’t think it is right to reveal whether Napoléon 
meant this passage or another”.] 
I  find  a  moving  testimony  to  this  same  European  literary  fabric  of  transnational  and 
translinguistic  admiration  in  the  first  phrase  of  the  Chateaubriand’s  draft  address  to  the 
Académie française – an address which was censored by Bonaparte himself: “When Milton 
published “Paradise Lost”, no voice was raised in any of Great Britain’s three kingdoms to 
praise a work that is one of the most beautiful monuments to the human spirit. The English 
Homer died forgotten, and his contemporaries left the task of immortalising the bard of Eden 
to future generations”. 
Dante Alighieri offers us another wonderful example of this influence and admiration which 
crosses  time  and  space  in  Europe.  “The  Divine  Comedy”  exerts  an  extremely  powerful 
fascination  over  its  European  readers.  Five  centuries  after  its  creation,  William  Blake 
comments, in the margin of the translation of the Inferno by Henri Boyd: “The grandest poetry 
is immoral, the grandest characters wicked, very Satan : (…) Cunning and morality are not 
poetry  but  philosophy  (…)  Poetry  is  to  excuse  vice,  and  show  its  reason  and  necessary 
purgation.”2  Marcel  Proust’s  “In  Search  of  Lost  Time”  is  strongly  inspired  by  the  work  of 
Dante.  More  than  600  years  after  the  “The  Divine  Comedy”  Proust  writes,  when  seeing  a 
water lily in a small river: “[The lily] would drift over to one bank only to return to the other, 
eternally  repeating  its  double  journey  (…)  like  one  of  those  wretches  whose  peculiar 
torments (…) aroused the curiosity of Dante, who would have enquired of them at greater 
length from the victims themselves, had not Virgil (…) obliged him to hasten after him at full 
speed, as I must hasten after my parents.”3  
Let’s  move  from  Proust  to  Ismail  Kadare,  a  contemporary  writer.  He  writes  that,  as  a 
schoolboy in Albania, he found himself at the age of 13 or 14 coming across “two groups of 
cantos (which) were quoted more often than the others in books, magazines, newspapers: 
those on Paolo and Francesca, the tragic lovers who didn’t know any respite in the second 
circle of the Inferno and those on Count Ugolino in the ninth circle, who, famished, ended up 
eating his own children. According to Kadare, Dante’s influence on popular Albanian culture 
is so strong that there are plenty of “Beatrices” in his country, “divided in equal proportions 
among Christians and Muslims in the civil registers”.4
Dante brings to Italy the “terza rima”, or triplet rhyme, which structures the poem in tercets 
closely linked to the preceding and following rhymes, so that a rhyme is never introduced that 
has not been framed by two earlier rhymes, with the exception of the first tercet of the canto. 
This  new  verse  form  –  which  creates  an  impression  of  fast,  breathless  movement,  while 
offering  the  permanence  of  an  unchangeable  structure  –  was  to  be  an  instant  success: 
Boccaccio  and  Petrarch  adopted  it  immediately.  Dante  himself  borrowed  it  from  another 
language, Provençal: the “sirventès”, a lyric form which goes back to the troubadours used 
the  “terza  rima”  or  triplet  rhyme.  It  was  another  example  of  the  felicitous  influence  of  a 
crossover between two forms of vernacular language: Provençal and Italian. 
But the extraordinary influence of Dante is perhaps not only explained by his genius and his 
verse technique. Other European influences may explain the emotional power of “The Divine 
Comedy”.  Thirty  years  before  the  birth  of  Dante,  Boncompagno  da  Signa,  a  professor  of 
                                                 
2   William Blake “From the annotations to Henry Boyd’s “A Translation of the Inferno of Dante Alighieri”, Oxford 
Classics. Selected Poetry, page 138. 
3   Proust, La Recherche, Du côté de chez Swann. Gallimard (1982). 
4  
Ismail Kadare, Dante l’incontournable, Fayard 2006 (translated from the Albanian by Tedi Papavrami). 
4 
 BIS Review 30/2009
rhetoric  from  Bologna,  publishes  the “Rhetorica Novissima”. In his chapter on  memory, he 
adapts  the  classical  “Art  of  Memory”5  –  the  technique  utilised  by  the  Greek  and  Roman 
orators to memorise their speeches – and transforms it into a powerful artificial memory of 
virtues and vices, of Paradise and Inferno. The historian Frances Yates comments that “The 
Divine Comedy” can be interpreted as a work embodying the contemporary adaptation of the 
classical “Art of Memory”. If we accept that interpretation, it is necessary to consider Dante 
as having been indirectly influenced by the founder of the “Art of Memory”, the Greek poet 
Simonides  of  Ceos,  who  also  influenced  the  Latin  authors  –  Quintilian  and  the  unknown 
author of the “Rhetorica ad Herennium” – and subsequently the fathers of the church Saint 
Albertus Magnus and Saint Thomas Aquinas, and ultimately Boncompagno da Signa.6  
Dante touches Europe’s collection of cultures today, seven centuries after writing “The Divine 
Comedy”.  He  himself  indirectly  drew  the  memory  power  of  his  poem  from  the  Greek 
Simonides 18 centuries before. We can see how the cultural fabric of Europe extends over 
25 centuries. 
Following the course of a poetic metaphor down the centuries, across borders and between 
languages is another marvel of European culture. The same Simonides of Ceos writes: “For 
the soldiers who died at Thermopylae…hymns rather than tears, odes rather than wailing: a 
monument which neither rust nor devouring time could destroy”. 
This metaphor of the poem as an “indestructible monument” was later used by Horace in his 
“Odes”:  “I  have  completed  a  monument  more  lasting  than  bronze  and  far  higher  than  that 
royal pile of pyramids which the rain cannot destroy, nor the endless sequence of years or 
the swift passing of time (…)”. The metaphor was also used by Ovid, Boccaccio, Ronsard, 
and  by  du  Bellay  in  “Les  antiquités  de  Rome”,  which  was  translated  by  Spenser  as  “The 
Ruins of Rome” and which inspired Shakespeare to write in his magnificent sonnet 55: “Not 
marble,  nor  the  gilded  monuments  /  Of  Princes,  shall  outlive  this  powerful  rhyme”.  This 
beautiful sonnet deals with the immortality of the person loved, of the feelings she inspires 
and  of  the  unchanging  nature  of  the  poem  itself.  Its  central  metaphor  dates  back  two 
thousand years to Simonides, and has travelled down the centuries and across the frontiers 
of the Greek, Latin, Italian, French and English languages. There is no finer example of the 
numerous  threads  that  form  the  very  fabric  of  European  culture.  This  weave,  this 
“indestructible monument” made of words, spanning time and space, from Simonides to du 
Bellay and Shakespeare, is Europe’s cultural unity! 
The writer Cees Nooteboom in “De ontvoering van Europa” [The Abduction of Europe] gives 
his personal interpretation of Europe’s cultural unity and diversity: “If I am European – and I 
hope I am starting to get there after almost 60 years of determined effort – this surely means 
that Europe’s multiculturalism profoundly influences my Dutch identity”. 
Isn’t  this  what  being  European  is  all  about?  We  must  fully  assume  our  national  cultural 
identity,  not  only  because  it  is  the  foundation  of  our  own  intellect  and  sensitivity,  but  also 
because Europe’s rich cultural variety and its national roots are what make it unique. It is this 
huge cultural endowment, with all its diversity, that gives Europeans their European identity. 
European-ness means being unable to understand fully my national literature and poetry –
Chateaubriand,  Mallarmé,  Julien  Gracq,  St  John  Perse,  Senghor  –  without  understanding 
Dante, Cervantes, Shakespeare, Goethe and Heine. European-ness means that I share with 
all other Europeans the same basic cultural sources, despite the fact that they come from 
vastly differing backgrounds. This means that I live in a modern literary atmosphere that is 
influenced directly and indirectly by the Czech Kafka, the Irishman Joyce and the Frenchman 
                                                 
5   “The Art of Memory”, Frances Yates, Routledge and Kegan, 1966. 
6   Albertus  Magnus,  “Opera  omnia”.  Saint  Thomas  Aquinas,  “Summa  Theologiae”.  Boncompagno  da  Signa, 
“Rhetorica Novissima”. Quoted by Frances Yates, “The Art of Memory”. 
BIS Review 30/2009 
 5
Proust.  And  as  the  Spanish  philosopher  José  Ortega  y  Gasset  wrote  in  his  “Revolt  of  the 
Masses”  in  1930,  “Si  hoy  hiciésemos  balance  de  nuestro  contenido  mental  –  opiniones, 
normas,  deseos,  presunciones  –  notaríamos  que  la  mayor  parte  de  todo  eso  no  viene  al 
francés de su Francia, ni al español de su España, sino del fondo común europeo”. I would 
translate  this  into  English  as  follows:  “If  we  were  to  take  an  inventory  of  our  mental  stock 
today – opinions, standards, desires, assumptions – we should discover that the greater part 
of it does not come to the Frenchman from France, nor to the Spaniard from Spain, but from 
the common European stock.” 
Writing  about  the  unity  of  Europe,  the  historian  Braudel  mentioned  what  he  termed  the 
“unités  brillantes”  (“bright  unities”),  distinguishing 
the  “unités  aléatoires” 
(“uncertain  unities”).  The  “unités  brillantes”  cover  all  fields  of  artistic  and  intellectual 
endeavour, not only poetry, literature and philosophy but also music, painting, sculpture and 
architecture. It is no coincidence that the Governing Council of the European Central Bank 
chose  European  architectural  styles  to  illustrate  the  banknotes  of  our  single  currency,  the 
euro.  It  is  amazing  to  see  how  widespread  these  styles  are  in  Europe,  with  countless 
buildings, churches and monuments built in the Romanesque, Gothic, baroque and classical 
traditions.  These  architectural  styles  were  born  in  very  different  areas  of  Europe,  and 
demonstrate Europe’s cultural richness. They also provide another powerful illustration of this 
unique concept of unity within diversity, which is the central trait of our continent. 
them 
from 
The cultural activities of the European Central Bank 
IV.  
I’d like now take a look at the art and cultural activities of the ECB. In view of our allegiance 
to  the  European  ideal  and  its  leitmotif  of  “unity  in  diversity”,  we  aim,  through  our  activities 
beyond those relating to monetary policy, to help further Europeans’ understanding of one 
another  and  to  raise  awareness  of  the  cultural  wealth  of  Europe  and  its  common  cultural 
roots.  
Our goal is to bring the people of the Rhine-Main area, our visitors and our staff closer to the 
cultural diversity of the EU Member States and thus enable them to deepen their knowledge 
of what they have in common and what binds them together. It is also an aim of the ECB to 
encourage cooperation and exchanges within the European System of Central Banks, also in 
the area of cultural activities.  
In  doing  this,  we  concentrate  on  two  areas  of  activity:  first,  the  ECB  has  presented 
exhibitions of contemporary art since 1997. Once a year we hold an exhibition at our main 
building in Frankfurt providing insights into the contemporary art scene of one Member State 
of  the  EU.  Each  exhibition  presents  works  from  the  fields  of  painting,  drawing,  print, 
installation, photography and sculpture by some 20 artists. The exhibitions are organised in 
collaboration  with  the  national  central  bank  of  the  country  in  question  and  generally  also 
include  works  from  its  collection.  The  exhibitions  regularly  provide  the  ECB  with  the 
opportunity  to  purchase  works  for  its  own  collection,  so  exhibitions  and  the  formation  of  a 
collection go hand in hand. To date the ECB  has presented 15 countries and also hosted 
three  special  exhibitions  dedicated  exclusively  to  the  collections  of  central  banks.  These 
showed  works  from  the  collections  of,  in  2006,  the  Oesterreichische  Nationalbank,  in 
2006/07 the Federal Reserve Board, and in 2008, for the tenth anniversary of the European 
System  of  Central  Banks,  18  central  banks  in  Europe.  The  ECB’s  collection  currently 
comprises 170 works by 75 artists and is shown in the ECB's three buildings. The ECB offers 
regular tours of the exhibitions and the collection, for example on the corporate collections 
weekend held by the state of Hesse.  
Second, the ECB has held the “Cultural Days of the ECB” since 2003. This event also takes 
place  once  a  year,  focuses  on  a  particular  Member  State  of  the  EU,  and  is  organised  in 
cooperation with the national central bank of the featured country. The programme provides 
a  broad-ranging  look  at  the  cultural  scene  in  the  country  and  usually  includes  readings, 
concerts,  films,  theatre  and  dance  performances,  lectures  and  exhibitions.  The  events  are 
6 
 BIS Review 30/2009
mostly held outside the ECB and in cooperation with cultural institutions in Frankfurt – such 
as the Alte Oper, the Literaturhaus, the Deutsches Filmmuseum or the Mouson-Turm. In the 
last six years we have presented 198 events and 158 artists and ensembles, from promising 
newcomers and talented young artists, such as the Polish pianist Joanna Marcinkowska, to 
international  greats  such  the  Nobel  prize-winning  Hungarian  author  Imre  Kertész  or  the 
Polish composer Krzysztof Penderecki, who have helped to shape the cultural legacy of the 
twentieth century.  
Our present art and cultural activities offer many examples of the unity in diversity that makes 
up Europe’s cultural identity. Let me give you only three examples of contemporary artists 
who illustrate very well the dense fabric of trans-frontier admiration and influence: 
Our collection includes two works by the Austrian painter Hubert Scheibl, one of the best-
known representatives of the new abstraction of the 1990s. His works allude to the romantic 
landscape  painting  which  reached  its  apogee  in  nineteenth  century  Europe  in  the  work  of 
J.M.W. Turner and Caspar David Friedrich. Like these artists before him, Scheibl attempts to 
capture the spirit of a mystical, pantheistic experience of nature. He too makes reference to 
the idea of the sublime – to experiences which are too overwhelming for our senses to be 
able  to  take  in,  in  their  entirety  –  to  a  concept  which,  since  the  eighteenth  century,  has 
recurred,  time  and  again,  in  the  works  of  philosophers  such  as  Edmund  Burke,  Immanuel 
Kant and Jean-François Lyotard. In the twentieth century the concept of the sublime primarily 
shaped  European  and  American  abstract  expressionism,  to  which  Scheibl's  works  –  with 
their subtly nuanced fields of colour and subjective gestures – are related. 
A second example would be the reading with literature Nobel laureate Imre Kertész, which 
was one of the high points of the Cultural Days dedicated to Hungary in 2005. The work of 
Kertész  is  embedded  in  the  literary  and  intellectual  history  of  the  twentieth  century  like  no 
other. At the centre of his works is the holocaust, which he sees as an indelible caesura in 
human  history  and  which  he  puts  at  the  heart  of  European  history  and  modern  existence. 
The  descriptions  of  his  protagonists  are  informed  by  the  writings  of  Arthur  Rimbaud  and 
Jacques  Lacan  on  split  identities  and  multiple  personalities.  Rimbaud’s  phrase  “Je  est  un 
autre”  was  even  used  by  Kertész  as  the  basis  for  the  title  of  his  memoirs  “I  –  Another: 
chronicle  of  a  metamorphosis”  which  appeared  in  1997.  To  earn  a  living  under  the 
communist  regime  in  Hungary,  Kertész  translated  works  by  Ludwig  Wittgenstein,  Friedrich 
Nietzsche,  Sigmund  Freud,  Hugo  von  Hofmannsthal,  Arthur  Schnitzler,  Joseph  Roth  and 
Elias  Canetti,  all  of  whom  had  a  lasting  influence  on  his  thinking.  In  “Galley  Diary”,  a 
collection of observations, aphorisms and philosophical excursions which appeared in 1992, 
Kertész engages directly with great thinkers and poets of the twentieth century. In an internal 
dialogue with them he attempts to find the definitive answers to the holocaust and modernity, 
totalitarianism  and  freedom.  Kertész  cites  as  further  inspirations  popular  literature  such  as 
penny-dreadfuls  as  well  as  Gustave  Flaubert,  with  whom  he  shares  a  belief  in  the  written 
word as the only truth.  
Finally, I would like to look at the medium of film. In line with the European focus of the last 
Cultural Days, we showed Lars von Trier’s internationally award-winning 1991 film “Europa”. 
Von  Trier  is  one  of  the  best-known  film-makers  of  the  modern  age.  His  most  important 
sources  of  inspiration  include  literature  and  classics  of  European  and  American  cinema 
history. He has a fascination for the dark and mysterious moods which mark the stories of 
Franz Kafka and Joseph Conrad, both of whom inform his “Europa” in a very tangible way: 
the basic idea for the film was based on Kafka’s fragment “America“ (1911-14) and Conrad’s 
“Heart of Darkness” (1899). In particular his early works – to which “Europa” belongs – are 
clearly influenced by German expressionist film of the 1920s, Italian neo-realism of the 1940s 
and the contemporaneous “film noir” which emerged in the United States. Thus, in “Europa”, 
von  Trier’s  images  and  stylistic  renderings  allude  to  the  main  representatives  of  these 
decades: Fritz Lang, Alfred Hitchcock and Roberto Rossellini. 
BIS Review 30/2009 
 7
Of  course,  there  are  many  other  revealing  interrelationships  within  European  culture  to  be 
discovered in our rich treasure trove of art exhibitions and Cultural Days programmes. We 
will remain committed to promoting cultural exchanges within Europe in the future and greatly 
look  forward  to  the  insights  and  experiences  which  the  Romanian  Cultural  Days  later  this 
year will bring. 
The aspiration of European culture to universality 
V.  
Have we exhausted the deep significance and the rich cultural identity of Europe once we 
have  identified  its  sources  and  got  the  measure  of  its  remarkable  diversity,  with  its  tight 
weave  of  influences,  of  relationships  and  of  mutual  admiration  extending  beyond  national 
frontiers  and  linguistic  barriers?  Doesn’t  European  culture  have  another  fundamental 
characteristic that makes it unique among the world’s cultures? 
Jacques Derrida, the French philosopher, phrases the question this way in “L’autre Cap”7: 
“On peut aimer à se rappeler qu’on est un intellectuel européen sans vouloir l’être de part en 
part. Se sentir européen entre autres choses, est-ce être plus ou moins européen ? Les deux 
sans  doute  (…).”.  In  other  words,  “It’s  nice  to  remind  yourself  that  you  are  a  European 
intellectual  without  wanting  to  be  it  through  and  through.  To  feel  European  among  other 
things, does it mean being more, or less, European? Both, without doubt.” 
It’s precisely because Europe has been gradually built on the basis of a sincere and deep-
seated recognition of its cultural diversity that it aspires to be universal. Its cultural unity does 
not mean confinement, introspection or isolation inside a cultural “fortress”. An integral part of 
its culture is its admiration and insatiable curiosity about the abundance of cultures beyond 
its shores.  
In the same text Derrida also says: “Comment assumer une responsabilité contradictoire qui 
nous  inscrit  dans  une  sorte  de  double  bind:  se  faire  les  gardiens  d’une  idée  de  l’Europe, 
d’une  différence  de  l’Europe  qui  consiste  précisément  à  ne  pas  se  fermer  sur  sa  propre 
identité et à s’avancer exemplairement vers ce qui n’est pas elle, vers l’autre Cap (…)”. To 
put it in English: “We need to accept a conflicting responsibility which puts us in a kind of 
double  bind:  to  become  the  guardians  of  a  concept  of  Europe  and  of  Europe’s 
distinctiveness, which consists not of closing oneself to one’s own identity but of moving in 
an  exemplary  way  towards  precisely  what  is  not  one’s  own  identity,  towards  the  ‘Other 
Cape’.”  
Europe’s  deep  aspiration  to  universality  is  expressed  in  a  particularly  ambitious  way  by 
Husserl in the same lecture in Vienna that I mentioned earlier. He talked about “a spirit of 
free criticism…of creating new, infinite ideals…”, and he added that “…there are some ideals 
that  exist  for  individuals  in  their  nations,  and  other  ideals  for  the  nations  themselves.  But, 
ultimately, there are also infinite ideals for the spreading “synthesis” of nations, and in that 
synthesis each of these nations gives its best to its partner nations precisely by aiming for its 
own ideal task in a universal spirit”.8
Is it not remarkable that, at a global level, UNESCO refers to cultural diversity using words 
similar to those used by the European Union itself to promote its cultural diversity? Let us 
compare the two texts.  
                                                 
7   Jacques Derrida, “L’autre Cap”, Liber, revue européenne des Livres 1990. Raison d’Agir Editions. 
8   The German original reads as follows. “Es sind solche für die einzelnen Menschen in ihren Nationen, solche 
für die Nationen selbst. Aber schließlich sind es auch unendliche Ideale für die sich ausbreitende Synthese 
der Nationen, in welcher jede dieser Nationen gerade dadurch, dass sie ihre eigene ideale Aufgabe im Geiste 
der Unendlichkeit anstrebt, ihr Bestes den mitvereinten Nationen schenkt.” 
8 
 BIS Review 30/2009
Article  151  of  the  Treaty  of  Amsterdam,  which  incorporates  Article  128  of  the  Treaty  of 
Maastricht,  states:  “The  Community  shall  contribute  to  the  flowering  of  the  cultures  of  the 
Member States, while respecting their national and regional diversity and at the same time 
bringing the common cultural heritage to the fore”. 
Compare  this  with  part  of  the  preamble  to  UNESCO’s  Convention  on  the  Protection  and 
Promotion of the Diversity of Cultural Expressions: the General Conference of UNESCO is 
“Conscious  that  cultural  diversity  forms  a  common  heritage  of  humanity  and  should  be 
cherished and preserved for the benefit of all”. 
How  does  this  diversity  and  universality,  on  which  European  unity  is  based,  apply  to  the 
European Central Bank? Diversity is reflected, as I have already mentioned, by the fact that 
27 nationalities are represented within the ECB, forming a single group and making a major 
contribution  to  our  shared  success.  The  ECB’s  Governing  Council  itself  represents  a 
formidable example of diversity and unity. Together, we all fulfil our role of guiding Europe’s 
monetary team, the Eurosystem, consisting of the ECB and the 16 euro area national central 
banks, each with their own culture, language and history. And together with the 27 national 
central  banks  we  make  up  the  European  System  of  Central  Banks.  We  embrace  this  rich 
diversity, and it forms an integral part of our identity. 
We also aspire to universality. We are open to the world and in close contact with institutions 
on other continents. We aim to play as active a role as possible in the international financial 
institutions  and  international  informal  groups  to  which  we  belong,  we  always  support  a 
multilateral  approach.  We  greatly  value  our  discussions  with  central  banks  on  other 
continents,  and  particularly  the  regular  meetings  of  the  Eurosystem  with  central  banks  in 
Asia, Latin America and the Mediterranean region.  
As  my  final  point,  we  are  united  because  we  have  the  eminent  responsibility  under  the 
Maastricht  Treaty  as  guardians  of  Europe’s  single  currency.  Because  Economic  and 
Monetary Union is a magnificent undertaking that forms the basis of Europe’s prosperity and 
shared  stability.  And  because  the  single  currency  is  an  emblem  of  Europe’s  unity.  The 
experience we have gained in this Economic and Monetary Union, based on the free will of 
the Member States, is exemplary in today’s globalised world that is rapidly integrating. It’s 
also why we are pleased to engage in close cooperation with institutions on other continents 
that  are  observing  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  and  thinking  about  the  lessons  they  can 
draw from Europe’s unique experiences. 
I  would  like  to  end  by  quoting  the  philosopher  and  writer  Ernest  Renan,  who  defined  a 
nation’s  identity  as  follows:  “In  the  past,  it  was  a  heritage  of  glory  and  of  regrets  to  share 
together; in the future, it will be the same programme to be realised…”.9 Europe has more 
than  its  fair  share  of  past  glory  and  regrets,  and  possesses  a  deep  cultural  unity  in  its 
diversity.  The  single  currency  is  an  essential  part  of  this  “programme  to  be  realised”.  We 
shall continue to offer the euro as a unique and irreplaceable anchor of stability and trust. In 
the present very difficult circumstances it is more important than ever. Europe can rely on us 
to preserve that anchor. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
9   “Dans le passé un héritage de gloire et de regrets à partager; dans l’avenir un même programme à réaliser.”, 
Ernest Renan, “Qu’est ce qu’une nation?” 1882. 
BIS Review 30/2009 
 9
