Michael C Bonello: The challenges facing Malta's banking system  
Speech  by  Mr  Michael  C  Bonello,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  at  the  Second 
Annual Conference of Finance Malta, Valletta, 29 May 2009.  
 Introduction 
This  conference  about  Malta’s  financial  services  industry  is  being  held  in  the  midst  of  the 
most severe global financial crisis since the Great Depression and whose consequences for 
the  real  economy  in  terms  of  output  and  employment  losses  are  proving  to  be  the  most 
devastating in living memory. It is a crisis, therefore, which cannot but have repercussions on 
a small, open economy like Malta’s that is highly integrated with the world economy through 
trade  and  finance.  These  circumstances  present  challenges  for  the  domestic  banking 
system, and in addressing them it is important to recognise the implications for the economy 
at large. A sound, adaptable and innovative banking system is a prerequisite for sustainable 
development. 
The birth of a modern banking system 
Malta’s  recent  banking  history  has  indeed  tended  to  mirror  policy  shifts  in  the  broader 
economy. The nationalisation of the major banks in the 1970s was itself recognition that the 
centralisation  of  economic  activity  could  not  be  achieved  without  state  control  of  financial 
resources, including credit flows. Lending rates were set by the minister of finance while the 
central bank controlled deposit rates. Nominal interest rates were kept artificially low, often 
resulting  in  negative  real  interest  rates.  Unable  to  adjust  lending  rates  according  to  the 
creditworthiness  of  borrowers,  banks  resorted  to  significant  collateral  requirements  and  to 
credit rationing. The heavy reliance on real estate as collateral, the insufficient importance 
attached  to  the  viability  of  project  proposals,  along  with  the  absence  of  a  capital  market 
meant  than  savings  were  often  not  channelled  efficiently  into  productive  investment.  The 
resulting misallocation of resources served to compound the distortions that would proliferate 
in the rest of the economy. 
A  sea  change  in  economic  strategy  occurred  in  the  late  eighties  with  the  introduction  of 
policies  to  reduce  the  overbearing  state  presence.  These  included  a  gradual  reorientation 
towards a more market-oriented banking system and a monetary policy that operated more 
through  incentives  and  less  through  command.  A  first  reduction  in  the  government’s 
shareholdings  in  banks  took  place  during  1990/1991,  and  this  was  accompanied  by  a 
strengthening of the regulatory framework, including measures to enhance the capital base 
of banks through profit retention and the issue of new stock. A capital market, in the form of 
the  Malta  Stock  Exchange,  was  also  created.  Supporting  economic  reforms  included  a 
relaxation of the extensive system of import controls, the partial lifting of wage-price controls 
and an overhaul of the income tax regime. 
While reforms were incremental, a number of landmarks stand out. In 1994, for example, a 
comprehensive package of legislation was enacted as part of a strategy to further develop 
Malta  as  an  international  financial  centre.  The  thrust  of  this  initiative  was  to  promote 
competition  by  opening  up  the  licensing  process  and  removing  administrative  controls  on 
lending, while stressing the importance of maintaining adequate capital and managing risk 
appropriately. At the same time, the Malta Financial Services Centre was established as the 
regulator for financial services other than banking, which remained the responsibility of the 
Central Bank of Malta. 
Also in 1994, responsibility for monetary policy was moved to the Central Bank of Malta. The 
introduction of reserve requirements and the Bank’s engagement in open market operations 
BIS Review 65/2009 
 1
paved  the  way  for  the  establishment  of  a  market-driven  interest  rate  structure,  which  is  of 
paramount  importance  for  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy.  To  promote  activity  in  the 
money  market  and  bolster  its  own  ability  to  steer  interest  rates,  the  Bank  initiated  weekly 
auctions to influence the size of the monetary  base, while gaining control over the excess 
liquidity of the banking system. 
Further steps were subsequently taken to create an independent regulatory framework in line 
with  international  standards.  In  2002  the  renamed  Malta  Financial  Services  Authority  took 
over from the Central Bank of Malta the responsibility for supervising the banks and the stock 
exchange,  becoming  the  single  regulator.  At  the  same  time,  the  Bank  was  given  formal 
independence in the conduct of monetary policy, in the oversight of payment systems and in 
safeguarding the stability of the financial system. To complement the institutional framework, 
a  Financial  Intelligence  Analysis  Unit  was  established  to  strengthen  the  anti-money 
laundering regime and to combat the financing of terrorism.  
As part of the authorities’ efforts to create a reputable financial centre, in late 2002 the IMF / 
World Bank were requested to conduct a Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP). 
The  assessment  concluded  that  Malta’s  financial  system  appeared  to  be  healthy  and  well 
supervised,  with  a  comprehensive  legal  framework  and  strong  adherence  to  most 
international  standards  and  codes.  At  the  same  time,  the  report  also  noted  that,  mainly 
because of the predominance of two large banks, the system was highly concentrated and 
exposed to the country’s narrow economic base.  
Malta as an international financial centre 
EU membership in 2004 proved to be an important catalyst in the further development of the 
financial services industry. Malta now benefits from the greater credibility conferred by EU-
compliant  legislation  and  access  to  passporting  rights  in  the  vast  European  market,  which 
allows licensed financial institutions to exploit previously unavailable avenues for growth. 
Malta has also capitalized on its other strengths. Its small size facilitates access to the single 
regulator, allowing for a swift licensing process and the possibility of custom-made solutions. 
The financial services industry is supported by a modern telecommunications infrastructure 
and  a  plentiful  supply  of  experienced,  English-speaking  tax  professionals,  legal  and 
accounting firms and other service providers. Labour and rental costs are competitive, while 
Malta’s  geographical  position  enables  it  to  serve  as  a  finance  hub  in  the  Mediterranean 
region. 
These  attributes  are  complemented  by  a  competitive  tax  regime.  In  the  2008  Forbes  Tax 
Misery  and  Reform  Index,  Malta  was  classified  as  the  fifth  most  tax-friendly  country 
worldwide  for  companies  and  the  most  attractive  in  the  EU.  In  addition,  Malta  has  an 
extensive network of almost fifty double taxation treaties, and income earned overseas may 
be exempted from double taxation even when no bilateral treaty exists.  
Malta’s development as an international financial centre is reflected in the range of financial 
services  available.  Complementing  the  traditional  retail  functions,  banks  are  increasingly 
offering  private  and  investment  banking,  project  finance,  treasury  services  and  syndicated 
loans. Malta also hosts a number of institutions specializing in trade-related products such as 
structured trade finance, factoring and forfeiting.  
At the end of last year, the number of banks stood at 22, up from 17 in 2004. The assets of 
the banking system, including both the domestically and the internationally-oriented banks, 
totalled €41.9 billion at the end of 2008, an increase of 10.5% over 2007 and nearly double 
the total in 2004.  
Other  areas,  too,  have  experienced  rapid  growth.  These  include  fund  management  and 
insurance,  asset  management,  back  office 
collective 
investment  schemes,  captive 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2009
processing  facilities  and  call  centres.  Following  the  recent  legislation  on  professional 
investment funds, considerable interest has also been shown by the hedge fund industry. 
The  establishment  of  specialized  international  institutions  has  enabled  Malta  to  place  34th 
among  134  countries  in  terms  of  financial  market  sophistication,  according  to  the  Global 
Competitiveness Report 2008/09, published by the World Economic Forum. The same report 
ranks the balance sheet soundness of Maltese banks in the 10th place.  
The sustained growth of the financial services industry is having positive effects on the real 
economy.  The  number  of  persons  employed  in  the  industry  rose  from  4,300  in  2004  to 
around 6,000 in 2008. Furthermore, these figures do not include the substantial employment 
created by support activities such as professional and business services. 
The ingredients all seem to be in place, therefore, for this industry to continue to prosper in 
the future. The 2008 Global Financial Services Index, published by the City of London, ranks 
Malta fourth among the financial centres that have the potential to become significantly more 
important over the next few years, and fifth as the centre where organisations are most likely 
to open up new operations. The report describes Malta as a country “worth watching as it 
consolidates its position in the EU after adopting the euro”. 
The way forward: challenges in the short-term … 
The challenge now is to live up to these lofty expectations. In the short-term, Malta’s banking 
system  must  endeavour  to  emerge  from  the  current  downturn  well  equipped  to  seize  the 
opportunities that will no doubt arise once the crisis has run its course. For this purpose, it 
will be important for the banks to build on their strengths and minimise their weaknesses. 
With  regard  to  the  former,  our  banks  start  from  a  relatively  strong  position  since  their 
fundamentals  have  not  been  weakened  by  the  financial  crisis.  The  existence  of  a  sound 
regulatory  system,  effective  risk  management  practices  and  prudent  lending  policies  have 
combined  to  minimise  the  banks’  exposure  to  bad  or  dubiously-valued  assets.  Investment 
portfolios are in fact highly diversified, with minimal holdings of asset-backed securities, while 
the domestically-oriented banks’ measured approach to credit is reflected in loan-to-deposit 
and residential loan-to-value ratios that average around 79% and 73%, respectively. 
One  of  the  lessons  learned  from  the  crisis  is  that  a  bank’s  funding  model  is  crucial.  The 
reliance  by  a  number  of  international  banks  on  wholesale  funding  proved  to  be  a  major 
source of weakness in time of stress. In contrast, Maltese banks have traditionally relied on 
retail  deposits  to  fund  their  lending  operations,  a  source  of  liquidity  that  has  proved  more 
reliable. This explains the banks’ high liquidity ratios, currently averaging 46%. The steady 
supply of liquidity, combined with a sustained demand, have permitted the credit channel to 
remain  intact,  despite  the  ongoing  global  turmoil.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  bank  lending  to  the 
private sector grew by 9.7% in the twelve months to April 2009, compared with 8.7% in the 
preceding twelve months. 
Another lesson concerns the importance of a strong capital base. Here too, Maltese banks 
appear  to  be  in  a  good  position,  with  capital  adequacy  ratios  averaging  15%.  The  banks’ 
resilience in this regard is confirmed by the results of stress tests carried out recently by the 
Central Bank of Malta in connection with the Financial Stability Report published earlier this 
month. 
Going  forward,  however,  there  can  be  no  room  for  complacency,  particularly  during  a 
recession. The latest projections indeed suggest that most major economies, including those 
in the euro area, will contract this year and a recovery is only likely to set in well into 2010. 
The Bank’s most recent forecast for the Maltese economy, which was based on information 
available in February and which anticipated GDP growth in a range of 0.5% to 1.1% for 2009, 
is currently being revised to take account of the further deterioration in external conditions 
BIS Review 65/2009 
 3
since  then.  Everything  now  suggests  that,  barring  unforeseen  developments,  this  year  is 
likely to end with a marginally negative growth rate. 
Just as there are increasing signs internationally that an adverse feedback loop between the 
real  economy  and  the  financial  sector  has  taken  hold,  posing  new  challenges  for  financial 
stability, so also is it likely that our banks will become increasingly susceptible to the negative 
feedback  from  the  expected  further  slowdown  in  the  Maltese  economy.  Non-performing 
loans, which had fallen to more manageable levels in recent years, are likely to increase as 
debt-servicing capabilities weaken. This expectation is linked in particular to the significant 
concentration  risk  to  which  banks  in  Malta  are  exposed  stemming  from  both  a  direct 
exposure,  and  indirectly  through  collateral,  to  the  construction,  property  development  and 
mortgage sectors. Taken together, property-related loans account for almost 60% of loans by 
the banking system to the private sector. 
Profitability levels are also likely to be affected by slower growth in business volumes and 
squeezed interest margins due to increased competition for customer deposits. And as the 
repricing  of  risk  is  expected  to  continue  in  the  near  term,  further  downside  pressure  on 
earnings growth will come from write-downs in investment portfolios resulting from fair value 
adjustments. 
While  a  prudent  credit  risk  assessment  process  has  long  been  a  characteristic  of  banking 
practice in Malta, the importance of ensuring that the risk potential of assets is adequately 
understood and controlled bears emphasising at this time of uncertainty. The results of such 
monitoring  need  to  be  translated  into  appropriate  internal  ratings,  classifications  and  loss 
recognition to develop an accurate picture of credit quality. The concentration risk referred to 
earlier, combined with the prospect of a prolonged period of slow growth, also suggests that 
banks would do well to strengthen capital buffers further beyond statutory ratios. 
… and in the likely post-crisis scenario 
While the immediate priority of the authorities during the ongoing crisis has been to restore 
calm  to  the  financial  markets,  considerable  attention  has  also  been  devoted  to  drawing 
lessons  and  devising  remedies.  It  is  very  likely  that  once  the  dust  has  settled,  banks 
everywhere will have to face a much changed operational and regulatory environment. This 
will  entail  a  number  of  longer-term  challenges.  For  a  start,  when  established  business 
models  no  longer  work,  innovation  cannot  be  far  behind.  New  banking  institutions,  both 
physical and virtual, will appear. This will accentuate the degree of competition in the limited 
retail  deposit  and  loan  markets  and  result  in  narrower  interest  rate  spreads.  In  Malta,  the 
traditional  dependence  on  retail  funding  will  also  be  put  to  the  test.  All  this  will  happen 
against a backdrop of a more stringent regulatory regime. In sum, the challenge will be to 
meet  the  higher  regulatory  standards  without  stifling  the  dynamism  that  has  characterised 
our banking industry in recent years. 
In the remaining part of my remarks, I will focus on some issues that are likely to become 
especially relevant in the future. 
New accounting regime 
Changes in the regulatory framework are expected to include revisions to accounting rules. 
Accounting standards are a key aspect of the financial infrastructure and essential for market 
discipline. In line with the recommendations of the recent  de Larosière Report, accounting 
standards  should  not  distort  business  decisions  or  promote  pro-cyclical  behaviour  nor 
discourage long-term investment. 
Several  standard-setting  bodies  had  already  emphasised  the  need  for  the  exercise  of 
sounder  judgement  in  the  estimation  of  fair  values,  particularly  for  instruments  that  do  not 
trade in active markets. This raises concerns of both a macro- and micro-prudential nature. 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2009
Macro considerations relate to the pro-cyclical nature of the current accounting framework. 
The micro dimension relates to absence of depth in some financial markets, particularly in 
times  of  stress  when  liquidity  problems  arising  from  valuation  adjustments  are  quickly 
transmitted to an institution’s capital base. The presumption in the current valuation rules that 
a market value for a financial instrument exists does not necessarily hold during a crisis. The 
reclassification of assets in such circumstances would help financial institutions mitigate the 
problems arising from the inability to discover prices. 
Another  concept  that  is  gathering  support  internationally  is  that  of  dynamic  provisioning, 
which  seeks  to  avoid  the  pro-cyclical  impact  of  current  accounting  rules  by  recognising 
portfolio  losses  over  the  cycle.  As  a  result,  loss  provisions  are  measured  against  the 
expected losses over the life of an asset rather than when losses are actually incurred. The 
losses made during a downturn can then be met from the accumulated buffer built up during 
the economic upswing. 
Risk management practices and stress testing 
Let  me  now  turn  to  some  risk  management  issues.  Another  lesson  that  has  been  learned 
from the financial turmoil is that proper liquidity management is of paramount importance to 
satisfy  the  banks’  funding  needs,  and  heightens  their  resilience  against  idiosyncratic  or 
systemic risks. Although existing EU legislation on liquidity risk is highly fragmented, in part 
reflecting the various national approaches, adherence to a set of common principles such as 
those provided by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision should prove fruitful. These 
principles  promote  sound  liquidity  risk  management  frameworks  and  formal  contingency 
funding plans. 
Payment  systems  are  an  important  component  of  liquidity  management.  The  efficient 
execution of payment instructions is vital, as payment failures can result not only in higher 
costs but also liquidity problems. It is, therefore, somehow not clear why banks in Malta have 
opted for only an indirect participation in TARGET2 when this means that they rely entirely 
on their foreign correspondents to settle payments in euro.  
A recent survey carried out by the Central Bank of Malta indeed shows that this choice has 
occasionally  given  rise  to  operational  problems  and  additional  costs.  Indirect  participation, 
moreover,  also  carries  a  reputation  risk  in  the  event  of  a  payment  failure,  and  implies  the 
need to have in place a contingency plan to cater for the operational failure of counterparties. 
In this respect, I am pleased to note that some banks are now considering direct participation 
in the system. 
Another project which should help Maltese banks play a more active role in Europe is the 
Single  Euro  Payments  Area  (SEPA),  which  went  live  in  2008.  SEPA  represents  the  next 
major  step  towards  closer  European  financial  integration  and  is  a  further  building  block 
towards the realisation of the full potential of the Single Market. Its objective is to remove the 
distinction  between  domestic  and  cross-border  payments,  promoting  efficiency  and  safety, 
minimising transactions costs and reducing bank charges.  
Following  the  launch  of  the  first  SEPA  payment  product  for  credit  transfers  last  year,  the 
transposition of the Payments Services Directive into national law as from November 2009 
will support direct debit schemes, thus opening up the possibility of using such instruments in 
the  SEPA  area,  including  Malta.  Given  its  importance  for  our  banking  system,  the  Central 
Bank  of  Malta  has  launched  a  Consultative  Paper  on  the  National  Implementation  of  the 
Payment Services Directive. 
Malta  stands  to  gain  from  SEPA.  Along  with  the  benefits  of  financial  market  integration, 
increased  competition  and  scope  for  innovation,  there  is  also  a  strong  potential  to  attract 
e-commerce  payment  business  and  payment 
trans-national 
corporations.  
factory  operations 
for 
BIS Review 65/2009 
 5
Investing in SEPA should not, therefore, be viewed as an expense, but rather as a business 
opportunity  that  will  help  banks  pre-empt  competition  law  problems,  reduce  costs  and 
expand in new markets. In time, it may also come to offer new and profitable services, such 
as  e-invoicing  and  reconciliation.  For  this  to  happen,  the  banks  must  see  to  it  that  their 
customers understand the advantages offered by SEPA and make use of it. 
The  financial  crisis  has  also  highlighted  the  importance  of  stress  tests,  which  assess  an 
institution’s  ability  to  withstand  both  institution-specific  credit  and  liquidity  risks  as  well  as 
systemic  risks,  including  adverse  macroeconomic  conditions.  As  stated  in  the  Bank’s 
Financial Stability Report, the latest stress test results show that the banks generally have 
adequate capital buffers and sufficient liquidity to withstand extreme, yet plausible shocks.  
The  tests  carried  out  by  the  Bank  should,  however,  be  complemented  by  parallel  tests 
conducted by individual institutions. In particular, banks should make an in-depth, bottom-up 
assessment of the potential implications of critical events to identify potential weaknesses at 
an early stage so as to be in a position to take early corrective measures. This would also 
serve to reduce the pro-cyclicality of such measures. In recognition of the need for a strong 
risk management framework, the Central Bank of Malta, in cooperation with the MFSA, has 
been working with a number of banks on their contingency funding plans and stress testing 
capacity. 
A new supervisory regime 
The lessons that are emerging from the financial crisis will almost certainly change the shape 
of financial regulation and supervision as we know it. The globalisation of financial institutions 
and  markets,  and  the  associated  interdependencies,  imply  that  a  regime  that  has  only  a 
narrow institutional and geographic focus will prove inadequate. There is now a heightened 
recognition  of  the  importance  of  the  macro-prudential  dimension  of  supervision  and  of  the 
need  to  have  mechanisms  in  place  to  address  systemic  risks,  within  and  across  national 
borders. In this regard, the recommendations contained in the de Larosière Report constitute 
an excellent basis for action. 
The Report distinguishes between micro-prudential supervision (the supervision of individual 
institutions)  and  macro-prudential  supervision  (the  limitation  of  the  distress  of  the  financial 
system as a whole to protect the overall economy from significant losses in real output). The 
fact  that  entire  financial  systems  may  be  exposed  to  common  and  systemic  risks  is  not 
always fully taken into account in micro-prudential supervision. The two processes, however, 
are essential and complementary components of an effective monitoring system for financial 
stability. Indeed, macro-prudential supervision cannot be meaningful unless it can somehow 
impact on supervision at the micro-level; while micro-prudential supervision cannot effectively 
safeguard financial stability without adequately taking account of macro-level developments. 
An  improved  domestic  framework  for  macro-prudential  supervision  should  mirror  these 
international developments. Although the stress tests have shown that banks in Malta are for 
the most part adequately capitalised, they may still need to strengthen their capital buffer to 
cover Pillar II risks, such as concentration and interest rate risks, once the requirements of 
the Capital Requirements Directive are fully implemented. 
The high exposure to property-related loans, which I referred to earlier, represents a potential 
systemic risk and thus falls within the purview of macro-prudential supervision. The Bank has 
both  a  statutory  responsibility  as  well  as  the  necessary  expertise  for  assessing  systemic 
risks. In this context, the importance being given in the global debate to endowing macro-
prudential  regulators  with  the  necessary  policy  tools  beyond  what  they  have  now,  namely 
moral  suasion,  should  be  echoed  domestically.  Micro-  and  macro-prudential  supervision 
should go hand in hand. This would also provide reassurance to the banks, complementing 
their own efforts to overcome the challenges I have outlined here today. 
6 
 BIS Review 65/2009
Conclusion 
While  Maltese  banks  have  been  spared  the  full  impact  of  the  financial  crisis,  in  the  years 
ahead they will be operating in an environment that is likely to have changed as a result of 
the  crisis.  Our  banks,  too,  will  face  tougher  regulation,  higher  capital  requirements  and, 
perhaps, also scarcer funding. They will have to strengthen their capacity to manage risk and 
growth itself. The small size of the domestic market, moreover, will require them to be more 
innovative  and  outward  looking,  exploiting  the  opportunities  of  the  Single  Market  and  of 
Malta’s strategic location on the EU’s southernmost frontier. Only in this way will they be able 
to  compete  and  continue  to  play  a  vital  role  in  support  of  a  modernising  and  growing 
economy. 
BIS Review 65/2009 
 7
