Christian Noyer: Economic and financial crisis – the post-G20 outlook  
Speech by Mr Christian Noyer, Governor of the Bank of France, at a luncheon organised by 
the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce, Hong Kong, 11 June 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  speak  to  you  today.  At  a  time  when  the  regulation  of  the 
financial  and  banking  sectors  is  being  discussed  in-depth,  this  meeting  is  a  unique 
opportunity for exchanging our ideas and thoughts on the most topical issues.  
I would like to raise three questions that seem absolutely essential today, a couple of weeks 
after  the  G20  summit  and  the  Spring  meetings  of  the  IMF.  These  three  questions  are  the 
following: 
• 
• 
• 
What is the economic and financial outlook? 
What type of financial regulatory framework are we moving towards? 
How can we strengthen financial stability at the international level? 
What is the economic and financial outlook? 
After the recession that has been affecting the world economy since September 2008, the 
first  signs  of  a  recovery  are  being  examined  very  closely.  While  in  the  first  quarter  output 
data  confirmed  a  further  decline  at  a  similar  or  stronger  pace  than  by  end-2008,  survey 
indicators  point  to  deceleration  of  the  slowdown  in  the  second  quarter,  which  justifies 
cautious optimism. Indeed, I see several reasons for hoping that “the worst is behind us”.  
The strength, the scope and the synchronisation of the crisis were exceptional and the risks 
that continue to weigh on the world economy should not be underestimated. The first wave of 
the crisis consisted in the drying-up of liquidity on financial markets, a collapse in confidence 
and world trade. Although this first wave has not subsided, a second wave could hit the world 
economy. On the one hand, the feedback effects between the financial sector and the real 
economy would curb the availability of loans. On the other hand, the rise in unemployment, 
which lags the contraction in activity, may affect household consumption. 
However, the factors that lend support to a recovery are also significant. They stem not only 
from a natural rebalancing of the economy but also from an exceptional fiscal and monetary 
stimulus.  
Firstly,  disinflation,  which  has  been  more  rapid  than  expected,  boosts  households’ 
purchasing power and should partly offset the deterioration in the labour market. [In the euro 
area,  disinflation  could  result  in  a  3.5-point  year-on-year  increase  in  purchasing  power  in 
2009; the rise in unemployment could reach two points.]  
Secondly,  the  automatic  stabilisers  have  a  strong  effect  in  the  euro  area,  thanks  to 
unemployment  benefits  and  a  broad  tax  base.  They  are,  by  construction,  temporary, 
appropriate and targeted, which guarantees their countercyclical impact. 
Thirdly, large-scale stimulus packages have been adopted and shall be implemented in 2009 
and 2010. In the euro area, they are equivalent to 1.7% of GDP and are expected, according 
to the IMF, to contribute to raising growth by 0.9 point in 2009 and 0.3 point in 2010.  
Fourthly,  governments’  very  strong  commitment  to  guaranteeing  the  solvency  of  banks 
should prevent risks of a credit crunch. In France, the two structures set up, the Société de 
financement de l’économie française (SFEF) and the Société de prises de participation de 
BIS Review 75/2009 
 1
l’Etat  (SPPE),  give  the  government  considerable  room  for  manoeuvre  to  recapitalise  the 
banking sector and ensure its financing, and thereby that of the economy.  
Last, but not least, the 325-basis-point decline in the ECB’s refinancing rate since July 2008 
is unprecedented, both in terms of size and speed. In an environment characterised by fixed 
rates,  the  effects  of  this  decrease  shall  spread  progressively,  but  rates  on  new  loans  are 
already falling, in line with the cuts in policy rates. In addition, the ECB has embarked on a 
quantitative easing policy aimed at banks, which, by contrast with the United States, provide 
80%  of  the  financing  of  the  economy.  Since  October  2008,  the  ECB  has  been  providing 
unlimited  liquidity  and  has  eased  collateral  rules  for  its  refinancing  operation.  At  its  May 
meeting, the Governing council has decided to extend the maturity of its provision of liquidity 
up to one year and to purchase euro-denominated covered bonds issued in the euro area. 
As a result, the 1-year interbank market has converged to the level of the US 1-year market 
rate.  
What type of financial regulation framework are we moving towards? 
The  current  crisis  has  highlighted  certain  failures  in  financial  regulation  and  this  is  why, 
beyond  the  immediate  measures  I  have  just  described,  an  ambitious  agenda  to  reform 
financial regulation has been launched. This overhaul is crucial for laying the foundations of a 
more stable financial system. It should not be implemented in a hasty manner if we want to 
avoid hurting the recovery from the crisis. 
The  G20  has  laid  down  clear  principles  to  guide  the  overhaul  of  financial  regulation.  They 
mainly  cover  three  areas:  the  strengthening  of  prudential  standards,  the  redefinition  of  the 
scope of regulation and the revision of accounting standards. 
Before bringing up these three dimensions, I would like to point out that the G20 Action Plan 
imposes a requirement for all stakeholders concerned with financial stability: how to better 
assess the risks facing the financial system as a whole? On this point, you will agree with me 
that systemic risk is THE risk that we need to take better account of. We have not been able 
to identify it, control it, or capture it in prudential terms. In many respects, systemic risk is the 
result of liquidity risk, leverage, compounded by financial innovation and high transformation 
risks. These factors are not easy to measure at the level of individual banks. They are even 
less so at the level of the financial system as a whole. This is nevertheless the challenge we 
have to face today.  
Let me come back to the G20 action plan. This plan first recognises the need to strengthen 
prudential regulation in three areas. Capital requirements need to be strengthened and made 
more counter-cyclical by introducing a system of capital buffers. The quality of capital should 
be  enhanced  and  its  definition  harmonised.  We  also  may  need  to  add  to  the  range  of 
instruments  currently  available  a  simple  mechanism  to  measure  leverage  in  order  to 
complement the information provided by the solvency ratio. 
Another lesson that the G20 has learned from the crisis is that the current scope of regulation 
and supervision is inappropriate as it is too narrow. The current framework is based on the 
implicit idea that banks alone – because they collect deposits – are the source of risks for the 
system as a whole. This used to be the case. Yet, it is no longer true at all. It is now evident 
that  all  systemically  important  institutions  and  markets  need  to  be  regulated.  In  concrete 
terms, the G20 is widening the scope of regulation to include rating agencies, hedge funds 
and derivatives markets. The general principle is to abandon a silo approach to regulation, 
which was structured around institutions' legal character (e.g. banks, insurance companies, 
etc.),  and  to  move  over  to  a  type  of  regulation  based  on  the  roles  performed  by  different 
players in the stability of the system (liquidity provision, deposit-taking, market making, etc). 
Lastly, the G20 has set out a road map to improve accounting standards. Agreement on this 
point is not as broad as on the previous ones. The members of the G20 have sometimes 
divergent  views  about  the  role  of  accounting  rules.  In  particular,  one  of  the  controversial 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2009
points  relates  to  mark-to-market  and  the  scope  of  application  of  fair  value  accounting. 
Nonetheless,  I  observe  that  the  G20,  by  asking  that  the  accounting  standard  setters  take 
greater  account  of  financial  stability  constraints,  implicitly  acknowledges  that  the  impact  of 
accounting choices on the latter are not neutral. In any event, the countries agreed on three 
objectives: reducing the complexity of accounting standards, increasing the harmonisation of 
standards internationally and introducing a more forward-looking system of provisioning. 
The discussions at the G20 summit find a strong echo in Europe. In fact, it is no exaggeration 
to  say  that  the  Europeans  are  a  driving  force  in  the  international  projects  I  have  just 
described. 
In regional terms, the report by the high level group chaired by Jacques de Larosière is a 
cornerstone for the new financial regulation and supervision that will emerge in Europe after 
the crisis. These recommendations appear highly relevant to me. They reconcile efficiency 
and pragmatism. Whether it concerns developing a European system of financial supervision 
or setting up a Systemic Risk Council under the auspices of the ECB and the ESCB, these 
ideas are truly conducive to greatly strengthening the surveillance of risks both at individual 
institution level and for the European financial system as a whole. 
The reforms that I have just described should make it possible for the incentives of financial 
system players to be compatible with the stability of this system. The crisis has highlighted 
two types if not of incompatibility, at least of divergence that need to be corrected. 
First,  within  the  financial  industry  itself.  Financial  innovation  and  developments  in  the 
business  models  of  financial  intermediaries  have  weakened  credit  discipline  in  favour  of  a 
strict return-oriented discipline. Regulators are working on correcting the regulatory sources 
of these incentives, which are dangerous for financial stability. I am thinking notably of the 
work aimed at reducing regulatory arbitrage and at countering the short-termism encouraged 
by certain prudential and accounting provisions. 
Second,  we  need  to  reconverge  the  incentives  of  private-  and  public-sector  players.  Their 
divergence  is  a  natural  phenomenon  in  periods  of  economic  and  financial  boom.  In  these 
periods, regulators and supervisors find it harder to limit risk-taking when the risks to financial 
stability  are  unclear  and  competition 
fierce.  Maximising  profit  and  competition 
considerations  stand  in  the  way  of  prudence  and  the  prevention  of  financial  imbalances. 
Countering these forces requires in particular the implementation of an independent macro-
prudential  policy.  This  is  one  of  the  main  thrusts  of  the  reforms  proposed  by  Jacques  de 
Larosière. 
is 
How can we strengthen financial stability at the international level? 
The  overall  reform  agenda  that  I  have  just  outlined  would  not  be  complete  without  a 
component  concerning  the  strengthening  of  the  international  financial  architecture.  Let  me 
conclude my speech on this point. This strengthening currently has two very visible faces: 
the IMF and the Financial Stability Board. 
The IMF has once again become one of the key actors in the new international architecture. 
It is tasked, together with the Financial Stability Board, with monitoring the implementation of 
the  G20  agreements  on  financial  regulation.  It  also  has  a  central  role  to  play  in  the 
multilateral  surveillance  of  financial  risks:  since  late  April,  it  has  been  conducting  early 
warning  exercises  on  financial  and  macroeconomic  risks  jointly  with  the  Financial  Stability 
Board; it will also extend its analysis of the resilience of domestic financial sectors as part of 
the  Financial  System  Assessment  Programs  (FSAP)  to  include  all  systemically  important 
countries. Indeed, one of the notable outcomes of the G20 is that all the member countries 
undertook to accept this assessment by their peers, including, for the first time, the United 
States. This broadening of the Fund's role is being supported by a trebling of its resources, 
which will increase its lending capacity to USD 750 billion. In addition, the instruments at its 
disposal  were  reviewed,  with  notably  the  creation  of  a  new  credit  line  facility  aimed  at 
BIS Review 75/2009 
 3
countries with a proven track record and designed to avoid the stigma that up to now has too 
often been associated with the IMF's interventions. 
The Financial Stability Board is the other face of the new international financial architecture. 
As you know, this is the new name of the former Financial Stability Forum. In fact, it's much 
more than a change of name. The Forum is becoming a fully-fledged international body. It is 
gaining in firepower thanks to a reinforced and permanent administrative structure. It is also 
gaining greatly in legitimacy thanks to the broadening of its membership to all G20 countries. 
Moreover, it is acquiring new powers through its position as the supervisor of international 
standard setters. Lastly, it is strengthening its key role in the supervision of financial stability 
through its full participation in the exercise to identify vulnerabilities being developed by the 
IMF. 
Let me stop here. Thank you ladies and gentlemen. 
4 
 BIS Review 75/2009
