Rundheersing Bheenick: Comprehensive reflections on economic and 
financial activities in Mauritius during 2008 
Letter  by  Mr  Rundheersing  Bheenick,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Mauritius,  to  stakeholders, 
Bank of Mauritius, Port Louis, December 2008. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  Bank  of 
Mauritius’ website.  
 Dear Stakeholders 
As  we  begin  2009,  every  central  bank  Governor  around  the  world  must  be  asking  himself 
whether the worst is over yet. Except for a few überbears and habitual doomsayers, no one 
anticipated the troubles of 2008. Now that we are caught up in a global slowdown, with most 
of  the  major  economies  actually  in  recession,  we  have  new  concerns.  What  are  the 
prospects for 2009? Will the bail-out work? Why has Mauritius so far escaped the wreckage 
of financial systems and banking around the world? Shall we see the end of the crisis this 
year and if so, when?  
The lessons are becoming clear and I believe it is possible to reshape the global financial 
system to make it do its job again in promoting development, growth in jobs and the relief of 
poverty. I am hopeful that the global economy will emerge fitter from this crisis. But there are 
no quick fixes. The ability of Mauritius and other small states to elude the immediate impact 
of the crisis can be put down to two broad factors; first: avoiding the worst aspects of global 
credit delinquency through appropriate banking regulation and supervision; second: stability 
and  probity  in  accounting  and  banking  methods,  recognising  risks  for  what  they  are,  and 
reducing  exposure  to  potential  losses,  rather  than  grabbing  gold-plated  opportunities  for 
making a fast buck.  
In 2007, we launched a new strategy for communication which culminated in the End-of-Year 
Letter to Stakeholders. The essential idea here is to share with you the experiences of the 
Bank of Mauritius, the highs and lows of the year, and also to bring to you the outlines of our 
future  policy.  This  year,  we  continue  with  this  tradition.1  We  present  a  review  of 
developments  in  the  banking  sector  in  2008,  discuss  some  of  the  initiatives  taken  by  the 
Bank and adumbrate a foggy outlook for the year ahead. 
The  year  2008  has  been  unprecedented  in  global  banking  history  and  this  has  deeply 
affected  the  pattern  of  our  work  at  the  Bank.  It  began  with  massive  inflows  of  foreign 
exchange  powered  by  portfolio  flows,  investments  in  IRS  projects  and  gilts,  causing  our 
currency  to  appreciate  significantly.  The  second  part  of  the  year  saw  global  currency 
movements and the scaling down of investments by foreigners. We closed the year with a 
reverse  situation.  Between  these  two  extremes,  the  Bank  navigated  sometimes  in  rough 
seas but despite the storms, the Bank and its many partners have consolidated the financial 
sector  by  keeping  a  steady  course  and  taking  some  exceptional  measures  to  protect  our 
economy from the effects of the global turmoil.  
At the Bank, we have stepped up our vigilance and taken prompt action to sustain investor 
confidence  and  long-term  financial  stability  by  tasking  a  special  multi-divisional  cell, 
comprising  senior  officers  from  various  disciplines,  to  monitor  closely  the  evolution  of  the 
crisis.  
                                                 
1   We are presenting this letter in a new computer-friendly format. Sections are segmented into principal points 
and detail. You can either navigate to the detail by clicking on the access points or skip the detail and read on. 
We hope that this will help in finding the points of special interest to you.  
BIS Review 13/2009 
 1
In the midst of all these uncertainties, I must admit we have also been lucky. Our banking 
system has been steady and stable throughout the year, maintaining strong capital buffers 
and high solvency ratios, all of which have ensured its resilience. The judicious lending and 
investment practices of our banks have protected them from exposure to the toxic assets and 
complex derivative products fatally linked to the US sub-prime credits and the over-valuation 
of real estate. A key element in the soundness of our banking practices has been our greater 
reliance on deposit funding rather than on money market or external funding. These classic 
and simple safety measures have kept us relatively unaffected by the global financial crisis.  
If banking has remained safe and secure in Mauritius, what can we say of the wider aspects 
of the domestic economy? Or, in U.S parlance, what about Main Street? 
Mauritius has not of course entirely escaped the spillover effects of the global crisis on the 
real  economy.  Indeed,  the  impact  is  becoming  increasingly  visible.  We  are  witnessing  a 
slowdown in levels of production and investment in Mauritius. This will have knock-on effects 
on banking activities and there will be need for a revaluation of assets that are pledged as 
security. Yet, the strong performance of our banks during the past year, their solid deposit 
base, their low level of non-performing loans, and the continuous monitoring of all banking 
matters under the watchful eye of your Central Bank, comfort us in the view that we are well-
placed to confront the anticipated levels of external shocks that our wider economy will face. 
(Click here for further details on Performance of the Banking Sector)
In the second half of 2008, the Bank has been working closely with the Treasury to respond 
to  the  unfolding  global  crisis  and  further  buffer  the  domestic  economy.  The  Additional 
Stimulus  Package  announced  by  Government  in  December  was  prepared  in  consultation 
with  the  Bank  as  part  of  the  closer  policy  dialogue  between  the  Bank  and  the  Ministry  of 
Finance.  Furthermore,  in  response  to  tight  liquidity  conditions  in  global  credit  which  might 
have exerted an adverse impact on the cost and availability of short-term trade finance, the 
Bank took pre-emptive action by making available a Special Foreign Currency Line of Credit 
of US$ 125 million. This allowed local banks to maintain the flow of credit for international 
trade, which is a vital lifeline for an open economy like ours. 
Regulation and supervision 
The  flaws  in  the  national  regulatory  systems  of  the  major  economies  have  been  cruelly 
exposed  by  the  global  crisis  and  its  attendant  financial  scandals.  Effective  and  timely 
regulation,  built  on  prudent,  transparent  and  sound  supervisory  practices,  must  be  at  the 
heart  of  a  stable  financial  system.  In  the  course  of  last  year,  the  Bank  reviewed  its 
supervisory  structures  and  revisited  most  of  its  regulatory  guidelines  to  ensure  that  the 
supervision  of  the  banking  sector  remains  ahead  of  the  game  and  meets  a  high  standard 
when gauged by international norms. 
(Click here for further details on Supervisory issues)
The Bank has been actively engaged in both on-site and off-site supervision of banks. The 
objective  is  to  strengthen  our  system-wide  approach  to  supervision  and  to  prevent  any 
spillover  into  the  system  of  any  specific  risk  from  individual  banks.  The  exercise  includes 
cross-border banks, that is, subsidiaries as well as branches of banks outside Mauritius. This 
is  done  through  a  mechanism  of  cooperation  and  information-sharing  with  home  and  host 
supervisors.  
(Click here for further details on Memoranda of Understanding) 
Financial stability 
Enhancing financial stability became a core task in 2008, and in this area, the Bank took two 
important  steps  during  the  year.  First,  the  Bank  ensured  closer  coordination  with  the 
2 
 BIS Review 13/2009
Financial Services Commission through the new Joint Coordination Committee (JCC). The 
enhanced collaboration helps to avoid regulatory gaps and the JCC will improve cooperation 
on  supervision,  by  establishing  a  lead  regulator  for  each  financial  institution.  The  second 
initiative in the pursuit of financial stability is the publication of the Bank’s very first Financial 
Stability Report (FSR) in line with an explicit requirement of our enabling Act. As I mentioned 
in the Foreword of the FSR, “The Financial Stability Report provides a useful communication 
tool about existing and potential future risks to financial stability and can serve as a means of 
focusing efforts to mitigate the key risks.” The FSR identified certain areas of vulnerabilities 
and proposed specific measures. It also unveiled the Mauritius Exchange Rate Index to track 
the average value of our currency against currencies of our trading partners. The FSR will be 
published twice a year. 
(Click here for details on the Mauritius Exchange Rate Index)   
Basel II 
Notwithstanding some weaknesses in Basel II which have been brought to the fore by the 
global crisis, the Bank endorses the stand of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision 
for  a  prompt  implementation  of  the  Basel  II  framework  with  its  increased  sensitive 
measurement  of  risks  and  enhanced  market  transparency.  The  Bank  issued  various 
guidelines  required  for  the  implementation  of  the  standardised  approaches  of  the  Basel  II 
framework. The way was thus cleared for the Basel II framework to become operational as 
from the quarter ending 31 March 2009.  
(Click here for the January 2009 Communiqué on Basel II)
Islamic banking and Islamic money market 
In 2008, we made significant progress in the introduction of Islamic banking in the country. 
We issued guidelines on Islamic banking after a process of intensive consultation through a 
multi-disciplinary sub-committee which the Bank spearheaded.  
The Guideline for Institutions Conducting Islamic Banking Business became effective at end-
June 2008, and amendments were brought to the Income Tax Act and other relevant Acts to 
take  into  account  the  specificities  of  Islamic  banking.  The  Bank  approved  two  Islamic 
Banking applications and we expect these institutions to start operation soon. One of these 
entities is headquartered in the Gulf region.  
The Bank has recently embarked on another major project, the development of an Islamic 
money  market  and  liquidity  management  framework.  This  will  allow  Islamic  banking 
institutions to conduct interbank transactions for the management of short-term liquidity and 
have access to Sharia-compliant money market products. The Bank is working closely with 
the  Islamic  Development  Bank  in  this  respect.  In  May  this  year,  we  shall  be  hosting  an 
international  seminar  on  Islamic  Capital  Markets  in  collaboration  with  the  Islamic  Financial 
Services Board. 
AML/CFT measures 
The  maintenance  of  our  reputation  as  a  clean  financial  centre  continues  to  be  one  of  our 
priorities. The Report of the Joint World Bank–IMF Financial Sector Assessment Programme 
(FSAP) mission of 2007 commended the Bank on its Anti-Money Laundering and Combating 
the Financing of Terrorism regime.  
(Click here for excerpts of the FSAP Report on Money Laundering)
BIS Review 13/2009 
 3
Reinforced regional presence 
I  have  always  been  a  firm  proponent  of  regional  economic  cooperation  as  I  believe  that 
building  ties  with  other  countries  in  the  region  is  vital  for  a  small  country  like  Mauritius.  In 
2008, we have seen much progress on this front.  
Following  a  decision  of  the  COMESA  Committee  of  Governors  of  Central  Banks  (Tripoli, 
Libya,  November  2007),  the  Bank  was  appointed  to  act  as  the  settlement  bank  for  the 
Regional  Payment  and  Settlement  System  (REPSS)  of  the  COMESA  Clearing  House  to 
allow  cross-border  payments  between  COMESA  member-states.  In  April  2008,  the  Bank 
organised a workshop for all COMESA central banks on the functioning of the REPSS.  
During the year, the Bank also hosted the Eastern Africa Sub-Regional meeting of Governors 
of the Association of African Central Banks and facilitated the Board Meeting of the African 
Export-Import Bank, which was held in Mauritius.  
The global financial crisis also brought African Central Bank Governors together to explore 
the way forward.  
• 
the  African  Union,  and 
I  attended  the  meeting  of  African  Ministers  of  Finance  and  Governors  of  Central 
Banks  (Tunis,  November  2008),  which  was  convened  jointly  by  the  African 
Development  Bank, 
the  United  Nations  Economic 
Commission for Africa, to assess and exchange notes on the evolving situation and 
to identify measures that could effectively be taken. At the end of the meeting, I was 
privileged to join a handful of Ministers/Governors in a teleconference with the US 
Treasury on the eve of the first G-20 Summit in Washington on the global crisis. 
In December I attended the meeting of francophone Governors which the Banque 
Centrale  de  L’Afrique  de  L’Ouest  hosted  in  Abidjan  to  examine  the  impact  of  the 
crisis on the countries of the African Francophone Group at the IMF and the World 
Bank. 
 The comparative performance of our country in the region was very creditable, as illustrated 
for example, by the World Bank’s 2008 “Banking the Poor Report”. Mauritius is the league 
champion  in  terms  of  financial  access  with  over  2000  accounts  per  thousand  adults.  We 
came  third,  behind  Malaysia  and  Singapore,  in  this  global  survey.  This  publication,  which 
explores  associations  between  banking  policies  and  practices  with  the  level  of  financial 
access  in  the  selected  countries,  had  its  world-wide  launch  at  the  Bank  of  Mauritius 
Headquarters in November 2008. 
Monetary policy 
The  exceptional  capital  inflows  at  the  beginning  of  2008,  to  which  I  alluded  earlier,  put 
significant pressure on monetary  matters for our small economy. They cause the rupee to 
appreciate and fuelled the rising rate of price inflation, already affected by the unprecedented 
spike in oil prices and the steady increase in prices of food and commodities. The Bank was 
therefore confronted with the combined challenge of combating inflation and preserving the 
competitiveness  of  the  export-oriented  sectors.  The  Monetary  Policy  Committee  (MPC), 
normally  set  to  meet  on  a  quarterly  basis,  met  eight  times  in  2008  with  interim  meetings 
having to be called to deal with rapidly-changing conditions. 
(Click here for further details on the work of the Monetary Policy Committee)
With rising inflation, the Bank continued with its tight monetary policy in the first quarter of 
2008. Unpredictable developments on the international scene in the second quarter, coupled 
with our own projected inflation, compelled the Bank to ease its stance a little in the second 
quarter.  An  expansionary  budget,  handed  down  in  June  2008,  coupled  with  a  generous 
wage-award  for  the  civil  service  which  raised  the  spectre  of  wage  push  inflation,  further 
complicated  the  situation  in  the  third  quarter  before  currency  volatility,  stock  market 
4 
 BIS Review 13/2009
nervousness, financial turmoil and the global economic slowdown threw things in complete 
disarray in the last quarter. Policy actions were coordinated with Government. During 2008, 
the Key Repo Rate was cut by a total of 250 basis points to stand at 6.75 per cent at the end 
of the year.  
(Click here for evolution of the Key Repo Rate in 2008)  
The decisions of the MPC, which are taken by simple majority, became mired in controversy. 
This,  in  turn,  provided  fertile  ground  for  lobbyists  and  other  pressure  groups  to  seek  to 
influence outcomes in their favour.  
In addition to the interest rate decisions of the MPC, the Bank had recourse to other tools to 
respond to abnormal monetary and credit conditions. Owing to structural excess liquidity in 
the system, the overnight rate had remained persistently outside its set limits (the corridor) 
since  the  framework  was  introduced  in  December  2006.  The  Bank  increased  the  Cash 
Reserve Ratio (CRR) from 4 per cent to 6 per cent in August. This resulted in the rate falling 
rapidly back within the limits of the corridor. However, in view of the rapidly-changing global 
environment, the Bank subsequently reduced the CRR first to 5 per cent and then to 4.5 per 
cent in December, to ensure that the system had sufficient liquidity. Another measure that I 
considered  necessary  in  the  circumstances  was  the  widening  of  the  corridor  from  the 
symmetric band of 50 basis points to a band of 125 basis points around the Key Repo Rate.  
(Click here for further details on other measures aimed at strengthening the Monetary 
Policy Framework)
When  we  compare  with  many  other  emerging  economies,  which  are  as  dependent  on 
imports as Mauritius, we have little reason to be too unhappy as we have managed to keep 
inflation at reasonable levels. And this year, we have the extra burden of having to counter 
the knock-on effects of the global economic slowdown on Mauritius, especially on our export-
dependent sectors such as tourism and manufacturing. 
To deliver on our mandate to fight inflation, the Bank invested resources in capacity-building. 
In  July  2008,  the  Bank  hosted  a  regional  seminar  on  Inflation  Targeting,  Modelling  and 
Forecasting,  in  collaboration  with  the  Centre  for  Central  Banking  Studies  of  the  Bank  of 
England  (CCBS).  Held  at  the  Bank’s  Headquarters,  and  attended  by  central  banks  in  the 
region, the seminar set a new attendance record in the entire history of the CCBS.  
We also published our first Inflation Report in November, to fall in line with a requirement of 
the  Bank  of  Mauritius  Act  2004.  This  report  retraced  the  historical  pattern  of  inflation  in 
Mauritius, and offered valuable insights into the critical factors affecting fluctuations in prices, 
which may serve as a guide for the future. We intend to publish Inflation Reports twice per 
year.  
Domestic debt management 
An important development in 2008  was the take-over of debt management functions, both 
Domestic  and  External,  from  the  Debt  Management  Unit  of  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and 
Economic Empowerment. The new arrangement, which took effect from 1 July 2008, under 
an  agreement  reached  by  the  Bank  with  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Empowerment, also requires the Bank to advise on the debt management strategy. Jointly 
with  the  Commonwealth  Secretariat,  the  Bank  organized,  at  the  end  of  2008,  a  
two-week  Workshop  on  Debt  Recording  and  Management  for  staff  members  of  the  Bank, 
and officers from both the Ministry of Finance and Economic Empowerment and the National 
Audit Office.  
BIS Review 13/2009 
 5
Domestic foreign exchange market 
During  2008  there  were  erratic  movements  in  the  foreign  exchange  market.  This  reflected 
rapid and substantial global fluctuations. The Bank intervened regularly on the market and by 
the end of the year, we succeeded in significantly dampening volatility.  
(Click here for further details on Intervention on the Foreign Exchange Market)
There have been different views, some quite vociferous, on how “weak” or how “strong” the 
rupee  should  be,  depending  from  which  side  of  the  market  one  is  operating.  Any 
orchestration of demand for a central-bank-led depreciation of the Mauritian Rupee fails to 
appreciate the serious ill effects of a highly devalued currency for a small import-dependent 
open  economy  like  ours.  Its  consequences  could  be  disastrous  if  a  self-accentuating 
expectation is fuelled with instant pass-through into domestic inflation.  
The Bank believes that both sellers and buyers should get a fair price. One way of achieving 
this  is  by  reducing  the  cost  of  intermediation.  The  Bank  has  been  addressing  this  in  two 
ways.  First,  the  Bank  has  agreed  to  buy  and  sell  foreign  currency  directly  in  a  structured 
manner from/to those in the market that have, or require them, in large quantities. Second, 
with  a  view  to  spurring  greater  competition,  the  Bank  issued  licences  to  14  new  Money 
Changers and one Foreign Exchange Dealer on a revised set of conditions.  
Whilst the Bank does not target any specific exchange rate against any particular currency 
and is not itself in a market-maker, we do have a key role in market management. This is a 
matter of continual review by the IMF which commented favourably on the functioning of our 
interbank  foreign  exchange  market  in  its  2007  FSAP  Report.  We  can  say  that  the  foreign 
exchange market has functioned well in 2008. 
(Click here for excerpts on Exchange Rate from the IMF) 
Changes in our financial landscape 
The year 2008 witnessed some significant reshaping of the banking scene in Mauritius. Two 
banks had new shareholders and two others merged into one, leading to three new names 
being  added  to  the  list  of  operating  banks,  while  four  were  de-listed.  Whereas  the  current 
trend  worldwide  is  to  effectively  nationalise  banks  as  part  of  the  response  to  the  credit 
crunch,  in  Mauritius  we  have  the  reverse  situation  –  the  public  sector  selling  its  majority 
interest in one of the banks to private sector operators.  
Strengthening of interaction with the banking industry 
At the apex level, collaboration between commercial banks and the Bank occurs through the 
quarterly  Banking  Committee  meetings  in  which  Chief  Executives  of  all  banks  and  the 
Mauritius Bankers Association (MBA) participate. The Banking Committee is not confined to 
supervision and regulation alone but covers the entire gamut of issues relating to banks. I 
have  increased  interaction  with  the  banking  industry  since  June  2008  when  I  initiated 
meetings with the Bureau of the MBA, comprising the Chairman, the two Vice-Chairmen and 
the Chief Executive, in-between the regular Banking Committees.  
The Banking Committee operates a number of sub-committees to examine certain areas in 
detail – compliance, treasury and payments system.  
Information technology 
Banking  technology  has  been  evolving  rapidly  and  has  become  a  key  driver  of  financial 
sector  efficiency.  On  the  technological  front,  the  Bank  has  embarked  on  various  projects 
which are at different stages of implementation: 
• 
The Cheque Truncation Project 
6 
 BIS Review 13/2009
The Mauritius Automated Clearing and Settlement System  
The Regional Payment and Settlement System  
The Mauritius Credit Information Bureau  
• 
• 
• 
(Click here for further details on Information Technology projects)
Towards a more modern and efficient Bank 
In 2008, we have moved to a new building, the Bank of Mauritius Tower. This has been a key 
element  in  the  transformation  of  the  work  of  the  Bank  now  that  it  is  properly  housed  and 
equipped with advanced information and communication technology.  
(Click  here  for  further  details  on  the  New  Headquarters  Building  and  the  Regional 
Office in Rodrigues)
The restructuring 
A  modern  and  efficient  institution  requires  a  workforce  that  has  the  requisite  skills  and 
knowledge. In 2008, we rejuvenated and strengthened the workforce by recruiting additional 
staff  and  promoting  others  in  some  critical  functions  of  the  Bank.  To  meet  the  need  to 
constantly upgrade and develop skills, more than 50 officers, out of a total professional staff 
complement  of  around  125,  were  sent  on  training  courses  abroad.  These  covered  a  wide 
range of topics, such as Monetary Policy, Payment and Settlement Issues, Supervision, and 
Accounting  and  Auditing  for  central  banks.  The  programme  of  continuing  education  and 
training  will  make  further  progress  in  2009  with  a  special  focus  on  International  Financial 
Reporting Standards.  
In 2009, we are organising a calendar of in-house training sessions for all levels to make the 
Bank an organisation in which staff are multi-skilled, flexible, adaptable, innovative and able 
to  think  laterally.  Some  of  the  courses  include  customer  care,  executive  programmes  for 
effective management and leadership, efficient communication and a better understanding of 
applicable law, including the Bank of Mauritius Act itself.  
This year we are also targeting our Rodrigues Office for special attention. The staff will have 
the  chance  to  come  to  the  head  office  at  regular  intervals  on  induction  courses  to  involve 
them more in the development of the Bank’s operations and functions. 
Bank charges – shop window for customers 
Many people have complained to us about the variations in charges between banks and the 
difficulties  in  finding  out  what  they  are.  This  is  where  a  central  bank  can  help  to  make 
banking easier for the customers we all serve. We have addressed this issue during the year. 
Since, November 2008, information on the fees and charges relating to normal services are 
available,  on  a  standard  comparable 
to  all  customers  online  at 
http://bom.intnet.mu. 
template, 
Launching of commemorative gold coin 
To mark the 40th anniversary of the independence of Mauritius, the Bank launched a limited 
edition  of  a  Commemorative  Gold  Coin  to  pay  tribute  to  the  Father  of  the  Nation,  Sir 
Seewoosagur  Ramgoolam.  The  Prime  Minister  attended  the  launch  event.  This  gold  coin 
proved  to  be  the  fastest-seller  in  the  Bank’s  history.  The  whole  edition  was  sold  within  a 
week. In 2009, we plan to launch a “Father of the Nation” platinum series.  
BIS Review 13/2009 
 7
Future projects 
The Bank’s financial markets function 
In keeping with our modernization plan of the financial system, I will continue to encourage 
the development of a vibrant futures and forward market. By mid-February 2009, the Bank 
intends  to  move  away  from  paper-based  auctions  of  Government  securities  and  Bank  of 
Mauritius instruments to online auctions. 
Since  I  joined  the  central  bank,  it  has  been  my  aim  to  improve  the  returns  on  our  foreign 
exchange  reserves.  When  I  attended  the  International  Monetary  Fund/World  Bank  Annual 
Meeting in 2007 and the BIS annual meeting of Governors last year in 2008, I engaged in 
consultations with those bodies for a peer review of our reserves management function. 
In  June  2008,  a  team  from  the  World  Bank  Treasury’s  Sovereign  Investment  Partnership 
(SIP)  conducted  an  on-site  peer  review  of  our  reserve  management  operations.  In 
September 2008, the BIS, which manages a part of our foreign reserves, conducted a similar 
review  as  well  as  an  evaluation  of  our  investment  and  risk-control  processes.  The 
recommendations of the BIS and SIP are under study and appropriate changes will be made 
to our Financial Markets operations. We will, at the appropriate time, revisit our accounting, 
provisioning  and  profit  allocation  policies,  in  consultation  with  our  shareholder,  the 
Government of Mauritius. 
We  envisage  to  recruit  an  expert  with  international  experience  in  financial  markets  to  give 
effect to the changes that we shall be introducing.  
Special Data Dissemination Standard  
In 2009, we shall graduate from the current General Data Dissemination System of the IMF, 
in  which  Mauritius  has  been  participating  since  September  2000,  to  the  Special  Data 
Dissemination Standard. This will enable us to meet the needs of global financial markets in 
the provision of timely and quality macroeconomic data. We are committed to develop the 
quality of data in the areas where the Bank has responsibility within our national statistical 
system.  
We are improving the coverage of the balance of payments and the international investment 
position through the conduct of surveys of the Global Business Licence Holders. The Bank 
has enlisted the collaboration of the Financial Services Commission, our sister regulator, in 
this exercise.  
(Click here for further details on General Data Dissemination System and Special Data 
Dissemination Standard) 
Ombudsperson for banks 
I am confident that in 2009, the Bank will proceed with the appointment of an Ombudsperson 
for  banks.  As  I  have  said  on  many  occasions,  for  a  small  country  of  our  size  and  the 
expected  workload,  a  single  Ombudsperson  for  the  entire  financial  services  sector  would 
have been more appropriate so that the customer does not face jurisdictional issues.  
Financial Literacy and Outreach Programme 
We started a Financial Literacy and Outreach Programme when the Bank commemorated its 
40  years  in  2007.  In  2008,  talks  were  delivered  by  eminent  financial  sector  personalities, 
including  Central  Bank  Governors.  Dr  Guy  Quaden,  the  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of 
Belgium, spoke on “The First Ten Years of the Euro. Achievements. Challenges. Lessons for 
Other  Parts  of  the  World”.  We  also  recently  had  a  lecture  on  “Applicability  of  International 
8 
 BIS Review 13/2009
Financial  Reporting  Standards  to  Central  Banks”  by  Mr  Ian  Ingram,  Director  of  Internal 
Finance from the European Central Bank.  
The Bank also organised programmes in local languages on the local radio/television. The 
Bank intends to make such programmes a regular feature.  
I thought I should mention here that the Bank does not have a specialised unit to take care of 
communications,  events  and  functions.  All  events  hosted  by  the  Bank  are  co-ordinated  by 
the Governor’s office and organised by Staff who volunteer for the assignment. 
Meetings attended by the management 
The Governor and the Bank’s two Deputy Governors, the Chief Economist and the Head of 
Corporate Services attended a wide range of international meetings and seminars in 2008, 
as part of the remit of the Bank for furthering international contact and for keeping abreast of 
international developments with a view to improving the effectiveness and efficiency of our 
services. 
(Click here for further details on Participation in International Meetings and Seminars)
Very sadly, 2008 witnessed the tragic loss of one of Mauritius’ most reputed bankers, Mr Anil 
Guness, who died in the terrorist attacks in the Taj Hotel in Mumbai in November 2008 in the 
same week in which he last came to the Bank to attend our Banking Committee meeting. We 
shall  miss  his  wise  counsel  and the  sound  judgments  he brought  to  the  work  of  the  State 
Bank and within the banking sector in Mauritius and beyond.  
Finally,  I  must  emphasise  that  both  the  Management  and  the  Board  are  strong  in  their 
resolve to take the Bank of Mauritius to greater heights in the days to come.  
If we are to achieve our objectives, we need sufficient autonomy to do so, built on a close 
working  relationship  with 
to  ensure  our  polices  and  actions  are 
complementary in our joint pursuit of economic and social development in this country.  
2008 has been a year that will go down as a turning point in the history of global banking and 
finance.  
Even,  as  the  Bank  wishes  a  very  happy  and  prosperous  year  to  all  our  stakeholders,  we 
must all be conscious of the trials and travails that lie ahead in 2009, a year that could prove 
still  more  turbulent  as  the  global  crisis  may  very  well  intensify  further.  In  2009,  the  Bank 
needs  to  continue  to  be  alert  to  the  global  financial  and  banking  volatility  and  must  be 
especially  vigilant  in  protecting  our  interests  and  judiciously  managing  our  reserves.  No 
country has been immune to the crisis, but as light craft can in safe hands weather a storm, 
so  this  small,  vulnerable  and  highly  open  economy  of  Mauritius  may  be  buffeted  but  will 
maintain course and shall not be sunk.  
The  Bank  of  Mauritius  will  do  all  that  is  possible  to  ensure  a  safe  passage  through  these 
difficult times in matters of banking and financial policy and practice.  
Best wishes for 2009. 
the  Government 
BIS Review 13/2009 
 9
