Paul Tucker: The state of the markets – four issues  
Remarks by Mr Paul Tucker, Deputy Governor, Financial Stability, of the Bank of England, at 
the Association of British Insurers 2009 Biennial Conference, London, 9 June 2009. 
 Many thanks for the invitation to be here today. The Bank greatly values its relationship with 
the insurance industry. We are just immensely grateful for the intelligence you provide, as 
asset managers and insurers; and for our constructive dialogue on policy issues.  
I have a few brief remarks on four broadly linked issues.  
The macroeconomic outlook and bank lending  
Since the beginning of the year I have felt that it will take until late autumn at least to have 
any kind of a handle on broadly what type of outlook we face. My view on that hasn’t really 
changed. Of course, over recent weeks near-term indicators, notably the business surveys, 
have improved a bit. Confidence seems to have stabilised. And that has been most obvious 
in the financial markets, where the really good news is that firms on both sides of the Atlantic 
have been raising funds in the equity and bond markets.  
But a sense of perspective is needed if those apparently small steps forward are not to be 
frittered  away.  Inevitably  the  medium-term  outlook  remains  highly  uncertain,  and  the  path 
back to anything like normality can only be gradual I’m afraid.  
In particular, for the moment it is unclear – as, I must say, it is bound to be at this stage – 
whether  the  financial  system  can  generate  the  expansion  of  credit  that  will  most  likely  be 
necessary  to  support  recovery.  The  reopening  of  high-grade  bond  markets  has  definitely 
been encouraging. But in most countries, including the UK, bank lending remains subdued. It 
is hard to disentangle how much of that is down to weak demand, and how much to tighter 
supply conditions from the banks. I would just say this. I truly believe that it is in the interests 
of the banks themselves to ensure that businesses get the working-capital finance they need. 
While  one  can  imagine,  I  suppose,  individual  banks  being  tempted  to  sit  it  out  in  order  to 
deleverage their balance sheets in an environment that is obviously tougher for them, there 
cannot sensibly be free riders. If all banks were to adopt such a strategy, recovery might end 
up being anaemic at best, which would feed back into the banking system itself – increasing 
defaults  and  depleting  banks’  capital.  Not  lending  would  be  a  counterproductive  business 
and financial strategy. I’m reasonably confident that senior bankers can be persuaded to see 
that themselves, if indeed they don’t already.  
But it will, in my view, take until the autumn at least to gauge whether tolerable progress is 
being  made  on  this  front.  Without  it,  confidence  could  ebb  away.  But  with  it,  recovery  will 
have a fair chance of becoming rooted.  
Risks will, I should be clear, persist from the international environment and, in particular, the 
pattern  of  international  saving.  If  the  Asian  economies  were  to  continue  to  save  at  an 
extraordinary rate but the Western economies increase their saving, as over time we must in 
order to repair national and sectoral balance sheets, longer-term risk-free rates could again 
fall  in  order  to  bring  about  the  counterpart  expansion  in  investment.  And,  although  it  may 
seem  far-fetched  right  now,  that  could  give  an  upward  impetus  to  asset  prices  over  the 
medium-term. We would need to be careful not to mistake any such future developments for 
a  miracle 
Indeed, 
internationally, we need to learn lessons about brewing risks from medium-term imbalances.  
in  underlying  economic  and 
financial  conditions. 
improvement 
BIS Review 71/2009 
 1
The Bank’s policy response, and credit markets  
Alongside  the  Government’s  actions  to  underpin  the  capital  resources  and  funding  of  the 
banking system, the Bank’s policy actions have been designed to assist recovery in credit 
flows and nominal demand.  
The big downside risks to the outlook have warranted a substantial monetary stimulus, which 
the  MPC  has  provided  by  bringing  Bank  Rate  down  to  nearly  zero,  and  by  injecting  a 
substantial amount of money directly into the economy. Speaking of course only for myself, I 
have so far preferred that approach to one where we would instead commit to keep Bank 
Rate  low  for  a  specified  extended  period.  It  would  be  hard  to  avoid  the  country 
misunderstanding that any such commitment was conditional on the outlook; in other words 
that our plans could and would change as the outlook changed. And the current strategy has 
been  consistent  with  a  mildly  upward-sloping  money-market  curve,  which  signals  that  the 
market is confident – as it should be – that the MPC will retighten monetary conditions when 
in due course that is warranted by the medium-term outlook for inflation. Our 2% target is a 
valuable anchor in shaping and implementing our strategy.  
In this, insurance companies are by no means on the sidelines. By focusing our purchases 
on  medium  and  long-maturity  gilts,  we  are  aiming  in  part  to  shift  the  composition  of  the 
portfolios  of  long-term  investment  institutions.  And  it  was  encouraging,  therefore,  that  the 
money  holdings  of  non-bank  financial  institutions  expanded  recently.  Some  economists 
argue that gilts and central bank money are near perfect substitutes, so that the effect of our 
Quantitative Easing will be negligible. They may well be close substitutes for traders. But I 
doubt  they  are  perfect  substitutes  for  insurance  companies  and  pension  funds,  many  of 
which probably don’t participate in the secured deposit “repo” markets for switching gilts into 
cash; and which in any case desire assets with a longer “interest-rate duration” than money. 
If so, holding zero-yielding money balances will not suit them, and we could reasonably hope 
for increased demand for, perhaps, corporate bonds and other financial assets. Risk premia 
might  decline  slightly.  And  the  flow  of  credit  outside  the  banking  system  may  improve, 
helping to support a recovery in nominal demand. Over the next quarter or so, amongst other 
indicators I will therefore be looking at what happens to firm and household money holdings, 
as well as credit flows and risk premia.  
The  Bank’s  Asset  Purchase  Facility  schemes  for  corporate  paper  are  designed  to  help 
catalyse that process. The fact that the Bank is buying relatively small amounts of paper may 
have been misunderstood by some. As the central bank, we are not operating the schemes 
in order to lend in scale to the real economy, but rather to help revive the markets. Some 
have described this variant of liquidity insurance as acting as “Market Maker of Last Resort”, 
and I recently aired some thoughts on the kind of principles that might guide central banks in 
this area.1 They include consistency with monetary policy; avoiding undue risk to the central 
bank;  acting  as  a  catalyst;  and  avoiding  attempts  to  prop  up  markets  that  would  not  be 
fundamentally viable once peacetime resumes.  
Yesterday, the Bank issued for consultation some ideas on how we might be able to extend 
our liquidity insurance, through the APF, to facilities for working capital finance. They cover a 
possible  facility  for  secured  commercial  paper,  where  the  underlying  assets  would  be 
portfolios of SME trade-finance credit, and a facility for supply chain finance. I would hope 
that  the  insurance  industry,  and  the  liquidity  and  investment  funds  you  run,  might  be 
investors in such paper, whose liquidity would receive some underpinning. Certainly you will 
                                                 
1   For  example,  see  Buiter  W  (2009),  “Central  banks  and  financial  crises”,  paper  presented  at  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City’s symposium at Jackson Hole, Wyoming and Tucker (2009), “The repertoire of 
official  sector  interventions  in  the  financial  system:  Last  resort  lending,  market-making  and  capital”  paper 
presented at the 2009 International Conference: Financial System and Monetary Policy Implementation, Bank 
of Japan.  
2 
 BIS Review 71/2009
be  an  important  part  of  the  Bank’s  consultative  process  led  by  my  colleagues  Paul  Fisher 
and Sarah Breeden.  
Addressing trade and working capital finance has become all the more important given the 
reduction in the availability of trade-credit insurance, which our regional Agents hear quite a 
lot  about.  We  therefore  welcomed  the  initiative  of  that  relatively  concentrated  industry  to 
release  a  code  of  conduct,  supported  by  the  ABI,  for  handling  difficult  cases  where 
unnecessary firm distress could be avoided. The Bank has followed this carefully given our 
role as midwife for the London Approach designed to help facilitate the orderly resolution of 
creditor/debtor problems. In a few cases over recent months, as well as over the trade-credit-
insurance  code,  my  colleague  Andrew  Bailey  has  played  a  behind-the-scenes  role  –  the 
traditional role of providing the Bank’s good offices where (and only where) we can help, and 
where help is desired by those involved. Effective resolution mechanisms are an important 
back-stop when the system’s resilience proves wanting, as recently.  
Developing more resilient capital markets  
Over the medium term, we of course need a much more resilient financial system. This is not 
just  a  matter  of  a  better  structured,  better  capitalised,  more  liquid,  more  prudently  risk-
managed, more transparent, and better regulated banking system (and I emphasise system). 
We also need more resilient capital markets. In the 1980s and into the 1990s the authorities 
here and elsewhere helped to bring about a number of important structural changes in the 
market infrastructure: LIFFE; reforms at LCH; book-entry transfer, and later delivery-versus-
payment,  settlement  systems;  a  wholesale  payment  system  designed  to  withstand  bank 
failures; the introduction of the gilt repo market. A lot of plumbing! And proof from the past 
that, working together, the industry and the authorities can do good. Those initiatives were 
designed to underpin stability in the rapidly evolving capital markets of the day. The current 
crisis  has  reminded  everyone  of  the  need  for  the  authorities,  occasionally  and  in  a  well-
targeted  way,  to  help  remove  blockages  or  quietly  steer  private  sector  initiatives  on  to  a 
course  serving  the  wider  public  interest.  Entrepreneurial  innovation  is  the  life  blood  of 
economic  growth.  But  sometimes  it  outstrips  the  supporting  infrastructure.  That  happened 
with some parts of our capital markets over the past decade or more. The recent initiatives 
coming out of the US Treasury to strengthen markets are therefore to be welcomed in their 
broad thrust and goals.   
In particular, the Bank of England agrees that more of the vanilla OTC markets should be 
cleared  via  central  counterparty  clearing  houses.  LCH  led  the  way  globally  in  opening  up 
central  counterparty  services  to  interest-rate  swaps,  breaking  a  mis-think  that  somehow 
CCPs could clear only exchanged-traded instruments. And recently it has made the welcome 
announcement  that  non-dealers  will  be  able  to  access  such  central  clearing,  at  least 
indirectly via “clearing members”, as for exchange-traded contracts. Central clearing can help 
to provide transparency and consistency in valuations and haircuts. It can help to promote 
greater standardisation in terms. It makes haircuts more visible to the market as a whole, and 
to the authorities, who as overseers of the system should be prepared to form a view when 
haircuts are too low – and the associated market leverage is too high – for system stability to 
be  assured.  The  role  of  the  authorities  is  important.  It  is  absolutely  vital  that  management 
maintain the integrity and soundness of the key clearing houses as they expand their range.2 
As overseers of the payments systems embedded in clearing houses, the Bank will work with 
the FSA and our international counterparts on this.  
It is often said that dealers resist such initiatives, as it can squeeze their margins. That may 
well be the perspective at desk level, but I suspect it is unfair to many CEOs, who have a 
                                                 
2   As  the  failure  of  Hong  Kong’s  futures  clearing  house  demonstrated  in  1987,  very  bad  things  happen  if  a 
central counterparty fails. Many lessons were drawn. 
BIS Review 71/2009 
 3
clear interest in the health, safety and soundness of the system. And if some didn’t recognise 
it before, they will now – as their predecessors did in the relatively recent past.  
The  key  industry  associations  can  also  play  a  constructive  role  in  this  whole  area  –  as, 
indeed, they have in the past. This crisis would have been even worse if ISDA and others 
had not overseen the introduction of the collateralisation of derivatives-related counterparty 
credit  exposures  amongst  the  dealer  community.  But  there  are  lessons  about  extending 
collateralisation,  and  standardising  terms  in  vanilla  instruments,  beyond  the  dealer 
community in some circumstances.  
The  debate  is  not  just  about  clearing  houses  and  post-trade  infrastructure.  The  financial 
community must also be open to more trading in core, vanilla markets going via exchanges 
or  other  well-designed  and  open  trading  platforms.  If  well  constructed,  that  could  help  to 
preserve  liquidity  when  times  are  tough.  We  would,  for  example,  like  to  see  serious 
consideration of whether the corporate bond markets could benefit through something along 
those lines.  
Bank capital instruments  
The insurance industry is involved, one way or another, in everything I have touched on this 
morning.  But  there  is  one  other  area  –  as  investors  in  bank  capital  instruments.  I  am 
therefore  sure  you  understand  that  the  authorities,  internationally,  cannot  avoid  reviewing 
what should count in the medium term as regulatory capital for banks. It won’t do for banks to 
be able to leverage up on subordinated debt (or other forms of hybrid capital) if, just when it 
matters, the holders do not suffer because the authorities cannot let the banks concerned be 
liquidated without bringing system collapse down on us all. We either need a system where 
banks of any type can quietly fail and hybrid capital is actually useful in protecting the deposit 
insurer; or, more realistically, we shall need a much narrower definition of capital. Only equity 
can absorb losses and sustain a going concern. Finding a way through that in the current 
crisis remains a challenge. One helpful step might be for the investment industry to seek out 
opportunities  to  convert  subordinated  debt  into  equity;  or,  at  a  discount,  into  senior 
unsecured  debt,  as  has  occurred  in  a  few  instances  already.  It  would  probably  entail  a 
haircut, but I wouldn’t air it unless I thought it could be in your collective and medium-term 
interests as investors in our economy and the system of credit that supports and lubricates it. 
The new Special Resolution Regime for banks may create healthy incentives in that broad 
direction.  
In concluding, can I thank you again for inviting me to join you today. Authorities everywhere 
are having to innovate to help get us through this crisis. And we will need to innovate to build 
a better system for tomorrow. Our dialogue with you can only help that. We are very grateful 
for it. 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2009
