Mario Draghi: Financial stability in the global environment? Learning the 
lessons from the market crisis  
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Mario  Draghi,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Italy  and  Chairman  of  the 
Financial Stability Board, at IOSCO’s Annual Conference, Tel Aviv, 10 June 2009. 
 I am pleased to be here today to discuss the emerging financial regulatory landscape that we 
are building in response to the market crisis. The last few months have been very busy ones 
in  the  international  regulatory  policy  field.  I  will  speak  to  the  main  thrusts  of  the  reform 
agenda and the work underway and ahead of us to implement its directions. But before I do 
so I would like to say a few words about changes to the role that the Financial Stability Board 
(FSB) will play in future.  
Over  the  last  year,  a  broad  consensus  emerged  towards  placing  the  Financial  Stability 
Forum (FSF) on stronger institutional ground, with a view to strengthening its effectiveness 
as a mechanism for national authorities, standard setting bodies and international financial 
institutions  to  address  vulnerabilities  and  to  develop  and  implement  strong  regulatory, 
supervisory and other policies in the interest of financial stability. A stronger institutional set-
up will make the FSB more effective in shaping the global response to the present crises and 
to retaining globally integrated financial markets.  
To  mark  these  changed  objectives,  the  London  Summit  re-launched  the  FSF  as  the  FSB, 
with an expanded membership and a broadened mandate to promote financial stability.  
The FSB expanded membership now includes, in addition to the FSF members, the rest of 
the G20, Spain and the European Commission.  
These  changes  will  enhance  our  ability  to  contribute  to  ongoing  efforts  to  strengthen  the 
international  financial  system.  New  members  will  add  broader  perspectives  to  our 
deliberations, and increase buy-in and implementation of our output. All members commit to 
pursue the maintenance of financial stability, maintain the openness and transparency of the 
financial  sector,  and  implement  international  financial  standards.  To  this  end,  members 
commit to undergo periodic peer reviews – based, among other evidence, on the Financial 
Sector Assessment Program of the IMF and World Bank.  
In  terms  of  mandate,  alongside  the  FSF  old  remit  –  which  was  to  assess  vulnerabilities 
affecting  the  financial  system,  identify  and  oversee  action  needed  to  address  these 
vulnerabilities,  and  promote  coordination  and  information  exchange  among  authorities 
responsible for financial stability – the FSB will now also:  
• 
monitor  and  advise  on  market  developments  and  their  implications  for  regulatory 
policy, and on best practice in meeting regulatory standards;  
we will set guidelines for and support the establishment of supervisory colleges and 
manage contingency planning for cross-border crisis management, particularly with 
respect to systemically important firms;  
the FSB will strengthen its collaboration with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), 
including by conducting Early Warning Exercises;  
and importantly, we will undertake joint strategic reviews of the policy development 
work  of  the  international  standard  setting  bodies  to  ensure  their  work  is  timely, 
coordinated,  focused  on  priorities  and  addressing  gaps.  Here  there  is  a  strong 
consensus  that  the  independence  of  standard  setting  is  essential  and  must  be 
preserved. Indeed, the value of international standard setting is indispensably linked 
with  their  independence.  At  the  same,  independent  standard  setting  needs  to  be 
complemented  with  processes  for  coordination,  accountability  and  governance  for 
   BIS Review 72/2009 
 1
standard setters, including regular consultations with stakeholders. As we have seen 
in the FSB in the last 18 months or so, coordination across standard setting bodies 
has been essential in crafting a coherent response to this crisis and to creating a 
more  resilient  financial  sector  going  forward.  The  work  of  IOSCO  has  been  and 
continues to be of great importance in this regard.  
To support its functions, the FSB will establish an institutional structure commensurate with 
its expanded tasks. This will comprise a Steering Committee to take forward to the work of 
the  FSB  in  between  plenary  meetings,  as  well  as  Standing  Committees  on  Vulnerabilities 
Assessment,  Regulatory  and  Supervisory  Cooperation,  and  on  Standards  Implementation. 
And we will greatly expand its secretariat resources.  
 Moving on to the regulatory reform agenda, the main value of the intense recent period of 
international policy making has been the broad consensus it has established on the agenda 
of change needed to build a stronger, less crisis-prone financial system for the future. Let me 
emphasize  the  importance  of  this:  without  this  consensus,  the  integrated  system  that  has 
been of such benefits to all of us would be at high risk of fracture. We now need consistent 
implementation  going  forward  to  preserve  a  level  playing  field  across  national  financial 
sectors.  
To summarise very broadly the thrusts of the agenda, let me begin with a key lesson: the 
need  in  future  to  take  a  system-wide  approach to  the  assessment  of  financial system  and 
economic conditions, as well to the system’s regulation, rather than focus alone on the health 
of  individual  institutions,  markets  and  products.  While  individual  economies  and  financial 
institutions  appeared  sound  to  market  participants  and  to  us  as  authorities,  we  failed  to 
recognise  the  extent  to  which  savings-investment  imbalances,  the  growth  of  complex 
securitised  credit  intermediation,  changing  patterns  of  maturity  transformation,  rising 
embedded leverage, a burgeoning shadow banking sector, and rapid credit-fuelled growth, 
had  created  large  systemic  vulnerabilities.  In  the  future,  we  need  –  at  national  and  global 
level – to be in a much better position to understand and address trends in credit growth, in 
system-wide  leverage  and  maturity  transformation,  and  in  the  inter-linkages  within  the 
financial  system,  to  identify  and  constrain  emerging  risks.  For  this  we  require  additional 
system-wide prudential as well as other tools.  
Creating the prudential tools, regulatory set-ups and policy tools required to better constrain 
system-wide risks, including generating the transparency needed for authorities and markets 
to  be  better  informed  about  the  risks  to  the  system,  is  the  focus  of  much  of  the  reform 
agenda. These changes do of course need to be implemented at national levels. But there is 
work  internationally  to  generate  the  tools  and  policies  needed,  to  promote  coherence  in 
implementation  and  to  conduct  the  monitoring  that  is  required.  Let  me  speak  to  some  of 
these.  
One  central  lesson  of  this  crisis  is  that  the  system  entered  it  with  too  little  capital,  far  too 
small  liquidity  buffers,  and  a  capital  and  valuation  regime  with  significant  pro-cyclical 
consequences. Much work is underway on bank capital and liquidity that will address these 
issues.  The  Basel  Committee  proposed  last  year  changes  that  by  end  2010  will  expand 
Basel II risk capture and very significantly increase trading book capital requirements. And 
the  Committee’s  much  strengthened  liquidity  guidelines  are  in  the  process  of  being 
implemented nationally. Further work is underway to strengthen guidance for and monitoring 
of liquidity management at large cross-border banks.  
The FSF and its member bodies also produced a set of recommendations to mitigate pro-
cyclicality. These call for (i) regulatory capital requirements to increase the quality and level 
of  capital  in  the  financial  system  during  strong  economic  conditions  so  that  they  can  be 
drawn down during periods of economic and financial stress; (ii) a revision of the market risk 
framework  of  Basel  II  to  reduce  the  reliance  on  cyclical  Value-at-Risk  based  capital 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2009
estimates;  and  (iii)  to  supplement  risk-based  capital  requirements  with  a  leverage  ratio  to 
contain the build up of leverage in the banking system.  
Regarding  provisioning,  we  –  and  now  G20  Leaders  –  called  on  the  IASB  and  FASB  to 
reconsider the incurred loss model by analyzing alternative approaches for recognizing and 
measuring  loan  losses  that  incorporate  a  broader  range  of  available  credit  information, 
including by analysing fair value, expected loss and dynamic provisioning approaches.  
Policy development in these areas is underway by the IASB and FASB, as well as by the 
Basel Committee and detailed proposals will be set out by year-end.  
On accounting more generally, the G20 asked the FSB to monitor progress by accounting 
standards setters in implementing the G20’s accounting-related recommendations, including 
efforts to enhance convergence, and improve involvement of prudential regulators and other 
stakeholders in the IASB’s standards setting process. We welcome the efforts by the IASB to 
accelerate  its  work  schedule  to  reduce  complexity  in  accounting  for  financial  instruments, 
and  reduce  inconsistencies  in  standards,  a  goal  that  is  very  close  to  the  FSB’s  global 
mission. Some authorities have raised concerns about the IASB and its approach to certain 
issues.  The  FSB  has  a  strong  interest  in  seeing  the  IASB  come  through  this  period  in  a 
manner that supports its role as a high-quality independent accounting standard setter that 
considers  constructive  input  from  key  stakeholders.  As  you  know,  the  Financial  Stability 
Forum (FSF; now the FSB), of which the IASB, IOSCO and others are key members, has 
had  a  proven  record  of supporting  IFRS  as  one  of  the  12  key  international  standards  that 
promote  financial  stability,  and  in  providing  constructive  recommendations  that  enhance 
transparency and related IASB standards. Good recent examples of this are the FSF's report 
on Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience published in April 2008 as requested by the 
G7  and  the  FSF’s  procyclicality  report  in  April  2009  which  included  recommendations 
developed by a working group co-chaired by Kathy Casey. We have had a positive role in 
supporting high-quality IFRS and the FSB plans to continue to do so.  
A  second  important  area  in  implementing  a  system-wide  approach  is  to  ensure  that  all 
systemically relevant institutions, markets and activities are subject to appropriate oversight, 
transparency  requirements  and,  where  needed,  resolution  mechanisms.  In  practice,  this 
means  that  the  scope  of  regulation  will  be  broadened,  and  that  prudential  tools  and 
standards,  as  well  as  the  intensity  of  oversight,  will  be  recalibrated  to  better  reflect  the 
systemic  foot-print  of  institutions  and  activities.  How  to  deal  with  too-big-to-fail  institutions 
and  related  moral  hazard  concerns  will  be  an  important  focus  ahead.  And  we  need  to 
establish  market  infrastructure,  including  adequate  resolution  frameworks,  to  address  the 
problems of interconnectedness and opaqueness in the financial system.  
A lot of work is underway in these areas:  
• 
The  BIS  and  the  IMF  are  setting  out  methodologies  for  quantifying  systemic  risk, 
identifying  systemically  relevant  institutions  and  activities,  and  developing  system 
wide tools for monitoring leverage.  
And the Joint Forum is advancing a project on gaps in the scope of regulation, and 
approaches to addressing them. This covers gaps both in the regulated sector (i.e. 
gaps  such  AIG’s  holding  company),  and  unregulated  markets,  products,  and 
entities, where IOSCO has recently set out consultative proposals.  
In  the  area  of  OTC  derivatives,  work  thus  far  has  focused  on  establishing  central 
counterparty clearing for the CDS market, but central clearing should be extended to 
standardized OTC derivatives more generally.  
On hedge funds, the US, the EU and other relevant jurisdictions are in the process 
of  articulating  registration,  regulation  and  oversight  arrangements  for  hedge  fund 
managers. The FSB, relying on IOSCO, have been tasked with fostering coherent 
approaches in this area.  
   BIS Review 72/2009 
 3
 The FSF also recently published Principles for Cross-border Cooperation on Crisis 
Management, to strengthen arrangements for dealing with financial stress at cross-
border  institutions,  and  better  prepare  authorities  to  manage  crisis  situations. 
Another  group  under  the  Basel  Committee  is  looking  into legal  differences  across 
countries and how they can hinder orderly resolution of financial firms.  
I would like to highlight here the very important work of securities market regulators, working 
through  IOSCO,  to  restore  transparency,  market  quality  and  integrity  in  the  securitisation 
process. The checks and balance within the market failed to address significant moral hazard 
problems  within  this  chain.  For  securitization  to  recover  and  to  play  a  role  consistent  with 
financial stability objectives, these problems need to be addressed. There is balance to be 
drawn here as to how far regulation should go and how far we can trust market discipline to 
reassert itself. But one issue we must not lose sight of is that much securitisation product, 
whether  complex  or  not,  whether  with  their  knowledge  or  not,  ultimately  ends  up  in  retail 
investor  portfolios.  IOSCO  is  formulating  recommendations  to  address  these  incentives 
problems,  through  conduct  and  disclosure  requirements,  retention  by  issuers  of  economic 
exposure  to  transactions,  strengthened  due  diligence  requirements  on  asset  managers, 
strengthened investor suitability requirements, and not least, reduction of conflicts of interest 
at credit rating agencies. We look forward to receiving your conclusions at our forthcoming 
FSB meeting.  
The  above  complements  other  important  efforts  to  strengthen  risk  management  practices 
and  governance  at  banks  and  other  financial  institutions.  The  lessons  of  failures  in  these 
areas have been set out in reports and guidance by the Senior Supervisors Group (SSG), 
the Basel Committee, by the IIF and the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group.  
One  area  that  politicians,  the  broad  public  and  supervisory  authorities  will  pay  significant 
attention to is changes to compensation practices at financial institutions. The Principles we 
have developed cover Effective Governance of Compensation Systems, Effective Alignment 
of  Compensation  with  prudent  risk  taking,  and  Effective  Supervisory  Oversight  and 
disclosure to and engagement by shareholders. They will be reinforced through supervisory 
examination and intervention at the national level, as well as by disclosure requirements (on 
which  IOSCO  is  working).  We  expect  national  authorities  and  firms  to  implement  material 
parts of the Principles by end of 2009.  
There  is  a  clear  need  for  supervisors,  regulators  and  other  authorities  to  raise  their  own 
game,  nationally  and  internationally.  At  both  levels,  authorities  need  to  become  more 
responsive  to  and  more  nimble  and  effective  in  mitigating  emerging  risks.  Information 
exchange  and  co-operation  across  authorities  both  nationally  and  internationally  needs  to 
improve. Most countries are reviewing their national arrangements for collaboration amongst 
relevant  national  authorities.  And  at  the  international  level,  supervisory  colleges  have  now 
been established for most global banks.  
The priority ahead is implementation. This is largely in national hands, but we need coherent 
approaches across countries and regions. Indeed, the G20 leaders have placed a renewed 
emphasis on this. The FSB, the standard setting bodies and the IMF/WB have been tasked 
with  assessing  implementation  to  serve  three  complementary  aims:  first,  to  foster  greater 
adherence to international standards; second, to help identify jurisdictions that lag behind in 
terms  of  their  implementation  of  selected  standards;  and  third,  to  support  peer  review 
processes, such as those FSB members have committed to as an obligation of membership.  
 I’d  like  to  conclude  with  a  number  of  principles  that  guide  our  actions  as  we  pursue  our 
reform agenda:  
• 
First,  the  guiding  principles  behind  our  work  is  to  recreate  a  financial  system  that 
operates with less leverage, is more immune to the set of misaligned incentives at 
the  root  of  this  crisis,  where  transparency  allows  better  identification  and 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2009
    management  of  risks,  where  prudential  and  regulatory  oversight  is  strengthened, 
and the system is able to let mismanaged institutions fail.  
Second, clarity. We are committed to establishing clear expectations about what the 
future  regulatory  environment  will  look  like.  Establishing  stable  expectations 
regarding  the  future  regulatory  environment  will allow  market  participants  to  make 
forward strategic decisions with a greater degree of confidence.  
Third, while the direction is clear, changes will in cases be gradual. Some elements 
of  the  reformed  system  (such  as  higher  capital)  will  need  to  be  phased  in  as 
conditions improve.  
Fourth,  we  must  preserve  the  advantages  of  open  and  integrated  global  financial 
markets.  Given  global  markets  and  institutions  but  national  regulatory  rules  and 
practices, we must strive for international consistency in standards of regulation to 
support  a  level  playing  field  across  jurisdictions.  At  the  same  time,  if  open  global 
markets  are  to  be  preserved,  these  standards  need  to  be  strengthened  to  give 
adequate  protections  to  “innocent  bystanders”  affected  by  the  indiscriminate  risk 
taking and retrenchment we have observed.  
Last, as we develop and apply more assertive regulation and supervision to contain 
excessive leverage and address market failures, we must resist imposing excessive, 
stifling  levels  of  regulation.  Regulation  must  not  prevent  innovation,  which  is 
necessary  if  we  are  to  improve  product  choices  for  consumers  and  an  expanded 
access to credit. But we need to ensure that innovation does not compromise other 
clearly  stated  goals,  including  systemic  stability  and  consumer  protection.  The 
challenge for regulators and market participants alike is, as always, to strike the right 
balance.  
BIS Review 72/2009 
 5
