Denny H Kalyalya: Broadening financial services provision 
Opening  remarks  by  Dr  Denny  H  Kalyalya,  Deputy  Governor-Operations  of  the  Bank 
of  Zambia;  at  the  opening  of  the  Pilot  Financial  Inclusion  Advisors  (FIA)  Programme, 
Lusaka, 6 April 2009. 
 Chairperson 
The Deputy Minister of Finance and National Planning, Ms Chileshe Kapwepwe, MP 
Dr Mahaela Smith, Co-Founder and CEO, the Commonwealth Partnership for Technology 
Management (CPTM) 
Deputy Governor – Central Bank of Swaziland 
Distinguished Resource persons and representatives from Bank Negara Malaysia 
Regional Central Bank representatives 
Distinguished Participants 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
On behalf of the Bank of Zambia and indeed on my own behalf, it gives me great pleasure to 
welcome you all to this pilot Financial Inclusion Advisers programme and to Zambia for our 
colleagues  from  other  countries.  Before  going  any  further,  please  allow  me  to  convey  the 
Governor’s  regret  for  not  being  able  to  be  with  us.  He  is  attending  to  another  important 
assignment,  the  AERC  Senior  Policy  Seminar  on  the  Global  Financial  Crisis  and  its 
implications  for  African  Economies,  also  here  in  Lusaka.  Nonetheless,  he  extends  his 
welcome and good wishes for a successful programme. 
This important conference has brought together practitioners and regulators of microfinance 
institutions from different countries to share experiences. I also note that participants have 
been  drawn  from  Central  Banks  in  the  region,  the  public  sector,  commercial  banks, 
microfinance institution and other non-bank financial institutions. 
Chairperson: 
The  Bank  of  Zambia,  in  conjunction  with  the  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  (the  Central  Bank  of 
Malaysia) is pleased and greatly honoured to co-host this pilot Financial Inclusion Advisers 
Conference. We have no doubt that this Conference will provide the necessary impetus to 
advance the frontiers of financial services provision to our people in the region. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
The  genesis  for  this important  forum  goes  back  to  the  Langkawi  International  Dialogue,  in 
2007  at  which  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Malaysia  proposed  this  initiative.  The 
purpose was to bring together practitioners and regulators of microfinance to learn from each 
other on how to deepen and broaden financial services provision. 
The proposal was concretized at the Global Southern Africa International Dialogue under the 
CPTM  SMART  Partnership  Movement,  held  here  in  Lusaka,  in  August  2008  following  an 
agreement  between  the  Bank  of  Zambia  and  Bank  Negara  Malaysia  to  conduct  the  first 
Financial Inclusion Advisers Programme in Zambia. 
Distinguished Guests and Participants: 
As you may know, the debate on financial inclusion has been going on for some time now. A 
common  understanding  arising  from  this  debate  is  that  financial  exclusion  has  negative 
economic  and  social  effects  on  society.  For  instance,  lack  of  access  to  financial  services 
tends to restrict the economic opportunities open to the poor and makes them vulnerable to 
adverse events. The absence of savings products in particular makes it difficult to build up 
capital. 
BIS Review 46/2009 
1
This  Conference  is  therefore,  aimed  at  enhancing  financial  inclusion  by  equipping 
practitioners  and  regulators  with  tools  to  promote  financial  literacy  and  to  expand  the 
provision of financial services. 
Chairperson: 
Allow me to give some highlights of the status of financial inclusion in Zambia. Like in many 
other developing countries, the financial sector in Zambia still faces a number of challenges. 
The joint IMF/World Bank, Financial Sector Assessment Programme (FSAP) Report of 2002, 
highlighted a number of these, including limited access to financial services by the rural and 
peri-urban population and doubtful sustainability of financial services in Zambia. 
In light of these findings, and in recognition of the strategic importance of the development of 
the financial sector in contributing to sustainable economic growth and poverty reduction, the 
Government  of  the  Republic  of  Zambia  developed  and  launched  the  Financial  Sector 
Development Plan (FSDP) in 2004. 
The FSDP is a comprehensive five year strategy to build and strengthen the financial sector 
infrastructure to enable it to support economic diversification and sustainable growth. Under 
the FSDP, two important studies, namely, the FinScope™ Surveys of 2005 and 2007, on the 
demand for and supply of financial services in Zambia have been undertaken. These studies 
have  augmented  the  earlier  findings  of  the  FSAP  with  respect  to  the  key  developmental 
challenges for the financial sector in Zambia. 
The key findings of the Finscope Survey on the demand for financial services included the 
following: 
• 
Only one third (33.3%) of the population were “financially served”, i.e., used formal 
and/or informal financial products, whilst two thirds (66.7%) had no access to financial 
services; 
77.5% of Zambians report to have never had a bank product or service; 
40% of salaried staff reported not having bank accounts, signifying that they received 
money in cash rather than through the financial system; and 
The barriers to accessing financial services include cost, distance, time and transport 
to reach the bank or financial service provider. 
  In addition, the FinScope™ Survey noted that microfinance institutions although used by only 
5% of the adult population plays an important role in increasing levels of access to financial 
services; and that the informal sector in Zambia played a significant role in the provision of 
financial services catering for 11% of the population. 
Distinguished Participants: 
An important point to note is the fact that the majority of those who had no access to financial 
services  are  the  rural  poor,  with  women  being  more  disadvantaged  than  men.  These  are 
worrisome results, which call for concerted efforts by all stakeholders to expand the frontiers 
of financial services. 
In furtherance of the objectives of the FSDP, the BoZ Strategic Plan for 2008-2011 has made 
financial inclusion as one of its key strategic objectives. Government has also set a financial 
access  target  of  50  percent  by  the  end  of  2009  under  the  Performance  Assessment 
Framework (PAF). 
The holding of this Conference is therefore, consistent with our aspirations to increase levels 
of  financial  access  in  the  country.  As  earlier  alluded,  the  aim  of  this  Forum  was  to  bring 
together  practitioners  and  regulators  of  microfinance  to  learn  from  each  other  in  order 
deepen and broaden financial services provision. In this regard, the forum has a number of 
eminent persons who will share with us their unique experiences. 
2 
 BIS Review 46/2009
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
This FIA programme is customized and among the issues that will be addressed include the 
following: 
1. 
2. 
Emerging best practice in microfinance; 
Self-help  group  models  for  microfinance,  which  may  be  viable  for  countries  in  our 
region; 
Microfinance product development knowledge and risk management strategies; and 
Specific micro-credit practices for agricultural-related businesses, which is relevant for 
most our countries’ strategies to diversify into agriculture. 
3. 
4. 
Distinguished Participants: 
We consider the timing of this workshop appropriate given the impact of the on-going global 
financial crises. I therefore, call upon all of you to take advantage of this unique opportunity 
to learn and share experiences, so that we can come up with efficient and effective ways of 
advancing financial inclusion in our respective countries. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
At  this  point,  kindly  allow  me  to  call  upon  our  Guest  of  Honour,  Honourable  Ms  Chileshe 
Kapwepwe, MP, the Deputy Minister of Finance and National Planning to deliver the key note 
address and to officially open this Conference. 
Honorable Minister Sir! 
BIS Review 46/2009 
 3
