K C Chakrabarty: Banking and finance in India – developments, issues 
and prospects 
Inaugural address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  62nd  International  Banking  Summer  School  (IBSS),  jointly  organized  by  the  Indian 
Institute of Banking & Finance and Indian Banks’ Association, New Delhi, 31 August 2009. 
The  assistance  provided  by  Dr.  Deba  Prasad  Rath  and  Mr.  Sujit  K  Arvind  in  preparation  of  the  address  is 
gratefully acknowledged. 
 Indian 
Mr. M.V. Nair, Chairman IBA and Chairman and Managing Director of Union Bank of India; 
Mr.  Bhaskaran,  Chief  Executive  Officer, 
Institute  of  Banking  and  Finance; 
Representatives  from  EBTN,  Distinguished  participants  from  different  parts  of  the  Globe, 
invited guests, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am delighted to be here amidst all of you at the 62nd International Banking Summer School 
(IBSS) being organised by the Indian Institute of Banking and Finance (IIBF) jointly with the 
Indian Banks' Association (IBA). I am thankful to the organisers and sponsors for providing 
me an opportunity to share my views and interact with you at a forum which I personally rate 
very  high.  Central  bankers  talk  among  themselves  in  various  fora,  it  is  high  time  that  the 
bankers talk with each other. 
The  School,  open  to  senior  bankers  and  financial  professionals,  as  we  are  aware  is  a  10 
days' brisk academic exercise that provides a platform for the practitioners of banking and 
finance  to  learn  and  share  the  latest  developments  in  the  banking  and  finance  field,  best 
practices and products available in today's fiercely competitive global banking arena. In the 
present situation of global turmoil that we have been going through in the last two years, this 
forum will provide opportunities to the bankers and finance professionals for understanding 
each  other better.  The exchange  of  views  and  the  ideas which  are  going  to  be generated 
here during the next ten days will certainly throw useful insights and better understanding on 
how  to  overcome  such  problems  in  future  which  will  be  of  great  relevance  in  shaping  the 
banking operations in future. I am saying so, as I am sure, in times to come, many of you are 
going to occupy high positions in banks and Financial Institutions including positions of Chief 
Executive Officers (CEOs). The takeaway from the School is, therefore, of great importance. 
Considering the theme of IBSS this year and more focus on managing banks in the era of 
turbulence,  I  think  it  would  be  appropriate  if  I  share  my  views  on  a  topic  of  contextual 
relevance, that is, “Banking and Finance in India: Developments, Issues and Prospects” in 
the backdrop of the global financial crisis. 
A  recent  BIS  report  has  stated  that  it  is  useful  to  think  of  the  financial  system  as  the 
economy’s  plumbing.  And  like  the  plumbing  in  a  house,  the  modern  economic  system 
depends  on  a  reliable  flow  of  financing  through  intermediaries.  Modern  life  requires  the 
smooth  operation  of  banks,  insurance  companies,  securities  firms,  mutual  funds,  finance 
companies,  pension  funds  and  governments.  These  institutions  channel  resources  from 
those who save to those who invest, and they are supposed to transfer risk from those who 
can’t afford it to those who are willing and able to bear it (BIS, 2009). In India too, we have a 
well-diversified financial system which is still dominated by bank intermediation, though the 
size of the capital market has expanded significantly with financial liberalization in the early 
1990s.  Important  components  of  the  financial  sector  in  India  broadly  fall  into  categories 
namely;  commercial  banks,  urban  co-operative  banks  (UCBs),  rural  financial  institutions, 
non-banking  financial  companies  (NBFCs),  housing  finance  companies  (HFCs),  financial 
institutions (FIs), mutual funds and the insurance sector. Commercial banks together with co-
operative  banks  account  for  nearly  70  per  cent  of  the  total  assets  of  Indian  financial 
institutions. 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 1
Global banking trends and the crisis 
Before  I  dwell  on  the  developments  in  the  Indian  banking  and  financial  arena  let  me  first 
touch upon briefly the global banking trends in view of the present crisis. The current global 
crisis, as is well known by now, has its genesis in the imprudent practices of banks and non-
bank  institutions  worldwide,  especially  in  the  US.  The  fact  that  more  than  80  banks  have 
failed in the US alone is a pointer to how deep and widespread the malaise was. Looking at 
the past few years, it may be useful to divide the causes of the current crisis into two broad 
categories:  macroeconomic  and  microeconomic.  The  macro-economic  causes  fall  into  two 
groups:  problems  associated  with  the  build-up  of  imbalances  in  international  claims  and 
difficulties created by the long period of low real interest rates. The microeconomic causes 
fall into three areas: incentives, risk measurement and regulation (BIS, 2009). 
The crisis is best regarded as the steep downside of an extraordinary global financial cycle 
that  was  amplified  by  structural  weaknesses.  The  financial  imbalances  that  had  built  up 
slowly but inexorably during the boom, on the back of aggressive risk-taking and leveraging, 
had finally started to unwind. As elaborated in the BIS Annual Report (2009), financial cycles 
are  exacerbated  by  inherent  difficulties  in  measuring  risk  and  by  distortions  in  incentives. 
Episodic financial strains cannot be eradicated entirely; the market is not fully self-correcting. 
But they can be mitigated or magnified by policy. 
The crisis events can be traced to evidence of serious trouble emerging from when banks 
became less willing to lend to each other, because they were no longer sure how to value the 
assets held and the promises made – both their own and those of potential borrowers. For a 
time, central bank lending was able to fill the gap. But from August 2007 the stress in the 
financial system increased in waves. By March 2008, we are all aware, the crisis deepened 
and  Bear  Stearns  had  to  be  rescued  from  failure;  six  months  later,  on  September  15, 
Lehman  Brothers  went  bankrupt;  and  by  the  end  of  September,  2008  the  global  financial 
system itself was on the verge of collapse.  
large 
“shadow 
financial  system” 
involving  various  poorly 
Global crisis: US, Europe and emerging market economies 
In the United States, the crisis was shaped by particular characteristics of the US financial 
system  such  as  a  complex  mortgage  financing  value  chain  with  opaque  securitization 
structures,  a 
regulated 
intermediaries (investment banks, hedge funds, structured investment vehicles – SIVs) and 
instruments  (credit  default  swaps),  the  important  role  played  by  government-sponsored 
enterprises  (Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac),  as  well  as  a  fragmented  supervisory 
architecture. 
The US financial system is in many aspects unique due to the high share of capital market 
intermediaries and instruments. “Deposit money banks” account for a relatively low share of 
financial system assets; the stocks of market instruments are significantly larger (including 
private  bonds),  and  the  ratio  of  claims  on  the  private  sector  to  deposits  is  much  higher. 
Overall,  these  indicators  reflect  the  much  greater  role  played  by  large  investment  banks, 
institutional  investors,  and  other  financial  institutions,  as  well  the  extensive  use  of 
securitization. 
While financial institutions in the US are at the heart of the problem, European banks face 
similar  problems  which  shows  how  deeply  interconnected  national  financial  systems  have 
become. European banks have been hit nearly as strongly as their American peers by losses 
from subprime mortgage investments, leveraged loans, failed financial hedges and a surge in 
conventional  credit  losses.  As  per  one  study  of  June  2009,  banks  on  both  sides  of  the 
Atlantic had to cope with combined write-downs of more than USD 1 trillion in this crisis – 
and they may have to take USD 1.3 trillion more. Governments around the globe have had to 
intervene to prevent a wholesale collapse of the financial system. They have injected more 
than USD 200 billion in fresh capital into the top 20 banks alone; besides there are much 
larger asset and debt guarantees. 
2 
 BIS Review 101/2009
Emerging countries have not developed the same complex financing structures as those in 
the  US,  but  several  countries  have  already  suffered  from  severe  external  imbalances, 
caused by fiscal imbalances and/ or over-extended banking systems. These countries have 
become  particularly  vulnerable,  as  the  crisis  is  transmitted  through  financial  and  trade 
channels.  However,  the  specific  channels  of  transmission  may  differ  significantly  across 
countries. The basic structure of the financial system is, however, not expected to change 
significantly,  as  banks  still  play  a  dominant  role  and  capital  markets  are  generally  less 
developed. 
Hard-hit by  the global financial crisis, the worldwide banking industry's future development 
has  now  been  sharply  drawn  into  focus.  Bankers  and  government  officials  will  have  to 
grapple with important issues such as the best corporate governance model for the future of 
an industry in which a number of banks have benefitted from government bailouts. Equally 
important concerns such as the return of morality to the market, the definition of financial risk 
and the tradeoff among innovation, self-discipline and regulation require the banking industry 
to think outside the box. It has changed the face of Wall Street with lots of investment banks 
changing their business models. What will the future holds for these financial institutions is a 
subject being widely debated internationally to probe the future of the banking industry world 
over. I am sure this school will devote some time for such discussions. 
Role of banking/financial system in economy 
In  the  analytical  and  empirical  literature  on  the  subject  of  finance  and  growth,  there  is  a 
consensus  among  economists  that  development  of  the  financial  system  contributes  to 
economic  growth  (Rajan  and  Zingales,  2003).  Financial  development  creates  enabling 
conditions for growth through either a supply-leading (financial development spurs growth) or 
a  demand-following  (growth  generates  demand  for  financial  products)  channel.  Empirical 
evidence consistently emphasises the nexus between finance and growth, though the issue 
of  direction  of  causality  is  more  difficult  to  determine.  At  the  cross-country  level,  evidence 
indicates  that  various  measures  of  financial  development  (including  assets  of  the  financial 
intermediaries, liquid liabilities of financial institutions, domestic credit to private sector, stock 
and bond market capitalisation) are robustly and positively related to economic growth (King 
and Levine, 1993; Levine and Zervos, 1998). 
Financial deepening in India 
In the Indian case, healthy growth of the assets of commercial banks in the recent period, 
driven  primarily  by  credit  growth  and  sharp  rise  in  credit-GDP,  deposit-GDP  and  M3-GDP 
ratios are reflective of significant financial deepening in India. For example, during the period 
since 1980s, while bank assets-GDP ratio has tripled moving up from 31.4 per cent in the 
1980s to 93.3 per cent in 2008-09, credit-GDP ratio has increased from 19.3 per cent to 52.2 
per cent, deposits-GDP ratio has increased from 29.8 per cent to 72.0 per cent and M3-GDP 
ratio has increased from 39.0 per cent to 89.5 per cent (Statistical Annex SA 1). 
In a cross-country perspective, when measured by the ratio of bank assets to GDP, financial 
depth  in  India  was  among  the  lowest  in  the  world  (Barth,  Caprio  and  Levine,  2001). 
Comparable cross-country data indicated that in 2001, this ratio, at 48 per cent for India, was 
lower than those prevalent in Asian economies such as Indonesia (101 per cent), Korea (98 
per cent), Philippines (91 per cent), Malaysia (166 per cent) and much lower than developed 
economies, such as UK (311 per cent), France (147 per cent) and Germany (313 per cent). 
In India, while the ratio of bank assets to GDP has increased significantly to a shade over 93 
per cent in 2008-09 – a result of high credit growth in recent years – it is still lower than other 
emerging countries. Financial deepening, hence, has been taking place on an accelerated 
pace on a macro basis in recent years and banking productivity has improved significantly. 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 3
As  per  the  data  from  India’s  national  accounts,  over  the  period  since  1980s,  banking  and 
insurance sector has witnessed a growth which is in excess of the overall GDP consistently 
over the years. In the 1980s, the growth of banking and insurance sector was 10.6 per cent 
vis-à-vis the GDP growth of 5.6 per cent – this increased to 15.4 per cent in 2007-08 vis-à-vis 
the GDP growth of 9.0 per cent (Statistical Annex SA 2).  
Another  noteworthy  feature  discernible  in  Indian  context  is  that  the  rise  in  indicators  of 
financial  deepening  takes  place  along  with  a  noticeable  rise  in  the  domestic  savings  rate. 
The rate of domestic savings has specially picked up in the recent period during 2003-04 to 
2007-08 against the backdrop of financial sectors reforms, rise in total factor productivity and 
investment  boom,  which  had  led  to  acceleration  in  the  growth  performance,  while  in  the 
developed countries like the US and Japan the rise in financial deepening has had a limited 
effect on the savings rates of the economies. The results may seem contrasting; however, 
the  country  specific  reason  such  as  the  level  of  social  security  measures  on  welfare  of 
people,  wealth  effect  in  the  period  of  rising  assets  prices  and  most  significantly  the 
demographic profile which explain the Life Cycle Hypothesis (LCH) may have dampened the 
savings propensity in a country. 
A  cautionary  remark,  however,  I  would  like  to  make  here.  In  the  context  of  the  macro-
economic trend of high services sector growth which includes the banking sector growth, I 
feel that the services growth needs to be well supported by growth from the real sectors of 
the economy. Financial leverage cannot bring perpetual prosperity. Banks need to keep this 
in mind, and I am telling this as a banker, as well as a central banker.  
Indian banking trends 
As  you  are  aware,  there  is  significant  transformation  of  the  Indian  banking  sector.  The 
financial  sector  reforms  in  the  country  were  initiated  in  the  beginning  of  the  1990s.  The 
reforms  have  brought  about  a  sea  change  in  the  profile  of  the  banking  sector.  Our 
implementation of the reforms process has had several unique features. Our financial sector 
reforms  were  undertaken  early  in  the  reform  cycle.  Notably,  the  reforms  process  was  not 
driven  by  any  banking  crisis,  nor  was  it  the  outcome  of  any  external  support  package. 
Besides, the design of the reforms was crafted through domestic expertise, taking on board 
the  international  experiences  in  this  respect.  The  reforms  were  carefully  sequenced  with 
respect  to  the  instruments  to  be  used  and  the  objectives  to  be  achieved.  Thus,  prudential 
norms and supervisory strengthening were introduced early in the reform cycle, followed by 
interest-rate  deregulation  and  a  gradual  lowering  of  statutory  pre-emptions.  The  more 
complex aspects of legal and accounting measures were ushered in subsequently when the 
basic tenets of the reforms were already in place. 
Though public sector banks (PSBs) account for around 70 per cent of commercial banking 
assets and 72.7 per cent of the aggregate advances of the Scheduled commercial banking 
system (as on March 31, 2008), competition in the banking sector has increased in recent 
years  with  the  emergence  of  private  players  as  also  with  greater  private  shareholding  of 
PSBs.  Listing  of  PSBs  on  stock  exchanges  and  increased  private  shareholding  have  also 
added  to  competition.  The  new  private  banks  which  accounted  for  2.6  per  cent  of  the 
commercial banking sector in March 1997 have developed rapidly and accounted for nearly 
17 per cent of the commercial banking assets by end March 2008.  
Financial health of the banking system 
The implementation of reforms has had an all-round salutary impact on the financial health of 
the banking system, as evidenced by the significant improvements in a number of prudential 
parameters. Let me briefly highlight the improvements in a few salient financial indicators of 
the banking system (Statistical annex SA 3 & 4). The average capital adequacy ratio for the 
scheduled  commercial  banks,  which  was  around  10.4  per  cent  in  1997,  had  increased  to 
4 
 BIS Review 101/2009
13.08 per cent as on March 31, 2008. In regard to the asset quality also, the gross NPAs of 
the scheduled commercial banks, which were as high as 15.7 per cent at end-March 1997, 
declined significantly to 2.3 per cent as at end-March 2008. The net NPAs of these banks 
during the same period declined from 8.1 per cent to 1.08 per cent. The reform measures 
have  also  resulted  in  an  improvement  in  the  profitability  of  banks.  The  Return  on  Assets 
(RoA)  of  scheduled  commercial  banks  increased  from  0.4  per  cent  in  the  year  1991-92  to 
0.99 per cent in 2007-08. The Indian banks are well placed in this regard too vis-à-vis the 
broad range of RoA for the international banks. The banking sector reforms also emphasised 
the need to improve productivity of the banks through appropriate rationalisation measures 
so as to reduce the operating cost and improve the profitability. A variety of initiatives were 
taken by the banks, including adoption of modern technology, which has resulted in improved 
productivity. 
One area that needs to be watched continuously due to recent crisis is the off-balance sheet 
(OBS) exposure of the banks. The spurt in OBS exposure is mainly on account of derivatives 
whose  share  averaged  around  80  per  cent.  The  derivatives  portfolio  has  also  undergone 
change  with  single  currency  Interest  Rate  Swaps  (IRS)  comprising  57  per  cent  of  total 
portfolio at end-March 2008 from less than 15 per cent at end-March 2002. 
With  regard  to  the  assessment  of  the  banking  system  in  India  we  appear  to  be  in  a 
comfortable  position,  as  confirmed  by  the  Committee  on  Financial  Sector  Assessment 
(CFSA):  
(i) 
Commercial  banks  have  shown  a  healthy  growth  rate  and  an  improvement  in 
performance  as  is  evident  from  capital  adequacy,  asset  quality,  earnings  and 
efficiency indicators. In spite of some reversals during the financial year 2008-09, the 
key financial indicators of the banking system do not throw up any major concern or 
vulnerability and the system remains resilient; and  
The  single-factor  stress  tests  carried  for  the  commercial  banking  sector  covering 
credit risk, market / interest rate risk and liquidity risk have revealed that the banking 
system can withstand significant shocks arising from large potential changes in credit 
quality, and liquidity conditions. 
(ii) 
Lessons from India 
The  fact  that  India  has  not  gone  through  any  financial  crisis  as  a  result  of  financial 
deregulation is not only remarkable, but a testimony to the correctness of the judgment that 
reforms to global standards need to be adjusted to local conditions (Mohan, 2007). The need 
of the hour is to have financial sector reforms in a recalibrated manner to address the issues 
in light of the crisis. India has so far remained relatively insulated from the crisis that global 
banking system has experienced in the course of the 1990s. Our exposure to troubled sub-
prime assets and related derivatives is negligible in comparison to many other economies. 
The  fact  that,  so  far  financial  sector  reforms  have  been  calibrated  with  a  progressive 
integration  into  the  world  economy  has  paid  us  rich  dividends.  A  key  consideration  in  the 
choice of pace and sequencing has been the management of volatility in financial markets 
and implications for the conduct of monetary operations. The nuanced approach to financial 
sector  reform  has  served  us  well  with  an  accent  on  conscious  gradualism  in  the 
implementation  of  coordinated  and  sequenced  moves  on  several  fronts.  What  have  been 
ensured are appropriate safeguards to ensure stability, while taking account of the prevailing 
governance  standards,  risk  management  systems  and  incentive  frameworks  in  financial 
institutions in the country. Overall, these progressive but cautious policies have contributed 
to  efficiency  of  the  financial  system  while  sustaining  the  growth  momentum  in  an 
environment of macroeconomic and financial stability. The policy challenge is, to continue to 
ensure financial stability in India during this period of international financial turbulence, while 
achieving high growth with price stability. 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 5
Some  of  the  reasons  for  India’s  insulation  as  highlighted  by  Dr.  Y.V.  Reddy,  the  former 
Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  India  are:  (1)  The  nascent  stage  of  development  of  the 
credit derivatives market; (2) Regulatory guidelines on securitisation do not permit immediate 
profit  recognition;  (3)  Perseverance  of  prudential  policies  which  prevent  institutions  from 
excessive risk taking and financial markets from becoming extremely volatile and turbulent; 
and (4) Close co-ordination between supervision of banks and their regulation. 
Future challenges to banking from the regulatory perspective 
I  would  like  to  bring  to  the  fore  four  issues  that  I  consider  very  important  for  the  future 
regulatory  reform  process  not  only  in  Indian  context  but  in  the  context  of  many  emerging 
markets  as  we  move  ahead.  First  is  the  issue  related  to  “Know  Your  Customer  (KYC)”  in 
banks; Second, from a central banker’s perspective whether the banks are according “Fair 
Treatment’  to  their  Customers”  (FTC);  Third,  is  the  issue  of  “Risk  Management”  and  its 
proper  understanding  and  Fourth  is  the  Leveraging  Technology  for  greater  Financial 
Inclusion. Let us discuss these four important issues in some detail now. 
Know Your Customer (KYC) in all its manifestations 
First  is  the  issue  of  KYC  in  banks  and  its  importance  in  the  overall  enhancement  in  the 
functioning of the banks. Sound KYC policies and procedures not only contribute to a bank's 
overall  safety  and  soundness,  they  also  protect  the  integrity  of  the  banking  system  by 
reducing the likelihood of banks becoming vehicles for money laundering, terrorist financing 
and other unlawful activities. There are three components here. “Knowing their customers” is 
not enough for banks, they should also know the “business” of their customers; (KYBC) and 
if the banks know the business of their customers, the banks must understand and assess 
the risks associated with each of their customers’ businesses (KYCBR). The banks should 
realize that these parts of Know Your Customer in all their manifestations, viz. Know Your 
Customer  (KYC),  Know  Your  Customers’  Business  (KYCB)  and  Know  Your  Customers’ 
Business Risk (KYCBR) is not only an integral part of elementary Risk Management Process 
but  it  also  makes  a  good  business  sense.  Regulatory  intervention  in  this  area  is  going  to 
increase in future. 
Fair Treatment to Customers (FTC) 
Second issue is with regard to affording Fair Treatment to Customers (FTC) by banks. This 
requirement is key to the operation of an efficient retail market for financial services. FTC is 
also central to consumers having confidence in the financial services industry. This principle 
must  be  adopted  and  supported  by  the  leadership  of  financial  firms,  and  embedded 
throughout a firm’s operations and within its culture. Another important aspect related to FTC 
is  from  the  Regulator’s  perspective.  One  may  ask  why  the  regulator  should  at  all  be 
concerned  about  customers  not  being  treated  fairly  by  banks.  In  this  connection,  it  is 
important to note that not all financial entities are accorded the status of the “Banks”. The 
banks raise deposits many times more than the capital resources they have and hence they 
have  a  special  responsibility  to  customers  for  providing  fair  treatment.  Banks  need  to 
respond to the challenge of restoring consumer confidence in the financial services industry 
and ensuring that they treat their customers fairly. 
In  addition,  in  a  competitive  marketplace,  FTC  should  be  an  important  element  (alongside 
service  levels,  pricing  and  customer  satisfaction)  in  determining  the  success  of  a  bank  in 
acquiring  and  maintaining  market  share.  However,  in  many  markets  for  retail  financial 
products and services the incentive structure for firms to treat their customers fairly has not 
always  been  robust  enough  to  deter  all  firms  from  inadvertently  or  deliberately  taking 
advantage of the relative weakness of the financial services consumer. 
6 
 BIS Review 101/2009
Product design and governance;  
Identifying target markets;  
Marketing and promoting the product;  
Sales and advice processes;  
After-sales information; and  
Complaint handling.  
There should be a blend of regulatory and market-based solutions to delivering fairness to 
customers. The key issue is the balance between these two. The issue of addressing the fair 
treatment of customers throughout the product life-cycle comprises: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
These  issues  will  create  challenges  for  banks.  They  may  have  to  adapt  the  management, 
reward  and  operating  systems  they  currently  use  and  enhance  the  controls  they  have  in 
place to monitor whether they are meeting the FTC requirement.  
Thus, there is a need to develop a better, and common, understanding of what FTC means 
in  practice.  Banks  need  to  examine  what  most  effectively  constitutes  fair  treatment  of 
customers.  Banks’  senior  management  needs  to  assess  their  current  performance  against 
the requirement to treat customers fairly, identify possible areas for improvement and ensure 
that the principle of fairness is embedded in their work-culture. 
Risk management 
The Third issue which has assumed critical significance now is “Risk Management” and its 
proper understanding. We cannot view banks’ risks at individual level in isolation all the time. 
It  has  also  been  argued  that  the  emphasis  on  micro-prudential  regulation  may  have 
contributed to the buildup of some macro risks. Collectively, the systemic risk is becoming 
more and more prominent with the increasing complexities and the associated risk factors in 
the banking activities. The banks have to have a proper understanding of all the risk factors 
and  at  the  same  time  they  have  to  ensure  that  their  customers  also  understand  and 
appreciate  the  associated  risk.  In  the  event  of  such  banking  activities  leading  to  the 
emergence  of  systemic  risks,  the central  bank may  intervene  which  might  result  in  stricter 
regulation and supervision. 
The most critical issue is of liquidity risk management in the banks in the wake of the crisis. 
We  may  have  a  situation  where  the  liquidity  may  dry  up  and  the  banks  and  the  financial 
institutions  would  face  severe  liquidity  crunch  due  to  adverse  market  conditions.  In  this 
scenario,  the  liquidity  crunch  might  completely  wipe  out  the  capital  of  the  bank  as  well 
leading to its failure. Another case might be a scenario where plenty of liquidity in the market 
may fuel inflation. Therefore, we have to be vigilant and monitor the market conditions more 
vigorously. 
In recent times increase in the banks’ dependence on bulk deposits to fund credit growth has 
assumed significance as this could have liquidity and profitability implications. An increase in 
growth  in  housing  loans,  real  estate  exposure  as  also  infrastructure  has  resulted  in 
elongation of the maturity profile of bank assets. There is growing dependence on purchased 
liquidity and also an increase in the illiquid component in banks’ balance sheets with greater 
reliance on volatile liabilities, like bulk deposits to fund asset growth. Simultaneously, there 
has  been  a  shortening  of  residual  maturities,  leading  to  a  higher  asset-liability  mismatch. 
There is a need to strengthen liquidity management in this context as also to shore up the 
core  deposit  base  and  to  keep  an  adequate  cushion  of  liquid  assets  to  meet  unforeseen 
contingencies. What needs to be borne in mind is that while at an individual customer level, 
retail deposits may be volatile, but for the bank and the banking system as a collective lot, it 
provides solid foundation for the banks to fund their long term assets like infrastructure and 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 7
similar business activities. How do we cultivate this aspect in our business model and Risk 
Management Process is a great challenge. 
Inclusive growth: financial inclusion through leveraging technology 
Coming to Fourth issue, let me remind that, in the history of human civilization it has always 
been the technology which has led to mass availability of products and services. Same is the 
case  for  banking  services.  We  are  in  the  midst  of  the  most  exciting  period  of  human 
civilization when two billion of population is expected to move “up” from below poverty line to 
above poverty line (BPL). Majority of these will be in this sub-continent and banks will have 
an  opportunity  to  participate  in  this  process,  which  will  bring  sustainable  peace  and 
prosperity to the mankind. 
For  achieving  the  goal  of  Financial  Inclusion,  experts  have  recommended  the  Business 
Correspondent/Facilitator  (BC/BF)  model.  However,  some  recent  studies  have  pointed  out 
that  the  BC  model  at  the  initial  stage,  may  not  be  commercially  viable  due  to  a  high 
transaction cost for the banks and customers. Here, the appropriate use of technology can 
help  in  reducing  the  transaction  cost.  The  need  of  the  hour  is  to  develop  and  implement 
scalable platform independent technology solutions which, if implemented on a larger scale, 
will bring down the high cost of operation. Technology, thus, really holds the key for financial 
inclusion to take place on an accelerated scale. 
The need of the hour is leveraging technology in Indian banking for providing affordable and 
cost-effective banking services to the masses through multi-delivery channels. All of us know 
that  apart  from  traditional  business,  banks  nowadays  provide  a  wide  range  of  services  to 
satisfy  the  financial  and  non-financial  needs  of  all  types  of  customers  from  the  smallest 
account holder to the largest company and in some cases of non customers. The range of 
services offered differs from bank to bank depending mainly on the type and size of the bank. 
The  key  enabling  factor  has  been  the  adoption  of  technology.  Banking  industry  is  fast 
growing with the use of technology in the form of ATMs, on-line banking, Telephone banking, 
Mobile banking etc., plastic card is one of the banking products that cater to the needs of 
retail  segment  has  seen  its  number  grow  in  geometric  progression  in  recent  years.  The 
internet banking is changing the banking industry and is having the major effects on banking 
relationship.  Retail  banking  in  India  is  maturing  with  time;  several  products,  which  further 
could be customized are in the retails segments of housing loan, personal loan, education 
loan, vehicle loan, etc. 
Being convinced that technology is the key for improving in productivity, the Reserve Bank 
took  several  initiatives  to  popularize  usage  of  technology  by  banks  in  India.  Periodically, 
almost once in five years since the early 1980s, the Reserve Bank appointed Committees 
and Working Groups to deliberate on and recommend the appropriate use of technology by 
banks given the circumstances and the need. 
Even as global financials face growth and asset-quality issues, Indian banks continue to offer 
a healthy growth trajectory with minimal balance-sheet risks. Despite the high growth rate of 
the past decade, penetration for most financial products/services in India remains low. Indian 
banks  can  sustain  their  structural  high  growth  trajectory,  driven  by  an  under-penetrated 
financial-services  sector,  a  conducive  economic  environment  and  a  supportive  regulatory 
regime.  Financial  penetration  holds  the  key  to  financial  inclusion  and  inclusive  growth. 
Favorable demographics would be a facilitating factor. Way forward, financial penetration is 
expected to rise as banks expand into new areas, focus on building their retail business and 
strengthen their risk-management system. 
Conclusion 
To  sum  up,  while  global  banking  developments  have  offered  innumerable  perspectives, 
important perceptions are emerging from the Indian banking developments. Given the long 
8 
 BIS Review 101/2009
term objective of achieving 9.0 per cent of GDP growth, we need to understand that there are 
significant challenges for Indian banking. Of these, the major challenge would be to achieve 
financial inclusion through improved financial penetration in hitherto uncovered areas, which 
in turn would enable inclusive and sustainable growth for the economy. We all have to put 
our minds together and continually strive towards achieving this in the days ahead. 
The question currently on top of the minds of most bankers present here would be: what will 
be the shape of banking in days to come? Will banks do business differently? What are the 
changes  that  are  likely  to  take  place?  The  answer  to  these  questions  may  come  out  from 
some serious deliberations in the next few days and before arriving at any conclusion in this 
regard, we certainly have to explore many options. The only thing that can be said at this 
juncture is that regulation may become tighter and supervision more controlled. Other than 
that, it is difficult to say whether there will be any fundamental change in the way banks work. 
I am sure that the discussions, case studies, panel discussions, CEO Round Table planned 
during the IBSS sessions, which have been woven around topics of contemporary relevance 
like, understanding the reasons for the global financial system melt down; changing contours 
of risk; understanding the role of IT and Risk Management system and discussion on arriving 
at  coping  strategies;  new  frontiers  of  banking;  emergence  of  “Inclusive”  banking,  etc.  will 
bring out some useful insights and out of box creative and innovative ideas from the market 
players to deal with the present complex situation. This will also help in creating an enabling 
environment for an overall balanced economic growth of the world economy. 
I wish you all the best and the 62nd IBSS deliberations a grand success. 
Thank you. 
Select reference 
Bank for International Settlements (2009), “79th Annual Report”, 1 April 2008 to 31 March 
2009. 
Barth, J., G. Caprio and R. Levine (2001): The Regulation and Supervision of Banks around 
the  World:  A  New  Database,  World  Bank  Policy  Research  Working  Paper  No.  2588, 
Washington DC. 
King, R.G. and R. Levine (1993): Finance and Growth: Schumpeter might be right, Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 108, 717-37. 
Levine,  R.  and  S.  Zervos  (1998):  Stock  Markets,  Banks  and  Economic  Growth,  American 
Economic Review 88, 537-58. 
Mohan, Rakesh (2007), India's financial sector reforms – fostering growth while containing 
risk, Address at Yale University, New Haven, 3rd December 2007. 
Rajan, R.G. and L. Zingales (2003), “Saving Capitalism from Capitalists, Crown Business”, 
New York. 
Reddy,  Y.  V  (2008),  “Global  Financial  Turbulence  and  Financial  Sector  in  India:  A 
Practitioner’s Perspective”, Address at the Meeting of the Task Force on Financial Markets 
Regulation organized by the Initiative for Policy Dialogue at Manchester, United Kingdom, on 
July 1, 2008. 
BIS Review 101/2009 
 9
  10 
 BIS Review 101/2009
    11
BIS Review 101/2009 
  12 
 BIS Review 101/2009
