Shyamala Gopinath: Technology in banks – responding to the emerging 
challenges 
Inaugural  address  by  Ms  Shyamala  Gopinath,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of 
India, at the CII’s BANKing TECH Summit 2009, Mumbai, 23 March 2009.  
Assistance  provided  by  Mr  Ganesh  Kumar  and  Mr  Sujit  K.  Arvind  in  preparation  of  the  address  is  gratefully 
acknowledged.  
 Ladies  and  gentlemen,  a  very  good  morning.  A  central  banker  addressing  an  impressive 
gathering of technology experts on a topic which is their very own – to say the least, is a 
formidable task. In the current global financial context, though, I may not be surprised if many 
central banks, as regulators of banking and other financial institutions get more engaged with 
the technology aspects of the regulated institutions’ operations. 
It is not hard to miss the role played by greater technological integration in transforming the 
image of banking as model centric blackboxes, unrecognizable from the traditional brick-and 
mortar systems. Not surprisingly, the internal audit and financial reporting systems within the 
banks  were  not  given  similar  focus  probably  because  effective,  real  time  data  analytics 
requires huge data crunching that involves cost. It may be something to ponder that while a 
lot of focus is given to using technology to manage client and customer accounts at banks 
and the trading systems, the same level of sophistication does not extend to internal auditing, 
accounting and financial reports.  
In India, the situation of the banks is quite different from the banks overseas particularly in 
developed markets. Indian banks are not facing huge write downs or losses and are still quite 
well  capitalized.  There  may  be  a  slowdown  in  credit  but  that  is  more  a  reflection  of  the 
broader  economic  slowdown-the  impact  of  the  real  sector  on  the  financial  sector.  In  this 
context,  for  India  the  theme  of  the  seminar,  which  refers  to  ‘sustaining  the  growth 
momentum’ is quite apt.  
Globally,  the  IT  spends  of  financial  institutions  are  expected  to  go  down  drastically  in 
2009-10. In India, however, this could be an opportune moment for banks to focus on the 
internal processes and consolidate their IT platforms across functionalities to use technology 
as an effective strategic tool. It is also an opportunity for the technology companies to gear 
up to meet the demands of the domestic market for new technology as well as expanding 
existing technologies. 
The  use  of technology  in  India  has undergone  rapid  transformation.  The  last  two  decades 
have witnessed a sea change in the nature of services offered by not only banks but also the 
financial sector and even the Government - all of which have had a positive impact on the 
customers of these organizations and the general public at large.  
Technology and payment systems initiatives 
Let me dwell briefly now on the various technological and payment systems developmental 
initiatives undertaken in the Indian banking and financial sector. Though, we are moving from 
‘brick  and  mortar’  banking  concepts  to  ‘virtual’  banking  concepts  gradually  in  view  of  IT 
penetration in every sphere of banking, banking with physical presence is going to stay in 
India  due  to  the  unique  nature  of  the  Indian  banking  and  varied  Indian  demographic 
structure.  
BIS Review 43/2009 
 1
Starting from the Rangarajan Committee report in early 1990s which started the process of 
branch automation in banks, banks have witnessed a lot of changes on the technology front 
during  the  last  18  years.  The  banks  in  India  started  from  a  disparate  IT  infrastructure  in 
general  and  moved  over  to  consolidation  and  virtualization  of  databases  and  servers 
gradually  over  the  years  in  order  to  achieve  efficiency,  cost  reduction,  improvement  in 
customer services and to address the issues arising from competition from the other market 
players. Use of technology in a large but judicious way provides relief in the form of more 
effective work processes, reduced costs of processing and the capability to handle relatively 
large transaction volumes with remarkable ease. The Core Banking concept to a great extent 
emerged  from  this  centralisation  process  and  has  since  received  a  complete  and  focused 
attention from all the banks for its rapid implementation. The banks have also undergone a 
massive change in terms of improvement in the IT Communication network which has greatly 
facilitated  not  only  the  networking  of  the  internal  communication  processes  but  the 
integration with the external payment systems gateways as well.  
In regard to the implementation of ‘Core Banking’ and ‘Electronic Banking’ banks have made 
considerable progress in recent years as far as the centralization of customers’ accounts are 
concerned; however, we can also think of making it more useful by expanding the coverage 
of  Core  Banking  Systems  (CBS)  and  all  the  essential  services  /  banking  products  like 
treasury,  Customer  Relationship  Management  (CRM),  Corporate  Banking,  Management 
Information  Systems  (MIS),  etc.  getting  seamlessly  integrated  into  the  present  CBS.  The 
offering  of  electronic  banking  service  channels  like  Internet  Banking,  Mobile  Banking,  real 
time  fund  transfer,  ATM  Applications  and  other  forms  of  upcoming  electronic  banking 
channels  have  become  important  vehicles  of  offering  banking  services  in  a  cost-efficient 
manner with wide geographical spread; enhancing the banks’ reputation and brand building 
addressing the competitive forces as well.  
We have also seen the developments in the communication network and messaging system 
in India as a whole in the form of Indian Financial Network (INFINET), Structured Financial 
Messaging  System  (SFMS),  VSAT  connectivity,  cable  and  leased  line  connection,  fiber 
optics  channels,  etc.  There  have  been  marked  improvements  in  the  Indian  payment  and 
settlement  systems  in  the  form  of  popularizing  and  strengthening  of  Real  Time  Gross 
Settlement  (RTGS),  Centralised  Fund  Management  System  (CFMS),  Electronic  Clearing 
System  (ECS),  National  Electronic  Fund  Transfer  (NEFT),  Cheque  Truncation,  National 
Financial  Switch  (NFS),  developments  and  initiatives  at  Clearing  Corporation  of  India  Ltd. 
(CCIL) platform, ATMs, electronic banking channels etc. to name a few.  
The  facility  for  inter-bank  funds  settlement  through  RTGS  is  available  today  across  more 
than 53,000 branches of banks spread across the length and breadth of the country. Today 
while  we  have  settled  close  to  100,000  transactions  in  the  RTGS,  the  average  is  around 
60,000 per day. Therefore the volume of transactions per branch is still in single digits. At the 
same time the country is clearing paper cheques close to 50 lakhs per day, with the so called 
High Value Clearing clocking large volumes. The high value clearing which settles on T+0 
basis was introduced in this country when we did not have any electronic products. Today 
this clearing entails high levels of operational risk. It is time that we migrate this to electronic 
mode. RBI would soon be coming out with an approach document in this regard.  
However,  despite  the  use  of  electronic  methods  of  payments,  the  use  of  cheques  will 
continue. In order to improve efficiency, reduce operational risk and time taken for cheque 
processing, the Reserve Bank has initiated steps to introduce a Cheque Truncation System 
(CTS).  A  pilot  project  has commenced  in  the  National  Capital  Region  in  Delhi  where 
processing volumes have picked up substantially and about 70% of the cheques are being 
routed  through  the  CTS.  We  are  now  expanding  the  CTS  to  other  centres.  Ultimately  the 
whole country would be connected through 6 or 7 Grids. The next grid is planned for Chennai 
covering the southern centres. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2009
RBI set up an exclusive institution called the Institute for Development Research in Banking 
Technology more popularly known as IDRBT at Hyderabad in 1997, which implemented, in 
1999, the Closed User Group network – the INFINET – as mentioned by me earlier. This was 
aimed at sharing expensive IT resources so as to achieve the economies of scale. One of 
the  notable  achievements  of  the  IDRBT  has  been  the  implementation  of  Public  Key 
Infrastructure  (PKI)-based  electronic  data  transfer  with  very  high  security  levels.  It  also 
developed  a  messaging  standard  called  SFMS  with  security  features  far  superior  to  even 
SWIFT  which  hastened  the  computerization  efforts  in  the  financial  sector.  Today  INFINET 
has migrated to the latest MPLS technology in an effort to offer state of the art network. 
Technological risk factors 
All these technological developments as mentioned earlier have undoubtedly led to greater 
efficiency and speed which has resulted in enhanced customer satisfaction. At the same it 
has opened a floodgate of concerns due to the risk factors involved in the implementation. 
Let me now discuss some of these important risk factors involved in this regard. If we glance 
across  some  of  the  major  frauds  across  countries,  it  is  evident  that  many  institutions  and 
banks have suffered a great deal of loss either due to the deficiencies in the internal control 
processes of the IT implementation or due to the deficiencies in the software and hardware 
itself. These frauds were perpetrated usually by a single person by taking advantage of the 
lax  internal  control  processes,  in  spite  of  the  technology  safeguards  put  in  place  to  check 
such deficiencies. It reminds and cautions us of the fact that technology is not an end in itself 
and at most is a facilitator, to be used optimally and judiciously.  
Another set of IT risks which are gaining importance these days are related to software and 
hardware  glitches  in  the  technology  implementation.  To  name  a  few  such  risks  like, 
‘Phishing’,  ‘SQL  Injection’,  ‘Advance  Fee  frauds’,  Database  and  Server  Hacking,  Network 
attacks, ‘Denial of Service’ attack, Web Defacing, Cross Site scripting, IP Spoofing, Man-in-
the Middle Attacks etc. have resulted in huge losses for the banks and customers across the 
globe. Particularly in recent times, security experts and the federal government in the US are 
warning  that  scam  artists  are  leveraging  public  concern  over  the  global  financial  crisis  to 
steal sensitive financial data and spread malicious software. 
Credit card frauds are also on the rise. Large numbers of   customers’ accounts and credit 
card  holders’  accounts  have  been  compromised  in  the  past  resulting  in  not  only  financial 
loss,  but  also  legal  risk  and  reputational  loss  in  the  market.  These  electronic  windows 
irrespective of the usage percentage and pattern have opened a new gate into the banks’ 
Information Systems’ components which can be exploited by hackers, inside employees or 
even ex-employees to name a few. Money Laundering risk through electronic channel and its 
countering  is  also  a  challenging  task  for  the  banking  and  financial  system.  Though  Indian 
financial system has not been affected to that extent from these risk factors as compared to 
its counterpart abroad, the strengthening of the electronic banking channel by the banks and 
systems’  participants  will  greatly  assist  in  banks’  and  financial  institutions’  efforts  for 
sustaining and consolidating the business growth and above all maintaining confidence.   
A few organisational issues 
IS Security, IS Audit and adoption of international standards 
The  Information  System  (IS)  Security  issues,  Information  System  Audit  and  adoption  of 
international  standards  in  the  technology  domain  are  the  other  challenges  for  the  Indian 
banks today. These have become more pertinent in view of data breach cases in India as 
well as abroad in recent times. The financial institutions should conduct IS Auditing in such a 
manner to ensure that Information Systems security policies and standards are enforced in 
the bank on a ‘continuous’ basis rather than at the end of the specified cycle or on a spot 
BIS Review 43/2009 
 3
basis. The failure to do so may result in serious internal control lapses resulting in loss as I 
had mentioned earlier.    
The adoption of international standards and industry’s best practices in the IT sphere by the 
financial institutions would certainly result in benefits for them and supplement their efforts for 
sustaining  growth.  In  this  regard,  adoption  of  ISO/IEC  38500  Standard,  which  is  the  first 
international standard for IT governance may help organisations for establishing an efficient 
and effective framework for IT governance for a better alignment of IT and business goals. 
The standard provides a single integrated framework that enables the financial institutions to 
take the full advantages of other standards / frameworks. 
Change Management 
Another  major  challenge  which  Indian  banks  /  financial  institutions  would  encounter  apart 
from the emerging IT Threats is the ‘Change Management’ issue and the shortage of skilled 
IT  personnel  in  technology  development  and  the  Information  Systems  security  and  audit 
area. It is imperative, therefore, that banks adopt standardised methods and procedures for 
all technological changes in the organisation to bring efficiency and to save the consequent 
problems 
‘Change 
Management’ principles. In this background and especially in the light of shortage of skilled 
qualified  IS  Security  and  Audit  personnel  at  present,  the  issues  like  staff  selection,  staff 
retention, staff posting, staff rotation, staff screening, etc. have become more relevant today. 
I would further like to emphasize the fact that the success of any technological initiative is 
dependent on  ‘technology’  factors only  to  the  extent  of  50%  and  the  rest  is  dependent  on 
how the organisation manages the ‘human’ element in it. 
that  any  organisation  usually 
to  non-adherence 
faces  due 
to 
IT outsourcing 
The  ‘outsourcing’  of  IT  activities  in  banks  is  also  an  area  to  be  looked  into  closely  by  the 
banks.  In  many  countries,  frauds  or  data  breach  cases  leading  to  legal  tangles  and 
reputational loss have been witnessed either due to the ‘loose’ outsourcing contract, deficient 
internal  controls  in  managing  the  vendors  or  complete  reliance  on  the  vendors  even  for 
critical  banking  activities  support  from  technical  perspective.  More  prudence  and  timely 
corrective actions would benefit the financial institutions in this regard to avoid any functional, 
financial or reputational repercussions.  
Business Continuity and Disaster Recovery Management  
A robust and time-tested Business Continuity’ and ‘Disaster Recovery’ Management plan has 
also become a necessity and need of the hour due to work-processes’ dependency on IT. 
The plan should not only be a ‘good plan’ on paper, but one that can be implemented in real 
life scenario as well with practical ease. To achieve this, the banks must conduct mock test 
of their BCP and DRP of their IT logistics, Data Centres, Communication channels at regular 
intervals  in  real  life  scenario  and  compare  the  ‘Recovery  Time  Objective  (RTO)’  and 
‘Recovery Point Objective (RPO)’ outputs of the mock runs with the expected planned RTO 
and RPO and self-judge the efficacy of the plan.  
Technology and Basel II implementation 
The implementation of Basel II with regard to Operational Risk is also an area where banks 
would like to focus more from the technology point of view. The capturing of the operational 
loss data and to correctly assess the capital charge on this account would be a challenging 
task as the same is very much a data and technology intensive endeavour. The banks may 
like to put in place an efficient operational risk management system for this purpose from not 
only the compliance perspective but from the perspective of the benefits that would accrue to 
the banks in the long run.  
4 
 BIS Review 43/2009
Governance and regulatory compliance 
To sustain growth and enhance efficiency, Governance and Regulatory Compliance are two 
issues which appear very critical as the rest of the business and IT activities of the institution 
emanate  from  them.  A  proper  handling  of  the  IT  Governance  issues  by  synergizing  the 
disparate ‘silos’ within the organisation would help in creating a robust system internally and 
provide a solid platform to prosper in the long run.  
Another  important  aspect  of  regulatory  compliance  is  the  reporting  returns  to  the  various 
wings of the regulator. In this regard implementation of XBRL (Extensible Business Reporting 
Language) in the banking and financial system is a welcome sign as it will not only help in 
regulatory compliance but also act as an effective tool for Management Information System 
(MIS) within the organisation. In general, XBRL reduces the cost of analyzing and reporting 
business  information,  helps  in  effective  MIS  and  increases  the  speed  and  efficiency  of 
business decisions.  
XBRL as we all know is a standard based electronic format for communication of business 
and  financial  data  which  provides  a  lot  of  benefits  in  the  preparation,  analysis  and 
communication  of  business  information  in  different  formats;  extraction  and  automatic 
exchange  of  the  financial  data;  and  enhancing  the  usability  and  transparency  of  financial 
information reported under existing accounting standards. This is helpful in preparation of not 
only  financial  statements  like  balance  sheet,  profit  and  loss  accounts,  flow  of  funds  or 
financial  disclosures, etc.  but  includes  any  type  of  financial  reporting,  like  Basel  II  system, 
statutory reporting, regulatory or supervisory reporting systems. 
Future prospects and way forward 
The  downturn  in  the  BFSI  sector  overseas  may  prove  to  be  an  advantage  for  the  Indian 
financial  system  as  availability  of  highly  skilled  people  at  a  reasonable  cost  in  view  of 
employment cuts abroad may propel India for high speed growth in all the sectors. The IT-
BPO industry is expected to grow at a reasonable rate of around 16 per cent in India. This 
opportunity  may  churn  out  another  set  of  dynamic  entrepreneurs  and  intrapreneurs  (term 
coined  by  Gifford  Pinchot)  who  would  lead  the  march  for  business  transformation  and 
provide opportunities for sustained growth of the financial system.  
For Indian banks and financial institutions in India the issue is not of pruning IT programs but 
making  these  more  cost  effective  and  revenue  generating.  India’s  value  proposition  in  the 
financial sector I believe will continue to be strong and even in the current context IT may 
provide  support  in  the  re-structuring  of  the  work-processes,  products  and  may  be  the 
institution itself, thereby fulfilling the growth sustenance objectives of the institutions. 
This period also provide excellent opportunities and avenues for the banks and the financial 
institutions to reach out to the people in the rural and semi-urban areas and bring them under 
the fold of our banking and financial system. The percentage of no-frills account holders and 
coverage of people under the banking umbrella is still miniscule. This prospect in fact throws 
a lot of opportunities for the technology driven initiatives to expand the coverage of the Indian 
banking  and  financial  system.  The  use  of  technology  like  Smart  card,  mobile  ATMs,  e-
Chowpals,  coverage  of  post-offices  under  electronic  payments  network  in  far  flung  areas, 
etc.  in  providing  financial  services  to  the  people  holds  a  tremendous  potential  for  the 
business growth of the financial institutions on one hand and the inclusive growth of India on 
the other.  
Another opportunity lies in the form of integration of the Indian banking and financial system 
with the Government’s e-Governance initiatives. The electronic benefits in this regard would 
be  passed  on  to  the  beneficiaries  directly  thereby  preventing  the  leakage  of  the  funds 
provided under various Government’s schemes like NREGA payments, etc. for the upliftment 
of the people. The collective efforts of the Government, banks, financial institutions and the 
IT  firms  to  provide  innovative  solutions  for  an  inclusive  growth  of  the  Indian  economy  will 
BIS Review 43/2009 
 5
certainly  go  a  long  way  not  only  for  the  sustained  growth  of  the  financial  system  but  the 
Indian economy as a whole.   
The role of technology providers becomes critical in enabling the users to use technology as 
a strategic tool in their business pursuits. I would like to mention a few fundamental tenets in 
regard to expectations from the technology providers.  
• 
The first relates to affordability. In times where margins of the user organizations are 
under pressure, affordability assumes significance. We have to recognize that unless 
there is a perceptible value addition to the user organization, investment in any area, 
including technology, will be looked at with a skeptical mind set.  
The second relates to availability. IT based operations have jerked the world out of a 
slumber  to  a  24  by  7  operational  cycle  for  most  businesses,  If  this  has  to  be 
sustained,  then  technology  providers  will  also  have  to  ensure  uninterrupted 
availability.  While  I  am  aware  that  this  is  something  that  is  currently  also  being 
provided for by most technology service providers, the need for this to become a way 
of  operations  of  these  entities  –  at  affordable  costs  for  customers  –  gains 
significance. With the death of geographical distances and the existence of safe and 
effective  network  based  communication,  juxtaposed  with  the  trend  of  most  user 
organizations migrating to off-site support, this aspect assumes criticality.  
Closely related to the first two is reliability. With the margins of IT companies coming 
under pressure, it is essential that Reliability of support provisions to customers does 
not  get  impacted  in  any  way.  I  am  fully  aware  that  Indian  Technology  Service 
providers  have  always  been  providing  services  with  a  high  level  of  operational 
reliability, but now is the time to redeem our efforts in this direction if sustenance with 
high growth has to continue for the technology services sector of the economy.  
The fourth pertains to adaptability which is something Indian companies have always 
excelled  in.  If  this  is  translated  as  the  business  objectives  of  technology  service 
providers as well, then it would be easy for businesses to realign to changing global 
scenarios  and  tailor  make  their  offerings  to  suit  the  changing  requirements  of  the 
target sections which they service.  
Finally,  convenience.  Today,  most  users 
for  operational  comfort  and 
convenience of operations in a highly challenging environment. The most important 
requirement relates to looking at the convenience of customers as the most important 
gospel for survival of the organization and has to be a mantra which has to percolate 
to all the employees in the organisation.  
look 
    To conclude, RBI’s stance has always been to progressively develop the Indian banking and 
financial system through various measures and focus on technology driven initiatives for an 
inclusive  growth.  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  urge  upon  all  the  banks,  financial 
institutions  and  the  technology  solution  providers  to  gear  up  to  face  the  new  challenges 
facing the financial system, some of which I shared with you today. I fully understand that this 
is an on-going process and the banks and financial institutions will continue to address these 
challenges in right earnest for the sustained growth of the financial system as a whole.   
I would like to thank the organizers once again for inviting me here to BANKing summit 2009 
to share some of my views on the theme. I wish the Summit great success. 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2009
