Jean-Claude Trichet: Restoring confidence in the global financial system 
Speech by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the annual 
meeting of the Research Institute of Japan, Tokyo, 17 April 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am honoured to be invited to address the Naigai Josei Chousa Kai.  
Today I would like to share with you my views on the roots of the current financial crisis, and 
the policy responses which aim to address it and to inspire a new sense of direction. The 
G-20, at its meeting a fortnight ago, sent a strong signal of reform that can provide the basis 
for a more resilient and stable global economy, in the period to come. Swift implementation 
of this important agenda will be key.  
I will explain the ECB’s response to the financial crisis. I will also note, en passant, how our 
policy  compares  with  those  of  other  major  central  banks.  In  my  view,  differences  in  crisis 
management  approaches  between  major  central  banks  reflect  differences  in  economic 
structures  rather  than  conflicting  views  on  fundamental  principles.  The  ECB’s  guiding 
principles are very simple and very  clear. In the medium term, the ECB’s policy is geared 
towards  preserving  price  stability  in  line  with  our  objective  and  in  so  doing,  creating  the 
conditions for enduring financial stability. This policy is essential to revive a resource that has 
become much too scarce over recent months: confidence in the future. 
Financial excesses – at the root of the financial crisis 
In the last ten years finance has seen a dramatic shift of focus away from facilitating trade 
and real investment to unfettered speculation and financial gambling. The assumption and 
hedging of genuine economic risk – the risk that companies face when engaged in product 
and process innovation – gradually ceased to be the main concern of international finance. 
Over  time,  the  creation  and  assumption  of  financial  risk  became  the  core  activity  of  the 
financial industry. This is the risk posed by arbitrage and deliberate exposure to asset price 
changes.  It  reached  a  point  where  it  seemed  that  the  financial  system  no  longer  existed 
primarily  to  hedge  existing  economic  risks,  but,  increasingly,  to  create  and  propagate  new 
risks on its own.  
In  the  past  two  decades  financial  innovation  and  liberalisation  have  made  important 
contributions  to  the  overall  productivity  of  our  economies.  But,  as  the  demand  for  finance 
increased throughout the 1990s, intermediaries had growing incentives to develop innovative 
funding techniques. The securitisation of assets, for example – the transformation of bilateral 
loans into tradable credit instruments – had tremendous ability to facilitate the diversification 
and efficient management of risk. As such, it was a powerful and useful tool.  
But securitisation also meant that banks and non-banks were able to sell loans – or place 
them off-balance sheet – immediately after they had been extended. This alchemy enabled 
lenders to expand the volume of their operations and conserve on capital. Fatally, the same 
mechanism  weakened  lenders’  incentives  for  prudent  screening  and  constant  monitoring. 
The resulting decline in underwriting standards and lending oversight was one of the main 
reasons for the excessive credit growth. 
The credit boom was exacerbated by three factors. First, ill-designed compensation schemes 
for loan managers reinforced the shortening of lenders’ horizons. In the eyes of many loan 
managers, the short-run gains from an expansion of credit outweighed the need to consider 
the potential losses that their institutions could incur over the longer term.  
BIS Review 48/2009 
 1
Second, the complex structures of securitised products made it difficult for holders to assess 
the  quality  of  the  underlying  investments.  This  perpetuated  the  boom,  as  it  took  time  for 
investors to discover and assess the underlying risks.  
Third,  international  macroeconomic  imbalances  reflected  a  chronic  shortage  of  savings  in 
some of the world’s advanced economies, made possible by a glut of savings in other parts 
of  the  world.  These  imbalances  resulted  from  unbalanced  international  macroeconomic 
policies  pursuing  an  inconsistent  set  of  goals.  These  imbalances  also  contributed  to  the 
augmentation of global liquidity, further fuelling credit and debt accumulation. In the period 
before  the  start  of  the  crisis,  the  oil  and  commodity  price  boom  further  fuelled  the 
international savings glut and aggravated major imbalances. 
The global response to the financial crisis  
The interplay of the forces and the facilitating factors that I have described so far went into 
reverse  in  the  middle  of  2007.  This  reversal  was  sudden,  but  not  unexpected.  When  the 
asset cycle turned, and many of the missing links in the financial chain were finally exposed, 
investors lost confidence. After years of high profits and exceptional risk tolerance, markets 
became extremely discriminating with regard to financial risks. Funding costs for borrowers 
increased.  The  spreads  on  the  debt  of  financial  companies  –  seen  as  being  clogged  with 
assets of dubious value – widened considerably. Uncertainty over the extent of credit write-
offs and the future earnings capacity of financial institutions took a heavy toll on the valuation 
of many revered names. 
Central banks around the globe had to spring into action in the summer of 2007 when there 
were signs of what appeared at the time to be a liquidity crisis. You might remember that the 
ECB  was  the  first  central  bank  to  embark  on  exceptional  decisions  as  early  as  9  August 
2007. The collapse of a major, highly interconnected financial player in mid-September 2008 
eventually  turned  a  very  large-scale  financial  market’s  correction  into  a  financial  panic. 
Throughout  the  difficult  months  that  followed,  central  banks  and  governments  around  the 
globe  took  unprecedented  and  bold  steps.  These  steps  were  aimed  at  restoring  financial 
market functioning and the flow of credit, and at ensuring that our banks have the capital and 
the  liquidity  necessary  to  discharge  their  critical  function  even  in  an  acute  economic 
downturn. 
Before going into detail, allow me to say that the crisis has brought out the best in terms of 
international  cooperation.  Leading  central  banks  around  the  globe,  including  the  Bank  of 
Japan  and  the  ECB,  have  cooperated  intimately  to  alleviate  financing  strains  in  interbank 
markets.  Governor  Shirakawa  and  I  had  numerous  useful  exchanges  of  views  on  the 
sidelines  of  our  regular  meetings  at  the  G-7,  G-20  levels  and,  more  importantly,  in  the 
occasion of the global economy meeting of central bank governors which takes place every 
two months in Basel. In the language of game theory, one could say that major central banks 
are closely cooperating to deliver the best possible outcome for the global economy. 
Similarly, the outcome of the G-20 meeting a fortnight ago has confirmed that governments 
can  agree  on  a  future  course  for  policy  that  is  based  on  unity  of  purpose  and  shared 
principles of action. Decisive and immediate action is still required. In my view, progress on 
three fronts will be critical to restore confidence. Two are geared to the medium term; one is 
geared to the short term.  
First,  we  need  a  quantum  leap  in  the  breadth  and  authority  of  international  financial 
supervision  and  regulation.  Any  viable  and  effective  solution  will  necessarily  require 
broadening 
fragmentation  of  domestic  oversight 
arrangements. Second, lasting confidence can only be restored if the commitment to near-
term fiscal and monetary stimulus is backed by an equally strong and credible commitment to 
fiscal  sustainability  and  price  stability.  The  importance  of  this  point  cannot  be  overstated. 
Third, governments need to swiftly implement the far-reaching set of measures, designed to 
focus  and  overcoming 
the 
the 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2009
support  the  financial  system.  With  fellow  governors,  Governor  Shirakawa  has  convincingly 
argued  that  resolute  action  to  put  commercial  banks  in  a  healthy  situation  was  absolutely 
indispensable in the experience of Japan at the beginning of the millennium. In the absence 
of such action, there is a risk that fiscal stimulus packages will simply trickle away, leaving us 
burdened with the full load of outsized fiscal liabilities and with no prospect of a sustained 
economic recovery. 
How  far  has  Europe  advanced  on  these  issues?  With  regard  to  financial  supervision  and 
regulation,  the  European  Union  is  currently  preparing  important  decisions  along  the  lines 
recommended by the De Larosière report. Among other things, this report proposes a new 
system for macro-prudential supervision in which the General Council of the ECB would play 
an important role. There was certainly no lack of warnings – from many quarters – before the 
crisis. But no mechanism or institution existed to ensure that admonitions were followed by 
decisive and swift action. The new European system would assign the task of pre-emptive 
analysis and grant the necessary authority to put risk mitigation measures into practice. 
With  regard  to  the  appropriate  balance  between  near-term  stimulus  and  medium-term 
stability, the euro area clearly benefits from its medium-term stability-oriented framework. It is 
an invaluable anchor for private sector expectations, regarding both fiscal sustainability and 
price stability. Having proved its value in times of crisis, this framework has emerged even 
stronger than before. With regard to the overall support to the financial sector, I have been 
deeply impressed by the action plan drawn up by euro area governments and the European 
Commission within a short period of time. This action plan and its swift implementation has 
confounded the sceptics who had questioned the ability of euro area governments to act in a 
timely fashion in the event of a major economic crisis. Nevertheless, more action is urgently 
needed to entirely resolve the toxic asset problem. 
The ECB’s response to the financial crisis  
Let me now turn in more detail to the ECB’s management of the financial crisis. When the 
first  signs  of  liquidity  hoarding  by  banks  appeared  in  August  2007,  the  ECB  took  several 
measures to protect against a disorderly correction in credit. Banks were not only concerned 
about the volume of liquidity that they could secure at present, but also about the horizon at 
which  liquidity  was  expected  to  remain  available  to  them.  So  the  first  thing  we  did  was  to 
provide banks with an insurance against future liquidity shortfalls. We lengthened the liquidity 
horizon for banks by expanding the share of refinancing that was granted at maturities longer 
than  two  weeks.  This  “insurance  scheme”  encouraged  banks  to  maintain  those  lending 
relations  with  their  clients  that  are  central  to  Europe’s  financial  architecture.  At  the  same 
time, it helped bolster public confidence that banks would remain solvent.  
The financial panic that developed in mid-September 2008 marked a dramatic turning point. 
Interbank trading in the euro area and elsewhere came to a virtual halt. As cash-rich banks 
were unwilling or unable to lend to cash-deficient institutions, the ECB had to substitute for 
the missing interbank trading. We started to provide credit well above the levels that banks 
had absorbed to fulfil their reserve requirements in normal times.  
Since  October,  against  a  background  of  a  drastic  deterioration  in  global  conditions,  falling 
commodity  prices  and  rapidly  receding  inflationary  pressures,  the  ECB  has  stepped  up  its 
crisis resolution measures in an extraordinary effort to protect the functioning of our financial 
system and the stability of our economies.  
Again,  our  primary  concern  was  to  preserve  the  availability  of  credit  for  households  and 
companies  at  accessible  rates.  Under  our  new  “fixed-rate  full  allotment”  tender  procedure, 
banks have been granted access to essentially unlimited liquidity at our policy interest rate. 
To fully appreciate what this means, one should note that in normal times we auction a given 
amount of central bank credit and let competition among bidders determine the interest rate 
at  which  that  credit  will  become  available  to  the  banking  system  as  a  whole.  But,  as  the 
BIS Review 48/2009 
 3
demand  for  liquidity  by  individual  institutions  has  expended  abnormally  and  markets  have 
ceased  to  perform  their  allocative  function,  we  have  turned  that  practice  around.  We  now 
determine the lending rate and we stand ready to fill any shortage of liquidity that might occur 
at  that  interest  rate.  We  currently  surrogate  the  market  in  both  its  allocative  and  price 
discovery functions.  
We have also considerably lengthened the list of eligible assets that banks can pledge as 
collateral,  so  as  to  ease  banks’  balance  sheet  constraints  and  facilitate  the  liquefaction  of 
bank assets for which markets could find no price. The intention was to encourage banks to 
extend new credit or continue rolling over maturing loans.  
Traditionally,  the  number  of  counterparties  that  are  eligible  to  take  part  in  our  refinancing 
operations –  both  ordinary  and  long-term  –  has  been  the  largest  among  the  major  central 
banks  that  are  most  directly  comparable  to  the  Eurosystem.  This  structural  feature  of  our 
operational framework has been instrumental in the first stages of the crisis in ensuring that 
all relevant intermediaries could be granted easy access to liquidity. The recent changes to 
our  operational  framework  have  expanded  the  number  further.  Between  July  2007  and 
March 2009, counterparties have increased from 1676 to 2136.  
We have granted unlimited access to central bank credit at a decreasing cost. Our key policy 
rate has been reduced by 300 basis points since the exacerbation of the crisis in the autumn 
of last year. As I speak, the Eurosystem provides refinancing to all commercial banks that 
present  eligible  collateral  at  a  rate  of  1.25%.  Sound  and  creditworthy  banks  can  secure 
overnight  credit  at  an  interest  rate  that  is  significantly  lower,  today  0.8%,  something  never 
seen before in the entire post-war history of European monetary affairs. Being able to borrow 
at  such  low  costs,  banks  can  grant  credit  to  other  banks  and  to  non-bank  borrowers  at 
conditions  that  are  very  favourable  by  historical  and  international  standards.  For  example, 
the 6-month and 12-month euro interbank offered rate – benchmarks that euro area banks 
widely use to reset floating-rate loans to households and firms – have reached levels that are 
lower than the corresponding rates for contracts denominated in dollar and British pounds. 
This  underscores  that  in  current  circumstances  international  comparisons  of  policy  rates 
alone  do  not  provide  all  the  pertinent  information  about  the  effective  credit  conditions 
prevailing in single markets.  
Our  measures  to  support  credit  have  resulted  in  a  sharp  expansion  of  the  Eurosystem’s 
balance sheet. As banks’ usage of central bank credit soared at the height of the crisis late 
last year, the value of our operations grew quickly. Between June 2007 and March 2009 the 
size  of  our  balance  sheet  increased  by  close  to  €600  billion.  Since  the  end  of  September 
2008 the growth in the overall size of our operations has been 40%. These measures have 
likely  prevented  the  whole  credit  market  from  seizing  up.  Since  then,  the  volume  has 
declined somewhat, as banks have been more conservative in bidding for central bank credit 
and strains in the money market have eased to a certain extent. 
The  ECB  has  so  far  concentrated  its  non-standard  measures  on  commercial  banks’ 
refinancing, mainly because of the nature of the euro area financial structures. As compared 
to the United States, which have primarily a market-based financial system, the euro area is 
very  largely  bank-centred.  Accordingly,  in  a  euro  area  context,  guaranteeing  firms  and 
households steady access to credit largely means preserving the functioning of the banking 
system. In our economy, banks play such a dominant role that non-standard measures need 
to  be  implemented  –  first  and  foremost  –  through  the  intervention  and  with  the  active 
participation of banks. This is why I have sometimes referred to our non-standard measures 
as  those  of  enhanced  credit  support.  They  aim  at  supporting  banks  in  providing  credit  to 
firms and households on an ongoing basis. 
This goes a long way towards explaining events in the past. As regards the possible further 
additional  non-standard  measures,  I  have  been  very  clear.  On  behalf  of  the  Governing 
Council, during my last press conference in Frankfurt: We will decide in our next monetary 
policy  decision  Governing  Council  meeting  on  7  May.  And  it  is  on  7  May  that  I  will  make 
4 
 BIS Review 48/2009
public  the  decision  of  the  Governing  Council.  At  this  stage,  as  a  porte-parole  of  the 
Governing Council, I think it is important not to create or encourage expectations. Be sure 
that what we will decide will fully take into account the financing structure of the euro area 
economy and will be fully in line with our medium term strategy. 
When taking all our decisions, we are inspired by our remit to provide a solid nominal anchor 
for the economic system. As you know, the ECB’s quantitative definition of price stability is a 
key  element  of  its  monetary  policy  strategy.  We  define  price  stability  as  a  year-on-year 
increase  in  consumer  prices  of  below  2%  over  the  medium  term.  In  2003  the  ECB’s 
Governing Council clarified that, within its definition, it aims to keep the inflation rate close to 
2% over the medium term. This clarification was aimed at confirming the robust anchor for 
long-term inflation expectations that the ECB had provided since the setting up of the euro.  
In the first ten years since the introduction of the euro, the ECB’s quantitative definition of 
price  stability  has  proved  to  be  an  invaluable  asset,  guarding  against  undesirably  high 
inflation  and  against  deflation.  Long-term  inflation  expectations  in  the  euro  area,  whether 
based on surveys or extracted from financial indicators, have been and continue to be firmly 
anchored at levels consistent with our definition of price stability.  
Conclusions  
More than ever, in the present very demanding circumstances, confidence is key. The global 
economy was hit in mid-September 2008 by an unprecedented sudden loss of confidence. It 
was perhaps the first time in economic history that a single adverse event was able, in just a 
few  days,  to  have  a  simultaneous  adverse  effect  on  all  private  economic  agents  in  every 
economy,  industrialised  and  emerging.  We  are  in  uncharted  waters,  and  the  risk  of  the 
sudden emergence of economic and financial phenomena and unprecedented behaviour on 
the part of economic agents remains.  
Public  authorities,  executive  branches,  and  central  banks  must  do  all  they  can  to  restore, 
preserve and foster confidence among households and corporations in order to pave the way 
for  sustainable  prosperity.  This  calls  for  a  measured  response  to  changing  conditions.  We 
must  maintain  the  appropriate  balance  between  the  need  to  take  immediate  action  that  is 
commensurate  with  the  gravity  of  today’s  situation,  and  the  equally  essential  obligation  to 
return  to  a  path  that  is  sustainable  in  the  medium  to  long  term.  Confidence  today  relies 
equally upon the audacity of our immediate decision and upon the soundness and credibility 
of  our  exit  strategies.  Any  ambiguity  in  our  medium  term  policy  direction  would  delay  the 
return  of  sustainable  prosperity,  because  they  would  undermine  confidence,  which  is  the 
most precious ingredient in the present circumstances. We will continue serve our 329 million 
fellow citizens as a solid anchor of stability and confidence. 
BIS Review 48/2009 
 5
