Andres Lipstok: Estonia’s economic environment and central bank 
activities 
Speech  by  Mr  Andres  Lipstok,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Estonia  (Eesti  Pank),  at  the  the 
presentation  of  Bank  of  Estonia’s  2008  Annual  Report  to  the  Riigikogu,  Tallinn,  11  June 
2009. 
 Dear Riigikogu, 
Thank you for the possibility to present you Eesti Pank's 2008 Annual Report. I am going to 
start with a brief retrospect of the Estonian economic environment and then address issues 
concerning the activities of Eesti Pank. 
The Estonian economic environment in 2008 and 2009 
2008 was an exceptional year in the world economy. Developed economies have not faced 
the  risk  that  banking  and  financial  markets  could  collapse  and  the  global  financial  system 
stop  functioning  since  the  beginning  1930s.  But  the  financial  crisis,  which  was  caused  by 
previous years' incorrect decisions, made this a very likely scenario. In the final months of the 
past year major banks were too afraid to lend money to each other and trading with private-
sector bonds nearly ceased. Loss of confidence in financial markets, loan losses amounting 
to  3-4  billion  dollars  and  a  sharp  decline  in  crediting  the  private  sector  had  an  immediate 
impact on global trade, investment and economic growth. Global trade contracted 17% in the 
fourth quarter of 2008 and at the beginning of this year. 
Major  central  banks  and  governments  have  taken  unprecedented  steps  to  alleviate  the 
economic  situation.  The  Federal  Government  and  the  central  bank  of  the  USA  have 
channelled  funds  worth  over  787  billion  dollars  into  banking  and  the  private  sector.  In  the 
European Union, the fiscal stimulus amounts to 1.8% of GDP and to 225 billion euro. Banks 
have received direct support and state guarantees in the amount of 393 billion euro. Such 
massive intervention has put brakes on the rate of recession. 
The  past  couple  of  months'  stabilisation  in  the  global  economy  has  come  at  a  high  price. 
Major economies face rapidly expanded fiscal deficits and central banks' balance sheets and 
total volume of base money have promptly increased. Therefore it cannot be said for sure 
whether the current "green shoots" refer to a new growth cycle. Only structural reforms and 
maintaining confidence in fiscal and monetary policy can help the economy out of the crisis 
on a more permanent basis. 
When  speaking  about  this  year's  forecasts,  the  EU  economy  as  a  whole  is  expected  to 
undergo  a  4%  recession.  Small  economies  which  are  more  dependent  on  exports  and 
international capital flows suffer from the crisis disproportionally more. Sweden and Finland, 
our close neighbours, can expect a recession of up to 4.7%. As we know, the global financial 
crisis and the collapse of markets caused serious difficulties to several new Member States.  
It is clear the events that took place at the end of the last and at the beginning of this year 
were real challenges for the Estonian monetary and financial system, testing their resilience 
and  ability  to  adjust  to  the  changing  external  environment.  Today  I  dare  to  look  at  the 
situation with moderate optimism and repeat what has already been said in March: Estonia 
has all the possibilities of successfully passing through the crisis. 
BIS Review 91/2009 
 1
Estonia's monetary policy and financial stability in 2008 
Turning to the tasks of Eesti Pank, I would like to start with an overview of the functioning of 
the  monetary  policy  framework.  The  objective  of  Eesti  Pank,  member  of  the  European 
System of Central Banks, is to ensure price stability in Estonia. To this end, we rest on the 
currency  peg  to  the  euro,  the  currency  board  arrangement  and  the  EU  exchange  rate 
mechanism ERM II. The success of this system is confirmed by the slowdown in the price 
rise  which  started  in  2008,  and  the  halt  in  the  growth  rate  of  consumer  prices  in  recent 
months. Looking ahead, Eesti Pank forecasts the price level to decline somewhat in both this 
and next year. It is clear the Estonian monetary policy or the monetary policy framework will 
not and must not be changed. The exchange rate of the Estonian kroon will remain as it is 
and we will accede to the euro area at the current exchange rate. I would also like to stress 
that price stability is one of the most important factors supporting economic growth. 
The second main objective of Eesti Pank is to support the stability of the financial system, 
especially the credibility of the banking system. Similarly to choices made in monetary policy, 
Eesti Pank has over the years proceeded from clear and comprehensible principles also in 
banking. We have firmly supported the common banking market of the EU and the Nordic-
Baltic  region.  In  addition,  we  have  emphasised  the  relevance  of  the  capitalisation  and 
liquidity  of  the  banks  operating  here.  Eesti  Pank  kept  the  obligatory  minimum  capital 
adequacy ratio at the level of 10% and increased the reserve requirement to 15% of the total 
liabilities of a bank.  
Against this background I dare to say that so far the banking sector has coped well with the 
crisis. The average capital adequacy ratio of the Estonian banking sector is currently above 
22%.  The  capitalisation  of  the  subsidiaries  of  the  banks  operating  in  Estonia  is  absolutely 
sufficient  to  cope  with  loan  losses  markedly  bigger  than  the  current  estimated  2%  level 
without including additional capital. The credibility of the banks operating in Estonia is thus 
not threatened by a possible increase in the share of so-called bad loans in the loan portfolio 
in the course of this year compared to the current 5.2%. 
The integration of the banking system with the Scandinavian and European markets, which is 
one  of  the  most  important  factors  supporting  stabilisation,  is  another  issue.  The  banking 
groups operating in Estonia are able to manage capital and liquidity in a flexible way at group 
level. The integration of the banking system consists in the readiness of banking groups to 
promptly channel money flows to various subsidiaries and branches according to need. 
The  integration  of  banking  is  supported  by  cooperation  in  the  Nordic-Baltic  region.  I  am 
convinced the daily information exchange and cooperation agreements of our region set an 
example of ensuring financial stability for the entire European Union. In the final months of 
2008, Sweden initiated support schemes, which have had a very positive impact on banking 
groups as a whole, i.e., national support measures have been implemented from group level 
also on subsidiaries and branches. In this context, Estonia has in the EU actively supported 
the principle that the implementation of rescue packages must not discriminate against other 
Member States. 
2009 economic policy priorities in Estonia 
Now  I  would  like  to  say  a  few  words  about  the  current  monetary  and  economic  policy 
situation and the most important priorities for 2009. 
By  now  it  is  clear  that  the  Estonian  enterprises  and  households  have  thoroughly  changed 
their behaviour and expectations over the past half a year. In this respect, a big part of the 
adjustment process has already taken place and Estonia's primary macro vulnerabilities have 
considerably  decreased.  The  current  account,  i.e.,  the  difference  between  investment  and 
savings, has practically balanced and the financing of the economy's current expenditure is 
ensured by current income. In addition, Estonia has no problems with financing its external 
2 
 BIS Review 91/2009
debt.  Companies  and  people  in  Estonia  have  taken  serious  steps  to  pave  way  for  getting 
through the global crisis and recovering growth. 
Therefore, the state needs to implement some important macro-level objectives to support 
the recovery of economic growth. Here I mean, above all, the readiness to join the euro area 
as well as medium-term and long-term stability of fiscal policy. 
In the current situation, accession to the euro area is Estonia's utmost short-term objective. 
The  adoption  of  the  euro  will  ensure  the  stability  of  the  money  used  in  Estonia  and  is 
extremely  important  for  further  reinforcement  of  the  banking  system  and  the  investment 
climate.  It  can  be  said  the  clear  perspective  of  joining  the  euro  area  is  an  absolutely 
necessary precondition at the national economy level for the permanent recovery of growth. 
Declining inflation has created all the possibilities in Estonia to meet the Maastricht criteria by 
end-2009, which makes it possible to join the euro area on 1 January 2011 at the latest. 
In this context and from the point of view of  monetary and financial system stability, fiscal 
policy has two tasks in 2009. First of all it must be made sure that the current account deficit, 
which cannot be avoided in the prevailing economic environment, remains below 3% of GDP 
both  this  year  and  in  2010.  In  order  to  achieve  this,  Eesti  Pank  is  of  the  opinion  that  in 
addition  to  the  steps  taken  in  February,  this  year's  fiscal deficit  needs  to  be  reduced  by  a 
further 6.5 billion kroons. 
In  addition  to  fiscal  consolidation,  it  is  important  to  ensure  long-term  fiscal  sustainability. 
Once  the  acute  crisis  is  over,  the  first  thing  to  do  is  to  achieve  fiscal  balance.  Then  it  is 
necessary  to  restore  the  public  sector's  extensive  fiscal  reserves.  The  national  budget 
strategy  recently  approved  by  the  government  creates  a  necessary  macro  framework 
according to which the budget should reach balance by 2011. Eesti Pank is of the opinion the 
new  strategy  is  a  timely  and  ambitious  document  which  requires  cooperation  also  at 
Riigikogu level. 
Taking  into  account  that  government  expenditure  as  a  ratio  to  GDP  has  soared,  budget 
adjustment  must  be  done  primarily  on  the  expenditure  side.  Tax  revenue  increases  may 
support  the adjustment,  but  they  should  not  play  the  main  role.  If  only  tax  advances  were 
used  to  finance  costs  at  the  current  level,  Estonia's  long-term  economic  growth  would  be 
imperilled. Also, we support the principles of the current tax policy, according to which the 
share of indirect and pollution taxes would increase on account of direct taxes. 
I would like to emphasise once again that the measures taken over the past half a year in 
both the public and the private sector have improved Estonia's ability to exit the crisis. This is 
confirmed by the fact that most of the rating agencies as well as the IMF's recent mission to 
Estonia  have  expressed  positive  assessments  of  Estonia's  economic  outlooks.  To  support 
economic  growth,  it  is  necessary  to  reinforce  the  principles  of  open  economy  and  market 
flexibility and to ensure the stability of the national economy. In order to meet these goals, 
the best state support is the resumption of investment in the private sector and using the new 
possibilities that accompany every crisis. 
Thank you for your attention! 
BIS Review 91/2009 
 3
