José Manuel González-Páramo: Beyond the financial crisis – some 
issues on the future of central banking 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the Inaugural Conference of “Cátedra Fundación Ramón Areces 
de Distribución Comercial” at the University of Oviedo, Oviedo, 19 June 2009. 
 1.  
Introduction 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  participate  in  the  Inaugural  Conference  of  the  “Cátedra 
Fundación Ramón Areces de Distribución Comercial” here in Oviedo. I am very grateful to 
the  organiser  –  Alfonso  Novales  –  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  address  this  audience 
today and to share with you some reflections on the current financial crisis and the role of 
central banks in responding to it.  
We are currently experiencing one of the deepest and most complex crises witnessed by the 
world  for  many  decades.  The  turmoil  stemming  from  a  relatively  small  segment  of  the  US 
mortgage  market  (the  sub-prime  segment)  has  developed  over  time  into  a  global  crisis 
affecting a number of economies and markets all over the world. The global dimension of the 
crisis as well as its complexity have posed a number of challenges for policy makers, forcing 
them to introduce exceptional measures and use innovative modalities of intervention.  
In  particular,  increasing  awareness  that  the  current  crisis  has  the  potential  to  jeopardise 
systemic  financial  stability  and  undermine  macroeconomic  stability  worldwide  has  led  to 
public authorities developing a common understanding of the causes of the crisis and of the 
concerted actions needed to address them. Thus, a high degree of cooperation among public 
authorities  both  at  national  and  international  level  has  become  a  hallmark  of  public 
interventions throughout the current crisis.  
A  highly  symbolic  episode  of  international  policy  cooperation  during  the  crisis  was  the 
announcement  of  a  coordinated  interest  rate  cut  by  the  ECB  and  five  other  major  central 
banks (the Bank of Canada, the Bank of England, the Federal Reserve, Sveriges Riksbank 
and  the  Swiss  National  Bank)  in  October  2008.  This  coordinated  interest  rate  cut  was 
unprecedented  by  historical  standards  and  was  interpreted  as  a  sign  of  the  strong 
commitment  of 
the 
macroeconomic implications of the financial market turmoil.  
International  cooperation  among  central  banks  has  also  been  remarkable  in  the  area  of 
liquidity management. First, through enhanced information sharing and collective monitoring 
of  market  developments  and,  later  on,  by  means  of  coordinated  steps  to  provide  liquidity, 
central  banks  have  cooperated  from  the  start  of  the  crisis  to  guarantee  the  smooth 
functioning of global money markets and provide support to the international banking system. 
The  first  initiative  in  this  direction  was  the  agreement  in  December  2007  between  the 
Eurosystem  and  the  US  Federal  Reserve  to  grant  loans  in  US  dollars  to  euro  area 
counterparties in connection with the Fed’s Term Auction Facility.  
The need to strengthen liquidity provision in order to address the global liquidity squeeze and 
ease pressures in international money markets has also led to central banks adjusting their 
operational frameworks in order to increase their effectiveness and expanding their ability to 
reach  markets  under  stress.  This  has  resulted  in  a  certain  degree  of  international 
convergence of the operational frameworks. As part of the adjustments to their operational 
frameworks, some central banks have extended lending to institutions other than depository 
banks, including non-bank financial institutions and even directly to the real sector.  
international  central  banking  community 
to  addressing 
the 
BIS Review 78/2009 
 1
Direct lending to the real sector represents a significant deviation from the traditional central 
banking practice of using banks as the main channel of transmission of central bank liquidity. 
But this is not the only area in which the crisis has prompted central bankers to reconsider 
their existing practices. The issue of the optimal response of monetary policy to asset price 
bubbles is also being re-examined, with the prevailing view – postulating that a central bank’s 
policy  interest  rate  is  too  blunt  an  instrument  to  address  bubbles  –  coming  under  much 
stricter scrutiny that it has being subjected to in the past decade. 
Finally, the need to strengthen the role of central banks in preserving financial stability has 
also become the focus of the policy debate as efforts are made to address the causes of the 
crisis. The recognition that market failures as well as regulatory and supervisory deficiencies 
are  at  the  root  of  the  crisis  has  prompted  the  relevant  public  and  private  fora  to  make 
significant  efforts  to  identify  weaknesses  in  the  international  financial  sector  and  develop 
measures  to  restore  its  smooth  functioning.  In  the  case  of  Europe,  there  is  increasing 
concern that the current prudential framework based on national regulatory and supervisory 
regimes  cannot  address  the  many  challenges  arising  from  the  activities  of  large,  complex 
and highly interdependent financial institutions operating across borders. 
To  sum  up,  the  current  crisis  is  likely  to  bring  important  changes  for  the  future  of  the 
economic and financial systems in which we live. These include changes in the nature of the 
relationship and degree of coordination among the different policies and public authorities, 
revisions to the regulatory and supervisory domains as well as reforms of the international 
financial architecture. Therefore, we are likely to witness a number of institutional changes 
that  will  bring  about  a  new  environment  for  policy-making  in  a  number  of  areas  related  to 
central banking.  
A new environment for central banking? 
2.  
I should like to share with you some thoughts on this potential new environment. In order to 
do so, I will organise my intervention around six specific issues among those that in my view 
deserve particular attention: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
Should we increase policy coordination at the domestic level? 
Should there be more international monetary policy coordination? 
Should we see more international convergence in liquidity frameworks? 
Should central banks increase direct lending to the real economy? 
Should asset prices being given more weight in monetary policy considerations? 
Should central banks be more involved in supervision? 
More domestic policy coordination? 
2.1  
As  we  have  seen,  policy  responses  both  at  the  global  and  the  European  level  have  been 
characterised by an increasing degree of coordination. A natural question, therefore, seems 
to be whether in the future greater policy coordination at the level of the euro area or the EU 
should be warranted. Given the existence of the single currency in the euro area, I will first 
focus on the coordination among national fiscal policies. 
On  the  fiscal  side,  a  key  challenge  for  the  future  is  to  prevent  the  financial  crisis  from 
eventually undermining the sustainability and credibility of public finances. What can we do to 
prevent this from happening? At this point, let me reiterate that the Stability and Growth Pact 
already  provides  a  coordination  device  for  fiscal  policies  and,  in  particular,  provides  peer 
pressure mechanisms for sound and sustainable public finances. It provides the appropriate 
framework for the conduct and coordination of fiscal policies in good times and also in bad 
times. 
2 
 BIS Review 78/2009
The challenge at times of crisis is, thus, to use this existing mechanism to the best effect. To 
put it rather bluntly, we should not tinker with the keel just because the wind is strong; the 
Pact is already flexible enough to allow room for the policy to adjust without undermining the 
foundations  for  a  sustainable  path.  Indeed,  EU  countries  are  already  facing  considerable 
long-term challenges from the costs associated with population ageing that should be borne 
in mind when considering short-term demand policies. If the starting position is less strong, 
an  inappropriate  short-term  response  may  make  us  literally  “age  faster”  by  exposing  even 
more strongly the need for adjustments to cope with the long-term challenges. Countries with 
large deficit and/or debt levels may be particularly vulnerable in this regard. 
Unfortunately,  many  euro  area  countries  entered  the  financial  crisis  and  the  economic 
downturn with unnecessarily weak fiscal balances, having missed the opportunity presented 
by past years’ revenue windfalls to consolidate their budgets. While this is never a popular 
message even in normal times, it still deserves mention so that the mistakes can be avoided 
once  the  crisis  has  passed.  Indeed  one  of  the  fiscal  policy  errors  prior  to  and  including 
2000-01 was to mistakenly interpret budgetary improvements in good times as evidence of 
structural improvements, which were often used to motivate spending increases or tax cuts. 
On  a  positive  note,  we  can  say  that  while  compliance  with  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact 
during its first ten years has been somewhat uneven, the EU’s overall fiscal performance in 
terms of avoiding high budget deficits and the build-up of government debt was much better 
than in the decades preceding the Pact.1 Indeed, some of the EU countries that comply with 
the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  can  now  take  advantage  of  their  relatively  large  automatic 
stabilisers  to  do  much  of  the  work.  These  accomplishments  should  be  a  guiding  beacon. 
Sound  fiscal  policies  with  a  strong  keel  provide  the  basis  for  stability  and  the  necessary 
conditions for good long-term growth in the challenging seas ahead. 
One additional dimension of policy coordination in the euro area is that between the single 
monetary  policy  and  the  national  fiscal  policies  of  the  Member  States.  In  this  respect,  the 
institutional set-up of European Monetary Union consists of a clear and efficient assignment 
of  objectives  and  instruments  to  the  different  authorities,  together  with  a  strict  division  of 
responsibilities. The ECB must focus on its primary mandate of delivering medium-term price 
stability  under  conditions  of  full  independence.  Fiscal  policy  must  focus  on  its  traditional 
objectives  related  to  allocation,  redistribution  and  stabilisation  (to  varying  extents),  while 
contributing to maintaining an environment of macroeconomic stability. 
Of course, in setting monetary policy the ECB takes into account the fiscal policy stance, as 
one of the factors which contribute to the outlook for price stability over the medium term. It 
goes  without  saying  that  an  open  exchange  of  views  and  information  among  the  different 
authorities is welcome if it enhances a common understanding of desirable objectives and 
strategies to pursue them. 
However, there cannot be any scope for active ex-ante coordination of fiscal and monetary 
policies. Indeed, a commitment to ex ante coordination between fiscal and monetary policies 
may blur the responsibilities of the various authorities at the expense of accountability and 
may  ultimately  reduce  their  incentives  to  pursue  their  objectives.  Thus,  the  current 
macroeconomic policy framework in the euro area based on a separation of responsibilities 
is the most appropriate to ensure sustained and non-inflationary economic growth. 
More international monetary policy coordination? 
2.2  
While cooperation in the field of liquidity management on an unprecedented scale has been 
certainly  one  of  the  hallmarks  of  public  responses  to  the  current  turmoil,  another  example 
without precedents of central bank coordination was the decision by the ECB and five other 
                                                 
1   See the article entitled “Ten years of the Stability and Growth Pact”, ECB Monthly Bulletin, October 2008. 
BIS Review 78/2009 
 3
transmitted  around  the  globe  almost  simultaneously.  Through  the 
major central banks to ease global monetary conditions on 8 October 2008. Commentators 
and observers have wondered whether this concerted policy decision may be the beginning 
of a new era of increased international monetary policy coordination in response to economic 
and financial globalisation. 
It is important to stress that this coordinated interest rate cut was taken in a specific context 
and  with  a  specific  objective.  There  was  extraordinary  uncertainty  at  the  time  about  the 
economic outlook and strong evidence that upside risks to price stability had diminished at 
the global level. The coordinated cut addressed the need to respond to a common shock that 
was  being 
joint 
communication, the international central banking community provided a signal of its strong 
commitment to responding to the macroeconomic implications of the financial market turmoil. 
There  is  no  doubt  that  over  the  past  three  decades  the  trade,  economic  and  financial 
linkages among the different regions of the work have grown tighter, and of course policy-
makers  take  this  into  account  in  the  design  of  their  policies.  However,  when  talking  about 
international  policy  coordination,  it  is  important  to  define  clearly  what  we  mean.  Policy 
coordination does not mean, of course, that all central banks need to adopt the same policy 
stance 
for  domestic 
macroeconomic  prudence  nor  weaken  the  commitment  of  each  central  bank  to  its 
institutional objective. 
Indeed, differences in cyclical positions, structures of the economies (e.g. in terms of market 
rigidities and frictions, sectoral leverage, financial systems, etc.), monetary policy institutional 
frameworks as well as shocks hitting the economy almost necessarily lead to differences in 
deciding  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  stance.  Thus,  systematic  monetary  policy 
coordination may eventually come at the cost of weakening a central bank’s commitment to 
its institutional objective. 
For  central  banks,  international  policy  coordination  is  better  understood  as  the  continuous 
cooperation  and  exchange  of  information  at  both  staff  and  decision-making  levels,  shared 
experienced  and  mutual  understanding  and  trust,  which  very  much  lies  on  the  consensus 
among central banks that monetary policies geared towards domestic price stability, sound 
public  finances  and  flexible  economic  structures  do  create  the  conditions  for  long-term 
economic growth and financial stability. 
the  entire  world  and  certainly 
it  cannot  be  a  surrogate 
for 
More international convergence in liquidity frameworks? 
2.3  
Since August 2007 central banks have responded in a variety of ways to the financial market 
disruptions,  reflecting  differences  in  the  extent  to  which  markets  have  been  hit  by  the 
turbulences,  and  differences  in  the  design  of  their  operational  frameworks.  However,  in 
general all major central banks stepped up their intermediation role with a view to addressing 
the  liquidity  squeeze  and,  in  doing  so,  they  showed  a  certain  degree  of  convergence  in 
operating procedures. In particular, central banks: 
• 
Pursued more active reserve management, reassuring banks of their orderly access 
to overnight funds and increasing the frequency of their operations. 
Increased the supply of funds (notably long-term); expanded to varying degrees the 
definition of collateral accepted in collateralised lending operations; provided access 
to collateralised lending to a large number of counterparties. 
Adapted tender procedures for open market operations in the direction of price rather 
than quantity-based schemes, akin to those used for standing facilities. 
As  the  turbulence  developed,  central  banks  strengthened  their  cooperation  through 
enhanced communication and collective market monitoring and coordinated actions 
to provide liquidity. In this respect, a significant number of swap lines between central 
   4 
 BIS Review 78/2009
banks  have  been  set  up  to  facilitate  the  distribution  of  foreign  currency  liquidity  to 
domestic counterparties. 
Overall, one lesson we can draw from the turmoil is that there are certain key operational 
features  that  facilitate  the  implementation  of  monetary  policy  under  stress.  In  particular, 
central banks are better positioned to distribute reserves effectively —  when the interbank 
lending  is  impaired  —  if  they  are  capable  of  providing  access  to  collateralised  lending 
operations  on  a  large  scale  to  a  wide  set  of  counterparties  and  against  a  broad  range  of 
collateral. 
Yet, a very important issue, on which I myself have no clear answer, is how – not so much 
whether but rather how – this convergence in the understanding of the “optimal” features of 
the operational framework under stress, should be reflected by the design of the operational 
framework  in  the  steady  state.  For  this,  we  need,  in  particular,  to  develop  a  better 
understanding  of  the  optimal  mix  between  private  market  and  central  bank  intermediation 
and we need to carefully liaise with supervisory bodies. 
I  should  clarify  that  when  I  say  “optimal”  in  this  context,  I  do  not  mean  “uniform”.  To  the 
extent  that  monetary  policy  strategies,  central  banks’  status  vis-à-vis  governments,  and 
certain  specific  features  of  domestic  financial  systems  persist,  the  optimal  liquidity 
frameworks of each country or monetary union should reflect such country or area-specific 
factors. 
More scope for direct lending to the real economy? 
2.4  
An additional issue that has come to the fore during the present crisis, especially in the last 
few months, concerns the extent to which central banks may engage in direct lending to the 
real  economy.  This  is  not  a  purely  theoretical  subject,  as  the  recent  establishment  by  the 
Federal  Reserve  System  of  several  liquidity  facilities  directed  to  non-banks  shows  (for 
instance, those directed to money market funds and issuers of commercial paper). 
In  principle,  the  scope  for  direct  lending  by  the  central  bank  to  the  real  economy  should 
depend on the extent to which the malfunctioning of the money and credit markets distorts 
bank lending and prevents aggregate households and businesses from obtaining credit. In 
that sense, some central banks have decided to bypass the banking system and start lending 
to  households  and  firms  directly  for  the  sake  of  preserving  the  orderly  functioning  of  the 
economy. 
In  practice,  even  abstracting  from  possible  legal  constraints  (e.g.  prohibition  of  monetary 
financing to the state in the European Monetary Union), there are several issues that central 
banks  must  consider  before  deciding  on  the  appropriateness  for  their  “own”  economies  of 
providing direct financing to the real sector. I stress the term “own” because this is one of 
those cases in which there is no unique answer. Whether or not a central bank engages in 
direct  lending  will  very  much  depend  on  a  number  of  considerations  referring  to  structural 
features  of  the  economy,  the  gravity  of  the  crisis,  the  state  of  the  financial  system  and  a 
number of institutional factors, notably those governing the relationship between the central 
bank and the government. 
For  instance,  one  apparently  straightforward  observation  is  that  the  need  to  provide  direct 
credit to the economy at times of dysfunctions in banking activity is likely to depend on the 
relative  importance  of  the  banking  sector  for  financial  intermediation.  Following  this 
argument, one may argue that in a bank-based economy there may be relatively less need to 
provide  credit  to  agents  other  than  banks  than  in  a  market-based  economy.  Indeed,  by 
focusing  on  providing  support  to  the  banking  sector,  the  central  bank  may  increase  its 
chances  of  sustaining  the  economy  as  a  whole.  However,  under  extreme  circumstances 
(notably, when the banking sector is no longer able to fulfil its institutional role as the main 
engine of financial intermediation), a central bank may reach the opposite conclusion: exactly 
BIS Review 78/2009 
 5
because of the banking sector’s predominance in financial intermediation, its dysfunctional 
state might prompt a central bank to intervene before the entire economy comes to a halt. 
If so, the central bank will need to decide which sectors to target. Once again, this is not an 
easy  choice.  It  may  imply  the  need  for  the  central  bank  to  take  decisions  on  the  optimal 
allocation of resources in the economy which, historical experience shows, are better left to 
the private sector. 
Other  concerns  may  relate  to  the  risk  of  political  pressure  and  government  interference, 
especially  if  the  scale  of  the  financing  programme  requires  support  from  the  Treasury.  If 
financing is ensured through the expansion of the central bank’s liabilities, this may give rise 
to more general concerns about the fiscal costs of actions taken by the monetary authority.2 
Finally, but related to the previous arguments, direct lending to the real economy may imply 
an increase in the financial risks taken by the central bank, potentially exposing the latter to 
risks to its financial independence and, ultimately, to its institutional independence. 
The purpose of these remarks is certainly not to suggest that central banks should abstain 
from direct lending to the real sector, but rather to point out that the number of aspects to 
consider  before  doing  so  are  so  many  and  of  such  complexity  that  no  central  bank  would 
ever take such a decision with a light heart. This is why, before embarking on such a policy, 
some  central  banks  may  prefer  to  provide  indirect  support  (i.e.  through  banks)  to  the  real 
economy.  
Based on the considerations, the Eurosystem has chosen to make full use of the possibilities 
provided by its operational framework to support the economy, using the banking sector as 
an intermediary agent. Indeed, the euro area’s financial system is still predominantly bank-
based,  despite  despite  significant  changes  in  the  area’s  financial  landscape  in  recent 
decades (as a result of a number of structural developments, including the introduction of the 
euro).  Just  to  illustrate  this  point,  in  2007  aggregate  bank  lending  to  the  private  sector 
amounted to 145% of GDP in the euro area, compared with 63% in the US. By contrast, the 
ratio  of  outstanding  debt  securities  issued  by  the  euro  area  private  sector  relative  to  GDP 
(81%) was less than half than in the US.  
Thus, banks play such a dominant role in the euro area economy that, guaranteeing steady 
access  to  credit  for  households  and  companies  in  the  euro  area  to  a  large  extent  means 
preserving the viability of the banking system. The Eurosystem does so by providing banks 
with unlimited access at fixed rates to its refinancing operations (of course, against adequate 
collateral).  
More recently, the Eurosystem has announced plans to purchase euro-denominated covered 
bonds issued in the euro area to provide further support to credit provision by the banking 
sector.  These  purchases  will  target  an  important  segment  of  the  private  securities  market, 
which has been particularly affected by the financial market turbulence and will contribute to 
achieve the objective of maintaining the availability of credit for households and companies 
at accessible rates.  
More weight given to asset prices in monetary policy? 
2.5  
Another  interesting  debate  that  has  gained  –  for  obvious  reasons  –  renewed  interest  and 
strength over the past year is the role that asset prices should take in the monetary policy 
design.  Indeed,  as  we  are  experiencing  at  present,  large  volatility  in  asset  prices  can 
jeopardise  the  stability  of  the  financial  system  and  potentially  undermine  macroeconomic 
stability.  The  repetition  of  boom-bust  cycles  and  the  potentially  very  high  costs  for 
                                                 
2   See Cukierman, A. (2006), “Central bank finances and independence – How much capital should a central 
bank have?”, in M. Blejer and S. Milton (eds.), The Capital Needs of Central Banks, Bank of England Press. 
6 
 BIS Review 78/2009
macroeconomic stability associated with the typically abrupt reversal of asset price bubbles 
beg the question: should monetary policy give more weight to asset prices? 
There are various arguments that must be carefully weighed in order to answer this question. 
First, we know that bubbles are extremely difficult to identify in real time. Assessing whether 
or not asset prices are being driven by fundamentals is surrounded with so much uncertainty 
—  perhaps  sometimes  uncertainty  in  the  “Knightian”  sense  —  that  central  banks  should 
refrain from targeting asset prices. Moreover, some hold the view that, while monetary policy 
actions can influence asset price developments, the magnitude of the swings in policy rates 
that  would  be  needed  to  curb  boom  and  bust  cycles  in  asset  prices  at  times  of  “irrational 
exuberance” could be so large as to have adverse implications for macroeconomic stability in 
the short term.3
Based on these arguments, which are broadly shared in the central banking and academic 
community, one policy view (perhaps, the predominant view in the past years) postulates that 
it  is  better  to  wait  for  the  bubble  to  burst  on  its  own  and  then  ease  monetary  policy 
aggressively to provide support to the banking system and to the economy. This is the so-
called “mop up after” approach. In this case, sharp monetary policy easing after the bursting 
of the bubble is supportive of both price stability and financial stability, though at the possible 
expense of creating moral hazard and excessive risk-taking in future boom times.  
An alternative approach consists of “leaning against the wind”. According to this approach, 
monetary  policy  should  be  conducted  in  a  “symmetric”  manner  over  the  financial  cycle.  In 
other  words,  it  should  be  accommodative  at  a  time  of  falling  asset  prices,  but  restrictive 
during  a  financial  market  boom.  For  instance,  the  central  bank  should  conduct  a  slightly 
tighter monetary policy than warranted by its price stability objective, when the build-up of a 
potentially detrimental asset price boom is identified. By doing so, the central bank would buy 
insurance  against  the  risk  of  a  harmful  asset  boom-bust  cycle,  with  its  potential  costs  in 
terms of macroeconomic and financial stability.  
The  main  argument  against  this  approach  is  that  the  insurance  premium  associated  with 
such policy may be excessively high. In fact, a contractionary policy response to asset price 
increases may end up destabilising the economy if the asset price revaluation is driven by 
fundamentals. This risk is related to the difficulty that I have just mentioned concerning the 
identification of asset price misalignments in real time. This risk, however, should not act as a 
perfect  alibi  for  policy  inaction.  As  the  recent  literature  on  early  indicators4  started  by 
researchers at the BIS shows, there are indicators based on money and credit developments 
that can provide guidance on the nature and the consequences of extraordinary asset price 
developments, and thereby help to define the need for policy action. 
As the current financial crisis illustrates, the macroeconomic costs of financial instability and 
the challenges that it poses for the maintenance of price stability provide support to the case 
for a flexible “leaning against the wind” strategy. More generally, a lesson from the current 
crisis seems to be that central banks should assign a greater role to asset prices in monetary 
policy considerations and should aim to pre-empt the emergence of asset price bubbles.  
                                                 
3   See Papademos (2009) for a review of recent arguments challenging the view that monetary policy is too blunt 
a tool to lean “against the wind” (“Monetary policy and the “Great Crisis”: Lessons and challenges”, Speech at 
the 37th Economics Conference “Beyond the Crisis: Economic Policy in a New Macroeconomic Environment”, 
Vienna). 
4   See for instance Detken, C. and F. Smets (2004), “Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy”, ECB Working 
Paper, No. 364; and Alessi,  L. and  C. Detken (2009), ““Real time” early  warning  indicators for costly asset 
price  boom/bust  cycles:  A  role  for  global  liquidity”,  presented  at  the  EABCN  and  CREI  Conference  on 
Business  Cycle  Developments,  Financial  Fragility,  Housing  and  Commodity  Prices,  Barcelona,  21-23 
November 2008. 
BIS Review 78/2009 
 7
How can one implement such a policy approach in practice? The answer very much depends 
on  the  monetary  policy  framework  specifically  adopted  by  a  central  bank.  Central  banks 
following  inflation  targeting,  the  most  commonly  adopted  strategy  among  developing  and 
emerging  countries,  may  find  it  relatively  difficult  to  make  this  approach  fit  in  their  policy 
framework. Indeed, inflation targeters tend to concentrate on the pursuit of price stability at 
specific horizons and generally assign low weight to the need to monitor asset prices or other 
indicators (notably, monetary and credit variables) that may signal the building up of financial 
imbalances.5
In  response  to  these  concerns,  some  inflation  targeters  have  specified  further  information, 
not  included  in  macroeconomic  forecasts,  which  should  be  taken  into  account  in  order  to 
formulate monetary policy decisions. Such information includes, inter alia, the monitoring of 
credit and property price conditions. In addition, some inflation targeting central banks have 
relaxed  the  strict  focus  on  a  specific  forecast  horizon  for  monetary  policy,  by  explicitly 
referring  to  a  “medium  term”  horizon  or  by  enlarging  the  horizon  of  their  macroeconomic 
projections, also to take into account challenges stemming from asset price developments.  
I should like to stress that the ECB’s two-pillar monetary policy strategy is well suited to cope 
with the challenges brought about by asset price developments.6 More precisely, there are 
two features of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy that may provide a suitable framework to 
implement a “leaning against the wind” approach: 
• 
First,  the  ECB’s  definition  of  price  stability  objective  –  an  inflation  rate  below,  but 
close to, 2% in the medium term – allows the conduct of a more restrictive monetary 
policy during a period of booming asset prices, even in an environment of relatively 
subdued inflationary pressures. In this case, “leaning against the wind” would likely 
result  in  lower  inflation  over  the  short  term,  but  would  be  expected  to  be  more 
effective in maintaining price stability over the longer term, by helping to prevent the 
materialisation of deflation risks when the asset bubble bursts.  
Second,  the  ECB’s  analysis  of  monetary  and  credit  developments7  aimed  at 
identifying  longer-term  inflation  risks  can  also  provide  signals  of  growing  financial 
imbalances, which could in principle be used to implement a policy of “leaning against 
the  wind”.  This  is  because  there  is  a  close  link  between  monetary  and  credit 
developments  and  evolving  imbalances  in  asset  and  credit  markets.8  By  exploiting 
this  link,  our  monetary  analysis  (consisting  of  a  comprehensive  assessment  of 
liquidity  and  credit  conditions)  may  provide  early  information  on  developing  asset 
price  imbalances  and,  therefore,  allow  for  a  timely  response  to  the  implied  risks  to 
price and financial stability.  
 Thus, the ECB’s two-pillar strategy may represent a practical way of mimicking the “leaning 
against the wind” approach.  
                                                 
5   Christiano et al. (2008) show in a recent paper that in a closed economy, the application of inflation targeting 
in a context of a rising bubble might lead to the policy stance actually encouraging the growth of asset price 
bubbles  (see  Christiano,  L.,  C.  Ilut,  R.  Motto  and  M.  Rostagno  (2008),  “Monetary  policy  and  stock  market 
boom-bust cycles”, ECB Working Papers No. 955. October). 
6   See also the April 2005 ECB Monthly Bulletin article entitled, “Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy and 
Trichet, J.C. (2005), “Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy”, Speech at the Mas Lecture, Singapore. 
7   For a description of the role of the monetary pillar in ECB’s policy-making see Issing et al. (2001), Monetary 
Policy in the Euro Area- Strategy and Decision Making at the European Central Bank, Cambridge: CUP; Issing 
et al. (eds.), Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of its Monetary Policy Strategy, Frankfurt: ECB; and 
ECB (2004), “Monetary Analysis in Real Time”, Monthly Bulletin October, pp. 43-63. 
8   See for instance Adalid, R. and C. Detken (2007), “Liquidity Shocks and Asset Price Boom/Bust Cycles”, ECB 
Working Paper, No. 732; Christiano, L., R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2008), “Monetary Policy and Stock Market 
Boom-Bust Cycles”, ECB Working Paper, No. 955; Detken and Smets, cit.; and Goodhart, C. and B. Hofmann 
(2008), “House Prices, Money, Credit and the Macro-economy”, ECB Working Paper Series, No. 888. 
8 
 BIS Review 78/2009
More central bank involvement in supervision? 
2.6  
The recent financial market crisis has also highlighted the important role that central banks 
play in safeguarding financial stability and the need to increase interaction between central 
banks  and  banking  supervisors.  This  need  for  increased  interaction,  also  identified  by  the 
Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB)  in  one  of  its  recommendations,  would  further  support  and 
enhance  the  central  banks’  role  in  financial  stability  assessments,  crisis  management  and 
resolution, and liquidity provision. 
First, with regard to financial stability assessment: central banks can benefit from extended 
access to supervisory information especially in relation to systemically relevant institutions, in 
order  to  identify  risks  and  vulnerabilities  for  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  in  a  more 
efficient  way.  In  this  context,  the  FSB  and  the  International  Monetary  Fund  are  already 
intensifying their cooperation with a view to enhancing the assessment of financial stability 
risks  on  a  global  scale,  while  in  the  EU  the  same  is  valid  for  the  Banking  Supervision 
Committee and the Committee of European Banking Supervisors. These efforts should also 
be mirrored at the national and regional levels, through the intensification of the cooperation 
and exchange of information between central banks and supervisory authorities for an overall 
better monitoring and assessment of risks to the financial system. The other side of this coin 
relates  to  the  issue  of  incorporating  the  outcome  of  the  financial  stability  risk  analysis  into 
policy action in the field of supervision, which also needs to be reinforced. 
Second,  in  the  area  of  crisis  management  and  resolution  :  the  global  nature  of  financial 
markets  and  the  increased  interlinkages  between  markets  and  institutions  requires 
competent  financial  authorities,  central  banks,  supervisors  and  ministries  of  finance  to 
strengthen  their  coordination  mechanisms  for  the  management  of  crisis  involving  cross-
border  financial  institutions.  In  the  EU,  an  important  milestone  has  been  reached  with  the 
Memorandum  of  Understanding  (MoU)  signed  by  the  competent  authorities  of  all  Member 
States in June 2008. This MoU establishes common principles, procedures and terminology 
to be used by all parties involved in a cross-border crisis. 
Third,  in  relation  to  liquidity  provision:  in  order  to  maintain  stable  money  markets,  central 
banks  would  benefit  from  enhanced  access  to  supervisory  information,  including  liquidity 
stress-testing and contingency funding plans of banks. At the same time, supervisors would 
benefit from information available at central banks, such as banks’ bidding behaviour. 
Overall,  while  the  need  for  enhanced  interaction  between  central  banks  and  supervisory 
authorities  is  widely  acknowledged,  recent  events  have  called  into  question  whether 
improved interaction in cooperation suffices. In this context, the debate has recently turned 
towards the future supervisory architecture. In particular, the financial crisis has underscored 
the  urgency  of  reviewing  the  EU  supervisory  framework,  which  is  still  based  on  national 
responsibilities  against  the  background  of  increased  financial  market  integration  and  the 
growing role of large cross-border financial institutions.  
In response to these concerns, a High Level Group was set up under the chairmanship of Mr 
Jacques  de  Larosiére  with  the  mandate  to  examine  the  allocation  of  tasks  between  the 
national  and  the  European  level.  The  final  report  of  the  group,  published  last  February, 
includes  a  number  of  proposals  to  strengthen  both  macro-  and  micro-supervisory 
arrangements in Europe.  
As  regards  the  arrangements  for  macro-prudential  supervision,  the  De  Larosière  report 
proposes  to  establish  a  European  Systemic  Risk  Board  under  the  auspices  of  the  ECB, 
which should substantially improve the assessment of systemic risks to financial stability at 
the EU level. By assigning a strong role to central banks, and particularly to the ECB, the 
report  recognises  that  these  institutions  should  play  a  leading  role  in  macro-prudential 
supervision.  
However, in order for the new Board to perform its tasks in an optimal manner, it is important 
that three key requirements are fulfilled: 
BIS Review 78/2009 
 9
   First,  the  ECB  must  have  timely  access  to  all  relevant  information,  including  that 
concerning individual institutions;  
Second, risk warnings from the new Council should be translated into effective policy 
action;  
And third, the new Council must have a solid institutional and legal basis in order to 
ensure independence and effectiveness of its decision-making processes.  
Concluding remarks 
3.  
The financial turmoil, which began in the summer of 2007, has developed over time into one 
of the most disruptive crises that the world has experienced in many decades. This is why 
from  the  start  of  the  turmoil  public  authorities  have  undertaken  interventions  in  key  policy 
fields,  including  liquidity  management,  monetary  policy  and  fiscal  policy,  which  are 
unprecedented by number and scale. In addition, many initiatives have been undertaken to 
address  weaknesses  in  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  in  order  to  provide 
sounder foundations to our financial systems.  
Despite our best efforts, we cannot yet see the light at the end of the tunnel and key financial 
markets and economic sectors remain under stress. It would be very difficult to predict when 
exactly our economies will return to normality, but I would be prepared to bet that, when this 
finally happens, the world will look different in many respects.  
In this speech I have focused on six specific areas of relevance for central banks that are, to 
a varying extent, in a state of flux. They may all lead to changes in the environment in which 
central banks operate. By increasing our efforts to draw the right lessons from the crisis and 
implementing 
the  regulatory  and  supervisory 
frameworks, we can make sure that in the future the environment surrounding central banks 
will not be just different, but also more conducive to price and financial stability. 
the  necessary  reforms,  especially 
in 
10 
 BIS Review 78/2009
