Jean-Claude Trichet: The financial crisis and the ECB's response so far 
Keynote address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the 
Chatham House Global Financial Forum, New York, 27 April 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
Chatham  House  was  established  after  the  First  World  War  to  promote  understanding  of 
international affairs. My intention today is to promote understanding of the European policy 
framework and specifically our response to the financial crisis.  
Policy-makers  around  the  globe  are  facing  formidable  challenges  as  the  crisis,  which 
originated within a few blocks from here, has swept across the globe. Restoring confidence 
in the global financial system is of paramount importance. The G7 and IMFC meetings last 
weekend, as well as the G20 meeting four weeks ago, confirmed in my view a strong signal 
of reform that can provide the basis for a more resilient global economy in the future. In my 
remarks, I would like to focus mainly on the ECB’s response to the crisis. I will also note, en 
passant, how our policy compares with those of other major central banks. Clearly, there are 
differences  in  central  banks’  approaches  to  managing  the  crisis.  In  my  view,  these  reflect 
profound differences in the economic structures within which central banks operate. But they 
do not reflect conflicting views on fundamental principles. Central banks around the world are 
united in purpose. 
The ECB’s guiding principles are very simple and very clear. Our policy is geared towards 
preserving price stability over the medium term and, in so doing, supporting the conditions for 
enduring financial and economic stability. The crisis has not changed this objective. Where 
we  have  made  changes  is  in  our  operational  framework  and  the  implementation  of  an 
exceptional set of policy tools that is very broad and very deep, as I will explain. This set of 
policy tools, in combination with the bold action taken by euro area governments over recent 
months, is essential to revive a resource that has become much too scarce in recent months: 
confidence in the future. 
The origins of the financial crisis 
To set the scene, let me recall the origins of the current crisis. Over the past ten years, we 
have witnessed a dramatic shift of focus in the financial sector – away from facilitating trade 
and  real  investment  towards  unfettered  speculation  and  financial  gambling.  Managing 
genuine  economic  risk  gradually  ceased  to  be  the  main  concern  of  international  finance. 
Instead,  the  creation  and  assumption  of  financial  risk  –  the  risk  involved  in  arbitrage  and 
deliberate  exposure  to  asset  price  changes  –  became  the  core  activity  of  the  financial 
industry. A point was reached where the main role of the financial system was no longer to 
hedge  existing  economic  risks  and  assist  trade  within  and  between  countries,  but 
increasingly to create and propagate new risks.  
To be clear, I do not deny that financial liberalisation and financial innovation over the past 
two decades have made important contributions to the overall productivity of our economies. 
For example, the securitisation of assets – the transformation of bilateral loans into tradable 
credit 
the  diversification  and  efficient 
management of economic risk.  
But securitisation also meant that banks and non-banks were able to sell loans – or place 
them off-balance sheet – immediately after they had been extended. This weakened lenders’ 
incentives  to  conduct  prudent  screening  and  constant  monitoring.  The  resulting  decline  in 
underwriting standards and lending oversight fuelled excessive credit growth starting in the 
second half of the 1990s. At the same time, it created the conditions for its reversal. 
tremendous  potential 
instruments  –  had 
for 
BIS Review 51/2009 
 1
The  credit  boom  was  exacerbated  by  three  multipliers.  First,  incentives:  ill-designed 
compensation schemes for loan managers and traders reinforced the shortening of their time 
horizons.  Second,  complexity:  increasingly  complicated  and  opaque  financial  instruments 
made it difficult for holders of securities to assess the quality of the underlying investments. 
And  third,  global  macroeconomic  imbalances:  a  chronic  shortage  of  savings  in  some 
industrialised economies was made possible by an excess of savings in other parts of the 
world, a multiplier that was exacerbated during the years immediately preceding the crisis by 
the sharply rising prices of oil and other commodities.  
From financial turmoil to financial panic  
In  mid-2007,  suddenly  though  not  unexpectedly,  the  interactions  of  perverse  incentives, 
excessive complexity and global imbalances threw the credit boom into reverse. The asset 
cycle turned, and many of the missing links in the financial chain were exposed. Investors 
suddenly lost confidence. After years of high profits and exceptional risk tolerance, markets 
became extremely discriminating about financial risk. Funding costs for borrowers increased. 
The  spreads  on  the  debt  of  financial  institutions  –  seen  as  being  clogged  with  assets  of 
dubious value – widened considerably. Uncertainty about the extent of credit write-offs and 
the future earnings capacity of financial institutions took a heavy toll on the valuation of many 
revered names.  
The  collapse  in  mid-September  last  year  of  a  major  financial  player,  which  was  directly 
involved  in  about  30  large  payment  and  settlement  systems  worldwide  and  disposed  of  a 
balance sheet of $600 billion, turned a large-scale crisis of confidence into a global financial 
panic. As the intensity of the crisis became evident, financial intermediaries restored liquidity 
buffers.  While  intermediaries  were  scrambling  to  economise  on  capital  and  to  scale  down 
their  balance  sheets,  assets  were  sold  and  lending  conditions  tightened.  Banks  and  other 
financial  institutions  dramatically  reduced  their  exposure  to  the  risks  that  they  had 
imprudently accumulated during the phase of financial euphoria. They reduced illiquid claims 
and  sought  refuge  in  cash-like  instruments,  such  as  reserves  or  short-term  government 
paper.  Collectively,  they  engaged  in  a  large-scale  process  of  “deleveraging”.  Banks’ 
intermediation was reduced in the aggregate, and loans to companies were curtailed. The 
credit squeeze and the toll on the real economy set in.  
Financial/economic structures and monetary policy  
So  much  for  the  backdrop  of  events  against  which  our  policy  actions  have  been 
implemented.  We  at  the  ECB  have  moved  pre-emptively  and  forcefully  to  counter  the 
adverse consequences of the financial crisis. At all times our response has been carefully 
calibrated to the structure of the euro area economy.  
Allow me to elaborate a little on this structure, which differs significantly from the structure of 
the US economy in several important respects, relating to both the financial system and the 
real economy. 
First,  there  are  profound  differences  in  the  financial  structures  of  the  euro  area  and  the 
United States. The United States has a primarily market-based financial system; in contrast, 
the financial system of the euro area is largely bank-centred. A few numbers illustrate these 
differences.  At  the  end  of  2007,  the  stock  of  outstanding  bank  loans  to  the  private  sector 
amounted to around 145% of GDP in the euro area. The corresponding proportion of bank 
loans to GDP in the United States is only 63%. This means that the banking sector is more 
than twice as important in the euro area as it is in the United States. It also means that to be 
effective, ECB policy must focus first and foremost on the banking sector.  
Similarly, direct debt securities account for 81% of GDP in the euro area. The corresponding 
proportion  in  the  United  States  is  168%.  This  means  that  market-based  financing  plays  a 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2009
much  smaller  role  in  the  euro  area  and  is  only  half  as  relevant  as  in  the  United  States. 
Therefore, the structures of private credit outstanding in the euro area and the United States 
are almost mirror images: recourse to banks on our side of the Atlantic makes up two-thirds 
of non-equity external finance. On this side, the equivalent proportion is only around 30%. 
Against  this  background,  it  is  natural  that  the  Federal  Reserve’s  “credit  easing”  policies 
mainly target markets for debt securities, whereas our policies of “enhanced credit support” 
focus on banks. 
There are also many profound differences in our respective economic structures, which of 
course are also reflected in financial structures. For the sake of brevity, I will single out three 
characteristics of the euro area economy that our policies have to take into account in order 
to be effective.  
The  first  characteristic  is  the  very  important  role  that  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises 
(SMEs) play for the euro area economy. These SMEs in general cannot tap credit markets 
directly. Guaranteeing continued access to bank credit is vital for SMEs to be able to finance 
their activities.  
The second characteristic is the role of the housing market in the crisis. In the United States, 
the  housing  market  is  at  the  epicentre  of  the  crisis.  This  is  not  true  for  the  euro  area. 
Nevertheless,  the  euro  area  is  indirectly  affected  as  banks  there  hold  toxic  assets  partly 
backed  by  mortgage  loans  originated  in  the  United  States.  Forcefully  addressing  the  toxic 
asset problem is a precondition for reviving credit on both sides of the Atlantic. I should add 
that addressing this problem clearly falls into the realm of fiscal policy, not monetary policy. 
The  third  characteristic  is  the  flexibility  of  the  economy.  Goods  and  services  prices  and 
wages are more sluggish in the euro area than in the United States. This sluggishness, on 
the one hand, has drawbacks as it slows down the adjustment of the euro area economy to 
adverse  shocks.  At  the  same  time  it  offers  some  protection  against  very  bad  outcomes, 
provided that the policy framework provides a solid anchor for private sector expectations. In 
the euro area, the institutional framework provides such an anchor through the medium-term 
stability orientation of fiscal policies and monetary policy geared towards fiscal sustainability 
and price stability. In this environment, overly activist policies risk destabilising expectations 
and, thus, being counterproductive.  
In  technical  terms,  I  would  say  that  acknowledging  the  existence  of  structural  differences 
between the euro area and the United States is crucial for understanding the mechanisms 
behind  the  policy  models  and  concepts  that  we  use  in  our  decision-making  processes. 
Structural differences imply that the policy response has to be calibrated to the structure of 
the economy.  
The financial and economic structures I have just described provide the background for our 
policies. These policies are guided by our monetary policy strategy, a key element of which is 
the quantitative definition of price stability. We aim at an inflation rate of below, but close to, 
2% over the medium term. The precise quantification of our policy objective has proved an 
invaluable asset, a fail-safe mechanism against excessive swings in inflation expectations, 
downwards as much as upwards. Long-term inflation expectations in the euro area, whether 
based  on  surveys  or  extracted  from  financial  indicators,  have  thus  far  been  exceptionally 
resistant  to  sudden  short-term  price  changes.  We  will  ensure  that  inflation  expectations 
remain  impervious  to  short-term  changes  in  inflation,  even  in  the  face  of  sharply  falling 
inflation. 
The ECB’s response to the financial crisis  
Against the background of the economic and financial structures I have just described, you 
will see that the ECB’s responses to the financial crisis are in line both with these structures 
and  with  our  medium-term  objective.  Our  actions  have  been  different  from  those  taken  by 
BIS Review 51/2009 
 3
other central banks, reflecting differences in economic and financial structures. Indeed, given 
the different economic structures, they need to be different to achieve the same objective. 
Interest rates 
Before  explaining  in  detail  the  core  elements  of  ECB  policy  since  August  2007  and  in 
particular  since  last  September,  I  would  like  to  talk  briefly  about  interest  rates  –  the 
conventional indicators of monetary policy. Some observers tend to reduce monetary policy 
to  the  level  of  the  key  policy  rate.  Monetary  policy  is  the  more  effective  in  response  to  a 
downturn,  the  argument  goes,  the  lower  the  policy  rate.  This  view  is  too  simplistic. 
Comparing only the levels of policy rates without consideration of the resulting market rates 
and other economic variables is looking at just one part of a far broader canvas.  
Let  me  give  you  a  concrete  example.  At  1.25%  at  the  moment,  our  rate  on  refinancing 
operations  is  higher  than  the  federal  funds  rate  target  range  of  0-0.25%.  But  owing  in 
particular to the very low rate on our deposit facility of 0.25%, this difference in policy rates 
does not translate into equivalent differences in money market rates.  
In  the  euro  area,  six-month  and  twelve-month  euro  interbank  offered  rates  are  important 
benchmarks, which are widely used by banks to set floating rate loans to households and 
companies, for example, for setting mortgage rates in countries such as Spain. These six- 
and twelve-month rates are actually slightly lower in euros than the corresponding rates for 
contracts denominated in US dollars. In a similar vein, the benchmark ten-year government 
bond yield in the euro area – the German bund yield – is broadly comparable to the yield on 
the  ten-year  Treasury  note.  This  shows  that  in  the  current  circumstances,  international 
comparisons of policy rates provide limited information about the effective credit conditions 
prevailing  in  individual  markets.  One  key  reason  for  lower  market  rates  is  the  fact  that 
spreads  are  lower  in  the  euro  area,  a  positive  interpretation  of  which  would  point  to 
somewhat lower credit and liquidity risk premia. 
Non-standard measures 
Let me now turn to the exceptional policy actions that we have taken in response to the crisis 
– the so-called “non-standard” measures. As you will recall, when the very significant stress 
in interbank markets first manifested itself in August 2007, the ECB immediately stepped into 
the  breach  and  accommodated  the  temporarily  elevated  liquidity  demand  from  the  banks 
through a fixed rate operation with full allotment, providing €95 billion to the market within a 
few  hours.  Overnight  lending  of  the  same  kind  continued  to  be  provided  albeit  with  lower 
volumes during the following three days. So we can say that the ECB was the first central 
bank in the turmoil to engage in non-standard measures. 
When  in  mid-September  2008  interbank  trading  came  to  a  virtual  halt,  the  ECB  had  to 
engage in a new mode of liquidity provision. We started to provide refinancing well above the 
levels that banks had absorbed to fulfil their reserve requirements in normal times.  
Let me explain to you how and why we did this. There are three main building blocks to our 
new approach. 
1) 
Our  primary  concern  was  to  maintain  the  availability  of  credit  for  households  and 
companies at accessible rates. We significantly adapted our regular operations in the 
crisis. Since then, we have followed a new “fixed rate full allotment” tender procedure 
and we have significantly expanded the maturity of our operations. This means that 
banks have been granted access to essentially unlimited liquidity at our policy interest 
rate at maturities of up to six months. To appreciate fully what this means, let us step 
back  for  a  moment  and  look  at  what  we  do  in  normal  times.  In  normal  times,  we 
auction a given amount of central bank credit, mainly in refinancing operations with a 
one-week maturity, and let competition among bidders determine the interest rate at 
which that credit will become available to the banking system as a whole. This means 
4 
 BIS Review 51/2009
2) 
 3) 
that the liquidity injection is restrained by a policy decision. Last autumn, we changed 
that. As the demand for liquidity by individual institutions expanded abnormally and 
markets dramatically ceased to allocate liquidity, we have turned that practice around. 
We  have  been  determining  the  lending  rate  –  at  a  very  low  level  –  and  we  stand 
ready to fill any shortage of liquidity that might occur at that interest rate for maturities 
of up to six months. This means that we currently act as a surrogate for the market in 
terms of both liquidity allocation and price-setting.  
The second building block of our new approach is our large list of assets that we take 
as collateral. This list was already very large before the crisis, but we have enlarged it 
even  further  and  now  accept  an  even  wider  range  of  securities  as  collateral. 
Government securities account for only 44% of the nominal value of securities on the 
list. The rest are private securities. In contrast to many other central banks, the ECB 
already intermediated private paper before the crisis and we have even strengthened 
this aspect in the crisis by accepting an even wider range of private paper.  
The  total  value  of  these  securities,  which  are  45,000  in  number,  is  currently 
€12.2 trillion. This amounts to 86% of all debt securities issued in euros and to 130% 
of  GDP  in  the  euro  area.  This  very  ample  eligibility  of  collateral  has  dramatically 
eased banks’ liquidity constraints during the crisis and, ultimately, it has encouraged 
them to extend new credit or continue rolling over maturing loans. 
The first two building blocks offer unlimited refinancing against a very wide range of 
collateral. But they can only reach the financial system if they are coupled with the 
third building block, namely the very large number of counterparties that have always 
been  able  to  take  part  in  our  refinancing  operations.  Even  before  the  crisis,  1,700 
counterparties fulfilled all relevant criteria. This number was higher at the time than for 
the other major central banks. Following the changes to our operational framework in 
October 2008, this number rose further. Currently 2,200 credit institutions in the euro 
area  have  the  opportunity  to  refinance  themselves  with  us,  and  for  most  of  the 
remaining 4,300 credit institutions it would not be a problematic to become eligible. 
For  example,  in  March  2009,  750  counterparties  actually  made  use  of  this 
opportunity, compared with 450 in July 2007. 
This  structural  feature  of  our  operational  framework  has  been  instrumental  since  the  first 
stages  of  the  crisis  in  ensuring  widespread  confidence  that  all  relevant  intermediaries  can 
access liquidity. It may be useful, by way of comparison, to note that whereas we had about 
450 active counterparties before the crisis, the Federal Reserve had about 20. These facts 
may demonstrate to you the dimension of our outreach to the financial system in the euro 
area and its effectiveness in insuring against a systemic liquidity threat.  
Our  measures  to  safeguard  the  banking  system’s  access  to  liquidity  have  resulted  in  a 
considerable expansion of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet, which reached a peak of 19% of 
GDP at the height of the crisis around the turn of the year. Since then, we have seen liquidity 
flows moving back from our balance sheet to the money market. This is a sign of improving 
confidence  and  more  favourable  conditions.  We  therefore  see  some  indication  that  the 
functioning of the money market is improving. 
How  does  the  ECB’s  non-standard  policy  compare  with  the  approaches  taken  by  other 
central  banks  also  grappling  with  the  turmoil  in  financial  markets?  Since  mid-September 
2008,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  embarked  on  a  policy  of  direct  “credit  easing”.  This  policy 
involves,  first,  the  provision  of  liquidity  directly  to  borrowers  and  investors  in  key  credit 
markets and, second, the purchase of debt instruments such as commercial paper or asset-
backed securities. These measures are targeted at directly addressing instability or declining 
credit availability in critical non-bank channels of intermediation. 
Clearly, while sharing a common purpose, the ECB and the Federal Reserve have relied on 
different channels of transmission. And as I explained earlier, this is justified by the profound 
differences in the financial and economic structures of the euro area and the United States.  
BIS Review 51/2009 
 5
In  the  context  of  the  euro  area,  guaranteeing  steady  access  to  credit  for  households  and 
companies largely means preserving the viability of the banking system. Banks play such a 
dominant  role  in  our  economy  that  it  was  appropriate  until  now  for  our  non-standard 
measures to be implemented through the intervention in and with the active participation of 
the banks.  
As for possible additional non-standard measures in the future, I will stick to what I said at my 
last press conference: the Governing Council will take any new decision on 7 May. At this 
stage we have agreed not to give any further indications but will, on that day, provide all the 
necessary information on anything that is decided.  
Conclusions  
I  have  spoken  about  differences  in  the  approaches  to  crisis  management  of  major  central 
banks,  which  are  related  to  differences  in  the  structure  of  their  economies.  But  let  me 
reiterate that we are all united in purpose. The overarching aim is to restore confidence, to 
take measures that will solidly anchor the expectations of households and companies, and to 
lay the groundwork for a return to sustainable prosperity.  
I have also strongly stressed that the scarcest resource we have right now is confidence in 
the  future.  That  is  why  in  the  present,  very  demanding,  circumstances  our  primary  goal 
should  be  to  strengthen  confidence  at  all  levels.  The  global  economy  was  hit  in  mid-
September 2008 by an unprecedented and abrupt loss of confidence. It was perhaps the first 
time  in  economic  history  that  a  single  event  was  able  within  just  a  few  days  to  have  a 
simultaneously  negative  effect  on  all  households  and  companies  in  both  the  industrialised 
and emerging economies. We are in uncharted waters, and there are still risks of a sudden 
emergence of unexpected financial turbulence.  
My  personal  conclusion  of  the  G7,  the  G20  and  the  IFMC  meeting  in  Washington  is  that 
public  authorities,  executive  branches  and  central  banks  must  do  everything  they  can  to 
restore, preserve and foster confidence so as to pave the way for sustainable prosperity.  
This  calls  for  a  bold  yet  solidly  anchored  response.  We  must  maintain  the  appropriate 
balance  between  the  need  to  take  immediate  action  commensurate  with  the  gravity  of 
today’s situation, and the equally undeniable obligation to return to a path that is sustainable 
in the medium term.  
Confidence  also  calls  for  ensuring  a  global  level  playing  field.  It  is  essential  that  all 
economies  of  the  world  apply  the  same  rules,  respect  the  same  principles  as  regards 
financial  regulation,  and  display  the  results  of  their  corporate  businesses  along  the  same 
accounting  rules.  Regulatory  arbitrage  across  countries  and  across  continents  would  be  a 
recipe for catastrophes.  
Confidence  calls 
financial 
for 
protectionism which could delay the recovery and considerably dampen the future growth of 
the global economy. 
Confidence calls now for an effective, efficient, convincing, as well as a quick implementation 
of  the  decisions  which  have  been  recommended  by  the  Financial  Stability  Board,  the  IMF 
and the World Bank and approved by the G20. In crisis periods time is of the essence. At this 
stage  we  do  not  need  new  decisions  from  executive  branches,  but  resolute  and  rapid 
implementation. 
The ECB for its part will do all that is necessary to continue to be a very solid and reliable 
anchor of stability and confidence in these challenging times. 
I thank you for your attention. 
resolutely  combating  protectionism  and  particularly 
6 
 BIS Review 51/2009
