Elizabeth A Duke: Regulatory perspectives on the changing accounting 
landscape 
Speech  by  Ms  Elizabeth  A  Duke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  AICPA  National  Conference  on  Banks  and  Savings  Institutions, 
Washington DC, 14 September 2009. 
 Good morning. I want to thank the AICPA for inviting me to speak at this year's Conference 
on  Banks  and  Savings  Institutions.  Over  the  years,  this  conference  has  served  as  an 
important  forum  for  the  exchange  of  views  on  regulatory  matters,  emerging  accounting 
issues, new accounting standards, and new auditing considerations.  
This  year's  conference  comes  at  a  critical  time:  Regulators  and  policymakers  around  the 
world  are  now  evaluating  changes  to  practices  and  structures  to  address  weaknesses 
revealed  by  the  recent  financial  crisis.  At  the  same  time,  accounting  standard  setters  are 
proposing changes that will, in turn, affect regulatory standards. These changes, along with 
those made by regulators and policymakers, will help determine the speed and the durability 
of the global financial system's revitalization. Further, the accounting and regulatory changes 
made now will help shape future business models for financial institutions and thus influence 
credit  availability.  It  is  important  to  ensure  that  these  changes  facilitate,  not  hinder,  the 
decision-making processes that support financial intermediation and economic activity.  
I would like to spend my time with you today talking about current and proposed accounting 
standards that will, in my opinion, have the greatest impact on the operation and supervision 
of the U.S. banking system. Before I begin, I should define for you my perspective on these 
matters. Given my background as a community banker, I feel it is crucial that an accounting 
regime  directly  link  reported  financial  condition  and  performance  with  the  business  model 
and  economic  purpose  of  the  firm.  It  is  difficult  for  me  to  comprehend  the  value  of  an 
accounting regime that doesn't make that link.  
As  a  regulator,  I  focus  on  the  viability  of  individual  financial  institutions  and  the  financial 
system as a whole. To be frank, it has been frustrating to try to assess that viability when the 
value of an asset is based on the nature of its acquisition rather than the way in which it is 
managed or the way in which its economic value is likely to be realized. 
And  finally,  as  an  economic  policymaker,  I  fully  understand  the  integral  role  that  financial 
institutions play in the overall performance of our economy. Equally important are the roles 
played  by  those  that  trade  and  those  that  lend  and  by  the  securitization  markets.  And  I 
believe a legitimate case can be made for differences in accounting treatment between them 
to facilitate financial intermediation and economic activity. You might have guessed by now 
that I would like to talk primarily about fair value and loan reserve accounting. 
I should also remind you that the views I express are my own and do not necessarily reflect 
the thinking of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or Board staff. 
Relevance and reliability 
I  think  it  might  be  useful  to  discuss  current  and  proposed  accounting  standards  by  first 
considering the concepts of relevance and reliability. 
In terms of relevance, the measurement principle should reflect the manner in which entities 
actually use financial instruments. In this regard, the business model and risk-management 
approach  taken  by  the  reporting  entity  –  as  well  as  the  way  in  which  the  value  of  the 
instrument  itself  is  likely  to  be  realized  –  should  be  factored  into  the  measurement 
determination.  
BIS Review 107/2009 
 1
If the business model is predicated on the trading of financial instruments for the realization 
of value, or other strategies that essentially focus on short-term price movements, then fair 
value  has  relevance.  In  the  trading  business  model,  reporting  fair  value  focuses  risk 
management on short-term price movements and in most cases incentivizes management to 
define the organization's risk appetite and to mitigate risk through hedging or other means. 
Fair  value  also  incentivizes  the  entity  to  raise  and  maintain  capital  at  a  level  sufficient  to 
cover the price volatility of its assets. For example, if the business model is an originate-to-
distribute model, then fair value has relevance. 
In contrast, if the business model is predicated on the realization of value through the return 
of principal and yield over the life of the financial instrument, then fair value is less relevant. 
Consider, for example, a bank that finances the operations of a commercial enterprise. The 
realization of value will come from the repayment of cash flows. Risk management is based 
on an assessment of the borrower's creditworthiness and the entity's ability to fund the loan 
to  maturity.  In  this  case,  the  accounting  should  incentivize  the  entity  to  maintain  sufficient 
funding to hold the instrument to maturity and to hold a sufficient amount of capital to cover 
potential credit losses through the credit cycle, preferably in a designated reserve. Indeed, 
the use of fair value could create disincentives for lending to smaller businesses whose credit 
characteristics are not easily evaluated by the marketplace. 
Admittedly, some have used the business model argument to manipulate accounting results. 
But the actions of those entities do not diminish the relevance of the business model to the 
measurement  principle.  Indeed,  over  time  if  the  valuation  model  is  not  relevant  to  the 
business  model,  the  business  model  itself  is  likely  to  change.  Rather,  the  lesson  to  be 
learned  from  such  manipulation  is  that  we  –  preparers,  users  and  auditors  of  financial 
statements – need to be vigilant in evaluating actual business practice, and restrict the use of 
particular measurement principles to the relevant business models. 
To this end, safeguards should be implemented to eliminate a firm's ability to overstate gains 
or  understate  losses  by  switching  back  and  forth  between  business  models  or  by 
reclassifying assets from one business segment to another. For example, from a regulatory 
perspective,  assets  in  a  financial  institution's  liquidity  reserve,  by  their  nature,  imply  utility 
through sale and, therefore, should be valued at market price. 
In  terms  of  reliability,  the  measurement  principle  should  reflect  the  ability  of  all  types  of 
entities  to  calculate  a  value  within  a  reasonable  range  of  confidence  throughout  the 
economic  cycle  and  the  life  of  the  financial  instruments.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  reliability 
when  the  fair  value  of  a  financial  instrument  is  observable  in  an  active  market.You 
accountants refer to these observable inputs to fair value as level 1. As you leave the active 
markets and get into the so-called level 2 and level 3 inputs to fair value measurements, an 
entity's ability to reach a consistent fair value or an estimate of fair value within a reasonable 
range  of  values  for  a  particular  financial  instrument  significantly  diminishes.  As  the  recent 
financial  crisis  has  shown  us,  a  financial  instrument's  fair  value  can  vary  widely  among 
entities in similar markets. And the existence of wide variability in valuation models makes 
comparisons between entities difficult if not suspect. 
The reliability of amortized cost is not as questionable. Amortized cost simply is the amount 
paid  to  acquire  a  financial  asset,  adjusted  for  any  unaccreted  discount  or  unamortized 
premium. All entities calculate amortized cost using the same formula. Of course, amortized 
cost is not a panacea. Entities purchase assets at different times and the timing of expected 
cash flow changes can result in different measurements for the same financial instruments. If 
the receipt of future payments is in doubt, impairment must be estimated. 
The  use  of  a  reserve  for  credit  losses  helps  distinguish  between  contractual  amounts  due 
and  payment  uncertainty  created  by  economic  or  borrower-specific  conditions.  Current 
accounting standards permit credit reserves only for losses likely to be realized in the short 
term.  Lenders  regularly  adjust  credit  standards  to  achieve  life  of  loan  profitability  given 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2009
through-the-cycle estimates of credit loss. They should similarly be able to estimate through-
the-cycle reserves as reliably as short term likely losses. 
The stress test 
Accounting treatment issues are critically important in the regulatory evaluation of financial 
institutions' safety and soundness. The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (popularly 
known as the stress test) provides a window into the likely future of bank supervision as well 
as  the  accounting  issues  encountered  by  regulators  in  evaluating  capital  adequacy.  The 
stress test was a simultaneous, horizontal review of the 19 largest financial institutions in the 
United States. The review was led by the Federal Reserve, but conducted jointly with other 
federal banking regulators. In essence, we focused on three key pieces of information – pre-
provision net revenue, potential losses, and final equity capital.  
Pre-provision net revenue and potential losses were estimated under two different economic 
scenarios, a baseline scenario and one that was more stressful. Importantly, losses in the 
trading  book  were  estimated  using  indicators  of  financial  stress  and  market  volatility  while 
losses in  the  loan  book  were  estimated  using economic  indicators  to assess  probability  of 
default and projections of asset prices to estimate loss severities. In this way, the stress test 
held to the principle of relevance, while statistical history provided us with some measure of 
reliability. The stress test was a forward-looking exercise and losses were estimated over a 
two-year horizon: 2009 and 2010. Given that the two-year horizon was likely to be one of the 
most  stressful  time  periods  in  our  history,  the  credit  loss  estimates  would  come  closer  to 
approximating  through-the-cycle  losses  than  the  reserve  amounts  calculated  under  current 
accounting standards.  
Three of the banks that participated in the stress tests had acquired significant loan portfolios 
through business combinations. Given the elimination of the pooling-of-interest method, the 
advent of AICPA Statement of Position 03-3 (SOP 03-3) accounting, and the prohibition on 
presenting an allowance for any acquired pools of loans, it was very challenging to determine 
the amount of credit risk that was already captured in the carrying amount of these acquired 
loans. Essentially, we had to determine the level of credit risk that would have been present 
under  the  pooling-of-interest  method  and  adjust  those  amounts  under  the  economic 
scenarios. Adjusting our measurement of these portfolios for pre-provision net revenue, loan 
loss,  and  capital  proved  quite  challenging.  I  would  expect  it  to  be  similarly  challenging  for 
analysts and investors to make similar adjustments in order to set benchmarks and compare 
performance, of an individual bank over time or between two or more banks. This is a case 
where  I  believe  we  have  experienced  a  reduction  in  transparency  and  have  lost  valuable 
credit information on acquired loans.  
I  recognize  that  the  Loan  Loss  Disclosures  project  at  the  Financial  Accounting  Standards 
Board  (FASB)  is  an  attempt  to  provide  some  of  this  information  by  (1)  requiring  more 
disclosure  of  credit  risks  generally  and  (2)  requiring  the  disclosure  of  the  total  carrying 
amount and the total unpaid principal balance of impaired FAS 114 loans for both loans with 
and without a related allowance for credit loss. However, reserve coverage and loss ratios 
are calculated using amounts shown in the financial statements. Allowing different treatment 
of  portfolios  acquired  through  business  combinations  and  originated  portfolios  will  make 
comparisons difficult and will make norms and averages less meaningful over time. 
In  calculating  capital  requirements,  we  treated  off-balance-sheet  entities  as  if  they  were 
carried  on  the  balance  sheet.  We  consulted  with  the  FASB  for  the  most  current  thinking 
about what would be consolidated under the accounting rules they were finalizing.  
To  recap,  in  the  stress  test  we  analyzed  19  financial  intermediaries  engaged  in  a  mix  of 
trading and lending businesses. We conducted this analysis on behalf of the U.S. taxpayer 
who had become a primary investor in these institutions. And we analyzed them  in a way 
that, in my opinion, best characterizes the risk and performance of the entities: 
BIS Review 107/2009 
 3
  We evaluated trading assets on a fair value basis;  
We evaluated loan assets on the basis of expected credit loss through an adverse 
cycle;  
We evaluated assets based on the way they were managed rather than the way they 
were acquired; and  
We included assets held both on- and off-balance sheet. 
• 
And finally, we used this analysis to estimate the capital buffer needed to protect the entity in 
an  adverse  scenario.  We  published  both  our  methodology  and  our  findings.  While  I  am 
normally firmly opposed to making public confidential supervisory information, in this case, 
we  were  able  to  respond  to  high  levels  of  uncertainty  and  speculation  by  publishing  our 
findings.  Marketplace  confidence  seemed  to  rise  upon  the  publication  of  results  and  the 
subsequent successful capital raises by the firms. 
Now that some measure of confidence has been restored and financial strains are receding, 
it is time to turn our attention to the lessons learned in the crisis. And to ask: How can we 
prevent future crises? Accounting standard setters, regulators, and policymakers around the 
world  are  discussing  and  proposing  preventative  measures.  Now  the  challenge  lies  in 
integrating those changes smoothly and seamlessly. 
Accounting issues identified during the crisis 
A number of groups have analyzed the role that accounting played during the crisis and have 
made  recommendations  to  strengthen  accounting  standards  and  the  standard-setting 
process.  Although  accounting  was  not  the  cause  of  the  financial  crisis,  certain  accounting 
measures, such as the use of fair value accounting for illiquid financial instruments and the 
impairment  model  for  loans  and  debt  securities,  have  drawn  considerable  attention. 
Throughout the crisis, there were considerably fewer actual market transactions available for 
use as reference prices for fair values. At the height of the crisis, there was such little market 
activity that serious consideration was given to abandoning the use of fair value for a period 
of  time.  Even  now,  the  debate  continues  about  whether  fair  value  is  the  appropriate 
measurement attribute for debt securities and other financial instruments, particularly in less 
active markets.  
Similarly,  there  were  serious  concerns  about  the  approaches  used  to  determine  the 
impairment  of  loans  and  certain  debt  securities  during  the  crisis.  Some  argued  that  the 
approaches  available  inhibited  firms  from  recognizing  credit  losses  on  loans  sooner  and 
artificially required the recognition of losses on debt securities. Standard setters responded 
by providing guidance on the determination of fair values in the stressed market environment 
and the determination of financial instrument impairment. This was a very challenging period 
for financial statement preparers, users, standard setters, and regulators. 
FASB and IASB approaches under consideration 
Standard setters are now actively engaged in the discussion of the appropriate accounting 
principle  for  measuring  financial  instruments.  Currently  FASB  and  the  International 
Accounting Standards Board (IASB) are pursuing measurement approaches that diverge in 
important ways. 
FASB's approach would measure all financial instruments (assets and liabilities) at fair value 
through  the  income  statement  or  other  comprehensive  income.  This  would  mean  that  an 
entity's business strategy for investing in securities and originating loans would not be taken 
into account. FASB is willing to disclose the amortized cost of these financial instruments on 
the balance sheet along with the fair value, but there is a catch. The FASB approach would 
modify  the  income  statement  to  include  all  changes  in  fair  value  whether  or  not  they  are 
4 
 BIS Review 107/2009
included in other comprehensive income. Reflecting market value fluctuations of all assets 
through  the  income  statement  would  significantly  increase  the  volatility  of  reported  bank 
earnings,  likely  leading  to  changes  in  risk-management  practices.  At  the  extreme,  this 
approach could incent all financial intermediaries to adopt a trading or investment banking 
business model. 
On the other hand, IASB's approach would measure financial instruments at amortized cost if 
they have characteristics of a basic loan and are managed on a yield basis. Under the IASB 
approach, characteristics of a basic loan are fairly narrowly defined. For example, only the 
most senior tranche of an asset securitization might qualify for amortized cost. Similarly, any 
loan  with  any  unusual  provision  might  not  qualify  for  amortized  cost.  This  approach  would 
measure  all  other  financial  instruments  at  fair  value  predominantly  through  the  income 
statement. There is a narrow exception for fair valuing certain strategic equity investments 
through  other  comprehensive  income.  Consistent  with  the  FASB  approach,  the  IASB 
approach would modify the income statement to include all changes in fair value whether or 
not they are included in other comprehensive income. 
By now, you have gotten the picture that both of the approaches under consideration would 
constitute  a  significant  departure  from  current  practice.  Both  of  these  proposals  raise  a 
number of concerns for me: 
• 
From  the  standpoint  of  relevance  and  reliability,  the  FASB  and  IASB  approaches 
would  not  accurately  reflect  the  traditional  commercial  banking  model.  Indeed,  the 
imbedded  incentives  would  actually  favor  "originate  to  distribute"  rather  than 
"originate and hold" lending models.  
Second, we have very little actual experience in fair valuing liabilities. Using fair value 
for liabilities introduces a new set of incentives and risk exposures for management.  
Thirdly,  no  market  currently  exists  for  non-government-guaranteed,  small  business 
loans.  The  lack  of  fair  value  information  for  these  types  of  loans  could  actually 
discourage small business lending.  
Fourth: Smaller banking companies likely will incur substantial costs and experience 
great difficulty in applying the new standards. But will financial statement users see 
any real benefit?  
And finally, the two Boards are planning to exchange views and work products, but 
are not duty-bound to achieving a single converged standard. If the approaches are 
implemented  along  different  timelines  in  the  United  States  and  abroad,  they  could 
bring the two sets of standards further apart and possibly incent some governmental 
bodies to mandate an approach in order to level the playing field. 
    Retaining both lending and trading models 
My  preference  would  be  for  standards  that  recognize  both  lending  and  trading  business 
models for financial intermediation even when they exist within the same firm. My wish list 
would include the following: 
• 
Trading  assets  shown  at  fair  value  with  market  value  gains  and  losses  recognized 
through the income statement;  
Assets held for secondary liquidity shown at fair value with market value gains and 
losses recognized in the capital account through other comprehensive income;  
Assets held to maturity and managed for yield and return of principal over time shown 
at amortized cost with a reserve reflecting life-of-loan or through-the-cycle potential 
credit losses; and  
  BIS Review 107/2009 
 5
 For  business  combinations,  identical  accounting  treatment  for  acquired  assets  and 
similarly managed assets on the acquirer's balance sheet. 
Regulatory changes 
In terms of regulatory changes, our current regulatory capital framework needs to be revised 
to  ensure  that  banking  organizations  have  a  level  of  capital  sufficient  to  facilitate  lending, 
while  also  ensuring  safe  and  sound  operation  throughout  the  economic  cycle.  Work  is 
underway  to  develop  an  approach  that  would  allow  banks  to  retain  more  capital  in  good 
economic  times  and  to  allow  this  excess  or  buffer  to  be  reduced  as  the  economic  cycle 
worsens.  The  goal  is  to  have  a  level  of  capital  that  is  sufficient  to  support  lending,  while 
maintaining safety and soundness. The challenge is to develop an appropriate target for this 
excess amount and to identify the right economic trigger for determining when this excess 
should be reduced. This is a delicate balance. 
In addition, the elements that we consider to be tier 1 capital in our current framework need 
to  be  revised.  Since  our  framework  starts  with  components  of  equity  capital  as  measured 
under  generally  accepted  accounting  principles  (GAAP),  we  are  carefully  evaluating  every 
element of regulatory capital that is treated differently in regulatory capital than in GAAP. For 
example, GAAP equity includes accumulated other comprehensive income (AOCI) and the 
current  regulatory  framework  neutralizes  the  impact  of  certain  items  in  AOCI  such  as 
unrealized holding gains and losses on available-for-sale debt securities. 
And  finally  we  are  coordinating  capital  standard  setting  with  our  counterparts  in  other 
countries. To the extent that GAAP and accounting standards in those countries are different, 
our capital definitions may also differ. 
financial  system  has  become  dependent  upon  securitization  as  an 
Impact on securitization 
Finally, I'd like to offer a quick word of caution on accounting for off-balance-sheet items and 
the future of securitization markets. 
Our 
important 
intermediation  tool.  During  the  crisis,  securitization  markets  ground  to  a  halt.  The  Federal 
Reserve's Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) has helped restart activity in 
some markets, such as securities backed by auto loans or credit card receivables. But the 
CMBS market is still very weak and the market for newly issued, private-label RMBS remains 
closed. And although the TALF has been successful, it is a short-term facility that was only 
intended to give the markets and policymakers time to restructure the securitization model to 
make the securitization markets more viable going forward. 
The  recent  G20  agreement  calls  for  a  retention  of  risk,  or  "skin-in-the-game"  approach  for 
asset  securitizations.  It  also  calls  for  higher  capital  standards  and  a  leverage  ratio  for  all 
banks. If the risk retention requirements, combined with accounting standards governing the 
treatment  of  off-balance-sheet  entities,  make  it  impossible  for  firms  to  reduce  the  balance 
sheet  through  securitization  and  if,  at  the  same  time,  leverage  ratios  limit  balance  sheet 
growth, we could be faced with substantially less credit availability. I'm not arguing with the 
accounting standards or the regulatory direction. I am just saying they must be coordinated 
to avoid potentially limiting the free flow of credit. 
We will learn more about the impact of the new accounting rules on securitization activities 
as banking organizations implement the new standards. We will also learn more about the 
impact  of  our  regulatory  capital  regime  on  securitization  activities  as  we  evaluate  the 
responses  to  our  proposed  changes  to  the  regulatory  capital  guidelines.  In  the  past, 
accounting  rules  and  regulatory  capital  guidelines  have  been  drivers  for  how  the 
securitization model has been structured. As policymakers and others work to create a new 
framework for securitization, we need to be mindful of falling into the trap of letting either the 
6 
 BIS Review 107/2009
accounting  or  regulatory  capital  drive  us  to  the  wrong  model.  This  may  mean  we  have  to 
revisit  the  accounting  or  regulatory  capital  in  order  to  achieve  our  objectives  for  a  viable 
securitization market. A healthy economy needs an array of tools for financial intermediation 
and we need to be careful not to be overly punitive to this particular tool. We just need to 
focus on providing the appropriate incentives, oversight, and accountability. 
Conclusion 
The financial crisis has certainly highlighted the need for a safe and stable financial system. 
To promote confidence and attract capital to the system, we need financial statements that 
provide  maximum  insight  into  the  financial  condition  and  risk  positions  of  financial 
intermediaries. We need supervisory oversight and regulatory constraints, such as regulatory 
capital,  that  provide  safeguards  and  incentives  that  support  our  objectives  of  prudent 
provision  of  credit  and  sustainable  economic  activity.  And  the  accounting  and  supervisory 
frameworks  need  to  recognize  and  support  all  viable  forms  of  financial  intermediation 
regardless  of  whether  it  occurs  in  the  traditional  lending  model,  the  trading  model,  the 
securitization model, or some other business model. In this regard, I believe it is important to 
show in the statements themselves the numbers needed to construct ratio analysis between 
firms or of individual firms across time. 
Finally, I believe that accounting standard setters, regulatory bodies, and lawmakers have a 
vested  interest  in  working  together  to  ensure  the  oversight  mechanisms,  reporting 
frameworks, and other elements of the revitalized financial system operate in a manner that 
is both stable and efficient. 
BIS Review 107/2009 
 7
