 Andrew G Haldane: Rethinking the financial network 
Speech by Mr Andrew G Haldane, Executive Director, Financial Stability, Bank of England, at 
at the Financial Student Association, Amsterdam, 28 April 2009. 
I  would  like  to  thank  Ian  Bond,  Sebastiano  Daros,  Kemal  Ercevik,  David  Gregory,  Sujit  Kapadia,  Iman  van 
Leyveld,  Sarah  Parkinson,  Filipa  Sa,  Nick  Vause,  Lewis  Webber,  Matthew  Willison  and  Peter  Zimmerman  for 
comments and contributions. I would also like to thank Lord Robert May for conversations on the topic. 
 On 16 November 2002, the first official case of Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) 
was  recorded  in  Guangdong  Province,  China.  Panic  ensued.  Uncertainty  about  its  causes 
and  contagious  consequences  brought  many  neighbouring  economies  across  Asia  to  a 
standstill. Hotel occupancy rates in Hong Kong fell from over 80% to less than 15%, while 
among Beijing’s 5-star hotels occupancy rates fell below 2%. 
Media  and  modern  communications  fed  this  frenzy  and  transmitted  it  across  borders.  In 
North America, parents kept their children from school in Toronto, longshoreman refused to 
unload a ship in Tacoma due to concerns about its crew and there was a boycott of large 
numbers of Chinese restaurants across the United States. Dr David Baltimore, Nobel prize 
winner in medicine, commented: “People clearly have reacted to it with a level of fear that is 
incommensurate with the size of the problem”. 
The macroeconomic impact of the SARS outbreak will never be known with any  certainty. 
But it is estimated to stand at anything up to $100 billion in 2003 prices. Across Asia, growth 
rates  were  reduced  by  SARS  by  between  1  and  4  percentage  points.  Yet  in  the  final 
reckoning,  morbidity  and  mortality  rates  were,  by  epidemiological  standards,  modest.  Only 
around 8000 people were infected and fewer than 1000 died.  
On  15  September  2008,  Lehman  Brothers  filed  for  Chapter  11  bankruptcy  in  a  New  York 
courtroom in the United States. Panic ensued. Uncertainty about its causes and contagious 
consequences brought many financial markets and institutions to a standstill. The market for 
Credit Default Swaps (CDS) froze, as Lehman was believed to be counterparty to around $5 
trillion of CDS contracts.  
Media and modern communications fed this frenzy and transmitted it across markets. Banks 
hoarded  liquidity  for  fear  of  lending  to  infected  banks,  causing  gridlock  in  term  money 
markets,  spreads  on  lower-rated  companies’  bonds  spiked  and  there  was  an  effective 
boycott of the remaining large US investment banks. Professor Paul Krugman, Nobel prize 
winner  in  economics,  commented:  “Letting  Lehman  fail  basically  brought  the  entire  world 
capital market down.” 
The  macroeconomic  impact  of  Lehman  Brothers’  failure  will  never  be  known  with  any 
certainty.  IMF  forecasts  of  global  growth  for  2009  have  been  revised  down  by  over  5 
percentage points since Lehman’s failure. Yet in the final reckoning, the direct losses from 
Lehman’s  failure  seem  likely  to  be  relatively  modest.  Net  payouts  on  Lehman’s  CDS 
contracts amounted to only around $5 billion.  
These  similarities  are  striking.  An  external  event  strikes.  Fear  grips  the  system  which,  in 
consequence, seizes. The resulting collateral damage is wide and deep. Yet the triggering 
event is, with hindsight, found to have been rather modest. The flap of a butterfly’s wing in 
New  York  or  Guangdong  generates  a  hurricane  for  the  world  economy.  The  dynamics 
appear chaotic, mathematically and metaphorically.  
These  similarities  are  no  coincidence.  Both  events  were  manifestations  of  the  behaviour 
under stress of a complex, adaptive network. Complex because these networks were a cat’s-
cradle of interconnections, financial and non-financial. Adaptive because behaviour in these 
networks was driven by interactions between optimising, but confused, agents. Seizures in 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 1
the  electricity  grid,  degradation  of  eco-systems,  the  spread  of  epidemics  and  the 
disintegration  of  the  financial  system  –  each  is  essentially  a  different  branch  of  the  same 
network family tree. 
This paper considers the financial system as a complex adaptive system. It applies some of 
the  lessons  from  other  network  disciplines  –  such  as  ecology,  epidemiology,  biology  and 
engineering – to the financial sphere. Peering through the network lens, it provides a rather 
different account of the structural vulnerabilities that built-up in the financial system over the 
past decade and suggests ways of improving its robustness in the period ahead. 
Part 1 provides the diagnosis. Using network theory and evidence, it explains the emergence 
of  two  characteristics  of  the  financial  network  over  the  past  decade  –  complexity  and 
homogeneity. Together, these resulted in a financial network: 
• 
Which was at the same time both robust and fragile – a property exhibited by other 
complex adaptive networks, such as tropical rainforests; 
Whose feedback effects under stress (hoarding of liabilities and fire-sales of assets) 
added to these fragilities – as has been found to be the case in the spread of certain 
diseases; 
Whose  dimensionality  and  hence  complexity  amplified  materially  Knightian 
uncertainties in the pricing of assets – causing seizures in certain financial markets; 
Where  financial  innovation,  in  the  form  of  structured  products,  increased  further 
network dimensionality, complexity and uncertainty; and 
institutions’  business  and  risk 
Whose  diversity  was  gradually  eroded  by 
management  strategies,  making  the  whole  system  less  resistant  to  disturbance  – 
mirroring  the  fortunes  of  marine  eco-systems  whose  diversity  has  been  steadily 
eroded and whose susceptibility to collapse has thereby increased.  
    This evolution in the topology of the network meant that sharp discontinuities in the financial 
system were an accident waiting to happen. The present crisis is the materialisation of that 
accident. 
Given that diagnosis, Part 2 of the paper provides some tentative policy prescriptions. The 
experience of other network disciplines suggests a rather different approach to managing the 
financial network than has been the case in the past, if future systemic dislocations are to be 
averted. Three areas in particular are discussed:  
• 
failure  of 
Data  and  Communications:  to  allow  a  better  understanding  of  network  dynamics 
following a shock and thereby inform public communications. For example, learning 
from  epidemiological  experience  in  dealing  with  SARs,  or  from  macroeconomic 
experience after the Great Depression, putting in place a system to map the global 
financial network and communicate to the public about its dynamics; 
Regulation: to ensure appropriate control of the damaging network consequences of 
the 
from 
experience in epidemiology by seeking actively to vaccinate the “super-spreaders” 
to avert financial contagion; and 
Restructuring:  to  ensure  the  financial  network  is  structured  so  as  to  reduce  the 
chances  of  future  systemic  collapse.  For  example,  learning  from  experience  with 
engineering  networks 
implementation  of  central 
counterparties  and  intra-system  netting  arrangements,  which  reduce  the  financial 
network’s dimensionality and complexity. 
through  more  widespread 
institutions.  For  example 
interconnected 
learning 
large, 
  Networks and finance are not complete strangers. There has been growing interest among 
network  theorists  in  applying  their  techniques  to  financial  phenomena  over  the  past  few 
years.  For  example,  network  techniques  have  already  been  applied  extensively  to  the 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2009
 dynamics of payment systems and inter-bank networks.  But the financial crisis of the past 
two years provides both a greater body of evidence, and a stronger incentive, to apply the 
lessons from other network disciplines to the pressing problems facing financial policymakers 
today. 
1
Part 1: Topology of the financial network 
In many important respects, the current financial crisis is cut from familiar cloth. Its genesis 
was  the  over-extension  of  credit,  over-inflation  of  asset  prices  and  over-exuberance  of 
participants. From the South Sea bubble to the sub-prime crisis, this roll-call of excesses is 
familiar. Gerald Corrigan, ex-President of the New York Fed, said ahead of the crisis: 
“In  recent  years  the  pace  of  change  and  innovation  in  financial  markets 
and institutions here and around the world has increased enormously as 
have  the  speed,  volume  and  value  of  financial  transactions.  The  period 
has  also  seen  a  greatly  heightened  degree  of  aggressive  competition  in 
the financial sector. All of this is taking place in the context of a legal and a 
regulatory  framework  which  is  increasingly  outdated  and  ill-equipped  to 
meet the challenges of the day. This has led to…concern that the fragility 
of  the  system  has  increased,  in  part  because  the  degree  of  operational, 
liquidity and credit interdependency has risen sharply”.2  
Corrigan  was  speaking  in  January  1987.  The  crisis  foretold  was  the  October  1987  stock 
market crash. Plus ça change. 
Yet  in  some  more  fundamental  respects  this  time’s  crisis  feels  different  –  larger  probably, 
more  discontinuous,  complex  and  interconnected  certainly.  There  are  already  numerous 
accounts of why that might be. Here, I argue that these knife-edge dynamics can essentially 
be explained by two structural features of the financial network. These have developed over 
many  years  but  at  particular  pace  over  the  past  decade.  They  are  complexity  on  the  one 
hand, and homogeneity on the other.  
In  essence,  the  financial  network  has  over  time  become  progressively  more  complex  and 
less diverse. Why? And what have been the consequences? 
In  the  1987  film  Wall  Street,  the  financial  sector  mantra  was  “greed  is  good”.  The  stock 
market crash of the same year put paid to that doctrine, at least temporarily. By the early part 
of  this  century,  both  the  circumstances  and  the  individuals  had  changed.  So  too  had  the 
mantra.  It  had  become  the  rather  gentler  “diversification  is  desirable”.  Risk-taking  became 
less Gordon Gekko and more Merton Miller.  
Diversification came care of two complementary business strategies. The first was “originate 
and distribute”. Risk became a commodity. As  such it could be bundled, sliced, diced and 
then re-bundled for onward sale. Credit became, in the jargon, structured. Securitisation was 
one vehicle for achieving this. Derivatives, such as CDS, were another. As these marketable 
instruments passed between participants, the network chain lengthened.  
In principle, these instruments delivered a Pareto-improving reallocation of risk. Risk would 
flow  to  those  best  able  to  bear  it.  They  had  deep  pockets  which  they  sought  to  line  with 
higher yield. For the system as a whole, this sounded like the land of milk and honey. For a 
risk shared was a risk halved – perhaps more than halved, given the magic of diversification. 
The network chain, meanwhile, just kept on growing. 
                                                 
1   Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2007); May, Levin and Sugihara (2008); Allen and Gale (2000).  
2   Corrigan (1987). 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 3
The second strategy was diversification of business lines. Firms migrated activity to where 
returns looked largest. As each new day dawned – leveraged loans yesterday, CDOs today, 
proprietary  trading  tomorrow  –  the  whole  sector  was  drawn  to  the  new  source  of  sunlight. 
Through competitive forces, finance engaged in a frantic game of follow-the-leader, played 
for real money. 
From an individual firm perspective, these strategies indeed looked like sensible attempts to 
purge risk through diversification: more eggs were being placed in the basket. Viewed across 
the system as a whole, however, it is clear now that these strategies generated the opposite 
result: the greater the number of eggs, the greater the fragility of the basket – and the greater 
the probability of bad eggs. 
Securitisation  increased  the  dimensionality,  and  thus  complexity,  of  the  financial  network. 
Nodes grew in size and interconnections between them multiplied. The financial cat’s-cradle 
became dense and opaque. As a result, the precise source and location of underlying claims 
became anyone’s guess. Follow-the-leader became blind-man’s buff. In short, diversification 
strategies  by  individual  firms  generated  heightened  uncertainty  across  the  system  as  a 
whole.  
Meanwhile,  a  strategy  of  changing  the  way  they  had  looked  in  the  past  led  to  many  firms 
looking the same as each other in the present. Banks’ balance sheets, like Tolstoy’s happy 
families, grew all alike. So too did their risk management strategies. Financial firms looked 
alike and responded alike. In short, diversification strategies by individual firms generated a 
lack of diversity across the system as a whole.  
So  what  emerged  during  this  century  was  a  financial  system  exhibiting  both  greater 
complexity  and  less  diversity.  Up  until  2007,  many  participants  in  financial  markets  would 
have  viewed  that  network  evolution  as  the  inevitable  by-product  of  technical  progress  in 
finance. Until then, complexity plus homogeneity equalled stability.  
But  in  just  about  every  non-financial  discipline  –  from  ecologists  to  engineers,  from 
geneticists to geologists – this evolution would have set alarm bells ringing. Based on their 
experience,  complexity  plus  homogeneity  did  not  spell  stability;  it  spelt  fragility.  In 
understanding why, it is useful to explore some of the wider lessons from those disciplines, 
taking in turn the effects of complexity and diversity on stability. 
Complexity and stability 
Tropical rainforests are a complex adaptive system. In the immediate post-war period, these 
eco-systems  were  often  used  as  a  case-study  when  demonstrating  why  complex  systems 
tended  to  exhibit  greater  stability.3  In  Elton’s  (1958)  words,  this  was  because  there  are 
“always  enough  enemies  and  parasites  available  to  turn  on  any  species  that  starts  being 
unusually  numerous”.  Complexity  strengthened  self-regulatory  forces  in  systems,  so 
improving robustness. This was the prevailing ecological wisdom up until the early 1970s. 
That  conventional  wisdom  has  since  been  turned  on  its  head.  From  the  1970s  onwards, 
orthodoxy  was  altered  by  a  combination  of  enriched  mathematical  models  and  practical 
experience.4  Counter-examples  emerged,  with  some  simple  eco-systems  –  savannas  and 
grasslands  –  found  to  exhibit  high  robustness  and  some  complex  eco-systems  proving 
vulnerable 
tropical  rainforests 
highlighted their inherent fragility. Not for nothing did rainforests become known as a “non-
renewable” resource from the early 1970s.  
large-scale  clearance  of 
to  attack.  Perhaps 
tellingly, 
                                                 
3   For example, Voute (1946) and Elton (1958).  
4   For example, May (1974). 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2009
 Finance appears to be following in ecologists’ footsteps, albeit with a generational lag. Until 
recently, mathematical models of finance pointed to the stabilising effects of financial network 
completeness.5  Connectivity  meant  risk  dispersion.  Real-world  experience  appeared  to 
confirm that logic. Between 1997 and 2007, buffeted by oil prices shocks, wars and dotcom 
mania, the financial system stood tall; it appeared self-regulating and self-repairing. Echoes 
of 1950s ecology were loud and long. 
The  past  18  months  have  revealed  a  system  which  has  shown  itself  to  be  neither  self-
regulating nor self-repairing. Like the rainforests, when faced with a big shock, the financial 
system has at times risked becoming non-renewable. Many of the reasons for this have a 
parallel  in  other  disciplines.  In  particular,  in  making  sense  of  recent  financial  network 
dynamics,  four  mechanisms  appear  to  have  been  important:  connectivity;  feedback; 
uncertainty; and innovation. 
6
Connectivity and stability 
(a)  
Over the past 30 years, a great deal has been established about the links between network 
connectivity  and  robustness.  These  lessons  span  a  range  of  disciplines  including  physics, 
biology, engineering and epidemiology. There are perhaps three key robustness results from 
this literature which are relevant to the financial system.  
Perhaps the key one concerns the “robust-yet-fragile” property of connected networks.  The 
intuition behind this result is beguilingly simple, but its implications profound. In a nutshell, 
interconnected  networks  exhibit  a  knife-edge,  or  tipping  point,  property.  Within  a  certain 
range,  connections  serve  as  a  shock-absorber.  The  system  acts  as  a  mutual  insurance 
device  with  disturbances  dispersed  and  dissipated.  Connectivity  engenders  robustness. 
Risk-sharing – diversification – prevails. 
But  beyond  a  certain  range,  the  system  can  flip  the  wrong  side  of  the  knife-edge. 
Interconnections serve as shock-amplifiers, not dampeners, as losses cascade. The system 
acts not as a mutual insurance device but as a mutual incendiary device. Risk-spreading – 
fragility – prevails. The extent of the systemic dislocation is often disproportionate to the size 
of  the  initial  shock.  Even  a  modest  piece  of  news  might  be  sufficient  to  take  the  system 
beyond its tipping point. This same basic logic has latterly been applied to financial systems, 
using mathematical models and simulated data.7  
These knife-edge dynamics match closely the behaviour of the financial system in the recent 
past. A lengthy period of seeming robustness (the Golden Decade from 1997 to 2007) was 
punctuated by an acute period of financial fragility (the period since). The shock causing this 
tipping point to be reached – the sub-prime crisis – was by global financial standards rather 
modest.  The  robust-yet-fragile  property  of  networks  helps  make  sense  of  these  non-linear 
financial  dynamics.  Though  they  looked  and  felt  like  chaos,  these  dynamics  were  in  fact 
manifestations of a new network order. 
The  second  key  robustness  result  concerns  the  “long-tailed  distribution”  of  connected 
networks. The degree of a node measures the number of links to other nodes. So the degree 
distribution could be thought of as a histogram of the number of links for each node. For a 
network  whose  links  are  randomly  configured, this  degree distribution would  be  symmetric 
and bell-shaped; it would have a fat middle and thin tails.  
                                                 
5   For example, Allen and Gale (op.cit).  
6   For example, May and Anderson (1991), Albert et al (2004), Kinney et al (2005), Watts (2002). 
7   For example, at the Bank of England by Nier et al (2008) and Gai and Kapadia (2008); and by Battiston et al 
(2009) and Gallegati et al (2008).  
BIS Review 53/2009 
 5
But  many  real-world  networks  do  not  exhibit  these  properties,  including  the  internet, 
biological food webs and epidemiology networks.8 Instead these networks have been found 
to have a thin middle and long, fat tails. There is a larger than expected number of nodes 
with both a smaller and a larger number of links than average. Some financial networks, such 
as payment systems, have also been found to exhibit long tails.9
Long  tails  have  been  shown  to  have  important  implications  for  network  robustness.  In 
particular,  long-tailed  distributions  have  been  shown  to  be  more  robust  to  random 
disturbances, but more susceptible to targeted attacks.10 Why? Because a targeted attack on 
a hub risks bringing the heart of the system to a standstill, whereas random attacks are most 
likely to fall on the periphery. 
This result carries important policy implications. Long periods of apparent robustness, where 
peripheral  nodes  are  subject  to  random  shocks,  should  offer  little  comfort  or  assurance  of 
network health. It is only when the hub – a large or connected financial institution – is subject 
to stress that network dynamics will be properly unearthed. When large financial institutions 
came under stress during this crisis, these adverse system-wide network dynamics revealed 
themselves.  
 The origin 
The third result is the well-known “small world” property of connected networks.
of  this  was  a  chain  letter  experiment  by  Stanley  Milgram  in  1967.  This  showed  that  the 
average path length (number of links) between any two individuals was around six – hence 
“six  degrees  of  separation”.  Although  networks  tend  to  exhibit  local  clustering  or 
neighbourhoods, certain key nodes can introduce short-cuts connecting otherwise detached 
local communities.  
This  small  world  property  has  again  been  found  across  a  range  of  physical  networks, 
including the World Wide Web and forest fires.12 Its implications for network robustness are 
subtle. In general, however, it will tend to increase the likelihood of local disturbances having 
global  effects  –  so-called  “long  hops”.  That  could  occur  between  different  institutions  or 
between  different  nation  states.  Either  way,  a  small  world  is  more  likely  to  turn  a  local 
problem into a global one. 
So  what  evidence  do  we  have  on  these  three  characteristics  in  real  financial  networks? 
Charts 1-3 look at the evolution in the international financial network. In particular, they look 
at cross-border stocks of external assets and liabilities in 18 countries at three dates: 1985, 
1995 and 2005. These data can be used to gauge the scale and evolution of interconnectivity 
within the global financial network.  
In Charts 1-3, the nodes are scaled in proportion to total external financial stocks, while the 
thickness  of  the  links  between  nodes  is  proportional  to  bilateral  external  financial  stocks 
relative to GDP.13 Table 1, meanwhile, provides some summary statistics for the international 
financial  network,  in  particular  measures  of  the  skew  and  fat-tailedness  in  the  degree 
distribution and its average path length.  
Three  key  points  emerge.  First,  it  is  clear  that  the  scale  and  interconnectivity  of  the 
international financial network has increased significantly over the past two decades. Nodes 
11
                                                 
8   May (2006). 
9   Pröpper et al (2008). 
10   May and Anderson (1991), Porterie et al (2008). 
11   Watts and Strogatz (1998). 
12   On the former see Albert et al (2000); on the latter see Porterie et al (2008). 
13   Specifically, nodes are scaled by (Total External Assets + Total External Liabilities) for each node, and links 
between nodes i and j by (Total External Assetsij + Total External Liabilitiesij )/(GDPi + GDPj). The data are 
developed and analysed in Kubulec and Sa (2008).  
6 
 BIS Review 53/2009
 have  ballooned,  increasing  roughly  14-fold.  And  links  have  become  both  fatter  and  more 
frequent,  increasing  roughly  6-fold.  The  network  has  become  markedly  more  dense  and 
complex.  And  what  is  true  between  countries  is  also  likely  to  have  been  true  between 
institutions within countries.  
Second,  the  international  financial  network  exhibits  a  long-tail.  Measures  of  skew  and 
kurtosis  suggest  significant  asymmetry  in  the  network’s  degree  distribution.  Global  finance 
appears to comprise a relatively small number of financial hubs with multiple spokes.  
Third, the average path length of the international financial network has also shrunk over the 
past  twenty  years.  Between  the  largest  nation  states,  there  are  fewer  than  1.4  degrees  of 
separation. Were the network extended beyond the 18 countries in the sample, the evolution 
of this “small world” property would be clearer still.  
So based on evidence from a sampled international financial network, the past twenty years 
have resulted in a financial system with high and rising degrees of interconnection, a long-
tailed degree distribution and small world properties. That is an unholy trinity. From a stability 
perspective, it translates into a robust-yet-fragile system, susceptible to a loss of confidence 
in the key financial hubs and with rapid international transmission of disturbances. That is not 
the  worst  description  of  financial events  over  the  past  decade  –  and  in  particular  over  the 
past 18 months. 
Feedback and stability 
(b) 
In epidemiology, the impact of a disease depends crucially on such structural parameters as 
the mortality rate once infected and the transmission rate across agents.14 The first is largely 
fixed and biological. But the second is likely to be variable and sociological. In other words, 
agents’ responses to infection, or indeed the fear of infection, are often crucial in determining 
its rate of transmission. 
In practice, these behavioural responses typically take one of two forms: “hide” or “flight”. For 
example, the response to the SARS epidemic in the 21st century was a “hide” response, with 
people self-quarantining by staying at home and with flight, in this case literally, prohibited. 
But the response to yellow fever in North America in the 19th century was “flight”, with half 
the population of Memphis fleeing in 1878.15
Either response is rational from an individual perspective. Both responses have the aim of 
removing  that  individual  from  circulation  with  other,  potentially  infectious,  agents.  But  the 
implications  of  these  responses  for  infection  rates  across  the  system  are  potentially  very 
different. Hide responses tend to contain infection locally, thus protecting the system globally. 
This  was  the  SARS  experience.  Flight,  by  contrast,  tends  to  propagate  infection  globally. 
This was the yellow fever experience, as incidence of the disease followed the railroad line 
out of Memphis.16
During  this  financial  crisis,  faced  with  fears  about  infection,  similar  sets  of  behavioural 
responses by financial institutions have occurred. Only the names are different. The “hiding” 
has taken the form of hoarding, typically of liquidity. And the “flight” from infected cities has 
taken the form of flight from infected assets, as institutions have sold toxic assets. Unlike in 
an epidemiological context, however, both behavioural responses have aggravated stresses 
in the financial system. How so?  
                                                 
14   May (2006), Newman (2002). 
15   Epstein et al (2008) provide a range of examples.  
16   Wheelis  (2006)  provides  an  excellent  example  of  the  role  of  human  (in  this  particular  case  literal)  flight  in 
transmitting the Plague to Europe in the 14th Century. Transmission of the Plague was reputedly the result of 
Genoese traders fleeing the Crimean city of Caffa after the Mongol army had catapulted infected corpses over 
the city walls. 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 7
Banks  entered  the  crisis  with  a  large  portfolio  of  risky  assets.  As  risk  materialised,  banks 
rationally sought to protect themselves from infection from other banks by hoarding liquidity 
rather  than  on-lending  it.  The  result  has  been  enduring  stress  in  money  markets.  Banks’ 
mutual  interdependence  in  inter-bank  networks  meant  that  individually-rational  actions 
generated a collectively worse funding position for all.  
That,  in  turn,  contributed  to  the  second  behavioural  response.  Unable  easily  to  fund  their 
asset portfolio, some financial firms instead opted for flight through sales of assets. These 
acted  like  the  railroad  out  of  Memphis,  placing  downward  pressure  on  asset  prices  and 
thereby  spreading  the  infection  to  other  institutions.  Others’  immunity  to  infection  was 
simultaneously being lowered by widespread marking of assets to market. In escaping the 
plague, asset flight served to propagate it.  
These behavioural dynamics – panic hoarding of liabilities, distress sales of assets – have 
been defining features of this crisis. Placing these responses in a network framework clarifies 
the individual rationalities, but collective externalities, that drove these actions. These rational 
responses by banks to fear of infection added to the fragility of an already robust-yet-fragile 
financial network.  
Uncertainty and stability 
(c)  
A  related,  but  separate,  behavioural  response  to  fear  of  infection  is  felt  in  the  pricing  of 
financial instruments. Networks generate chains of claims. At times of stress, these chains 
can amplify uncertainties about true counterparty exposures. Who is really at the end of the 
chain – Warren Buffett or Bernard Madoff? Through their impact on counterparty uncertainty, 
networks have important consequences for dynamics and pricing in financial markets.  
To illustrate, consider the case of pricing in the CDS market – an inherently complex, high 
dimension market. In particular, consider Bank A seeking insurance from Bank B against the 
failure  of  Entity  C.  Bank  A  faces  counterparty  risk  on  Bank  B.  If  that  were  the  end  of  the 
story,  network  uncertainty  would  not  much  matter.  Bank  A  could  monitor  Bank  B’s 
creditworthiness, if necessary directly, and price the insurance accordingly. 
But what if Bank B itself has n counterparties? And what if each of these n counterparties 
itself  has  n  counterparties?  Knowing  your  ultimate  counterparty’s  risk  then  becomes  like 
solving  a  high-dimension  Sudoku  puzzle.  Links  in  the  chain,  like  cells  in  the  puzzle,  are 
unknown – and determining your true risk position is thereby problematic. 
For Bank A, not knowing the links in the chain means that judging the default prospects of 
Bank B becomes a lottery. Indeed, in some ways it is worse than a lottery, whose odds are at 
least  known.  In  this  example,  Bank  A  faces  uncertainty  in  the  Knightian  sense,  as  distinct 
from risk, about the true network structure. Counterparty risk is not just unknown; it is almost 
unknowable. And the higher the dimensionality of the network, the greater that uncertainty. 
It is possible to formalise this intuition with some simple numerical examples.
Consider two states of the world, pre-crisis and crisis. And consider the impact of network 
complexity  on  CDS  pricing.  Once  we  introduce  Knightian  uncertainty,  asset  prices  are  no 
longer  determinate;  they  are  defined  by  a  range  rather  than  a  point.  So  the  range  of 
equilibrium CDS spreads can be taken as a metric of the uncertainty, and hence distortion, 
arising from different network structures.  
Chart 4 plots a pre-crisis world where it is assumed that counterparty default probabilities, 
and the uncertainty around them, are low. Subject to those assumptions, it illustrates how the 
range of CDS spreads is affected by Bank B’s number of counterparties. Larger numbers of 
 17
                                                 
17   The following is based on work in progress at the Bank on asset pricing under network Knightian uncertainty, 
by Sebastiano Daros and Kemal Ercevik. 
8 
 BIS Review 53/2009
 counterparties are marginally beneficial. There is a “law of large numbers” benefit. Broadly-
speaking, however, network dimensionality has no material bearing on CDS pricing.  
Chart 5 simulates a crisis world in which the default probability of Bank B has risen and so 
too the uncertainty around that probability. The difference is striking. Pricing uncertainty now 
increases  with  the  dimensionality  of  the  web.  Extra  counterparties  add  to,  rather  than 
subtract  from,  pricing  distortions.  There  is  a  “law  of  large  numbers”  cost.  That  uncertainty 
cost, or Knightian distortion, is roughly proportional the dimension of the network. 
It  is  difficult  not  to  draw  comparisons  with  Lehman’s  experience.  Lehman  had  large  CDS 
counterparty  exposures  relative  to  its  balance  sheet  and  hundreds  of  counterparties.  AIG 
was  similarly  situated.  It  is  little  wonder  participants  took  fright  as  both  institutions  came 
under stress, fearful not so much of direct counterparty risk, but of indirect counterparty risks 
emanating from elsewhere in the network. The network chain was so complex that spotting 
the weakest link became impossible. This added yet a further layer of fragility to the financial 
system.  
Innovation and stability 
(d)  
A  fourth  dimension  to  complexity  in  network  chains  derives  from  the  effects  of  financial 
innovation. Over the past decade, this often took a particular form – structured credit – with 
risk decomposed and then reconstituted like the meat in an increasingly exotic sausage. The 
result was a complex interlocking set of claims. With each restructuring of ingredients, the 
web branched and the dimensionality of the network multiplied.  
Chart 6 shows some of the interlocking networks of structured products that emerged. I will 
not attempt to describe this chart; it would take too long and, even if I had the time, I doubt I 
would  have  the  ability.  These  were  the  self-same  constraints  –  time,  complexity  –  which 
faced  investors  in  these  products.  Due  diligence  was  the  casualty.  End-investors  in  these 
instruments were no more likely to know the name of the companies in their portfolios than 
the name of the cow or pig in their exotic hot dog. 
To  illustrate,  consider  an  investor  conducting  due  diligence  on  a  set  of  financial  claims: 
RMBS, ABS CDOs and CDO2. How many pages of documentation would a diligent investor 
need  to  read  to  understand  these  products?  Table  2  provides  the  answer.  For  simpler 
products,  this  is  just  about  feasible  –  for  example,  around  200  pages,  on  average,  for  an 
RMBS investor. But an investor in a CDO2 would need to read in excess of 1 billion pages to 
understand fully the ingredients.  
With a PhD in mathematics under one arm and a Diploma in speed-reading under the other, 
this  task  would  have  tried  the  patience  of  even  the  most  diligent  investor.  With  no time  to 
read  the  small-print,  the  instruments  were  instead  devoured  whole.  Food  poisoning  and  a 
lengthy loss of appetite have been the predictable consequences. Though it had aimed to 
dampen institutional risk, innovation in financial instruments served to amplify further network 
fragility. 
Diversity and stability 
A  final  dimension  to  network  robustness  concerns  the  effects  of  diversity.  The  oceans 
provide a rich and lengthy test-bed of the links between diversity and robustness. Over the 
past millennium, studies of coastal eco-systems reveal some dramatic patterns.18 For around 
800  years,  between  the  years  1000-1800AD,  fish  stocks  and  species  numbers  were 
seemingly stable and robust. Since then, almost 40% of fish species across the world’s major 
                                                 
18   The results here are based on Worm et al (2006). 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 9
coastal  eco-systems  have  “collapsed”,  defined  here  as  a  fall  in  population  of  greater  than 
90%. That is systemic by any metric.  
There appear to be many environmental reasons for this collapse, some natural, others man-
made. But the distribution of this collapse across eco-systems is revealing. For species-rich – 
that is, diverse – eco-systems the rate of collapse has been as low as 10%; for species-poor 
eco-systems,  as  high  as  60%.  Diverse  coastal  eco-systems  have  proved  to  be  markedly 
more robust, measured over century spans. 
Results for large marine eco-systems suggest a similar picture. Over the period 1950-2003, 
the incidence of collapsed fisheries declines exponentially with species-diversity.19 Diversity 
also appears to increase the resilience of fisheries – that is, their capacity to recover – in the 
event of collapse. These results reappear throughout marine eco-systems, “in coral reefs in 
Jamaica and on rocky shores in Panama”.20  
And they do not appear to be unique to marine eco-systems. For example, similar effects of 
diversity have been found in studies of the resilience of crops to pathogen outbreaks; in the 
robustness  of  savannas  and  grassland  to  drought;  and  in  morbidity  and  mortality  rates 
among humans facing disease and infection.21 Diversity of the gene pool, it seems, improves 
durability.  
The  financial  system  has  mirrored  the  fortunes  of  the  fisheries,  for  many  of  the  same 
reasons. Since the start of 2007, 23 of the largest European and US banks have seen their 
market capitalisation fall by 90% or more – the fisheries equivalent of collapse. But what took 
marine eco-systems two hundred years to achieve has been delivered by financial engineers 
in two. In explaining the collapse in fish and finance, lack of diversity seems to be a common 
denominator.  
Within  the  financial  sector,  diversity  appears  to  have  been  reduced  for  two  separate,  but 
related,  reasons:  the  pursuit  of  return;  and  the  management  of  risk.  The  pursuit  of  yield 
resulted  in  a  return  on  equity  race  among  all  types  of  financial  firm.  As  they  collectively 
migrated  to  high-yield  activities,  business  strategies  came  to  be  replicated  across  the 
financial sector. Imitation became the sincerest form of flattery. 
So savings cooperatives transformed themselves into private commercial banks. Commercial 
banks ventured into investment banking. Investment banks developed in-house hedge funds 
through  large  proprietary  trading  desks.  Funds  of  hedge  funds  competed  with  traditional 
investment  funds.  And  investment  funds  –  pension,  money  market  mutual,  insurance  – 
imported the risk the others were shedding.  
Cumulative returns earned by, on the face of it, very different financial models illustrate this 
story  (Chart  7).  Looking  across  global  banks,  large  complex  financial  institutions  (LCFIs), 
insurance  companies  and  hedge  funds,  cumulative  returns  have  exhibited  a  remarkably 
similar pattern, both in the run-up to crisis and in the subsequent run-down. Rolling averages 
of  pairwise  correlations  across  sectors  averaged  in  excess  of  0.9  throughout  the  period 
2004-2007. At the height of the credit boom, financial imitation appears to have turned into 
near-cloning. Flattery gave way to fat-cattery. 
What was true across financial sectors was also true within them. For example, hedge fund 
strategies  rejoice  in  such  oblique  names  as  “convertible  arbitrage”  and  “dedicated  short 
bias”. The average pairwise correlation between these different funds’ strategies was roughly 
zero at the turn of the century. By 2008, it had risen to around 0.35. Far from daring to be 
different, hedge funds seem increasingly to have hunted as a pack.  
                                                 
19   Worm et al (op.cit.). 
20   Levin and Lubchenco (2008). 
21   For example, Tilman (1999) and Clay (2004). 
10 
 BIS Review 53/2009
 Management of the risks resulting from these strategies amplified this homogeneity. Basel II 
provided a prescriptive rule-book ensuring a level playing field. Ratings were hard-wired into 
regulation.  Risk  models  blossomed,  with  Value-at-Risk  (VaR)  and  stress-testing  providing 
seductively precise outputs. Like blossom, these models looked and acted alike – and may 
yet prove similarly ephemeral. The level playing field resulted in everyone playing the same 
game at the same time, often with the same ball. 
Through  these  channels,  financial  sector  balance  sheets  became  homogenised.  Finance 
became a monoculture. In consequence, the financial system became, like plants, animals 
and  oceans  before  it,  less  disease-resistant.  When  environmental  factors  changed  for  the 
worse,  the  homogeneity  of  the  financial  eco-system  increased  materially  its  probability  of 
collapse. 
So where does this leave us? With a financial system exhibiting, for individually quite rational 
reasons,  increasing  complexity  and  homogeneity.  A  network  which,  in  consequence,  was 
robust-yet-fragile. A network predisposed to tipping points and discontinuities, even for small 
shocks. A network which, like Tolstoy’s unhappy families, could be unhappy in quite different 
ways. A network mostly self-repairing, but occasionally self-destructing. A network which, like 
the little girl with the curl, when the going was good was very, very good – but when it turned 
bad was horrid. 
Part 2: Improving network stability 
This  is  a  gloomy  prognosis:  a  financial  system  teetering  between  triumph  and  disaster. 
Unlike  Kipling,  policymakers  in  practice  are  unlikely  to  treat  those  two  imposters  just  the 
same. Recent events have rather illustrated that. Public interventions in the financial system 
during this crisis – through liquidity injections, capital injections or public sector guarantees – 
already total in excess of £5 trillion.22  
So what could be done to protect the financial network from future such dynamics? And are 
there lessons from other network disciplines which might help inform these efforts? Let me 
highlight three areas where improvements in the robustness of the financial network seem 
feasible: mapping; regulating; and restructuring.  
Mapping the network 
(a)  
The SARS episode may be remembered by historians as an overblown economic reaction to 
a small health risk – that was Nobel Laureate Dr David Baltimore’s prognosis. But there is an 
alternative  reading  of  the  runes,  one  which  offers  some  lessons,  and  not  a  little  hope,  for 
financial policymakers. 
In  2000,  the  World  Health  Organisation  (WHO)  established  the  Global  Outbreak  Alert  and 
Response  Network  (GOARN).  This  brings  together  over  120  international  institutions  and 
networks to share resources to better identify and manage outbreaks. In the case of SARS, 
the speed and scale of response was striking.  
On 12 March 2003, less than two weeks after the Hong Kong outbreak, the WHO issued a 
global  health  alert.  On  15  March,  a  “general  travel  advisory”  was  issued.  By  17  March,  a 
network of scientists from 11 laboratories in 9 countries was established to devise diagnostic 
tests,  analyse  samples  and  share  results  in  real  time.  This  allowed  national  agencies  to 
promulgate information quickly and widely, with governments in Thailand, Malaysia, China, 
                                                 
22   For example, Bank of England Financial Stability Report, October 2008. 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 11
Singapore  and  Canada  each  imposing  some  combination  of  travel  bans,  quarantining  and 
public health notices.23
These measures appear to have contributed both to the rapid subsidence of SARS-related 
fears  and  uncertainties  among  the  general  public  and  to  containing  the  spread  of  the 
disease.  Since  April  2004,  there  have  been  no  reported  cases  of  SARS.  The  global 
information infrastructure of GOARN is widely acknowledged as having helped nip the SARS 
crisis in the bud.  
There are important lessons here for the financial system. At present, risk measurement in 
financial systems is atomistic. Risks are evaluated node by node. In a network, this approach 
gives  little  sense  of  risks  to  the  nodes,  much  less  to  the  overall  system.  It  risks  leaving 
policymakers navigating in dense fog when assessing the dynamics of the financial system 
following failure. The market repercussions of Lehman’s failure were in part the result of such 
restricted visibility.  
What more might be done to prevent a repeat? Part of the answer lies in improved data, part 
in  improved  analysis  of  that  data,  and  part  in  improved  communication  of  the  results.  On 
data, in some real-world physical networks, data is collected on virtually all nodes and links. 
For  example,  in  modelling  the  US  electricity  grid,  data  are  collected  on  all  major  power 
stations (nodes) and power lines (links).24 As these total 14,000 and 20,000 respectively, this 
is a large-dimension network.  
Data from physical networks such as the power grid are relatively easy to collect. For many 
other large-dimension networks, sampling techniques are typically required. These typically 
take one of three forms: node sampling; link sampling; and “snowball” sampling.25 There are 
lessons for the financial system from all three.  
To  date,  sampling  of  nodes  has  been  the  dominant  means  of  assessing  risk  within  the 
financial  system,  typically  for  a  sub-set  of  the  nodes  such  as  banks.  Where  non-bank 
financial intermediaries are an important part of the network, sampling of nodes has shown 
itself deficient. For example, little was known about the activities of off balance sheet vehicles 
–  SIVs  and  conduits  –  ahead  of  crisis.  More  fundamentally,  this  approach  provides  little 
information  on  the  links  between  nodes.  These  are  central  to  understanding  network 
dynamics.  Imagine  assessing  the  robustness  of  the  electricity  grid  with  data  on  power 
stations but not on the power lines connecting them. 
Sampling of links has historically been little deployed when analysing the financial system. 
Some  data  exist  on  the  degree  of  linkage  between  financial  firms  –  for  example,  from 
regulatory  returns  on 
to  construct  rough 
approximations  of  inter-bank  networks.26  But  these  data  are  typically  partial  and  lack 
timeliness. They are weak foundations for understanding the financial network. 
That  takes  us  to  snowballing  –  that  is,  constructing  a  picture  of  the  network  by  working 
outwards from the links to one of the nodes. As a way of understanding the financial web, 
there  are  attractions  to  this  approach.  It  is  agnostic  about  which  are  the  key  nodes  and 
important links. Network boundaries are uncovered by following the money, rather than by 
using institutional labels or national or regulatory boundaries.  
Applied in practice, this approach might have helped identify some of the key nodal sources 
of  risk  ahead  of  financial  crisis.  In  early  2007,  it  is  doubtful  whether  many  of  the  world’s 
large  exposures.  This  has  been  used 
                                                 
23   For example, Smith (2006) and McKercher and Chon (2004). 
24   For example, Kinney et al (2005). 
25   Lee, Kim and Jeong (2006).  
26   Propper et al (2008). 
12 
 BIS Review 53/2009
 largest  financial  institutions  were  more  than  two  or  three  degrees  of  separation  from  AIG. 
And in 1998, it is unlikely that many of the world’s largest banks were more than one or two 
degrees of separation from LTCM. Rolling the snowball might have identified these financial 
black holes before they swallowed too many planets. 
There have been a number of recent policy proposals in this general area. For example, the 
de Larosiere Report (2009) calls for a European and, ultimately, global initiative to create an 
international register of claims between financial institutions. A similar initiative following the 
LDC  debt  crisis  resulted  in  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  (BIS)  developing 
international banking statistics. These are now an essential source of international financial 
network  data.  There  is  a  need  for  similar  ambition  now  in  fashioning  international  flow  of 
funds and balance sheet data. 
Even  with  these  data,  policymakers  and  practitioners  need  to  invest  in  new  means  of 
analysis. Node-by-node diagnostics, such as VaR, have shown themselves during this crisis 
to offer a poor guide to institutional robustness. Fortunately, network theorists have identified 
some of the key summary statistics determining system robustness.27 This includes degree 
distributions  and  average  path  lengths.  In  time,  network  diagnostics  such  as  these  may 
displace atomised metrics such as VaR in the armoury of financial policymakers. 
To these static diagnostics could be added dynamic summary statistics of network resilience, 
such as simulated responses to nodal failure or stress. Stress-testing to date has focussed 
on institutional, idiosyncratic risk. It needs instead to focus on system-wide, systematic risk.28 
Advances in computing power mean that technology is no longer a constraint. In studies of 
the  electricity  grid,  simulations  of  hundreds  of  thousands  of  observations  are  common. 
Finance can piggy-back on these efforts.  
After  data  and  analysis  comes,  crucially,  communication.  Network  information  is  a  classic 
public good. Not only is it in no-one’s individual interest to collect it; nor is it remotely within 
anyone’s compass. Aggregate data are a job for the authorities. And having been collected, 
these results need then to be disseminated. This is important both ex-ante as a means of 
better pricing and managing risk, and ex-post as a means of containing that risk.  
In a world of 24/7 media, public communications during crisis become crucial. That was the 
lesson  from  SARS  –  and  may  yet  be  the  enduring  lesson  from  Lehman.  From  mid-
September to mid-October 2008, the financial crisis did not just dominate the news; it was 
the news. Only a hermit could have failed to have their perceptions shaped by this tale of 
woe. As woe became the popular narrative, depressed expectations may have become self-
fulfilling.  
In their recent book, Animal Spirits, George Akerlof and Robert Shiller emphasise the role of 
popular psychology – “stories” – in shaping people’s perceptions and actions. Depression is 
a  psychological state  as  well  as  an economic  one.  Perhaps  the  best  explanation  we  have 
about  events  following  the  Lehman  crisis  is  that  these  two  states  merged.  Adroit 
communications  by  the  authorities,  like  counselling,  might  help  head-off  future  bouts  of 
clinical depression in the financial system. 
This  is  undoubtedly  an  ambitious  agenda.  But  experience  after  the  Great  Depression 
suggests  grounds  for  optimism.  That  crisis  brought  about  a  revolution  in  thinking  about 
macroeconomic theory and macroeconomic policy. In many respects, it marked the birth of 
modern  macroeconomic  models  – 
IS/LM  analysis  –  and  modern 
macroeconomic policy – in the form of activist monetary and fiscal policy.  
form  of 
the 
in 
                                                 
27   Newman (2002). 
28   Haldane (2009). 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 13
Though  less  heralded,  it  also  resulted  in  a  revolution  in  macroeconomic  data.  Despite 
attempts in the 1920s and 1930s, it was from the 1940s onwards that national accounts data 
emerged for the main developed economies. This was largely a response to the evolution in 
macroeconomic 
the  Great  Depression.  Crisis 
experience led theory which in turn led data. That is the evolutionary path finance now needs 
to be on. 
thinking  and  policy-making 
following 
Regulating the network  
(b)  
The  first  diagnosed  case  of  Human  Immuno-Deficiency  Virus  (HIV)  in  the  United  States 
came in June 1981. The first diagnosed case of HIV in Australia came in November 1982. In 
the  early  1980s,  rates  of  HIV  and  AIDS  incidence  in  the  US  and  Australia  were  roughly 
similar  on  a  per  capita  basis.  But  from  the  mid-1980s  onwards,  things  changed.  By  1994, 
rates  of  incidence  in  the  US  were  six  times  those  in  Australia.  By  2003,  the  per  capita 
prevalence  of  HIV  in  the  US  was  ten  times  that  in  Australia.29  What  explains  these 
differences?  
The short answer appears to be government policy. In the US, the policy stance since the 
early 1980s has been largely theological. The preventative response has taken the form of 
moralising  about  sexual  abstinence  and  monogamy.  Since  the  mid-1990s,  the  US 
government  has  invested  in  the  less  contentious  areas  of  HIV/AIDS  treatment.  But  as 
recently as 2007, the US administration remained opposed to the provision of condoms or 
needle and syringe programmes to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS.  
Australian  policy  since  the  early  1980s  has,  by  contrast,  been  grounded  in  biology  rather 
than  theology.  It  has  been  systematic,  with  policy  evidence-based  and  preventative. 
Education  and  prophylactic  measures  have  been  widely  available.  But  there  have  been 
targeted initiatives for high-risk groups – for example, sex workers and drug users – through 
subsidised needle and syringe exchanges and free condoms. The results of this programme 
are clear in the statistics.  
There are perhaps two clear lessons from this experience. First, the importance of targeting 
high-risk, high-infection individuals – the “super-spreaders”. This principle has an impeccable 
epidemiological  pedigree.30  For  randomly  distributed  networks,  targeted  treatment  has  no 
value.  But  for  networks  exhibiting  long  tails  –  which  is  most  of  them,  certainly  including 
finance – targeted vaccination programmes offer a much more effective means of curtailing 
epidemics.  
 For a number of diseases, 
Not for nothing is epidemiology the origin of the 80/20 principle.
including  SARS  and  measles,  the  distribution  of  infection  rates  suggest  20%  of  the 
population  is  responsible  for  80%  of  the  spread.  Similar  patterns  have  been  found  in  the 
transmission of HIV/AIDS, foot and mouth and computer viruses on the internet. In each of 
these  cases,  the  right  response  has  been  shown  to  be  targeted  vaccination  of  the  super-
spreaders. 
The second lesson concerns the importance of a system-wide approach to the management 
of network problems. The Australian HIV/AIDS programme was system-wide, tackling both 
the  causes  and  consequences  of  the  disease  and  its  spread.  Fisheries  management 
provides a second revealing case study. Concerns about the collapse of fisheries came to a 
head  during  the  1970s  and  1980s,  leading  to  the  imposition  of  fishing  quotas  for  various 
species. The effect of quotas was, at best, mixed.  
31
                                                 
29   Bowtell (2005, 2007).  
30   May and Anderson (1991). 
31   May and Anderson (op.cit.), May (2005).  
14 
 BIS Review 53/2009
 Recently,  there  has  been  a  growing  recognition  of  what  went  wrong.  In  setting  quotas,  no 
account was taken of interactions between species and the surrounding eco-system. During 
this  century,  fisheries  management  has  pursued  a  different  strategy  –  Ecosystem-Based 
Fishery  Management  (EBFM).32  EBFM  takes  as  its  starting  point  the  management  of  the 
eco-system. It develops system-level standards and single-species targets are calibrated to 
ecosystem-wide  objectives.  The  EBFM  approach  is  already  being  implemented  in  Alaska, 
California and the Antarctic. 
Existing regulatory rules for financial institutions have echoes of fisheries management in the 
1970s.  Risk  quotas  are  calibrated  and  applied  node  by  node,  species  by  species.  This 
approach  takes  no  account  of  individual  nodes’  system-wide  importance  –  for  example, 
arising from their connectivity to other nodes in the network or their scale of operations.  
Charts 8 and 9 illustrate the problem. They plot the relationship between global banks’ capital 
ratios and their size, where size is used here as a rough proxy for connectivity and scale. 
Chart 8 shows there is essentially no relationship between banks’ systemic importance and 
their Basel capital ratios. There has been no targeted vaccination of the super-spreaders of 
financial  contagion.  Chart  9  uses  leverage  ratios  rather  than  risk-weighted  Basel  capital 
ratios.  It  suggests  that,  if  anything,  the  super-spreaders  may  historically  have  had  lower 
capital buffers. 
One  potential  explanation  of  these  findings  is  that  large  banks  have  benefited  from  the 
diversification benefits – those words again – of Basel II. Another is that financial markets 
have  allowed  these  banks  lower  capital  buffers  because  of  the  implicit  promise  of 
government support. Chart 10 offers support for the latter hypothesis. It suggests a positive 
relationship between bank size and pre-crisis expectations of official sector support.33 Size 
matters. Historically, the safety net was perceived to be fur-lined for those above a certain 
size. 
This  evidence  is  discouraging  from  a  systemic  risk  perspective.  It  suggests  incentives  to 
generate  and  propagate  risks  may  have  been  strongest  among  those  posing  greatest 
systemic threat. Basel vaccinated the naturally immune at the expense of the contagious: the 
celebate were inoculated, the promiscuous intoxicated. Latterly, this defect has begun to be 
addressed. For example, the US and Swiss authorities have announced plans to introduce 
tighter regulatory requirements for systemic institutions.  
There  is  further  to  go  internationally.  Work  is  needed  to  give  systemic  regulation  practical 
effect. A number of calibration devices have been proposed.34 With richer data on network 
topology,  calibrated  simulation  models  could  help  gauge  financial  institutions’  marginal 
contribution to systemic risk. This is standard practice in management of the electricity grid 
and eco-systems. Finance needs to catch up. 
Restructuring the network 
(c)  
In Herbert Simon’s The Architecture of Complexity, he tells the parable of two watchmakers, 
Hora and Tempus.35 Both produce watches composed of 1000 parts. Both watches are, in 
this sense, equally complex. They are also of equal quality and sell at the same price. But 
Hora’s business prospers, while Tempus’s founders. Why? 
                                                 
32   For example, Pikitch et al (2004). 
33   Proxied by Fitch ratings agency’s support ratings for institutions. 
34   Including  measures  of  banks’  Conditional  VaR  or  CoVaR  (NYU  Stern  School  of  Business  (2009),  and 
Brunnermeier  et  al  (2009)).  These  are  statistical  measures  of  an  institution’s  VaR  conditional  on  other 
institutions in the network simultaneously facing stress.  
35   Simon (1962). 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 15
The answer lies in the structure of complex systems. Hora’s watches are designed as ten 
sub-assemblies  each  comprising  ten  elements,  which  are  combined  into  ten  larger  sub-
assemblies, ten of which then constitute a whole watch. Tempus, by contrast, assembles his 
watches part by part. The result is that, whenever Tempus is interrupted – in Simon’s parable 
by a telephone call ordering more watches – his work is lost and he must start again. Hora 
suffers  the  same  fate  much  less  frequently,  due  to  the  sub-assembly  structure  of  his 
watches.  
The  differences  in  the  robustness  of  these  equally  complex  structures  are  dramatic.  If  the 
probability  of  interruption  is  0.01,  Hora  will  complete  9  watches  for  every  10  attempts.  By 
contrast,  Tempus  completes  44  watches  for  every  million  attempts.  The  probability  of 
horological collapse is lowered from 0.999956 to 0.1.  
The  secret  of  the  structure  of  Hora’s  complex  watches  is  that  they  are  “hierarchical”,  with 
separate and separable sub-structures. Simon discusses how a number of other networks, 
both social and physical, exhibit this hierarchical structure. This is no evolutionary accident. 
For many networks, hierarchy emerges naturally. It is the product of a process of Darwinian 
selection  in  which  it  is  only  the  hierarchical  structures  that  survive  to  maturity.  Hora’s 
business thrives, Tempus’s dies.  
In other networks, hierarchy is the result not of natural evolution but human intervention. For 
example, the optimal distribution of trees has been shown to comprise contiguous patches 
separated by firebreaks.36 The firebreaks created by man generate hierarchy in this system. 
The  same  man-made  firebreaks  are  present  in  epidemiological  networks,  such  as  the 
imposition  of  travel  bans  following  the  SARS  outbreak  in  Asia  or  the  prohibition  of  animal 
movement during the foot and mouth epidemic in the UK.37  
All of this has relevance to the future structure and design of the financial network. What is 
second  nature  to  the watch-maker  needs  to become  second  nature  to  the  watchdog.  Four 
topical  examples  can  be  used  to  illustrate  the  importance  of  these  structural  issues  for 
financial network design. 
First, the past decade has seen an explosion in the dimensionality, and thus complexity, of 
the financial web. Among others things, that has exacerbated the system’s robust-yet-fragile 
characteristics and uncertainty about counterparty pricing within the network. Both have been 
much  in  evidence  recently.  Yet  there  are  structural  means  of  addressing  these  combined 
problems at a stroke. 
The stroke is infrastructure. Central counterparties (CCPs) are intended to deal with precisely 
these  problems.  They  interpose  themselves  between  every  trade.  In  this  way,  a  high-
dimension  web  is  instantly  compressed  to  a  sequence  of  bilateral  relationships  with  the 
central counterparty – a simple hub-and-spokes. The lengthy network chain is condensed to 
a  single  link.  Provided  that  link  is  secure  –  the  hub’s  resilience  is  beyond  question  – 
counterparty uncertainty is effectively eliminated.  
Table 3 simulates the benefits of introducing a CCP in reducing counterparty uncertainty. As 
in the earlier example, Knightian uncertainty is measured by the size of the range of CDS 
spreads. In all cases, moving to a central counterparty (n = 1) results in a material reduction 
in uncertainty around spreads. These benefits are predicated on the CCP “super-spreader” 
itself being impregnable to attack. 
There have been various initiatives over the recent past to introduce central counterparties 
for  the  clearing  of  certain  financial  instruments,  including  CDS  products  over  the  past  18 
                                                 
36   Carlson and Doyle (1999).  
37   Kelling et al (2003).  
16 
 BIS Review 53/2009
 38
 This is welcome. But the debate needs not to end there. A much broad range of 
months.
over-the-counter  financial  instruments,  both  cash  and  derivatives,  could  potentially  benefit 
from the introduction of a central counterparty.  
Central  counterparties  are  of  course  not  new.  Clearing  houses  date  from  the  early  19th 
century.  But,  latterly,  the  question  often  most  asked  of  central  counterparties  has  been 
“Why”?  Experience  during  the  crisis  means  we  now  know  why.  From  a  network  resilience 
perspective,  it  is  important  that  in  future  the  central  counterparty  question  becomes  not 
“Why?” but “Why not”? 
Second,  financial  innovation  has  created  strings  of  gross  claims  between  financial  entities 
which far exceed their capital bases. Lehman had gross CDS exposures around eight times 
its balance sheet. These gross intra-system claims have grown rapidly over the past decade, 
fuelled by off balance sheet activity. CDS growth has outpaced Moore’s Law – the more than 
doubling of microchip capacity every two or so years. In the CDS market, what were 1000-
piece watches in 2000 would by 2007 have become more than 64,000 piece.  
Intra-system claims on this scale increase network fragility. When one node collapses, the 
ripple across the system risks developing into a tsunami – as Lehman’s experience attests. 
Herbert  Simon  recognised  just  this  problem.  Hierarchical  networks  are,  in  his  words, 
decomposable with intra-system interactions constrained. The financial system has recently 
evolved in the opposite direction, with intra-system interactions growing and decomposability 
of the system thereby reduced. 
Policy initiatives may be able to help. For example, infrastructure could be developed to “net 
off” gross claims within the financial system. Attempts have already been made to do this in 
the  CDS  market,  by  tearing-up  redundant  claims  among  participants.  This  has  reduced 
outstanding CDS claims by as much as 30%. The same netting principle could potentially be 
applied to a wider range of contracts and counterparties, to improve the decomposability and 
hence robustness of the system.39  
Third,  financial  innovation  in  the  form  of  structured  credit  also  had  the  consequence  of 
creating  a  network  structure  which  was  non-hierarchical.  Financial  engineers  created 
products  in  which  elements  of  a  loan  portfolio  were  reassigned  to  a  higher-order  sub-
assembly.  In  this  way,  an  automatic  dependence  was  created  among  almost  every  sub-
structure. By contract design, the overall financial system became impossible to decompose 
into separable sub-structures. 
Such  a  structure  is  in  fact  worse  even  than  Tempus’s  complex  production  line.  Structured 
credit  was  equivalent  to  taking  one  part  randomly  from  each  of  1000  watches  and 
reassembling  the  pieces.  No  watchmaker  in  their  right  mind  would  expect  the  resulting 
timepiece to keep time for too long. Such was the CDO story.  
However sensible structuring of credit may have seemed for individual firms, it is difficult to 
conceive of a network which could have been less structurally robust. Darwinian evolution is 
currently  in  the  process  of  naturally  deselecting  CDOs.  But  there  is  a  strong  public  policy 
case for the authorities intervening more aggressively when next financial innovation spawns 
species with undesirable physiological features.  
Finally,  the  business  strategies  of  financial  firms  have  over  the  past  decade  created  a 
network  structure  which  is  much  less  easily  decomposable.  Under  the  old  financial  order, 
mutuals were a sub-structure, as were commercial banks, investment banks and investment 
funds.  In  some  cases  that  was  by  choice.  In  other  cases  it  was  the  result  of  regulatory 
                                                 
38   President’s Working Group (2008). 
39   For example, as proposed in King (2008). 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 17
design:  for  the  larger  part  of  the  past  century,  the  Glass-Steagall  Act  in  the  US  prohibited 
inter-breeding between commercial and investment banking. 
Deregulation swept away banking segregation and, with it, decomposability of the financial 
network. The upshot was a predictable lack of network robustness. That is one reason why 
Glass-Steagall is now back on the international policy agenda. It may be the wrong or too 
narrow an answer. But it asks the right question: can network structure be altered to improve 
network robustness? Answering that question is a mighty task for the current generation of 
policymakers. Using network resilience as a metric for success would help ensure it was a 
productive one. 
Conclusion 
Through history, there are many examples of human flight on an enormous scale to avoid the 
effects of pestilence and plague. From yellow fever and cholera in the 19th century to polio 
and  influenza  in  the  20th.  In  these  cases,  human  flight  fed  contagion  and  contagion  fed 
human catastrophe. The 21st century offered a different model. During the SARS epidemic, 
human flight was prohibited and contagion contained.  
In the present financial crisis the flight is of capital, not humans. Yet the scale and contagious 
consequences  may  be  no  less  damaging.  This  financial  epidemic  may  endure  in  the 
memories long after SARS has been forgotten. But in halting the spread of future financial 
epidemics, it is important that the lessons from SARS and from other non-financial networks 
are not forgotten.  
References 
Akerlorf,  G,  and  Shiller,  R  (2009),  “Animal  Spirits:  How  Human  Psychology  Drives  the 
Economy, and Why It Matters for Global Capitalism”, Princeton University Press. 
Albert,  R,  Albert,  I  and  Nakarado,  G.L  (2004),  “Structural  vulnerability  of  the  North 
American power grid”, arXiv:condmat/040107v1. 
Albert,  R,  Jeong  H  and  Barabasi,  A-L  (2000),  “Attack  and  error  tolerance  of  complex 
network”, Nature, Vol. 406: 379-382. 
Allen, F and Gale, D (2000), “Financial Contagion”, Journal of Political Economy 108(1) 1-
33.  
Battiston,  S,  Gatti,  D.  D,  Gallegati,  M,  Greenwald,  B.C.N.  and  Stiglitz,  J.E.  (2009), 
“Liasons Dangereuses: Increasing Connectivity, Risk Sharing, and Systemic Risk”. Working 
Paper. 
Bowtell,  W  (2005),  “Australia’s  response  to  HIV/AIDS  1982-2005”,  Lowy  Institute  for 
International Policy. 
Bowtell,  W  (2007),  “HIV/AIDS:  The  looming  Asia  Pacific  Pandemic”,  Lowy  Institute  for 
International Policy. 
Brunnermeier,  M,  Crockett,  A,  Goodhart,  C,  Persaud,  A.D  and  Shin,  H.  (2009),  “The 
fundamental principles of financial regulation”, Geneva Reports on the World Economy 11. 
Carlson,  J.M  and  Doyle,  J  (1999),  “Highly  optimized  tolerance:  A  mechanism  for  power 
laws in designed systems”, Phys. Rev. E 60: 1412-1427. 
Clay, J (2004), “World Agriculture and the Environment: A commodity-by-commodity guide to 
impacts and practices”, Washington (DC): Island Press. 
Corrigan, E.G (1987), “Financial Market Structure: A Longer View”, Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York. 
18 
 BIS Review 53/2009
 (2009), 
“Why  Banks  Failed 
the  Stress  Test”,  available  at 
de Larosière, J (2009), “Report”, The high-level group on financial supervision in the EU, 
available at ec.europa.eu/internal_market/finances/docs/de_larosiere_report_en.pdf. 
Elton, C.S (1958), “The Ecology of Invasions by Animals and Plants”, Methuen.  
Epstein,  J.M,  Parker,  J,  Cummings,  D,  and  Hammond,  R  (2008),  “Coupled  contagion 
dynamics  of  fear  and  disease:  Mathematical  and  computational  explorations”,  PLoS  ONE, 
Vol. 3, Issue 12: 1-11. 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2007), “New Directions for Understanding Systemic 
Risk”, FRBNY Economic Policy Review, Vol. 13, No. 2. 
Gai, P and Kapadia, S (2008), “Contagion in Financial Networks”, mimeo, Bank of England. 
Gallegati, M, Greenwald, B, Richiardi, M and Stiglitz, J (2008), “The Asymmetric Effect of 
Diffusion Processes: Risk Sharing and Contagion”, Global Economy Journal, Vol 8, Issue 3.  
Galvani, A.P and May, R.M (2005), “Dimensions of superspreading”, Nature, Vol. 438: 293-
296. 
Haldane,  A 
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/speech374.pdf. 
Kelling,  M.J,  Woolhouse,  M.E.J,  May,  R.M  and  Grenfell,  B.T  (2003),  “Modelling 
vaccination strategies against food-and-mouth disease”, Nature, Vol. 421: 136-142. 
King, M (2008), Speech to the CBI dinner, Nottingham, Tuesday 20 January 2009, available 
at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/speeches/2009/ 
speech372.pdf. 
Kinney, R, Crucitti, P, Albert, R and Latora, V (2005), “Modeling Cascading Failures in the 
North American Power Grid”, The European Physics Journal, B 46 (2005) 101.  
Kubelec, C and Sa, F (2009), “The Geographical Composition of National External Balance 
Sheets: 1980-2005”, Bank of England Working Paper (forthcoming). 
Lee,  S.H,  Kim,  P-J  and  Jeong,  H  (2006),  “Statistical  properties  of  sampled  networks”, 
Physical Review, Vol.73. 
Levin, S and Lubchenco, J (2008), “Resilience, Robustness, and Marine Ecosystem-based 
Management”, Bioscience Vol. 58: 27-32. 
Lloyd-Smith J.O, Schreiber S.J, Kopp, P.E and Getz, W.M (2005), “Superspreading and 
the impact of individual variation on disease emergence”. Nature 438, 355-9. 
May,  R.M  (1974),  “Stability  and  Complexity  in  Model  Ecosystems”,  Princeton  University 
Press. 
May, R.M (2006), “Network structure and the biology of populations”, Trends in Ecology and 
Evolution Vol. 27, No. 7. 
May, R.B and Anderson, R.M (1991), “Infectious Diseases of Humans”, Oxford University 
Press. 
May,  R,  Levin,  S.A  and  Sugihara,  G  (2008),  “Complex  systems:  Ecology  for  bankers”, 
Nature Vol. 451: 893-895. 
McKercher, B and Chon, K (2004), “The over-reaction to SARS and the collapse of Asian 
tourism”, Annals of Tourism Research 31(3): 716-719. 
Milgram, S (1967), “Small-world problem”, Psychology Today 1(1): 61-67. 
Newman,  M  (2003),  “The  structure  and  function  of  complex  systems”,  arXiv:cond-
mat/0303516v1. 
Newman, M (2008), “The physics of networks”, Physics Today: 33-38. 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 19
Nier, E, Yang, J, Yorulmazer, T and Alentorn, A (2008), “Network Models and Financial 
Stability”, Bank of England Working Paper No.346. 
NYU  Stern  School  of  Business  (2008),  Repairing  the  US  Financial  Architecture:  An 
Independent View. 
Pikitch, E.K, Santora, C , Babcock, E.A, Bakun, A, Bonfil, R, Conover, D.O, Dayton, P, 
Doukakis, P, Fluharty, D, Heneman, B, Houde, E.D, Link, J, Livingston, P.A, Mangel, M 
McAllister,  M.K,  Pope,  J  and  Sainsbury,  K.J  (2004),  “Ecosystem-Based  Fishery 
Management”, Science Magazine, Vol. 305: 346-347. 
Porterie, B, Kaiss, A, Clerc, J-P and Zekri, L and Zekri, N (2008), “Universal scaling of 
forest fire propagation”, eprint arXiv:0805.3365. 
President’s Working Group (2008), Initiatives to strengthen OTC derivatives oversight and 
infrastructure, available at http://www.ustreas.gov/press/releases/hp1272.htm. 
Pröpper,  M,  van  Lelyveld,  I  and Heijmans,  R  (2008),  “Towards  a  network  description  of 
interbank payment flows”, DNB Working Paper No. 177. 
Simon,  H  (1962),  “The  architecture  of  complexity”,  Proceedings  of 
Philosophical Society, Vol. 106, No. 6: 467-482. 
Smith, R.D (2006), “Responding to global infectious disease outbreaks: Lessons from SARS 
on the role of risk perception, communication and management”, Journal of Social Science 
and Medicine, 63, 3113-3123. 
Tilman,  D  (1999),  “The  ecological  consequences  of  changes  in  biodiversity:  A  search  for 
general principles”, Ecological Society of America, Vol. 80, No. 5: 1455-1474. 
Voute, A.D (1946), “Regulation of the density of the insect populations in virgin forests and 
cultivated woods”, Archives Neerlandaises de Zoologie, 7, 435-470. 
Watts, D (2002), “A simple model of global cascades on random networks”, Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences 9: 5766-5771. 
Watts,  D.J  and  Strogatz,  S.H  (1998),  “Collective  dynamics  of  'small-world'  networks”, 
Nature 393 (6684): 409–10. 
Wheelis,  M  (2002),  “Biological  warfare  at  the  1346  Siege  of  Caffa”,  Emerging  Infectious 
Diseases, Vol. 8, No.9. 
Worm, B, Barbier, E.B, Beaumont, N, Emmett Duffy, Folke C, Halpern, B.S, Jackson, 
J.B.C,  Lotze,  H.K,  Micheli,  F,  Palumbi,  S.R,  Sala,  E,  Selkoe,  K.A  and  Stachowicz,  J.J 
(2006), “Impacts of biodiversity loss on ocean ecosystem services”, Science, Vol. 314: 787-
790. 
the  American 
TABLES: 
Table 1: Summary Statistics on the Global Financial Network 
 
 
Skewness  
Kurtosis  
Average path length 
 
1985 
7.4 
71.3 
1.55 
1995 
8.0 
80.6 
1.44 
2005 
3.1 
14.3 
1.37 
20 
 BIS Review 53/2009
[4] 
[5] 
[6] 
Table 2: Climbing the Complexity Tree 
 
Typical contract details(a) 
 
[1] 
[2] 
[3] 
 
Pages in CDO^2 prospectus 
Pages in ABS CDO prospectus 
Pages in RMBS prospectus 
Number  of  ABS  CDO  tranches  in
CDO^2 
Number of RMBS in a typical CDO 
Number  of  mortgages 
RMBS 
 
typical
in 
 [2] + [3]*[5] 
 
Metrics of complexity(a) 
 
[1] + [3]*[5]*[2]*[4]  Pages to read for a CDO^2 investor 
Pages  to  read  for  an  ABS  CDO
investor 
Max.  number  of  mortgages  in  a
CDO^2(b) 
Max.  number  of  mortgages  in  an
ABS CDO(c) 
 
[4]*[5]*[6] 
[5]*[6] 
    300 
 300 
 200 
 125 
 150 
 5,000 
 
 
 
1,125,000,300 
 30,300 
 93,750,000 
 750,000 
  
Sources: Bloomberg, deal documents and Bank calculations 
 
(a) CDO^2 is used as short-hand for CDO of ABS CDO. 
(b) Assuming there is no overlap in the composition of the RMBS pools that back the CDO or
the CDO pools that back the CDO^2. 
(c) Assuming there is no overlap in the composition of the RMBS pools that back the CDO. 
 
 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 21
Table 3: Range of CDS Premia (bp) and Central Counterparties 
 
Number of counterparties 
Probability of 
counterparties 
defaulting 
 uncertainty 
Low 
around 
counterparties' 
inter-linkages 
uncertainty 
High 
around 
counterparties' 
inter-linkages 
 Charts: 
1% 
5% 
10% 
30% 
1% 
5% 
10% 
30% 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
2 
2 
10 
18 
42 
3 
14 
27 
63 
10 
0 
2 
6 
44 
9 
39 
68 
127 
50 
0 
0 
2 
43 
18 
60 
87 
136 
Probability  of  reference  entity  defaulting  =  10%;  Loss  given  default  rate  = 
50%;  
Chart 1: Global Financial Network: 1985  
 22 
  BIS Review 53/2009
Chart 2: Global Financial Network: 1995 
  Chart 3: Global Financial Network: 2005 
 
  BIS Review 53/2009 
 23
Chart 4: CDS Premia and Network 
Uncertainty – Pre-crisis 
Chart 5: CDS Premia and Network 
Uncertainty – Post-crisis 
bps
500
i
a
m
e
r
p
 
S
D
C
 
f
o
 
e
g
n
a
r
 
f
o
 
e
z
i
S
400
300
200
100
0
50
40
30
Number of counterparties
20
10
0
0
bps
500
400
300
200
100
0
50
i
a
m
e
r
p
 S
D
C
 
f
o
 e
g
n
a
r
 
f
o
 e
z
i
S
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
40
30
Number of counterparties
20
0.1
Default probability of reference entity (p)
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
10
0
0
0.1
Default probability of reference entity (p)
 
 
Chart 6: Financial Contract Design 
 
SIV
CDO
LBO’d company
  Y
M
O
N
O
C
E
L
A
C
N
A
N
F
I
I
ABCP
MTNs
Capital 
Notes
Senior 
ABS/CDO
tranches
Senior 
AAA
Leveraged 
loans
(and
bank debt/ 
capital)
Mezzanine 
tranche
Equity
Mezzanine
HY bonds
Corporate 
assets
Leveraged 
loans
Mezz/second 
lien debt
HY bonds
Equity
CDO2
CDO of ABS
HEL ABS/CMBS
Senior
CDO
mezzanine
tranches
Mezzanine
Equity
CPPI on CDO equity
Principal 
protected 
notes
CDO
equity
tranches
BBB- rated
HEL ABS/
CMBS
or
synthetic
Senior
Mezzanine
Equity
Senior
Mezzanine 
(often BBB-)
Sub-prime 
mortgages/
Commercia
l mortgages
Equity
Y
M
O
N
O
C
E
L
A
E
R
  24 
 BIS Review 53/2009
Chart 7: Weighted-average Cumulative Total Returns 
 Large Complex Financial Institutions
Banks excl. LCFIs 
Insurers 
Hedge Funds
Cumulative return
200%
150%
100%
50%
0%
-50%
 00 
01 
02 
03 
04
05
06
07
08
09
Source: Bloomberg, CreditSuisse/Tremont and Bank calculations. 
(a) Sample based on banks and insurers in S&P 500, FTSE All Share and DJ EuroSTOXX indices as at March 
2009. Excludes firms for which returns not quoted over entire sample period. 
 Chart 8: Global Banks’ Size and Capital Ratios (a) 
Tier 1 Ratio (%) 
18 
16 
14 
12 
10 
8 
6 
4 
2 
0 
0.0 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0
Total Assets (£trn)
 Source: Bankscope 
(a) As at end 2007 due to data availability  
BIS Review 53/2009 
 25
Chart 9: Global Banks’ Size and Leverage ratios(a)  
 
 
Tier 1 Ratio (%) 
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.0 
0.3 
0.6 
0.9 
1.2
1.5 
1.8 
Total Assets (£trn) 
 Source: Bankscope 
(a) As at end 2007 due to data availability  
 
Chart 10: Global Banks’ Size and Government support (a) 
 
Support rating
4
3
2
1
0
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
Total Assets (£ trn)
 
Source: Bankscope and Fitch  
(a) As at end 2006. Government support proxied by Fitch’s ‘support rating’. A higher number is a lower level of 
support. 
26 
 BIS Review 53/2009
