George Provopoulos: Reflections on the economic and financial crisis 
Speech by Mr George Provopoulos, Governor of the Bank of Greece, at the 17th Meeting of 
the Economic and Environmental Forum of the OSCE, Athens, 18 May 2009. 
 I  am  delighted  for  the  opportunity  to  address  this  meeting  of  the  Economic  and 
Environmental Forum of the OSCE. As the history of this Organization clearly demonstrates, 
the management and resolution of security crises call for forceful and well-articulated policy 
responses. My presentation – reflecting my comparative advantage as a central banker – will 
deal with a crisis of a different kind – the economic and financial crisis that has engulfed the 
global  economy  for  almost  two  years.  My  remarks  will  deal  with  four  broad  issues  –  the 
origins  of  the  crisis,  the  policy  responses  taken  so  far,  the  prospects  for  an  economic 
recovery  during  the  next  year,  and  the  policy  challenges  that  remain  to  be  addressed. 
Although I will touch upon global developments in the course of my presentation, my main 
focus will be the euro-area economy and, to a lesser extent, the Greek economy.  
The origins  
For four years, through the summer of 2007, the global economy boomed. Global economic 
growth rose at an average rate of 5 per cent a year, its highest sustained growth rate since 
the early 1960s, while inflation remained generally contained. To some analysts, it began to 
look as if the global economy had entered a new phase – which some characterized as "The 
Great Moderation" – robust growth without the ups and downs of the normal business cycle.  
That  picture  changed  dramatically  with  the  eruption  of  the  financial  crisis  in  August  2007, 
following the collapse of the U.S. subprime mortgage market. What were the factors that led 
to that crisis? The seeds of this crisis were planted over a number of years and relate mainly 
to changes that took place in the financial industry.  
During the past ten years or so, a dramatic shift took place in the financial sectors of many 
economies. The  management  of  economic  risk,  aimed  at  facilitating  trade  and  investment, 
became less of a core activity of international finance. In its place, the financial industry came 
to  be  dominated  by  the  risk  inherent  in  arbitrage  and  deliberate  exposure  to  asset  price 
changes.  In  other  words,  the  financial  system  increasingly  moved  away  from  activities 
geared to hedging existing economic risks – activities that promote trade within and among 
nations – and toward activities aimed at creating and promoting new risks.  
Clearly, the liberalization of financial markets and innovations in those markets have made 
important  contributions  to  economic  welfare,  providing  substantial  improvements  in  the 
productivity  of  our  economies.  However,  as  the  demand  for  finance  increased,  financial 
institutions  began  to  increasingly  rely  on  innovative  funding  techniques.  For  example,  the 
securitization of assets – that is, the transformation of, say, mortgages into tradable financial 
instruments – has the potential to facilitate the diversification of risk. Yet, securitization also 
meant  that  banks  were  able  to  sell  their  credit  –  for  example,  their  mortgage  loans  – 
immediately after they had been extended.  
Such innovative financial techniques had several consequences. First, they enabled lenders 
to expand the volume of their operations and conserve on capital. Second, they weakened 
lenders'  incentives  for  prudent  screening.  The  resulting  decline  in  lending  oversight 
contributed to rapid credit growth, helping to underpin asset price bubbles in some markets, 
including  the  housing  market  in  the  United  States.  Third,  the  complex  structure  of  many 
structured products made it difficult for the ultimate holders to assess the quality and price of 
the underlying instrument.  
BIS Review 63/2009 
 1
Another  contributing  factor  to  the  crisis  is  important  to  mention.  For  most  of  the  past  ten 
years,  a  chronic  shortage  of  savings  in  some  of  the  world's  most  advanced  economies  – 
especially  the  United  States  –  was  funded  by  savings  from  emerging  market  economies, 
particularly  those  in  Asia.  For  example,  during  the  period  1999  to  2006,  the  U.S.  current 
account deficit – a measure of that economy's shortage of savings – doubled as a share of 
gross domestic product, rising from 3 per cent to 6 per cent. In turn, Asian emerging market 
economies,  especially  China,  recorded  huge  current  account  surpluses  and  accumulated 
enormous  foreign-exchange  reserves,  mainly  denominated  in  U.S.  dollars.  Effectively,  the 
United Stated paid for its deficits – or shortage of savings – by supplying dollars to the rest of 
the world, contributing to the creation of excess global liquidity and asset-price bubbles.  
Feedback loops  
All  of  this  came  to  a  head  in  August  2007  with  the  outbreak  of  the  U.S.  subprime  crisis. 
Although that crisis produced a substantial slowdown in U.S. economic growth, initially much 
of the remainder of the global economy, including the euro area, was largely unaffected. The 
global economy bent, but it did not break.  
Financial  wounds  continued  to  ferment,  however,  despite  the  efforts  by  policy-makers  to 
sustain  market  liquidity  and  capitalization.  Concerns  about  losses  from  bad  assets  raised 
questions  about  the  solvency  and  funding  of  some  key  financial  institutions.  The  situation 
deteriorated rapidly in September 2008, following the default of Lehman Brothers, the large 
U.S. investment bank, and the rescue of A.I.G., the largest U.S. insurance company. These 
events prompted a huge increase in perceived counterparty risk as banks faced large write-
downs.  Moreover,  the  solvency  of  some  of  the  most  established  financial  firms  came  into 
question,  market  volatility  surged,  and  liquidity  dried  up.  In  effect,  the  entire  U.S.  financial 
system was put under severe strain.  
The impact of these events was felt across the global economic and financial systems, and 
the world economy entered its sharpest downturn since the Great Depression of the 1930s. 
A  striking  feature  of  this  crisis  has  been  the  successive  revisions  –  all  in  a  downward 
direction – of global growth forecasts. To give an example, one year ago the IMF forecasted 
that global growth in 2009 would be 3.8 per cent. In October of last year – that is, shortly 
after  the  events  of  Lehman  Brothers  and  A.I.G.  –  the  IMF  reduced  its  global  growth 
projection for 2009 to 3.0 per cent, lower, to be sure, than the earlier forecast, but still a fairly 
robust rate. In January of this year, the IMF again reduced its growth forecast for 2009, this 
time  to  0.5  per  cent.  Several  weeks  ago,  the  IMF  released  a  new  forecast.  The  IMF  now 
projects that global growth will turn negative – on the order of 1.3 per cent – this year.  
What happened to produce such a dramatic turnaround? Because the banking system was 
at the epicenter of the crisis, the ramifications were quickly transmitted to all sectors in all 
countries  of  the  global  economy,  and  were  magnified  by  a  collapse  in  business  and 
consumer confidence. Historical evidence confirms that financial crises are more likely to be 
followed by severe economic downturns when they are centered in the banking system and 
occur in the context of rapid build-ups of credit and house prices – characteristics that were 
features of the present crisis. Adding to the strains, the turbulence exposed long-simmering 
internal  vulnerabilities  within  some  emerging  economies,  focusing  investors'  attention  on 
currency  mismatches  on  borrower's  balance  sheets  and  excessive  credit  growth  in  those 
economies.  Moreover,  the  severity  of  the  crisis  has  been  exacerbated  by  a  corrosive 
feedback loop between the financial and the real sectors of the economy, which has, to some 
extent,  undermined  policy-makers'  efforts 
the  situation.  Specifically,  a 
disfunctioning  of  financial  markets  has  reduced  economic  activity  while  the  weakening  of 
activity  has,  in  turn,  impacted  on  the  capital  position  of  the  financial  sector  and,  thus,  its 
ability to provide credit to enterprises and households.  
to  address 
2 
 BIS Review 63/2009
Policy responses  
The policy responses, in both advanced and emerging-market economies, to the crisis have 
been rapid, bold, and unprecedented. Central bankers around the world have been on the 
front lines to sustain demand in the face of the financial-market disruptions. In what follows, I 
will  focus  my  remarks  on  monetary-policy  and  fiscal  actions  in  the  euro  area  and  the 
responses of the international community.  
What did the Governing Council of the ECB do in response to the crisis and why did it do it? 
Broadly  speaking,  the  Governing  Council's  responses  took  place  in  two  stages  –  the  first 
stage corresponds to the outbreak of the crisis and the second stage to its intensification.  
Upon the first signs of financial-market turbulence, in August 2007, the Governing  Council 
moved  to  ensure  the  functioning  of  the  money  market.  The  so-called  "wholesale"  money 
market plays a key role in the economy because it is the market in which banks borrow and 
lend to each other. In times of distress, however, banks and other financial institutions seek 
to  reduce  their  exposure  to  risk.  To  do  so,  they  move  to  reduce  their  illiquid  investments, 
including  some  loans,  and  increase  their  liquidity.  This  process  is  what  is  known  as 
"deleveraging".  If  a  large  number  of  banks  do  this  at  the  same  time,  it  can  lead  to  large 
reduction of loans to corporations and consumers, inflicting damage on the economy.  
Because banks were concerned about both the amount of liquidity they could obtain and the 
length of time for which they could hold on to the liquidity, in August 2007 the ECB provided 
liquidity at long time horizons as a way to insure banks against future liquidity shortfalls. This 
action helped increase public confidence that banks would be able to meet their obligations.  
Since the intensification of the crisis this past fall, the Governing Council's actions entered a 
second stage. The Council has reduced its key policy interest rate from 4.25 per cent to 1.00 
per cent. Such a large reduction in such a short period of time has been unprecedented in 
the euro area. As a result of this reduction, we are providing unlimited funding to banks at a 
rate of 1.00 per cent. In addition, sound and creditworthy banks can secure overnight funds 
in the interbank market at a rate that is between the 1.00 per cent main policy rate and the 
deposit  rate,  the  latter  of  which  is  only  0.25  per  cent.  Moreover,  we  have  taken  several 
measures  that  are  not  standard  in  order  to  encourage  banks  to  extend  new  credit  or  to 
continue  to  roll  over  maturing  loans  to  firms.  These  measures  include  fixed-rate,  full-
allotment tenders which grant eligible banks access to unlimited funding for up to six months 
at our main policy rate, and the expansion of the list of eligible assets that can be used as 
collateral. I should also mention that ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet recently announced 
that additional non-standard measures will be implemented in the next few months.  
As concerns about the extent of the downturn have mounted, euro-area governments have 
also  turned  to  fiscal  policy  to  support  demand.  Fiscal  policy  is  providing  support  through 
automatic  stabilizers  and  the  use  of  government  balance  sheets  to  shore  up  the  financial 
system, including capital injections to banks. In addition, many euro-area governments have 
taken discretionary measures to stimulate their economies.  
While discretionary fiscal measures can help bolster aggregate demand and limit the impact 
of  the  financial  crisis  on  the  real  economy,  the  room  for  such  measures  is  subject  to  a 
number of important limitations.  
• 
First, the use of fiscal policies will need to take account of the sustainability of public 
finances. While global developments have played a role in the widening of euro-area 
sovereign-interest-rate  differentials  since  last  fall,  country-specific  factors,  including 
projected debt levels, have also played an important role.  
Second,  a  clear  and  credible  commitment  to  long-run  fiscal  consolidation  is  more 
essential  than  ever  in  present  circumstances.  Any  loss  of  market  confidence  could 
raise long-term real interest rates and debt-service costs, offsetting the expansionary 
effects  of  measures  already  taken  and  adding  to  financing  costs.  Therefore,  fiscal 
 BIS Review 63/2009 
 3
   support measures should be accompanied by a plan to withdraw the stimulus as the 
crisis abates.  
Third,  to  attain  such  a  credible  commitment,  it  is  crucial  that  euro-area  countries 
respect  fully  the  provisions  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact.  This  will  provide  the 
necessary  medium-term  framework  with  which  to  preserve  the  public's  trust  in  the 
sustainability of the public finances.  
Fourth,  as  growth  is  a  key  factor  in  restoring  debt  sustainability,  directing 
expenditures 
in 
transportation, infrastructure, and education – would be beneficial. A similar argument 
applies for tax reforms that reduce distortions.  
Fifth, as indicated by the foregoing remarks, for some countries there is no room for 
discretionary fiscal expansion. I might add that, reflecting past choices, Greece is one 
of  those  countries.  It  would  be  possible,  however,  to  boost  public  investment  in 
Greece  without  any  significant  budgetary  effects  if  the  advance  payments  of 
Community funds are used for the financing of infrastructure projects.  
toward  productive  areas  –  such  as  government 
investment 
Let me say a few words about the policy response to the crisis at the international level. The 
IMF has been the main vehicle for coordinated action by the international community. The 
Fund's  resources  have  been  greatly  expanded  and  actions  have  been  initiated  to  further 
increase the Fund's resources through, among other vehicles, a quota increase and an SDR 
allocation. In turn, the Fund has responded with a record lending commitment totaling some 
$157 billion. A number of European countries – including Belarus, Hungary, Iceland, Latvia, 
Romania,  Serbia,  and  the  Ukraine  –  have  undertaken  adjustment  programs  supported,  in 
part, by financial assistance by the Fund. These programs have helped increase confidence 
and have reduced pressure on capital outflows.  
Prospects for recovery  
The picture that I have described thus far is of a global economic downturn that is by far the 
deepest  since  the  Great  Depression  of  the  1930s  and  of  a  policy  response,  including 
monetary  and  fiscal  actions,  and  support  measures  for  banking  systems,  that  are 
unprecedented  in  both  breadth  and  magnitude.  It  is  important  to  point  out  that  this  policy 
response is very different from that which took place during the Great Depression. During the 
1930s, many large economies did not pursue expansionary monetary or fiscal policies. In the 
early years of the Great Depression, some countries, including the United States, operating 
under the rules of the gold standard, implemented tight monetary policies in order to stem 
gold outflows. With regard to fiscal policies, the conventional wisdom of that earlier period 
was that budgets should not be expansionary, even during depressions. That wisdom did not 
begin to change until 1936, the year in which Keynes published a book that ushered in the 
Keynesian Revolution. Moreover, during the 1930s there was no IMF to provide support for 
countries  facing  balance-of-payments'  difficulties.  Instead,  many  countries  implemented 
extensive trade protectionism to deal with balance-of-payments problems. 
In terms of  policy responses, therefore, we are in a better  position at the present juncture 
than was the case in the 1930s. Nevertheless, there are also some differences between the 
1930s and the present situation that are not so favorable to the latter situation.  
• 
First, in 1929, when global stock markets crashed, the U.S. banking system was in a 
relatively-healthy condition. It took three years of deep depression to wreck havoc on 
U.S. banks. The response of the U.S. policy-makers – including their introduction of 
deposit insurance – quickly got the U.S. banking system up and running again. In the 
present  situation,  the  U.S.  banking  system  has  been  the  epicenter  of  the  problem 
from the start, and the issue of pricing toxic assets has yet to be resolved.  
4 
 BIS Review 63/2009
 Second, there is some concern that the fiscal response to the present crisis may, in 
some countries, be overly aggressive. The largest fiscal deficit of the United States, 
for  example,  during  the  Great  Depression  was  less  than  6  per  cent  of  GDP.  In 
contrast, the deficit in the U.S. is expected to exceed 13 per cent of GDP this year 
and be close to 10 per cent of GDP next year. Other countries will also be running up 
huge deficits. The IMF projects that the aggregate fiscal deficit of the euro area will 
rise  from  1.8  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2008,  to  over  6  per  cent  of  GDP  in  2010.  These 
deficits  could  put  upward  pressures  on  long-term  interest  rates,  helping  to  abort  a 
recovery.  This  situation  underscores  the  concern  that  I  expressed  earlier  about  the 
need to formulate clear exit strategies at an early stage.  
Based  on  what  I  have  said  so  far,  the  key  factor  determining  the  course  and  speed  of  a 
recovery will be the rate of progress toward returning the financial sector to health. History 
shows,  however,  that  recoveries  from  financial  crises,  especially  when  they  are  global  in 
nature, are significantly slower than recoveries from other types of shocks, such as shocks to 
oil prices. Moreover, recovery from the present situation is made especially difficult in light of 
the complexities involved in dealing with bad assets and restoring confidence among banks.  
These factors underlie the IMF's projection – to which I referred earlier – of a 1.3 per cent 
contraction  in  global  output  this  year.  The  euro  area  is  projected  to  experience  an  even 
steeper decline in economic activity than the rest of the global economy. Both the IMF and 
the European Commission project that the euro area economy will contract by about 4 per 
cent  this  year.  This  contraction  reflects  an  expected  sharp  contraction  in  euro-area  export 
markets  along  with  the  effects  of  financial  stress  and  housing  corrections  on  domestic 
demand.  
The IMF also projects that global growth will re-emerge in 2010, but at 1.9 per cent it would 
be sluggish compared with past recoveries. With regard to the euro area, the ECB Governing 
Council expects that economic activity will be very weak for the remainder of this year before 
gradually recovering in the course of 2010.  
Recently, there have been some positive signs in the euro area economy, mainly reflecting 
financial-market  developments  and  confidence  indicators.  Those  so-called  "green  shoots" 
suggest that the economy may be stabilizing. It is important to keep in mind, however, that, if 
stabilization is indeed taking place, it is at a very low level of activity. It will take some time 
before our economies fully recover and grow at a robust pace.  
Allow me to say a few words about the Greek economy. As a result of the crisis, I expect that 
growth will slow from almost 3 per cent last year, to zero per cent this year, perhaps even 
moving  into  negative  territory.  Moreover,  several  fundamental  problems  beset  the  Greek 
economy, including low international competitiveness, reflected in very-large current-account 
imbalances, a large fiscal deficit, and a very-high debt level. To restore competitiveness and 
correct  the  fiscal  imbalances,  bold  and  wide-ranging  reforms  in  the  public  sector,  and 
structural reforms to enhance productivity and raise the employment rate, are required. The 
Bank  of  Greece's  Annual  Report,  published  last  month,  provides  a  roadmap  for  the 
implementation  of  a  credible  medium-term  strategy  aimed  at  addressing  the  economy's 
problems. Clearly, we have reached decision-time in Greece. It is now time to move forward 
and there is no room for delay.  
The international financial crisis has had a more limited impact on the Greek banking system 
than on many others and the fundamentals of the Greek banking system remain sound. To a 
significant extent, this is a consequence of the very limited exposure of Greek banks to toxic 
assets and their relatively-strong liquidity positions, which reflects the fact that Greek banks 
are  largely  deposit-based.  Nevertheless,  the  weakening  of  economic  activity  will  affect  the 
ability of individuals and companies to service debts, and reduce profits. In its supervisory 
role, the Bank of Greece has been closely monitoring the banking system, tightening credit 
standards  and  supervisory  controls,  to  ensure  continued  soundness.  As  you  may  know, 
Greek banks have been large investors in other economies of Southeastern Europe. With the 
BIS Review 63/2009 
 5
sharp weakening of economic activity in the region, the Bank of Greece has called on banks 
to be prudent in their assessments of economic conditions in those economies so as to limit 
risk  exposure.  Finally,  in  line  with  all  EU  governments,  the  Greek  government  has  been 
implementing a plan for enhancing liquidity and strengthening banks' capital base. The Bank 
of Greece has been encouraging banks to make use of the plan.  
The challenges ahead  
The recovery from this crisis may be slow, but there will be a recovery. What, then, are the 
policy challenges that lie ahead? I believe that there are two main types of challenges that 
need to be addressed.  
The first challenge concerns macroeconomic policies. Clearly, the short-term effectiveness of 
these policies will depend on their medium-term credibility. As I have emphasized, to retain 
their  credibility,  exit  strategies  will  be  needed  to  convert  fiscal  and  monetary  policies  from 
extraordinary short-term support to sustainable medium-term frameworks.  
With regard to the euro area, monetary policy is formulated in a medium-term context, with 
the  aim  of  ensuring  price  stability.  Measures  of  price  expectations  show  that  our  policy  is 
highly credible.  
The  second  challenge  concerns  financial  sector  reform.  The  pace  of  the  recovery  will 
crucially depend on how quickly confidence can be restored in the soundness of the financial 
system.  
To this end, it is essential that the revealed weaknesses in the functioning of the financial 
system  and  the  inadequacies  of  the  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks  are  effectively 
and promptly addressed. In particular, there is a growing consensus among policy-makers 
about the need to strengthen and broaden the regulatory framework and to develop macro-
prudential supervision globally and in the European Union.  
There  are  different  views  about  how  to  best  achieve  that  goal.  At  the  initiative  of  the 
European  Commission,  a  group  chaired  by  Jacques  de  Larosière  undertook  a 
comprehensive review of the EU framework for financial regulation and supervision.  
The  group  proposes  to  establish  a  European  System  of  Financial  Supervisors,  bringing 
together  the  national  supervisors  with  three  independent  supranational  "Authorities"  (for 
banking,  insurance,  and  securities  markets),  accountable  to  the  EU  institutions.  These 
Authorities  would  oversee  the  work  of,  and  resolve  disputes  among,  national  supervisors, 
who would retain responsibility for the conduct of supervision. Cross-border institutions would 
be supervised by colleges of home and host supervisors. To bridge the gap between macro- 
and  micro-prudential  oversights,  the  group  proposes  creating  a  European  Systemic  Risk 
Council linked to the European Central Bank. This council would comprise the Governors of 
the  European  System  of  Central  Banks,  the  heads  of  the  Authorities,  and  the  European 
Commission.  The  group  advocates  the  establishment  of  "a  truly  harmonized  set  of  core 
rules" harmonized and prefunded deposit insurance schemes, and more detailed criteria for 
burden sharing.  
If  implemented,  the  approach  would  constitute  a  historic  step  forward,  putting  in  place 
important  building  blocks  of  an  EU  financial  stability  framework  that  is  consistent  with  the 
objective of creating a single financial market.  
Conclusion  
The key priority among policy makers is to bring back economic growth and help bring about 
prosperity for everyone. The crisis that we presently face is a dual one – a financial crisis and 
an economic crisis. As I have stressed, our policy response should also be of a dual nature, 
one  part  of  which  involves  a  short-run  response  and  the  second  part  of  which  involves  a 
6 
 BIS Review 63/2009
medium-term  response.  In  the  short  run,  we  should  do  whatever  is  feasible  to  support 
economic  recovery.  In  the  medium  term,  we  should  be  prepared  to  pursue  a  credible  exit 
strategy from the extraordinary policy interventions while developing an effective framework 
for financial supervision at the EU level. The former, short-term, response will help pave the 
way  to  recovery.  The  second,  medium-term,  response  will  help  ensure  that  we  do  not 
experience a similar crisis in the future.  
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 63/2009 
 7
