Philipp Hildebrand: Developments in the current financial crisis 
Summary of a speech by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of 
the Swiss National Bank, at the Swiss Funds and Asset Management Forum, Berne, 2 April 
2009. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The  financial  market  turbulence,  which  began  some  20  months  ago,  has  grown  into  the 
largest and most complex crisis since the 1930s. The real world economy is now feeling the 
full force of this financial crisis. We are currently experiencing a very difficult period, although 
there are a few signs that the global economy could possibly be close to the cyclical trough. 
However, the route to recovery is unlikely to be straightforward, and the downside risks to 
growth remain considerable. 
Throughout  the  world,  governments  and  central  banks  have  taken  steps  to  stabilise  the 
financial system. In addition, a large number of countries are pursuing fiscal policies aimed at 
stimulating demand. Central banks have lowered interest rates rapidly and sharply, and, in 
some cases, taken exceptionally far-reaching measures to alleviate the economic downturn. 
Cumulatively, these measures will ultimately help to ensure that the global economy returns 
to a growth path.  
The Swiss National Bank (SNB), too, has made decisive use of conventional monetary policy 
tools and innovative, far-reaching monetary policy measures. We will deploy these measures 
aggressively for as long as this remains appropriate, both within the context of our monetary 
policy strategy and with a view to our inflation forecast.  
We are aware that long-term risks are associated with the option we have chosen for fighting 
this crisis. Yet the SNB is profoundly convinced that the risks associated with the option of 
“doing too little”, let alone the option of “doing nothing”, would have been far greater. As soon 
as a return of the Swiss economy to its long-term growth path can be foreseen, the SNB will 
certainly not hesitate to redirect its monetary policy accordingly. 
BIS Review 41/2009 
 1
