Ewald Nowotny: Austria’s role in the international financial system 
Speech by Mr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, to representatives of 
official Austrian institutions, New York, 28 April 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is my pleasure to speak to such a distinguished audience tonight on Austria’s role in the 
international financial system. Essentially, I would like to give you a brief overview on the key 
figures of the Austrian financial market and elaborate in more detail on the historical chances 
Austrian banks have found in Eastern Europe since the fall of the iron curtain. Then I would 
like to talk about the consequences of the current crisis for Austria, and the policy measures 
which  have  already  been  taken  to  stabilize  the  situation  in  Europe  in  general  and  in  my 
country in particular. Finally, I want to share some ideas with you on how we might prevent 
such a crisis in the future. 
 
The most significant difference between the financial market in Austria and the U.S.A. – next 
to the difference in sheer size, which is hard to ignore – is the structural importance of banks 
for  financing  the  private  sector  in  Austria,  whereas  the  financial  system  in  the  US  is  a  lot 
more  market-based.  This  difference  is  probably  most  visibly  reflected  in  the  volume  of 
outstanding  bank  loans  to  the  private  sector,  which  currently  amounts  to  120%  of  GDP  in 
Austria  and  to  only  60%  in  the  U.S.A.  On  the  other  hand,  the  market  capitalization  of  the 
stock exchange is 140% in the U.S.A. and only 60% in Austria. 
 
 BIS Review79/2009 
 1
 
The  assets  of  Austrian  banks  have  been  increasing  steadily  over  the  last  decade,  and  in 
2008 they exceeded 1 trillion euro for the first time; banks assets amounted up to 373% of 
the Austrian GDP. This expansion was supported by the increase in foreign assets, which 
accounted for 361 billion euro in 2008 or 128% of GDP. More than half of the foreign assets 
of Austrian banks were located in Central and Eastern Europe (some 200 billion), thereof ¾ 
in EU Member States. 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2009
Austrian banks in Eastern Europe 
  
The  end  of  communism  in  Europe  in  1989  and  the  transition  of  Central  and  Eastern 
European  economies  provided  Austrian  banks  with  a  historic  opportunity.  To  that  very 
moment,  their  business  had  been  more  domestically  oriented,  but  all  of  a  sudden  the 
demand  for  banking  services  was  increasing  tremendously  in  their  closest  neighborhood. 
Over night, Austria changed from being a frontier state of the cold war and became a hub of 
European  integration.  To  show  you  how  close  many  of  the  newly  emerging  opportunities 
were located, let me give you some comparisons: Vienna is no further from Bratislava, the 
capital  of  Slovakia,  than  Stamford1    is  from  New  York;  getting  to  Budapest,  the  capital  of 
Hungary,  from  Vienna  is  like  getting  to  Albany  for  you;  Prague,  the  capital  of  the  Czech 
Republic, is as far as Boston; and Ljubljana, the capital of Slovenia, as far as Washington. 
The  proximity  together  with  cultural  similarities  and  a  shared  history  gave  Austrian  banks 
some advantages on these new markets, and they did not miss their chance. Their strategy 
for the years after 1989 clearly was: Go east! 
The engagement of Austrian banks in the Central and Eastern European countries has been 
very  successful,  and  it  has  been  beneficial  for  all  parties  involved  –  and  even  for  some 
uninvolved. For Austrian banks, the investments in the region proved to be highly profitable 
and contributed most favorably to their earnings over the past years. 
                                                 
1   Stamford,  Connecticut,  is  part  of  the  New  York  metropolitan  area  and  hosts  a  cluster  of  corporate 
headquarters, many of which moved from New York in the 1980s both to lower their tax bill and to be closer to 
the homes of their top executives. 
BIS Review79/2009 
 3
  
At  the  beginning  of  the  transition  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  the  domestic  financial 
corporations in these countries were unable to fund the elevated rates of economic growth 
sustainably; in some cases, banks as we know them hardly existed. Even ten years after the 
beginning of transition, the ratio of private credit to GDP was much lower in these countries 
than in the mature EU economies. Therefore, foreign investors and financial intermediaries 
were highly welcome to fill the gap. After decades of centrally planned economic activities, 
domestic banks in these countries often lacked the experience or the corporate governance 
to  support  the  establishment  of  dynamic  markets.  Foreign  banks  contributed  to  the 
necessary  financial  deepening  in  the  region  and  thereby  allowed  for  a  smoother  transition 
process. 
But in many Eastern European countries, access to financial intermediation is still far beyond 
the levels in OECD countries, and therefore the extension of financial activities in that region 
will  offer  an  attractive  business  opportunity  for  Austrian  banks  and  other  international 
intermediaries in the future. 
4 
 BIS Review 79/2009
  
This  financial  strengthening  of  transition  economies  provided  positive  spillover  effects  by 
raising the demand for imported goods and services from the mature economies which were 
already  members  of  the  European  Union.  Thus,  the  financial  integration  of  Central  and 
Eastern Europe fuelled the prosperity of the whole continent. Around 20% of all euro area 
exports  went  to  the  10  new  EU  member  states  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe.  The  trade 
surplus of the euro area with those countries added up to 60 billion euro. 
As  countries  in  that  region  on  average  have  higher  trend  growth  rates  than  the  “old”  EU 
Member States, because they are still in the process of convergence towards higher GDP 
per capita, Central and Eastern Europe will remain a driver of economic growth in Europe for 
the foreseeable future. 
I do not want to suggest that no mistakes were made. In some countries credit volumes were 
probably  expanded  too  fast,  and  the  capital  inflows  contributed  to  overheating;  the  wide-
spread  allocation  of  foreign  currency  credits  made  some  countries  rather  vulnerable  for 
macroeconomic  shocks.  But  this  happened  only  in  a  small  part  of  Central  and  Eastern 
Europe,  and  above  all  the  bigger  economies  experienced  balanced  growth  over  the  past 
decade. 
 
BIS Review79/2009 
 5
    
In this respect I also want to stress the very fact that Austrian banks have been prudently 
pursuing their cross-border financial intermediation: their exposure in Eastern Europe is the 
6 
 BIS Review 79/2009
largest in Europe, but it is also well diversified over the whole region with a particular focus 
on countries which are members of the European Union – or even members of the European 
Monetary  Union  –  already.  Only  15%  of  Austrian  banks’  assets  in  Eastern  Europe  are 
located outside EU boundaries. Even a recent IMF Paper2 drew the conclusion that “Austria 
(…) has the most diversified loan portfolio among the major home countries”. 
The current crisis and its impact 
When the financial crisis started to unfold, it hardly affected the financial corporations in my 
country  at  all  initially,  as  they  did  not  hold  lots  of  securities  that  originated  from  the  U.S. 
mortgage market. Most of them were heavily engaged in Eastern and Central Europe, with 
little resources left to invest in assets which might turn out to be toxic ex post. But as the 
crisis spread around the globe and especially after the collapse of Lehman Brothers caused 
major disruptions on the interbank market, our banks were also suffering from the worsening 
conditions. The rising uncertainty on financial markets would in the end turn against every 
bank,  regardless  how  prudent  its  business  model  might  have  been.  In  previous  financial 
crises hot money flew out of certain countries or regions and made those economies suffer 
from  an  under-supply  of  capital,  but  this  time  liquidity  evaporated  globally.  The  financial 
stress caused asset prices to decline further as many financial institution tried to reduce their 
leverage by a kind of fire sale. 
Of  course,  the  financial  crisis  had  its  consequences  for  the  real  economy.  Non-financial 
corporation saw their access to needed funds dwindle as the liquidity of the markets dried up; 
households saw the present value of their savings decline as asset prices dropped. Together 
these factors caused the effective demand in most economies simultaneously to stay behind 
their  productive  potential,  resulting  in  a  major  global  recession.  As  the  whole  crisis  had 
started with a bubble on the housing market, some countries have also been hit by a slump 
of their property prices; this is true not only for the coastal areas of the U.S.A., but also for 
some European countries like Spain or Ireland. The burst of a bubble, the financial market 
crisis and the recession of the real economy all at the same time make the current situation 
particularly  challenging.  We  know  from  historical  comparison  that  a  recession  which  goes 
along  with  a  banking  crisis  tends  to  be  especially  long  and  severe3;  we  have  seen  this 
phenomenon in Sweden, Norway or Japan. Therefore, governments all over the world are in 
charge to take the required measures and to do so timely and well targeted. If we want to 
adhere  to  the  audacity  of  hope,  we  also  need  the  audacity  for  change;  therefore,  new 
instruments are needed and brave steps are warranted. 
The neglect of risk and its consequences 
One of the main reasons for the mess we are in now has been a general misperception of 
risk. In the financial industries, many believed that innovations like structured asset-backed 
securities would improve the diversification of risks and thereby help to reduce the markets’ 
vulnerability  to  adverse  shocks.  However,  the  risks  were  never  actually  traded  away,  but 
stayed  concentrated  on  the  books  of  the  financial  corporations  involved.  There  is  nothing 
wrong with risk diversification, but obviously something is wrong with innovative products that 
are too complex to be understood by the very people who originate and distribute them. And 
there is something wrong with markets that are not properly understood by their participants 
                                                 
2   Andrea M. Maechler and Li Lian Ong (2009) “Foreign Banks in the CESE Countries: In for a Penny, in for a 
Pound?” IMF Working Paper 54/09. 
3   Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff (2008) “Is the 2007 U.S. Sub-Prime Financial Crisis So Different? 
An International Historical Comparison“ NBER Working Paper No. 13761. 
BIS Review79/2009 
 7
and with participants who know the party must come to an end soon but keep on dancing just 
because the music is playing4. 
A second misperception with respect to risk was the belief that financial globalization would 
reduce country risks by the growing opportunities of international risk sharing. The core idea 
of risk sharing is that individual country risks should be negatively correlated, so if the home 
country is affected by a negative shock, some foreign countries face a positive shock at the 
same  time,  and  the  returns  from  those  countries  would  protect  internationally  diversified 
investors  from  domestic  income  losses.  But  the  increased  financial  globalization  not  only 
made it easier for investors to invest in different countries, it also made it easier for financial 
crises  to  spread  across  borders.  If  international  investors  have  to  recover  from  a  crisis  in 
country  A,  they  might  start  selling  assets  from  country  B,  which  was  until  then  in  no  way 
affected by any sign of crisis. This kind of crisis transmission, sometimes also referred to as 
contagion, has so far mostly affected emerging markets; now for the first time we witness this 
phenomenon on a global scale. 
As a consequence of the crisis, the global risk perception has shifted towards a more prudent 
assessment,  and  like  so  often  in  financial  markets,  the  market  has  tended  to  overshoot, 
going  from  risk  ignorance  to  a  very  high  degree  of  risk  aversion.  Such  overshooting  is 
currently taking place with regard to the spreads on government bonds in Europe. Whereas 
the interest on German 10-year government bonds has been decreasing, several European 
countries  now  face  higher  interest  rates,  which  can  partially  be  explained  by  the  soaring 
demand  for  liquidity,  which  is  of  course  highest  for  German  papers.  The  rather  unusual 
increase of the interest spread of Austrian sovereign debt versus Germany has in addition 
been associated with the exposure of Austrian banks in Central and Eastern Europe. 
                                                 
4   Widely quoted statement by Chuck Prince, then CEO of Citigroup, in a FT interview July 9, 2007 “When the 
music stops, in terms of liquidity, things will be complicated. But as long as the music is playing, you’ve got to 
get up and dance. We’re still dancing.“ 
8 
 BIS Review 79/2009
 In this respect I want to clarify again that Central and Eastern Europe’s economic potential is 
still intact, and that growth rates in that region will exceed those in Western Europe and the 
U.S. for the years to come, so these investments are still to be viewed as assets rather than 
liabilities. 
The euro as a shield in stormy times 
Referring  to  a  particularly  negative  episode  in  Austrian  and  in  world  financial  history,  Paul 
Krugman correctly stated: “Smaller countries – like Austria in 1931 – may once have been at 
the mercy of financial tides, unable to control their economic destiny”5. Now, Austria has not 
become  a  bigger  country  than  it  was  in  those  unhappy  days,  but  something  else  has 
changed in our favor since then: we are now members of the European Union and part of the 
euro area. In contrast to previous crises, this time our efforts to fight the recession are part of 
a  coordinated  European  macroeconomic  recovery  plan  upon  which 
the  European 
Commission and the EU member states already agreed in November 2008. 
If we compare the situation with our last recession before entering the EU, which took place 
in the early 1990s, monetary union with our key trading partners is very helpful as it prevents 
competitive  devaluations  by  some  neighboring  countries  that  harmed  our  economy  back 
then.  In  that  sense,  the  euro  has  worked  as  a  shield  for  small  open  economies  all  over 
Europe. 
What needs to be done now? 
Policy makers are confronted with two main tasks at the moment. On the one hand they must 
restore  stability  in  financial  markets  by  bringing  back  liquidity,  recapitalizing  banks  and 
getting toxic assets off banks’ balance sheets. In Europe, we have some examples that can 
serve as guidance for how to deal with a banking crisis, for instance the Swedish and the 
Finnish  experience  of  the  early  1990s.  (If  anything,  our  own  Austrian  experience  from  the 
1930s would rather qualify as an example of how not to save banks.) 
In Austria we have already taken measures to establish confidence among savers, and our 
government has also presented a stabilization package for banks, to which it has allotted 100 
billion  euro,  which  is  roughly  1/3  of  the  Austrian  GDP;  15  billion  euro  are  reserved  for 
recapitalizing banks, 75 billion for bank guarantees and an additional 10 billion for insuring 
the domestic deposit protection. 
In terms of GDP, the Austrian banks’ stabilization package is among the biggest in the EU. 
 
                                                 
5   Paul Krugman (2009) “The Return of Depression Economics and the Crisis of 2008“, Norton, page 4. 
BIS Review79/2009 
 9
  10 
   BIS Review 79/2009
The second task we now face is to fight the global recession and prevent it from turning into 
a  lasting  depression.  This  is  a  challenge  for  both  monetary  and  fiscal  policy.  The  main 
objective of monetary policy in the euro area has always been to preserve price stability, in 
the current state of affairs means to prevent deflation. I can assure you that, at the Governing 
Council  of  the  ECB  we  will  take  all  available  measures  to  stabilize  the  inflationary 
expectations in the euro area and keep them anchored in positive terrain. We will keep the 
interest  rate  very  low  for  as  long  a  time  as  is  required,  and  we  stand  ready  to  use 
unconventional  measures  of  quantitative  easing  to  assure  European  firms  and  consumers 
access to credit at appropriate conditions. 
As  for  fiscal  policy,  the  necessity  of  a  large  and  timely  stimulus  package  is  most  obvious. 
Olivier  Blanchard  and  others  from  the  IMF6  explained  concisely  late  last  year  how  such  a 
stimulus  package  should  look  like.  It  should  be  broad-based  as  the  crisis  will  hit  each 
economy as a whole; it should be fairly long-term as this crisis won’t go away next quarter; 
and it should be supported by as many countries as possible as this is a global crisis and it is 
not  the  time  for  beggar-my-neighbor  policies.  Although  the  automatic  stabilizers  in  most 
European  countries  help  to  adjust  for  the  loss  in  effective  demand,  some  additional 
discretionary spending is now needed. 
The crisis also highlighted differences between the EU and the U.S. in terms of fiscal policy. 
While  the  two  regions  are  roughly  comparable  in  economic  size,  the  EU  lacks  a  federal 
budget like the U.S. In times of crisis, when timely and targeted action is warranted, the EU 
with its budget of 1% of total GDP is rather shiftless compared to the U.S. Federal budget of 
more than 20% of GDP. In terms of fiscal policy, European countries are mostly on their own 
when  fighting  recessions.  Like  in  the  U.S.,  not  all  states  within  the  EU  are  affected  in  the 
same  way  by  the  crisis;  but  those  EU  Member  States  which  are  hit  most  severely  by  the 
crisis now are also the ones which will amass high budget deficits very quickly and therefore 
find it harder to finance their stimulus spending. Some of the new EU Member States have 
been  affected  rather  harshly  by  the  crisis  already,  and  unfortunately  it  has  not  been 
understood yet by all remaining countries that assisting those countries is not only an act of 
European solidarity, but that it is also in their economic interest to support those countries 
which  have  relatively  high  import  demand  for  their  products.  Like  in  the  so-called  “tequila 
crisis”  of  1995,  it  was  not  immediately  understood  by  all  politicians  in  Washington  that 
helping  Mexico  was  in  the  best  interest  of  the  U.S.,  but  thankfully  those  in  charge  in  the 
administration  knew  how  to  deal  with  the  situation.  It  also  took  some  time  before  policy 
makers in Europe did recognize that it was in the best interest of Europe to pave the way for 
a  European  initiative  for  economic  stabilization  and  recovery.  For  instance,  the  European 
Council  at  the  level  of  heads  of  state  and  government,  has  already  decided  to  double  the 
ceiling for the EU’s support facility for balance-of-payments assistance to 50 billion euro. 
What shall be done in the future? 
If macroeconomic policies work together in a well-coordinated way globally, I am convinced 
we will master this crisis and successfully prevent a global depression. But then we should 
also change the financial system in such a way that such a crisis will not occur again. Now in 
concluding,  let  me  briefly  point  out  some  ideas  how  these  changes  in  the  global  financial 
system should look like. 
First,  we  need  more  cooperation  or  even  integration  of  international  financial  supervision 
authorities. That means an end to the formerly common practice of some institutions to shop 
around  for  the  lowest  level  of  regulation  on  the  globe  and  hence  minimize  their  degree  of 
supervision.  Next,  I  think  we  must  increase  the  number  of  institutions  subjected  to 
                                                 
6   Olivier  Blanchard,  Antonio  Spilimbergo,  Steve  Symansky,  and  Carlo  Cottarelli  (2008).  “Fiscal  Policy  for  the 
Crisis,” IMF Staff Position Note, December 29, 2008. 
BIS Review79/2009 
 11
regulations which are at the moment reserved for commercial banks. Putting it simple, every 
single institution that has the capacity to create the kind of trouble a failing bank may create 
should be regulated like a bank; I am thinking here of highly leveraged institutions such as 
hedge funds, the need to regulate which is now generally understood. Then we should take a 
close look at the functioning of the rating agencies. They were wrong on Enron, they were 
wrong on the subprime market and yet their ratings continue to be of enormous importance 
for access to credit for many firms and even governments. As this importance is based on 
the assumption of superior information held by these agencies, I really wonder how such an 
assumption can be sustained any longer. 
The  crisis  has  shown  the  importance  of  international  cooperation  and  the  importance  of 
financial  institutions  like  the  IMF,  the  EIB  or  the  EBRD,  as  they  have  been  able  to  help 
quickly and provide countries in need with appropriate credit lines. Whereas the European 
Union  should  consider  establishing  certain  institutions  of  its  own  or  at  least  funding  the 
existing  institutions  more  generously,  on  a  global  level  the  IMF  has  re-established  its 
essential role. With respect to the conditionality of IMF loans we might as well question the 
wisdom  of  the  market  whether  it  is  useful  to  contain  public  spending  strongly  in  what  has 
turned out to be the most severe crisis for generations. But the results of the G20 summit 
have shown that the willingness necessary for close cooperation among the big economies is 
there.  The  agreed  upon  increase  in  credit  lines,  the  additional  funding  of  the  IMF  and  the 
creation of more Special Drawing Rights, all these measures will provide some stimulus to 
effective global demand, and the new approach to financial market regulation will help us to 
ensure financial stability and to control and trim the shadow banking system. Therefore, we 
can  be confident  that  this  crisis  will  be  contained,  and  that  recovery  won’t  take  too  long  a 
time coming; and once prosperity is growing again, it will do so more sustainably and in a 
more balanced manner. 
12 
 BIS Review 79/2009
