Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Financial stability through collaboration and 
understanding 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Insurance  Congress  of  Developing  Countries  (ICDC) 
2009, Makati City, 25 March 2009. 
 Atty. Eduardo Malinis, Insurance Commissioner and Chairman of the Organizing Committee 
of  the  Insurance  Congress  of  Developing  Countries  2009,  other  distinguished  speakers, 
distinguished delegates to this Insurance Congress, ladies and gentlemen, good morning.  
To our visiting delegates, Welcome to Manila! Welcome to the Philippines! I hope you’ve had 
or  you  will  have  the  chance  to  partake  of  the  many  options  to  help  further  “stimulate”  our 
domestic economy. I am sure all of us in this room have heard about the different financial 
stability and fiscal stimulus packages, being pursued by economies across the globe, to help 
stem  the  impact  of  the  current  global  financial  and  economic  crisis.  I  am  certain  the 
organizers of ICDC Manila 2009 have also put together their “own” version of a post-meeting 
stimulus package to complement the many interesting conference breakout sessions. For my 
part, I’d like to encourage all of you to participate as actively in that endeavor as you would in 
the different sessions in the next three days. 
Let  me  begin  my  remarks  this  morning  by  thanking  Commissioner  Ed  Malinis  and  the 
Congress  organizers  for  inviting  me  to  speak  before  you  today.  At  first  blush,  the  keynote 
message for a gathering of insurers to be delivered by the governor of a central bank that 
supervises only the banking sector, may be a bit peculiar. But if one seriously looks at the 
situation, it is indeed quite reflective of the theme of the Congress, which is Financial Stability 
through Collaboration and Understanding.  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  at  no  other  time  than  now  has  the  need  for  promoting  financial 
stability been more imperative. As we are all keenly aware, the current financial turmoil has 
gone  beyond  the  borders  of  the  epicenter  of  the  financial  crisis  –  the  US  and  the  major 
economies – and has reached the shores of emerging markets. More importantly, the global 
financial turmoil has transcended the bounds of the financial realm and has crossed over to 
the real sector of most economies, including several represented here today. 
You  will  be  pleased  to  know  that  my  remarks  this  morning  will  be  brief.  I  only  have  two 
messages that I wish to bring across, in light of our desire for financial stability. First is that, 
information  efficiency  must  be  created  and  maintained  among  financial  regulators.  As  we 
have witnessed in this current crisis, the lines delineating the financial institutions that make 
up the financial system have become at times blurred, making improved collaboration among 
financial regulators exigent. Second, there must be a conscious effort among regulators to 
devote  more  resources  to  the  regulation  of  the  conduct  of  business.  There  is  often  the 
temptation  during  a  large-scale  (global)  crisis,  such  the  one  we  are  in  at  the  moment,  to 
speak  only  about  systemically  important  institutions.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  believe  we 
must be careful not to forget the public that ultimately we serve. We must remember that the 
financial sophistication of the investing public may not necessarily coincide with the pace of 
financial innovation. This creates a gap that could result in the public not fully appreciating 
the products and new structures that they are investing in, thereby unduly exposing them to 
risk.  
The need for information efficiency 
I.  
In discussing my first point, which is the need for information efficiency, I’d like to highlight 
two  recent  developments  in  the  global  financial  markets.  First,  the  convergence  among 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 1
different  types  of  financial  institutions.  And  second,  the  convergence  in  the  framework  for 
financial regulation and supervision.  
Convergence among different types of financial institutions 
A.  
The financial crisis in the US, as we now understand it, is partly explained by the relatively 
loose regulation of entities heavily involved in financial innovation, including the oversight of 
the sale of these products to the wider public. Financial markets have developed in recent 
years  so  that  the  same  financial  products  are  sold  across  different  financial  sub-sectors  – 
from  banks  to  insurance  companies,  to  securities  firms,  with  several  cross-combinations 
thereof. In addition, the emergence (through common ownership) of financial conglomerates 
that  encompass  the  different  types  of  financial  institutions  has  eroded  the  long-standing 
barriers that kept these business lines apart. With these changes, it has become important 
that financial regulators clearly understand the mechanisms for passing on of risks among 
these different sub-sectors.  
Let  me  illustrate.  The  distress  certain  insurance  companies  currently  face  can  be  directly 
traced to their exposure to risks that originated in the banking system, including structured 
products  and  derivatives  whose  underlying  assets  were  sub-prime  mortgages.  This  further 
highlights the fact that the risks to financial soundness of insurance firms may now also arise 
from the asset side of their balance sheets, a clear departure from the traditional insurance 
firm risk management practice that focused exclusively on the underwriting risks associated 
with insurance liabilities.  
Indeed, the barriers that used to separate the analysis of risks in different lines of business 
have slowly been breaking down. 
To give you another example, unlike in their old (standard) business models, banks are now 
paying  more  attention  to  the  adequacy  of  pricing  risk  exposures  so  as  to  at  least  cover 
expected  losses.  In  many  business  models,  this  is  called  the  probability  function  for  loss 
given default. Curiously, this is central to and is a long-standing practice among insurance 
firms. 
As we are now able to appreciate, this product and financial structure convergence has been 
driven  by  financial  liberalization  and  advances  in  information  and  financial  technology. 
Developments in risk management and in valuation methodologies also helped to heighten 
convergence.  These  factors  nurtured  convergence,  particularly  during  the  extended  low-
interest rate environment – referred to as The Great Moderation – when market participants 
sought to enhance yield and “offload” or spread risk.  
in 
too.  The 
insurance 
framework 
Convergence in the framework of prudential regulation and supervision  
B.  
A  second  major  development  in  the  financial  market,  which  makes  information  efficiency 
among regulators urgent, is the convergence in the framework of prudential regulation and 
supervision. Just as in banking, for instance, a set of core principles now lays out the broad 
prudential 
Insurance 
Supervisors  (IAIS)  has  released  just  two  weeks  ago  an  Issues  Paper  on  Group-Wide 
Solvency  Assessment  and  Supervision.  This  sets  out  the  future  IAIS  work  on  the 
development  of  a  comprehensive  suite  of  supervisory  papers  on  group-wide  solvency 
assessment and supervision. One could look at this as the international insurance industry’s 
version of the capital adequacy framework under Basel II for banks.  
It  is  not  only,  however,  the  framework  for  prudential  regulation  and  supervision  that  has 
converged.  At  the  national  level  (counting  over  30  countries  now),  there  has  also  been  a 
physical  convergence  of  the  different  financial  supervisory  bodies  –  more  specifically  the 
establishment  of  “integrated  supervisors”  (i.e.,  supervisors  that  are  responsible  for  at  least 
two (2) types of financial institutions).  
International  Association  of 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2009
Internationally  though,  the  convergence  has  not  really  been  physical  but  only  intellectual, 
with the creation of the Joint Forum. The Joint Forum is composed of international financial 
supervisory  organizations,  namely,  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking  Supervision  (BCBS), 
the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), and the IAIS. The Forum 
has  been  performing  a  valuable  role  in  identifying  differences  in  prudential  arrangements 
across sectors and in considering the ever larger set of issues of common interest across the 
different supervisory communities. 
The Philippine case 
C.  
In the Philippines, we do not have an integrated supervisor for the financial system although, 
as  I  will  explain  later,  there  are  existing  collaborative  arrangements  among  the  different 
financial  supervisory  agencies  in  order  to  achieve  our  goal  of  a  stable  financial  system. 
Supervision of the Philippine financial system follows a “silo” approach, i.e., each supervisory 
agency is responsible for supervision of a certain segment of the system – (1) the Bangko 
Sentral ng Pilipinas (BSP) for banks and quasi-banks, their financial allied subsidiaries and 
affiliates; non stock savings and loan associations, and pawnshops; (2) the Securities and 
Exchange  Commission  (SEC)  for  investment  houses,  financing  companies,  securities 
dealers/brokers,  investment  companies,  and  pre-need  companies;  and  (3)  the  Insurance 
Commission (IC) for insurance and reinsurance companies, insurance brokers, and mutual 
benefit associations. 
While  the  BSP  supervises  the  largest  financial  groups  holding  the  bulk  of  the  financial 
system’s  resources,  in  some  instances,  the  existing  mandates  of  the  three  supervisory 
agencies  result  in  overlaps  in  supervisory  jurisdictions.  These  overlaps  are,  however, 
remedied by our continuous collaborative efforts. Most notable of these collaborative efforts 
is the establishment in 2004 of the Financial Sector Forum (FSF), which is similar to the Joint 
Forum but only on a national scale. The FSF is comprised of the three supervisory agencies 
– the BSP, the SEC and the IC – together with the Philippine Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(PDIC). The members of the FSF are the heads of the four member agencies, with the BSP 
Governor as the Chair. FSF is essentially a cooperative effort without any legal mandate lest 
it be construed as being an integrated supervisory body.  
A  quick  survey  among  the  participants  in  this  Congress  will  show  that  there  is  no  clearly 
identifiable single optimal model for supervision. There are motivations commonly cited for 
establishing  consolidated  supervision,  although  no  standard  has  been  established  for  its 
design. These motivations include 1) regulatory consistency and coordination to harmonize 
rules  and  standards,  2)  the  difficulty  that  hybrid  financial  instruments  and  presence  of 
financial conglomerates pose to separate regulators, and 3) the value of economies of scale 
given limited financial and human resources.  
What  is  evident  in  all  discussions,  however,  is  the  need  to  share  information  efficiently, 
regardless  of  the  form  of  supervision  structure  present  in  the  economy.  Ladies  and 
gentlemen,  what  is  incumbent  among  financial  supervisors  in  order  to  facilitate  and 
strengthen  financial  stability  at  this  time,  is  to  create  and  maintain  an  information  sharing 
structure  that  will  allow  all  to  react  swiftly  and  preemptively  to  changes  in  the  operating 
environment. This will certainly help prevent the occurrence of a crisis of the magnitude and 
breadth we’re seeing today.  
Conduct of business supervision 
II. 
Let me now move on to my second message which, I believe is an issue that is of particular 
interest to developing countries.  
One characteristic of developing countries is the relatively weaker financial sophistication of 
their consumers, which makes the customers quite vulnerable to financial scams, including 
relatively simple ones. I believe therefore that financial supervision in developing countries 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 3
should not only focus on setting prudential standards, but also on strengthening conduct of 
business  oversight  of  financial  institutions  (i.e.,  supervision  of  the  business  practices, 
including  dealings  with  customers).  The  increased  globalization  of  the  financial  industry 
presents  a  further  complication  as  globalization  improves  the  availability  of  and  access  to 
complex  financial  products  across  developing  countries,  without  necessarily  discriminating 
among levels of sophistication of the target markets.  
Ensuring that financial institutions conduct their business in a proper and transparent manner 
should  therefore  be  a  primary  concern  for  financial  supervisors  in  developing  countries. 
Failure  to  ensure  proper  business  conduct  by  financial  institutions  would  have  adverse 
implications on market confidence, which, in turn, could threaten the viability of the financial 
markets as source of funds that could support the productive capacity of the economy.  
This point could not be more apparent in the developments in the global financial markets we 
are  witnessing  right  now.  The  fallout  from  the  global  financial  crisis  left  many  investors  in 
financial  products  with  substantial  losses,  and  exposed  some  investment  schemes  as 
economically unsound if not totally fraudulent. The immediate impact was the weakening of 
confidence  in  financial  markets,  which  played  a  key  role  in  stoking  the  crisis.  Restoring 
market confidence through conduct of business supervision is therefore essential in order to 
restore the smooth functioning of financial markets.  
In the Philippines, financial supervisors, independently and in collaboration with the Financial 
Sector Forum, have already undertaken initiatives and issued rules to improve the conduct of 
business by financial institutions, especially those relating to complex products and services. 
The BSP, for instance, came out with circulars requiring banks and trust entities to take a 
more pro-active responsibility in marketing their derivative and trust products by conducting 
client  suitability  tests.  Under  these  rules,  the  bank/trustee  shall  perform  a  client  profiling 
process  under  the  general  principles  on  client  suitability  assessment  to  guide  the  client  in 
choosing investment outlets that are best suited to his objectives, risk tolerance, preferences 
and  experience.  In  addition,  the  BSP  has  tightened  disclosure  requirements  covering  the 
interest structure on credit cards, fees paid on loans and deposits, and the management and 
custody  fees  for  trust  funds.  The  FSF,  for  its  part,  has  also  intensified  the  release  of 
advisories against fraudulent and unsound corporate financial practices. 
Concluding remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, allow me to conclude my remarks this morning by recapping my two 
points.  
The  increasing  convergence  of  the  different  types  of  financial  institutions  and  financial 
products calls for closer collaboration among the different financial supervisory agencies or 
units  in  order  to  ensure  financial  stability.  For  the  developing  countries,  however,  another 
important issue is the refocusing of financial supervision to include not only the oversight role 
of supervisors in the safety and soundness of financial institutions, but also the oversight role 
of supervisors in the conduct of business of these institutions.  
I trust that these would be food for thought among you, as you consider the many different 
issues that surround financial stability during these very difficult and challenging times.  
I wish you all a productive and meaningful Congress. 
Thank you very much for your attention, and good day. 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2009
