Ben S Bernanke: Reflections on a year of crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Kansas  City's  Annual  Economic 
Symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 21 August 2009. 
 By  the  standards  of  recent  decades,  the  economic  environment  at  the  time  of  this 
symposium one year ago was quite challenging. A year after the onset of the current crisis in 
August 2007, financial markets remained stressed, the economy was slowing, and inflation – 
driven  by  a  global  commodity  boom  –  had  risen  significantly.  What  we  could  not  fully 
appreciate when we last gathered here was that the economic and policy environment was 
about to become vastly more difficult. In the weeks that followed, several systemically critical 
financial institutions would either fail or come close to failure, activity in some key financial 
markets  would  virtually  cease,  and the  global  economy  would  enter  a deep  recession.  My 
remarks  this  morning  will  focus  on  the  extraordinary  financial  and  economic  events  of  the 
past year, as well as on the policy responses both in the United States and abroad.  
One very clear lesson of the past year – no surprise, of course, to any student of economic 
history,  but  worth  noting  nonetheless  –  is  that  a  full-blown  financial  crisis  can  exact  an 
enormous toll in both human and economic terms. A second lesson – once again, familiar to 
economic historians – is that financial disruptions do not respect borders. The crisis has been 
global, with no major country having been immune. 
History is full of examples in which the policy responses to financial crises have been slow 
and inadequate, often resulting ultimately in greater economic damage and increased fiscal 
costs. In this episode, by contrast, policymakers in the United States and around the globe 
responded  with  speed  and  force  to  arrest  a  rapidly  deteriorating  and  dangerous  situation. 
Looking forward, we must urgently address structural weaknesses in the financial system, in 
particular  in  the  regulatory  framework,  to  ensure  that  the  enormous  costs  of  the  past  two 
years will not be borne again. 
September-October 2008: the crisis intensifies 
When  we  met  last  year,  financial  markets  and  the  economy  were  continuing  to  suffer  the 
effects of the ongoing crisis. We know now that the National Bureau of Economic Research 
has determined December 2007 as the beginning of the recession. The U.S. unemployment 
rate  had  risen  to  5-3/4  percent  by  July,  about  1  percentage  point  above  its  level  at  the 
beginning  of  the  crisis,  and  household  spending  was  weakening.  Ongoing  declines  in 
residential  construction  and  house  prices  and  rising  mortgage  defaults  and  foreclosures 
continued  to  weigh  on  the  U.S.  economy,  and  forecasts  of  prospective  credit  losses  at 
financial institutions both here and abroad continued to increase. Indeed, one of the nation's 
largest  thrift  institutions,  IndyMac,  had  recently  collapsed  under  the  weight  of  distressed 
mortgages, and investors continued to harbor doubts about the condition of the government-
sponsored  enterprises  (GSEs)  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac,  despite  the  approval  by  the 
Congress of open-ended support for the two firms.  
Notwithstanding these significant concerns, however, there was little to suggest that market 
participants  saw  the  financial  situation  as  about  to  take  a  sharp  turn  for  the  worse.  For 
example,  although  indicators  of  default  risk  such  as  interest  rate  spreads  and  quotes  on 
credit  default  swaps  remained  well  above  historical  norms,  most  such  measures  had 
declined from earlier peaks, in some cases by substantial amounts. And in early September, 
when  the  target  for  the  federal  funds  rate  was  2  percent,  investors  appeared  to  see  little 
chance that the federal funds rate would be below 1-3/4 percent six months later. That is, as 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 1
of  this  time  last  year,  market  participants  evidently  believed  it  improbable  that  significant 
additional monetary policy stimulus would be needed in the United States. 
Nevertheless, shortly after our last convocation, the financial crisis intensified dramatically. 
Despite  the  steps  that  had  been  taken  to  support  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac,  their 
condition continued to worsen. In early September, the companies' regulator placed both into 
conservatorship,  and  the  Treasury  used  its  recently  enacted  authority  to  provide  the  firms 
with massive financial support.  
Shortly  thereafter,  several  additional  large  U.S.  financial  firms  also  came  under  heavy 
pressure 
from  creditors,  counterparties,  and  customers.  The  Federal  Reserve  has 
consistently  maintained  the  view  that  the  disorderly  failure  of  one  or  more  systemically 
important institutions in the context of a broader financial crisis could have extremely adverse 
consequences for both the financial system and the economy. We have therefore spared no 
effort, within our legal authorities and in appropriate cooperation with other agencies, to avert 
such  a  failure.  The  case  of  the  investment  bank  Lehman  Brothers  proved  exceptionally 
difficult,  however.  Concerted  government  attempts  to  find  a  buyer  for  the  company  or  to 
develop  an  industry  solution  proved  unavailing,  and  the  company's  available  collateral  fell 
well short of the amount needed to secure a Federal Reserve loan of sufficient size to meet 
its  funding  needs.  As  the  Federal  Reserve  cannot  make  an  unsecured  loan,  and  as  the 
government as a whole lacked appropriate resolution authority or the ability to inject capital, 
the  firm's  failure  was,  unfortunately,  unavoidable.  The  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Treasury 
were  compelled  to  focus  instead  on  mitigating  the  fallout  from  the  failure,  for  example,  by 
taking measures to stabilize the triparty repurchase (repo) market.  
In contrast, in the case of the insurance company American International Group (AIG), the 
Federal Reserve judged that the company's financial and business assets were adequate to 
secure an $85 billion line of credit, enough to avert its imminent failure. Because AIG was 
counterparty  to  many  of  the  world's  largest  financial  firms,  a  significant  borrower  in  the 
commercial  paper  market  and  other  public  debt  markets,  and  a  provider  of  insurance 
products to tens of millions of customers, its abrupt collapse likely would have intensified the 
crisis  substantially  further,  at  a  time  when  the  U.S.  authorities  had  not  yet  obtained  the 
necessary fiscal resources to deal with a massive systemic event. 
The failure of Lehman Brothers and the near-failure of AIG were dramatic but hardly isolated 
events. Many prominent firms struggled to survive as confidence plummeted. The investment 
bank Merrill Lynch, under pressure in the wake of Lehman's failure, agreed to be acquired by 
Bank of America; the major thrift institution Washington Mutual was resolved by the Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) in an assisted transaction; and the large commercial 
bank  Wachovia,  after  experiencing  severe  liquidity  outflows,  agreed  to  be  sold.  The  two 
largest  remaining  free-standing  investment  banks,  Morgan  Stanley  and  Goldman  Sachs, 
were  stabilized  when  the  Federal  Reserve  approved,  on  an  emergency  basis,  their 
applications to become bank holding companies.  
Nor were the extraordinary pressures on financial firms during September and early October 
confined  to  the  United  States:  For  example,  on  September  18,  the  U.K.  mortgage  lender 
HBOS,  with  assets  of  more  than  $1  trillion,  was  forced  to  merge  with  Lloyds  TSB.  On 
September  29,  the  governments  of  Belgium,  Luxembourg,  and  the  Netherlands  effectively 
nationalized Fortis, a banking and insurance firm that had assets of around $1 trillion. The 
same day, German authorities provided assistance to Hypo Real Estate, a large commercial 
real  estate  lender,  and  the  British  government  nationalized  another  mortgage  lender, 
Bradford and Bingley. On the next day, September 30, the governments of Belgium, France, 
and Luxembourg injected capital into Dexia, a bank with assets of more than $700 billion, 
and the Irish government guaranteed the deposits and most other liabilities of six large Irish 
financial  institutions.  Soon  thereafter,  the  Icelandic  government,  lacking  the  resources  to 
rescue  the  three  largest  banks  in  that  country,  put  them  into  receivership  and  requested 
assistance from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and from other Nordic governments. 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2009
In  mid-October,  the  Swiss authorities  announced  a  rescue  package  for  UBS,  one  of  the 
world's  largest  banks,  that  consisted  of  a  capital  injection  and  a  purchase  of  assets.1  The 
growing  pressures  were  not  limited  to  banks  with  significant  exposure  to  U.S.  or  U.K  real 
estate  or  to  securitized  assets.  For  example,  unsubstantiated  rumors  circulated  in  late 
September  that  some  large  Swedish  banks  were  having  trouble  rolling  over  wholesale 
deposits,  and  on  October  13  the  Swedish  government  announced  measures  to  guarantee 
bank debt and to inject capital into banks.2  
The  rapidly  worsening  crisis  soon  spread  beyond  financial  institutions  into  the  money  and 
capital  markets  more  generally.  As  a  result  of  losses  on  Lehman's  commercial  paper,  a 
prominent money market mutual fund announced on September 16 that it had "broken the 
buck"  –  that  is,  its  net  asset  value  had  fallen  below  $1  per  share.  Over  the  subsequent 
several  weeks,  investors  withdrew  more  than  $400  billion  from  so-called  prime  money 
funds.3  Conditions  in  short-term  funding  markets,  including  the  interbank  market  and  the 
commercial paper market, deteriorated sharply. Equity prices fell precipitously, and credit risk 
spreads jumped. The crisis also began to affect countries that had thus far escaped its worst 
effects. Notably, financial markets in emerging market economies were whipsawed as a flight 
from risk led capital inflows to those countries to swing abruptly to outflows. 
The policy response 
Authorities in the United States and around the globe moved quickly to respond to this new 
phase  of  the  crisis,  although  the  details  differed  according  to  the  character  of  financial 
systems.  The  financial  system  of  the  United  States  gives  a  much  greater  role  to  financial 
markets and to nonbank financial institutions than is the case in most other nations, which 
rely primarily on banks.4 Thus, in the United States, a wider variety of policy measures was 
needed than in some other nations. 
In the United States, the Federal Reserve established new liquidity facilities with the goal of 
restoring  basic  functioning  in  various  critical  markets.  Notably,  on  September  19,  the  Fed 
announced the creation of a facility aimed at stabilizing money market mutual funds, and the 
Treasury unveiled a temporary insurance program for those funds. On October 7, the Fed 
announced the creation of a backstop commercial paper facility, which stood ready to lend 
against  highly  rated  commercial  paper  for  a  term  of  three  months.5  Together,  these  steps 
                                                 
1   Of course, these interventions were not the first of the crisis. For example, in July and August of 2007, two 
German  banks  that  had  relied  heavily  on  market  funding  through  asset-backed  commercial  paper  (ABCP) 
conduits – IKB and Sachsen LB – received assistance from public-sector owners to cope with severe funding 
pressures. In September 2007, Northern Rock, a large mortgage lender that relied heavily on securitizations 
for  funding,  was  nationalized  by  U.K.  authorities  after  experiencing  a  run  by  retail  depositors.  In  February 
2008, West LB – another German bank with large ABCP conduits – received protection against losses from its 
owners, including the state of North Rhine-Westphalia. And in March 2008, the U.S. Treasury and the Federal 
Reserve facilitated the acquisition of the investment bank Bear Stearns by JPMorgan Chase & Co. 
2   Throughout these remarks, where examples are given, they represent only a selection of instances, not an 
exhaustive list of all the relevant cases. 
3   Prime  money  funds  hold  a  variety  of  instruments,  with  commercial  paper  and  bank  obligations  typically 
accounting for the majority of their assets. 
4   For  example,  most  financing  of  automobile  purchases  was  provided  through  nonbank  channels,  and  such 
channels began shutting down in September and October of 2008. 
5   More precisely, in the Commercial Paper Funding Facility (CPFF), the Fed lends to a special purpose vehicle 
that, in turn, purchases highly rated three-month commercial paper directly from eligible issuers. On October 
21, the Fed also announced the creation of the Money Market Investor Funding Facility, or MMIFF, which was 
intended to provide a source of backup liquidity to U.S. money market mutual funds and certain other money 
market  investors.  Given  the  improvement  in  short-term  markets  brought  about  by  the  Asset-Backed 
Commercial  Paper  Money  Market  Mutual  Fund  Liquidity  Facility  (AMLF),  the  CPFF,  and  the  Treasury 
guarantee  of  money  market  funds,  the  MMIFF  never  had  to  be  tapped.  Nonetheless,  market  participants 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 3
helped  stem  the  massive  outflows  from  the  money  market  mutual  funds  and  stabilize  the 
commercial paper market. 
During this period, foreign commercial banks were a source of heavy demand for U.S. dollar 
funding,  thereby  putting  additional  strain  on  global  bank  funding  markets,  including  U.S. 
markets,  and  further  squeezing  credit  availability  in  the  United  States.  To  address  this 
problem, the Federal Reserve expanded the temporary swap lines that had been established 
earlier with the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Swiss National Bank, and established 
new temporary swap lines with seven other central banks in September and five more in late 
October,  including  four  in  emerging  market  economies.6  In  further  coordinated  action,  on 
October 8, the Federal Reserve and five other major central banks simultaneously cut their 
policy rates by 50 basis points. 
The failure of Lehman Brothers demonstrated that liquidity provision by the Federal Reserve 
would  not  be  sufficient  to  stop  the  crisis;  substantial  fiscal  resources  were  necessary.  On 
October 3, on the recommendation of the Administration and with the strong support of the 
Federal Reserve, the Congress approved the creation of the Troubled Asset Relief Program, 
or TARP, with a maximum authorization of $700 billion to support the stabilization of the U.S. 
financial system. 
Markets  remained  highly  volatile  and  pressure  on  financial  institutions  intense  through  the 
first weeks of October. On October 10, in what would prove to be a watershed in the global 
policy  response,  the  Group  of  Seven  (G-7)  finance  ministers  and  central  bank  governors, 
meeting in Washington, committed in a joint statement to work together to stabilize the global 
financial  system.  In  particular,  they  agreed  to  prevent  the  failure  of  systemically  important 
financial institutions; to ensure that financial institutions had adequate access to funding and 
capital, including public capital if necessary; and to put in place deposit insurance and other 
guarantees to restore the confidence of depositors.7 In the following days, many  countries 
around the world announced comprehensive rescue plans for their banking systems that built 
on the G-7 principles. To stabilize funding, during October more than 20 countries expanded 
their deposit insurance programs, and many also guaranteed nondeposit liabilities of banks. 
In addition, amid mounting concerns about the solvency of the global banking system, by the 
end of October more than a dozen countries had announced plans to inject public capital into 
banks,  and  several  announced  plans  to  purchase  or  guarantee  bank  assets.  The 
comprehensive  U.S.  response,  announced  on  October  14,  included  capital  injections  into 
both  large  and  small  banks  by  the  Treasury;  a  program  which  allowed  banks  and  bank 
holding companies, for a fee, to issue FDIC-guaranteed senior debt; the extension of deposit 
insurance  to  all  noninterest-bearing  transactions  deposits,  of  any  size;  and  the  Federal 
Reserve's continued commitment to provide liquidity as necessary to stabilize key financial 
institutions and markets.8  
This  strong  and  unprecedented  international  policy  response  proved  broadly  effective. 
Critically,  it  averted  the  imminent  collapse  of  the  global  financial  system,  an  outcome  that 
seemed  all  too  possible  to  the  finance  ministers  and  central  bankers  that  gathered  in 
                                                                                                                                                      
reported that the facility's existence helped reassure investors that ample liquidity would be available in case 
of further disruptions in the money markets. 
6   A  crucial  feature  of  these  lines  is  that  the  Federal  Reserve's  counterparties  are  the  foreign  central  banks, 
which are governmental entities, not the private-sector entities to which those central banks might lend in turn. 
Accordingly, the Fed bears little risk through these arrangements. 
7   Notably,  these  commitments  were  reaffirmed  on  October  11  in  communiqués  issued  by  the  International 
Monetary and Financial Committee of the Board of Governors of the IMF and by the Group of Twenty finance 
ministers and central bank governors. 
8   The  FDIC's  guarantee  program  complemented  a  temporary  increase  in  the  deposit  insurance  limit,  from 
$100,000 to $250,000 per account, passed by the Congress as part of the Emergency Economic Stabilization 
Act, the bill that created the TARP. 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2009
Washington on October 10. However, although the intensity of the crisis moderated and the 
risk  of  systemic  collapse  declined  in  the  wake  of  the  policy  response,  financial  conditions 
remained  highly  stressed.  For  example,  although  short-term  funding  spreads  in  global 
markets began to turn down in October, they remained elevated into this year. And, although 
generalized  pressures  on  financial  institutions  subsided  somewhat,  government  actions  to 
prevent the disorderly failures of individual, systemically significant institutions continued to 
be  necessary.  In  the  United  States,  support  packages  were  announced  for  Citigroup  in 
November  and  Bank  of  America  in  January.  Broadly  similar  support  packages  were  also 
announced for some large European institutions, including firms in the United Kingdom and 
the Netherlands.9  
Although  concerted  policy  actions  avoided  much  worse  outcomes,  the  financial  shocks  of 
September  and  October  nevertheless  severely  damaged  the  global  economy  –  starkly 
illustrating  the  potential  effects  of  financial  stress  on  real  economic  activity.  In  the  fourth 
quarter  of  2008  and  the  first  quarter  of  this  year,  global  economic  activity  recorded  its 
weakest performance in decades. In the United States, real GDP plummeted at nearly a 6 
percent average annual pace over those two quarters – an even sharper decline than had 
occurred in the 1981-82 recession. Economic activity contracted even more precipitously in 
many foreign economies, with real GDP dropping at double-digit annual rates in some cases. 
The crisis affected economic activity not only by pushing down asset prices and tightening 
credit  conditions,  but  also  by  shattering  household  and  business  confidence  around  the 
world. 
In  response  to  these  developments,  the  Federal  Reserve  expended  the  remaining 
ammunition  in  the  traditional  arsenal  of  monetary  policy,  bringing  the  federal  funds  rate 
down, in steps, to a target range of 0 to 25 basis points by mid-December of last year. It also 
took  several  measures  to  further  supplement  its  traditional  arsenal.  In  particular,  on 
November 25, the Fed announced that it would purchase up to $100 billion of debt issued by 
the  housing-related  GSEs  and  up  to  $500  billion  of  agency-guaranteed  mortgage-backed 
securities,  programs  that  were  expanded  substantially  and  augmented  by  a  program  of 
purchases  of  Treasury  securities  in  March.10  The  goal  of  these  purchases  was  to  provide 
additional  support  to  private  credit  markets,  particularly  the  mortgage  market.  Also  on 
November 25, the Fed announced the creation of the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan 
Facility  (TALF).  This  facility  aims  to  improve  the  availability  and  affordability  of  credit  for 
households  and  small  businesses  and  to  help  facilitate  the  financing  and  refinancing  of 
commercial  real  estate  properties.  The  TALF  has  shown  early  success  in  reducing  risk 
spreads and stimulating new securitization activity for assets included in the program. 
Foreign  central  banks  also  cut  policy  rates 
implemented 
unconventional  monetary  measures.  For  example,  the  Bank  of  Japan  began  purchasing 
commercial  paper  in  December  and  corporate  bonds  in  January.  In  March,  the  Bank  of 
England  announced  that  it  would  purchase  government  securities,  commercial  paper,  and 
corporate bonds, and the Swiss National Bank announced that it would purchase corporate 
bonds and foreign currency. For its part, the ECB injected more than €400 billion of one-year 
funds  in  a  single  auction  in  late  June.  In  July, the  ECB  began  purchasing  covered  bonds, 
which  are  bonds  that  are  issued  by  financial  institutions  and  guaranteed  by  specific  asset 
levels  and 
to  very 
low 
                                                 
9   On  January  26,  the  Dutch  government  announced  that  it  would  provide  ING  Group,  a  large  banking  and 
insurance firm, with loss protection on some of its assets, following up a €10 billion capital injection on October 
19. Shortly afterward, the U.K. Treasury announced packages for the Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) and for 
Lloyds Banking Group that included loss protection on assets and, in the case of RBS, a capital injection. 
10   In March, the Federal Reserve announced that it would purchase up to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury 
securities  and  raised  the  caps  on  other  purchases  to  $200  billion  for  the  direct  debt  of  the  housing-related 
GSEs and $1.25 trillion for agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities. 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 5
pools.  Actions  by  central  banks  augmented  large  fiscal  stimulus  packages  in  the  United 
States, China, and a number of other countries.  
On February 10, Treasury Secretary Geithner and the heads of the federal banking agencies 
unveiled the outlines of a new strategy for ensuring that banking institutions could continue to 
provide credit to households and businesses during the financial crisis. A central component 
of that strategy was the exercise that came to be known as the bank stress test.11 Under this 
initiative,  the  banking  regulatory  agencies  undertook  a  forward-looking,  simultaneous 
evaluation of the capital positions of 19 of the largest bank holding companies in the United 
States,  with  the  Treasury  committing  to  provide  public  capital  as  needed.  The  goal  of  this 
supervisory  assessment  was  to  ensure  that  the  equity  capital  held  by  these  firms  was 
sufficient – in both quantity and quality – to allow those institutions to withstand a worse-than-
expected  macroeconomic  environment  over  the  subsequent  two  years  and  yet  remain 
healthy and capable of lending to creditworthy borrowers. This exercise, unprecedented in 
scale  and  scope,  was  led  by  the  Federal  Reserve  in  cooperation  with  the  Office  of  the 
Comptroller  of  the  Currency  and  the  FDIC.  Importantly,  the  agencies'  report  made  public 
considerable  information  on  the  projected  losses  and  revenues  of  the  19  firms,  allowing 
private  analysts  to  judge  for  themselves  the  credibility  of  the  exercise.  Financial  market 
participants responded favorably to the announcement of the results, and many of the tested 
banks were subsequently able to tap public capital markets.  
Overall, the policy actions implemented in recent months have helped stabilize a number of 
key financial markets, both in the United States and abroad. Short-term funding markets are 
functioning more normally, corporate bond issuance has been strong, and activity in some 
previously  moribund  securitization  markets  has  picked  up.  Stock  prices  have  partially 
recovered, and U.S. mortgage rates have declined markedly since last fall. Critically, fears of 
financial  collapse  have  receded  substantially.  After  contracting  sharply  over  the  past  year, 
economic activity appears to be leveling out, both in the United States and abroad, and the 
prospects  for  a  return  to  growth  in  the  near  term  appear  good.  Notwithstanding  this 
noteworthy  progress,  critical  challenges  remain:  Strains  persist  in  many  financial  markets 
across  the  globe,  financial  institutions  face  significant  additional  losses,  and  many 
businesses and households continue to experience considerable difficulty gaining access to 
credit.  Because  of  these  and  other  factors,  the  economic  recovery  is  likely  to  be  relatively 
slow at first, with unemployment declining only gradually from high levels. 
Interpreting the crisis: elements of a classic panic 
How  should  we  interpret  the  extraordinary  events  of  the  past  year,  particularly  the  sharp 
intensification  of  the  financial  crisis  in  September  and  October?  Certainly,  fundamentals 
played a critical role in triggering those events. As I noted earlier, the economy was already 
in recession, and it had weakened further over the summer. The continuing dramatic decline 
in house prices and rising rates of foreclosure raised serious concerns about the values of 
mortgage-related assets, and thus about large potential losses at financial institutions. More 
broadly,  investors  remained  distrustful  of  virtually  all  forms  of  private  credit,  especially 
structured credit products and other complex or opaque instruments. 
At  the  same  time,  however,  the  events  of  September  and  October  also  exhibited  some 
features of a classic panic, of the type described by Bagehot and many others.12 A panic is a 
generalized run by providers of short-term funding to a set of financial institutions, possibly 
resulting in the failure of one or more of those institutions. The historically most familiar type 
                                                 
11   Officially, it was called the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, or SCAP. 
12   See Walter Bagehot ([1873] 1897), Lombard Street: A Description of the Money Market (New York: Charles 
Scribner's Sons). 
6 
 BIS Review 27/2009
of panic, which involves runs on banks by retail depositors, has been made largely obsolete 
by deposit insurance or guarantees and the associated government supervision of banks.13 
But a panic is possible in any situation in which longer-term, illiquid assets are financed by 
short-term,  liquid  liabilities,  and  in  which  suppliers  of  short-term  funding  either  lose 
confidence  in  the  borrower  or  become  worried  that  other  short-term  lenders  may  lose 
confidence.14,15 Although, in a certain sense, a panic may be collectively irrational, it may be 
entirely rational at the individual level, as each market participant has a strong incentive to be 
among the first to the exit. 
Panics arose in multiple contexts last year. For example, many financial institutions, notably 
including the independent investment banks, financed a portion of their assets through short-
term repo agreements. In repo agreements, the asset being financed serves as collateral for 
the loan, and the maximum amount of the loan is the current assessed value of the collateral 
less  a  haircut.  In  a  crisis,  haircuts  typically  rise  as  short-term  lenders  attempt  to  protect 
themselves from possible declines in asset prices. But this individually rational behavior can 
set  off  a  run-like  dynamic:  As  high  haircuts  make  financing  portfolios  more  difficult,  some 
borrowers  may  have  no  option  but  to  sell  assets  into  illiquid  markets.  These  forced  sales 
drive down asset prices, increase volatility, and weaken the financial positions of all holders 
of  similar  assets,  which  in  turn  increases  the  risks  borne  by  repo  lenders  and  thus  the 
haircuts they demand.16 This unstable dynamic was apparent around the time of the near-
failure  of  Bear  Stearns  in  March  2008,  and  haircuts  rose  particularly  sharply  during  the 
worsening of the crisis in mid-September.17 As we saw last fall, when a vicious funding spiral 
of this sort is at work, falling asset prices and the collapse of lender confidence may create 
financial contagion, even between firms without significant counterparty relationships. In such 
an environment, the line between insolvency and illiquidity may be quite blurry. 
                                                 
13   The Northern Rock episode in the United Kingdom may be seen as a counterexample, but in that case deposit 
insurance coverage was only partial. 
14   To be sure, there are good economic reasons for a maturity mismatch between assets and liabilities in the 
financial system, including allowing households flexibility in when to consume (see Douglas W. Diamond and 
Philip H. Dybvig (1983), "Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 91 
(June),  pp.  401-19).  Moreover,  short-term  creditors  can  help  to  impose  market  discipline  on  financial 
institutions  (see  Charles  W.  Calomiris  and  Charles  M.  Kahn  (1991),  "The  Role  of  Demandable  Debt  in 
Structuring  Optimal  Banking  Arrangements,"  American  Economic  Review,  vol.  81  (June),  pp.  497-513;  and 
Douglas  W.  Diamond  and  Raghuram  G.  Rajan  (2001),  "Liquidity  Risk,  Liquidity  Creation,  and  Financial 
Fragility: A Theory of Banking," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 109 (April), pp. 287-327). 
15   Also, during a panic, financial firms concerned about funding are likely to hoard liquidity, further exacerbating 
the situation. See Douglas W. Diamond and Raghuram G. Rajan (2009), "Fear of Fire Sales and the Credit 
Freeze,"  NBER  Working  Paper  Series  14925  (Cambridge,  Mass.:  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research, 
April); and Zhiguo He and Wei Xiong (2009), "Dynamic Debt Runs)," unpublished paper, June 30, Princeton 
University, Princeton, N.J. 
16   See  Markus  K.  Brunnermeier  (2009),  "Deciphering  the  Liquidity  and  Credit  Crunch  2007-2008,"  Journal  of 
Economic Perspectives, vol. 23 (Winter), pp. 77-100. This dynamic differed from the standard bank run in that 
investors did not completely withdraw funding. The reason for the difference lies in the nature of the lending 
contract.  In  a  standard  bank  deposit  contract,  the  price  of  deposits  in  terms  of  currency  is  fixed,  and  so 
depositors have no alternative to withdrawal when the value of deposits falls below the value of currency. For 
similar reasons, many investors in money market mutual funds withdrew all their funds when the redemption 
value  exceeded  the  value  of  holding  the  fund.  In  contrast,  in  the  case  of  repo  lending,  lenders  have  the 
alternative to withdrawal of varying the haircut they demand. There is a close analogy to the discounting of 
bank notes during the U.S. free banking era, as discussed by Gorton (see Gary Gorton (1996), "Reputation 
Formation in Early Bank Note Markets," Journal of Political Economy, vol. 104 (April), pp. 346-97). In either 
case, however, variations in the liquidity premium play an important role in the amount of funding that lenders 
are willing to provide against a given set of assets. 
17   See  Gary  B.  Gorton  and  Andrew  Metrick  (2009),  "Securitized  Banking  and  the  Run  on  Repo,"  Yale 
International Center for Finance Working Paper No. 14, July. 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 7
Panic-like phenomena occurred in other contexts as well. Structured investment vehicles and 
other asset-backed programs that relied heavily on the commercial paper market began to 
have difficulty rolling over their short-term funding very early in the crisis, forcing them to look 
to  bank  sponsors  for  liquidity  or  to  sell  assets.18  Following  the  Lehman  collapse,  panic 
gripped  the  money  market  mutual  funds  and  the  commercial  paper  market,  as  I  have 
discussed. More generally, during the crisis runs of uninsured creditors have created severe 
funding  problems  for  a  number  of  financial  firms.  In  some  cases,  runs  by  creditors  were 
augmented  by  other  types  of  "runs"  –  for  example,  by  prime  brokerage  customers  of 
investment banks concerned about the funds they held in margin accounts. Overall, the role 
played  by  panic  helps  to  explain  the  remarkably  sharp  and  sudden  intensification  of  the 
financial crisis last fall, its rapid global spread, and the fact that the abrupt deterioration in 
financial conditions was largely unforecasted by standard market indicators.  
The view that the financial crisis had elements of a classic panic, particularly during its most 
intense phases, has helped to motivate a number of the Federal Reserve's policy actions.19 
Bagehot instructed central banks – the only institutions that have the power to increase the 
aggregate  liquidity  in  the  system  –  to  respond  to  panics  by  lending  freely  against  sound 
collateral.20 Following that advice, from the beginning of the crisis the Fed (like other central 
banks) has provided large amounts of short-term liquidity to financial institutions. As I have 
discussed, it also provided backstop liquidity support for money market mutual funds and the 
commercial paper market and added significant liquidity to the system through purchases of 
longer-term securities. To be sure, the provision of liquidity alone can by no means solve the 
problems of credit risk and credit losses; but it can reduce liquidity premiums, help restore 
the confidence of investors, and thus promote stability. It is noteworthy that the use of Fed 
liquidity facilities has declined sharply since the beginning of the year – a clear market signal 
that liquidity pressures are easing and market conditions are normalizing. 
What does this perspective on the crisis imply for future policies and regulatory reforms? We 
have  seen  during  the  past  two  years  that  the  complex  interrelationships  among  credit, 
market,  and  funding  risks  of  key  players  in  financial  markets  can  have  far-reaching 
implications, particularly during a general crisis of confidence. In particular, the experience 
has  underscored  that  liquidity  risk  management  is  as  essential  as  capital  adequacy  and 
credit and market risk management, particularly during times of intense financial stress. Both 
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the U.S. bank regulatory agencies have 
recently issued guidelines for strengthening liquidity risk management at financial institutions. 
Among other objectives, liquidity guidelines must take into account the risks that inadequate 
liquidity  planning  by  major  financial  firms  pose  for  the  broader  financial  system,  and  they 
must ensure that these firms do not become excessively reliant on liquidity support from the 
central bank. 
But  liquidity  risk  management  at  the  level  of  the  firm,  no  matter  how  carefully  done,  can 
never fully protect against systemic events. In a sufficiently severe panic, funding problems 
will almost certainly arise and are likely to spread in unexpected ways. Only central banks 
                                                 
18   See Daniel M. Covitz, Nellie Liang, and Gustavo Suarez (2009), "The Evolution of a Financial Crisis: Runs in 
the Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Market," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve 
System,  Division  of  Research  and  Statistics,  August.  Moreover,  the  scale  of  these  conduits  and  their 
vulnerability to runs contributed importantly to the liquidity panics globally as many of these programs were 
sponsored by non-U.S. banks (see Carlos O. Arteta, Mark Carey, Ricardo Correa, and Jason Kotter (2009), 
"Revenge of the Steamroller: ABCP as a Window on Risk Choices," unpublished paper, Board of Governors 
of the Federal Reserve System, Division of International Finance, May). 
19   See  Brian  F.  Madigan  (2009),  "Bagehot's  Dictum  in  Practice:  Formulating  and  Implementing  Policies  to 
Combat the Financial Crisis," speech delivered at this symposium, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 21-23. 
20   See Bagehot, Lombard Street. 
8 
 BIS Review 27/2009
are well positioned to offset the ensuing sharp decline in liquidity and credit provision by the 
private sector. They must be prepared to do so. 
The role of liquidity in systemic events provides yet another reason why, in the future, a more 
systemwide  or  macroprudential  approach  to  regulation  is  needed.21  The  hallmark  of  a 
macroprudential  approach  is  its  emphasis  on  the  interdependencies  among  firms  and 
markets that have the potential to undermine the stability of the financial system, including 
the  linkages  that  arise  through  short-term  funding  markets  and  other  counterparty 
relationships,  such  as  over-the-counter  derivatives  contracts.  A  comprehensive  regulatory 
approach  must  examine  those  interdependencies  as  well  as  the  financial  conditions  of 
individual firms in isolation. 
Conclusion 
Since we last met here, the world has been through the most severe financial crisis since the 
Great Depression. The crisis in turn sparked a deep global recession, from which we are only 
now beginning to emerge. 
As  severe  as  the  economic  impact  has  been,  however,  the  outcome  could  have  been 
decidedly worse. Unlike in the 1930s, when policy was largely passive and political divisions 
made  international  economic  and  financial  cooperation  difficult,  during  the  past  year 
monetary,  fiscal,  and  financial  policies  around  the  world  have  been  aggressive  and 
complementary. Without these speedy and forceful actions, last October's panic would likely 
have  continued  to  intensify,  more  major  financial  firms  would  have  failed,  and  the  entire 
global financial system would have been at serious risk. We cannot know for sure what the 
economic effects of these events would have been, but what we know about the effects of 
financial crises suggests that the resulting global downturn could have been extraordinarily 
deep and protracted.  
Although  we  have  avoided  the  worst,  difficult  challenges  still  lie  ahead.  We  must  work 
together  to  build  on  the  gains  already  made  to  secure  a  sustained  economic  recovery,  as 
well as to build a new financial regulatory framework that will reflect the lessons of this crisis 
and prevent a recurrence of the events of the past two years. I hope and expect that, when 
we  meet  here  a  year  from  now,  we  will  be  able  to  claim  substantial  progress  toward  both 
those objectives. 
                                                 
21   See Ben S. Bernanke (2009), "Financial Reform to Address Systemic Risk," speech delivered at the Council 
on Foreign Relations, Washington, March 10. 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 9
