Pierre Duguay: Financial stability through sound risk management 
Remarks  by  Mr  Pierre  Duguay,  Deputy  Governor  at  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Risk 
Management Association, Toronto Chapter, Toronto, Ontario, 8 January 2009.  
 It's a pleasure to be here at the beginning of a new year, one that we hope will end on a 
stronger note than the last year. The extraordinary turmoil of 2007 and 2008 has brought to 
the fore many issues and challenges, most of which will be with us for some time as we deal 
with what has become the deepest financial crisis since the 1930s. Policy-makers around the 
world  have  taken  bold  and  timely  steps  to  deal  with  the  financial  instability  and  economic 
crisis,  but  it  will  take  time  for  confidence  to  be  restored  and  for  markets  to  become  fully 
functional  again.  There  are  important  lessons  to  be  learned  from  this  crisis,  lessons  that 
should help us to be better prepared the next time a shock occurs – and even reduce the 
probability of a large shock by limiting the buildup of financial imbalances in the first place. 
In  that  spirit,  I'd  like  to  talk  about  the  importance  of  sound  risk  management  for  financial 
system  stability.  I  will  begin  by  briefly  discussing  what  I  mean  by  financial  system  stability 
and  why  it  is  important.  I  will  then  consider  some  of  the  weaknesses  that  the  crisis  has 
exposed  in  risk-management  practices,  and  suggest  possible  measures  to  enhance  the 
management of risk in the future. Finally, I'll look at some of the steps that policy-makers are 
considering to make the financial system more resilient to shocks, before concluding with a 
brief discussion of the Canadian economy. 
The importance of financial system stability  
Financial system stability is the capacity of the financial system to do its job under a wide 
range of circumstances. This is critical to the economic well-being of the country, because 
the  financial  system  provides  the  channels  through  which  savings  become  investments, 
money and financial claims are transferred and settled, and risk is allocated to those most 
willing and able to bear it. For the financial system to function properly, households and firms 
must have confidence in it, and investors must know what they are investing in and what risk 
they are assuming. 
The current crisis demonstrates what happens when the financial system breaks down. We 
have seen that investors of all types – even the most sophisticated – did not always know or 
understand what they were investing in. Their frantic search for yield led many to presume 
that others knew what they were doing and that risk had been priced appropriately. These 
investors  substituted  the  judgments  of  credit-rating  agencies  and  others  for  their  own  due 
diligence.  This  opened  the  door  to  abuses  in  the  creation  of  increasingly  complex  and 
opaque structured products with embedded leverage, and in the origination of loans intended 
for  redistribution.  These  problems  were  compounded  by  a  distinct  disregard  for  economic 
fundamentals, which led many borrowers and lenders to discount the risk of a correction in 
house prices long after activity in the U.S. housing market had peaked. When the problems 
finally surfaced, the sudden realization that exposure to defaults was both widespread and 
difficult to locate led to extreme risk aversion and to a broad loss of confidence that impeded 
credit expansion and weighed heavily on economic activity. 
Canada's  financial  system  has  fared  relatively  well  throughout  this  global  crisis,  thanks  to 
prudent practices and the important steps that we have already taken in Canada to make our 
system more resilient to shocks. To be sure, our markets have been strained as a result of 
the global financial crisis but, for the most part, they have remained open. Importantly, banks 
have  continued  to  extend  credit,  albeit  on  tightened  terms.  Still,  the  system  has  not 
performed  as  well  as  it  should  have.  Bank  funding  costs  have  come  under  pressure,  and 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 1
bond issuance has virtually ceased. Further, our economy is now in recession as a result of 
the weakness in global economic activity engendered by the financial crisis.  
Risk management: lessons from the current crisis 
The  current  global  situation  has  clearly  demonstrated  the  importance  of  sound  risk 
management. So, let me turn to lessons that we can draw from the crisis to develop more 
robust risk-management processes in the future.  
As  I  noted  earlier,  a  key  contributing  factor  to  the  global  financial  crisis  was  the  very  high 
leverage embedded in structured products and actively pursued by some financial institutions 
– primarily those outside Canada. In their search for higher returns, institutions took on more 
and more risk, while paying less and less attention to the consequences. Risk-management 
models (such as estimates of value at risk) that were based on a short history of data and a 
presumption  of  continuous  liquidity  did  not  prepare  them  for  crisis  conditions.  Reliance  on 
these  models  led  to  a myopic  focus  within  institutions  that  ignored  the  risk  of  a  significant 
disruption  to  the  financial  system  if  everyone  reacted  to  a  large  shock  in  the  same  way. 
Consequently,  when  significant  problems  emerged,  and  correlations  between  asset-price 
movements moved towards unity, institutions were often ill-prepared to cope, because they 
had  not  developed  effective  contingency  plans.  They  did  not  anticipate  the  broad 
consequences of widespread deleveraging, forced asset sales that exacerbated the illiquidity 
in markets, or the broad loss of confidence that followed. It's now obvious that this inability to 
anticipate  and  prepare  for  extremely  bad  outcomes  posed  a  significant  risk  to  financial 
system stability.  
More  robust  risk-management  practices,  grounded  in  a  longer-term,  through-the-cycle 
perspective  and  appropriately  designed  stress  tests,  could  have  helped  to  prevent  the 
buildup  of  leverage  that  became  unsustainable.  It  has  also  become  clear  that  risk-
management models must take into account the collective impact of individual choices. For, 
without an understanding of this impact, there is a risk that core markets can close, liquidity 
can dry up, and the type of crisis we are currently enduring could be repeated. The regulator 
and the central bank can possibly help in this area. By running coordinated macroeconomic 
stress-test scenarios, they can observe the details of risk-management systems at individual 
institutions  and  may  identify  possible  feedbacks  that  are  missing  in  these  systems.  They 
could then disseminate the results of these exercises in a suitably aggregated form among 
risk managers at individual institutions, to help them internalize these externalities. 
The crisis has exposed some weaknesses and inconsistencies in the application of fair value 
accounting methods. First, the reliance on market valuations has the potential to amplify the 
boom and bust cycle in credit and asset prices, by creating a feedback loop between asset 
values  and  lending.  Second,  the  application  of  fair  value  methods  in  illiquid  or  inactive 
markets  may  distort  information  if  the  models  or  observable  prices  used  for  valuation  are 
inadequate or inappropriate – a problem that is heightened during periods of market stress, 
when  correlations  break  down.  For  example,  as  the  liquidity  of  many  markets  became 
impaired in this crisis, there was considerable uncertainty about how to value certain assets 
and how to compare financial statements.  
The  Financial  Stability  Forum  (FSF)  –  which  includes  senior  representatives  of  national 
financial  authorities  from  selected  countries  including  Canada,  along  with  international 
financial institutions and standard setters – has called for improved guidance from standard 
setters in the use of fair value accounting at times when measurement is challenging, and for 
improved disclosure by financial institutions. Accounting standard setters have since clarified 
their position and have proposed increased disclosure standards for the valuation of financial 
instruments.  This  is  a  good  first  step,  considering  how  essential  disclosure  of  such 
information  is  to  the  efficient  functioning  of  markets  and,  ultimately,  to  financial  system 
stability. As the Bank points out in its December Financial System Review, good disclosure 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2008
can  foster  a  better  appreciation  of  the  uncertainty  surrounding  valuations.  This  may  help 
avoid the mechanistic use of these valuations.  
The crisis has also exposed a potential weakness in the new Basel II capital requirements for 
banks,  since  these  requirements  rely  on  some  of  the  same  inadequate  risk-management 
models just described. This topic is also explored in the December Financial System Review. 
The concern is that the new requirements would encourage higher leverage when times are 
good,  further  feeding  a  booming  economy  and  raising  the  risk  of  asset-price  bubbles  and 
excessive  credit  expansion.  These  requirements  would  also  hasten  deleveraging  in  a 
downturn, thus exacerbating the slowdown and raising the risk of negative feedback between 
the real economy and the financial system. Regulation should be designed to counter, not 
reinforce,  the  natural  tendency  to  procyclicality.  It  should  encourage  institutions  to  build 
healthy levels of capital reserves during good times, for use in bad times. This would help 
institutions to withstand economic crises, in addition to dampening the credit cycle. I'm glad 
to note that the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision is working on ways to address this 
issue. 
Other perspectives on improving financial system resilience  
I have briefly discussed some of the problems in risk management exposed by the current 
crisis,  as  well  as  the  negative  implications  for  financial  stability.  Let  me  now  turn  to  some 
steps that regulators and policy-makers can take to foster greater resilience in the financial 
system.  
A macroprudential approach  
1. 
It has become clear that it's time to take a macroprudential approach to financial stability, in 
terms  of  both  surveillance  and  regulation.  Macroprudential  surveillance  assesses  current 
risks  by  looking  at  the  broad  economic  and  financial  conditions  that  can  contribute  to  the 
buildup  of  risks  to  the  financial  system  and  to  the  economy  as  a  whole.  Macroprudential 
regulation aims to strengthen resilience in the financial system by designing standards and 
codes to limit the buildup of financial and economic imbalances. 
The  Bank  of  Canada  is  well-placed  to  bring  a  macro  perspective  to  the  oversight  of  the 
financial system, since our responsibilities for the conduct of monetary policy require a deep 
knowledge of the economy and the financial system. We intend to leverage our position in 
key  domestic  and  international  organizations  to  bring  that  perspective.1  In  terms  of 
surveillance, we are placing increased emphasis on identifying risks and vulnerabilities to the 
Canadian  financial  system  and  on  developing  a  better  early  warning  system.  The  Bank's 
Financial  System  Review  was  recently  revamped  with  that  objective  in  mind.  In  terms  of 
regulation, the Bank is drawing attention to the need to mitigate procyclical tendencies within 
the financial system, to improve transparency, and to keep core financial markets open. In 
this regard, the central bank has the power to see to it that core markets have continuous 
access  to  liquidity  by  acting  as  a  counterparty  to  major  market  participants,  if  needed,  in 
times  of  crisis.  The  principles  guiding  the  Bank's  use  of  that  power  were  discussed  in  the 
June 2008 issue of the Financial System Review. 
Continuously open markets and risk-proofed infrastructure  
2.  
Other  measures  can  contribute  to  continuously  open  and  resilient  markets.  For  example, 
efforts outside Canada to create a clearing house for credit default swaps (CDS) have the 
                                                 
1   M.  Carney,  "From  Hindsight  to  Foresight"  (Speech  to  Women  in  Capital  Markets,  Toronto,  Ontario,  17 
December 2008). 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 3
potential to reduce counterparty risk and to help keep this market open in stressful times. A 
clearing house offers the advantages of robust operational arrangements and clear workout 
procedures in the event of a default. Without underestimating the complexities that this would 
involve, policy-makers could look for other markets that could benefit from being moved onto 
exchanges or into clearing houses. They could encourage such moves by establishing higher 
capital  requirements  for  securities  that  trade  outside  of  continuously  open  markets  and  by 
working to further risk-proof custodial banks. 
Recent  events  have  demonstrated  the  value  of  well  risk-proofed  clearing  and  settlement 
systems. For example, the use of CLS Bank to settle foreign exchange transactions was a 
stabilizing factor, especially during the working out of the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy. By 
providing simultaneous settlement of both transaction legs (payment-versus-payment), CLS 
Bank  virtually  eliminates  the  credit-risk  component  of  foreign  exchange  transactions.  Yet 
Canadian institutions use CLS Bank relatively less than their international counterparts. This 
is  partly  because  CLS  Bank  doesn't  currently  allow  for  settlement  of  same-day,  bilateral 
Canadian-U.S. dollar transactions. Nonetheless, there would be benefits from a greater use 
of  CLS  Bank  by  Canadian  institutions.  The  Bank  of  Canada  encourages  them  to  consider 
using CLS Bank for managing their foreign exchange settlement risk, while bearing in mind 
that other risks associated with foreign exchange transactions not addressed by CLS Bank 
must also be managed.  
Improved transparency  
3.  
We  must  also  do  much  more  to  encourage  improved  transparency  and  disclosure, 
particularly for complex financial instruments. The opacity of many highly structured products 
contributed  importantly  to  the  turmoil.  Progress  has  been  made  in  encouraging  greater 
transparency.  The  FSF  has  provided  a  template  for  the  disclosure  of  banks'  exposures  to 
these products. Closer to home, the Bank of Canada has set out disclosure requirements, 
available  to  all  investors,  for  asset-backed  commercial  paper  that  it  would  be  prepared  to 
accept as collateral. But those steps must be taken further. Investors require relevant and 
digestible  information  tailored  to  their  particular  level  of  sophistication.  Here,  credit-rating 
agencies  have  a  very  important  role.  So  do  institutions  that  distribute  financial  products  – 
they have a responsibility to know their clients and to supply them with products and advice 
consistent with their clients' investment goals, risk appetite, and investment knowledge. The 
International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) has launched a task force to 
address  gaps  highlighted  during  the  crisis,  by  developing  new  standards  designed  to 
strengthen  financial  markets  and  protect  investors.  Domestically,  the  Investment  Industry 
Regulatory Organization of Canada (IIROC) has made several recommendations related to 
product due diligence, focusing on product transparency, management of conflicts of interest, 
and dealer use and disclosure of credit ratings. 
Work with global partners  
4.  
At the international level, the Bank of Canada is working with its global partners to strengthen 
financial  stability.  It  is  contributing  to  FSF  work  on  procyclicality  issues  related  to  bank 
capital,  loan-loss  provisioning,  and  margin  requirements.  Canada  is  also  actively  engaged 
with  its  G-20  counterparts  and  is  directly  involved  in  several  working  groups  considering 
potential regulatory improvements in a broad range of areas. These include: strengthening 
transparency and disclosure; reinforcing international co-operation in the management and 
resolution  of  cross-border  crises;  promoting  integrity  in  financial  markets;  assessing 
measures to mitigate procyclicality; and improving risk-management practices. The activities 
of the working groups will culminate in action plans for the next summit of G-20 leaders in 
April.  
At  the  outset  of  these  remarks,  I  discussed  the  importance  of  sound  risk  management  for 
financial system stability. Many lessons have been learned from the current crisis, and we 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2008
can  foster  a  more  robust  and  more  stable  financial  system  through  improvements  in  the 
critical areas that I have just outlined. The benefits of such stability would be felt throughout 
the Canadian economy.  
The Canadian economy  
Let  me  close  with  some  remarks  about  the  Canadian  economy.  As  we  noted  in  our 
December  policy  announcement,  the  outlook  for  the  world  economy  has  deteriorated 
significantly since October. The global recession will be broader and deeper than previously 
anticipated.  Global  financial  markets  remain  severely  strained.  Measures  taken  by  major 
governments are beginning to encourage credit flows, although it will take more time before 
conditions  in  those  markets  normalize.  In  addition,  monetary  and  fiscal  policy  actions 
announced late in 2008 are expected to support global economic growth. Nonetheless, the 
Canadian economy is entering a recession as a result of the weakness in global economic 
activity, the associated decline in our terms of trade, and the drop in household and business 
confidence. The depreciation of the Canadian dollar is providing an important offset to the 
effects  of  weaker  global  demand  and  lower  commodity  prices,  and  the  monetary  policy 
actions  taken  in  October  and  December  (a  150-basis-point  reduction  in  the  policy  interest 
rate) will provide timely and significant support to the Canadian economy. As we prepare for 
the next interest rate announcement on 20 January, and the Update to the Bank's Monetary 
Policy  Report  two  days  later,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  carefully  economic  and  financial 
developments in judging to what extent further monetary stimulus will be required to achieve 
the 2 per cent inflation target over the medium term. 
Conclusion  
In  conclusion,  let  me  stress  again  the  importance  of  sound  risk  management  for  financial 
system stability. Risk cannot be avoided; it must be anticipated and managed. The current 
crisis has exposed serious flaws in prevailing risk-management models and showed ways to 
enhance  our  ability  to manage  risk.  Policy-makers  are  also  considering  steps  to make  the 
financial system more resilient so that we may be better prepared for the next storm.  
Thank you for your attention. I'd now be pleased to take your questions. 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 5
