Usha Thorat: Impact of global financial crisis on Reserve Bank of India 
(RBI) as a national regulator 
Presentation by Ms Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 56th 
EXCOM Meeting and FinPower CEO Forum organised by APRACA, Seoul, 29 June 2009. 
 I am delighted to be here in Seoul, participating in this 56th EXCOM Meeting and FinPower 
CEO  Forum  –  my  thanks  to  Secretary  General  Bayaua  for  inviting  me  to  make  this 
presentation on the “impact of the global financial crisis on RBI as a national regulator”.  
In order to understand the impact of the global crisis on India and the manner in which the 
Reserve  Bank  of  India  (RBI)  responded,  it  is  important  to  realise  that  the  RBI  is  a  central 
bank that is entrusted with multi-dimensional roles and hence in this talk I propose to analyse 
how the RBI responded with respect to several of these roles.  
Multi-dimensional roles of the RBI  
The  RBI  is  entrusted  with  several  functions,  one  of  the  most  important  one  being  the 
monetary authority of the country. As monetary authority, the RBI has as its objectives price 
stability, growth and financial stability. The weight and emphasis accorded to each of these 
objectives would vary depending on the overall macro economic conditions. In addition to its 
role  as  monetary  authority,  the  RBI  has  responsibilities  for  forex  management  and 
government  domestic  debt  management  –  both  national  and  sub  national.  It  is  also  the 
banking regulator – it regulates commercial banks, cooperative banks (both rural and urban), 
financial  institutions  and  non  banking  financial  companies.  It  has  a  developmental  role  to 
ensure inclusive growth – thus, policies on rural credit, SME and financial inclusion are an 
integral part of its functions.  
Impact of the global crisis on India  
The direct effect of the global financial crisis on the Indian banking and financial system was 
almost  negligible,  thanks  to  the  limited  exposure  to  riskier  assets  and  derivatives.  The 
relatively  low  presence  of  foreign  banks  also  minimised  the  impact  on  the  domestic 
economy.  
However, the crisis did have knock on effects on the country, broadly, in three ways. First, 
the reduction in foreign equity flows – especially FII flows – impacted the capital and forex 
markets and the availability of funds from these markets to domestic businesses; second, the 
shrinking of credit markets overseas had the impact of tightening access to overseas lines of 
credit including trade credit for banks and corporates. Both these factors led to pressure on 
credit  and liquidity  in  the  domestic markets  with  the  knock  on  effects, and  third,  the  fall in 
global trade and output had impact on consumption and investment demand. The cumulative 
impact of all this was a slowing down of output and employment. Despite the slowing down, 
India is still the second fastest growing economy in the world.  
Moderation in growth  
After  clocking  an  average  of  9.4  per  cent  during  three  successive  years  from  2005-06  to 
2007-08,  the  growth  rate  of  real  GDP  slowed  down  to  6.7  per  cent  (revised  estimates)  in 
2008-09.  Industrial  production  grew  by  2.6  per  cent  as  compared  to  7.4  per  cent  in  the 
previous year. In the half year ended March 2009, imports fell by 12.2 per cent and exports 
fell by 20.0 per cent. The trade deficit widened from $88.5 billion in 2007-08 to $119.1 billion 
BIS Review 88/2009 
 1
in 2008-09. Current account deficit increased from $17.0 billion in 2007-08 to $29.8 billion in 
2008-09.  Net  capital  inflows  at  US$  9.1  billion  (0.8  per  cent  of  GDP)  were  much  lower  in 
2008-09 as compared with US$ 108.0 billion (9.2 per cent of GDP) during the previous year 
mainly due to net outflows under portfolio investment, banking capital and short-term trade 
credit.  As  per  the  estimate  made  by  the  RBI  in  its  Annual  Policy  announced  on  April  21, 
2009, GDP is expected to grow by 6 per cent in 2009-10. 
RBI’s response as monetary authority  
Till  August  2008,  the  RBI  followed  a  tight  monetary  stance  in  view  of  the  inflationary 
pressures  arising  from crude,  commodity  and  food  prices.  In  mid-September  2008,  severe 
disruptions of international money markets, sharp declines in stock markets across the globe 
and extreme investor aversion brought pressures on the domestic money and forex markets. 
The  RBI  responded  by  selling  dollars  consistent  with  its  policy  objective  of  maintaining 
orderly conditions in the foreign exchange market. Simultaneously, it started addressing the 
liquidity pressures through a variety of measures. A second repo auction in the day under the 
Liquidity Adjustment Facility (LAF) was also re-introduced in September 2008. The repo rate 
was cut in stages from 9 per cent in October 2008 to the current rate of 4.75 per cent. The 
reverse repo rate was brought down from 6 per cent to 3.25 per cent. The cash reserve ratio 
which was 9 per cent in October 2008 has been brought down to 5 per cent. To overcome 
the problem of availability of collateral of government securities for availing of LAF, a special 
refinance facility was introduced in October 2008 to enable banks to get refinance from the 
RBI  against  a  declaration  of  having  extended  bona  fide  commercial  loans,  under  a  pre-
existing provision of the RBI Act for a maximum period of 90 days. The statutory liquidity ratio 
requiring banks to keep 25 per cent of their liabilities in government securities was reduced 
to 24 per cent. These actions of the RBI since mid-September 2008 resulted in augmentation 
of actual/potential liquidity of nearly $50 billion.  
Financial stability objective – RBI’s response  
The immediate result of tightening of the money and credit markets in October 2008 created 
demands on banks that were already expanding credit well beyond the resources raised from 
the public by way of deposits. Companies which were substituting overseas credit and capital 
market  sources  with  bank  funds  started  withdrawing  funds  parked  with  mutual  funds  and 
utilising their undrawn limits with banks. Some of the companies that had issued commercial 
paper in the market – especially the real estate companies and the non banking companies – 
found it difficult to roll over the maturing paper. The Commercial Paper and Certificates of 
Deposit  markets  became  illiquid  and  mutual  funds  started  facing  severe  redemption 
pressures. Hence, in the interest of maintaining financial stability, the RBI instituted a 14-day 
special repo facility for a notified amount of about $ 4 billion to alleviate liquidity stress faced 
by mutual funds, and banks were allowed temporary use of Statutory Liquidity Ratio (SLR) 
securities  for  collateral  purposes  for  an  additional  0.5  per  cent  of  Net  Demand  and  Time 
Liabilities  exclusively  for  this.  Subsequently,  this  facility  was  extended  for  Non  Banking 
Finance Companies (NBFCs) and later to housing finance companies as well. The relaxation 
in  the  maintenance  of  the  SLR  was  enhanced  to  the  extent  of  up  to  1.5  per  cent  of  their 
NDTL.  
In  order  to  curtail  leveraging,  commercial  banks,  all-India  term  lending  and  refinancing 
institutions  were  not  allowed  to  lend  against  or  buy  back  CDs  held  by  mutual  funds.  This 
restriction was relaxed in the context of the drying up of liquidity for CDs and CPs.  
Considering  the  systemic  importance  of  the  NBFC  sector,  the  Government  in  consultation 
with the RBI announced the setting up of a special purpose vehicle (SPV) that could raise 
funds  from  the  RBI  against  government-guaranteed  bonds  to  meet  the  temporary  liquidity 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2009
constraints  of  systemically  important  non-deposit  taking  non-banking  financial  companies 
(NBFCs-ND-SI).  
RBI’s response as forex manager  
The  RBI  assured  the  markets  that  it  would  continue  to  sell  foreign  exchange  (US  dollar) 
through  agent  banks  to  augment  supply  in  the  domestic  foreign  exchange  market  or 
intervene directly to meet any demand-supply gaps, and did so, especially in October 2008. 
It  also  provided  forex  swap  facility  with  a  three  month  tenor,  to  Indian  public  and  private 
sector banks having overseas branches or subsidiaries – this acted as a strong comfort to 
such  banks  in  the  context  of  the  drying  up  of  the  overseas  money  markets.  Further,  for 
funding the swap facility, banks were allowed to borrow under the LAF for the corresponding 
tenor  at  the  prevailing  repo  rate.  The  forex  swap  facility  of  tenor  up  to  three  months  was 
extended up to March 31, 2010. The prudential limit on overseas borrowing by banks has 
been doubled.  
Taking  into  account  the  difficulties  faced  by  exporters,  as  orders  got  cancelled  and 
receivables mounted, the RBI extended the period of concessional pre-shipment and post-
shipment export credit. The export credit refinance available to banks from the RBI was also 
increased.  
Interest rates on dollar and rupee deposits kept in Indian banks by non resident Indians are 
capped by the RBI in order to prevent hot money flows. In order to address the impact of 
slow down in capital flows, the ceiling rates on these deposits were raised.  
The  ceiling  on  the  interest  rates  at  which  companies  could  raise  funds  from  abroad  were 
increased and the end use restrictions that were placed on the deployment of such funds, to 
deal with the huge inflows in 2007-08, were restored to the status quo position.  
Systemically  important  NBFCs  that  were  not  otherwise  permitted  to  resort  to  overseas 
borrowing were allowed to raise short term foreign borrowings; housing finance companies 
were  also  allowed  to  access  External  Commercial  Borrowings  (ECBs)  subject  to  RBI 
approval.  
Taking advantage of the discount on Foreign Currency Convertible Bonds (FCCBs) issued 
by Indian companies in overseas markets, they were allowed to prematurely buy back their 
FCCBs at prevailing discounted rates.  
Regulator of banks and NBFCs – RBI’s response  
As indicated earlier, the Indian banking system was not affected by the global crisis and all 
financial  parameters  have  remained  strong  with  capital  adequacy  ratio  for  the  system  at 
13.65 per cent (tier I ratio at 8.95 per cent), return on assets over 1 per cent, non-performing 
loans around 2 per cent as of March 2009. All commercial banks meet the minimum capital 
adequacy norm of 9 per cent and throughout the crisis period, inter-bank markets for money, 
forex and debt have been functioning smoothly.  
The  impact  of  the  crisis  in  India,  as  in  many  Emerging  Market  Economies  (EMEs),  spilled 
over from the real sector to the financial sector. Industry and businesses especially the Small 
and Medium Enterprises (SME) sector had to grapple with a host of problems such as delay 
in  payments  of  bills  from  overseas  buyers  as  also  domestic  buyers  affected  by  the  global 
slowdown;  increase  in  stocks  of  finished  goods;  fall  in  value  of  inventories,  especially  raw 
material, which in many cases were acquired at higher prices such as metal and crude oil 
based  products;  slowing  down  of  capacity  expansion  due  to  fall  in  investment  demand; 
demand  compression  for  employment  intensive  industries,  such  as,  gems  and  jewellery, 
construction  and  allied  activities,  textiles,  auto  and  auto  components  and  other  export 
BIS Review 88/2009 
 3
oriented industries. Hotels and airlines apart from IT also saw fall in demand due to global 
downturn.  
Recognising  that  the  unexpected  and  swift  turn  of  events  could  lead  to  problems  of  a 
spiralling  downturn,  the  RBI  took  a  series  of  regulatory  measures  in  addition  to  providing 
liquidity and special refinance.  
During the years from 2005-6 onwards, in the context of high growth in bank credit to certain 
sectors,  the  RBI  had  raised  in  stages  the  risk  weights  for  these  sectors  and  had  also 
increased  the  provisioning  requirements  for  standard  assets.  In  November  2008,  as  a 
countercyclical  measure,  the  additional  risk  weights  and  provisions  were  withdrawn  and 
restored to previous levels.  
The prudential regulations for restructured accounts were modified, as a one-time measure 
and for a limited period of time in view of the extraordinary external factors, for preserving the 
economic  and  productive  value  of  assets  which  were  otherwise  viable.  The  modified 
regulations  were  in  operation  for  applications  for  re-structuring  received  up  to  March  31, 
2009 and restructured packages implemented within 120 days of receipt of application or by 
June 30, 2009, whichever was earlier. Banks were, therefore, required to take swift action for 
detecting weaknesses and putting in place the re-structured packages in order to avail of the 
benefits in assets classification under the modified prudential regulations. The modifications 
permitted  the  restructured  accounts  to  be  treated  as  standard  assets  provided  they  were 
standard  on  the  eve  of  the  crisis,  viz.,  September  1,  2008,  even  if  they  had  turned  non-
performing  when  restructuring  had  been  taken  up.  This  special  regulatory  treatment  for 
restructured  accounts  was  extended  to  most  cases  of  second  restructuring  and  for  first 
restructuring of exposures to commercial real estate in view of the sudden downturn. To take 
care of the problem of restructured accounts that had become unsecured due to loss in the 
value  of  inventories,  special  regulatory  treatment  for  asset  classification  was  permitted  if 
additional provisions were made as prescribed for the unsecured portion.  
In the case of NBFCs, having regard to their need to raise capital, they were allowed to issue 
perpetual debt instruments qualifying for capital. They were also allowed further time of one 
more  year  to  comply  with  the  increased  Capital  to  Risk-Weighted  Asset  Ratio  (CRAR) 
stipulation of 15 per cent as against the existing requirement of 12 per cent. Risk weight on 
banks’ exposures to NBFCs which had been increased earlier was brought down.  
The impact of liquidity easing and prudential measures is reflected in the credit growth in the 
year ended June 2009 at 15.8 per cent against 26.3 per cent in the previous year. Though 
there  was  slowing  down  in  the  period  after  October  2008,  the  credit  growth  in  the  period 
October 2008 to June 2009 clocked annualised rate of 8.9 per cent. The credit growth during 
November 2008 – May 2009 was higher than average for sectors such as infrastructure, real 
estate, NBFCs, SME, agriculture and certain industries like iron and steel.  
Employment intensive sectors – RBI’s response  
Following  the  announcement  in  the  Union  Budget  2008  in  February  2008,  the  commercial 
banks, cooperative banks and regional rural banks implemented in the period till June 2008, 
the debt waiver (100 per cent waiver) program for small and marginal farmers and debt relief 
(25 per cent relief) program for other farmers, covering an estimated 40 million farmers to the 
extent of nearly Rs. 71,000 crore or $14.5 billion. The RBI took sector-specific measures to 
alleviate  the  stress  faced  by  employment  intensive  sectors  such  as  SME,  export  and 
housing. In order to address the problems faced by the MSEs, meetings of the State Level 
Bankers Committee were convened almost on a monthly basis in the first half of this year. 
During  these  meetings,  State  governments  and  banks  were  sensitised  about  the  need  to 
respond  promptly  to  the  credit  needs  of  the  sector  to  ensure  that  units  do  not  get  into 
distress. The RBI guidelines on restructuring were disseminated at such meetings.  
4 
 BIS Review 88/2009
The RBI extended special refinance of $1.4 billion to Small Industries Development Bank of 
India (SIDBI) to enable it to on-lend to banks and financial institutions towards incremental 
SME  loans.  Banks  were  advised  to  carve  out  and  monitor  separate  sub-limits  of  large 
companies to meet payment obligations to micro and small enterprises. MSME (Refinance) 
Fund  of  Rs.  2000  crore  ($400  million)  was  instituted  and  banks  were  asked  to  contribute 
towards this fund against their shortfall in their lending to the weaker sections as low interest 
deposits with SIDBI to be used by the latter for providing assistance to the MSME sector.  
Considering  the  knock  on  effects  on  the  housing  sector,  and  the  role  of  housing  finance 
companies (HFCs) in providing housing loans, the National Housing Bank (NHB) was made 
available  a  refinance  limit  of  $800  million  to  assist  the  sector.  As  in  case  of  SIDBI,  banks 
were asked to deposit specified amount against the shortfall in their lending to the weaker 
sections with NHB. Loans to HFCs were made eligible for the special repo window opened 
for bank lending to mutual funds. HFCs were also allowed to borrow abroad from bilateral 
and multilateral agencies with prior approval from the RBI.  
The period of concessional export credit was extended and the entitlement of banks under 
the export refinance facility from the RBI was enhanced. Export-Import Bank of India (EXIM 
Bank) was given a special refinance limit of $1 billion as also extended a special forex swap 
facility as in case of banks with overseas branches.  
RBI’s response as debt manager  
To contain the knock on effects of the global slowdown, the Government of India announced 
three  fiscal  stimulus  packages  during  December  2008-February  2009.  These  stimulus 
packages were in addition to the already announced post-budget expenditure towards farm 
loan waiver, rural employment guarantee and other social security programs , enhanced pay 
structure  arising  from  the  sixth  pay  commission,  etc.  As  a  result,  the  net  borrowing 
requirement for 2008-09 increased by nearly 2.5 times the original projection in 2008-09 from 
2.08 per cent of GDP to 5.89 per cent of GDP.  
The  RBI  managed  the  additional  borrowings  in  a  non-disruptive  manner  through  a 
combination of measures including unwinding under the market stabilisation scheme (MSS), 
open market operations and easing of monetary conditions.  
The MSS was introduced in 2004 to help the RBI sterilise the impact of capital flows when 
huge  accretion  to  reserves  added  primary  liquidity  to  the  system.  Under  an  agreement 
entered into between the Government of India (GOI) and RBI, GOI agreed to issue bills and 
bonds the proceeds of which were immobilised with the RBI and thereby the liquidity impact 
of forex purchase by the RBI was neutralised. The MSS operates symmetrically, and acts as 
a store of liquidity and hence has the flexibility to smoothen liquidity in the banking system 
both  during  episodes  of  capital  inflows  and  outflows.  When  capital  outflows  were 
experienced  in  2008,  and  the  borrowing  requirement  of  government  increased,  it  was 
decided to buy back MSS securities while simultaneously issuing new securities under the 
borrowing program. The agreement between RBI and GOI alluded to earlier was amended in 
February 2009 to allow the funds immobilised under the MSS to be de-sequestered instead 
of going in for fresh borrowing. So far between March and May this year, cash balances of 
nearly $8 billion have been de-sequestered.  
Keeping  in  view  the  government  market  borrowing  in  2009-10  as  provided  in  the  interim 
budget,  coming  on  top  of  a  substantial  expansion  in  market  borrowing  in  2008-09,  it  was 
important for the RBI to provide comfort to the market so that the borrowing programme is 
conducted  in  a  non-disruptive  manner.  Accordingly,  the  RBI  simultaneously  indicated  its 
intention  to  purchase  government  securities  under  open  market  operations  (OMO)  for  an 
indicative amount of Rs.80,000 crore ($16 billion) during the first half of 2009-10.  
BIS Review 88/2009 
 5
The distribution method for the primary issuances was also shifted to uniform price auction in 
view  of  the  uncertain  market  conditions.  Offers  of  shorter  term  bonds  and  benchmark 
securities have also helped meet investor preference and stabilise yields.  
The  general  easing  of  monetary  conditions,  in  addition  to  the  above  measures  have  also 
ensured that the additional borrowing needs of the government do not result in crowding out 
of credit to the private sector and helped in maintaining stable conditions in the government 
securities markets.  
Factors that helped in responding swiftly and effectively 
In concluding my presentation on the impact of the global crisis on the RBI, I would like to 
briefly touch upon the factors that enabled the RBI to respond swiftly and effectively to the 
unfolding crisis.  
The single most important concern that needed to be addressed in the global crisis was the 
liquidity issue. The RBI had in its arsenal a variety of instruments to manage liquidity, viz., 
CRR,  SLR,  LAF, Refinance, OMO  and MSS. Through a judicious combination of all these 
instruments, the RBI was able to ensure more than adequate liquidity in the system. At the 
same time it was ensured that the growth in primary liquidity was not excessive.  
The inherent synergies in its multiple roles enabled the RBI to ensure orderly functioning of 
money, forex and government securities markets while dealing with capital flows, managing 
additional  government  market  borrowing  and  ensuring  adequate  credit  to  restore  growth 
momentum.  
As regulator and forex manager, the RBI was able to build reserves, calibrate capital controls 
and take prudential countercyclical measures which could be reversed when the need arose.  
Both,  macro  prudential  and  micro  prudential  policies  adopted  by  the  RBI  have  ensured 
financial  stability  and  resilience  of  the  banking  system  The  timely  prudential  measures 
instituted during the high growth period especially in regard to securitisation, additional risk 
weights  and  provisioning  for  specific  sectors,  measures  to  curb  dependence  on  borrowed 
funds, and leveraging by systemically important NBFCs have stood us in good stead. The 
reserve  requirements  –  both  cash  and  liquidity  –  acted  as  natural  buffers  preventing 
excessive leverage.  
While  credit  expansion  by  private  sector  and  foreign  banks  was  significantly  lower  during 
2008-09 especially to retail and SME borrowers, public sector banks (covering nearly 70 per 
cent of banking assets) maintained their credit growth to employment impacting sectors such 
as SME, agriculture, real estate and infrastructure, even as regulatory policies have ensured 
that prudential norms and financial soundness were not compromised.  
Finally, the close coordination and interaction between the Government and the RBI ensured 
that appropriate package of measures were put in place promptly to deal with the crisis and 
restore the growth momentum. Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 88/2009
