Seongtae Lee: The global financial crisis and the Bank of Korea's 
monetary policy 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Seongtae Lee,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Korea,  at  the  Euromoney 
Conference, Seoul, 28 May 2009. 
 Greetings 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  to  speak  at  "The  Euromoney  Korean  Capital  Markets  Congress 
2009" with prominent institutional investors, financiers and academic experts from around the 
world. 
My  remarks  today  will  focus  on  the  recent  global  financial  crisis,  the  Bank  of  Korea's 
monetary policy response, and the tasks that remain in the future. 
Development and impact of the global financial crisis 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
As you know, this global financial crisis struck as the impact of the US sub-prime mortgage 
meltdown spread worldwide and it triggered a synchronized global economic downturn. 
The  main  reason  that  this  financial  crisis  spread  with  such  a  wide  range  and  at  such 
unprecedented  speed  lies  in  the  massive  progress  made  in  the  integration  of  the  world 
economy and financial markets over the last two decades. 
As this crisis progressed, Korea and other emerging market countries were unable to avoid 
its  impacts  even  though  they  did  not  have  large  sub-prime  mortgage  related  exposures. 
Rather they experienced deteriorating foreign currency supply and demand conditions and 
credit crunches, as funds flowed out due to deleveraging by overseas financial institutions in 
response  to  heightened  concerns  about  credit  risk.  Their  real  economies  also  slipped  into 
recessions,  as  their  exports  shrank  rapidly  owing  to  the  contraction  of  import  demand  in 
advanced countries. 
The Bank of Korea's policy response and its effects 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The  Bank  of  Korea  eased  its  monetary  policy  aggressively,  to  soothe  the  financial  market 
unrest and ward off a sharp contraction of the real economy. It brought its Base Rate down 
by a total of 3.25 percentage points, to its lowest level of 2%, in six steps from last October 
until this February. Along with this, it strove to expand provision of liquidity to sectors badly 
affected by the credit crunch through its open market operations and lending facilities. At the 
same  time,  it  actively  provided  foreign-currency  liquidity  to  domestic  financial  institutions 
through, for example, the swap market, in order to stabilize the foreign exchange market that 
was directly hit by the impact of the global financial crisis. It also entered into currency swap 
arrangements with the central banks of the United States, Japan and China. 
The Korean financial and foreign exchange markets have recently been showing a pattern of 
improved  movements  helped  by  these  actions.  Long-  and  short-term  market  interest  rates 
are maintaining downward stability while stock prices and the exchange value of the Korean 
won  have  rebounded  substantially.  In  addition,  the  issuance  of  corporate  bonds  is 
proceeding seamlessly and bank lending to households and SMEs is steadily increasing. 
BIS Review 85/2009 
 1
In the real economy, the speed of the downturn has clearly moderated, and some economic 
and confidence indicators are showing better movements than expected. As a result of these 
developments, the perception of the Korean economy among foreign investors has improved 
considerably. There remain, however, downside risks to economic growth for the future, due 
to  the  persistence  of  the  global  economic  downturn  and  the  worsening  of  domestic  labor 
market conditions. 
Tasks ahead 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
The Bank of Korea will, for the time being, conduct its monetary policy with a main emphasis 
on supporting the recovery of economic activity and stabilizing the financial markets. It is still 
uncertain whether the green shoots of recovery in the financial markets and real economy 
will  continue  into  full  leaf.  Even  if  this  monetary  easing  stance  is  maintained  for  a  while, 
prices are expected to remain on their downwardly stable track since demand-side inflation 
pressures are almost absent. 
The experience of this global financial crisis has served to spur full recognition of the vital 
necessity for efforts to secure financial stability. The legal framework in relation to financial 
stability requires overhauling in this context, but to my mind, in light of past experience, what 
is of great importance for Korea and other small open economies is to draw up proposals to 
reduce the potential for financial unrest arising from large-scale in- and outflows of foreign 
capital. Of course, international agreement should be reached as a prior condition for such 
proposals, through discussions in forums such as the G-20, since they could restrict market 
principles and give rise to conflicts of interest among countries. 
I would also point out that for Korea, the bilateral currency swap arrangements have been of 
considerable  help 
this  crisis. 
Consequently, we will seek to strengthen our international financial cooperation still further 
by, for example, striving to construct a framework of multilateral currency swap arrangements 
among countries in the Asian region. 
foreign  exchange  market  unrest  during 
in  calming 
Closing remarks 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Drawing  my  remarks  to  a  close,  let  me  express  my  profound  hope  that  everyone  at  this 
conference will obtain fruitful information concerning the Korean economy and take part in a 
lively exchange of opinions. And, as a result, I trust that this conference will contribute to the 
flourishing development of the institutions represented here and to the stability and growth of 
the Korean economy. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 85/2009
