Ardian Fullani: Recent economic developments in Albania 
Speech by Mr Ardian Fullani, Governor of the Bank of Albania, at the Press Conference on 
Monetary  Policy  Decision  of  Supervisory  Council  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  Tirana,  29  July 
2009. 
 The Supervisory Council of the Bank of Albania, at its meeting of July 29, 2009, after getting 
acquainted  with  the  latest  economic-financial  developments  at  home  and  abroad  and 
analysing prudentially the confidence indicators, banking system expectations and forecasts 
made  by  Bank  of  Albania’s  staff  about  eight  coming  quarters,  decided  to  keep  the  base 
interest rate, i.e., the weekly repurchase agreement rate unchanged, at 5.75 percent. 
indicators  and 
This decision of the Supervisory Council is based on the following arguments:  
The  economic  developments  in  the  first  half  posed  strong  challenges  to  the  Albania 
economy.  The  global  crisis  affected  our  economy,  swinging  the  factors  and  balances  that 
have  sustained  the  economic  growth,  thus  testing  the  immunity  and  self-adjusting 
mechanisms of the economy and raising certain complex questions to economic agents and 
macroeconomic policies.  
The economic recession hitting a major part of our trading partners is accompanied by the 
fall of trade exchanges and of foreign currency inflows. Rise of uncertainty in global financial 
markets  has  shaken  the  confidence  in  the  financial  system,  exerting  pressure  on  the 
tightening  of  financial  conditions  in  Albania.  Both  these  factors  are  reflected  in  reduced 
consumption, exports and investments, leading to economic activity slowdown and exerting 
pressure on fiscal indicators of budget revenues and budget deficit. On the other hand, the 
reduction  of  foreign  currency  inflows  is  accompanied  by  deterioration  of  the  balance  of 
payments 
the  arising  of  depreciating  pressures  on  exchange  rate, 
underscoring the role of current account stability on macroeconomic and financial balances 
at home and the need for taking precautions to guarantee it.  
World  economic  environment  is  characterised  by  further  deepening  of  economic  and 
financial crises. Curtailing of consumption and investments, under the presence of high rates 
of public and private debt and underlined macroeconomic imbalances, has made the world 
economy  experience  the  sharpest  economic  downturn  in  last  50  years.  The  developed 
countries, USA, Euro-zone, United Kingdom and Japan have followed easing monetary and 
fiscal  policies,  aiming  to  hamper  the  economic  downturn  and  improve  the  financial  and 
capital  markets  situation.  Under  their  impact,  the  latest  data  signal  relative  improvement 
signs of some macroeconomic indicators. Tensions observed over the previous periods have 
relaxed  and  the  main  financial  indicators  have  shown  recovering  signs  during  the  last 
months.  In  the  meantime,  the  world  inflation  rates  have  been  falling,  owing  to  low  raw 
materials  prices  and  low  use  of  productive  capacities,  in  the  presence  of  a  low  aggregate 
demand and increasing unemployment. 
The  economic  activity  downturn  worldwide  was  associated  with  contraction  of  world  trade, 
tightening  of  financial  conditions  and  dropping  of  economic  agents’  confidence  The  direct 
impact on emerging countries, such as Albania, is the fall of demand for their exports, decline 
of  foreign  direct  investments  and  tightening  of  lending  terms  in  world  markets.  Thereupon 
these countries have been increasingly affected by the crisis. According to IMF, the emerging 
countries of Eastern Europe are estimated to incur a contraction of about 5 percent during 
this year.  
The  Albanian  economy,  in  the  face  of  this  unfavourable  environment,  has  recorded  a 
comparatively positive performance. There are few data on the real economy. The Bank of 
BIS Review 94/2009 
 1
Albania estimates that a positive economic growth has characterised the first half of year. On 
the  others  hand,  low  growth  of  credit  and  money  supply,  deteriorated  business  and 
consumer  confidence  indicators,  slow-down  of  budget  revenues  and  specific  indicators  of 
certain economy sectors, suggest that the economic growth rate has decelerated. It is still 
early  to  draw  conclusions  on  the  economic  performance  over  the  course  of  2009  and 
onward.  The  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  the  premises  to  keep  positive  economic  growth 
rates in the country are present, among which the macroeconomic and financial stability of 
the country is of primary importance. 
Economic activity at home is carried out under the presence of favourable consumer price 
stability.  It  is  sustained  by  a  soothing  tendency  of  monetary  conditions  and  by  an 
expansionist fiscal policy over this period. The Bank of Albania cut the base interest rate in 
January  and  undertook  liquidity-injecting  operations,  raising  its  quantity  in  the  market. 
Simultaneously, we have prolonged the maturity span of injecting operations to smooth down 
the upward slope of interest rate curve and we have expanded the base of eligible collateral 
to facilitate the access of financial institution in liquid funds. These operations of the Bank of 
Albania have helped control on interest rate level. Bank of Albania’s intervention has been 
more  effective  in  controlling  the  short-term  interest  rates.  The  long-term  interest  rates  of 
Government  securities  and  loans  revealed  rising  tendencies,  owing  to  the  Government’s 
demand  for  financing  and  the  increased  sensitiveness  of  the  banking  system  towards 
liquidity indicators. In parallel, the depreciating exchange rate trends have complemented the 
easier  monetary  conditions  framework,  providing  advantage  to  exports  and  trade  deficit 
improvement. However, as we have constantly underscored in our statements, the Bank of 
Albania  has  been  attentive  to  managing  the  momentary  stimulus,  aiming  above  all  the 
achievement of its target for maintaining the macroeconomic stability, by preserving internal 
and external balances.  
Annual  inflation  in  the  first  semester  2009  was  2.0  percent,  recording  a  fall  compared  to 
inflation rates of the last year, but remaining within the Bank of Albania’s targeted band. Low 
inflation  rates  over  the  first  semester  of  the  current  year  are  due  to  the  weakening  of 
inflationary pressures on the demand and supply side, consequent to raw materials price cut 
in the international market and the economic activity slowdown at home. Inflationary pressure 
stability is clearly illustrated by low rates of core inflation of non-tradable goods one during 
this period, being reflected also in checked expectations of economic agents of the market. 
Meanwhile, after a long non-inflationary period and confirming Bank of Albania forecasts, the 
annual change of consumer prices revealed a slightly increasing tendency over the second 
quarter of 2009. The annual inflation marked 2.3 percent in June, reflecting a more complete 
pass-through of exchange rate deprecation effect on consumer goods prices. The Bank of 
Albania estimates that this factor may play a higher role in the future for determining these 
prices, comprising premises for short-term and medium-term shocks on price level.  
In the face of these developments, the Albanian economy continued to be featured by low 
public  and  private  savings  rates  even  during  the  first  half  of  2009,  associated  with  further 
enlargement of current account deficit and upward pressures on exchange rate performance. 
Simultaneous  reduction  of  exports  and  imports,  respectively  by  19.6  and  6.3  percent  on 
annual  level,  made  the  trade  deficit  contract  by  1.3  percent  during  first  five  months  of  the 
year. However, reduction of emigrants’ remittances by about 8 percent during the first quarter 
and  the  service  account  deterioration,  made  the  current  account  deficit  record  an  annual 
growth  of  5  percentage  points  of  GDP  during  this  quarter.  Though  this  deficit  goes  for 
financing,  to  a  large  extent,  the  capital  and  intermediate  goods  of  import,  its  sustainability 
deserves  a  greater  attention.  Particularly  concerning  is  the  low  degree  of  export  to  import 
coverage, signalling structural problems of this deficit due to still-low competitiveness in our 
economy.  
In this direction, a special attention should be paid to checking costs and productivity growth 
in  the  economy,  by  raising  investments  in  education,  and  by  attracting  most  advanced 
technologies in production. Also, in the medium run, the macroeconomic policies should be 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2009
prudent  in  terms  of  public  and  private  savings  level,  in  order  to  control  the  need  for  using 
foreign financing resources.  
The fiscal policy during the first half of 2009 had an expansionary stance, being featured by a 
rapid  growth  of  expenditures  and  budget  deficit.  Budget  revenues  have  recorded  a  more 
moderate growth, partially reflecting even the economic slowdown effects. Though remaining 
within the projected level for 2009, the budget deficit by about ALL 30 billion constitutes a 
much higher amount than in the same period of the previous year. Under these conditions, 
the Bank of Albania would appreciate the taking of measures for keeping budget deficit levels 
and public borrowing in check, helping the maintaining of the internal and external balances 
in  the  economy.  Preserving  the  projected  budget  parameters  will  impact  positively  on 
macroeconomic  stability,  by  controlling  the  fiscal  stimulus  on  aggregate  demand  and 
dampening the pressures on monetary markets. 
The  demand  for  monetary  assets  increased  during  the  last  months.  Money  supply  rise  by 
about 8 percent is based on money creation in the economy from the public sector and from 
private sector borrowing, mainly in ALL. Loan portfolio grew moderately, by ALL 7.5 billion or 
about 5 times less than as of the same period of the previous year. Reduction of bank funds 
source and increase of uncertainty in the country influenced the significant deceleration of 
credit growth rates. However, credit to economy increased along the first months of the year, 
while the banking system has signalled no further tightening of the lending terms in the third 
quarter of the current year. The private sector’s demand for Lek-denominated loans is faced 
with  an  increasing  willingness  from  banks,  thanks  to  stabilization  of  liquidity  situation  and 
easing of monetary conditions at start-2009. Restraint of foreign currency money supply has 
resulted  to  contraction  of  foreign  currency  component  of  money  structure,  even  on  the 
demand for money side, bringing about shifting of money supply structure towards the Lek.  
In the first half of 2009, the financial market situation was influenced by increased uncertainty 
and  revaluation  of  risk  premiums  that  associated  the  liquidity  constraint,  consequent  to 
deposit outflows and lending activity reduction. Ongoing intervention of the Bank of Albania 
in  the  money  market,  combined  with  measures  that  aimed  at  relaxing  the  market  and 
encouraging  the  interbank  market  activity,  as  well  as  the  maintaining  of  sound  financial 
system indicators, made the end of the period record stabilization of liquidity positions and of 
interest rates. The latter displayed different behaviour, according to maturity term. Short-term 
interest  rates  in  the  money  market  decreased,  consequent  to  base  rate  cut  and  improved 
liquidity conditions. Long-term interest rates rose under the conditions of a high demand for 
long-term  funds  and  growth  of  risk  premium.  Primary  market  interest  rate  rise  was 
transmitted  to  interest  rates  of  new  Lek-denominated  loans  of  more  than  1-year  maturity, 
influenced even by the overall lending tightening tendency.  
 The Bank of Albania deems that the issues of liquidity, internal and external balances in the 
economy  and  the  financial  soundness  constitute  direct  challenges  on  macroeconomic 
stability  and  long-term  development  of  the  Albanian  economy.  Their  treatment  should  be 
constantly oriented towards the need for observing the necessary macroeconomic balances 
of  the  country.  Price  stability,  smoothing  of  monetary  indicators  volatility,  a  sound  and 
efficient financial system, as well as sound public and private sector’s balance sheets, impact 
on  reducing  the  risk  premium  in  the  economy.  Also,  they  open  the  way  to  attract  foreign 
investments  and  cut  the  cost  of  borrowing  from  international  markets.  In  this  way,  they 
provide an irreplaceable contribution to the country’s long-term growth. 
Further promotion of this growth requires constant structural reforms in the economy, which 
should  not  only  address  the  deficiencies  of  our  economy  but  also  precede  future 
development  trends.  Investment  in  infrastructure  should  be  a  priority  of  funds  use  in  the 
economy.  Also,  further  development  and  consolidation  of  financial  market  segments, 
completion and expansion of pension system in the favour of private incentives, investment 
with priority in education and medical fields deserve the attention of all stakeholders of the 
BIS Review 94/2009 
 3
economy.  We  also  deem  that  it  is  just  the  time  for  the  private  sector  to  reflect  the  new 
development stage of the country, by enhancing and fostering its management. This requires 
a better management of business and financial risk, signifying also a closer cooperation with 
specialised  agents  in  the  market,  extension  of  business  plan  horizons  and  their  better 
orientation towards the global reality and the country’s development priorities.  
In light of this, the financial system should respond more prudentially to these requirements, 
enhancing the transparency and efficiency of its products. Now that the banking system has 
overcome  the  delicate  moments  it  was  faced  with  at  end-2008,  it  should  enhance  its 
contribution to financing the private sector’s activity of the economy. However, I avail myself 
of the occasion to once more emphasise that the financial stability of the banking system is 
another  major  objective,  to  which  the  Bank  of  Albania  remains  deeply  committed.  This 
system will be constantly subject to Bank of Albania’s supervision and stress-test analyses. 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2009
