Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Leveraging technology through turbulent 
times 
Address by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the Central Bank of 
Bahrain, at the MEFTEC 2009, Manama, 10 February 2009. 
 Good morning Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  am  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  Bahrain  for  the  2009  Middle  East  Financial  Technology 
Exhibition  and  Conference,  or  MEFTEC  as  it  is  popularly  called.  This  morning,  as  I  look 
around, I am happy to see that this event continues to arouse so much interest. Each year 
the  number  of  participants  continues  to  grow,  a  clear  testament  to  the  success  of  this 
Exhibition and Conference. I would like to thank the organisers for their efforts in enhancing 
and  improving  each  event,  and  the  delegates  for  their  participation.  I  wish  you  a  pleasant 
stay here. 
Information Technology is, of course, at the heart of the modern financial services industry. 
Banks have used advances in information technology to improve their service to clients and 
to improve the ways in which they manage their risks. 
The  delivery  of  financial  services  has  been  fundamentally  transformed  by  technological 
innovations such as mobile phone banking, internet banking and the ability to trade stocks 
and  bonds  from  a  home  computer.  For  many  millions  of  people  around  the  world  these 
technological  innovations  have  improved  the  speed,  availability,  and  cost  of  financial 
services. 
Technological  advances  have  also  contributed  to  financial  innovation.  Had  it  not  been  for 
technological  innovation,  and  particularly  increases  in  computing  power,  the  kinds  of 
products  which  enable  a  business  to  manage  its  interest  rate,  foreign  exchange  rate,  and 
funding risks could never have been developed. These products are now so commonplace 
that we tend to take them for granted. We forget just how important they have become to 
well-managed businesses. 
The  theme  of  this  year’s  conference  is  “leveraging  technology  through  turbulent  times.” 
These  are,  without  a  doubt,  turbulent  times.  The  world  is  confronting  its  most  serious 
financial crisis in several generations. 
The  current  global  financial  crisis  has  certainly  been  a  reminder  that  not  all  financial 
innovation is a good thing. Some of the new financial instruments that have been created in 
the past decade have imposed large costs, not just on those who own them, but also on the 
wider  society.  It  is  clear  that  we,  the  regulators,  will  need  to  become  much  more  cautious 
about financial innovation than we tended to be in the years before the crisis.  
At  the  same  time,  however,  we  should  remember  the  benefits  that  innovation  has  also 
managed to deliver. So, looking to the future, we can be confident that financial innovation 
and  technological  innovation  will  continue  to  advance  together.  That  is  why  we  consider 
MEFTEC, which is a showcase for the best in financial technology, plays such an important 
part in underpinning Bahrain’s position as the financial centre for the GCC and wider Middle 
Eastern region. 
Ladies and gentlemen, I am sure that you are eager to see what the exhibitors have to offer. 
I  thank  you  for  joining  us  today  and  again  extend  my  appreciation  and  thanks  to  the 
organizers and exhibitors. I wish you a successful Conference and Exhibition. 
BIS Review 15/2009 
 1
