Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung 
Interview  with  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  and  the 
Frankfurter  Allgemeine  Zeitung  conducted  by  Mr  Benedikt  Fehr,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
17 December 2008. 
 Mr Trichet, ten years ago you were Governor of the French central bank. How did you 
celebrate the historical event, the introduction of the euro? 
At midnight I invited all employees, who had worked extremely hard towards this event, to 
join me to celebrate both the euro and the New Year with foie gras and champagne. And I 
told them that the people of Europe were very fortunate that they had performed this task so 
well, as had all other colleagues in the euro area. 
What did the introduction of the euro mean to you personally? 
I can tell you that I was full of pride on that day. I had been in favour of the creation of the 
euro  for  a  long  time.  In  the  early  1990s  I  had  negotiated,  on  behalf  of  the  French 
Government, the Maastricht Treaty regarding the creation of the currency union; and it was 
an honour to negotiate with Horst Köhler, then German Staatssekretär and now President of 
the Federal Republic of Germany. As the Governor of the independent Banque de France, 
which became fully independent on 1 January 1994, I had, together with my colleagues on 
the Conseil de la Politique Monétaire, conducted a monetary policy which resulted in inflation 
in France averaging 1.4% per year in the five years prior to 1 January 1999. If we had not 
achieved this, the euro could not have been introduced.  
Have you ever doubted the success of the euro in the past ten years? 
No, certainly not. But of course we are living in times when one cannot sit back complacently. 
Like all central banks, the European Central Bank has had to manage many challenges and 
shocks, such as the Asian crisis, the bursting of the internet bubble, the oil and commodity 
price shock or the threats to the Stability and Growth Pact. But I was always convinced that 
the euro is a success – and proof of the fact that the people of Europe are able to put into 
effect a historic plan that they have undertaken. 
Not  all  Europeans  share  your  enthusiasm.  According  to  some  surveys,  many 
Europeans are still critical of the euro. 
The survey I have in mind was conducted by the European Commission (Eurobarometer). 
52% of the citizens of the euro area trust the ECB. And according to another survey, 80% of 
our fellow citizens consider it important that the ECB be independent from governments in 
order to deliver price stability. And I can say in particular to every German citizen – together 
with Jürgen Stark, member of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank and Axel 
Weber,  President  of  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank  –  that  in  the  past  ten  years  the  euro  has 
been  as  good  a  store  of  value  and  as  confidence-inspiring  as  the  Deutsche  Mark  was 
previously. 
Since  the  intensification  of  the  economic  and  financial  crisis,  risk  premia  on  the 
government  debt  of  some  euro  area  countries  have  risen  strongly.  Does  this  worry 
you? 
The  capital  markets  are  sending  signals  that  we  have  to  follow  attentively.  Following  an 
episode in which the pricing of risks was, in general, too low, markets now have a tendency 
to overvalue risks. But it does not affect the euro as a currency. Rather, it is clear that the 
single currency has proved to be an anchor of confidence and stability during this crisis. If 
you think back to the European currency turbulence and its consequences in 1992 and 1993, 
BIS Review 2/2008 
 1
you can imagine what consequences the crisis of recent months would have had for the euro 
area without the euro – both on the interest rate markets and on the exchange markets. 
The  euro  is  a  currency  without  a  state.  What  is  necessary  in  order  for  that  to  be  a 
success? 
The  euro  was  established  to  be  as  solid  and  confidence-inspiring  as  the  best  national 
currencies. The euro is the currency not of one single country, but of 15 countries – soon to 
be 16 with the addition of Slovakia. This union of 15 states shares a common destiny. Those 
countries have decided to participate in a single framework for fiscal policy: the Stability and 
Growth  Pact.  The  Pact  is  a  “quid  pro  quo”  for  the  absence  of  a  federal  government.  It 
establishes common rules for all in the area of fiscal policy and provides for the monitoring of 
the rules by all members and, when and where necessary, the imposition of sanctions. 
Do you consider that recent developments pose a threat to the Pact, for example the 
rule that countries’ budget deficits should not exceed 3% of economic output?  
The rules of the Pact were changed some years ago, not least at the request of the German 
Government. On behalf of the whole of the Governing Council of the ECB, I reiterate that the 
countries of the euro area should make appropriate use of the important leeway that the Pact 
currently gives several countries in terms of fiscal policy. However, those countries that have 
modest  leeway  or  no  leeway  at  all  should  respect  the  Pact  as  it  stands.  They  should  not 
forget that these rules are very important for the cohesion of the euro area. These rules are 
also underpinned by strong financial and economic principles. Governments have to take into 
account the fact that if their citizens consider that the fiscal policy of their government is not 
sustainable,  confidence  will  drain  away.  And  in  such  a  case,  when  confidence  is  lacking, 
additional public expenditure will not have a positive effect on growth.  
Does  the  euro  area  need  greater  coordination  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policy,  a 
European economic government of the kind that the French Government would like? 
Monetary policy is geared to ensuring price stability. According to our definition, that means 
keeping annual inflation below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. We have to achieve 
price stability in accordance with our definition in all circumstances – even if, as I have said, 
there  are  severe  economic  shocks,  and  even  if  we  are  confronted  with  fiscal  policies  that 
appear  not  to  be  as  sound  as  necessary.  There  is  no  “ex  ante”  coordination  between 
monetary policy and fiscal policy. That in no way prevents the governments of the euro area 
from  coordinating  their  activities  and  conducting  peer  surveillance  as  regards  the  policies 
they  are  responsible  for,  particularly  the  implementation  of  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact. 
Governments have also committed themselves to very important structural reforms within the 
framework of the Lisbon agenda. The national governments therefore have a lot to do, fully 
independently of the central bank.  
The European labour market is still highly fragmented... 
That is true. There are many reasons for this, such as the differing rules and regulations and 
also cultural differences. The labour market is an important factor in an economy’s costs and 
is  therefore  important  for  the  relative  competitiveness  of  the  individual  countries  within  the 
Single Market in the presence of a single currency. In any case, it is important to make the 
Single Market a reality in all markets, including the labour market. I think that in the euro area 
we  are  moving  in  the  right  direction  in  this  respect,  particularly  as  regards  the  younger 
generation, but a lot remains to be done. 
Do you think that the euro will lead to greater political integration? 
That will be a decision to be taken by our master, the people of Europe, our fellow citizens. 
At present, the democratically taken decisions in the euro area countries have told us that a 
single  currency  was  necessary,  but  not  a  fully  fledged  political  federation.  But  as  I  have 
already  said,  the  Stability  and  Growth  Pact  contains  far-reaching  rules  for  national  fiscal 
policies. That is very important if one considers that the desire to be able to decide over fiscal 
2 
 BIS Review 2/2008
burdens and taxation was to some extent the midwife of political democracies. In response to 
the observation that we do not have a fully developed political federation, I therefore stress 
that the Stability and Growth Pact is already a very important element of political union that is 
enshrined in Economic and Monetary Union.  
The crisis has led several EU countries to consider joining Monetary Union. Could the 
entry procedure be accelerated for them? 
No. There is no fast track to Monetary Union; there is a Treaty. The Maastricht Treaty lays 
down precisely what criteria a country must meet to join. This is important in the interests of 
all: in the interests of the euro area itself, but also, very importantly, in the interests of the 
candidate country itself, which must be fully prepared.  
Which countries will, in your opinion, follow Slovakia as the next members? 
I do not want to speculate on that. The Treaty says that, before it can join, a country must 
have brought its economy into line with the euro area – and that this convergence must not 
only be observed at the moment of entry, but also be sustainable in the medium and long 
term. But history shows that the euro area is not a “closed shop”: we started in 1999 with 11 
countries. When Slovakia joins on 1 January 2009 there will be 16 euro area countries. The 
euro area will then have around 329 million citizens. 
The enlargement of Monetary Union is not the only subject of public debate; there are 
also concerns that individual countries such as Italy or Greece could leave the Union. 
Could you imagine that happening? 
I don’t envisage such fantasies for one second! 
Ten years are behind you: what future challenges face the euro and the ECB? 
We  must  look  far  into  the  future,  very  far,  for  generations.  I  believe  that  all  major  central 
banks  face  four  big  challenges,  and  the  ECB  two  additional  ones.  The  first  challenge  is 
globalisation.  In  10,  20  years’  time  the  world  economy  will  have  a  completely  different 
structure, as a result of the rise of emerging markets such as China and India. This will have 
an influence on monetary policy. 
To what extent? 
Over the past few years, we have started to see this happen: with their large populations and 
extensive  resources,  these  countries  are  developing  rapidly  and  catching  up  rapidly.  As  a 
result of these economies entering into the world market, there have already been periods 
during  which  they  have  fostered  disinflation,  i.e.  very  low  or  falling  prices  of  manufactured 
goods, which have then been followed by periods where they have triggered inflation through 
energy  and  commodity  price  increases.  This  of  course  has  a  strong,  as  well  as  complex, 
influence  on  monetary  policy.  The  same  applies  to  the  second  challenge  of  scientific  and 
technological progress: a significant increase in productivity triggered by the advent of new 
technologies means that costs and prices change in the economy, as does the assessment 
of inflation risks by the central bank. The third challenge is the ageing population. 
Because price stability is particularly important for pensioners? 
That’s not what I mean. We have to ensure price stability in line with our definition of price 
stability in every situation. However, monetary policy must take into account the fact that the 
age structure of a population influences savings and investments, and thus is an important 
factor  for  real  interest  rates  in  any  given  economy.  This  has  to  be  taken  into  account  by 
monetary policy and this is why intensive research into these issues is being conducted at 
universities and central banks. The fourth and final challenge for central banks is the fragility 
of the financial system which has come to light during the present financial crisis. This calls 
for all appropriate lessons to be learned without any complacency.  
BIS Review 2/2008 
 3
And the two ECB-specific challenges? 
The fifth challenge is that the Single Market with its single currency is not yet achieved. We 
are still significantly changing the structure of our own euro area economy. Unlike elsewhere, 
a look into the euro area’s past provides hardly any indications for the future. And the sixth 
challenge for the ECB is enlargement. We are currently 15 members, soon to be 16, but the 
Treaty  stipulates  that  we  must  be  ready  to  be  25  one  day  and  we  have  to  manage  this 
historic enlargement process in the most professional and successful way possible. 
How is the ECB preparing itself for these challenges? 
Excellent  staff!  Both  at  the  ECB  and  in  all  national  central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem  –  in 
Germany at the Deutsche Bundesbank. There is the feeling that we are all working together 
on a task of historic proportions. The world in which we are living is changing very rapidly, 
requiring us to act intelligently, as well as boldly and courageously if necessary. 
Will the euro one day be as important a currency as the US dollar? 
That  is  not  the  aim;  the  euro  was  not  created  for  this  purpose.  My  predecessor  Wim 
Duisenberg and I have always said that the euro was not created to either compete with or 
replace another currency. We are not campaigning for the international use of the euro. The 
euro  was  created  in  order  to  achieve  the  single  European  market.  If  we  can  achieve  this 
goal, we will provide an important basis for prosperity, stability and peace in Europe. 
4 
 BIS Review 2/2008
