Caleb M Fundanga: Increasing access to financial services in Zambia  
Remarks by Dr Caleb M Fundanga, Governor of the Bank of Zambia, at the official opening 
of National Savings and Credit Bank, Lukulu Branch, Lusaka, 27 May 2009. 
 The Guest of Honour; the Honourable Minister of Finance and National Planning; Dr. 
Situmbeko Musokotwane, MP 
The Honourable Minister for Western Province; 
The Deputy Permanent Secretary for Western Province; 
The Honourable Members of Parliament for Lukulu East and West; 
The Acting Ngambela Imbua Imwaka representing the Barotse Royal Establishment; 
The District Commissioners for Lukulu and Kaoma; 
The Board and Management of National Savings and Credit Bank; 
Distinguished invited guests; 
Ladies and gentlemen. 
1. On behalf of the Bank of Zambia Governor, I would like to thank the Board of Directors 
and Management of National Savings and Credit Bank for inviting us to the occasion of the 
opening of another rural branch in Zambia, this time in Lukulu. 
2.  National  Savings  and  Credit  Bank  (also  commonly  referred  to  as  NATSAVE)  was 
established  on  1  April  1972  by  the  National  Savings  and  Credit  Bank  Act  of  1972  and  it 
commenced  business  operations  in  March  1973.  The  amendments  to  the  Banking  and 
Financial Services Act of 2000 extended the supervisory authority of the Bank of Zambia to 
NATSAVE which was until then, supervised by the Ministry of Finance and National Planning 
(MoFNP). 
3. NATSAVE was set up to administer savings and to provide credit facilities in urban, peri-
urban and rural areas to individuals and small business enterprises. Its business strategy is 
to  target  the  low  and  medium  income  earners  through  the  establishment  of  a  sustainable 
network of outlets and by offering sustainable financial services. The Bank has continued to 
be a leading public vehicle in ensuring financial inclusion to all citizens across the country 
through  the  vast  branch  network.  Currently,  NATSAVE  has  27  branches  (including  Lukulu 
branch), spread across the country. 
4. Honourable Ministers and Distinguished invited guests, a key element in the strategy 
of poverty reduction is the provision of financial services to the majority of our people, the 
small  and  micro  enterprises  who  have  traditionally  been  neglected  by  the  formal  banking 
sector.  NATSAVE’s  expansion  program  therefore  has  the  potential  to  improve  access  to 
financial  services  and  enhance  competition  in  the  financial  sector.  This  improves  financial 
services  delivery  to  the  Zambian  people  and  brings  more  of  the  financially  excluded 
population to the financial institutions. The Bank of Zambia views this development positively, 
particularly  as  recent  trends  indicate  that  many  institutions  in  the  financial  sector  are 
extending their branch networks. 
5. However, it is important for financial service providers to complement branch expansion 
with increased product innovation. The ability to offer a broad range of products and services 
is the hallmark of financial sector deepening, as different types of products appeal to a wider 
range of clients, leading to enhanced access to financial services. The Bank of Zambia, as a 
regulator, is determined to facilitate viable branch expansion, and the introduction of new and 
innovative financial products, to tap savings and channel these savings to investment. The 
BoZ will therefore continue to work in close collaboration with the financial sector to cultivate 
partnership in order to establish the framework necessary for build ing strong institutions that 
will mitigate risks and build confidence in the sector. 
BIS Review 69/2009 
 1
6. As at 30th April 2009, NATSAVE held customer deposits in excess of K135 billion with a 
loan  portfolio  of  K92  billion  and  served  over  120,000  clients.  NATSAVE  has  also 
endeavoured  to  introduce  various  products  such  as  marketeer  and  pensioner  accounts 
(specific savings products for people in these categories), as well as loan products such as 
individual  loans,  salary  loans  and  money  transfer  services.  The  development  in  Lukulu 
therefore  offers  some  hope  that  rural  areas,  and  especially  the  agricultural  sector,  may 
eventually be offered attractive financial products. 
7.  Notwithstanding  this,  allow  me  now  to  reflect  on  some  of  the  key  challenges  in  the 
financial sector that all of us must strive to address: 
(i) 
Increasing  access  to  financial  services  by  the  small  and  micro  entrepreneurs  who 
form  the  backbone  of  the  economy.  This  sector  provides  employment  for  many 
people  who  cannot  be  absorbed  into  formal  employment;  increased  access  to 
financial services remains a key challenge to this segment. 
The  BoZ  took  a  step  towards  regulating  microfinance  institutions  (MFIs)  in  2006 
because  these  institutions  can  help  in  narrowing  the  access  gap  in  the  delivery  of 
financial  services.  So  far,  21  MFIs  have  been  licensed  but  most  of  these  operate 
along the line of rail providing mainly salary-backed loans. More institutions are still 
needed  to  increase  outreach  and  deliver  financial  services  in  a  safe,  sound  and 
sustainable manner; 
Zambia is predominantly an agricultural country, but lending to agriculture has been 
limited.  The  challenge  therefore  is  to  devise  financial  products  that  meet  the 
requirements of the rural and predominantly agricultural areas while at the same time 
devising  means  of  protecting  the  financial  institutions  from  risks  associated  with 
agricultural lending. 
(ii) 
(iii) 
8.  Allow  me  to  conclude  my  remarks  by  highlighting  the  need  for  banks  and  non-bank 
financial institutions to consider their customers and potential customers when determining 
the  pricing  of  their  products  and  services.  The  public  continues  to  decry  the  high  level  of 
charges and interest rates for banking services and products. 
9. The BoZ has previously and will continue to appeal to the financial sector to review their 
charges and to explore ways of enhancing efficiency in service delivery. 
10. The majority of Zambians cannot afford the current banking charges and are effectively 
shut  out  of  the  financial  system.  More  affordable  banking  services  will  draw  in  a  larger 
number  of  Zambians  to  the  financial  system,  which  will  in  turn  be  beneficial  to  the 
development of the banking system and the economy at large. 
11.  According  to  a  market  knowledge  study  called  the  ‘FinScope  Demand  –  Side  Survey’ 
which was conducted in 2005 to review the inclusiveness of the Zambian financial system, 
two  thirds  (or  66.3%)  of  the  Zambian  adult  population  do  not  have  access  to  financial 
services  and  only  one  third  (or  33.7%)  use  banks,  other  formal  and  informal  financial 
services  and  products  (such  as  those  offered  by  microfinance  and  savings  clubs). 
Furthermore,  only  15%  of  the  adult  population  access  commercial  bank  services.  A  huge 
market therefore exists to tap if transaction costs are reduced. 
12. Finally, Honourable Guest of Honour, let me congratulate NATSAVE for its participation 
in  addressing  the  issue  of  increased  access  to  financial  services  for  the  people  of  Lukulu 
despite the challenges of physical access and resultant higher transaction costs. 
I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2009
