Ben S Bernanke: Acquisition of Merrill Lynch by Bank of America 
Testimony by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve System, before the Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, US House of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 25 June 2009. 
 Chairman Towns, Ranking Member Issa, and other members of the Committee, I appreciate 
the  opportunity  to  discuss  the  Federal  Reserve's  role  in  the  acquisition  by  the  Bank  of 
America  Corporation  of  Merrill  Lynch  &  Co.,  Inc.  I  believe  that  the  Federal  Reserve  acted 
with  the  highest  integrity  throughout  its  discussions  with  Bank  of  America  regarding  that 
company's acquisition of Merrill Lynch. I will attempt in this testimony to respond to some of 
the questions that have been raised.  
Background 
On September 15, 2008, Bank of America announced an agreement to acquire Merrill Lynch. 
I  did  not  play  a  role  in  arranging  this  transaction  and  no  Federal  Reserve  assistance  was 
promised  or  provided  in  connection  with  that  agreement.  As  with  similar  transactions,  the 
transaction  was  reviewed  and  approved  by  the  Federal  Reserve  under  the  Bank  Holding 
Company Act in November 2008. It was subsequently approved by the shareholders of Bank 
of  America  and  Merrill  Lynch  on  December  5,  2008.  The  acquisition  was  scheduled  to  be 
closed on January 1, 2009. 
As you know, the period encompassing Bank of America's decision to acquire Merrill Lynch 
through the consummation of the merger was one of extreme stress in financial markets. The 
government-sponsored  enterprises,  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac,  were  taken  into 
conservatorship a week before the Bank of America deal was announced. That same week, 
Lehman Brothers failed, and American International Group was prevented from failing only 
by  extraordinary  government  action.  Later  that  month,  Wachovia  faced  intense  liquidity 
pressures which threatened its viability and resulted in its acquisition by Wells Fargo. In mid-
October,  an  aggressive  international  response  was  required  to  avert  a  global  banking 
meltdown.  In  November,  the  possible  destabilization  of  Citigroup  was  prevented  by 
government action. In short, the period was one of extraordinary risk for the financial system 
and the global economy, as well as for Bank of America and Merrill Lynch. 
Discussions regarding the possible Termination of Agreement to acquire Merrill Lynch 
On  December  17,  2008,  senior  management  of  Bank  of  America  informed  the  Federal 
Reserve  for  the  first  time  that,  because  of  significant  losses  at  Merrill  Lynch  for  the  fourth 
quarter of 2008, Bank of America was considering not closing the Merrill Lynch acquisition. 
This  information  led  to a  series  of meetings  and  discussions  among Bank  of  America,  the 
regulatory agencies, and Treasury. During these discussions, Bank of America's CEO, Ken 
Lewis, told us that the company was considering invoking the Material Adverse Event clause 
in  the  acquisition  contract,  known  as  the  MAC,  in  an  attempt  to  rescind  its  agreement  to 
acquire Merrill Lynch. 
In responding to Bank of America in these discussions, I expressed concern that invoking the 
MAC would entail significant risks, not only for the financial system as a whole but also for 
Bank of America itself, for three reasons. First, in light of the extreme fragility of the financial 
system  at  the  time,  the  uncertainties  created  by  an  invocation  of  the  MAC  might  have 
triggered a broader systemic crisis that could well have destabilized Bank of America as well 
as  Merrill  Lynch.  Second,  an  attempt  to  invoke  the  MAC  after  three  months  of  review, 
preparation, and public remarks by the management of Bank of America about the benefits 
BIS Review 81/2009 
 1
of the acquisition would cast doubt in the minds of financial market participants – including 
the  investors,  creditors,  and  customers  of  Bank  of  America  –  about  the  due  diligence  and 
analysis  done  by  the  company,  its  capability  to  consummate  significant  acquisitions,  its 
overall risk-management processes, and the judgment of its management. Third, based on 
our  staff  analysis  of  the  legal  issues,  we  believed  that  it  was  highly  unlikely  that  Bank  of 
America  would  be  successful  in  terminating  the  contract  by  invoking  the  MAC.  Rather,  an 
attempt  to  invoke  the  MAC  would  likely  involve  extended  and  costly  litigation  with  Merrill 
Lynch that, with significant probability, would result in Bank of America being required either 
to  pay  substantial  damages  or  to  acquire  a  firm  whose  value  would  have  been  greatly 
reduced or destroyed by a strong negative market reaction to the announcement. For these 
reasons, I believed that, rather than invoking the MAC, Bank of America's best option, and 
the best option for the system, was to work with the Federal Reserve and the Treasury to 
develop  a  contingency  plan  to  ensure  that  the  company  would  remain  stable  should  the 
completion  of  the  acquisition  and  the  announcement  of  losses  lead  to  financial  stress, 
particularly a sudden pullback of funding of the type that had been experienced by Wachovia, 
Lehman, and other firms.  
Ultimately, on December 30, the Bank of America board determined to go forward with the 
acquisition.  The  staff  of  the  Federal  Reserve  worked  diligently  with  Treasury,  other 
regulators, and Bank of America to put in place a package that would help to shore up the 
combined  company's  financial  position  and  reduce  the  risk  of  market  disruption.  The  plan 
was  completed  in  time  to  be  announced  simultaneously  with  Bank  of  America's  public 
earnings announcement, which had been moved forward to January 16, 2009, from January 
20, 2009. The package included an additional $20 billion equity investment from the Troubled 
Asset Relief Program and a loss-protection arrangement, or ring fence, for a pool of assets 
valued at about $118 billion. The ring-fence arrangement has not been consummated, and 
Bank of America now believes that, in light of the general improvement in the markets, this 
protection is no longer needed.  
Importantly, the decision to go forward with the merger rightly remained in the hands of Bank 
of  America's  board  and  management,  and  they  were  obligated  to  make  the  choice  they 
believed was in the best interest of their shareholders and company. I did not tell Bank of 
America's  management  that  the  Federal  Reserve  would  take  action  against  the  board  or 
management if they decided to proceed with the MAC. Moreover, I did not instruct anyone to 
indicate to Bank of America that the Federal Reserve would take any particular action under 
those circumstances. I agreed with the view of others that the invocation of the MAC clause 
in this case involved significant risk for Bank of America, as well as for Merrill Lynch and the 
financial system as a whole, and it was this concern that I communicated to Mr. Lewis and 
his colleagues. 
Disclosures 
The  Federal  Reserve  also  acted  appropriately  regarding  issues  of  public  disclosure.  As  I 
wrote in a letter to this Committee, neither I nor any member of the Federal Reserve ever 
directed,  instructed,  or  advised  Bank  of  America  to  withhold  from  public  disclosure  any 
information  relating  to  Merrill  Lynch,  including  its  losses,  compensation  packages  or 
bonuses, or any other related matter. These disclosure obligations belong squarely with the 
company, and the Federal Reserve did not interfere in the company's disclosure decisions. 
The Federal Reserve had a legitimate interest in knowing when Bank of America or Merrill 
Lynch  intended  to  disclose  the  losses  at  Merrill  Lynch.  Given  the  fragility  of  the  financial 
markets  at  that  time,  we  were  concerned  about  the  potential  for  a  strong,  adverse  market 
reaction to the reports of significant losses at Merrill Lynch. If federal assistance to stabilize 
these companies were to be effective, the necessary facilities would have to be in place as of 
the  disclosure  date.  Thus,  our  planning  was  importantly  influenced  by  the  companies' 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2009
followed 
in  January  by  significant  and 
planned  disclosure  schedule.  But  the  decisions  and  responsibilities  regarding  public 
disclosure always remained, as it should, with the companies themselves. 
A related question is whether there should have been earlier disclosure of the aid provided 
by the U.S. government to Bank of America. Importantly, there was no commitment on the 
part of the government regarding the size or structure of the transaction until very late in the 
process. Although we had indicated to Bank of America in December that the government 
would  provide  assistance  if  necessary  to  keep  the  company  from  being  destabilized,  as  it 
had  done  in  other  cases  during  this  time  of  extraordinary  stress  in  the  financial  markets, 
those  December  discussions  were 
intense 
negotiations  involving  Bank  of  America,  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  Treasury,  the  Federal 
Deposit Insurance Corporation, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency regarding 
many  key  aspects  of  the  assistance  transaction,  including  the  type  of  assistance  to  be 
provided, the size of the protection, the assets to be covered, the terms for payments, the 
fees, and the length of the facility. The agreement in principle on these items was reflected in 
a term sheet that was not finalized until just before its public release on January 16, 2009. 
The  Federal  Reserve  Board  and  the  Treasury  completely  and  appropriately  disclosed  the 
information  as  required  by  the  Congress  in  the  Emergency  Economic  Stabilization  Act  of 
2008. 
In  retrospect,  I  believe  that  our  actions  in  this  episode,  including  the  development  of  an 
assistance  package  that  facilitated  the  consummation  of  Bank  of  America's  acquisition  of 
Merrill  Lynch,  were  not  only  done  with  the  highest  integrity,  but  have  strengthened  both 
companies  while  enhancing  the  stability  of  the  financial  markets  and  protecting  the 
taxpayers.  These  actions  were  taken  under  highly  unusual  circumstances  in  the  face  of 
grave threats to our financial system and our economy. To avoid such situations in the future, 
it is critical that the Administration, the Congress, and the regulatory agencies work together 
to  develop  a  new  framework  that  strengthens  and  expands  supervisory  oversight  and 
includes a broader range of tools to promote financial stability. 
I would be pleased to take your questions. 
BIS Review 81/2009 
 3
