Donald L Kohn: Policies to bring us out of the financial crisis and 
recession 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Forum  on  Great  Decisions  in  the  Economic  Crisis,  College  of 
Wooster, Wooster, Ohio, 3 April 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 I am glad to be back at Wooster. As I know from my time here, a strength of a small liberal 
arts school like Wooster is its ability to draw on the diverse perspectives of people of different 
disciplines and backgrounds to work closely with students in examining important issues, and 
I'm pleased to be part of such an effort today.  
My  role  today  is  to  discuss  the  actions  the  government  is  taking  to  address  our  current 
financial and economic difficulties. Although my  fellow panelists will be discussing how we 
got here and the regulatory policies we should adopt to prevent a recurrence, I won't be able 
to  fulfill  my  task  without  impinging  a  bit  on  their  topics.  The  choice  of  policies  follows  by 
necessity  from  the  diagnosis  of  the  causes  of  the  problems  being  addressed.  And,  as  we 
address the challenges of the here and now, we cannot lose sight of the longer-term policy 
adjustments that we will have to make to avoid similar crises in the future.1
I should say at the outset that I will focus today on the economic and financial problems and 
policy  responses  in  the  United  States.  However,  because  capital  markets  and  financial 
institutions are linked globally, financial dislocations and their consequences have been felt 
around the world. Moreover, other countries have taken policy steps similar to those taken 
here, including traditional and nontraditional monetary policy, programs to support banking 
institutions, and fiscal stimulus. This is truly a global crisis, and it is a hopeful sign that the 
need for forceful policy responses to the serious challenges we face is broadly recognized. 
Characteristics of the crisis 
A defining characteristic of the crisis has been a deepening adverse feedback loop in which 
financial strains have caused economic weakness, which has in turn led to credit losses and 
heightened financial strains, which then contribute to further economic weakness, and so on. 
The  trigger  for  the  crisis  when  it  broke  in  the  summer  of  2007  was  a  weakening  of  the 
housing  market  and  a  sharp  rise  in  delinquencies  on  subprime  mortgages.  These 
delinquencies  were  importantly  the  result  of  a  breakdown  in  underwriting  standards  that 
reflected,  in  part,  incentive  problems  in  the  securitization  process.  Lenders  did  not  see  a 
need  to  underwrite  carefully  because  they  did  not  intend  to  hold  the  loans  themselves. 
Moreover, based on experience over recent years, investors expected property prices to rise; 
they did not appreciate the extent of the bubble in housing prices, and so they did not focus 
as much as they should have on the ability of the borrowers to repay the loans – or pieces of 
loans  –  they  were  purchasing.  Complex  and  opaque  securitizations  of  loans  made  due 
diligence on the underlying credits nearly impossible.  
As  losses  on  subprime  loans  mounted,  investors  realized  that  even  highly  rated  securities 
backed  by  subprime  mortgages  could  face  large  write-downs,  and  the  prices  of  such 
                                                 
1   The views are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Federal Open Market Committee. 
William English of the Board's staff contributed to these remarks.  
BIS Review 44/2009 
 1
securities declined sharply. Uncertainty about the extent of banks' mortgage-related losses 
and their potential liquidity needs to support off-balance-sheet entities led banks to become 
much less willing to lend to each other and to other financial institutions. The result was a 
sharp  widening  of  risk  spreads  in  key  funding  markets.  Leverage  in  the  financial  sector, 
which  had  contributed  to  higher  profits  during  the  financial  boom,  was  now  seen  to  be 
excessive. As financial firms moved to reduce their exposures, they became less willing to 
make markets, and the liquidity of many securities declined. 
Although housing was the trigger and the largest single source of problems, as time went on 
it became clear that problems in financial institutions and markets were more broadly based. 
Risk on a variety of assets had not been priced appropriately, and risk spreads in a range of 
markets  increased,  as  did  the  equity  risk  premium.  Markets  for  private  asset-backed 
securities (ABS) were hit especially hard. Reflecting the deterioration in funding conditions, 
as  well  as  efforts  to  conserve  capital  and  liquidity,  banks  tightened  lending  standards  and 
terms on loans to both businesses and households.  
With  both  financial  markets  and  intermediaries  under  considerable  strain,  credit  became 
more  expensive  and,  in  some  cases,  unobtainable,  causing  spending  to  be  reduced.  The 
weaker  economy  in  turn  contributed  to  further  deterioration  in  asset  quality  and  concerns 
about greater losses to come. As a result, banks and other lenders tightened their lending 
stance further, which put additional downward pressure on spending. 
This  adverse  feedback  loop,  which  was  already  visible  from  late  2007,  intensified 
considerably  last  fall.  Failures  and near-failures  of  some  major  financial  institutions  greatly 
undermined  confidence  in  financial  institutions  and  severely  disrupted  financial  markets, 
leading to a further sharp tightening of credit conditions. Risk spreads, which were already 
elevated, escalated further and equity prices fell. In addition, the financial turmoil contributed 
to a sharp decline in consumer and business confidence. The result was a major pullback in 
spending  as  consumers  responded  to  decreases  in  wealth  and  the  deterioration  in  their 
future  employment  prospects  and  as  businesses,  worried  about  the  demand  for  their 
products,  cut  back  on  capital  spending  and  sharply  reduced  production  to  avoid  an 
accumulation of unsold stocks. A gradual decline in economic activity through most of 2008 
took a decided turn for the worse late in the year.  
The policy response 
Because the threat to economic stability in the current episode has been so closely related to 
problems in the financial sector, most of the policy responses have been focused on financial 
institutions and markets and the flow of credit to households and businesses. Many of these 
policies have been aimed at countering the tightening of financial conditions that occurred as 
lenders became more risk averse and took steps to conserve capital and liquidity. To that 
end,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  lowered  interest  rates,  made  backup  sources  of  liquidity 
available to private lenders, and used its own lending capacity to try to revive a variety of 
financial markets. In addition, the Federal Reserve, the Treasury, and the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (FDIC) have taken a number of steps to stabilize and repair financial 
institutions in order to limit the tendency of those institutions to pull back from lending and 
thereby intensify the decline in spending.  
Other  government  policies  operate  at  the  intersection  of  the  financial  and  real  sectors. 
Foreclosure mitigation, for example, not only serves to keep people in their homes, but also 
should reduce downward pressures on house prices and hold down loan losses at lenders. 
Finally, fiscal stimulus works directly on demand, in effect bypassing the financial sector in its 
first-round effects; by strengthening aggregate demand, it too should help alleviate strains on 
lenders and contribute to stemming the vicious cycle. 
Although I'll be discussing each of these policy initiatives separately, it is important to keep 
their interactions in mind. They all  attempt to break into that adverse feedback loop we've 
2 
 BIS Review 44/2009
been talking about at different points in the chain of cause and effect and then cause again. 
The  expectation  of  recovery  rests  importantly  on  the  natural  recuperative  powers  of  the 
economy,  but  it  also  depends  on  the  effects  of  the  various  policy  efforts  reinforcing  each 
other:  A  stable  financial  system  is  critical  to  realizing  the  positive  effects  of  monetary  and 
fiscal  policies;  the  financial  system  won't  stabilize  very  quickly  without  monetary  and  fiscal 
stimulus to help support spending and ease credit problems. 
Monetary policy 
In  response  to  the  rise  in  credit  spreads  and  tightening  of  credit  conditions,  the  Federal 
Reserve has aggressively eased monetary policy, as conventionally defined by the target for 
the  federal  funds  rate.  In  the  second  half  of  2007  and  into  the  spring of  2008,  the  federal 
funds rate target was cut rapidly, and, as the financial turbulence intensified last fall and the 
economic outlook deteriorated, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) responded by 
cutting the target further, setting a range of 0 to 1/4 percent by the end of last year.  
With  the  federal  funds  rate  already  near  zero,  the  FOMC  noted,  in  the  statement  after  its 
March meeting, "that economic conditions are likely to warrant exceptionally low levels of the 
federal  funds  rate  for  an  extended  period."  By  communicating  this  expectation,  the 
Committee  reinforced  market  beliefs  that  policy  is  likely  to  remain  on  hold,  and  so  put 
downward pressure on longer-term rates. Because it is these longer-term rates that have the 
largest  effects  on  spending  behavior,  this  sort  of  communication  can  be  very  useful  in 
stimulating borrowing and spending by businesses and households.  
In addition to easing the traditional interest rate instrument of monetary policy, the Federal 
Reserve has taken a range of other policy steps to ease credit conditions and support the 
broader  economy.  From  the  onset  of  the  crisis  in  the  summer  of  2007,  we  could  see  that 
widening spreads in interbank funding markets were putting upward pressure on the interest 
rates  paid  and  charged  by  banks.  To  combat  the  strains  in  these  markets,  the  Federal 
Reserve  provided  credit  to  banks  on  more  generous  terms  and  at  longer  maturities  than 
usual. The Federal Reserve subsequently introduced the Term Auction Facility, under which 
it holds auctions of fixed amounts of term credit to banks on a regular schedule. By providing 
banks with a more assured source of liquidity, these changes limited banks' need to bolster 
liquidity  through  fire  sales  of  assets  and  so  made  them  more  willing  to  lend  and  to  make 
markets.  
The Federal Reserve also expanded its provision of liquidity beyond U.S. banking institutions 
to other financial institutions and market participants. Because foreign dollar funding markets 
affect U.S. markets, swap lines were established with foreign central banks in late 2007 (and 
have since been expanded significantly), allowing them to obtain dollars so that they could 
meet the dollar liquidity needs of banks in their jurisdictions. As some large investment banks 
came increasingly under pressure in early 2008, the Federal Reserve, consistent with its role 
as  lender  of  last  resort  and  in  light  of  the  key  roles  these  institutions  play  in  a  range  of 
financial  markets,  introduced  programs  under  which  it  could  provide  liquidity  to  primary 
dealers.2  And,  as  the  financial  situation  deteriorated  last  fall,  the  Federal  Reserve 
established  liquidity  facilities  for  money  market  mutual  funds  and  introduced  programs  to 
provide  liquidity  directly  to  borrowers  and  investors  in  key  credit  markets,  including  the 
commercial  paper  market,  where  strains  threatened  the  ability  of  many  financial  and 
nonfinancial firms to place their paper. 
More recently, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury have teamed up to try to restart the 
markets in which loans had been securitized to be sold to final investors. Until the crisis, ABS 
issuance  was  a  key  source  of  funding  for  consumer  loans,  small  business  loans,  student 
                                                 
2   Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York.  
BIS Review 44/2009 
 3
loans,  and  other  types  of  household  and  business  credit.  However,  after  the  substantial 
losses  on  residential  mortgage-backed  securities,  and  with  the  economy  weakening, 
investors  became  wary  of  all  structured  securities;  spreads  on  ABS  rose  sharply  and 
issuance  tailed  off last  fall.  Under  the  Term  Asset-Backed Securities  Loan  Facility  (TALF), 
the Federal Reserve will provide loans against a variety of ABS while the private sector and 
the Treasury take most of the risk.  
Finally,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  begun  making  substantial  purchases  of  longer-term 
securities in order to support market functioning and reduce interest rates in the mortgage 
and private credit markets. As recently as our March meeting, the FOMC increased the total 
planned  amount  of  purchases  of  agency-guaranteed  mortgage-backed  securities  and 
initiated a program of buying longer-term Treasury securities.3
I  believe  these  efforts  have  been  somewhat  successful  at  addressing  the  "tightening  in 
financial conditions" side of the adverse feedback loop. Short-term interest rates are much 
lower than they were when the crisis began, and so are mortgage rates – at least those on 
mortgages  eligible  to  be  guaranteed  by  Fannie  Mae  and  Freddie  Mac.  Functioning  of  the 
commercial  paper  market  has  greatly  improved.  Banks,  investment  banks,  and  money 
market mutual funds tell us that without the liquidity backstops we have provided, they would 
have  had  to  shrink  and  deleverage  much  more  rapidly,  which  would  have  put  downward 
pressure on asset prices and would have further reduced credit availability for households 
and businesses.  
But we are not out of the woods yet. For many borrowers, credit remains much harder to get 
and far more expensive than it was in the summer of 2007. Some reductions in leverage and 
tightening  of  credit  conditions  relative  to  earlier  this  decade  clearly  were  needed,  and  I 
expect that lower leverage and tighter lending standards and terms will be enduring features 
of the financial landscape. But current credit conditions are far tighter than these adjustments 
would seem to justify. Many financial markets remain under considerable stress, asset prices 
have been reduced by the lack of liquidity in markets, and credit spreads and availability still 
reflect  very  high  aversion  to  risk.  These  conditions  are  not  conducive  to  a  substantial  and 
sustained economic rebound, and the Federal Reserve will continue to be alert to ways that 
monetary policy can contribute to economic recovery.  
We are also conscious of a potential adverse feedback loop between persistent economic 
weakness  and  a  continuing  decline  in  inflation  and  inflation  expectations.  With  the  federal 
funds rate about as low as it can go, significant further decreases in inflation as a result of 
the substantial slack in resources, lower import prices, and declines in the prices of oil and 
other commodities could imply an increase in the real federal funds rate. Indeed, if such a 
process continued for some time, we could fall into deflation, much as Japan did for a time in 
the  1990s  and  earlier  this  decade.  Then  again,  the  substantial  increase  in  the  size  of  the 
Federal  Reserve's  balance  sheet  as  a  result  of  the  credit  programs  that  have  been 
implemented  have  led  some  to  worry  that  inflation  could  rise  sharply  when  the  economy 
recovers  unless  the  Federal  Reserve  moves  quickly  when  the  time  comes  to  unwind  the 
programs and limit the growth in credit.  
Because  inflation  expectations  play  a  key  role  in  the  setting  of  prices  and  wages,  firmly 
anchored  inflation  expectations  can  help  avoid  both  of  these  outcomes.  To  help  anchor 
inflation expectations, the FOMC is now providing extended projections of inflation – along 
with growth and unemployment – in its quarterly economic projections.  
                                                 
3   To  improve  transparency  regarding  its  programs  to  help  stabilize  the  financial  sector,  as  well  as  its  other 
operations,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  established  a  resource,  Credit  and  Liquidity  Programs  and  the 
Balance  Sheet,  on  its  website  that  provides  detailed  information  on  credit  and  liquidity  programs  and  the 
Federal Reserve’s balance sheet.  
4 
 BIS Review 44/2009
To address concerns about its ability to rein in its balance sheet, the Federal Reserve must 
be prepared to exit from its various programs when the time is right. We have designed many 
of  our  facilities  to  discourage  use  when  markets  are  functioning  more  normally,  and 
securities  that  have  been  accumulated  can  be  sold  when  such  sales  are  judged  to  be 
appropriate. However, given very large purchases of long-term assets and substantial long-
term lending for the TALF and other purposes, the Federal Reserve would benefit from new 
tools that would allow it to drain reserves from the banking system. We are working with the 
Treasury and the Congress to obtain such tools.  
Financial repair 
In  addition  to  the  Federal  Reserve's  monetary  policy  actions,  which  broadly  support  the 
financial  sector  and  the  economy,  the  government  –  including  the  Treasury,  the  Federal 
Reserve, and the FDIC – has been working to provide more direct support to financial firms.4
In  part,  this  effort  has  involved  targeted  actions  to  prevent  the  failure  or  substantial 
weakening  of  specific  systemically  important  institutions,  including  Bear  Stearns,  Fannie 
Mae, Freddie Mac, AIG (American International Group, Inc.), Citigroup, and Bank of America. 
These actions were not taken to protect the affected firms' managers or shareholders from 
the  costs  of  past  mistakes.  Indeed,  managers  have  been  replaced  in  some  cases,  and 
shareholders  of  the  weakest  firms  have  experienced  massive  losses.  Instead,  our  actions 
have been driven by concerns that the disorderly failure of a large, complex, interconnected 
firm would impose significant losses on creditors, including other financial firms, dislocate a 
range  of  financial  markets,  and  impede  the  flow  of  credit  to  households  and  businesses. 
Losses  sustained  by  other  financial  firms  could  erode  their  financial  strength,  limiting  their 
ability  to  play  their  intermediation  role,  or  even  cause  them  to  fail,  reinforcing  financial 
pressures.  Moreover,  the  disorderly  failure  of  a  large,  complex  interconnected  firm  could 
undermine  confidence  in  the  U.S.  financial  sector  more  broadly,  potentially  triggering  a 
widespread  withdrawal  of  funding  by  investors  and  an  additional  tightening  of  credit 
conditions, which would, in turn, cause a further reduction in economic activity.  
Besides  this  targeted  support,  the  government  has  undertaken  programs  to  inject  capital 
more broadly into the banking system. Since last fall, nearly $200 billion has been distributed 
under  a  Treasury  program  that  provides  government  capital  investments  to  banks  in  good 
condition.  More  recently,  the  Treasury,  in  conjunction  with  the  bank  supervisory  agencies, 
announced  a  new  program  to  ensure  that  U.S.  banking  institutions  are  appropriately 
capitalized. Under this program, the capital needs of the major U.S. banking institutions are 
being  evaluated  relative  to  the  losses  that  would  be  anticipated  under  a  significantly  more 
challenging economic environment than anticipated in the consensus of private forecasters. 
Should  that  assessment  indicate  that  an  additional  temporary  capital  buffer  is  warranted, 
institutions will have an opportunity to raise the capital from private sources. If these efforts 
are unsuccessful, the temporary capital buffer will be made available from the government. 
By providing additional capital, the government can reduce concerns about the adequacy of 
bank  capital,  build  investor  confidence  in  U.S.  banking  institutions  and  the  U.S.  financial 
sector more generally, and so ease financial pressures and encourage new lending.  
In  addition  to  providing  capital,  the  government,  through  the  FDIC,  has  temporarily 
guaranteed selected liabilities of insured depository institutions and their holding companies. 
This  program  provides  a  stable  source  of  funds  for  these  institutions  and  so  eases  the 
pressures on funding that some of them faced.  
                                                 
4   To clarify the appropriate roles of the Federal Reserve and the Treasury during the current financial crisis and 
in the future, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury issued a joint statement on March 23, 2009. See Board of 
Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  and  U.S.  Department  of  the  Treasury  (2009),  "The  Role  of  the 
Federal Reserve in Preserving Financial and Monetary Stability," joint press release, March 23.  
BIS Review 44/2009 
 5
Finally,  the  Treasury  recently  announced  a  program  to  assist  banks  and  other  lenders  in 
reducing their "legacy assets" – that is, real estate loans held directly on their books ("legacy 
loans") and securities backed by loan portfolios ("legacy securities") that were accumulated 
during  the  housing  boom  and  which  have  since  declined  in  value  and  become  relatively 
illiquid.  Uncertainty  about  the  value  of  legacy  assets  is  weighing  on  confidence  in  banks, 
reflecting concerns that the assets will turn out to be worth much less than currently thought 
and  so  undermine  the  financial  strength  of  the  banks  holding  them.  Moreover,  the  lack  of 
liquid  markets  for  legacy  assets  means  that  banks  cannot  readily  manage  the  associated 
risks  and  cannot  easily  make  room  on  their  balance  sheets  for  new  loans  if  they  have 
attractive lending opportunities. In part, buyers for these assets are scarce because credit is 
expensive and difficult to obtain and because investors are highly averse to risk.  
Under  the  new  program,  the  Treasury,  with  the  participation  of  the  FDIC  and  the  Federal 
Reserve, is establishing public-private investment funds to purchase legacy assets. Capital 
for the funds will be provided jointly by private investors and the Treasury. In addition, the 
government will provide the funds with leverage (through Federal Reserve lending or FDIC 
guarantees)  that  currently  cannot  be  raised  from  market  sources,  allowing  the  funds  to 
increase  their  purchases  of  legacy  assets.  These  facilities  are  structured  to  give  the 
government  a  share  of  any  gains  in  the  value  of  assets  purchased  while  protecting  the 
private-sector  investors  from  some  of  the  downside  risks  inherent  in  real  estate  credit  at 
present.  By  providing  such  protection  along  with  leverage  that  is  unavailable  in  markets 
today,  the  government  hopes  to  bolster  demand  for  these  assets  and  restart  markets  in 
them.  
Taken together, these financial repair programs are a comprehensive and substantial effort 
to help financial institutions resume lending and so support economic activity. Banks worried 
about  the  adequacy  of  their  capital  have  been  reassured  by  the  capital  provided  by  the 
Treasury,  and  they  may  also  be  more  optimistic  about  their  ability  to  raise  private  capital 
once  they  have  shed  legacy  assets.  At  the  same  time,  concerns  about  the  availability  of 
funding should be eased by access to government-guaranteed funding options. Moreover, as 
I noted at the outset, these programs need to be viewed as complementing the monetary, 
fiscal,  and  other  policies  put  in  place  to  alleviate  financial  strains  and  support  aggregate 
demand.  Indeed,  when  I  think  back  to  the  exceedingly  perilous  financial  situation  last 
September and October, I judge the efforts at financial repair as at least a qualified success. 
Risk  spreads  in  bank  funding  markets  have  narrowed,  and  the  liquidity  positions  of  many 
institutions  have  improved.  Despite  significant  pressures  on  many  financial  firms,  we  have 
generally avoided fire sales of assets by institutions that were troubled or were anticipating 
trouble.  
Despite this progress, financial markets remain very fragile, lenders are still very protective of 
their  capital  and  liquidity,  risk  spreads  remain  elevated,  and  many  segments  –  especially 
securitization  markets  –  continue  to  be  impaired.  However,  some  of  the  government 
programs I have discussed – those to restart markets, provide additional capital buffers, and 
open outlets for legacy assets – are just now being implemented. While these programs are 
quite promising, we will not be able to judge their success at restarting lending for a time. 
Foreclosure mitigation 
Another way that the government has intervened to limit the spillovers of financial problems 
to the real economy, and vice versa, is by taking steps to reduce unnecessary foreclosures. 
Most  notably,  the  Treasury  recently  announced  the  Making  Home  Affordable  program  that 
will  provide  financial  incentives  to  encourage  lenders  and  servicers  to  refinance  existing 
mortgages with new mortgages having lower payments, thereby helping at-risk homeowners 
to  avoid  foreclosure.  The  large  supply  of  foreclosed-upon  houses  coming  onto  the  market 
has placed added downward pressure on house prices, and clusters of vacant properties can 
lead  to  higher  crime  rates  and  strains  on  municipal  budgets  as  well.  Thus,  in  addition  to 
helping  homeowners  stay  in  their  houses,  limiting  foreclosures  should  benefit  lenders, 
6 
 BIS Review 44/2009
mitigate  adverse  impacts  on  affected  communities,  and,  by  limiting  the  decline  in  overall 
home prices, help support the macroeconomy. 
Fiscal policy 
In addition to the wide range of policies to bolster financial firms and markets and so damp 
the adverse feedback loop of the past year and a half, the government has put in place fiscal 
stimulus  that  will  support  spending  and  economic  activity  directly.  The  fiscal  package 
includes tax cuts to bolster household incomes, new infrastructure investments, and financial 
assistance to state and local governments, many of which would otherwise have had to cut 
spending in light of declining revenues. The economy is very weak and is likely to remain so 
for  a  while  despite  strong  application  of  both  conventional  and  unconventional  monetary 
policy actions; as such, this point in time would seem to be a textbook moment for substantial 
fiscal stimulus. With monetary policy likely to be quite accommodative for an extended period 
and  the  margin  of  unused  capacity  extraordinarily  large,  crowding  out  of  private-sector 
spending by the fiscal expansion should be limited.   
Potential policy risks 
The policies that we have pursued have been targeted to the problems we face – strains in 
funding  markets,  tight  credit  conditions,  balance  sheet  weaknesses  at  some  banking 
institutions,  rising  foreclosures,  and  weak  overall  economic  activity.  By  taking  this  broad 
approach  to  the  situation,  we  allow  for  positive  interactions  among  the  policies  we  put  in 
place and have the best chance of countering the adverse feedback loop that has been an 
important  driver  of  economic  and  financial  developments  since  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis. 
Nonetheless, the success of these policies is subject to a number of risks.  
Protectionism and financial nationalism  
One  risk  is  that  the  crisis  and  the  accompanying  deterioration  in  economic  conditions  will 
lead to increases in protectionism and financial nationalism. In hard times countries may turn 
inward, focusing on the difficulties facing their own financial firms and the dislocations in their 
own  economies.  And  taxpayers  may  conclude  that  commitments  of  government  money 
should  be  devoted  primarily  to  policies  that  will  directly  benefit  their  nations'  citizens. 
Although these reactions are natural, we need to recognize that if all countries react in this 
way, the result will be great inefficiency and a worse outcome for all. For example, as is well 
known, international trade benefits all nations by allowing for the more efficient production of 
goods  and  services.  The  current  system  of  relatively  open  international  trade  has  been 
gradually built up over many years and has contributed substantially to global prosperity. To 
backtrack now would be a tremendous setback that likely could not be reversed for a very 
long  time.  And  if  governments  responded  to  problems  at  financial  institutions  in  their 
countries by attempting to protect only domestic investors, the result would be a rapid, and 
likely very disruptive, unwinding of the international capital flows that run through the global 
banking system, resulting in greater strains on financial institutions and so on the economy.  
Re-creating the problems that got us here? 
A  second  risk  that  we  should  consider  is  whether  in  our  efforts  to  deal  with  the  financial 
crisis, we are inadvertently re-creating many of the structures and behaviors that contributed 
to the crisis. For example, the government is providing increased leverage even as markets 
are calling for deleveraging; some of the government programs make use of credit ratings 
from  the  same  agencies  that  so  evidently  fell  short  in  their  assessments  of  structured 
financial instruments; some of these programs employ financial structures similar to the off-
balance-sheet entities that proved unstable in the crisis; we are trying to keep interest rates 
very low to support asset prices and spending after an episode in which low long-term rates 
BIS Review 44/2009 
 7
probably  contributed  to  unsustainable  housing  prices;  and,  finally,  we  are  supporting 
economic activity by further increasing government deficits at a time when the longer-term 
fiscal outlook is already troubling. So are we just perpetuating the errors and misjudgments 
that led to the crisis, and thus sowing the seeds of a new crisis in the years to come?  
I  don't  think  so.  The  steps  we  have  taken  need  to  be  seen  as  part  of  an  effort  by  the 
government  to  smooth  the  transition  of  our  financial  sector  and  economy  to  a  more 
sustainable  situation.  Both  markets  and  regulators  are  going  to  press  financial  firms  to 
employ less leverage. Similarly, households will need to save more of their income over time, 
and  in  that  process  domestic  spending  will  be  brought  more  into  line  with  our  nation's 
potential to produce, thus reducing our dependence on foreign savings. However, the speed 
and force of the private-sector adjustments risk overshooting. Investors, badly surprised by 
the  performance  of  some  structured  instruments  and  also  by  the  extent  of  the  economic 
downturn, have – at least for the time being – pulled back sharply from risk-taking. But they 
will  regain  confidence  over  time  and  return  to  markets  that  are  now  at  a  standstill. 
Government programs, like the TALF, can help rebuild that confidence. Similarly, the prices 
of  some  assets  may  be  in  the  process  of  overshooting  their  long-run  levels,  reflecting 
heightened risk aversion and the very weak economic outlook. And low asset prices could 
lead to a prolonged period of depressed consumer and business confidence and what will 
ultimately  prove  to  be  an  excessive  shortfall  in  consumer  spending  and  business  capital 
outlays. While these adjustments are playing out, we are, in effect, temporarily substituting 
the government's balance sheet and spending for their private-sector counterparts.  
However, while near-term stability seems to require slowing these adjustment processes, we 
must put in place frameworks for exiting these programs if we are to end up with a market-
based economy that is more balanced and more resilient. Over time, the Federal Reserve 
must reduce its lending; the government must put its deficits on a distinct downward track; 
financial institutions must retire government assistance and operate on their own.  
Dealing with the government 
The success of these policies requires that they be utilized. Because the government must 
protect the taxpayer, it needs to be sure that institutions taking taxpayer money are using the 
resources efficiently to address the intended problem. To ensure that government money is 
used appropriately, the government must monitor how it is used and impose conditions on 
those receiving it. However, the conditions for government assistance need to be carefully 
calibrated to protect the taxpayer while still allowing the policy objectives to be accomplished. 
Firms  might  hold  back  on  accepting  government  help  if  they  saw  the  cost  of  meeting  the 
conditions as greater than the benefit of the assistance or if they were concerned that the 
conditions  might  change  in  an  undesirable  way  after  the  assistance  had  been  accepted. 
Such  hesitance  could  impede  the  effectiveness  of  government  programs  and  slow  the 
recovery of jobs and income. 
Will we need to do more? 
My final issue is the hardest: Are the policies we have put in place sufficient to restart the 
flow of credit, or will the government need to do more? The answer, of course, is that we 
don't  know  –  we  have  no  reliable  precedents  for  the  current  situation.  Policymakers  are 
operating  in  a  highly  uncertain  environment  –  one  marked  by  a  huge  amount  of 
unquantifiable risks.  
Most people, including policymakers, did not anticipate the depth, breadth, and severity  of 
the  financial  meltdown  and  economic  downturn.  We  have  had  to  remain  very  flexible  and 
open  to  policy  actions  that  had  no  precedent.  And  all  of  us  –  the  Federal  Reserve,  the 
Administration, and the Congress – must continue in this posture. We must keep our ultimate 
objectives for the economy firmly in mind – sustained recovery to high levels of output and 
8 
 BIS Review 44/2009
employment  with  price  stability.  We  will  continue  to  adapt  our  policies  as  necessary  to 
accomplish these objectives. 
BIS Review 44/2009 
 9
