Ewart S Williams: Banks’ liquidity challenges in Trinidad and Tobago 
Remarks by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad & Tobago, for the 
CIB/Clico Media Conference, Port-of-Spain, 30 January 2009.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen  
Some  of  you  may  know  that  CIB  has  been  facing  liquidity  challenges  over  the  past  few 
weeks. These challenges came to a head in the last few days when the bank began to face 
an unusually high level of withdrawal requests which put a strain on their available liquid 
resources.  
Clico has also been facing liquidity problems, though nowhere near the levels of CIB. Of 
course, given the close integration of these two financial institutions within the CL Financial 
Group,  it  is  just  a  matter  of  time  before  Clico  also  begin  to  come  under  severe  liquidity 
pressures.  
The  Inspector  of  Financial  Institutions  and  the  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  met  with  the 
Chairman  and  Chief  Financial  Officer  of  CL  Financial  on  January  7  2009.  In  a  second 
meeting  on  January  13  2009,  Clico’s  Chairman  formally  raised  the  issue  of  possible 
financial assistance from the Central Bank.  
There is no doubt that the increase in CIB withdrawals and the nervousness seen at Clico 
have something to do with the depositors’ concerns about the impact of the sharp decline in 
methanol and real estate prices on CL Financial’s overall financial situation. In the Bank’s 
view however, the current financial difficulties being faced by CIB and Clico have more 
to do with four things:  
• 
excessive  related-party  transactions  which  carry  significant  contagion  risks.  I 
should note that the high level of concentration is not specifically prohibited by 
the present legislation.  
An  aggressive  high  interest  rate  resource  mobilization  strategy  to  finance 
equally high risk investments, much of which are in illiquid assets (including real 
estate both in Trinidad and Tobago and abroad).  
A  very  high  leveraging  of  the  Group’s  assets,  which  constrains  the  potential 
amount of cash that could be raised from asset sales.  
  In our regular monitoring of CIB, and of Clico since 2004 (when insurance supervision was 
transferred  from  the  Ministry  of  Finance),  the  Central  Bank  has  consistently  focused  on 
these deficiencies but have been stymied by the inevitable challenge of change and by 
inadequacies  in  the  legislative  framework  which  do  not  give  the  Bank  the  authority  to 
demand these changes.  
The  Central  Bank  is  very  conscious  of  the  contagion  risks  that  financial  difficulties  in  an 
institution as vast as the CL Financial Group could have on the entire financial system of 
Trinidad and Tobago and indeed in the entire Caribbean region.  
For the record, ladies and gentlemen, the CL Financial Group has an imposing presence 
with  potentially  systemic  consequences  for  the  financial  sector  and  the  economy  of 
Trinidad and Tobago and the entire region.  
For example,  
1. 
the Group controls over ($100) billion of assets in at least 28 companies located 
throughout the Region and the world.  
BIS Review 10/2009 
 1
2. 
3. 
The  Group’s  financial  interests  cover  several  industry  sectors  including  banking 
and financial services, energy, real estate and manufacturing and distribution. 
The  four  largest  financial  institutions  in  the  Group  manage  assets  of  over  $38 
billion, over 25 per cent of the country’s GDP.  
In addition to Clico, among the Group’s holdings is the British American Insurance 
Company Limited, which is one of the main insurance companies in the Eastern 
Caribbean.  
After intense discussions over the past week the Central Bank, the Ministry of Finance and 
representatives of the CL Financial Group have reached agreement on a strategy to deal 
with the liquidity challenges of CIB and Clico and to address the underlying problems that 
have given rise to the current financial stress.  
The principal objectives of the strategy are to ensure that resources are available to meet 
withdrawals of third-party CIB depositors and Clico policy holders; to protect the funds of 
the  depositors  and  policy  holders  and  in  so  doing  maintain  confidence  in  Clico  and 
reinforce confidence in the financial sector as a whole.  
The main elements of the strategy are as follows:  
• 
• 
The Central Bank will take control of CIB under section 44D of the Central Bank Act.  
Early next week all the third-party assets and liabilities on the books of CIB and 
CMMB will be transferred to First Citizens Bank. These liabilities will be matched 
by  resources  from  the  sale  of  CIB’s  holdings  of  certain  high  quality  assets. 
The  Central  Bank  will  provide  short  term  liquidity  as  needed  to  ensure  that  these 
liabilities are serviced.  
Following  the  execution  of  these  transactions,  CIB’s  banking  license  will  be 
revoked.  
Clico  has  a  sizeable  Statutory  Fund  deficit.  CL  Financial  has  agreed  to  divest 
additional assets to help fund this deficit. The Government has committed to provide 
any additional funding that is needed by Clico.  
Government  funding  will  be  provided  in  exchange  for  collateral  and  an  equity 
interest  in  Clico.  It  will  also  act  as  a  catalyst  for  implementing  a  change  in  the 
current  business  model  and  corporate  governance  structure  of  Clico.  The 
intention will be to return Clico to its original moorings.  
   I would like to emphasize that these considerable steps being taken – by the CL Financial 
Group,  the  Government  and  the  Central  Bank  are  specifically  designed  to  tell  CIB’s 
depositors  that  your  funds  are  safe  and  to  maintain  confidence  in  Clico  which  for 
decades has been the strength of the insurance sector in Trinidad and Tobago and in the 
region. Clico’s policy holders can also be assured that the long term future of Clico will be 
guaranteed by the adoption of a more robust and less risky model.  
Because any stress in one corner of the financial system tends to raise concerns throughout 
the  sector,  I  would  also  take  the  opportunity  to  remind  the  national  community  of  the 
tremendous  strength  of  our  financial  system,  which  indeed  is  the  envy  of  the  region. 
Excluding CIB, the banking system now boast of an average capital adequacy level of 18 per 
cent, compared with a recommended minimum of 8 per cent; in contrast to the illiquidity of 
CIB, the rest of the banking system is plagued by excess liquidity; the overall level of non-
performing  loans  is  an  impressively  low  2  per  cent  and  the  banks  have  more  than 
adequate level of provisions against bad loans.  
Let  me  support  the  point  raised  by  Minister  Tesheira  on  the  need  to  accelerate  some 
aspects  of  the  new  Insurance  Act  on  which  we  have  been  working  for  some  time  in 
collaboration with industry stakeholders. We absolutely need updated insurance legislation to 
regulate the insurance industry in normal times as well as in times of financial stress.  
2 
 BIS Review 10/2009
The “fast track” amendments to the 1980 Insurance Act that are being proposed will provide 
us with the authority to conduct on-site supervision; will give us the legal basis to share 
information with other regulators (I should note that CLICO and its affiliate British American 
have  vast  regional  operations)  and  will  allow  the  Central  Bank  to  take  prompt  corrective 
action to protect depositors, if and when necessary.  
Before  ending  I  would  like  to  acknowledge  the  high  level  of  cooperation  that  we  have 
received from Mr. Duprey in our efforts to address what must be a very difficult period for the 
CL Financial Group.  
I should also recognize the role of First Citizens Bank in doing its part to help stabilize the 
banking system.  
Resolving the problems of Clico will call for continued collaboration between CL Financial, 
Government  and  the  Central  Bank,  but  moreso  on  the  collaboration  of  the  entire 
financial community led by ATTIC and BATT. While it is currently a CL Financial problem, 
only the concerted and vigorous action of the entire financial sector would stave off financial 
contagion.  This  is  not  the  time  for  companies  to  take  advantage  of  CIB/Clico’s 
problems to expand their balance sheet: this is the time to let competition take a back seat 
and to support the Government and the Central Bank to keep Clico as a functioning entity 
and to ensure the continued stability of our financial system.  
The actions that we will be taking over the next several weeks and months will only work if 
they have the support of the community of depositors and policyholders as well as the 
entire financial sector.  
We  are  confident  that  the  proposed  strategy  will  lead  to  a  financial  sector  that  is  more 
resilient to deal with the adverse currents now buffeting the global economy.  
BIS Review 10/2009 
 3
