Njuguna Ndung’u: Credit information sharing to enhance financial sector 
development 
Address by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the launch of 
the Banking Credit Information Sharing Implementation Project, Nairobi, 27 August 2009. 
 Mr. Martin Oduor-Otieno, Chairman, Kenya Bankers Association; 
Mr. John Wanyela, Executive Director, Kenya Bankers Association; 
Chief Executives of Commercial Banks here present; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am pleased to join you this morning on this important occasion to launch the Banking Credit 
Information Sharing Project. Allow me therefore to extend my gratitude to the Kenya Bankers 
Association  for  facilitating  this  project  and  the  invitation.  The  importance  of  this  function 
cannot  be  overemphasised  and  I  am  delighted  at  the  excellent  turnout  of  the  banking 
fraternity. 
The Banking (Credit Reference Bureau) Regulations 2008 were published in July 2008 and 
launched  at  this  very  venue  in  September  2008.  The  Regulations  paved  the  way  for  the 
licensing and surveillance of Credit Reference Bureaus (CRB) by the Central Bank of Kenya. 
These Bureaus will collate credit information from institutions licensed under the Banking Act. 
I  am  pleased  to  report  that  since  the  Regulations  became  operational  in  February  2009, 
there has been considerable interest by potential investors. I do believe that interest is for 
those who cherish the importance of the development of information capital. 
The  Central  Bank  has  so  far  received  three  applications  for  CRB  licenses,  two  from  local 
investors  (Credit  Reference  Bureau  Africa  and  Metropol)  and  one  from  a  South  African 
based regional player – Compuscan. Accordingly the Central Bank has this week issued a 
letter of intent to the first applicant, Credit Reference Bureau Africa. This is an approval in 
principle to conduct credit reference bureau business. The Bureau will commence operations 
on  completion  of  an  independent  third  party  system  and  security  audit  and  an  onsite 
inspection  by  CBK.  The  letter  of  intent  was  granted  after  a  detailed  due  diligence  of  the 
application to ensure all statutory and prudential requirements were met. The Central Bank 
wishes  to  reassure  Kenyans  that  it  shall  rigorously  assess  all  applications  to  ensure  the 
integrity of the envisaged credit information sharing mechanism. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: The launch of this project today by the banking sector is therefore 
very timely. The overarching objective of the project is to co-ordinate the efforts of all players 
so as to build a sustainable and holistic information sharing mechanism. The Central Bank 
renders  its  full  support  to  this  project  and  we  expect  that  all  banks  will  also  commit  to 
implementing all the agreed milestones. 
Credit information sharing offers Kenya an opportunity to promote access to affordable credit 
to more Kenyans because information lowers the risk premium and search costs. There is 
indeed a clear and direct linkage between access to credit and economic development. Allow 
me to highlight four key benefits that the Central Bank sees accruing from this initiative. 
First, credit information sharing will facilitate the development of information capital. The risk 
premium  associated  with  information  asymmetry  and  search  costs  will  decline.  Second, 
information capital will change the current collateral technology. Credit by the banking sector 
in  Kenya  has  to  a  large  extent  been  underwritten  by  physical  collateral  such  as  land. 
Borrowers  without  access  to  such  collateral  have  been  constrained  in  accessing  credit. 
Credit  information  sharing  will  enable  borrowers  build  a  track  record  that  can  be  used  in 
accessing  credit.  This  will  be  especially  pertinent  to  those  borrowers  in  the  informal  and 
BIS Review 111/2009 
 1
Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) who have a track record and good performance to 
use it to access credit. The SME sector is very important to the industrial development of this 
country and the Vision 2030. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen:  The  third  benefit  is  to  enhance  information  symmetry  and  support 
financial development. The existing state of information asymmetry between borrowers and 
banks is a constraint to innovation. Two important outcomes in information asymmetry: moral 
hazard  problems  from  the  borrowers  and  adverse  selection  from  the  banks.  These  two 
problems  could  punish  the  economy  with  low  provision  of  credit.  We  have  also  seen  that 
there is adverse selection among banks as well. 
Fourth, in a segmented market like ours, some segments remain untapped because banks 
do not have adequate information to price suitable products. In part this has also contributed 
to the high cost of credit. Borrowers have had to bear a “risk premium” because of this lack of 
information.  It  is  therefore  the  Central  Bank’s  expectation  that  savings  arising  from  the 
increased credit information shall translate to lower cost of credit. In turn, more Kenyans will 
be able to access credit from banks. 
The current level of interest rates is a combination of costs (like information search costs), 
risk premium and of course banks’ profit margin. High interest rates also give rise to default 
risks.  The  risk  premium  and  search  costs  can  be  minimized  by  information  symmetry  and 
reduce  Non-Performing  Loans.  As  you  will  recall  the  Kenyan  banking  sector  was  saddled 
with a huge non performing loan portfolio in the 1980s and 1990s. Part of the burden was 
occasioned  by  “serial  defaulters”  and  inadequate  incentives  to  have  a  good  credit  history. 
The days of “serial defaulters” are definitely numbered with the advent of credit information 
sharing. More importantly, we expect that there will be incentives for good credit behaviour 
that will attract competitive pricing of credit facilities. The message to Kenyans is that now 
more  than  ever  before,  there  will  certainly  be  benefits  accruing  from  adhering  to  the 
contractual terms of loans. I am sure the other institutions in Kenya will deal with appropriate 
definition of property rights and contract enforcements to further reduce the risk premium. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: In a nutshell, credit information sharing will increase vibrancy in the 
market for the borrowers and lenders. Borrowers will be able to access enhanced facilities as 
they grow their credit histories and track record. Conversely credit providers will be able to 
develop new and competitive products that will tap into previously unserved and underserved 
market niches with the power of available information. This can only impact positively on the 
banking sector and the Kenyan economy as a whole. 
As  I  draw  to  a  close,  let  me  recognize  that  the  banking  sector  credit  information  sharing 
initiative will serve as a model for other credit providers. We must move with speed to have 
the mechanism up and running and begin to rope in other financial and non financial credit 
providers. This will allow the full benefits of credit information sharing to the whole economy. 
I  therefore  urge  all  banks  to  support  this  initiative  which  the  Central  Bank  is  unreservedly 
committed to. 
It  is  now  my  distinguished  duty  to  officially  launch  the  Banking  Credit  Information  Sharing 
Implementation Project. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 111/2009
