Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Towards the G8 – strategies for emerging from the 
crisis 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Università LUISS Guido Carli, Rome, 27 May 2009. 
 I would like to start by thanking the organisers of this conference for the invitation to reflect 
together on the topics related to the next G8 summit. There is no doubt that the economic 
and  financial  crisis,  the  most  serious  of  the  post-war  period,  will  take  centre  stage  at  the 
upcoming international meetings.  
Today’s conference is entitled “Strategies for emerging from the crisis”. It is right to speak of 
strategies, because intervention is required at a number of different levels. These concern 
financial regulation, the governance of institutions and companies, the ethical behaviour of 
economic agents and legislators, and economic policies. Looking at the composition of the 
panel for this conference, it seems to me that my comparative advantages chiefly relate to 
this last area, that of economic policies.  
There is no doubt that the economic policies of recent years have played a role in creating 
the conditions which have led us to this crisis. They were not the only factor, perhaps not 
even the main one, but they were important, because they tended to heighten, rather than to 
counter,  the  procyclical  behaviour  of  agents.  For  example,  in  countries  where  the  private 
sector  was  already  highly  indebted,  economic  policies  sometimes  promoted  further 
borrowing, in particular through low interest rates and fiscal incentives.  
If  we  wish  to  avoid  recreating  the  conditions  which  led  to  this  crisis,  we  must  carefully 
examine the motives behind the economic policies that were implemented during this period. 
This  exercise  can  be  conducted  at  two  levels.  The  first  implies  analysing  the  economic 
policies on the basis of the specific reference criteria of those policies. A policy may turn out 
to  be  inappropriate,  for  example,  because  it  is  based  on  incorrect  economic  forecasts  or 
because  it  is  implemented  through  ineffective  instruments.  Thus  far,  the  discussion  has 
mainly  taken  place  at  this  level,  and  the  remedies  suggested  have  mainly  been  aimed  at 
correcting these aspects. It is an important discussion, without a doubt, but there is a risk that 
such  discussion  is  insufficient  because  it  does  not  tackle  the  fundamental  causes  that  led 
economic policy-makers to take certain measures. For this reason, a second, more profound 
level of analysis is necessary.  
Let us proceed in order. Let us begin with the first level of analysis. This involves examining 
the  way  in  which  the  conduct  of  economic  policies  contributed  to  the  emergence  of  the 
imbalances  which  caused  the  crisis.  Various  policies  can  be  considered:  structural, 
regulatory,  fiscal  and  monetary  policies.  For  reasons  of  time,  I  would  like  to  concentrate 
briefly on monetary policy in order to provide an example of the type of analysis which will be 
conducted, and is being conducted, also in other areas.  
There is now a broad consensus that the policy of very low interest rates, especially in real 
terms, which was followed in particular in the United States in the period 2002-04, increased 
the  incentives  for  financial  institutions,  households  and  businesses  to  raise  their  levels  of 
indebtedness  and  to  take  high-risk  speculative  positions.1  In  a  recent  paper,  John  Taylor 
illustrated that if the Federal Reserve had implemented a less expansionary monetary policy, 
and  had  instead  followed  a  simple  rule  to  determine  interest  rates,  in  line  with  past 
                                                 
1   J.  Taylor  (2009),  Getting  Off  Track:  How  Government  Actions  and  Interventions  Caused,  Prolonged,  and 
Worsened the Financial Crisis, Hoover Institution Press. 
BIS Review 66/2009 
 1
behaviour,  less  liquidity  would  have  accumulated  at  the  global  level.  Clearly,  this  is  an  ex 
post evaluation. And it is too easy to lay the blame at the door of the US monetary authority. 
Looking back at the analyses conducted at the time, it can be seen that this policy met with 
the  approval  of  the  academic  world,  market  analysts  and  political  parties.  Following  the 
bursting of the technology bubble and 11 September, there was a general consensus that 
deflation represented the greatest risk and needed to be countered by strong and sustained 
monetary expansion.2
This line of reasoning was so widespread, propagated by the media (and not just the Anglo-
Saxon media), that anyone making different choices was subject to criticism. The European 
Central Bank (ECB), which had refused to cut interest rates to the same level as the Federal 
Reserve,  keeping  them  at  2%  (compared  with  the  Federal  Reserve’s  1%),  was  for  a  long 
time  the  subject  of  criticism.3  Not  just  academics,  commentators  and  market  analysts,  but 
also Heads of State and Government were moved to call upon the ECB to ease monetary 
policy. It was as if the only criterion when deciding on interest rates were not the underlying 
economic conditions, from a medium-term perspective, but the need to act at all costs, in a 
single direction, in imitation of what had been done on the other side of the Atlantic. Some 
even  called  on  the  ECB  to  intervene  in  the  exchange  rate  markets  to  establish  parity 
between the euro and the dollar. If this had been done, the speculative bubble would have 
been larger and the effects of it bursting even more devastating, particularly for Europe. 
When the ECB decided in December 2005 to raise interest rates, it again met with a flood of 
criticism. Many observers thought that the decision would hinder economic recovery.4 With 
hindsight,  the  policy  followed  by  the  ECB,  with  a  more  medium-term  orientation,  clearly 
turned out to be appropriate. 
The effects of monetary policy on financial market developments, in particular in fostering the 
subsequent financial bubble, have led to a reassessment regarding the conduct of monetary 
policy.  The  debate  is  under  way  and  concerns  various  aspects,  which  I  will  summarise 
briefly. 
The  first  concerns  the  tools  of  monetary  policy.  Recent  experience  has  shown  that  the 
approach  followed  by  most  central  banks,  based  on  inflation  targeting  (which  involves 
forecasting inflation on the basis of an economic model and changing interest rates so as to 
ensure  that  inflation  forecasts  are  in  line  with  the  target),  does  not  sufficiently  take  into 
account financial developments, in  particular with regard to asset prices, which may affect 
the stability of the markets and, in time, inflation. It is argued by some that monetary policy 
should act proactively to avoid the excessive tendencies of the financial markets, known as 
“leaning  against  the  wind”.5  In  other  words,  one  should  be  ready  to  hinder  the  creation  of 
speculative  bubbles,  among  other  things  by  raising  interest  rates,  before  inflationary 
pressures emerge. This is easier said than done. If it is difficult to forecast inflation, it is even 
                                                 
2   Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2002),  “Deflation:  Making  Sure  "It"  Doesn't  Happen  Here”,  remarks  before  the  National 
Economists  Club,  Washington,  D.C.,  21  November  2002;  Alan  Greenspan  (2004),  “Risk  and  uncertainty  in 
monetary policy”, remarks at the Meetings of the American Economic Association, San Diego, California, 3 
January 2004. 
3   See for example this comment which appeared in the July 2005 edition of The Economist: “ […] The pursuit of 
price stability is a means to an end (to achieve maximum sustainable growth), not an end in itself. While the 
ECB's prime task is price stability, it is also legally charged with supporting growth. Last year it could have cut 
interest rates to offset the impact of the rising euro; today it should stand ready to ease monetary policy to 
cushion the impact of structural reform and fiscal discipline.” 
4   See, for example, O. Blanchard e F. Giavazzi (2005), “Credibility does not require dogmatism - only clarity of 
purpose”, at www.voxru.org. 
5   S. Cecchetti, H. Genberg and S. Wadhwani (2002), “Asset Prices in a Flexible Inflation Targeting Framework,” 
NBER Working Paper No. 8970, June, and N. Roubini (2006), “Why Central Banks Should Burst Bubbles”, 
International Finance 9, No 1. 
2 
 BIS Review 66/2009
harder  to  interpret  financial  asset  prices  and  to  derive  from  them  indicators  regarding  the 
risks of instability. And it is even more difficult to adjust the course of interest rates on the 
basis of these indicators. For this reason, the proposition of leaning against the wind remains 
an abstract concept for now. It would be important to develop economic models which give a 
more  precise  idea  of  the  quantitative  dimension  of  these  phenomena,  in  particular  of  the 
correlation between monetary policy variables and financial asset prices.6
The  ECB  has  for  some  time  tried  to  use  information  relating  to  money  and  credit  markets 
when  forecasting  inflationary  pressures.  The  ECB  bases  its  strategy  on  two  pillars,  an 
economic  pillar  and  a  monetary  pillar,  which  collects  various  short  and  medium-term 
indicators, including aggregates and prices of financial assets. These indicators are not used 
mechanistically,  but  rather  to  gauge  whether  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy  is  broadly 
consistent with achieving the target. It was on the basis of these indicators, which showed 
strong dynamics, that the ECB decided to increase interest rates at the end of 2005 – that 
very controversial decision which subsequently proved to have been correct, as I mentioned 
earlier.7  
The  second  aspect  on  which  a  debate  is  developing  concerns  the  objective  of  monetary 
policy. In most countries monetary policy has price stability as its primary objective. There 
are also other, secondary objectives to be pursued insofar as they are consistent with price 
stability. The question which has been asked as a result of the crisis is whether the central 
bank also ought to have financial stability as an explicit objective, on the same level as price 
stability.  Indeed,  if  price  stability  is  a  necessary  condition  for  the  achievement  of  financial 
stability, it is not sufficient. On the other hand, without financial stability, there is a risk that 
price  stability  will  not  be  durable.  It  thus  seems  reasonable  to  assign  central  banks  the 
objective of financial stability too. 
If we plan to follow this route, the central banks need to have the instruments to achieve the 
objectives assigned to them. Interest rates are typically used to adjust monetary conditions to 
the objective of price stability. If the central bank is also to pursue financial stability, it needs 
to  have  another  instrument  at  its  disposal.  In  particular,  if  the  objective  is  to  counter  the 
procyclical behaviour and excessive accumulation of leverage on the  part of agents which 
are  at  the  root  of  speculative  bubbles,  the  central  bank  must  be  able  to  use  instruments 
which  affect  the  structure  of  bank  balance  sheets.  It  must  be  able  to  affect,  for  example, 
borrowing  capacity,  leverage,  liquidity  management  methods  or  the way  in  which  reserves 
are  recorded  in  favourable  phases  of  the  cycle  in  order  to  be  able  to  face  the  negative 
phases. These are the instruments of what is known as macro-prudential supervision, which 
are used in a preventive manner.  
In  this  regard,  the  de  Larosière  report  was  prepared  in  Europe  in  order  to  draw  some 
conclusions from the crisis.8 However, the report restricts the central banking system’s scope 
for  action  to  simply  issuing  recommendations,  while  direct  interventions  with  regard  to  the 
variables  at  the  root  of  financial  imbalances  are  not  foreseen.  The  responsibility  for 
implementing,  or  not  implementing,  the  macro-prudential  recommendations  remains  a 
national choice, to be made by the relevant supervisory authority. There is no guarantee that 
these measures will be taken in a uniform manner and in line with the need for stability within 
the  Single  Market.  Competition  between  national  financial  centres  in  reality  risks  deterring 
national authorities from adopting measures proposed by the European authority.  
                                                 
6   K.  Assenmacher-Wesche  and  S.  Gerlach  (2008),  “Can  monetary  policy  really  be  used  to  stabilise  asset 
prices?”, available at www.voxeu.org. 
7   J. C. Trichet, “Closing address at the Fourth ECB Central Banking Conference” on “The role of money and 
monetary policy in the twenty-first century”, Frankfurt, 10 November 2006 ( http://www.ecb.int/press/). 
8   Report of the High Level Group on financial supervision in the EU, Brussels, 25 February 2009. 
BIS Review 66/2009 
 3
It is not only in advanced economies that monetary policy has encountered problems. Alan 
Greenspan has claimed in particular that the increase in global liquidity of the past few years 
was not caused by the interest rates decided by the US central bank, but by the financing 
flows stemming from Asia, and China in particular.9 In other words, in a world characterised 
by  high  levels  of  financial  integration,  the  monetary  conditions  within  individual  countries, 
including  large  ones,  are  no  longer  determined  solely  by  the  respective  policies  of  those 
countries, but also by those implemented in emerging economies, particularly if the latter, as 
China has done, fix their exchange rates at levels which lead them to accumulate extensive 
foreign  exchange  reserves.  The  link  to  the  dollar  has  meant  China  adopting  the  same 
monetary policy as the United States, a policy which is undoubtedly too expansionary for the 
domestic conditions of an emerging economy. But it has also meant that large amounts of 
international  reserves  were  invested  back  into  the  US  financial  market,  in  particular  in 
government bonds, thus affecting that market. The same phenomenon occurred among oil-
exporting countries, which accumulated substantial dollar reserves over this period.  
Looking  ahead,  if  we  want  to  avoid  a  renewed  accumulation  of  global  imbalances, 
systemically  important  countries  such  as  China  must  equip  themselves  with  their  own 
monetary policy and must allow the exchange rate of their currency to fluctuate on the basis 
of relative competitiveness, avoiding the systematic accumulation of international reserves. 
This  requires  coordination  at  the  international  level.  Since  2003,  the  G7  has  exerted 
pressure, in particular on China, to reduce the accumulation of international reserves and to 
adopt  a  more  flexible  exchange  rate  system.  Since  mid-2005,  China  has  announced  the 
progressive  decoupling  of  the  yuan  from  the  dollar.  In  the  first  two  years,  the  yuan 
appreciated by 21.5% vis-à-vis the dollar. But the appreciation came to a halt in July 2008. 
The accumulation of international reserves continued, reaching around USD 2,000 billion in 
March  this  year.  Now  that  the  dollar  has  depreciated  slightly,  the  problem  of  pegging  the 
Chinese currency to that of the United States returns with force. 
To  conclude  the  first  part  of  my  remarks,  the  crisis  has  revealed  the  need  for  economic 
policies, and monetary policy in particular, to have a largely medium-term orientation, rather 
than  supporting  the  procyclical  behaviour  of  agents.  To  this  end,  central  banks  must  pay 
considerable attention to developments in the financial markets, both domestic and global, in 
order  to  identify  potential  imbalances  and  forestall  their  effect  on  monetary  and  financial 
stability.  
The analysis that I have just conducted with regard to monetary policy clearly needs to be 
extended to other policy areas, such as fiscal policy or financial regulation. It is essential to 
conduct an in-depth analysis of these subjects in order to fully understand which problems 
caused this crisis and how to rectify them in order to prevent them from happening again.  
An  interesting  aspect,  in  some  ways  worrying,  is  that  despite  the  consensus  that  has 
developed with regard to the analysis of the past, and the causes of the crisis, there does not 
seem to be a great deal of willingness to incorporate the lessons learned into present and 
future  behaviour.  To  paraphrase  St  Augustine,  give  economic  policy-makers  more  chastity 
and continence, but not yet. 
It is this apparent contradiction that leads to the view that this level of analysis is insufficient. I 
believe that we need to ask an additional series of “why” questions in order to understand 
thoroughly what induced economic policy-makers to make certain choices.  
A traditional response to this question is the short-sightedness of politics, which also applies 
to economic policy. According to this theory, political time – dictated by electoral terms – is 
too short to tackle far-reaching issues effectively. There is a considerable body of literature 
on  this  theory,  according  to  which  some  areas  of  economic  policy,  in  particular  monetary 
                                                 
9   A. Greenspan (2009), “The Fed Didn't Cause the Housing Bubble”, Wall Street Journal, 11 March 2009. 
4 
 BIS Review 66/2009
policy, should not be determined by discretion but should instead be subject to rules.10 This 
stream  of  analysis,  while  certainly  relevant,  does  not  seem  sufficient  to  explain  behaviour 
which is repeated over time, particularly in democratic systems where such behaviour should 
ultimately be penalised.  
An alternative theory is that the presumed short-sightedness of economic policy only reflects 
a  more  general  short-sightedness  in  advanced  societies,  in  particular  with  regard  to  the 
potential for economic development. A certain  level of indebtedness may be appropriate if 
income is expected to grow at a sustained pace, but excessive if such expectations turn out 
to  be  too  optimistic.  It  would  not  be  surprising  if,  in  a  society  in  which  citizens  have 
excessively optimistic expectations with regard to increases in their income, economic policy-
makers were to implement policies aimed at systematically stimulating aggregate demand. 
This  has  happened  on  various  occasions  in  the  past.  In  the  mid-1970s,  after  the  first  oil 
shock,  most  industrial  economies  did  not  realise  that  the  increase  in  energy  prices  had 
substantially  reduced  the  growth  potential  of  their  economies.  They  thus  implemented 
economic  policies  aimed  at  returning  economic  activity  to  levels  consistent  with  growth 
potential  prior  to  the  crisis.11  This  resulted  in  the  Great  Inflation  of  the  second  half  of  the 
1970s, the correction of which required drastic policies which led to the global recession of 
1981-82.  
The experience of the past decade should lead to reflection with regard to the motives which 
led  certain  societies,  such  as  the  United  States,  to  overestimate  their  income  growth 
potential. One must ask in particular what are the factors which in the past 20 years resulted 
in  the  progressive  misalignment  between  potential  economic  growth  and  the  target 
considered  to  be  sustainable,  but  which  clearly  was  not.  It  was  not  a  drastic  shock  as 
experienced in the 1970s, but a more complex phenomenon, which operated gradually. 
One theory, which was suggested a few years ago, is that the growth sustained by emerging 
economies  tends  to  suppress  the  potential  of  advanced  economies.  This  theory  was 
rejected,  perhaps  too  hastily,  because  it  is  not  in  line  with  the  neoclassical  theory  of 
international  trade,  based  on  comparative  advantages,  which  holds  that  when  a  country 
grows at an elevated rate, it benefits not only the country in question but also others. Higher 
disposable income makes it possible to increase imports from other countries, thus fostering 
production and growth in those countries too.  
The theory of mutual benefit is based on certain specific assumptions, which are not always 
reflected  in  reality.  It  is  worth  returning  to  this  theory  and  considering  in  particular  the 
exceptions. We will consider six such exceptions.  
The  first  occurs,  as  illustrated  a  few  years  ago  by  Paul  Samuelson,  when  emerging 
economies record an elevated rate of increase in productivity in high value added sectors, 
forcing advanced economies to re-specialise in low value added production, with a resulting 
loss in income for the latter.12
The  second  exception  concerns  the  adjustment  costs  which  have  to  be  absorbed  by 
advanced economies in order to face the new competition.13 The faster and more enduring 
the  transition  is,  the  greater  are  such  costs.  In  particular,  if  one  considers  the  point  from 
                                                 
10   L.  Bini  Smaghi  (2006),  "Democratic  Representation  and  Economic  Policy  Rules  in  an  Ageing  Society", 
Eumoniamaster – Institutional and Political Higher Education, 28 September 2006. 
11   A. Orphanides (2003), “The quest for prosperity without inflation”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 50, 3, pp. 
633-663. 
12   See, for example, P. Samuelson (2004), “Where Ricardo and Mill rebut and confirm arguments of mainstream 
economists supporting globalization”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 18, 3, pp. 135-146. 
13   See Chapter 5 of the World Economic Outlook of the International Monetary Fund, April 2007. 
BIS Review 66/2009 
 5
which  emerging  economies  start,  and  their  size,  in  terms  of  population,  the  adjustment 
resulting from their current process of growth could take a very long time and could be of 
considerable  magnitude.  Take  emerging  Asia  (excluding  Japan),  for  example,  which 
represents over 50% of the global population and 21% of GDP. 
The third exception to the conditions specified in the international trade theory relates to the 
high  savings  rate  of  some  emerging  economies,  in  particular  those  in Asia.  Such savings, 
which are in part precautionary, stem from the lack of a system of social shock absorbers 
and a developed financial system. Income growth in these countries does not translate into 
comparable increases in consumption, and thus in imports.  
The fourth exception concerns protectionist practices, explicit or implicit, which are applied in 
many of these countries and discourage imports. 
The  fifth  exception  involves  the  exchange  rate  policies  implemented  by  various  emerging 
economies,  which  favour  an  undervaluation  of  the  currency,  creating  a  competitive 
advantage in favour of their own products and net savings vis-à-vis the rest of the world. 
Finally,  the  strong  growth  of  emerging  economies  puts  pressure  on  the  world’s  scarce 
resources, increasing their prices and thus resulting in a loss of terms of trade for importing 
countries. The case of raw materials, the global demand for which increases at a higher rate 
than  supply,  is  well-known.  But  there  are  other,  less  obvious  examples,  such  as  that  of 
secondary  and  tertiary  education.  In  this  sector  too,  supply  has  grown  less  than  global 
demand, leading to greater competition and higher costs for attending the best universities in 
the world.  
The experience of recent years suggests that each of these exceptions to the assumptions 
on which the theory of international trade is based is plausible. This would perhaps explain 
why  the  past  decade  was  characterised,  at  least  until  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis,  by  a 
sustained  rate  of  growth  among  emerging  economies  but  a  decreasing  rate  for  advanced 
economies. It also explains the increase in income dispersion among the latter.  
If economic policies ignore such developments and continue to aim for unchanged income 
and consumption dynamics, they will create internal and external imbalances in the economy 
which will build up over time. Such imbalances may also exist for a prolonged period of time, 
owing to the financial system and the ability to issue debt securities in the national currency. 
But,  by  definition,  what  is  not  sustainable  will  sooner  or  later  generate  instability,  with 
negative repercussions for the whole economy. 
The  way  out  of  this  crisis  depends  on  the  ability,  in  advanced  economies,  to  align  the 
expectations  and  behaviour  of  agents  with  the  new  global  context.  This  does  not  mean 
passively  accepting  the  consequences,  but  avoiding  side-stepping  them  through  policies 
which put off the problem until later, in an attempt to win time. Which means, in other words, 
shifting the emphasis from macroeconomic to structural policies.  
These problems will be tackled not just by individual countries but also at the international 
level.  From  this  perspective,  too  many  have  been  quick  to  judge  obsolete  the  meetings 
attended  only  by  advanced  economies,  such  as  the  G7,  and  to  consider  that  only  those 
which  also  involve  emerging  economies,  such  as  the  G20,  have  the  legitimacy  to  discuss 
global problems. As we have seen, there are important questions on which the interests of 
advanced  economies  diverge  from  those  of  emerging  economies.  In  some  cases,  such 
divergences stem from specific characteristics or distortions in international relations created 
by  emerging  economies.  It  is  thus  essential  that  the  advanced  economies  find  common 
points of interest to be discussed subsequently in larger fora.  
This  crisis  began  and  developed  at  the  centre  of  the  advanced  economic  system,  and 
ultimately originates from an objective difficulty among more developed countries to accept 
the consequences of the process of international integration, which has accelerated in recent 
years. Such countries, even the larger ones, have become smaller individually, to a greater 
6 
 BIS Review 66/2009
extent affected by, and vulnerable to, the external environment. It is only by strengthening 
the cooperation between them that they will be able to maintain global leadership.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 66/2009 
 7
