Heng Swee Keat: The impact of the global financial crisis on Asia 
Keynote  speech  by  Mr  Heng  Swee  Keat,  Managing  Director  of  the  Monetary  Authority  of 
Singapore,  at  the  International  Institute  of  Finance  (IIF)  Asia  Regional  Economic  Forum, 
Singapore, 4 March 2009. 
 Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Good afternoon.  
I welcome the International Institute for Finance (IIF) for holding its Asia Regional Economic 
Forum in Singapore. It is good to see such a diverse group gathered here for this Forum.  
the  current 
financial  crisis 
is 
An unprecedented crisis 
The  most  commonly  used  adjective 
"unprecedented". Indeed, many aspects have been exceptional – 
• 
• 
to  describe 
the speed at which events unfolded and triggered a series of domino effects; 
the scale of the impact, which has become global; the range of financial institutions 
and investors affected; 
the  near-perfect  correlations  of  markets  and  asset  classes  that  had  been 
uncorrelated when conditions were benign; 
and the range of unconventional measures taken by financial authorities globally to 
try and arrest the unfolding crisis.  
  These  features  of  the  crisis  are  exceptional.  But  perhaps the  most  crucial  aspect  that  has 
had a profound effect on the dynamics of this crisis and its impact on emerging economies, is 
that unlike various past crises, this current crisis originated in the US. 
This  is  unlike  various  financial  crises  in  the  past  25  years  or  so  –  which  tended  to  have 
certain  recurring  themes,  and  which  tended  to  begin  in  emerging  economies  before  their 
knock-on  impact  was  felt  internationally.  The  analytical  tools  and  policy  prescriptions  for 
dealing  with  such  crises  became  more  tried  and  tested  over  time,  even  if  applied  in  too 
dogmatic a fashion at times. Global institutions, whether it was the IMF, developed nations, 
or  a  consortium  of  strong  international  banks,  had  the  wherewithal  to  bring  sufficient 
resources  to  bear  on  the  problem.  Crisis  resolution  was  never  easy  but  did  not  quite  look 
insurmountable. 
Not so this time. 
The  epicenter  of  this  crisis  is  the  US  –  it  is  the  world’s  largest  economy,  holder  of  the 
international  reserve  currency,  and  home  to  the  largest  and  most  sophisticated  financial 
system. So we are talking about the core of the global financial and economic system where 
severe problems arose and have since spread across borders. 
In  the  US,  the  “shadow”  banking  system  grew  rapidly  but  was  quite  opaque  in  the  way  it 
operated. Before long, problems built up and spread to engulf the “traditional” banking sector. 
Within a short time, commercial banking operations were severely impaired. Right now, we 
are  dealing  with  the  bursting  of  multiple,  overlapping  bubbles  –  the  housing  bubble,  the 
household credit bubble and the consumption bubble. Cutting across all three bubbles was 
leverage  –  households  overstretched  themselves;  the  financial  institutions  which  were 
extending  this  credit  to  households  were  themselves  taking  on  excessive  leverage.  The 
BIS Review 30/2009 
 1
combined effect now is a painful deleveraging process that drives down asset prices, shrinks 
balance sheets,  and  feeds  straight  into  the  real  economy  in  the  form of  credit  contraction. 
Adverse  feedback  loops  between  the  financial  system  and  real  economy  have  become 
entrenched. 
The  Eurozone,  which  accounts  for  the  second  largest  share  of  global  GDP,  has  deep 
financial linkages with the US. Through these linkages, financial stresses were transmitted 
across the Atlantic rapidly. Many banks in Europe, as well as other financial institutions such 
as insurance companies and asset managers had large exposures to US assets. Many were 
over-leveraged and dependent on benign conditions for liquidity to continue flowing. So they 
got sucked into this vortex. We have a similar story of credit evaporating and strains being 
felt in the real economy. 
Over in Japan, recovery from a decade of economic growth stagnation has been derailed by 
the collapse of external demand with serious knock-on effects on domestic activity. Japan’s 
capacity  to  support  the  growth  of  other  advanced  and  emerging  economies  is  now 
diminished. 
So  a  global  recession  is  now  upon  us.  The  three  economic  giants  –  the  US,  Europe  and 
Japan – together accounted for just over 50% of global GDP in 2007. All three cylinders are 
sputtering.  The  impact  has  already  been  felt  worldwide.  How  long  and  how  deep  this 
recession will be is still an unknown, though many economists are predicting a long L-shaped 
trajectory.  What  has  become  clear  is  that  US  households  can  no  longer  function  as  the 
engine for the entire world economy. Unfortunately, there is no clear alternative growth driver 
in sight yet. 
On  the  financial  front,  American  and  European  banks  that  have  been  at  the  core  of 
intermediating  global  capital  flows  are  severely  weakened.  Global  capital  flows,  not  least 
flows  into  emerging  markets,  are  likely  to  significantly  retract  in  2009  –  as  IIF  projections 
show. Foreign direct investment is set to ease substantially. Cross-border banking flows as 
well.  
On the surface, this is not unlike previous financial crises originating in emerging economies. 
But there is a critical difference. In those cases, external credit typically dries up due to some 
domestic  factor  triggering  a  loss  of  confidence  in  the  host  country.  Foreign  financial 
institutions  become  risk  averse,  and  withdraw.  This  time,  large  banks  in  the  developed 
countries have certainly also become risk averse. But there is also the important factor that 
their  own  balance  sheets  have  been  severely  impaired,  and  so,  risk  aversion  aside,  they 
have  little  capacity  to  lend.  In  other  words,  a  key  factor  for  capital  withdrawal  this  time  is 
banks  in  the  developed  source  countries  pulling  back  to  hunker  down  for  their  survival. 
Emerging economies, many with sound fundamentals, are suffering the collateral damage. 
This comes after years of rapid growth fuelled by yield-hungry foreign capital. 
For these reasons, the transmission of the shocks in the US and Europe to the rest of the 
world  has  been  swift  and  sharp.  Indeed  there  have  been  many  comparisons  to  the  Great 
Depression. Yet, compared to the 1930s, an importance difference today is that news spread 
across the globe far more rapidly. Even rural households in China and India can now access 
this stream of bad news, real-time, through satellite televisions and the internet. The hyper-
efficiency of information flows has in itself introduced new uncertainties as sentiment shifts 
rapidly and abrupt loss of confidence becomes self-reinforcing. 
Crisis response: decisive action needed 
How  do  we  deal  with  this  crisis?  Despite  its  scale  and  unprecedented  nature,  it  may  be 
instructive to study the pattern of responses in previous crises. In past crises, the responses 
typically go through several overlapping phases. Initially, there is a lack of appreciation of the 
scale  and  severity  of  the  problem.  This  then  gives  way  to  fear  and  panic  as  the  problem 
becomes  stark.  Next,  anger  sets  in,  and  a  hunt  for  culprits  begins.  As  the  financial  and 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2009
economic stresses take root, pessimism sets in. If remedial actions are seen to be tentative 
and lacking in conviction, recovery is delayed and interrupted by bouts of renewed panic. It 
may take some time before the hard realities are accepted, and a level-headed search for 
viable solutions sets the path for recovery. 
Elements of these have been played out in the current crisis. Initially, the "subprime" issue 
was  regarded  as  a  manageable  problem,  confined  to  a  small  segment  of  the  US  housing 
market. Then it triggered seizure in the wider credit markets. After months of turbulence, the 
hope was that markets would unclog and financial institutions would be quite unscathed by 
the credit losses and liquidity strains. When it became clear that this script was wrong, the 
new  hope  was  that  the  real  economy  would  be  largely  unaffected,  and  de-coupling  would 
spare  Asia.  All  these  hopes  have  been  dashed.  Confidence  is  at  an  all-time  low, 
uncertainties at an all-time high.  
The key lesson here is that we cannot base our actions on sequential responses that under-
estimate  the  severity  of  the  situation.  Policy  actions  have  to  be  decisive  and  coordinated. 
Policymakers,  financial  institutions,  businesses  and  the  general  public,  especially  in  those 
economies most severely affected, will have to make significant adjustments. Those better 
able and faster to adopt the right mindset to confront the new environment will fare better for 
it, and reduce the prospect of a long period of malaise. 
Even  with  the  right  mindset,  there  is  no  simple  solution  to  resolve  these  enormous 
challenges. But let me suggest three dimensions that need to be tackled: first, take decisive 
action  to  arrest  the  negative  spiral;  second,  in  doing  these,  keep  an  eye  on  medium  term 
sustainability;  third,  consider  the  global  dimension  and  impact  on  others.  Let  me  touch  on 
each of these in turn. 
Overcoming present difficulties 
First, political consensus has to emerge quickly, so that authorities can take decisive action 
to arrest the negative spiral between the financial system and the real economy. Injections of 
capital into distressed financial institutions and the removal of toxic assets are crucial. Capital 
injections  thus  far  have  only  matched  write-downs  recorded  to  date,  leaving  insufficient 
buffers for estimated future write-downs. The clean-up must be thorough. Only then can the 
financial system resume its critical role in credit intermediation. In the US, given the role of 
the shadow banking system and credit markets which continue to be impaired, alternatives 
need to be found to replace these. Bank balance sheets need not only to be maintained, but 
expanded to replace capital withdrawn from credit markets. Viable businesses need to get 
enough support to ride out extraordinary pressures. We need to rebuild confidence which is a 
key foundation for sustained recovery. 
Second,  while  it  is  important  for  us  to  focus  on  the  "here and  now",  we  also  need  to  look 
ahead. While "in the long run, we're all dead", quick fixes can return to haunt us faster than 
we  expect.  After  the  urgent  issues  are  resolved,  financial  markets  will  quickly  turn  their 
attention to other weaknesses. Many of the measures today can lay the seeds for structural 
difficulties, if these are not withdrawn as soon as practicable. 
For  instance,  the  unprecedented  easing  of  monetary  conditions,  including  quantitative 
easing, has been necessary to ensure sufficient liquidity in the system as weak bank balance 
sheets  suppress  intermediation.  But  excess  liquidity  remaining  in  the  system  longer  than 
necessary is in turn a recipe for inflation into the medium term. The mechanisms for mopping 
up the excess liquidity need to be put in place early. Meanwhile, the scale of fiscal stimulus, 
and funding needed to support this, has raised the spectre of destabilised sovereign bond 
markets  and  the  crowding  out  of  private  borrowings.  This  does  not  bode  well  for  private 
capital formation, and could create stresses downstream for corporations which do not have 
the  advantage  of  sovereign  backing.  Further,  if  deficits  are  seen  to  be  structural,  market 
reaction could negate much of the effect of fiscal stimulus. There is also the issue of how to 
BIS Review 30/2009 
 3
restore  private-sector  driven  intermediation  of  credit  in  due  course.  While  government 
support for businesses’ access to credit is necessary now, it cannot continue indefinitely. 
In  other  words,  even  as  we  take  unconventional  measures,  we  need  to  have  an  eye  on 
medium-term sustainability, and make clear our "exit" strategy and timing. Just as we must 
not be behind the curve in taking action to stabilise markets, we need to anticipate what lies 
ahead and plan accordingly. This is crucial because that later-stage "exit" action represents 
not just the end of this phase but a crucial transition into another set of conditions with totally 
different policy demands. 
Third, we need to consider the global dimension of our responses, and the impact on other 
economies.  For  instance,  the  bank  deposit  guarantee  scheme  that  first  started  in  Ireland 
triggered  a  domino  effect  and  made  its  way  to  this  region.  To  minimise  uncertainty,  some 
degree of coordination to remove these guarantee would be necessary. As governments in 
the developed economies inject huge sums of public funds to shore up banks, the instinct is 
to place demands on these banks to lend domestically. This may seem sensible individually. 
But collectively, this 'abandon-thy-neighbour' policy can trigger a big reduction of credit, and 
undermine economic recovery that eventually hurts the developed economies. Protectionist 
measures  hurt  emerging  economies  most,  and  they  can  trigger  a  backlash  that  sets  the 
world back. We must resist such regression. 
Asia’s responses 
Let me now turn to the impact of the crisis on Asia, and responses to that.  
Asian economies will slow considerably. Those that are more highly dependent on external 
demand will contract more sharply than the rest. But unlike during the Asian Financial Crisis, 
the fundamentals in Asian financial systems and economies are generally sound. Banks are 
well-capitalised and have limited direct exposures to toxic assets. Corporate and household 
balance sheets are stronger. Current account positions are healthier and external liabilities 
manageable.  The  policy  responses  in  several  countries  have  been  decisive  and  robust. 
Central  banks  in  the  region  have  appropriately  eased  monetary  policy,  and  governments 
have put in place a range of fiscal and other measures to support lending and to cushion the 
impact of the global crisis. 
Nevertheless,  considerable  risks  remain  for  Asian  economies.  The  extent  of  demand 
contraction for Asia depends on how long and deep the recession is in the US and Europe. 
That remains an unknown. Credit flows to corporations have been affected by the heightened 
risk  aversion  of  domestic  banks  as  well  as  by  some  pull-back  by  global  banks.  A  few 
economies  have  experienced  considerable  capital  outflows.  The  economic  contraction  will 
certainly affect the loan books of banks. Should the downturn be deep and prolonged, the 
resilience  of  banks  with  weaker  risk  management  systems  will  be  severely  tested.  It  is 
necessary to remain vigilant. 
However, Asia’s economic performance and policy responses so far provide assurance that 
the  medium-term  growth  story  remains  compelling.  FDI  and  domestic  investments  have 
increased  over  the  years,  and  intra-region  production  networks  have  deepened.  Both  the 
hard  and  soft  infrastructures  have  improved  significantly  in  the  last  decade.  Domestic 
consumption’s contribution to growth has grown steadily, and will play a bigger role in future. 
The  drive  towards  deeper  regional  integration  remains  unabated.  Just  days  ago,  ASEAN 
signed the Agreement Establishing the ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area, and 
re-affirmed its commitment to implement the ASEAN Economic Community.  
One  important  question  for  many  participants  here  today  is  the  policy  direction  of  Asian 
governments towards the financial sector. I believe that authorities in the region will continue 
with the twin track of developing the banking system and capital markets. The importance of 
a well-functioning financial system in supporting economic growth and wealth creation is well 
recognised in this region. The need for funding to promote investment, develop infrastructure 
4 
 BIS Review 30/2009
and facilitate urbanisation will return. Once growth resumes, the wealth that is generated has 
to be properly deployed. In this regard, global financial institutions, whose commitment and 
capacity are being tested by this crisis, need to take a medium-term view of their businesses 
in this region. 
Singapore’s response and commitment 
Let  me  now  briefly  say  a  few  words  on  Singapore’s  responses.  Like  everywhere  else, 
Singapore  has  experienced  tightening  credit  conditions.  We  have  taken  action  to  address 
both the inter-bank money markets, as well as the flow of credit from banks to corporations. 
In the inter-bank money markets, MAS remains focused on ensuring that both the Singapore 
Dollar  and  the  US  Dollar  markets  continue  to  function  smoothly.  For  the  Singapore  Dollar 
market,  we  have  and  will  continue  to  ensure  sufficient  liquidity,  through  our  monetary 
operations and standing facility. For the US  Dollar market, we established a US$30 billion 
swap line with the US Federal Reserve. This line is alongside other swap lines that the Fed 
has with 13 other central banks, including several in Europe and Asia.  
As a major funding centre, we took precautionary measures to ensure that global financial 
institutions  operating  here  continue  to  have  access  to  US  dollar  liquidity.  The  Federal 
Reserve  on  its  part  recognised  the  importance  of  providing  US  dollar  liquidity  to  financial 
institutions  through  central  banks  in  sound,  well  managed  and  systemically  important 
financial  centres,  so  as  to  improve  global  US  dollar  liquidity  conditions  as  necessary.  We 
have not had to use the swap line, nor do we see any impending need. But the precautionary 
measure  has  served  us  well.  We  will  continue  to  be  vigilant  in  anticipating  issues,  and  in 
taking proactive measures to strengthen the resilience of our system. 
With  regards  to  the  flow  of  credit  from  banks  to  corporations,  we  believe  this  is  best 
facilitated  through  government  schemes  to  co-share  some  of  the  risks  with  banks.  In 
February,  the  Government  announced  the  Special  Risk-Sharing  Initiative  (SRI).  Under  this 
Initiative, the Government will absorb 75% of the risk for insurance covering working capital 
and  trade-financing  loan  facilities.  The  Government  will  also  absorb  80%  of  the  risk  for 
bridging  loans  which  go  towards  meeting  firms'  working-capital  needs.  We  also  have 
schemes for SMEs and micro-loans.  
Apart  from  ensuring  that  the  financial  system  continues  to  function  effectively,  the 
Government  has,  as  in  past  periods  of  downturns,  used  fiscal  measures  to  minimise  the 
impact of the crisis. This involves targeted help for families and companies, while continuing 
to build capabilities to prepare for the upturn. This time, a creative Jobs Credit Scheme has 
been added to help companies keep their workers. 
Conclusion 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  these  are  very  challenging  times.  The  global  economy  is  in 
recession, and the financial system remains fragile. We need tough, decisive and forward-
looking actions in the core economies that are deeply affected.  
Asian economies have also been severely affected, and policy adjustments are necessary. 
However,  the  medium-term  prospects  for  growth  remain  strong.  The  secular  trend  in  the 
growth of Asian enterprises and corporations, growing intra-regional trade, and the demands 
for  infrastructure  financing  will  generate  new  opportunities  for  corporate  and  institutional 
businesses.  Wealth  creation  and  the  rise  of  the  Asian  middle  class,  coupled  with  the  low 
penetration of financial services will drive the growth of personal financial services.  
I  am  confident  that  when  the  dust  settles,  global  financial  institutions  which  rebuild  their 
resilience and stay engaged in our region will increase the value of their Asian franchises. 
Asia  will  continue  to  provide  strong  growth  opportunities  and  geographical  diversification 
BIS Review 30/2009 
 5
benefits. Some Asian financial institutions will also develop strong operations, brand names 
and a regional footprint. They will play their role in driving Asia’s continued growth. 
In Singapore, while we are working to cushion the impact of the crisis, we are also building 
capabilities in the economy and the financial sector for the upturn. 
I wish you all a fruitful two days of deliberations and interaction. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 30/2009
