Thomas Jordan: Challenges for the SNB in extraordinary times 
Introductory remarks by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 20 June 2008. 
 Around the world, the effects of the financial crisis on the implementation of monetary policy 
and  the  composition  of  central  banks’  balance  sheets  are  becoming  more  and  more 
apparent. On the one hand, conventional monetary policy has all but exhausted its options, 
and unconventional measures are being increasingly used. On the other hand, some central 
banks are having to manage the illiquid assets which they took over in an effort to stabilise 
the  banking  system.  Both  of  these  situations  also  apply  to  the  Swiss  National  Bank. 
Therefore, after giving a brief assessment of the developments in the international financial 
markets, I will turn my attention to the unconventional monetary policy measures being taken 
by the SNB. I will then move on to discuss the SNB StabFund. To conclude, I will look at the 
risks facing the SNB that are associated with these activities.  
Situation in the international financial markets 
Although the first few weeks of the year saw stock markets around the globe experiencing 
their lowest levels in many years, the surprisingly positive results from the US banking sector 
in mid-March prompted a turnaround in market sentiment. Stock markets have since been 
recording  strong  price  gains.  Other  financial  market  segments  also  saw  a  significant 
recovery.  
As a result, the downward spiral, which was triggered by the collapse of Lehman Brothers 
last  September  and  which,  for  a  short  while,  even  threatened  to  bring  the  global  financial 
system  crashing  down,  has  come  to  halt.  After  having  climbed  to  unsustainable  highs  in 
recent years, the prices of many investments fell to extremely low levels during the turmoil 
this past winter. The rapid recovery in the financial markets since March must also be partly 
regarded  as  a  correction  of  previous  excesses.  Furthermore,  the  extremely  expansionary 
monetary  policy  being  pursued  worldwide  is  likely  to  have  also  contributed  to  calming  the 
situation.  
However, the recovery in the financial markets should not conceal the fact that uncertainty is 
still high. How sustainable the shift in market sentiment really is remains to be seen. The risk 
of suffering a setback remains correspondingly high.  
The SNB’s unconventional monetary policy measures 
At  our  quarterly  assessment  in  March,  we  were  confronted  by  the  need  to  once  again 
significantly  expand  our  monetary  policy.  Since  the  repo  rates  were  already  practically  at 
zero, we had to resort to unconventional monetary policy measures. We decided to conclude 
longer-term  repo  transactions  on  the  one  hand,  and  to  purchase  foreign  currencies  and 
Swiss  franc  bonds  on  the  other.  By  simultaneously  intervening  in  the  money,  foreign 
exchange and capital markets when necessary, a strong and broad-based monetary policy 
impact can be generated, without leading to any major distortions in the markets concerned. 
Allow me here to add a few remarks on our foreign currency and bond purchases.  
Purchase of foreign currency 
The  aim  of  our  buying  foreign  currency  is  to  prevent  an  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc 
against  the  euro.  This  is  the  key  component  of  our  unconventional  monetary  policy.  It  is 
important to emphasise that we do not engage in foreign exchange interventions in order to 
BIS Review 77/2009 
 1
bring about a depreciation of the Swiss franc, but to prevent any further appreciation of the 
franc in its role as a safe haven currency. Therefore, the reproach we occasionally hear that 
the  SNB’s  policy  is  encouraging  an  international  depreciation  race  is  unjustified.  A  look  at 
exchange rate movements shows a clear appreciation of the Swiss franc during the course of 
the financial market crisis (cf. chart 1). So there can be no question of the SNB conducting a 
beggar-thy-neighbour policy. 
We give ourselves a great deal of latitude with regard to our foreign exchange interventions. 
There is no fixed threshold beyond which we become active; we simply decide in accordance 
with  the  situation  at  hand.  And  markets  should  not  become  used  to  a  certain  level  of 
intervention. We feel that this approach promises the highest possible impact, which in turn 
will allow us to phase out the strategy more easily when the time comes. Furthermore, we do 
not comment on the volume of our foreign currency purchases.  
The purchases of foreign currency have fulfilled their purpose – and with these I am referring 
to  our  first  unilateral  interventions  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  since  1992.  The 
appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  against  the  euro,  which  is  particularly  dangerous  for  the 
Swiss  real  economy  in  this  crisis,  has  been  halted,  and  the  volatility  of  the  EUR/CHF 
exchange rate has eased considerably (cf. chart 2). 
If  necessary,  we  will  continue  to  intervene  in  the  foreign  exchange  market  to  prevent  an 
appreciation of the Swiss franc against the euro. The SNB occupies a strong position in this 
regard. With interest rates at the zero bound and our policy of quantitative easing, we have 
an advantage over market participants who are expecting an appreciation of the Swiss franc. 
For  our  interventions,  we  neither  have  to  take  a  specific  rate  of  interest  into  account  nor 
neutralise the expansion of money supply. 
Purchase of Swiss franc bonds 
With the purchase of Swiss franc bonds issued by private domestic borrowers, we want to 
lower the risk premia in the capital market and, in so doing, make it easier for private issuers 
to raise capital. Depending on the situation, we try to achieve the greatest possible impact on 
risk premia and capital market liquidity while deploying the least amount of capital. We do not 
want  to  give  individual  companies  preferential  treatment,  instead  we  wish  to  ease  the 
refinancing of companies in Switzerland overall. 
By  also  purchasing  in  the  primary  market,  we  are  directly  promoting  the  raising  of  new 
capital.  Initially,  we  restricted  our  purchases  to  mortgage  bonds  (Pfandbriefe).  Since  the 
beginning  of  April,  however,  we  have  also  been  buying  corporate  bonds.  In  both  of  these 
segments, we hope to achieve the greatest impact on the market as a whole. In principle, we 
buy only marketable bonds and pay market prices. Apart from the mortgage bonds, we did 
not  buy  any  bonds  issued  by  financial  institutes.  As  of  mid-June,  our  total  purchases 
amounted  to  around  CHF  2.5  billion  in  mortgage  bonds  and  roughly  CHF  300  million  in 
corporate bonds. For the time being, we plan to continue purchasing selectively. As regards 
volume, we have set no restrictions. 
The bond purchases also seem to have fulfilled their purpose. Risk premia have come down 
significantly (cf. chart 3). That said, we were able to benefit from the favourable mood in the 
financial markets. The fact that, in the past few weeks, several issuers found their way back 
to the issues market for the first time in a long time is further proof of the effectiveness of our 
strategy. 
SNB StabFund 
Developments in the market since the UBS package of measures was announced show that 
the  transfer  of  illiquid  assets  from  UBS  to  the  SNB  StabFund  was  both  appropriate  and 
absolutely  necessary.  Had  these  assets  remained  on  UBS’s  books  and  been  valued  at 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2009
market  price,  the  bank’s  existence  would  have  been  seriously  threatened  these  last  few 
months. 
The transfer of assets was concluded at the beginning of April. Ultimately, the total volume of 
assets transferred amounted to USD 38.7 billion, where the purchase price was roughly USD 
1  billion  below  the  book  value  of  the  assets  at  UBS  at  the  end  of  September  2008.  In 
addition,  a  substantial  portion  of  the  amount  transferred  includes  liabilities  in  the  form  of 
derivatives which currently do not need to be financed by the SNB. The initial financing of the 
StabFund was therefore considerably lower than the purchase price. It comprised the SNB’s 
loan to the StabFund totalling USD 26.6 billion and UBS’s equity contribution in the value of 
USD 3.9 billion.  
The fund’s portfolio contains several thousand positions. Table 1 gives an overview of the 
portfolio and the different investment segments. The portfolio management concept is based 
on a long-term risk/return assessment. For assets where the cash flow is expected to exceed 
the  current  market  price,  we  are  mainly  pursuing  a  hold-to-maturity  strategy.  For  assets 
where this is not the case, we will sell if the opportunity arises. The objective of our portfolio 
management is to repay the SNB’s loan in full if at all possible. 
Market developments to date have impacted strongly on the StabFund’s assets. As it stands, 
most of the assets do not have to be entered in the balance sheet at market value. Rather, 
they  only  have  to  be  written  down  if  the  balance  sheet  value  is  no  longer  considered 
sustainable  based  on  the  results  of  an  impairment  test.  However,  despite  this  method  of 
stating assets in the balance sheet at amortised cost, the StabFund had already used up its 
equity capital by the end of March. Up until that point, it had been necessary to make value 
adjustments  amounting  to  roughly  USD  5  billion.  Nonetheless,  it  still  looks  as  though  the 
StabFund  will  ultimately  be  able  to  pay  back  the  loan.  This  is  because,  on  the  one  hand, 
markets can recover; the positive turn of events in April and May corroborates this. On the 
other hand, the assets have been generating relatively robust cash flows until now.  
Owing to interest payments and loan repayments, the SNB loan has already been reduced 
considerably. By mid-May, it came to only USD 23.7 billion. In addition, the original size of 
the StabFund has declined by around USD 6.7 billion as a result of sales, maturities and the 
closing  out  of  derivatives  positions.  In  mid-May,  the  size  of  the  StabFund,  as  valued  at 
amortised cost, was just roughly USD 32 billion, of which around USD 4 billion comprised 
contingent  liabilities  from  derivatives.  The  performance  of  the  stabilisation  fund’s  assets  is 
due to be reassessed at the end of the second quarter.  
Approximately  80%  of  the  SNB’s  loan  to  the  StabFund  is  denominated  in  US  dollars. 
Originally,  the  SNB  fully  refinanced  the  dollar  loan  via  the  existing  swap  facility  with  the 
Federal Reserve. Now, less than 20% is refinanced thus, accounting at this stage for only 
about  USD  3  billion.  By  contrast,  the  outstanding  volume  in  SNB  USD  Bills  –  launched  in 
February 2009 to refinance the SNB loan to the StabFund – is already at USD 15 billion. In 
addition  to  these  short-term  financing  operations,  the  SNB  concluded  long-term  deposit 
transactions  amounting  to  USD  4  billion.  We  plan  to  further  reduce  the  use  of  the  swap 
facility with the Federal Reserve.  
Risks 
The risks facing the SNB as a result of its commitment in the StabFund are substantial, yet 
owing to the bank’s strong balance sheet, these risks can be absorbed. I would particularly 
like to emphasise that the SNB’s commitment is actually considerably lower than the USD 60 
billion which still gets quoted by the public quite often. The SNB does not consider its loan to 
the  stabilisation  fund  as  a  hindrance  –  either  to  its  risk  capability  or  its  monetary  policy 
latitude. The unconventional measures also pose additional risks to the SNB’s balance sheet 
in the form of interest rate, currency and credit risks. However, our analyses show that, in 
terms of the consolidated balance sheet, these risks are relatively low.  
BIS Review 77/2009 
 3
The SNB is well aware of the fact that the unconventional monetary policy measures pose 
not only balance sheet risks, but also a whole series of other risks, including the difficulties 
connected with correctly assessing the monetary policy impact and with finding the best way 
to phase out the unconventional measures. As with the StabFund, we are convinced that – 
here too – we must take these risks in order to be able to avert other, even greater risks. 
Extraordinary  times  call  for  extraordinary  measures.  The  financial  market  crisis  has 
confirmed  our  belief  that  the  SNB  must  have  a  strong  capital  base  and  a  broad  range  of 
monetary policy instrument to ensure its capacity to act at all times.  
 
Chart 1. Effective exchange rate for Swiss franc
Export-weighted against 24 trading partners, nominal, 1.2007=100
115
112.5
110
107.5
105
102.5
100
97.5
95
2007
2008
2009
Source: SNB Markets Analysis Platform
Chart 2. EUR/CHF and exchange rate volatility
Implied volatility EUR/CHF 3M
EUR/CHF (rhs)
 15
12.5
10
7.5
5
2.5
Jul
Aug
Sep
Oct
Nov
Dec Jan 09 Feb Mar
Apr May
Jun
Sources: SNB Markets Analysis Platform, Bloomberg
   1.65
1.6
1.55
1.5
1.45
1.4
BIS Review 77/2009
 4 
 Chart 3. Swap spreads
Swap spreads Pfandbriefe
Swap spreads financial
Swap spreads industrial
Swap spreads utility
bp
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
–50
Jul
Sep
Aug
Dec
Sources: SNB Markets Analysis Platform, Credit Suisse
 
Nov
Oct
  Jan 09 Feb
Mar
Apr
May
Jun
Table  1.  StabFund  investments  at  transfer 
prices (as at 30.9.2008) 
Total for US 
RMBS  
Residential loans 
CMBS 
Commercial real estate loans 
ABS consumer 
ABS other  
CDO 
Corporates 
Student loans (loans and ABS) 
Total for Europe 
RMBS  
Residential loans 
CMBS 
Commercial real estate loans 
ABS other  
CDO 
Total for Japan 
Commercial real estate loans 
Total investments  
25.5 
9.6 
0.6 
4.4 
2.4 
2.0 
1.8 
3.2 
0.5 
0.9 
12.9 
5.4 
0.6 
2.2 
0.5 
1.3 
2.9 
0.3 
0.3 
38.7 
 BIS Review 77/2009 
 5
