Ben S Bernanke: The economic outlook 
Testimony by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before  the  Joint  Economic  Committee,  US  Congress,  Washington  DC, 
5 May 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 Chair  Maloney,  Vice  Chairman  Schumer,  Ranking  Members  Brownback  and  Brady,  and 
other members of the Committee, I am pleased to be here today to offer my views on recent 
economic  developments,  the  outlook  for  the  economy,  and  current  conditions  in  financial 
markets.  
Recent economic developments 
The  U.S.  economy  has  contracted  sharply  since  last  autumn,  with  real  gross  domestic 
product (GDP) having dropped at an annual rate of more than 6 percent in the fourth quarter 
of 2008 and the first quarter of this year. Among the enormous costs of the downturn is the 
loss of some 5 million payroll jobs over the past 15 months. The most recent information on 
the  labor  market  –  the  number  of  new  and  continuing  claims  for  unemployment  insurance 
through  late  April  –  suggests  that  we  are  likely  to  see  further  sizable  job  losses  and 
increased unemployment in coming months. 
However, the recent data also suggest that the pace of contraction may be slowing, and they 
include some tentative signs that final demand, especially demand by households, may be 
stabilizing. Consumer spending, which dropped sharply in the second half of last year, grew 
in  the  first  quarter.  In  coming  months,  households'  spending  power  will  be  boosted  by  the 
fiscal  stimulus  program,  and  we  have  seen  some  improvement  in  consumer  sentiment. 
Nonetheless,  a  number  of  factors  are  likely  to  continue  to  weigh  on  consumer  spending, 
among  them  the  weak  labor  market  and  the  declines  in  equity  and  housing  wealth  that 
households  have  experienced  over  the  past  two  years.  In  addition,  credit  conditions  for 
consumers remain tight. 
The housing market, which has been in decline for three years, has also shown some signs 
of bottoming. Sales of existing homes have been fairly stable since late last year, and sales 
of new homes have firmed a bit recently, though both remain at depressed levels. Although 
some of the boost to sales in the market for existing homes is likely coming from foreclosure-
related  transactions,  the  increased  affordability  of  homes  appears  to  be  contributing  more 
broadly to the steadying in the demand for housing. In particular, the average interest rate on 
conforming 30-year fixed-rate mortgages has dropped almost 1-3/4 percentage points since 
August, to about 4.8 percent. With sales of new homes up a bit and starts of single-family 
homes little changed from January through March, builders are seeing the backlog of unsold 
new homes decline – a precondition for any recovery in homebuilding.  
In contrast to the somewhat better news in the household sector, the available indicators of 
business investment remain extremely weak. Spending for equipment and software fell at an 
annual  rate of  about  30  percent  in both  the  fourth  and  first  quarters,  and  the  level  of  new 
orders  remains  below  the  level  of  shipments,  suggesting  further  near-term  softness  in 
business equipment spending. Recent business surveys have been a bit more positive, but 
surveyed firms are still reporting net declines in new orders and restrained capital spending 
plans.  Our  recent  survey  of  bank  loan  officers  reported  further  weakening  of  demand  for 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 1
commercial and industrial loans.1 The survey also showed that the net fraction of banks that 
tightened their business lending policies stayed elevated, although it has come down in the 
past two surveys. 
Conditions in the commercial real estate sector are poor. Vacancy rates for existing office, 
industrial, and retail properties have been rising, prices of these properties have been falling, 
and,  consequently,  the  number  of  new  projects  in  the  pipeline  has  been  shrinking.  Credit 
conditions in the commercial real estate sector are still severely strained, with no commercial 
mortgage-backed  securities  (CMBS)  having  been  issued  in  almost  a  year.  To  try  to  help 
restart the CMBS  market, the Federal Reserve announced last Friday that recently issued 
CMBS will in June be eligible collateral for our Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility 
(TALF).2  
An important influence on the near-term economic outlook is the extent to which businesses 
have  been  able  to  shed  the  unwanted  inventories  that  they  accumulated  as  sales  turned 
down sharply last year. Some progress has been made; the Bureau of Economic Analysis 
estimates that an acceleration in inventory liquidation accounted for almost one-half of the 
reported decline in real GDP in the first quarter. As stocks move into better alignment with 
sales,  a  reduction  in  the  pace  of  inventory  liquidation  should  provide  some  support  to 
production later this year. 
The outlook for economic activity abroad is also an important consideration. The steep drop 
in U.S. exports that began last fall has been a significant drag on domestic production, and 
any  improvement  on  that  front  would  be  helpful.  A  few  indicators  suggest,  again  quite 
tentatively, that the decline in foreign economic activity may also be moderating. And, as has 
been  the  case  in  the  United  States,  investor  sentiment  and  the  functioning  of  financial 
markets abroad have improved somewhat. 
As  economic  activity  weakened  during  the  second  half  of  2008  and  prices  of  energy  and 
other  commodities  began  to  fall  rapidly,  inflationary  pressures  diminished  appreciably. 
Weakness in demand and reduced cost pressures have continued to keep inflation low so far 
this  year.  Although  energy  prices  have  recently  risen  some,  the  personal  consumption 
expenditure (PCE) price index for energy goods and services in March remained more than 
20 percent below its level a year earlier. Food price inflation has also continued to slow, as 
the moderation in crop and livestock prices has been passing through to the retail level. Core 
PCE inflation (prices excluding food and energy) dropped below an annual rate of 1 percent 
in  the  final  quarter  of  2008,  when  retailers  and  auto  dealers  marked  down  their  prices 
significantly. In the first quarter of this year, core consumer price inflation moved back up, but 
to a still-low annual rate of 1.5 percent. 
The economic outlook 
We continue to expect economic activity to bottom out, then to turn up later this year. Key 
elements  of  this  forecast  are  our  assessments  that  the  housing  market  is  beginning  to 
stabilize and that the sharp inventory liquidation that has been in progress will slow over the 
next few quarters. Final demand should also be supported by fiscal and monetary stimulus. 
An important caveat is that our forecast assumes continuing gradual repair of the financial 
system; a relapse in financial conditions would be a significant drag on economic activity and 
could cause the incipient recovery to stall. I will provide a brief update on financial markets in 
a moment. 
                                                 
1   Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2009),  The  April  2009  Senior  Loan  Officer  Opinion 
Survey on Bank Lending Practices (Washington: Board of Governors, May 4). 
2   Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2009),  "Federal  Reserve  Announces  Expansion  of 
Eligible Collateral under Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF)," press release, May 1. 
2 
 BIS Review 54/2009
Even after a recovery gets under way, the rate of growth of real economic activity is likely to 
remain below its longer-run potential for a while, implying that the current slack in resource 
utilization  will  increase  further.  We  expect  that  the  recovery  will  only  gradually  gain 
momentum and that economic slack will diminish slowly. In particular, businesses are likely 
to  be  cautious  about  hiring,  implying  that  the  unemployment  rate  could  remain  high  for  a 
time, even after economic growth resumes. 
In  this  environment,  we  anticipate  that  inflation  will  remain  low.  Indeed,  given  the  sizable 
margin  of  slack  in  resource  utilization  and  diminished  cost  pressures  from  oil  and  other 
commodities, inflation is likely to move down some over the next year relative to its pace in 
2008.  However,  inflation  expectations,  as  measured  by  various  household  and  business 
surveys,  appear  to  have  remained  relatively  stable,  which  should  limit  further  declines  in 
inflation. 
Conditions in financial markets 
As I noted, a sustained recovery in economic activity depends critically on restoring stability 
to the financial system. Conditions in a number of financial markets have improved in recent 
weeks, reflecting in part the somewhat more encouraging economic data. However, financial 
markets and financial institutions remain under considerable stress, and cumulative declines 
in asset prices, tight credit conditions, and high levels of risk aversion continue to weigh on 
the economy. 
Among  the  markets  that  have  recently  begun  to  function  a  bit  better  are  the  markets  for 
short-term  funding,  including  the  interbank  markets  and  the  commercial  paper  market.  In 
particular, concerns about credit risk in those markets appear to have receded somewhat, 
there  is  more  lending  at  longer  maturities,  and  interest  rates  have  declined.  The  modest 
improvement  in  funding  conditions  has  contributed  to  diminished  use  of  the  Federal 
Reserve's liquidity facilities for financial institutions and of our commercial paper facility. The 
volume of foreign central bank liquidity swaps has also declined as dollar funding conditions 
have eased. 
The  issuance  of  asset-backed  securities  (ABS)  backed  by  credit  card,  auto,  and  student 
loans  all  picked  up  in  March  and  April,  and  ABS  funding  rates  have  declined,  perhaps 
reflecting the availability of the Federal Reserve's TALF facility as a market backstop. Some 
of  the  recent  issuance  made  use  of  TALF  lending,  but  lower  rates  and  spreads  have 
facilitated issuance outside the TALF as well. 
Mortgage markets have responded to the Federal Reserve's purchases of agency debt and 
agency mortgage-backed securities, with mortgage rates having fallen sharply since last fall, 
as I noted earlier. The decline in mortgage rates has spurred a pickup in refinancing as well 
as providing some support for housing demand. However, the supply of mortgage credit is 
still  relatively  tight,  and  mortgage  activity  remains  heavily  dependent  on  the  support  of 
government programs or the government-sponsored enterprises.  
The combination of a broad rally in equity prices and a sizable reduction in risk spreads in 
corporate debt markets reflects a somewhat more optimistic view of the corporate sector on 
the  part  of  investors,  and  perhaps  some  decrease  in  risk  aversion.  Bond  issuance  by 
nonfinancial firms has been relatively strong recently. Still, spreads over Treasury rates paid 
by both investment-grade and speculative-grade corporate borrowers remain quite elevated. 
Investors seemed to adopt a more positive outlook on the condition of financial institutions 
after  several  large  banks  reported  profits  in  the  first  quarter,  but  readings  from  the  credit 
default swap market and other indicators show that substantial concerns about the banking 
industry remain. 
As you know, the federal bank regulatory agencies began conducting the Supervisory Capital 
Assessment Program in late February. The program is a forward-looking exercise intended 
to  help  supervisors  gauge  the  potential  losses,  revenues,  and  reserve  needs  for  the  19 
BIS Review 54/2009 
 3
largest bank holding companies in a scenario in which the economy declines more steeply 
than is generally anticipated. The simultaneous comprehensive assessment of the financial 
conditions  of  the  19  companies  over  a  relatively  short  period  of  time  required  an 
extraordinary coordinated effort among the agencies. 
The  purpose  of  the  exercise  is  to ensure  that  banks  will  have  a  sufficient  capital buffer  to 
remain  strongly  capitalized  and  able  to  lend  to  creditworthy  borrowers  even  if  economic 
conditions  are  worse  than  expected.  Following  the  announcement  of  the  results,  bank 
holding companies will be required to develop comprehensive capital plans for establishing 
the  required  buffers.  They  will  then  have  six  months  to  execute  those  plans,  with  the 
assurance that equity capital from the Treasury under the Capital Assistance Program will be 
available as needed. 
Federal Reserve transparency 
I will conclude with a few comments on Federal Reserve transparency. The Federal Reserve 
remains  committed  to  transparency  and  openness  and,  in  particular,  to  keeping  the 
Congress  and  the  public  informed  about  its  lending  programs  and  balance  sheet.  As  you 
may  know,  we  have  created  a  separate  section  of  our  website  devoted  to  providing  data, 
explanations,  and  analyses  bearing  on  these  topics  and  related  issues.3  Recent  postings 
include  the  annual  financial  statements  of  the  12  Federal  Reserve  Banks,  the  Board  of 
Governors,  and  the  limited  liability  companies  created  in  2008  in  response  to  risks  to  the 
financial  system,  as  well  as  the  most  recent  reports  to  the  Congress  on  our  emergency 
lending programs. 
Earlier this year I asked Vice Chairman Kohn to lead a review of our disclosure policies, with 
the  goal  of  increasing  the  range  of  information  that  we  make  available  to  the  public.  The 
group has been making substantial progress, and I am pleased to say that we will soon be 
adding to the website material that provides the information requested in the Dodd-Shelby 
amendment to the recent budget resolution. Specifically, we will be adding new tables that 
provide information on the number of borrowers under each program and more information 
on  the  details  of  the  credit  extended,  including  measures  of  the  concentrations  of  credit 
among borrowers. In addition, we will be providing monthly information on the collateral that 
is being taken under our various lending programs, including breakouts by types of collateral 
and  by  ratings  categories.  And  we  will  be  supplementing  information  provided  on  the 
valuation  of  collateral  for  the  Maiden  Lane  facilities  and  the  Commercial  Paper Funding 
Facility. Finally, we will be providing additional information on the extent of our contracting 
with private firms with respect to our lending programs as well as on the terms and nature of 
such contracts. Over time, we expect to continue to expand the range of information on our 
website as our review of disclosure practices proceeds. 
Thank you. I will be pleased to respond to your questions. 
                                                 
3   "Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet," is a section of the Board's website. 
4 
 BIS Review 54/2009
