William C Dudley: Oversight of the Federal Government's intervention at 
American International Group  
Testimony  of  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  before  the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 24 March 2009. 
 Good  morning,  Chairman  Frank,  Ranking  Member  Bachus,  and  other  members  of  the 
Committee.  Thank  you  for  giving  me  the  opportunity  to  appear  before  you  today.  As  you 
know,  on  January  27,  2009,  I  became  the  president  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New 
York. Before I assumed that position, I served as the head of the Markets Group at the New 
York Fed. I appreciate having this opportunity to discuss the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York's involvement with American International Group, Inc. (AIG). 
Role of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
At the outset, it is important to note that before the New York Fed became involved with AIG 
as  a  lender  on  September  16,  2008,  the  Federal  Reserve  lacked  any  kind  of  authority  to 
oversee  AIG.  The  lack  of  effective  consolidated  supervision  over  AIG  was  a  critical 
contributing factor to the debacle that occurred at the company. 
The Federal Reserve made its decision to lend based on a judgment that a failure of AIG 
would cause dramatically negative consequences for the financial system and the economy 
–  consequences  worse  than  what  occurred  in  the  aftermath  of  the  failure  of  Lehman 
Brothers. We stand by that judgment today. In the case of Lehman, some of the most severe 
repercussions related to the difficulties in coordinating cross-border insolvency regimes and 
in  coordinating  the  insolvency  regimes  among  different  types  of  institutions  within  the 
organization's corporate structure. In light of AIG's unparalleled global footprint – operating in 
more than 130 countries around the globe – and the multiplicity of different types of financial 
services entities within its structure – including insurance providers, foreign banks, consumer 
lending companies and OTC derivatives affiliates – the factors that proved unmanageable in 
the Lehman insolvency threatened to be much more severe in AIG's case. The fact that no 
effective emergency resolution procedures exist under U.S. law to reconcile these difficulties 
heightened the need for quick, effective action by the Federal Reserve, in consultation with 
and supported by the U.S. Treasury. 
From the outset, the New York Fed has been sharply focused on addressing two overarching 
goals with respect to AIG: (1) the stabilization of the company so that it no longer poses a 
disruptive threat to our financial system and economy and (2) obtaining full repayment of the 
government funds that have been extended to AIG. In light of the exceptional size and scope 
of  AIG's  operations,  with  over  110,000  employees  in  more  than  130  countries,  spanning 
hundreds of legal entities, it was clear from the beginning that the New York Fed – which had 
never been engaged in any regulatory oversight of the company – was not in a position to 
exert day-to-day management control over the company. Rather, the New York Fed's actions 
have  consistently  been  directed  at  securing  its  objectives  as  lender.  As  any  lender  in  our 
position  would  do,  the  New  York  Fed  has  put  into  place  a  loan  agreement  that  contains 
covenants  designed  to  help  ensure  ultimate  repayment  of  the  loan  –  but  these  creditor's 
rights do not create an ability to manage AIG. 
Responsibility for AIG's day-to-day affairs continues to rest with AIG's chief executive officer, 
Edward  Liddy,  under  the  oversight  of  AIG's  board  of  directors.  Mr.  Liddy,  who  has  only 
become  involved  with  AIG  in  a  public-spirited  attempt  to  resolve  its  troubled  affairs,  has 
BIS Review 35/2009 
 1
made strides in dealing with AIG's  opaque corporate structure, lack of centralized controls 
and complex risk exposures, but much remains to be done. 
In  light  of  the  inherent  conflicts  that  would  arise  from  either  the  U.S.  government  or  the 
Federal  Reserve  exerting  ownership  control  over  the  world's  largest  insurer,  the  Federal 
Reserve, with the support of the Treasury Department, directed in the loan agreement that 
an  approximately  77.9  percent  equity  interest  in  AIG  be  issued  to  an  independent  trust 
established for the sole benefit of the United States Treasury. The trust, which now holds that 
controlling equity interest, is overseen by three independent trustees who are of the highest 
integrity  and  who  have  considerable  experience  leading  major  companies.  These  trustees 
have a legally binding obligation to exercise all of their rights as majority owner of AIG in the 
best interests of the U.S. taxpayer, with the proceeds of any ultimate sale of shares going 
directly to the Treasury of the United States. 
Efforts to reduce risk at AIG Financial Products 
As has been widely noted, the activities at AIG's Financial Products unit (FP) were a principal 
cause of the losses that drove AIG to the brink of bankruptcy in September 2008. Risks of 
substantial  magnitude  –  including  derivatives  positions  with  a  current  total  notional  value 
exceeding  one  trillion  dollars  –  still  remain  in  force  at  FP,  meaning  that  not  millions  but 
billions of taxpayer dollars are potentially at stake as the orderly wind-down of FP continues 
to progress. The winding down of these risk positions at FP is a delicate and complex matter 
with  systemic  implications  for  the  U.S.  and  global  economy.  Our  oversight  of  this  risk-
reduction process remains a top priority. 
With  respect  to  the  retention  awards  owed  to  FP  employees  under  their  pre-existing 
contracts, we believe that Mr. Liddy weighed a number of factors in deciding not to attempt to 
prevent payment, including: 
• 
the likely negative effects of disruption in staffing at FP in managing its multi-billion 
dollar exposures;  
legal advice that the contracts were valid – meaning that breaking them would likely 
increase the amount of  company funds ultimately paid to the covered employees; 
and  
the  negative  consequences  to  AIG's  business  that  could  result  from  the  public 
abrogation of contracts.  
  In conducting our oversight as lender, the New York Fed did not see reason to disagree with 
Mr.  Liddy's  judgment  from  a  risk  perspective.  Equally  important,  we  did  not  think  it  was 
legally permissible – or within the proper role of the New York Fed – to attempt to substitute 
our judgment for that of Mr. Liddy in this circumstance, even though we found the payment of 
the retention awards extremely distasteful. 
The broad public disapproval of sizeable retention payments being directed toward the unit 
most  responsible  for  last  fall's  downfall  of  AIG  is  understandable.  Americans  naturally  feel 
outraged  when  confronted  with  news  of  such  payments  to  an  entity  that  worsened  the 
financial crisis and that is dependent on taxpayer funds to stay out of bankruptcy court where 
these contracts would not have been fully honored. Moreover, the payments occurred during 
a time when so many Americans are struggling to find jobs, seeing their wages reduced or 
watching  their  retirement  savings  plummet  as  a  result  of  a  crisis  they  had  no  hand  in 
creating.  This  feeling  of  outrage  underscores  the  urgent  need  to  reform  the  system  of 
compensation at our financial institutions to more closely align the incentives of executives, 
owners and taxpayers. Congress saw fit to impose appropriate compensation restrictions on 
recipients  of  Troubled  Asset  Relief  Program  (TARP)  funding,  and  we  think  it  is  crucial  for 
Congress and the U.S. Department of the Treasury to continue to craft effective and sensible 
policies in this area. 
2 
 BIS Review 35/2009
the  Treasury 
Although  oversight  of  TARP-related  compensation  matters  rests  with 
Department,  the  New  York  Fed  has  played  a  role  since  September  in  reviewing  the 
adequacy  of  AIG's  corporate  governance  procedures.  This  review  has  helped  to  identify 
longstanding  deficiencies  with 
to  compensation  committee  governance, 
compensation benchmarking and lack of centralized control over compensation policy. We 
will continue to work with our colleagues at Treasury and the independent trustees to ensure 
that AIG's management properly addresses these deficiencies. 
respect 
Ongoing involvement with AIG 
The  total  package  of  assistance  that  the  Federal  Reserve  and  Treasury  Department  have 
committed  to  AIG  has  established  a  more  durable  capital  structure  for  the  company  that 
gives  AIG  greater  time  and  flexibility  to  execute  its  asset  disposition  plan  to  repay 
government funds. Notably, we have recently agreed in principle to accept preferred interests 
in  two  of  AIG's  large  foreign  life  insurance  subsidiaries,  AIA  and  ALICO,  in  order  to  make 
repayment  of  our  loan  less  dependent  on  forced  divestitures  into  a  depressed  acquisition 
market. Although it will take time, we still expect that the proceeds from asset sales should 
enable AIG to repay the New York Fed in full. 
In all that we have done, we have been motivated by two goals: to preserve the stability of 
the U.S. economy and to protect the U.S. taxpayer. The threat of a major systemic risk event 
has been averted by honoring all of AIG's contractual obligations around the globe – from 
insurance  policy  obligations  owed  to  individuals,  municipalities  and  businesses  across  the 
U.S., to the posting of collateral under credit default swap arrangements with the full range of 
counterparties  recently  disclosed.  As  unattractive  as  certain  aspects  of  this  treatment  may 
be,  these  negative  aspects  have  followed  unavoidably  from  the  decision  to  avert  a 
systemically destructive bankruptcy. I look forward to your questions today and, in the longer 
term, to working with you and your staffs on the broader public policy questions – such as 
formulation  of  a  resolution  regime  for  institutions  like  AIG  and  consideration  of  the 
appropriate supervisory structure for OTC derivatives – that are posed by the events at AIG. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 35/2009 
 3
