Jean-Pierre Landau: Complexity and the financial crisis 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Landau, Deputy Governor of the Bank of France, at 
the at the Conference on “The macroeconomy and financial systems in normal times and in 
times  of  stress”,  jointly  organized  by  the  Bank  of  France  and  the  Deutsche  Bundesbank, 
Gouvieux-Chantilly, 8 June 2009. 
 I  am  very  pleased  to  welcome  you  to  this  second  Banque  de  France-Bundesbank 
Conference on “The Macroeconomy and financial systems in normal times and in times of 
stress”. 
Actually, the distinction between normal and stress times may be somehow misleading. It is 
of course fascinating and extremely useful to study the behavior of financial systems under 
stress. But, from a policy perspective it is essential to recognize that the seeds of instability 
are  sown  in  normal  times.  The  crisis  has  shown  that  public  authorities  have  very  limited 
options  in  stress  times  but  to  keep  the  system  afloat  at  all  costs.  This  involves  rescuing 
financial institutions whatever previous commitments have been previously made not to do 
so.  Indeed,  the  doctrine  of  moral  hazard  may  be  one  of  the  most  prominent  and  lasting 
casualties of the crisis. So, collective efforts should mainly concentrate on detecting those 
features  of  financial  systems  which,  even  in  (apparently)  normal  times  create  or  amplify 
stress. This is the essence of the macro prudential approach to financial supervision. One of 
its  main  challenges  is  to  grasp  and  deal  with  the  full  complexity  of  contemporary  financial 
markets and institutions. 
Financial systems are complex systems. To day I would like to reflect on that complexity and 
its  consequences,  drawing  extensively  on  a  recent  illuminating  paper  by  Andrew  Haldane 
from  the  Bank  of  England  as  well  as  on  previous  work  published  by  the  Federal  Reserve 
Bank of New York. 
Complexity comes in two forms.  
First, it appears in financial instruments themselves, as financial innovation has led, in recent 
years to a proliferation of so called structured – and, indeed, very complex – products. 
Second, complexity shows up in the structure of the financial systems, which are based on 
interdependence between multiple actors and counterparties. Transmissions of shocks occur 
through  networks  whose  structure  and  architecture  is  constantly  transformed  by  financial 
innovation and regulatory arbitrage.  This potentially creates numerous feedback loops and 
amplification effects.  
Looking  more  specifically  at  the  last  decade,  this  increase  in  complexity  had  four  main 
features and consequences: 
• 
As  techniques  for  managing  and  allocating  risk  became  more  sophisticated,  the 
network  of  counterparties  expanded  in  scale  and  in  complexity.  This  was,  truly,  a 
systemic change that was properly understood but not fully captured by regulators at 
the  time.  Credit  and  market  risk  was  supposedly  more  broadly  spread.  But 
counterparty risk increased. Overall, the overall impact on financial stability may well 
have been negative. 
Complexity led to loss of information, a point underlined by Gorton. Through the chain 
of  tranching  and  distributing  the  risk,  fundamental  values  and  risk  profiles  of 
underlying  assets  became  impossible  to  reconstruct,  even  for  the  most  informed 
investors.  There  may  be  a  deep  paradox  here.  In  principle,  financial  innovation  is 
meant  to  increase  efficiency.  But,  in  financial  markets,  efficiency  depends  on  the 
availability  of  information.  And  the  nature  of  innovation  that  occurred  in  effect 
 BIS Review 95/2009 
 1
  those  characteristics  make 
destroyed  information.  There  was  only  one  way  out  of  this  paradox:  to  create  and 
construct  market  infrastructures  which  preserved  information,  its  completeness  and 
its  integrity.  As  the  failure  of  the  rating  process  amply  demonstrated,  this  did  not 
happen.  
Increase  in  complexity  did  not  come  with  more  diversity.  On  the  face  of  it,  market 
participants  looked  more  and  more  different  in  their  legal  status,  investment 
strategies, and business objectives. It has now become apparent that, behind these 
veils  of  diverse  colors,  there  was  a  profound  uniformity  in  the  approach  to  risk,  its 
measurement,  its  management,  as  well  as  in  the  drivers  of  risk  appetite.  This 
uniformity  had  very  destabilizing  consequences.  In  normal  times,  it  helped  and 
crystallize  expectations  on  overvalued  asset  prices.  In  times  of  stress,  it  made  the 
adjustment process extremely disorderly. 
Finally and most importantly, complexity resulted in an increase in overall uncertainty.  
Complex systems exhibit well-known features: non-linearity and discontinuities 
- 
(a good example being liquidity freezes); path dependency; sensitivity to initial 
conditions.  Together, 
truly 
unpredictable  and  uncertain,  in  the  Knightian  sense.  Hence  the  spectacular 
failure  of  models  during  the  crisis:  most,  if  not  all,  were  constructed  on  the 
assumption 
(usually  normal)  distribution 
probabilities  could  be  used  to  describe  the  different  states  of  the  financial 
system and the economy. They collapsed when extreme events occurred with 
a frequency that no one ever thought would be possible. 
Uncertainty  itself  has  huge  consequences.  As  shown  by  Caballero  and 
Krishnamurthy episodes of flight to quality and liquidity hoarding can be best 
explained by a regime shift, from an environment where risk can be measured 
and  probabilities  attached  to  different  states  of  nature  to  a  world  of  total 
uncertainty.  Such  regime  changes  are  "tipping  points"  for  the  system  as  a 
whole,  whose  behavior  is  suddenly  transformed.  When  they  occur,  agents 
respond  by  making  decisions  using  “worst-case”  scenarios  and  covering 
themselves against the possibility of their own demise. Doing so, they faced 
and created a collective action problem since the general rush for protection 
only aggravates the stress . This is the best way to rationalize and understand 
the liquidity and market freezes which occurred in August 2007 and, again, in 
September  2008.  Facing  such  unprecedented  reactions,  policy  makers  may 
have  wondered,  "does  the  market  know  something  that  we  don't".  Actually, 
markets  participants  knew  that  they  could  not  know.  Because  they  were 
directly involved, they were aware it was impossible for them to fully master 
the complexity they had themselves created. And they acted accordingly.  
that  stable  and  predictable 
the  system 
 Overall,  complexity  may  have  resulted  in  more  fragility,  an  evolution  already  foretold  by 
Minsky who saw structural changes in financial systems over time as an essential cause of 
their vulnerability 
Complexity has deep implications for public policy and the future of financial regulation. 
• 
First,  about  transparency.  Improving  transparency  is  the  first  item  on  the  G20 
international  agenda,  for  financial  regulation  reform.  Transparency  is  normally 
considered  as  a  prerequisite  to  the  existence  of  efficient  financial  markets.  More 
recently,  full  transparency  on  aggregate  positions  and  exposures  by  main  financial 
intermediaries  tends  to  be  seen  by  financial  supervisors  as  necessary  to  assess 
potential systemic risk. However, when the system is constantly morphing into new 
structures,  and  permanently  changing  networks,  a  comprehensive,  but  static  vision 
may  prove  inadequate,  because  it  will  not  eliminate  the  uncertainty  stemming  from 
the potential discontinuities embedded in market dynamics. What is needed, at least, 
2 
 BIS Review 95/2009
    is an overall understanding of the complex dynamics at work, which may be better 
reached through a permanent reexamination of their structure and constantly testing 
against very adverse circumstances. 
Second, robustness. A natural reaction to financial fragility is to strengthen the ability 
of  financial  institutions  to  withstand  shocks  by  increasing  their  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements. While necessary, it is doubtful whether this "buffer" approach will help 
when  uncertainty  settles  in.  Then,  the  net  demand  for  both  liquidity  and  capital 
becomes infinite, because gross demand is unknown and hoarding creates little or no 
supply. In sum, in times of stress, "enough" capital or liquidity is never enough. Even 
explicit  contracyclical  requirements  may  provide  little  or  no  relief.  One  possible 
solution is to offer – or impose – ex ante liquidity and capital insurance. Over the last 
two  centuries  liquidity  insurance  in  times  of  stress  has  been  provided  through  the 
lender  of  last  resort.  Proposals  have  been  made  to  explicitly  price  that  insurance 
which would better internalize its cost. Capital insurance, has also been suggested, 
among  others,  by  Kashyap,  Rajan  and  Stein  and  can  be  seen  as  a  new  –  and 
potentially powerful – way to provide contingent support. 
Looking  beyond  individual  institutions,  the  robustness  of  the  system  as  a  whole 
depends on the solidity of some of its key components (the "nodes" in the language of 
networks).  This  is  to  day  perfectly  understood  and  it  is  widely  expected  that 
"systematically important institutions" will, in the future, be subject to more stringent 
regulatory requirements and closer supervision. This may, or not, be related to their 
size. "Too big to fail" certainly warrants special treatment. But, the position and role of 
even smaller or medium size actors may also put them in a situation to have a strong 
influence on the system's dynamics.  
Ultimately, however, robustness in complex financial systems may be best addressed 
by shaping the structure itself of those systems. Without prejudice to the answer, the 
crisis makes it legitimate to ask whether some separation or segmentation of financial 
activities  between  institutions  with  different  legal  status  and  abilities  would  be 
justified. While it is grossly exaggerated to argue that the abolition of Glass-Steagall 
is a cause of the present crisis, a case can be made for regulating activities that a 
same institution is allowed to engage into, thus limiting the potential interactions and 
feed back loops it can create or to which it would contribute . 
Finally,  complexity  can  be  limited  through  standardization  of  financial  instruments. 
Such  standardization  would  bring  two  benefits  in:  it  would  make  products  more 
transparent,  hence  their  behavior  more  predictable  and  would  reduce  or  eliminate 
uncertainty created by the loss of information. And, second, it would allow them to be 
traded and/or cleared in organized exchanges and clearing houses, thus reducing by 
a  considerable  scale 
the  network  of  bilateral 
counterparties.  Current  efforts  to  set  up  central  counterparties  and  clearing  houses 
for credit derivatives are clearly a major step in that direction. 
the  size  and  complexity  of 
increasing  complexity. 
Obviously,  there  is  a  trade  off  since  standardization  could  create  obstacles  to  financial 
innovation. But it is also true that contemporary financial innovation, by creating enormous 
complexity in the financial system, all too often has contributed to conceal the true level of 
leverage and risk. It may be that, as in other economic activities, innovation in finance will 
inevitably  entail 
the 
pharmaceutical  industry  or  big  utility  networks,  the  risks  attached  to  this  complexity  have 
been  identified  and  mastered.  This  may  be  more  difficult  when  human  behavior  is  directly 
involved, as in financial or epidemiological systems, thus adding another, and different layer 
of  complexity.  Both  the  industry  and  regulators  will  have  to  rise  up  to  this  formidable 
intellectual and  operational  challenge  and  I  am  convinced  that  your  conference to  day  will 
provide invaluable help in this regard. 
Thank you.  
In  most  cases,  whether  we 
think  of 
BIS Review 95/2009 
 3
References 
Caballero,  Krishnamurty  "Collective  Risk  Management  in  a  Flight  To Quality  Episode"  The 
Journal of Finance VOL. LXIII, NO. 5, October 2008.  
Caballero,  Simsek:  Complexity  and  Financial  Panics,  NBER  Working  Paper  14997,  May 
2009 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  "New  Directions  For  Understanding  Systemic  Risk" 
Economic Policy Review Volume 13, number 2, November 2007. 
Gorton:  The  panic  of  2007.  Paper  presented  at  the  Economic  Symposium  of  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City. Jackson Hole. August 2008. 
Haldane  Andrew:  "Rethinking  The  Financial  Network",  Speech  delivered  at  the  Financial 
Student Association, Amsterdam, April 2009 (available on the BOE website). 
Kashyap, Rajan, Stein: "Rethinking Capital Regulation", Paper prepared for Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City symposium on “Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System”, 
Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 21-23, 2008. 
Landau:  “Extreme  events  in  finance:  some  reflexions”,  Remarks  at  the  Conference  on 
Extreme  Events  jointly  organised  by  the  Banque  de  France  and  Toulouse  School  of 
Economics (TSE), September 3, 2008. 
4 
 BIS Review 95/2009
