European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
5 March 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to today’s 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by the President of the Eurogroup, Prime Minister Juncker, 
and Commissioner Almunia. 
On the basis of its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council decided 
today to reduce the key ECB interest rates by a further 50 basis points. This decision brings 
the total reduction in the interest rate on the main refinancing operations of the Eurosystem 
since 8 October 2008 to 275 basis points. 
Overall,  inflation  rates  have  decreased  significantly  and  are  now  expected  to  remain  well 
below 2% over 2009 and 2010. This outlook for inflation is due to the fall in commodity prices 
and  diminishing  domestic  price  and  cost  pressures,  reflecting  the  severe  downturn  in 
economic activity. Indeed, recent economic data releases and survey information add further 
evidence  to  our  assessment  that  both  global  and  euro  area  demand  are  likely  to  be  very 
weak in 2009. Over the course of 2010, the economy is expected to gradually recover. At the 
same  time,  available  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  over  the  medium  to  longer  term 
remain firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation at rates 
of  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  A  cross-check  with  the  outcome  of  the 
monetary  analysis  confirms  that  inflationary  pressure  has  been  diminishing.  After  today’s 
decision  we  expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  supporting  the 
purchasing power of euro area households. The Governing Council will continue to ensure a 
firm anchoring of medium-term inflation expectations, which supports sustainable growth and 
employment and contributes to financial stability. Accordingly, we will monitor very closely all 
developments over the period ahead.  
Let me now explain our assessment in greater detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
Reflecting  the  impact  of  the  financial  market  turmoil,  the  world  economy  has  weakened 
substantially in recent months, affecting increasingly also emerging market economies. In a 
climate  of  heightened  uncertainty,  a  severe  fall  in  world  trade  volumes  has  been 
accompanied  by  a  pronounced  decline  in  domestic  demand  in  the  euro  area.  As  a 
consequence,  euro  area  real  GDP  contracted  markedly  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008,  by 
1.5% on a quarterly basis, according to Eurostat’s first estimate. Available data and survey 
indicators suggest that economic activity in the euro area remained weak in early 2009.  
Looking ahead, the Governing Council expects that both global and domestic demand will 
decline  in  2009  but  thereafter  recover  gradually.  This  assessment  is  also  reflected  in  the 
March 2009 ECB staff macroeconomic projections for the euro area, which place annual real 
GDP growth in a range of -3.2% to -2.2% in 2009, and between -0.7% and +0.7% in 2010. 
These  ranges  represent  a  downward  revision  of  the  December  2008  Eurosystem  staff 
macroeconomic  projections.  In  both  2009  and  2010,  the  annual  GDP  growth  rate  will  be 
significantly  reduced  by  negative  carry-over  effects  from  the  previous  year.  The  projected 
gradual  recovery  in  2010  reflects  the  effects  of  the  substantial  macroeconomic  stimulus 
under way as well as of the extensive policy measures that have been introduced to restore 
the functioning of the financial system, both inside and outside the euro area. In addition, the 
fall in commodity prices is expected to support real disposable income and consumption in 
the period ahead. 
BIS Review 26/2009 
 1
The outlook for the economy continues to be surrounded by uncertainty. In the view of the 
Governing Council, the risks to the economic outlook now appear to be more balanced. On 
the one hand, there may be stronger than anticipated positive effects, also on confidence, 
stemming from the extensive macroeconomic stimulus under way and reflecting other policy 
measures  taken.  On  the  other  hand,  concerns  relate  mainly  to  the  potential  for  a stronger 
impact on the real economy of the turmoil in financial markets, as well as to the emergence 
and  intensification  of  protectionist  pressures  and  to  possible  adverse  developments  in  the 
world economy stemming from a disorderly correction of global imbalances. 
With regard to price developments, annual HICP inflation has been steadily declining since 
the  middle  of  2008,  when  it  reached  a  peak  of  4.0%.  In  February  2009  it  was  1.2%, 
according to Eurostat’s flash estimate, broadly unchanged from 1.1% in January. The decline 
in inflation since last summer primarily reflects the sharp falls in global commodity prices over 
this  period.  However,  signs  of  a  more  broad-based  reduction  in  inflationary  risks  are  also 
increasingly emerging.  
Reflecting these trends, the March 2009 ECB staff inflation projections constitute a significant 
downward revision compared with the previous projections and foresee annual HICP inflation 
at between 0.1% and 0.7% in 2009. Owing mainly to base effects stemming from the past 
behaviour of energy prices, headline annual inflation rates are projected to decline further in 
the  coming  months,  possibly  temporarily  reaching  negative  levels  around  mid-year. 
Thereafter,  annual  inflation  is  expected  to  increase  again,  also  owing  to  base  effects 
stemming from past energy price developments. Accordingly, it is likely that HICP inflation 
rates will fluctuate noticeably during 2009. Such short-term volatility is, however, not relevant 
from a monetary policy perspective. 
For  2010,  ECB  staff  project  HICP  inflation  at  between  0.6%  and  1.4%.  This  range  also 
represents a substantial downward revision compared with the December 2008 Eurosystem 
staff  macroeconomic  projections,  mainly  reflecting  the  change  in  the  economic  growth 
outlook.  Available  forecasts  from  international  organisations  have  also  been  revised 
downwards and broadly confirm an outlook of moderate inflation rates in 2010. 
As  in  the  case  of  growth,  a  considerable  degree  of  uncertainty  surrounds  the  inflation 
projections. Risks to these projections are broadly balanced. They relate in particular to the 
risks to the outlook for economic activity as well as to risks to commodity prices.  
Turning to the monetary analysis, the latest data and estimates provide further evidence of 
an ongoing deceleration in the underlying pace of monetary expansion in the euro area. This 
implies a further reduction in inflationary risks in the medium term.  
The  further  deceleration  in  underlying  monetary  dynamics  has  contrasted  with  the  high 
month-to-month  volatility  of  developments  in  M3  and  its  components  which  has  been 
observed since the financial turmoil intensified in September 2008. This relates in particular 
to marketable instruments, but also to the significant substitution that is taking place between 
different categories of deposits included in M3. While annual M3 growth declined further, to 
5.9%, in January 2009, the annual growth rate of the narrow aggregate M1, which includes 
the most liquid assets, rose to 5.2%.  
Volatility also characterised the flow of MFI loans to the private sector around the turn of the 
year,  with  a  monthly  contraction  in  the  outstanding  amount  in  December  followed  by  a 
significantly positive flow in January. However, discounting a possible turn-of-the-year effect 
and  looking  beyond  these  latest  developments  confirms  the  decline  in  the  growth  of  bank 
credit to households and non-financial corporations observed in 2008. At the same time, it 
appears that the substantial past reduction in the key ECB interest rates is increasingly being 
passed  through  to  bank  lending  rates,  indicating  that,  despite  the  tensions  in  financial 
markets, the transmission mechanism of monetary policy is not significantly hampered in the 
euro area. Still, more data and analysis are needed to firmly assess the outlook for credit in 
the period ahead.  
2 
 BIS Review 26/2009
To sum up, inflation rates have decreased significantly and are now expected to remain well 
below 2% over 2009 and 2010. Recent economic data releases and survey information add 
further evidence to our assessment that both global and euro area demand are likely to be 
very weak in 2009. Over the course of 2010, the economy is expected to gradually recover. 
At  the  same  time,  available  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  over  the  medium  to  longer 
term remain firmly anchored in line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation at 
rates of below, but close to, 2% over the medium term. A cross-check with the outcome of 
the monetary analysis confirms that inflationary pressure has been diminishing. After today’s 
decision  we  expect  price  stability  to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  supporting  the 
purchasing power of euro area households. The Governing Council will continue to ensure a 
firm anchoring of medium-term inflation expectations, which supports sustainable growth and 
employment and contributes to financial stability. Accordingly, we will monitor very closely all 
developments over the period ahead. 
Regarding the fiscal policy responses to the economic downturn, the euro area countries’ 
updated  stability  programmes  and  recent  addenda  confirm  the  prospect  of  a  sharp  and 
broad-based deterioration in euro area public finances. A credible commitment to a path of 
consolidation in order to return to sound fiscal positions, respecting fully the provisions of the 
Stability and Growth Pact, is necessary to maintain the public’s trust in the sustainability of 
public finances, which is important both for the economy to recover and for supporting long-
term  growth.  In  this  respect,  we  support  the  Commission’s  intention  to  initiate  excessive 
deficit procedures for several countries. This is crucial to preserve the credibility of the EU 
fiscal surveillance framework. It is important that clear deadlines are set for correction of the 
excessive deficits and that consolidation plans are based on firm and well-specified structural 
measures.  
As regards structural policies, it remains important to pursue economic policies in line with 
the principle of an open market economy with free competition. In this respect, it is essential 
that government support measures do not distort competition and delay necessary structural 
adjustment,  and  it  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  avoid  protectionist  measures.  Refraining 
from protectionism will be key to allowing the global economy to overcome the current crisis 
more rapidly. The successful completion of the Doha round of trade negotiations would also 
be a milestone towards a more integrated and open world economy for the benefit of all. 
BIS Review 26/2009 
 3
