Njuguna Ndung’u: Growth and performance of the Kenyan banking 
sector 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, at the Launch of 
Southern  Credit  Banking  Corporation  Ltd  International  Mastercard  Debit  Card,  Nairobi, 
10 August 2009. 
 Chairman; 
Managing Director of Southern Credit Banking Corporation; 
Board Members;  
Management and Staff; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  this  morning  to  join  hands  with  the  family  of  Southern  Credit 
Banking Corporation Ltd in celebrating the launch of its MasterCard Debit Card. Allow me at 
the  onset  to  appreciate  the  presence  of  the  MasterCard  Representative  Assistant  Vice 
President: Commerce Development, Mr. Charlton Goredema. I also wish to salute the Board, 
Management  and  Staff  of  Southern  Credit  Banking  Corporation  for  successfully  serving 
Kenyans in the last twenty seven years. 
I  am  pleased  to  note  that  your  bank  has  expanded  its  network  from  the  two  branches  at 
incorporation  in  1982  to  nine  branches  countrywide  and  has  been  in  the  forefront  of 
innovations in  electronic  payments  solutions  in  Kenya,  a  position  that it  first  achieved  with 
their Senator Card brand. Today, the bank is becoming a market leader with the launch of 
the first MasterCard Debit Card in Kenya and also in the region. It is also one of the only 
three banks in Kenya with the Acquirer status on the MasterCard franchise. The service will 
enable the bank’s existing customers transact business at more outlets, at their convenience, 
anywhere in the world. I commend the Board for this. 
Ladies and Gentlemen; This new service will provide an expansion of Kenya’s card market 
segment  which  is  currently  thin  and  requires  patronizing  by  many  of  the  bank  customers. 
Similarly, the new product will go a long way in deepening the financial sector by facilitating 
payments. 
Mr. Chairman, Let me turn to growth of the banking sector and its performance, one of the 
main pillars of Kenya’s economic growth. 
Ladies and Gentlemen; Despite the local and global turbulences experienced over the past 
one  year,  the  banking  sector  remained  stable  and  exhibited  resilience.  The  sector  has 
continued  to  grow  and  expand  both  locally  and  regionally  to  new  markets  within  the  East 
African  region  and  beyond.  In  addition,  banks  are  posting  good  results  for  their  second 
quarter  ending  June  2009.  We  commend  the  banking  sector  for  the  efforts  in  weathering 
storms of the global financial crisis and our own share of internal shocks. 
Mr. Chairman; Let me at this point mention some indicators of financial sector performance 
for the quarter ended June 2009 to show not only its resilience but its source of strength: 
• 
The  Sector’s  assets  increased  by  15%  from  Kshs.1.09  trillion  in  June  2008  to 
Kshs.1.26  trillion  at  the  end  of  June  2009  as  banks  continued  to  expand  their 
lending portfolio. 
Deposits  increased  from  Kshs.871bn  in  June  2008  to  Kshs.954bn  mainly  due  to 
deposit mobilization and expansion of branch networks by banks. 
The Capital Adequacy Ratio stood at 19.8% above the statutory minimum of 12%. 
This is an indicator that the sector has a cushion against periodic shocks. 
  BIS Review 109/2009 
 1
    The  sector’s  average  liquidity  at  end  of  June  2009  was  40.9%  well  above  the 
statutory minimum of 20%. 
The number of people employed by the sector increased from 24,435 at the end of 
June 2008 to 25,766 at the end of June 2009. 
The number of branches at the end of June 2009 stood at 930 an increase of 158 
branches from the corresponding period in 2008. 
The  number  of  accounts  has  similarly  increased  to  6.7m  accounts  from  around  4 
million accounts in the same period – shows we need to do more on this count. 
Ladies  and  Gentlemen,  Our  appeal  to  the  banking  sector  is  to  put  up  strategies  that  will 
support  and  stimulate  the  private  sector.  Banks  stand  to  benefit  from a  strong  and  vibrant 
private sector. The CBK has shown the industry the way by the recent successive reduction 
of the Central Bank Rate and Cash Reserve Ratio. It is good and encouraging for banks to 
post  healthy  profits,  but  also  good  in  tandem  with  that  to  reduce  the  lending  rates  to 
encourage  the  private  sector  lending  and  financing  both  investments,  working  capital  and 
reducing the risks of default. 
I would like to reiterate once more that the Central Bank welcomes initiatives and innovations 
by the banking sector in coming up with new products and is committed to the creation of an 
enabling regulatory environment towards this end. I would therefore urge the banking sector 
to  seek  diversification  of  their  products  in  light  of  the  dynamic  banking  environment  to 
leverage on their growth and earnings. Such diversification of financial services like the Debit 
Card we are launching today do help to reduce transactions costs. But the banks should let 
us know how we can help to reduce risks and costs if they are the ones sustaining higher 
lending rates – but also keeping deposit rates low! 
Ladies and Gentlemen; It is now my honour and pleasure to declare Southern Credit Banking 
Corporation’s MasterCard Debit Card officially launched into the Kenyan market. 
Thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 109/2009
