Nils Bernstein: Denmark’s thoughts on the euro – a central banker’s view 
Statement by Mr Nils Bernstein, Governor of the National Bank of Denmark, in connection 
with  the  euro  consultation  of  the  European  Affairs  Committee  of  the  Folketing  (Danish 
parliament), Copenhagen, 22 January 2009. 
The spoken version is the final version. 
 Danish  participation  in  the  euro  can  be  expected  to  lead  to  slightly  lower  interest  rates,  a 
small increase in foreign trade and lower transaction costs. In normal, calm periods, interest 
rates  will  be  only  marginally  lower  than  under  the  current  fixed-exchange-rate  regime.  In 
turbulent periods such as the present one, the spread widens, often at a rather inopportune 
time, since the widening may go hand in hand with other negative factors affecting the real 
economy. 
Over a longer horizon, adopting the euro will have a certain positive overall effect on growth 
in Denmark. But it is difficult to quantify this effect, which is hardly likely to be felt in the short 
term. 
Since  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  1999,  Denmark  has  performed  well  outside  the  euro 
area.  This  is  due  to  our  stability-oriented  economic  policy  with  focus  on  medium-term 
objectives and reforms to improve the structure of our society, not least the labour market. It 
is important that Denmark continues along this path – even if we eventually join the euro. 
The  main  reason  for  establishing  the  euro  was  to  create  a  foundation  for  sustainable 
economic growth by way of stable prices and an area with irrevocably fixed exchange rates. 
With  its  fixed-exchange-rate  policy  vis-à-vis  the  euro,  Denmark  has  benefitted  from  this 
foundation. 
In the current situation with a financial crisis and a global economic slowdown, the Economic 
and  Monetary  Union  demonstrates  its  strength.  The  single  currency  and  single  monetary 
policy are stabilising factors that prevent the individual member states from seeking their own 
–  often  mutually  competitive  –  monetary  solutions  to  the  crisis.  This  would  only  make  it 
escalate further, as we saw in the 1970s. 
It is and has been the general view of Danmarks Nationalbank that Denmark's adoption of 
the euro is a natural extension of our fixed-exchange-rate policy and would not involve major 
economic upheavals. 
For  Danmarks  Nationalbank,  Danish  participation  in  the  euro  would  mean  joining  the 
Eurosystem,  which  comprises  the  central  banks  of  the  euro  area  member  states.  The 
Chairman of the Board of Governors of Danmarks Nationalbank would be given a seat on the 
Governing Council of the ECB. This would give us a say in relation to monetary policy and 
other key decisions concerning monetary conditions in the euro area. 
Today, I am a member of the General Council of the ECB, which meets every three months. 
This  is  mainly  a  forum  for  discussing  and  exchanging  analyses  of  recent  economic  and 
monetary trends. 
Denmark's status as a non-euro area member state excludes us from a number of decisions, 
even though they are highly relevant to us. This applies to interest-rate decisions, of course, 
which  affect  us  directly  owing  to  our  fixed-exchange-rate  policy.  It  also  applies  to  e.g.  the 
agreement with the Federal Reserve to provide dollar liquidity to euro area banks at an early 
stage  of  the  financial  crisis.  It  took  some  time  before  we  were  able  to  present  a  similar 
agreement for the Danish banks. 
I could list a number of other examples. Recently the Governing Council has thus agreed on 
standard-setting  recommendations  for  the  structure  and  pricing  of  government  guarantees 
BIS Review 8/2009 
 1
and capital injections in the banking sector. Likewise, the Governing Council has laid down 
rules for how EU central banks can deposit money in publicly owned banks. And decisions 
have  been  made  concerning  financial  assistance  from  the  ECB  to  Eastern  and  Central 
Europe. 
These  examples  show  that  not  only  interest-rate  decisions,  but  also  many  other  decisions 
made by the Governing Council have a direct impact on us – and yet we have no influence 
on these decisions, or even insight into the rationale behind them. 
In  addition,  the  ECB  is  responsible  for  the  second-largest  currency  in  global  terms  and  is 
therefore  increasingly  represented  in  international  forums,  where  it  influences  global 
monetary issues. 
The  regulatory  consequences  of  the  financial  crisis  are  being  debated  strongly  at  the 
moment  –  in  the  ECOFIN  Council  and  the  Eurogroup,  in  the  Basel  Committee,  in  the 
Financial Stability Forum, in the IMF and in G7, G20, etc. The outcome of these discussions 
will  have  a  major  impact  on  the  structure  of  the  financial  markets  and  regulation  and 
supervision  of  financial  institutions,  including  the  whole  issue  of  supervising  cross-border 
banks, funds and so forth. 
It  would  definitely  be  in  Denmark's  interest  to  participate  in,  influence  and  be  informed  of 
such  discussions.  The  ECB  is  an  important  actor  on  this  stage.  I  am  aware  that  our 
opportunities  to  exert  influence  should  not  be  exaggerated,  but  needless  to  say  the 
opportunities are greater if we actually take part in the discussions. 
Participation  in  the  Governing  Council  is  not  limited  to  merely  safeguarding  Denmark's 
interests. It is a question of putting a Danish fingerprint on the key discussions and decisions 
that are shaping and developing the monetary-policy framework for the euro area and this 
area's influence on global economic policy in a broader sense. 
The Governing Council of the ECB has decided that when the number of euro area member 
states  reaches  19,  i.e.  three  more  than  at  present,  it  will  introduce  a  rotation  system  in 
relation to voting in the Governing Council, as is already the case in the Federal Reserve. 
When this system is introduced, the central-bank governors of all euro area member states 
will, for short periods, be unable to vote in the Governing Council, but they will all participate 
fully  in  the  meetings  and  be  entitled  to  speak.  In  my  assessment,  this  system  will  not 
significantly reduce the influence of the individual central-bank governors in the Governing 
Council. 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2009
