Glenn Stevens: The road to recovery 
Address by Mr Glenn Stevens, Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia, to the Australian 
Institute of Company Directors, Directors Luncheon, Adelaide, 21 April 2009. 
 The  global  economy  is  in  recession.  Virtually  all  of  Australia’s  trading  partners  are 
contracting. In fact almost every country with which we would normally make comparisons is 
in recession, and for many of them it is a bad one. 
It is very rare for Australia to escape an international downturn and there is no precedent for 
avoiding one of this size. We, like most countries, have trade and financial linkages to the 
rest of the world. We are all aware of what happens abroad, and our own expectations and 
economic behaviour cannot but be affected by those events. Whether or not the next GDP 
statistic, due in early June, shows another decline, I think the reasonable person, looking at 
all the information available now, would come to the conclusion that the Australian economy, 
too, is in recession.1  
These  are  periods  of  hardship  for  significant  parts  of  the  community.  People  lose  jobs, 
businesses fail, loans go bad, and plans are unfulfilled. As such, they are to be avoided if 
possible  and  at  least  ameliorated  when  they  occur.  It  is  for  the  latter  reason  that  most 
countries today have extensive social safety nets, so that when recessions do occur, we can 
avoid the extent of outright misery seen in episodes like the 1930s. 
Policy-makers  also  seek  to  cushion  such  downturns  with  macroeconomic  policy.  They  are 
usually  more  successful  if  they  have  managed  to  restrain  the  preceding  boom.  But  no 
country’s policy-makers have been able to eliminate the business cycle, much as they have 
all tried. Cyclical behaviour has always been a feature of market economies. It always will be. 
Should you see, at some future time, a claim to the contrary, it would be advisable to treat it 
with great scepticism and, indeed, as a possible indication that a cyclical turning point is in 
the offing. 
Most  of  the  time,  economic  activity  expands,  as  population  growth,  increasing  wealth  and 
aspirations  to  higher  living  standards  lead  to  more  demand,  while  a  growing  workforce, 
higher productivity and technological innovation push up supply capacity. That is the normal 
situation for an economy. 
But  every  so  often –  on  average  about  once  every  seven  or  eight  years,  but  not  regularly 
enough to predict with accuracy – a set of conditions arises that sees demand weaken for a 
while,  output  decline  and  unemployment  rise.  That  is  a  recession.  Usually,  though  not 
always, inflation tends to fall as a result of such episodes. 
Modern  Australia  has  experienced  a  number  of  recessions –  in  the  early  1950s,  the  early 
1960s, the mid 1970s, the early 1980s, the early 1990s, and now in 2008/09. There were 
also  events  that  could  reasonably  be  labelled  brief  recessions  in  1957  and  1977.  On  that 
count,  the  current  episode  will  be  the  eighth  recession  since  World  War II.  Most  of  these 
events have been associated with international business cycles. 
                                                 
1   Perhaps it is useful to be clear what we mean by the term “recession”. The original definition is “a significant 
decline in economic activity spread across the economy, lasting more than a few months, normally visible in 
production,  employment,  real  income,  and  other  indicators”.  This  is  the  working  definition  of  the  National 
Bureau  of  Economic  Research  (NBER),  and  is  based  on  Burns  AF  and  WC Mitchell  (1946),  Measuring 
Business Cycles, NBER, New York. 
BIS Review 48/2009 
 1
There  were  significant mid-cycle  slowdowns,  which  did  not  develop  into  recessions,  in  the 
mid  1960s and  very  early  1970s2,  the  mid  1980s,  the  mid 1990s  and 2000/01.  In each  of 
these  periods,  output  slowed  or  even  fell  very  briefly,  the  rate  of  unemployment  stopped 
falling and/or rose, and inflation moderated. 
The 2000/01 episode was notable in that it coincided with a downturn in the major countries. 
It was very unusual for Australia not to have a recession in such circumstances, though as it 
was, the rate of unemployment rose by about a percentage point in the space of a year. One 
aspect that helped us on that occasion was that the downturn in many of the major countries 
was  not  an  especially  deep  one.  Another  was  the  continuing  strength  in  some  other  key 
trading partners, not least China. This time, the state of the global economy is much worse. 
The  extent  of  that  weakness  was  unexpected.  Until  the  financial  crisis  escalated  so 
dramatically  last  September,  it  appeared  that  some  of  the  major  countries  would  have 
downturns, but that the emerging world, including Asia, would not slow as much as on some 
other occasions. Although affected by weaker demand from the industrialised world, many of 
these  countries  appeared  largely  to  be  free  both  of  the  financial  problems  in  the  major 
countries and of the sorts of problems they themselves had experienced in past episodes. 
The growth of China seemed to be on a strong medium-term path, albeit with a cycle like 
every  other  economy.  This  was  not  “de-coupling”,  simply  the  assessment  that  the  net  of 
competing  forces  would  produce  a  significant  slowdown,  but  not  a  slump.  Hence,  global 
growth was generally expected to slow to below average, after several years in which it had 
been unsustainably high. 
Then,  things  took  a  serious  turn  for  the  worse.  The  financial  turmoil  following  the  Lehman 
collapse was the most intense in generations. It was contained within about six weeks, and 
indeed  over  the  past  few  months  conditions  have  been  gradually  improving  in  financial 
markets, in several respects. But we are now seeing the fallout in the rest of the economy 
from that financial turmoil. The weakened ability of the financial institutions to provide credit 
to industry is one of the factors at work, but in my judgment a bigger one is the decline in 
confidence, and the sudden and widespread aversion to risk, among firms and households 
all over the world. It seems that everyone, everywhere, having seen the instability in financial 
systems in September and October 2008, and consequently feeling poorer and fearing bad 
times ahead, simultaneously decided to pull back their own spending, curtail their expansion 
plans and reduce their debt. 
It was, of course, entirely rational, at the individual level, for firms and households to behave 
in  a  more  precautionary  way.  But  the  collective  sum  of  those  decisions  created,  over  the 
ensuing six months, an international slump in demand for consumer durables and investment 
goods that was sharper, and more synchronised, than any seen for decades. The result is 
that the world’s gross product is now thought likely to decline in 2009, the first time that has 
happened for many decades. 
Australians  shared  in  this  more  cautious  behaviour,  particularly  in  the  business  world.  A 
range of business surveys indicates that a trend moderation in business confidence that had 
been  occurring  for  some  months  turned  abruptly  much  weaker  in  October,  and  remained 
weak thereafter (Graph 1). There was some recovery in March. (The behaviour of Australian 
household confidence surveys has not been as weak, as I shall come to later.) While official 
data  are  yet  to  show  it,  it  is  likely  that  business  investment  spending  is  in  the  process  of 
declining  sharply.  Hiring  intentions  have  been  scaled  back  quickly.  Residential  investment 
and exports have fallen. 
                                                 
2  
In both those cases, by the way, if  we applied the “two negative growth quarters” definition, they  would be 
labelled  recessions.  No-one  remembers  them  as  recessions,  though,  which  perhaps  illustrates  why  that 
definition is not very useful. 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2009
Graph 1  
   
The  net  result  is  that  the  Australian  economy  has  been  contracting,  though  on  the  best 
information we have, not at the pace seen in a number of other countries, where quarterly 
declines in real GDP of 3, 4 or even 5 per cent have been observed in the last quarter of 
2008 and are likely to have occurred in the first quarter of 2009. 
A key dimension through which Australia experiences the global business cycle is the terms 
of  trade,  a  gauge  of  the  income  gains  or  losses  that  international  relative  price  changes 
impart to Australia. Over the five years to 2008, a period of exceptional strength in the global 
economy, the terms of trade rose by about 60 per cent, equivalent to about 12 per cent of a 
year’s GDP – about $140 billion – in additional annual income. It was the biggest such gain 
in half a century. Now, the terms of trade are falling, reversing part, though so far only part, of 
that earlier gain. 
I would like to make two points, however, about those terms of trade swings. The first is that, 
in earlier episodes such as in the early 1950s, and the mid and late 1970s, very large terms 
of trade movements seriously destabilised the economy. On this occasion, there have been 
plenty of adjustment challenges – generally coming under the heading of the so-called “two 
speed  economy”,  where  the  resource-intensive  regions  and  industries  grew  quickly  and 
others slowed. But for all that, a floating exchange rate, a much more flexible labour market 
and better macroeconomic policy frameworks have helped the economy adapt to the terms 
of trade swings without the degree of instability seen in the past. That is a testament to the 
arrangements that are now in place. 
The second point is that, at this stage, the fall in the terms of trade that is occurring does not 
seem to be reversing all of the previous rise. Even with the large falls in prospect for contract 
prices for bulk commodities, Australia’s terms of trade look like they could, at the end of this 
year,  still  be  about  40 per  cent  higher  than  the  average  for  the  period  from  1980  to  2000. 
Perhaps that will not persist. Alternatively, perhaps what commodities markets are telling us 
is  that  some  factors  beneficial  to  Australia –  foremost  the  continued  likely  emergence  of 
China – remain in place. It is probably not entirely coincidental that the clearest signs of a 
turning point in economic activity appear to be accumulating in China, though not exclusively 
there. 
That is a quick description of where we are, and some of the background of how we got here. 
I  will  not  speak  here  of  the  broader  background  of  the  financial  excesses  that  helped  to 
create the situation, because that has been covered in detail before. 
BIS Review 48/2009 
 3
Instead,  I  want  to  devote  some  attention  to  the  question:  how  do  we  get  on  the  road  to 
recovery? History shows that recessions come, but also that they end. Can we speed that 
process? And to the extent that we have some capacity to shape the next expansion, how 
might we use it? 
Since  this  is  essentially  an  international  episode,  and  not  really  an  Australia-specific  one, 
much depends on what happens abroad. This neither means we are helpless to affect our 
own  future,  nor  absolves  us  of  the  responsibility  to  pursue  sensible  policies  to  promote 
recovery here. I shall come to that, but first, a few words about the conditions for a durable 
global  recovery.  I  take  it  as  given  that  we  all  agree  that  a  better  financial  regulatory 
architecture is needed and there is a lot of work under way on that. But that is about avoiding 
a repeat crisis. What about steps to get out of this one? 
There are several necessary elements. 
The first, as many have said, is to sort out the mess in the financial system, especially in the 
United States, the United Kingdom and Europe. It is not an easy problem to solve. But quite 
a  lot  is  known  from  previous  episodes,  including  in  the  United  States  itself,  of  the  main 
principles that must be observed in this process. 
The first step is an honest accounting of the situation. Then, the “legacy” assets have to be 
quarantined so that the potential for further erosion of their quality, and uncertainty over their 
value, does not lead to further loss of bank capital and associated confidence problems. The 
relevant institutions must then be recapitalised if need be, so that, freed of the problem loans, 
they can resume normal commercial activity – lending for sound proposals. It may be that, 
appropriately cleaned up, banks can attract new private capital. If not, then public funds have 
to be made available to recapitalise them where needed. 
Everyone understands these principles. The question is how to implement them. There are a 
few  ways  to  go  about  it,  all  of  which  are  on  the  table  at  present.  One  is  to  hive  off  the 
problem  assets  into  a  “bad  bank”  or  some  other  like  vehicle,  which  is  then  managed  and 
gradually wound down. The assets have to be transferred at some price, and the process of 
striking that price has to protect the interests of taxpayers, who should not over-pay for the 
bad assets and thereby give a windfall to shareholders. At the same time, there has to be 
pressure on the institutions concerned actually to get on with the clean up, as opposed to just 
waiting  for  something  to  turn  up.  The  plan  being  implemented  in  the  United  States  is 
designed  to  induce  private  capital  to  take  part  in  the  asset  management  vehicles,  which 
helps to sort out the pricing question. 
Another  approach  is  to  leave  the  assets  on  the  banks’  balance  sheets,  but  have  the 
government insure them, for a price, to limit further downside. This is the essence of the UK 
approach. Yet another approach is to nationalise the relevant institutions, which obviates any 
pricing issues for the assets per se and automatically provides enough capital, but introduces 
new questions in dealing with shareholders. This approach is the traditional one, though it 
has  mostly  been  used  in  smaller  countries  or,  where  used  in  major  countries,  for  smaller 
institutions. 
The economics of all these approaches is essentially the same: recognising losses that have 
occurred, reducing the riskiness of bank balance sheets and finding new capital to restart the 
credit process. Which technique to choose is a matter of judgment. 
The  politics  may  be  harder  than  the  economics.  Ordinary  people  resent,  not  surprisingly, 
taxpayer funds being used to fix problems that arose, in part at least, because of seriously 
misaligned incentives that rewarded financiers for taking too much risk. But it has to be done, 
otherwise economies will suffer for longer. The political leaderships of the United States, the 
United  Kingdom  and  some  other  countries  have  the  unenviable  task  of  persuading  their 
citizens to accept the need for these initiatives. 
A second near-term condition for recovery is macroeconomic support for aggregate demand, 
in  an  environment  in  which  private  spending  has  weakened  sharply,  owing  to  loss  of 
4 
 BIS Review 48/2009
confidence  and  strained  credit  markets.  That  is  coming  into  place  as  a  result  of  easier 
monetary policy, and easier fiscal policy also in many countries. Internationally, the role of 
fiscal  policy  is  more  prominent  on  this  occasion  than  has  been  the  case  for  many  years, 
since the impaired credit system makes monetary policy less effective than it would normally 
be in many countries. The reason official interest rates are approaching zero in a growing list 
of countries is not because central banks think it is a good idea to make credit available for 
free. It is because the flow-through from official rates to the rates that matter most in these 
economies – those paid by businesses and households – has not been working very well. 
Third,  with  these  near-term  policy  requirements –  repairing  the  financial  system  and 
macroeconomic stimulus – come associated medium-term requirements, which fall under the 
heading of “exit strategies”. 
For those countries where governments end up owning part or all of banks, there will need to 
be  a  plan  to  divest  that  holding  when  conditions  improve.  The  same  can  be  said  of  the 
various guarantees under which banks globally are raising money at present. This was an 
important step to help the system through a period of severe dislocation, but it is surely not 
desirable as a permanent state of affairs. At some point, it will be prudent to start weaning 
banks,  or  more  to  the  point  investors,  off  those  guarantees.  Perhaps  co-ordinating  such  a 
departure across countries would be a useful role for the Financial Stability Board. 
The other international exit strategy needed will be on macroeconomic policies. The size of 
the downturn, the extent of fiscal stimulus and the cost of the financial restructuring packages 
have placed a very large burden on government finances in a number of countries. I am not 
arguing  against  the  measures.  But  they  will  need  to  be  accompanied  by  a  credible  story 
about  how  governments  will  keep  their  own  finances  on  a  sustainable  footing  over  time. 
Taxpayers, markets and creditors will lose, rather than gain, confidence if they cannot see 
that path back to sustainability. And, at this point, confidence is what it is all about. The same 
issues will arise for the exceptional monetary policy measures. 
The fourth condition for a durable new international expansion is to avoid perpetuating the 
so-called “global imbalances”. The excess of saving over investment in the emerging world, 
especially Asia, was one part of the story of how the search for yield led to excessive risk-
taking. This is not to blame Asia for the crisis, but simply to state the obvious: that for people 
to misuse abundant capital as they did, there has to be a fair bit of it around to begin with. As 
it  has  turned  out,  there  was  more  of  it  than  the  United  States  and  some  other  developed 
countries were able to use wisely.  
So to the extent that strong global growth relied on advanced country consumers lowering 
their  saving  rates,  absorbing  the  export  surpluses  of  the  emerging  world,  and  accepting 
higher  debt  burdens,  the  model  is  broken.  Of  course,  the  most  important  matter  in  the 
immediate term is for the US economy to resume growth. But even when it does, the reality 
is that for some time ahead, advanced country households will be looking to lower their debt 
burdens  and  save  more  of  their  income.  They  will  not  be  the  same  spur  to  consumption 
growth as they were. 
This will mean that global growth will be, for a while at least, lower on average than we saw 
for most of the past decade. How much lower will depend in part on the extent to which the 
economies in the emerging world are able to foster more demand at home. For them to feel 
safe in doing that, and perhaps to return to their traditional position as capital importers, there 
will  be  other  conditions –  not  least  confidence  on  their  part  that  the  rules  of  international 
engagement  are  not  just  skewed  to  the  advantage  of  the  advanced  countries.  In  the  end, 
though, durable growth will have to be more balanced than the growth we had over the past 
decade. 
To the above, I should add that maintaining openness to trade and capital flows is critical – 
lest  the  mistakes  of  the  1930s  be  repeated.  This  should  hardly  need  saying,  yet  times  of 
serious recession are often times when protectionist sentiments grow stronger. 
BIS Review 48/2009 
 5
That is all I have to say today on the global conditions for recovery. 
Turning  closer  to  home,  Australians  cannot  do  a  great  deal  to  make  these  improved 
international conditions come to pass. But we can maximise our chances of benefiting from a 
new international expansion. 
The first thing is to maintain some confidence in ourselves and the prospects for our country 
over  time.  We  cannot  achieve  effortless  prosperity  either  on  the  back  of  ever-escalating 
mineral prices or simply by bidding up the prices of our houses. It is as well to realise that. 
But as I have said on previous occasions, Australia’s genuine long-term economic prospects 
remain good, and there remain good grounds to think that we will continue to weather the 
storm better than most. 
It is noteworthy that in  measures of confidence taken from surveys, household confidence 
has fallen in Australia relative to the ebullient levels of a year ago, but it remains much more 
resilient  to  date  than  comparable  results  in  major  countries  (Graph  2).  While  households 
expect  unemployment  to  be  much  higher  in  a  year’s  time,  their  stated  expectations  about 
economic conditions five years from now have barely diminished at all from what we have 
seen consistently over a number of years (Graph 3). So notwithstanding their evident caution 
at present, people remain essentially optimistic about the long term. 
Graph 2  
 6 
  BIS Review 48/2009
Graph 3 
   
Consumer  demand  in  Australia,  while  weak  compared  with  recent  years,  is  actually  at  the 
stronger end of international comparisons among advanced countries. This presumably owes 
something to the stimulatory effects of fiscal measures and lower interest rates for borrowers 
(though savers are feeling the pinch). But perhaps it also shows the inherently optimistic view 
Australians  take  in  the  future.  Optimism,  combined  with  an  awareness  of  risk,  is  a 
fundamental strength. It is to be hoped that this will be matched by a recovery in business 
confidence over the months ahead. That remains to be seen, though there have been some 
encouraging signs recently. 
What can policy-makers do to help? Unfortunately, there is no lever marked “confidence” that 
policy-makers can take hold of. Our task is very much one of seeking to behave, across the 
board, in ways that will foster, rather than erode, confidence. Over the past six months, that 
has,  of  course,  involved  the  rapid  deployment  of  both  fiscal  and  monetary  measures,  to 
support demand. The effects of those measures will still be coming through for some time 
yet.  Measures  to  sustain  confidence  in  the  financial  sector  and  to  keep  key  markets 
functioning were also important. 
Perhaps there is also some value in articulating a view of where we want to get to when the 
cyclical  downturn  ends,  as  it  will,  and  recovery  takes  hold.  What  sort  of  country  does 
Australia  want  to  be,  economically,  during  the  next  expansion?  How  do  we  want  to  be 
positioned in the global marketplace for capital, in an environment in which markets will have 
absorbed  a  lot  of  government  debt  and  will  be  evaluating  opportunities  for  other  uses  of 
capital? 
I suggest that Australia has a very good chance of offering an economic setting in which the 
following conditions hold. 
First, political stability remains assured – something becoming a bit less common. 
Second, the Government does not own, and has not had to give direct financial support to, 
the banking system. Australia will be free of the difficult governance and exit strategy issues 
that such support is raising in a number of countries. 
Third, public finances remain in very sound shape, with modest debt levels and a medium-
term path for the budget back towards balance. Without the massive obligations arising from 
BIS Review 48/2009 
 7
bank  rescues  that  will  inevitably  narrow  the  options  available  to  governments  in  other 
countries, Australia should be able to articulate such a path more effectively than most. 
Fourth,  sensible  policy  frameworks –  both  macroeconomic  and  microeconomic –  remain  in 
place; the financial regulatory system is strong and tested. 
Fifth, we remain open for trade and investment, and have a capacity to deploy both our own 
and other people’s capital carefully and profitably. 
Finally, there is an exposure to, and an engagement with, an Asian region that still has the 
most  dynamic  growth  potential  in  the  world,  where  hundreds  of  millions  of  people  will  for 
decades to come be seeking rising living standards. 
There are rather few countries that have the potential to offer so attractive a proposition to 
international capital, and to their own citizens, over the years ahead. It is a proposition that, if 
pursued sensibly and consistently, offers the most secure basis for confidence in Australia’s 
future. It is such confidence that, more than anything else, will help to drive us along the road 
to recovery. 
8 
 BIS Review 48/2009
