Jean-Claude Trichet: Macroeconomic policies, imbalances and the need 
to avoid going back to the status quo ante 
Address by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, at the Annual 
Joint Parliamentary Meeting, European Parliament, Brussels, 16 February 2009. 
 Monsieur le Président du Parlement européen,  
Monsieur le Président du Sénat de la République Tchèque, 
Monsieur le Président de la Chambre des Députés de la République Tchèque, 
Mesdames et Messieurs les parlementaires européens et les parlementaires nationaux,  
Je me réjouis beaucoup de participer à cette réunion interparlementaire à Bruxelles. Alors 
que nous ne sommes qu’à la mi-février, c’est déjà ma troisième rencontre cette année avec 
le Parlement européen. Cela montre encore une fois à quel point le dialogue entre la Banque 
Centrale Européenne et le parlement est étroit.  
Auch heute steht unser Austausch im Zeichen der außergewöhnlichen wirtschaftlichen Lage. 
Die Weltwirtschaft erfährt einen starken konjunkturellen Abschwung. Dieser hat mittlerweile 
auch  die  EU  erfasst.  Regierungen,  Parlamente  und  Zentralbanken  haben  rasch  und 
entschlossen  reagiert.  Ich  möchte  heute  auf  einen  Aspekt  hinweisen,  der  mir  besonders 
wichtig  erscheint;  nämlich,  dass  wir  bei  all  unserer  Entschlossenheit  nicht  die  notwendige 
mittelfristige Orientierung unserer Entscheidungen aus den Augen verlieren. Diesen Aspekt 
möchte ich Ihnen erläutern.  
Our  primary  and  most  immediate  task  as  policy-makers  is  to  help  resolve  this  crisis,  in 
cooperation with the private sector. We need to address the fundamental causes underlying 
the crisis: in the international financial system, in the international setting of macroeconomic 
policies and in the international financial architecture. And yet, we also need to make sure 
that our decisions today do not lay the ground for similar disorder in the future. We can only 
do so – and this is my main proposition today – if we design policies in such a way that we 
do  not  go  back  to  the  status  quo  ante  and  instead  firmly  enshrine  in  our  policies  the 
appropriate focus on ensuring stability over the medium term.  
I would like to explain what I mean by this.  
The global economy was – and, to a significant extent, still is – imbalanced. It is imbalanced 
in  three  domains:  in  its  financial  system,  in  its  macroeconomic  configurations,  and  in  the 
governance  of  the  financial  architecture.  The  present  crisis  does  not  just  offer  us  an 
opportunity  to  rebalance,  it  provides  an  obligation  to  rebalance  these  three  intertwined 
domains of the global economy. These are the key challenges we must not fail to address, 
no matter how difficult the related work agenda. 
The root causes of the crisis 
Let me outline where I see these challenges more specifically, starting from the root cause of 
the crisis.  
Clearly,  the  root  cause  of  the  crisis  was  a  massive  underestimation  of  risk  in  the  financial 
sectors of virtually all advanced economies. Risks were blurred owing to financial innovation 
that had produced highly intransparent financial products. These allowed for a generalised 
deterioration in lending standards. The drop in virtually all credit spreads and the asset price 
booms were particularly important in spurring households and firms to increase consumption 
or  accumulate  debt  at  a  rapid  pace.  Much  of  this  boom  was  based  on  the  erroneous 
assumptions that house prices and asset prices would continue to increase indefinitely, and 
that macroeconomic cycles had been eliminated. In 2007 market participants began to notice 
BIS Review 17/2009 
 1
that  these  assumptions  were  unrealistic.  Asset  and  house  prices  fell,  financial  institutions 
were  caught  with  excessive  leverage,  and  households  and  firms  quickly  became  over-
indebted.  
As a second factor, we need to recognise that economic policies also played an important 
role. Macroeconomic policies in several economies were not sufficiently focused on medium-
term  stability  and  sustainability,  which  would  have  helped  prevent  macroeconomic 
imbalances  from  accumulating.  This  was  mainly  due  to  the  erroneous  belief  that  in  a 
globalised economy, it would be optimal for some countries to borrow from the rest of the 
world,  or  accumulate  claims  on  other  countries,  indefinitely.  This  belief  was  initially 
encouraged by years of rapid global growth. But ultimately it proved mistaken. The financial 
crisis  led  investors  to  shun  risk.  They  became  less  willing  to  allow  households,  firms  and 
entire economies to accumulate debt.  
As  a  third  factor,  we  have  observed  clear  imbalances  in  global  governance.  Still  at  the 
current  juncture  we  must  be  aware  of  the  shortcomings  in  the  international  financial 
architecture. Here, it is not necessarily the analysis that was the problem: the rising risks in 
the  global  financial  system  were  identified  in  the  process of  international  cooperation.  The 
IMF coordinated a multilateral consultation in 2006-07 to address global imbalances. The G7 
and the G20 regularly flagged concerns related to imbalances in their communiqués. Policy 
recommendations  were  developed,  but  not  appropriately  enforced  during  this  period.  Also, 
the  dangers  of  a  sharp  and  abrupt  correction  were  not  generally  perceived  as  grave  and 
quasi-immediate. I have to say that in this respect it is in the constituency of central banks 
that we can find the clearest public statements on the need for the private sector to prepare 
for a very serious market correction. This was the sentiment of the Global Economy Meeting 
of Central Banks Governors in Basel as early as 2006 and the beginning of 2007. And the 
Bank for International Settlements itself in its own research had been the most lucid of the 
international institutions. 
The course of action to be undertaken 
Looking  ahead,  what  actions  should  be  undertaken  to  redress  imbalances  in  the  global 
financial system, in macroeconomic policies and in international governance?  
For the financial system, there is a need for more stringent regulation. Such regulation needs 
to prevent a recurrence of the excesses witnessed in financial markets and must impose a 
much more stability-oriented perspective. The Financial Stability Forum has already identified 
the key avenues for reform. These include three policy areas where change is particularly 
warranted, in my view: 
• 
first, introducing incentives and rules to prevent the financial sector from focussing 
excessively on short-term returns; 
second, improving transparency as regards risks to the financial system, as well as 
regarding  institutions,  instruments  and  markets  that  are  currently  unregulated  or 
insufficiently regulated; and  
third, eliminating, wherever possible, the elements that amplify the tendency of the 
financial system to accumulate excessive risks and leverage in good times, and to 
shed risks hastily in bad times – i.e. dampening pro-cyclical tendencies. 
  I have dwelled upon these three issues on other occasions. These points are also reflected 
in the G7 communiqué issued last Saturday, and I will not elaborate on them further.  
What I would like to emphasise today is the overall setting of macroeconomic policies looking 
ahead. While it is imperative, in the short term, that the current situation be stabilised, we 
should  not  lose  sight  of  the  need  to  maintain  a  medium-term  orientation,  to  anchor 
expectations, and to stabilise economic conditions both domestically and globally.  
2 
 BIS Review 17/2009
Looking  at  the  immediate  future,  monetary  and  fiscal  measures  have  been  and  are  being 
implemented swiftly and on a large scale. Indeed, the ECB was one of the first authorities to 
react  through  appropriate  monitoring  of  the  money  market  when  the  first  signs  of  turmoil 
emerged in the summer of 2007. As regards monetary policy, our guiding principle has been 
and continues to be to ensure price stability in the euro area in the medium term, in line with 
our definition: below 2%, but close to 2%. This solid anchoring of price stability is the best 
contribution we can make to safeguarding the overall stability of the euro area. 
At the global level, it is equally important that policies do not steer the global economy back 
to the global imbalances experienced in the status quo ante, since this was the starting point 
of the current problems. It is of the utmost importance that policy-makers do not merely focus 
on  short-term  solutions  and  instead  adopt  a  longer-term  perspective,  with  the  objective  of 
ensuring a sustained recovery. Wise policy actions therefore include two central elements:  
• 
first,  credible  exit  strategies  must  be  planned  and  promptly  implemented  once 
macroeconomic measures have had their desired effects; and 
second, policies must aim not only to stimulate domestic demand over the short run, 
but also to foster longer-term structural adjustments. 
 Needless  to  say,  these  elements  are  fully  valid  also  for  Europe.  Stability-oriented  policies 
have become, if I may say so, a European trademark. The current crisis underscores the not 
only the value but the necessity of such stability-oriented policies. We should be proud of this 
European trademark and not abandon it at the current juncture.  
As regards the global financial architecture, international organisations and fora should play 
an  important  role  in  convincing  countries  to  adopt  stability-oriented  policies  and  ensure 
necessary corrective measures where required. And international institutions should, in turn, 
also  adapt.  Let  me  stress  that  the  central  banking  community  has  adapted  in  a  decisive 
manner, through unprecedented international cooperation, with global cooperation by central 
banks mirroring the globalisation of finance. 
In  particular,  the  connection  between  macroeconomic  and  financial  stability  needs  to  be 
more comprehensively addressed than has been the case thus far. This implies that we need 
to  have  an  even  better  understanding  of  the  link  between  macroeconomic  and  financial 
surveillance.  Closer  collaboration  between  global  institutions  such  as  the  International 
Monetary  Fund  and  the  informal  grouping  that  is  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  would  be 
helpful. 
In  addition,  the  IMF  needs  to  improve  its  surveillance,  including  financial  surveillance, 
especially as regards systemically important countries. We have for a long time concentrated 
on  the  surveillance  of  developing  and  emerging  economies,  while  industrial  economies 
considered themselves to be largely immune to international advice. The crisis provides the 
painful  lesson  that  industrial  economies  also  need  surveillance  –  indeed,  rigorous 
surveillance. All international institutions and fora should reflect on how to strengthen their 
surveillance and its effectiveness in fostering policy adjustment.  
This is clearly a long and difficult agenda, and we may still not have all the answers yet. But 
Europe can play a leading role. We need to continue pursuing stability-oriented policies with 
a medium to long-term orientation within Europe. And we can foster international cooperation 
with the aim of having such policies pursued also at the global level and thereby prevent a 
return  to  the  status  quo  ante.  Again,  the  current  crisis  is  an  obligation  to  correct  the 
fundamental causes of persisting imbalances, in the global financial system as well as in the 
setting of macroeconomic policies. The focus on sustainability and medium-term stability is a 
useful guidepost in this context.  
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 17/2009 
 3
