Elizabeth A Duke: Enforcement of financial consumer protection laws 
Testimony of Ms Elizabeth A Duke, Member of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 20 March 2009. 
 Chairman Frank, Ranking Member Bachus, and members of the Committee, I want to thank 
you  for  the opportunity  to  discuss  the  Federal Reserve  Board's  ongoing  efforts  to address 
and  prevent  mortgage-related  fraud  and  abusive  lending  practices  in  the  institutions  we 
supervise.  
While  the  expansion  of  the  subprime  mortgage  market  over  the  past  decade  increased 
consumers'  access  to  credit,  too  many  homeowners  and  communities  are  suffering  today 
because of lax underwriting standards and other unfair or deceptive practices that resulted in 
unsustainable loans. The Federal Reserve is committed to improving consumer protections 
and promoting responsible lending practices through each of the roles we play as supervisor 
for safety and soundness and consumer compliance, and as rulewriter. 
I will discuss the Federal Reserve's ongoing efforts as a banking supervisor to ensure that 
the  institutions  we  supervise  are  managing  their  mortgage  lending  activities  in  a  safe  and 
sound manner and in compliance with laws and regulations. I will also discuss the rules and 
guidance  that  have  been  issued  over  the  past  several  years  that  address  many  of  these 
issues.  In  addition  to  our  own  examination  and  enforcement  activities,  I  will  talk  about  our 
ongoing  efforts  to  coordinate  with  other  law  enforcement  agencies  to  hold  those  who  are 
involved in criminal activities in our supervised institutions accountable.  
The  Federal  Reserve's  enforcement  efforts  begin  with  the  examination  of  its  supervised 
institutions. The Federal Reserve conducts regular examinations of state member banks for 
both safety and soundness and compliance with consumer protection laws. We also conduct 
regular  inspections  of  bank  holding  companies.  We  examine  the  mortgage  businesses  of 
these institutions, including subprime residential portfolios, as applicable. 
Institutions with weaknesses are expected to take corrective actions that include improving 
their risk management and underwriting practices in the future. In those rare instances where 
the  bank  is  not  willing  to  address  the  problem,  we  have  and  use  a  full  range  of  powerful 
enforcement  tools  to  compel  corrective  action.  To  ensure  that  banks  with  performance 
deficiencies give appropriate attention to supervisory concerns, we may require them to enter 
into nonpublic enforcement actions, such as memoranda of understanding. When necessary, 
we use formal, public enforcement actions, such as Written Agreements, Cease and Desist 
Orders, or civil money penalties. 
Mortgage fraud and investigations 
In  recent  years,  there  has  been  a  significant  increase  in  suspected  criminal  activity  with 
respect  to  mortgage  fraud  and  other  mortgage-related  criminal  activity.  Mortgage  fraud 
occurs in various ways. In many cases mortgage fraud is perpetrated against the financial 
institution  by  brokers,  appraisers,  and  other  third  parties.  In  other  situations  fraud  is 
perpetrated  by  insiders  of  the  institution.  As  I  will  discuss  further,  there  are  other  abusive 
practices that occur in mortgage lending that harm borrowers and the safety and soundness 
of financial institutions. 
BIS Review 34/2009 
 1
The Suspicious Activity Reports (SARs) that banking organizations are required to file reveal 
significant  suspected  mortgage  fraud  activity.  As  recently  reported  by  FinCEN,  there  is  a 
continuing  upward  trend  of  SARs  filed  by  depository  institutions  involving  suspected 
mortgage loan fraud.1 From July 1, 2007, through June 30, 2008, depository institutions filed 
a total of 62,084 SARs reporting suspected mortgage loan fraud. This represents an increase 
of  44  percent  in  SARs  involving  mortgage  fraud  compared  with  the  prior  year.  During  the 
reporting period, mortgage loan fraud was the third most reported activity in SARs. The top 
25 filing institutions of mortgage loan fraud SARs submitted 82 percent of the total 62,084 
SAR filings. SARs alleging mortgage fraud involve numerous varieties of conduct from large-
scale multi-million-dollar "straw borrower" and property flipping schemes to single incidents of 
overstated income or assets by individual borrowers.  
Federal  Reserve  staff  regularly  review  SARs  filed  by  the  financial  institutions  the  Fed 
supervises. When bank insiders may be involved, we initiate investigations, make referrals to 
law  enforcement,  coordinate  with  law  enforcement  and  other  regulatory  agencies,  and 
pursue enforcement actions against individuals, including seeking prohibition orders and, in 
appropriate  cases,  civil  money  penalties  and  restitution.  We  are  pursuing  numerous 
investigations involving insiders relating to possible mortgage-related fraud, both commercial 
and residential. The Federal Reserve has established a Federal Reserve System examiner 
group to share information on the detection of fraud and pending investigations. On the local 
level,  Reserve  Bank  staff  also  interacts  with  representatives  from  law  enforcement,  the 
Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Internal Revenue Service, and other agencies in SAR 
"review  teams"  to  review  SARs  and  coordinate  actions.  These  meetings  provide  an 
opportunity to share information about criminal activities, including mortgage fraud, occurring 
within the district. 
The Federal Reserve regularly coordinates with law enforcement in a number of ways. Staff 
participates  in  monthly  interagency  meetings  led  by  the  U.S.  Department  of  Justice  (DOJ) 
Fraud  Section  and  attended  by  other  law  enforcement  and  regulatory  agencies.  This 
interagency group, the "Bank Fraud Working Group," discusses and shares information on 
recent cases, trends, and other issues, including mortgage fraud. 
Supervision examinations and enforcement 
In the Federal Reserve's regular safety and soundness examinations of state member banks 
and  bank  holding  companies,  we  evaluate  risk-management  systems,  financial  condition, 
and compliance with laws and regulations. In assessing a bank's risk management systems 
for its mortgage lending activity, examiners evaluate the adequacy of the bank's practices to 
identify,  manage,  and  control  credit  risk.  This  includes  the  appropriateness  of  the  bank's 
underwriting  standards,  credit  administration,  quality  control  processes  over  its  own 
originations and third-party originations, and appraisal and collateral valuation practices. 
To assist institutions in understanding our supervisory expectations, the Federal Reserve has 
supplemented its long-standing guidelines on safe and sound real estate lending practices by 
joining the other federal bank regulatory agencies in issuing additional guidance on mortgage 
lending practices.  
Specifically, starting in 2005, the Federal Reserve and the other federal agencies observed 
that lenders were increasingly originating nontraditional mortgage loans that lacked principal 
amortization and had the potential for negative amortization. We were also concerned about 
the  growing  use  of  adjustable  rate  mortgage  products  with  "teaser"  rates  that  adjust  to  a 
variable  rate  plus  a  margin  for  the  remaining  term  of  the  loan,  in  addition  to  other  risky 
characteristics.  These  products  could  result  in  payment  shock  to  borrowers,  and  present 
                                                 
1   FinCEN, Filing Trends in Mortgage Loan Fraud, February 25, 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2009
heightened risks to lenders and borrowers. Moreover, the easing of underwriting standards 
and  the  marketing  of  these  products  to  lower  credit  quality  borrowers,  including  those 
purchasing investment properties, held the potential to create significant risks for institutions 
and for borrowers.  
To  address  those  concerns  and  prevent  supervised  institutions  from  making  unaffordable 
mortgage  loans,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  other  federal  banking  agencies  issued  the 
Interagency  Guidance  on  Nontraditional  Mortgage  Products  Risks  in  2006  and  the 
Interagency Statement on Subprime Mortgage Lending in 2007. The nontraditional mortgage 
guidance  highlights  sound  underwriting  procedures,  portfolio  risk  management,  and 
consumer  protection  practices  that  institutions  should  follow  to  prudently  originate  and 
manage mortgage loans with payment option and interest-only features. A key aspect of both 
statements  is  the  recommendation  that  a  lender's  analysis  of  repayment  capacity  should 
include  an  evaluation  of  the  borrower's  ability  to  repay  debt.  The  subprime  guidance 
emphasizes  the  risks  of  stated  income  or  reduced  documentation  loans  in  the  subprime 
sector.  Further,  the  subprime  guidance  outlines  certain  practices  that  are  considered 
predatory  in  nature  and  stipulates  that  institutions  should  not  engage  in  these  practices 
regardless of loan features.  
Also, in 2005 the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies issued the Interagency 
Guidance on Independent Appraisal and Evaluation Functions. This statement reinforces the 
importance of appraiser independence from the loan origination and credit decision process 
to ensure that valuations are fairly and appropriately determined. Independence has been a 
core  principle  in  the  Board's  appraisal  regulation  and  guidance,  which  have  been  in  place 
since the early 1990s. When we examine a bank's real estate lending activities, examiners 
consider the adequacy of the appraisal function to ensure that it complies with the appraisal 
regulation  and  has  appropriate  risk  management  practices.  A  strong  appraisal  function  is 
essential to combating the potential for mortgage fraud by protecting the collateral valuations 
from influence by individuals whose intent is to deceive the lender about the condition and 
value of the collateral. The agencies took steps to further strengthen their guidance in this 
area by proposing interagency appraisal and evaluation guidelines last November.  
More  recently,  the  collapse  of  the  global  credit  market,  triggered  by  the  end  of  housing 
booms  in  the  United  States  and  other  countries  and  the  associated  problems  in mortgage 
markets, has led to a deterioration of asset values and credit conditions. As a result, financial 
institutions have incurred losses that in and of themselves have caused financial institutions 
to tighten credit underwriting standards to ensure that borrowers have the capacity to repay. 
Furthermore,  sweeping  new  rules  issued  by  the  Board  under  its  authority  in  the  Home 
Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) will further ensure that mortgage lenders that 
offer high-cost mortgages have appropriate practices to ensure consumers can repay their 
loans. 
Consumer compliance examination and enforcement 
The  Federal  Reserve  conducts  regular  examinations  of  state  member  banks  to  evaluate 
compliance  with  consumer  protection  laws,  the  fair  lending  laws,  and  the  Community 
Reinvestment  Act.  These  examinations  are  conducted  by  a  specially  trained  cadre  of 
examiners  for  the  approximately  875  banks  we  supervise.  The  Board  has  a  long-standing 
commitment  to  ensuring  that  every  bank  it  supervises  complies  fully  with  federal  financial 
consumer protection laws, including the fair lending laws. The scope of these examinations 
includes a review of the bank's compliance with the Truth in Lending Act, the Real Estate 
Settlement Procedures Act, the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act, the Equal Credit Opportunity 
Act (ECOA), the Community Reinvestment Act, and other federal consumer protection laws. 
One  objective  of  our  consumer  compliance  examination  program  is  to  identify  compliance 
risks  at  banks  before  they  harm  consumers  and  ensure  that  state  member  banks  have 
appropriate controls in place to manage those risks. In conducting a consumer compliance 
BIS Review 34/2009 
 3
examination at a state member bank, examiners review the commitment and ability of bank 
management  to  comply  with  consumer  protection  laws  as  well  as  the  bank's  actual 
compliance  with  such  laws.  Examinations  follow  a  risk-focused  approach  tailored  to  fit  the 
risk  profile  of  the  bank.  This  approach  directs  supervisory  attention  and  resources  to  the 
products,  services,  and  areas  of  the  bank's  operations  that  pose  the  greatest  risk  to 
consumers. Our examiners prepare a stand-alone consumer compliance examination report 
bearing  a  distinct  consumer  compliance  rating  for  each  state  member  bank  we  supervise. 
These  confidential  reports  include  an  evaluation  of  the  bank's  compliance  management 
program, a summary of the fair lending review, and a discussion of violations of consumer 
laws and regulations.  
When  examiners  identify  banks  with  weak  and  ineffective  compliance  programs,  they 
document the weaknesses in the examination report and take appropriate supervisory action. 
Banks  with  a  poor  record  of  compliance  are  examined  more  frequently  than  those  with 
favorable records. When necessary to obtain compliance with consumer protection laws, we 
can, and do, use our enforcement tools, ranging from nonpublic actions to public Cease and 
Desist Orders. However, most banks voluntarily address any violations and weaknesses in 
consumer compliance management programs that our examiners identify so we find public 
formal actions are not typically necessary. 
Important  tools  for  examiners  and  financial  institutions  are  guidance  and  examination 
procedures  for  enforcing  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  Act's  prohibition  of  unfair  or 
deceptive  acts  or  practices.  The  Unfair  or  Deceptive  Acts  or  Practices  by  State-Chartered 
Banks issued by the Board and the FDIC in 2004 outlines strategies for banks to use to avoid 
engaging in unfair or deceptive acts or practices, to minimize their own risks and to protect 
consumers. Among other things, the guidance focuses on loan servicing and managing and 
monitoring creditors' employees and third-party service providers. 
The Federal Reserve's consumer compliance supervision authority extends to bank holding 
companies as well as to state member banks. In recent years, banking organizations have 
greatly  expanded  the  scope,  complexity,  and  innovation  of  their  business  activities.  At  the 
same  time,  compliance  requirements  associated  with  these  activities  have  become  more 
complex. To assist financial institutions in addressing these challenges, the Federal Reserve 
recently issued guidance in 2008 clarifying its expectations regarding firm-wide compliance 
risk management and oversight for both prudential and consumer protection supervision in 
Complex  Risk  Management  Programs  and  Oversight  at  Large  Banking  Organizations  with 
Complex  Compliance  Profiles.  Further,  Federal  Reserve  consumer  compliance  examiners 
routinely  participate  in  the  review  and  assessment  of  the  adequacy  of  large  bank  holding 
company compliance risk management programs. 
In  addition  to  its  own  supervisory  efforts  related  to  bank  holding  companies,  the  Federal 
Reserve, along with the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Federal Trade Commission, and a 
number  of  state  authorities,  recently  completed  a  pilot  consumer  protection  compliance 
review as part of an interagency project to enhance the supervision of subprime mortgage 
lenders.  Under  the  pilot  project,  the  agencies  coordinated  to  conduct  consumer-protection 
compliance reviews at selected entities with significant subprime mortgage operations. The 
reviews  included  independent  state-licensed  mortgage  lenders,  nondepository  mortgage 
lending  subsidiaries  of  bank  and  thrift  holding  companies,  and  mortgage  brokers  doing 
business  with  or  serving  as  agents  of  these  entities.  These  reviews  included  targeted 
evaluations  of  mortgage  underwriting  standards,  risk  management  strategies,  and 
compliance with certain consumer protection laws. We are currently assessing the results of 
the pilot project. The results will guide the Board's decisionmaking as to how it may supervise 
these entities in the future.  
4 
 BIS Review 34/2009
Focus on fair lending enforcement 
Although the Federal Reserve's fair lending enforcement program is not intended to detect 
mortgage fraud, it is a vital component of the Federal Reserve's efforts to ensure fair access 
to  responsible  credit.  The  Federal  Reserve  is  committed  to  ensuring  that  every  bank  it 
supervises complies fully with the federal fair lending laws, the ECOA and the Fair Housing 
Act.  Every  consumer  compliance  examination  includes  an  evaluation  of  the  bank's  fair 
lending compliance program, as well as an assessment of the bank's fair lending risk across 
all types of lending, including mortgage lending. Examiners also test the institution's actual 
lending record for specific types of discrimination, such as pricing discrimination in mortgage 
lending. A specialized Fair Lending Enforcement Section on the Board's staff works closely 
with  staff  at  the  12  Reserve  Banks  across  the country  to  provide  guidance  on  fair  lending 
matters and to ensure that the fair lending laws are enforced rigorously. 
When examiners find fair lending violations, the Board takes appropriate supervisory action. 
If  we  have  reason  to  believe  that  an  institution  has  engaged  in  a  pattern  or  practice  of 
discrimination  under  the  ECOA,  the  Board,  like  other  federal  banking  agencies,  has  a 
statutory  responsibility  under  the  Act  to  refer  the  matter  to  the  DOJ,  which  reviews  the 
referral and decides if further investigation is warranted. A DOJ investigation may result in a 
public civil enforcement action or settlement. The DOJ may instead return the matter to the 
Federal  Reserve  for  administrative  enforcement.  When  this  occurs,  we  ensure  that  the 
institution takes all appropriate corrective action. If a fair lending violation does not constitute 
a pattern or practice, we similarly ensure that the bank takes all appropriate corrective action. 
In  carrying  out  our  supervisory  responsibilities  related  to  fair  lending,  Federal  Reserve 
examiners perform many reviews to detect pricing discrimination, redlining, and steering in 
mortgage  lending.  These  illegal  practices  can  limit  fair  access  to  responsible  credit,  and 
make  it  more  likely  that  minorities  will  fall  prey  to  potentially  abusive  lending  practices. 
Several of these reviews have resulted in referrals to the DOJ. In the past three years, we 
have  referred  fifteen  matters  to  the  DOJ  and  four  of  these  matters  have  involved  illegal 
discrimination in mortgage lending based on race or ethnicity. 
The  Board  referred  two  nationwide  mortgage  lenders  to  the  DOJ  because  we  determined 
that  Hispanic  and  African-American  borrowers  paid  more  for  their  loans  than  comparable 
non-Hispanic white borrowers. These reviews resulted from a process of targeted reviews for 
mortgage pricing discrimination that the Federal Reserve initiated when the mortgage pricing 
data became available under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act. We also referred a lender 
for imposing a restriction on rowhouse lending that resulted in discrimination against African 
Americans. Finally, we referred a lender for redlining. The lender's marketing strategy was 
based  on  negative  racial  stereotypes  and,  as  a  result,  excluded  a  cluster  of  minority 
neighborhoods from its lending activity. 
Rules banning unfair and deceptive practices 
In  addition  to  our  supervisory  activities,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  in  2008  finalized 
sweeping  new  rules  for  home  mortgage  loans  to  better  protect  consumers  and  facilitate 
responsible  residential  mortgage  lending.  The  rules,  which  amend  Regulation  Z  (Truth  in 
Lending),  were  adopted  under  HOEPA,  and  prohibit  unfair,  abusive  or  deceptive  home 
mortgage  lending  practices  and  restrict  certain  other  mortgage  practices.  Importantly,  the 
rules apply to all mortgage lenders, not just depository institutions supervised by the federal 
banking and thrift regulators. These rules resulted from a series of field hearings conducted 
by  the  Board  in  2006  and  2007  and  a  review  of  approximately  4,500  comment  letters 
representing  a  broad  spectrum  of  views  that  were  received  in  response  to  the  Board's 
proposed rule issued in December 2007. The final rule adds four key protections for a newly 
defined  category  of  "higher-priced  mortgage  loans"  secured  by  a  consumer's  principal 
dwelling. The higher-priced thresholds adopted by the Board would cover all, or virtually all, 
of the subprime market and a portion of the Alt-A market. For loans in this category, these 
BIS Review 34/2009 
 5
protections will prohibit a lender from making a loan without regard to a borrower's ability to 
repay  the  loan  from  income  and  assets  other  than  the  home's  value.  Second,  lenders  are 
prohibited  from  making  "stated  income"  loans  and  are  required  in  each  case  to  verify  the 
income and assets they rely upon to determine borrowers' repayment ability. Third, the rules 
restrict  the  use  of  prepayment  penalties  in  cases  where  the  borrower  could  encounter 
payment  shock.  Finally,  creditors  are  required  to  establish an  escrow  account  for  property 
taxes and homeowner's insurance for all first-lien mortgage loans. 
In addition to rules for higher-cost loans, the Board adopted other protections that apply to all 
mortgage loans secured by a consumer's principal dwelling, regardless of the cost. The rules 
prohibit lenders or brokers from coercing, influencing or otherwise encouraging an appraiser 
to misstate or misrepresent the value of the property. The rules also prohibit, among other 
things, servicers from engaging in certain unfair practices. 
I  note  that  the  Board  is  working  on  another  important  rulemaking  action  with  other  federal 
agencies and state organizations to implement  the registration requirements for residential 
mortgage loan originators employed by federally supervised institutions, as required by the 
S.A.F.E. Mortgaging Licensing Act of 2008 (SAFE Act). The SAFE Act, when implemented, 
will  provide  for  increased  accountability  and  tracking  of  loan  originators  in  a  publicly 
accessible database. Under the SAFE Act, an individual is prohibited from engaging in loan 
origination without obtaining and maintaining annually a unique identifier and either a license 
and  registration  as  a  state-licensed  loan  originator  or  a  registration  as  a  federal  loan 
originator. 
Prevention and future challenges 
The Federal Reserve will continue to take actions against institutions that violate consumer 
protection or fair lending laws, engage in unfair or deceptive practices, or otherwise engage 
in unsafe or unsound lending practices. We will continue to focus on strong supervision to 
prevent the occurrence of these practices and violations. In addition to our own examination 
and  enforcement  activities,  we  will  continue  our  efforts  to  coordinate  with  other  law 
enforcement  agencies  to  hold  those  who  are  involved  in  our  supervised  institutions 
accountable for criminal activities related to mortgage lending. 
Again, I want to thank you for the opportunity to discuss what the Federal Reserve does to 
address and prevent mortgage-related fraud and abusive lending practices in the institutions 
we supervise.  
6 
 BIS Review 34/2009
