Thomas Jordan: Prospects for the Swiss economy in 2009  
Summary of a speech by Mr Thomas Jordan, Member of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the erfa-Gruppe, Weinfelden, 15 January 2009. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 Following a long, strong and broad-based growth phase, the world economy moved into a 
major recession in mid-2008. About a year after the beginning of the unprecedented financial 
market crisis, there was a radical turnaround in the global economic outlook. The European 
and Asian economies were not disconnected from the US, as had been hoped. The Swiss 
economy  leans  heavily  on  its  export  and  financial  sectors  and  faces  a  difficult  year.  A 
recession appears unavoidable in 2009.  
Consequently,  the  skilful  deployment  of  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  as  well  as  optimal 
conduct  on  the  part  of  business  practitioners  in  Switzerland  are  particularly  important. 
Monetary policy can be changed quickly and its impact is relatively rapid through its influence 
on interest rates and the exchange rate. The SNB has reacted resolutely to the deterioration 
in  the  economic  situation  and  has  reduced  interest  rates  to  almost  zero.  If  necessary, 
monetary  policy  can  be  rendered  even  more  expansionary  through  a  series  of  alternative 
instruments.  
In the case of fiscal policy, the focus is on effective automatic stabilisers – first and foremost, 
allowing the occurrence of temporary budget deficits, together with unemployment benefits 
and compensation for short-time working. In view of the extent and risks of the current crisis, 
fiscal  policy  will  need  to  consider  and  prepare  the  deployment  of  additional  stabilisation 
measures alongside the automatic stabilisers.  
In addition to the increased focus on economic policy, business practitioners within the Swiss 
economy are also challenged. In the case of banks, it is essential that credit shortages for 
companies and private households be avoided. Moreover, interbank business needs to be 
strengthened  in  order  to  smooth  out  liquidity  imbalances.  Companies  must  enhance  their 
innovativeness and use opportunities for opening up new markets. The Swiss economy has 
many  structural  strengths  and  this  prompts  confidence  that  Switzerland  will  overcome  the 
crisis. 
BIS Review 5/2009 
 1
