Timothy Lane: The Canadian economy beyond the recession 
Remarks  by  Mr  Timothy  Lane,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Canada,  to  the  Canadian 
Association for Business Economics, Kingston, Ontario, 25 August 2009.  
 Good afternoon. It's a great pleasure to join you at this year's CABE meeting. The theme of 
the conference, "managing the recovery," is particularly timely: As we move past the gravest 
dangers  of  the  financial  crisis  toward  better  days,  attention  has  turned  to  the  policy 
challenges  posed  by  the  recovery.  "Managing  the  recovery"  may  turn  out  to  be  almost  as 
interesting as managing during the crisis! 
While the outlook is clouded by uncertainty, there are encouraging signs that we will return to 
positive  growth  this  quarter.  Stimulative  monetary  and  fiscal  policies,  improved  financial 
conditions,  firmer  commodity  prices,  and  a  rebound  in  business  and  consumer  confidence 
are spurring the growth of domestic demand. Globally, the vigorous policy actions taken by 
monetary  and  fiscal  authorities  appear  to  have  reduced  the  probability  of  an  extreme 
negative outcome for the global economy. But there remain significant upside and downside 
risks to the outlook for the Canadian economy. 
As we return to positive growth, policy-makers are facing difficult decisions – when and how 
to  remove  stimulus,  how  to  secure  the  stability  of  the  global  financial  system,  and, 
importantly,  and  over  the  long  term,  how  to  set  the  stage  for  a  return  to  rising  living 
standards. It is this last challenge that I'd like to focus on later in my remarks.  
I will start with a few comments on how the recovery is likely to unfold and the forces that will 
be driving it, and what this outlook means in terms of the output gap. Then I'd like to look at 
Canada's growth trajectory beyond the recovery by focusing on two key variables that affect 
both potential and actual output – labour input and productivity. Given the significant changes 
foreseen  in  the  labour  market  and  their  implications  for  output,  it's  clear  that  Canada,  like 
many  other  nations,  needs  to  improve  its  productivity  if  we  are  to  reap  the  benefits  of 
sustained growth. I'll also touch on the important role of monetary policy and financial system 
policy in setting the stage for sustainable growth. After I conclude, I'd be happy to respond to 
comments and questions. 
The outlook for the economy 
The Canadian economy is expected to start growing again this quarter. Our July Monetary 
Policy  Report  discusses  the  factors  underpinning  this  earlier-than-expected  resumption  of 
growth. Globally, there are signs of a nascent recovery. More specifically, the U.S. economy 
is likely to start recovering this quarter, and growth is also picking up again in China, a major 
source  of  demand  for  raw  materials.  In  Canada,  domestic  demand  is  strengthening, 
supported  by  improved  financial  conditions,  a  rebound  in  consumer  and  business 
confidence, and firmer commodity prices. We are projecting Canada's GDP growth at -2.3 
per cent for 2009, 3.0 per cent for 2010, and 3.5 per cent for 2011. 
Canada's economic recovery will be supported by a combination of factors, which is likely to 
make it somewhat more robust than elsewhere. First, the composition of economic activity in 
the United States as it recovers will prove favourable to Canadian exporters – as the sectors 
hit hardest by the recession, such as housing and automobiles, rebound. Second, Canada's 
relatively  well-functioning  financial  system  will  enable  credit  to  meet  the  needs  of  an 
expanding  economy.  A  third  supportive  factor  is  the  underlying  strength  of  household, 
business, and government balance sheets. These favourable circumstances are expected to 
support the return to economic growth, with the output gap closing by mid-2011.  
BIS Review 103/2009 
 1
Of  course,  many  uncertainties  remain  –  and  economic  forecasters  are  notoriously  more 
prone to error around turning points in the cycle. The July MPR identifies the upside risk of 
economic momentum in Canada being stronger and more sustained than expected. On the 
downside, the risks relate mainly to the external sector. There is a possibility that financial 
conditions  may  normalize  more  slowly  than  expected,  and  further  setbacks  cannot  be 
precluded. Two downside risks require elaboration. 
First,  it's  important  to  bear  in  mind  that  a  good  deal  of  the  impetus  for  the  recovery,  in 
Canada  and  worldwide,  is  coming  from  the  public  sector  –  from  policy  actions  by 
governments  and  central  banks.  The  scale  of  fiscal  expansion  has  been  quite  substantial. 
Monetary  policy  has  also  been  eased  aggressively,  bringing  policy  interest  rates  close  to 
their  effective  lower  bound  in  most  advanced  economies.  In  Canada,  the  target  overnight 
rate of 1/4 per cent is reinforced by our conditional commitment to keep the rate at its current 
level  until  the  middle  of  next  year.  This  monetary  easing  counters  other  factors  –  such  as 
tighter  lending  conditions  and  wider-than-usual  yield  spreads  on  corporate  bonds  –  that 
would  otherwise  have  resulted  in  tighter  overall  financial  conditions.  Other  central  banks, 
given the situations they have been facing, have gone even further by providing additional 
stimulus  through  quantitative  and/or  credit  easing.  In  many  countries,  the  authorities  have 
also  had  to  provide  substantial  direct  support  to  financial  institutions  facing  difficulties. 
Although we have been spared that in Canada, this support has been an important bolster 
for the global recovery. While these policy actions have been timely and effective, they imply 
that the incipient recovery depends to a considerable degree on official action. At what stage 
will  private  demand  be  robust  enough  to  make  the  recovery  self-sustaining?  Clearly,  we 
haven't reached that point yet. 
A second important risk is the possibility of persistent strength in the Canadian dollar, which 
would work against the positive factors that I mentioned earlier. The recent rise in the dollar 
is, in part, a reflection of the same factors that are leading to a recovery in Canada, notably 
the rebound in commodity prices. It is also a result of a more generalized weakening of the 
U.S. dollar, as global financial conditions normalize. Other things being equal, a persistently 
strong Canadian dollar would reduce real growth and delay the return of inflation to target. If 
a stronger dollar were to alter the path of projected inflation relative to that presented in our 
July  Monetary  Policy  Report,  we  would  need  to  take  that  into  account.  As  we  have  said 
before,  even  though  we  are  at  the  effective  lower  bound  for  our  policy  rate,  we  retain 
considerable  flexibility  through  the  use  of  unconventional  monetary  policy  instruments, 
including quantitative easing. 
The output gap and the evolution of potential output  
I'll now turn to the output gap and potential output. The output gap is the difference between 
actual  and  potential  output  –  with  the  latter  defined  as  the  level  of  output  that  can  be 
achieved  with  existing  labour,  capital,  and  technology  without  putting  sustained  upward 
pressure  on  inflation.  The  concept  has  been  much  maligned,  partly  because  it  is  not  an 
observed  variable,  and  it  is  subject  to  considerable  measurement  problems.  However,  it 
remains  a  convenient  "shorthand"  for  characterizing  underlying  inflation  pressures,  and  for 
bridging between the current conjuncture and the factors that will condition economic growth 
over the medium term, as the output gap is closed. Our current situation of excess supply (a 
negative output gap) implies, all else being equal, that core CPI inflation can be expected to 
decline and then recover as actual output growth exceeds potential, while the level of output 
returns to potential.  
The  output  gap  is  best  used  to  complement  more  detailed  and  micro-founded  analysis, 
particularly that captured in more formal models. For example, our main projection model for 
the Canadian economy, ToTEM, has a structure that is based on explicit assumptions about 
firms' profit objectives and the constraints that they face when setting prices. As a result, the 
output gap is not a direct determinant of inflation in ToTEM, in the sense that when firms set 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2009
prices, they do not explicitly take account of the aggregate output gap. More generally, we 
pay attention to a variety of indicators of inflationary pressures, such as core inflation, yield 
curves, and credit indicators.1 I should emphasize that we don't use any of these indicators in 
isolation  nor  in  a  mechanical  fashion.  We  use  a  good  deal  of  judgment  in  interpreting 
changes in the economy, as well as in making monetary policy decisions.  
Now,  three  quarters  after  the  onset  of  a  severe  recession,  the  output  gap  has  widened 
substantially.  This  is  indicated  by  the  fact  that  output  is  now  below  its  trend  level,  as 
represented  by  the  Bank  of  Canada's  conventional  measure  of  the  output  gap,  and 
corroborated  by  other  indicators  of  excess  supply.2  For  example,  the  Bank's  summer 
Business  Outlook  Survey  showed  that  the  percentage  of  firms  that  would  have  difficulty 
meeting an unanticipated increase in demand remained at an exceptionally low level. Most 
labour market indicators also mirror the weakness in product markets, and jobs continue to 
be lost. After reviewing all the indicators of capacity pressures and the ongoing restructuring 
in the Canadian economy, the Bank judged that the economy was recently operating about 
3.5 per cent below its production capacity.  
While the usual premise is that the output gap will close over time, the interesting question is 
how  this  will  occur.  In  the  current  circumstances,  we  believe  that  it  will  come  about  both 
through lower potential and increased output.  
There are several reasons to expect potential output to be altered by a major recession. In 
particular:  
• 
Some  of  the  decline  in  employment  may  turn  out  to  be  persistent  –  for  instance, 
because high unemployment may discourage workers from seeking employment or 
because  workers'  job  skills  may  deteriorate  during  long  spells  of  unemployment. 
Labour  displacement  associated  with  firm  closures  and  mass  layoffs  tends  to 
increase during recessions, adding to structural unemployment, particularly for older 
displaced workers.  
The lower level of investment during the recession translates into lower productive 
capacity. In addition, plant closures mean that some capital is effectively scrapped 
(although this is not fully reflected in the measured capital stock).  
Total factor productivity may either increase or decrease, at least temporarily. It could 
decrease as spending on research and development declines, and as workers' job-
specific human capital is lost as they find  employment in different sectors. It could 
also increase if, for example, the recession weeds out the less-productive activities 
associated with a pre-crisis "bubble economy," or stimulates efficiency gains through 
changes in work practices.  
There  is  also  evidence  that  recessions  associated  with  financial  crises  are  more 
severe  and  more  protracted  than  other  recessions,  and  that  a  financial  crisis 
negatively and permanently affects potential output – as highlighted in a recent paper 
by Carmen Reinhart and Ken Rogoff.3  
                                                    
1   The  Bank's  main  indicators  of  capacity  and  inflation  pressures  can  be  found  on  our  website  at 
<http://bankofcanada.ca/en/rates/indinf.html>. 
2   The conventional measure of the output gap reached -4.3 per cent in the second quarter of 2009. However, 
this measure tends to have a higher margin of error around turning points in the economy. For a discussion of 
potential problems in estimating the output gap at the end of a sample, see J.-P. Cayen and S. van Norden, 
"The Reliability of Canadian Output-Gap Estimates," North American Journal of Economics and Finance 16, 
no. 3 (2005): 373-393. 
3   C.  Reinhart  and  K.  Rogoff,  "The  Aftermath  of  Financial  Crises,"  American  Economic  Review-Papers  and 
Proceedings (May 2009): 466-72. 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 3
These  forces  are  at  work  worldwide,  as  economies  absorb  the  impact  of  the  global 
recession. A recent OECD study analyzed the factors influencing potential output across the 
advanced  economies,  and  traced  the  implications  for  growth  through  2017.4  This  study 
concluded that growth will be slower, to varying degrees, in most countries.  
Similar forces are at work in Canada. In our April Monetary Policy Report, we lowered our 
estimate  of  potential  output  for  the  2009-2011  period.  Here,  one  key  consideration  is  the 
structural  changes  under  way  in  key  sectors  of  the  Canadian  economy  –  notably, 
automobiles, energy, and forest products. We were also taking account of the sharp drop in 
investment that has taken place, particularly for machinery and equipment. As a result, we 
expected potential output growth to slow to 1.1 per cent in 2009, and then pick up gradually 
to 1.5 per cent in 2010 and to 1.9 per cent in 2011.5 We will be reviewing this estimate in the 
October Monetary Policy Report.  
So,  that's  the  outlook  for  the  medium  term.  Let  me  turn  now  to  examine  the  evolution  of 
potential  growth  over  the  long  term.  I'll  discuss  each  of  the  two  components,  trend  labour 
input  and  trend  labour  productivity,  emphasizing  longer-term  trends  and  reflecting  on  how 
these trends may have been affected by the current recession.  
Labour input: A drag on potential output growth 
For the past 30 years, Canada, like some other nations, has been sailing with a favourable 
wind  at  its  back.  Potential  output  has  increased  fairly  steadily  at  about  2.7  per  cent  per 
annum,  largely  because  of  long-term  increases  in  labour  input  –  that  is,  the  total  hours 
supplied by the labour force. Since 1977, trend labour input – a function of population, the 
labour force employment rate, and the change in average weekly hours worked – has grown 
about 1.6 per cent annually. Some key factors here have been the growth of the working-age 
population  as  baby  boomers  reached  working  age  and,  to  a  lesser  extent,  the  increased 
participation of women in the labour force. 
Over the next few years, these trends will begin to lose steam. Those on the leading edge of 
the baby boom are now in their 60s. Growth in the working-age population is slowing, and 
participation  rates  are  declining.  As  these  changes  work  their  way  through  the  population, 
they will have a dampening effect on trend labour input.6 As well, the dependency ratio is 
likely  to  double  over  the  next  20  years.7  The  demographic  challenges  that  we  have  been 
worrying about for years have started to arrive.  
                                                 
4   D. Furceri and A. Mourougane, "The effect of financial crises on potential output: New empirical evidence from 
OECD  countries"  (Working  Paper  No.  699,  OECD  Economics  Department,  22  May  2009).  Available  at: 
<http://www.olis.oecd.org/olis/2009doc.nsf/LinkTo/NT00002D9A/$FILE/JT03265117.PDF>. 
5   The Bank's previous estimates, as presented in the October 2008 Monetary Policy Report, were for growth of 
potential output of 2.4 per cent in 2009 and 2.5 per cent in 2010 and 2011. 
6   R. Barnett, "Trend Labour Supply in Canada: Implications of Demographic Shifts and the Increasing Labour 
Force  Attachment  of  Women,"  Bank  of  Canada  Review  (Ottawa:  Bank  of  Canada,  Summer  2007):  5-18. 
Available at: <http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/review/summer07/barnett.pdf>. 
7   The dependency ratio is the ratio of the population typically not of working age (the dependent part) to those 
typically of working age (the productive part). In published international statistics, the dependent part usually 
includes those under the age of 15 and over the age of 64. This estimate comes from Banerjee and Robson 
(2009) (see next footnote). 
4 
 BIS Review 103/2009
Immigration  is  not  likely  to  diminish  this  challenge  significantly.  Even  a  large  increase  in 
immigration would be unlikely to provide a major offset to the projected downward trend of 
labour input.8  
How  will  these  trends  be  affected  by  the  financial  crisis  and  recession?  One  potential 
mitigating  factor  is  the  negative  wealth  effect  that  households  have  experienced  over  the 
past year. This loss of wealth could lead some older workers to defer retirement or even to 
re-enter  the  workforce  –  and  there  is  anecdotal  evidence  suggesting  that  this  may  be 
happening. But our estimates suggest that such an effect is likely to be small – perhaps 0.1 
or 0.2 percentage points for one to three years into the future. In the larger scheme of things, 
it is thus unlikely to provide any significant offset to the projected long-term decline in labour 
input.  
Working in the other direction, the recession has resulted in sharply higher unemployment, 
and  some  of  that  unemployment  may  persist.  During  recessions,  long-term  spells  of 
unemployment  become  more  prevalent,  and  such  spells  can  impair  workers'  ability  to  find 
other  jobs.  Some  workers  become  discouraged  and  drop  out  of  the  workforce.  Scenarios 
from the OECD suggest that such longer-term unemployment will dampen potential output 
growth in Canada as well as in other countries over the next few years.  
In  sum,  the  recession has  not altered  the  basic  situation: The  favourable  conditions  we've 
had over the past decades are no longer with us – and indeed, we are about to face some 
headwinds.  This  sobering  outlook  for  the  likely  evolution  of  labour  input  leaves  one  other 
possibility for boosting potential output: improved labour productivity.  
Labour productivity: The key to increased living standards 
Compared  with  other  countries,  the  growth  of  labour  productivity  in  Canada  over  the  past 
decade  has  been  disappointing.  After  some  promising  signs  of  improvement  in  the  late 
1990s,  average  labour  productivity  growth  from  2000  to  2008  has  been  only  about  1  per 
cent, well below the 2.6 per cent level achieved in the United States over the same period. 
Canada's productivity ranking has gone from third out of 20 countries in the OECD in 1960 to 
17th out of the current 30 members.  
What  accounts  for  this  disappointing  performance,  and  is  it  likely  to  continue  beyond  the 
recession?  Three  factors  help  to  explain  the  situation.  First,  relative  to  other  countries, 
especially the United States, workers in Canada have lower amounts of capital with which to 
do their jobs. But particularly striking is the fact in Canada, Information and Communications 
Technology  (ICT)  capital  is  half  the  amount  per  worker  in  the  United  States.  A  study  by 
Andrew Sharpe reveals that Canada's ICT investment gap relative to the United States is not 
primarily  related  to  industrial  structure  and  firm  size;  in  fact,  the  gap  exists  in  most 
industries.9  This  is  important  because  ICT  capital  investment  has  been  linked  to  stronger 
multifactor productivity growth in many countries, as firms reorganize their workplaces to take 
advantage  of  new  technology.  Bank  of  Canada  research  suggests  that  the  contribution  of 
ICT capital to productivity growth over the first half of this decade has been considerable.10  
                                                 
8   See, for example, R. Banerjee and W.B.P. Robson, "Faster, Younger, Richer? The Fond Hope and Sobering 
Reality  of  Immigration's  Impact  on  Canada's  Demographic  and  Economic  Future"  (C.D.  Howe  Institute 
Commentary, Issue 291, July 2009). Available at: <http://www.cdhowe.org/pdf/commentary_291.pdf>. 
9   A. Sharpe, "What Explains the Canada-US ICT Investment Gap?" (Research Report 2005-2006, Centre for 
the Study of Living Standards (CSLS), December 2005). 
10   D. Leung and Y. Zheng, "What Affects MFP in the Long Run?: Evidence from Canadian Industries" (Working 
Paper No. 2008-4, Bank of Canada, 2008). Available at: <http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/res/wp/2008/wp08-
4.html>. 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 5
A second, and related, factor is Canada's poor record on innovation. In a recent report, Peter 
Nicholson  concluded  that  "too  many  businesses  in  Canada  are  technology  followers,  not 
leaders" and stressed the need for "innovation-based business strategies."11 Canada stands 
only 16th within the OECD in the intensity of business research and development. Moreover, 
this  situation  exists  despite  the  fact  that  Canada  would  appear  to  have  all  the  ingredients 
needed for innovation: a highly educated work force, flexible labour markets, and high rates 
of firm entry and exit.12  
A  third  influence  on  aggregate  productivity  growth  is  the  reallocation  of  capital  and  labour 
across firms. Recent Bank of Canada research suggests that job reallocation across firms is 
a  significant  positive  factor  explaining  Canadian  labour  productivity  growth  over  the  1992-
2006  period.13  This  in  turn  suggests  that  such  reallocation  may  be  associated  with  more 
efficient  economic  specialization  and  the  adoption  of  new  work  practices.  Of  course,  the 
short-run effects are likely to be negative, since it takes time and training for workers who 
have  been  reallocated  to  become  fully  productive.  Thus,  when  the  economy  undergoes 
major structural changes – such as at the present time – productivity growth may suffer in the 
short term and then recover – perhaps even to a higher rate – but only with a lag.14  
Interestingly,  a  recent  study  by  John  Baldwin  and  Wulong  Gu,  using  a  growth-accounting 
framework, shows results consistent with the three influences just discussed – that is, multi-
factor productivity (MFP), rather than capital intensity, is the main culprit in Canada's lagging 
productivity performance. They note that two industries in particular – mining and oil and gas 
extraction  and  manufacturing  –  account  for  much  of  the  slowdown  in  MFP  growth  in  this 
decade.15  
Against this background, we can consider the implications of the global financial crisis and 
recession for Canada's future productivity growth. Productivity growth tends to vary over the 
cycle, declining in the downturn and then rising during the recovery as labour is more fully 
utilized. But the recession may also have more persistent implications for productivity growth. 
First, investment has fallen off sharply, which in turn reduces the growth of capital per worker 
– even as labour is shed. And, because capital investment often embodies new technology, 
reduced  investment  will  dampen  MFP  growth.  Second,  investment  in  research  and 
development  is  likely  to  suffer  even  more  in  the  downturn.  Third,  as  I  noted  earlier,  the 
ongoing process of sectoral adjustment and reallocation of resources dampens productivity 
growth during the adjustment process. The adjustments now occurring in several sectors of 
the  Canadian  economy,  including  automobiles  and  forest  products,  are  a  particularly 
important example. Both physical capital and human capital – in the form of industry-specific 
and firm-specific skills – are also inevitably lost in such an adjustment.  
                                                 
11   P. Nicholson, "Innovation and Business Strategy: Why Canada Falls Short," International Productivity Monitor, 
No. 18 (Spring 2009): 51-71. Available at: <http://www.csls.ca/ipm/18/IPM-18-Nicholson.pdf>. 
12   R.  Dion,  "Interpreting  Canada's  Productivity  Performance  in  the  Past  Decade:  Lessons  from  Recent 
Research,"  Bank  of  Canada  Review  (Ottawa:  Bank  of  Canada,  Summer  2007):  19-32.  Available  at: 
<http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/review/summer07/dion.pdf>. 
13   D. Leung and S. Cao, "The Changing Pace of Labour Reallocation in Canada: Causes and Consequences," 
(Ottawa:  Bank  of  Canada,  Summer  2009):  31-44.  Available  at: 
Bank  of  Canada  Review 
<http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/review/summer09/leung.pdf>. 
14   Statistics  Canada  research  (J.  Baldwin  and  W.  Gu,  "Competition,  Firm  Turnover  and  Productivity  Growth" 
(Economic Analysis Research Paper Series No. 042, Statistics Canada, September 2006)) suggests that the 
longer-run gains can be large. For example, roughly 35 per cent of labour productivity gains in manufacturing 
over the 1989-1999 period were attributed to labour reallocation across firms. 
15   J. Baldwin and W. Gu, "Productivity Performance in Canada 1961 to 2008: An Update on Long-Term Trends" 
(The Canadian Productivity Review, Research Paper No. 025, Statistics Canada, August 2009). Available at: 
<http://www.statcan.gc.ca/bsolc/olc-cel/olc-cel?catno=15-206-X2009025&lang=eng>. 
6 
 BIS Review 103/2009
Although the recession is likely to exert some drag on productivity growth over the near term, 
two  factors  may  provide  a  boost  over  the  longer  term.  First,  in  the  wake  of  a  recession, 
resources  may  be  reallocated  to  more  productive  uses,  which  would  tend  to  stimulate 
productivity  growth,  once  adjustment  costs  have  been  borne.  Second,  the  shock  we  have 
experienced over the past two years may serve as a "wake-up call" to the financial system, 
resulting in better scrutiny of investment projects. This latter point leads me to a specific topic 
on which I would like to touch briefly: the role of the financial sector in aggregate productivity 
growth. 
The financial sector and productivity  
As services take on an increasingly important role in the Canadian economy, improving the 
productivity of services will grow in importance. The financial sector is key to productivity for 
two reasons. First, financial services are an important and growing sector of the Canadian 
economy in their own right – accounting for close to one-fifth of real output.16 Second, the 
financial sector plays a pivotal role in the allocation of resources, and hence to productivity 
growth throughout the economy.  
How productive is the Canadian financial services sector? Data from Statistics Canada point 
to  a  possibly  worrisome  trend.  Productivity  growth  in  this  sector  has  declined  from  an 
average of 2.8 per cent per year in the 1990s to just over one-half per cent in this decade.  
But there is an important caveat here. As you know, financial services, particularly banking 
and insurance, pose unique measurement difficulties, both in gauging the value of output and 
in  finding  an  appropriate  price  series  to  deflate  it.  Given  that  different  countries  measure 
these things differently, international comparisons can sometimes be misleading. That said, if 
we compare Canada with the United States, our own research suggests that generally, the 
productivity of Canadian banks compares favourably with the productivity of U.S. banks.17  
I said that the productivity of the financial sector also has implications for the wider economy. 
Since  the  financial  sector  helps  to  allocate  resources  efficiently,  productivity  gains  in  this 
sector  are  apt  to  fuel  productivity  gains  more  generally.  More  efficient  allocation  of  credit 
means better-targeted loans and a lower cost of capital for firms. These gains, in turn, spread 
into the wider economy, supporting better-targeted investment by firms. A Bank of Canada 
working  paper  concluded  that  the  overall  level  and  quality  of  financial  services  is  an 
important influence on long-run economic growth.18 In other words, the most important issue 
is  not  markets  versus  intermediaries  –  but  how  to  ensure  the  proper  functioning  of  both 
markets and intermediaries. 
Both  the  stability  and  the  efficiency  of  the  financial  system  are  important  for  long-run 
economic growth. A system that is prone to crises is unlikely to support sustained growth. 
Credit  booms  are  also  a  problem:  Rapid  increases  in  credit  can  ultimately  hamper 
productivity growth when insufficient attention is paid to allocation decisions, when the link 
between the borrower and lender is broken or not adequately monitored, and when risks are 
ignored or mispriced. A well-functioning financial system creates the incentives to manage 
                                                 
16   The "FIRE" sector of the economy – finance, insurance, and real estate – accounted for about 18.5 per cent of 
real output in 2000 and just over 20 per cent in 2008, based on 2002 constant prices. 
17   J.  Allen,  W.  Engert,  and  Y.  Liu,  "Are  Canadian  Banks  Efficient?  A  Canada-U.S.  Comparison,"  Financial 
at: 
of  Canada,  December 
61-65.  Available 
System  Review 
<http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/fsr/2006/research_1206.pdf>. 
(Ottawa:  Bank 
2006): 
18   V. Dolar and C. Meh, "Financial Structure and Economic Growth: A Non-Technical Survey" (Working Paper 
No.  2002-24,  Bank  of  Canada,  2002).  Available  at:  <http://www.bankofcanada.ca/en/res/wp/2002/wp02-
24.pdf>. 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 7
the  risks  associated  with  financial  innovation,  in  the  context  of  an  appropriate  regulatory 
framework. 
I'd now like to draw some of these threads together by discussing what policy can do to help. 
The role of policy 
The  combination  of  factors  that  are  thought  to  explain  Canada's  productivity  problem 
suggests that efforts to tackle the productivity challenge must be broad based. Appropriate 
labour market policies, tax structure, competition policy, and an open trading system can all 
help  to  boost  productivity.  Let  me  say  a  few  words  about  the  Bank  of  Canada's  roles  in 
monetary policy and financial system policy. 
Since 1991, Canada's monetary policy has been guided by an explicit inflation target. While 
we have been successful in meeting the target – for the past 15 years, inflation has averaged 
almost exactly 2 per cent – it's important to remember why inflation control is so crucial. Low, 
stable, and predictable inflation contributes to better economic performance. It enables clear 
price signals to be sent, which in turn helps people to make wise borrowing and investment 
decisions and thus makes the economy more resilient to economic shocks.  
The Bank of Canada also has important responsibilities in supporting a stable and efficient 
financial system, which is critical to long-run growth. The Bank's work on financial stability is 
carried  out  in  collaboration  with  federal  and  provincial  regulators  and  other  public  sector 
partners, and as a member of international bodies. One important responsibility is financial 
system surveillance – identifying, monitoring, and reporting on risks to the financial system. 
The Bank also oversees Canada's clearing and settlement systems, providing liquidity, both 
on a regular basis and in times of stress, and acts as the lender of last resort. Stemming from 
this responsibility, the Bank has been undertaking initiatives to maintain continuously open 
core financial markets.  
The  Bank  is  also  an  active  participant  in  discussions  of  financial  system  policy,  both  in 
Canada and internationally. The recent crisis has prompted initiatives, both at the global and 
national levels, toward making the financial system stronger and better able to support long-
term  economic  growth.  A  central  aspect  of 
the  establishment  of  a 
macroprudential framework for financial supervision and regulation. Here, the emphasis is on 
systemic stability, for example, through appropriate capital requirements.  
Finally,  the  Bank  is  engaged  in  research  to  better  understand  the  sources  of  long-run 
economic growth, given its importance in anchoring current policy. While progress has been 
made in our understanding of productivity growth, there is still a good deal that we simply do 
not  know.  Over  the  next  few  years,  the  Bank  will  continue  to  explore  how  relative-price 
shocks affect the Canadian economy, including the reallocation of resources and its impact 
on productivity growth. The Bank will also be further investigating the linkages between the 
financial sector and the real economy – for example, how firm and household balance sheets 
adjust to various shocks, and the implications for investment and spending. Members of the 
Canadian Association for Business Economics also have an important role here. With your 
skills and responsibilities, you are in an ideal position to contribute to this research effort.  
this  work 
is 
Conclusion 
Two  years  after  the  onset  of  a  global  financial  crisis  and  after  three  quarters  of  severe 
recession  in  Canada,  the  economic  outlook  for  this  country,  and  much  of  the  world,  has 
improved. The policies that were put in place to bring about the recovery, are starting to bear 
fruit.  Although  the  recovery  is  likely  to  be  muted,  and  effective  and  resolute  policy 
implementation will be required, we are likely to experience positive growth this quarter, and 
a gradual closing of the output gap by the middle of 2011. 
8 
 BIS Review 103/2009
A serious challenge lies ahead, however – that of continuing to improve our living standards 
against a less-favourable demographic backdrop. Improved labour productivity is the key to 
meeting that challenge, and how we set about it will shape our economic well-being for years 
to  come.  Meeting  the  challenge  will  involve  all  Canadians:  employees,  business  owners, 
researchers, policy-makers, inventors, and entrepreneurs. It will require creativity, adaptive 
learning, and innovation. 
The Bank has an important role to play. By achieving the inflation target, and by working to 
make the financial system more stable and efficient, it is contributing to the recovery that will 
take hold over the medium term. This work also helps to ensure that a sound foundation is in 
place for the work that must be done to meet the longer-term challenges that lie ahead.  
BIS Review 103/2009 
 9
