Duvvuri Subbarao: Retail payments – perspectives and way forward 
Valedictory address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
Regional  Seminar  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems,  organised  jointly  by  the  Reserve 
Bank of India and the Bank for International Settlements, Mamallapuram, Chennai, 19 March 
2009. 
 Introduction 
It  is  a  great  delight  for  me  to  be  here  at  the  conclusion  of  this  seminar  on  Payment  and 
Settlement Systems aimed at improving our understanding of the way forward on this vital 
segment of central bank infrastructure. Here, at the Reserve Bank of India (RBI), we have 
traversed  a  steep  learning  curve  over  the  last  several  years,  and  come  a  long  way  in 
implementing an efficient and effective payment system. I am deeply conscious of the fact 
that we still have a long way to go. On the way forward, we are challenged by the fact that 
the unknown unknowns are larger than the known unknowns, which in turn are larger than 
the known knowns. Our task on the way forward really is to learn from the international best 
practices and adapt them to the Indian context. Seminars such as this are, therefore, very 
rewarding learning experiences for us. I hope, the foreign participants too found this seminar 
useful, rewarding and, may I add, enjoyable.  
I am told you covered many important topics over the last three days, and I gather, there is 
greater clarity on various issues such as the growing importance of retail payment systems, 
the  relative  roles  of  banks  and  non-banks  in  the  payment  systems,  the  main  principles 
governing oversight, prepaid cards, aspects relating to cross-border remittance services and 
even issues pertaining to branchless banking.  
I  want  to  use  the  opportunity  of  this  valedictory  address  to  share  with  you  the  significant 
changes in the payment systems in India, the Reserve Bank’s role in this area and to look 
ahead at some of the challenges going forward. 
But first allow me a small digression. I hope you have all had some time off for going round 
and  enjoying  the  sights  and  heritage  of  this  famed  part  of  India.  Mamallapuram  bears 
testimony to the rich, ancient culture of this region, which was long forgotten, thanks to rapid 
developments  in  its  vicinity,  leaving  this  once-upon-a-time  great  trading  port  almost  at  the 
brink of extinction. Nature too, played a role in the erosion of this piece of history. The Great 
Shore  Temple  that  we  see  is  believed  to  be  actually  one  of  an  original  seven  pagodas 
(spires, temples), the rest having been eroded or submerged. Nature, once again, lent her 
helping hand, and I am told that after the tsunami of 2004, parts of the submerged remaining 
temples were visible, albeit briefly, when the waters of the ocean receded temporarily. We 
now have more “concrete” evidence of the role played by this small town in India's ancient 
trading culture.  
The payment system and central banks  
Let  me  now  try  to  relate  this  to  the  payment  systems  of  today.  Payment  and  settlement 
systems play an important role in improving overall economic efficiency. They consist of all 
the  diverse  arrangements  that  we  use  to  systematically  transfer  money  –  whether  using 
currency,  paper  instruments  such  as  cheques,  or  a  variety  of  electronic  channels.  It  is 
something  we  use  every  day.  Indeed  the  ability  to  make  and  receive  payments  with 
confidence  remains  the  cornerstone  of  any  commercial  activity  and  it  is  at  designing, 
implementing and running robust payment systems that our efforts are focussed.  
There  has  been  a  phenomenal  change  in  the  architecture  and  technology  of  payment 
systems  in  the  last  decade.  Until  just  a  few  years  ago,  payments  systems  in  India  were 
BIS Review 33/2009 
 1
almost  entirely  based  on  paper,  with  currency  and  cheques  being  the  dominant  form  of 
payment  for  both  retail  and  wholesale  transactions.  With  technological  advancement,  it  is 
today  quite  a  complex  collection  of  disparate  arrangements,  with  different  participants, 
different  rules,  and  different  processes  in  each  place,  but  which  all  ensure  quicker  flow  of 
money. Payment systems, therefore, have implications for the play out of monetary policy, 
and, therefore, form an important part of a central bank's mandate. 
The  main  concerns  in  ensuring  robust  payment  systems  are  efficiency  and  safety  of  the 
systems. Internationally, the nature and intensity of central bank supervision over the retail 
payment  systems  vary  considerably.  In  many  cases,  the  oversight  is  limited  to  only 
systemically  important  payment  systems.  Some  do  it  with  explicit  legal  authority  as  in 
Australia, some based on their regulatory power on banks as in the United States, and some, 
as part of the broader financial stability objective, as in the United Kingdom.  
Apart from economic efficiency, payment systems have a social dimension too as an efficient 
payment system is an important prerequisite for financial inclusion. The focus of attention in 
payment  systems  worldwide  has  traditionally  been  on  Systemically  Important  Payment 
Systems. Of late, however, with financial inclusion becoming a major objective, the existence 
of  efficient  retail  payment  systems  is  being  perceived  as  a  significant  public  good,  which 
deserves increased attention.  
The importance of Payment and Settlement Systems prompted the Governors of the central 
banks of the Group of Ten (G-10) countries to establish in 1990 a permanent central bank 
Committee  viz.,  the  Committee  on  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (CPSS),  as  a 
successor to the Group of Experts on Payment Systems, set up by them in 1980. The CPSS 
was established to monitor and analyse developments in domestic payments and settlement 
systems,  as  well  as  in  cross-border  and  multilateral  netting  schemes.  The  Committee  has 
done some pioneering standard-setting work in this area, including in the emerging area of e-
money. It is no coincidence that the CPSS Secretariat is located at the Bank for International 
Settlements, our co-host for this seminar.  
Evolution of payment systems in India  
Payment systems in India – like in most parts of the world – began as cash-based systems. 
The evolution over time of commerce and trade triggered varied payment instruments came 
into use in India. Even though the cash system dominated, there were some early payment 
systems not denominated in cash – such as the primitive form of the bill of exchange – the 
HUNDI  –  which  continues  to  be  in  use  in  some  form,  in  some  parts  of  the  country  even 
today!  With  the  advent  of  banking,  cheque  clearing  through  a  bankers'  clearing  house, 
conducted  on  a  net  settlement  basis,  was  the  most  predominant  form  of  clearing  and 
settlement, despite the inherent risks associated with net settlement systems. 
The  electronic  era  in  India  began  in  the  early  1990s  when  the  Reserve  Bank  developed 
technology-based payment and settlement systems, and also took on the oversight of these 
systems. Let me give you just a few significant figures to illustrate our rapid transition from 
paper  to  paperless  systems.  The  share  of  cheques  in  the  total  value  of  economic 
transactions (including through cash) declined from 5.2% in 2001 to 3.9% in 2008. The value 
of  funds  transferred  through  electronic  means  in  the  entire  payment  systems  increased 
phenomenally – from about 2% a decade ago to about 74% now. The number of transactions 
in the retail system, inclusive of cheques, electronic payments and cards, is also striking, with 
seven million transactions per day, accounting for more than 95% in terms of the number of 
total  transactions.  This  underscores  the  importance  of  continued  focus  on  retail  payment 
systems in India.  
The  growth  of  non-conventional  forms  of  retail  payment  systems  in  India  reveals  an 
interesting trend. We are all aware of the role of credit cards in our lifestyles and spending 
patterns. In India though credit cards had a somewhat lacklustre beginning. I still recall how, 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2009
in the late eighties, when a government owned bank – what we, in India, call a public sector 
bank – undertook this pioneering activity, there were few takers for this payment mode. The 
Indian culture is to save and then spend, not spend first and repay later. The task for the 
public sector bank in the early years was therefore not so much to market a new product but 
to bring about a fundamental change in the cultural mind-set and attitudes. More importantly, 
making the merchant establishments accept credit cards for payment of goods and services 
was not an easy task either. Banks had to use innovative strategies (such as providing free 
credit cards for their own account holders, cards to even non-customers of the bank, enticing 
merchant establishments with schemes of discounts and rewards, etc.). Similarly, in the early 
stages of development, a few banks got together to inter-connect and share their ATMs. The 
initiative failed to get off ground and had to be abandoned. Yet, today, the key words in the 
financial sector are inter-connectivity and shared payment system infrastructure. You will be 
interested  to  know  that  today  we  have  a  national-level  ATM  switch,  which  inter-connects 
nearly 35,000 ATMs of banks, across the country. 
With the opening up of the economy, many more banks joined the credit card band wagon. 
Soon, some banks began aggressively pushing credit cards even to unwilling customers and 
there were also concerns about the methods used by entities to which the recovery function 
had been outsourced by these banks. The Reserve Bank, which was not much concerned 
about  the  low  level  of  penetration  of  credit  cards  in  the  initial  years,  quickly  stepped  in  to 
ensure fair practices and customer protection. The Reserve Bank also took upon the task of 
assessing the existing retail payment systems and laying out a clear road map for the future. 
Legal reforms constituted the first step in this direction. 
The Reserve Bank’s role 
The  rapid  expansion  of  the  economy  and  the  phenomenal  increase  in  non-cash  payment 
transaction clearly defined the task and the challenge for the Reserve Bank. This led to the 
2007 Payment and Settlement Systems Act, the draft tenets for which were formulated by 
the  Reserve  Bank.  This  legislation  provides  a  legal  basis  and  framework  for  most  of  the 
requirements of payment and settlement systems. It also provides clear definitions relating to 
the  process  of  netting  and  settlement  finality  and  ensures  full  and  final  settlement  to 
participants, with no recourse to roll back or reversal of transactions. 
The  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  Act  also  mandated  the  Reserve  Bank  to  regulate 
payment and settlement systems, encompassing not only the system providers – which are 
most often the commercial banks – but also intermediaries as well as technology providers. 
We have just begun the process of authorisation of payment systems. Hopefully this will instil 
greater  confidence  amongst  the  users  of  such  systems,  in  addition  to  ensuring  that  the 
systems  are  robust  and  well  designed,  based  on  sound  principles  of  optimal  risk 
management. We also believe they provide for high levels of reliability of operations and are 
in compliance with international requirements for combating money laundering.  
To aid the Reserve Bank in managing this task of payments and settlements, a Board for 
Regulation  of  Payment  and  Settlement  Systems  (BPSS),  comprising  both  the  RBI 
management  and  external  experts,  was  established.  International  experts,  who  have 
reviewed  our  legal  framework  and  implementation  systems,  have  endorsed  the  scope  and 
coverage of the Payment and Settlement Systems Act. 
Recent initiatives and innovations  
Safety  is  at  the  heart  of  payment  systems.  Recognising  its  importance,  the  Reserve  Bank 
took the early initiative for creating a guaranteed platform for systemically important payment 
systems. The result was the establishment of the Clearing Corporation of India Ltd (CCIL) in 
2001. The CCIL is owned and managed by commercial banks, and the Reserve Bank has no 
BIS Review 33/2009 
 3
direct stake. You will recognise that this arms-length relationship is in accordance with the 
principles of good corporate governance. 
The CCIL functions as a Central Counter Party (CCP) for select categories of transactions 
such as those in government bonds, inter-bank foreign exchange market, call money market, 
etc., thus effectively managing, and mitigating, the counterparty risks arising out of possible 
default  by  any  constituent.  The  CCIL  platforms  are  all  fully  electronic  with  high  levels  of 
operational  security  and  provide  Straight  Through  Processing  (STP).  This  is  a  unique 
initiative  and  has  been  widely  acclaimed  as  a  success.  This  infrastructure  has  efficiently 
mitigated counter party risks in over-the-counter (OTC) markets – which, you will note, were 
at the root of the crisis in the credit derivatives segment in the current global financial turmoil.  
The Reserve Bank was instrumental in establishing in 1999 the INdian FInancial NETwork 
(or INFINET). The INFINET, similar to the S.W.I.F.T., is a platform for domestic transmission 
of inter-bank messages in electronic mode. The Cheque Truncation system, implemented by 
the RBI in India, on a scale not seen anywhere else in the world, is yet another landmark in 
the  advance  of  payments  and  settlements.  The  system  will  help  customers  accelerate 
realisation of their cheques, leveraging latest technology.  
I  can  claim  with  pride  that  state-of-the-art  technology  is  a  characteristic  of  many  retail 
payment systems in India. It may be of interest to note that we have been using the Public 
Key Infrastructure (PKI)-based security in electronic transactions using the INFINET since as 
early  as  1999  –  many  years  before  the  international  network-based  financial  message 
transfer systems, such as S.W.I.F.T., migrated to this technology.  
In developing payment systems, the Reserve Bank had to be sensitive to and conscious of 
India's  low  levels  of  literacy,  and  its  economic  and  cultural  diversity.  Accordingly,  we 
developed  local  language-based  ATMs,  ATMs  using  VSAT-based  telecommunication  for 
difficult geographical terrain, solar power-based systems, and multi-application-based smart 
cards for small-value payments.  
Building on these multidimensional efforts, the Reserve Bank is now facilitating the process 
of  setting  up  the  National  Payments  Corporation  of  India,  under  the  aegis  of  the  Indian 
Banks’  Association  which  will,  in  due  course,  provide  and  operate  retail  payment  systems 
with the objective of ultimate settlement in central bank money.  
Challenges  
As technology relentlessly advances, payment mechanisms will expand and proliferate. This 
will  make  the  task  of  the  central  bank  more  complex  and  challenging.  Let  me  take  a  few 
moments to highlight some of the major challenges the Reserve Bank faces and the manner 
in which we are seeking to address them.  
• 
The  first  challenge  relates  to  the  multiple  roles  of  the  central  bank.  In  its 
developmental  role,  the  Reserve  Bank  is  an  operator  as  well  as  a  settlement 
provider  for  the  many  electronic  payment  systems.  These  include  the  Electronic 
Clearing  Service  (ECS-Credit  and  Debit  Clearing  and  the  National  ECS)  which  is 
akin  to  the  ACH  services  elsewhere  in  the  world,  the  National  Electronic  Funds 
Transfer  (NEFT)  for  one-to-one  electronic-based  credit-push  funds  transfers,  etc. 
The  operations  of  these  systems  will  eventually  migrate  to  the  proposed  National 
Payments  Corporation  of  India,  but  until  that  happens,  our  challenge  is  to  also 
manage the operational aspects of these systems with adequate firewalls.  
The Reserve Bank is statutorily empowered to regulate and supervise commercial 
banks.  But  the  non-banks  and  other  entities  too  provide  vital  payment  system 
services and there was a need to bring these too under a unified oversight function. 
Towards this end, the Payment and Settlement Systems Act authorises the Reserve 
Bank to also regulate and supervise these non-banks and other entities. The second 
BIS Review 33/2009
 4 
 challenge, therefore, is managing a myriad of service providers, all of who play an 
important role in the smooth operation of such payment systems.  
Another  challenge  for  countries  like  India,  which  receive  a  large  number  of 
remittances from migrant expatriates, is to ensure the availability of an efficient, low-
cost payment system for transfer of funds. Here, central banks of different countries 
will have to take a view on the role of non-bank entities in the process.  
Fourth, the high rate of technological obsolescence demands that such systems are 
subject  to  regular  and  continuous  upgrades,  not  only  at  the  service  /  settlement 
provider end, but also at the customer end. The problems faced in replicating a high-
technology requirement across a large number of users are well known. Migration of 
magnetic stripe based cards to chip-based cards and the need for token-key-based 
authentication devices instead of a PIN are some aspects that may be impacted by 
costs as well as implementation-related logistics. Fortunately, in the Indian context, 
these  are  relatively  easier  to  address  since  we  joined  the  user-based  technology 
band wagon at a later point of time. Of course, we cannot, and indeed should not, 
count forever on the advantage of leap frogging in technology, and going forward, 
our challenge is to be at the frontiers of best practice.  
The final challenge, and one that is growing in importance by the day, is to ensure 
the integrity of these systems against money-laundering and financing of terrorism.  
   Perspectives on the way forward  
Let me now look ahead to some emerging opportunities, in retail payment systems and the 
tasks  they  set  for  central  banks.  According  to  international  estimates,  the  volume  of  retail 
payments  in  major  countries  far  exceeds  the  number  of  large-value  transactions.  These 
volumes offer opportunities for potential entrants / service providers to vie for market share. 
Users will also be willing to try out new systems which provide them with more comfort, ease 
of  operation  and  efficiency.  That  said,  central  banks  worldwide  will  have  to  remain  ever 
vigilant to ensure that the new systems conform to the critical minimum requirements. 
Second, one of the advantages of multiple systems and service providers widen choice for 
the  user.  Competitive  forces  will,  of  course,  ensure  that  the  products  and  services  are 
continually  upgraded.  More  importantly,  risks  will  be  dispersed  across  many  units  and  not 
bundled  in  just  one  basket.  The  need  to  regulate  and  monitor  the  operations  of  multiple 
entities will be an important challenge for central banks.  
Third,  market  dynamics  will  ensure  operational  efficiency  especially  when  volumes  are 
substantial.  A  case  in  point  is  the  Indian  mobile  telephone  industry.  When  they  were  first 
introduced about a decade ago, the average cost of a mobile phone call used to be Rs.24 
per minute (roughly half a US Dollar) and that used to be charged on both the caller and the 
call receiver. Today, India boasts of some of the world’s lowest per call rate – most local calls 
are  charged  only  to  the  caller,  and  the  per  call  rate  is  just  Re.0.50  paise  per  minute  (just 
about one US cent). A reduction of as much as one-fiftieth in the original call charges in so 
short  a  span  of  time  calls  for  revisiting  the  Moore’s  law!  An  encore  of  similar  dramatic 
reduction  in  costs  in  the  retail  payment  systems  is  not  beyond  the  realm  of  possibility.  A 
beginning has already been made in the area of ATM-based payments whereby no charges 
will  be  levied  on  customers  for  use  of  ATMs  not  belonging  to  their  own  bank,  from  April, 
2009. 
Fourth,  as  retail  payments  go  into  large-scale  expansion,  new  issues  will  emerge.  The 
demarcating line between the large-value and the retail-payment systems is getting blurred. 
This  calls  for  increased  efforts  to  set  up  bench  marks  even  for  retail  payment  systems. 
Considering  the  risks  inherent  in  such  systems,  fresh  initiatives  are  needed  to  address 
BIS Review 33/2009 
 5
customer-protection  issues.  These  assume  greater  importance  in  the  context  of  the 
increasing spread of the concept of branchless banking.  
By  all  indications,  retail  payments  are  going  to  be  the  drivers  of  the  future  payment  and 
settlement  architecture.  The  Reserve  Bank  will  take  proactive  steps  towards  their 
operationalisation but within a regulatory framework that will mitigate the risks. My staff have 
advised me that they already have a cryptology for risk management – RISK, which would 
take into account the following:  
R – Recognition – to identify any risk early on and take proactive steps before it gets 
out of hand; 
I  –  Improvisation  –  of  new  methods,  techniques  and  tools  to  secure  better 
monitoring, and providing for a feed-forward rather than a feed-back system;  
S – Segmentation – to address smaller systems and sub-systems individually so as 
to address their unique features while also being mindful of the systemic impact; and 
K  –  Knowledge  –  to  enable  knowledge-based  decisions  in  a  knowledge-powered 
economy, resulting in scientifically-engineered and output-oriented action. 
All  the  above  efforts  are  aimed  at  providing  a  better  risk  management  framework.  Retail 
payments hold the key to the value chain as economies achieve progress in today’s complex 
world.  Innovation,  risk  management,  effort  and  increased  international  co-operation  will  be 
the key to success.  
I hope you all profited from your participation in this seminar, and more importantly, enjoyed 
spending the last three days here in Mamallapuram. For my part, I must say that I greatly 
enjoyed being here. 
6 
 BIS Review 33/2009
