Andres Lipstok: How to exit the economic crisis? 
Presentation  by  Mr  Andres  Lipstok,  Governor  of  Bank  of  Estonia,  at  the  conference 
“Majandus,  kuhu  lähed?  Kas  õigus  saab  aidata?”  (Quo  vadis,  economy?  Is  law  able  to 
help?), Tartu, 8 May 2009.  
 Dear ladies and gentlemen, 
I would like to thank the conference organisers, especially my good friend Paul Varul, for the 
invitation to speak at today's very topical conference. 
How to exit the economic crisis – this is the most urgent question for the policy and 
economy of both Estonia and Europe in 2009 and also the next years. The destiny of the 
Estonian economy greatly depends on what is going on around us, i.e., in the EU and entire 
world. Therefore, the first part of my presentation addresses the possibilities and ways out of 
the crisis from a slightly broader perspective, in the context of the world and the EU. 
First, let us have a look at the global economic situation. 
The global economy is in a deep recession at the start of 2009. For the first time after 
World War II, the global GDP is forecast to decline in 2009. According to the IMF's forecast, 
the decrease may amount to 1.3% We all know the global crisis originated in 2007 from the 
USA with the collapse of the high-yield bonds market. This event caused loss of confidence 
in bonds, investment funds and large banks. When the financial system stopped functioning, 
investment  consumption  and  trade  contracted  as  well.  This  process,  which  many  analysts 
considered in the beginning to be a temporary correction, escalated rapidly and turned into a 
crisis. 
But the solvency problems of US lower-income residents and their inability to repay 
their  mortgages  were  naturally  not  the  main  causes  of  the  current  situation.  Every 
economic crisis is in its nature overproduction, when new services and goods find no buyers. 
Therefore,  enterprises  squeeze  their  production,  lay  off  employees  and  refrain  from  new 
investments. The current situation is no exception to this rule. It also lies in overproduction 
and insufficient demand, which are caused by two main reasons. 
One  reason  is  excessive  optimism  which  prevailed  in  many  parts  of  the  advanced 
economies and in financial markets, encouraging people to consume more and save less. 
The  demand  based  on  over-optimism  was  driven  by  overly  large  fiscal  deficits  in  major 
economies and probably also by unduly low interest rates in many parts of the world. Another 
factor  contributing  to  exorbitant  demand  was  the  regulation  of  the  financial  system,  which 
practically rewarded risk-taking. 
The  other,  just  as  significant  reason  is  economic  policy  pursued  by  several  Asian 
countries  which  was  based  on  relatively  cheap  exports  and  low  currency  exchange 
rates.  Broad-based  and  sustainable  domestic  demand  was  and  is  too  little  valued  in 
economies based on cheap labour force, goods exports and related investment. Therefore, it 
can be assumed that private consumption and domestic demand were below par in Eastern 
Asia. The result was large current account surpluses and accumulating foreign reserves that 
were lent to the rich USA. 
It was impossible for such an economic model to be stable and by now, as I already 
mentioned, the situation has thoroughly changed.  
GDP  in  leading  industrial  countries  will  decrease  3.8%  this  year  with  growth  in  the  USA 
contracting by 2.8%. For the rest of the world this means the USA foreign trade deficit will 
reduce  notably,  which,  in  the  IMF's  estimate,  will  lead  to  shrinkage  in  the  USA  imports. 
BIS Review 89/2009 
 1
Therefore, global economic growth will not be able to lean on the US domestic demand and 
exports of goods and services to the States either this or the next year. 
The recession in the USA has hit hard exports-dependent East-Asian countries, where 
goods exports have declined by more than a third year-on-year. Therefore, smaller and 
more open Asian countries have suffered a very sharp downturn. For instance, Singapore is 
expected to undergo a 10% and Taiwan a 7.5% contraction. Larger Eastern-Asian countries, 
such  as  China,  maintain  their  economic  growth  by  launching  foreign  assets  accumulated 
over  the  past  ten  years  and  reducing  interest  rates.  National  expenditure  on  infrastructure 
has  been  markedly  boosted  and  it  is  also  hoped  cheap  bank  loans  will  help  keep  up 
consumption. The IMF forecasts Asian new industrial countries' economic growth will be –
5.6% in 2009 and 0.8% in 2010. 
In  conclusion,  the  current  crisis  has  thoroughly  changed  the  past  ten  year's 
development  scenario  of  the  global  economy.  The  end  of  the  current  growth  model  is 
characterised, at least in short term, by catastrophic contraction in trade in the whole world. 
At  the  same  time  it  has  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  in  the  case  of  free  market  economy,  a 
temporary  fall  is  always  replaced  by  a  rise.  All  major  crises  are  almost  always  caused  by 
national  policies,  which  affect  people's  expectations  and  decisions  made  on  the  ground  of 
these  expectations.  When  trying  to  make  up  for  previous  mistakes  in  a  crisis  situation, 
national policies have often stood in the way of free market economy corrections and thus 
also the recovery of growth. 
This  was  the  case  also  in  the  1930s,  when  recuperation  from  the  Great  Depression 
was too slow in many countries. Governments mistakenly thought that the best choices 
would  be  hindering  external  trade,  artificially  high  wages,  administrative  regulation  of 
production  and  protectionism.  This  resulted  in  a  further  decline  of  private  demand  and 
corporate  production  and  investment.  Thus  now,  at  the  start  of  the  21st  century,  the  most 
important thing to do is to refrain from protectionism, restrictions on the movement of goods 
and capital. The current global crisis is not a market economy slump, but a crisis of national 
policies  amplifying  discordances  and  imbalances.  As  I  mentioned  before,  fiscal  policy  was 
too weak in good times and reforms needed for balanced economic growth have in several 
cases been insufficiently implemented. This does not mean the state should now do nothing 
at  all  –  vice  versa.  But  national  policies  across  the  world  must  take  into  account  that  the 
policy  to  take  us  out  of  the  crisis  must  support  the  functioning  of  market  economy,  not 
constraining it. 
In this light, the growth prospects of the EU are very insecure. In the IMF's opinion GDP 
in  EU  countries  will  decrease  4%  in  2009  and  may  decline  by  0.3%  next  year.  Industrial 
production  in  the  EU  has  lowered  to  a  level  last  recorded  nearly  ten  years  ago.  Such 
pessimism contrasts rather sharply with the opinion quite widespread in the middle of 2008 – 
that  Europe  will  not  be  hit  very  hard  by  the  crisis.  Reality,  however,  has  turned  out  rather 
different. 
The EU has, on the one hand, been affected by loan losses suffered by major banks 
due to the financial crisis and, on the other hand, by drastic contraction in demand in 
its main export markets. The European Union is, for instance, much more open than the 
USA, thus the share of exports in its GDP is larger and its economy is more severely affected 
by  dwindling  global  trade.  In  addition,  banks  in  Europe  have  difficulties  with  financing 
enterprises,  since  on  top  of  the  losses  suffered  in  securities  markets,  asset  quality  is  also 
expected to deteriorate. To put it more simply, the share of bad loans will increase due to the 
recession. 
The  economic  crisis  has  affected  EU  Member  States  differently.  On  the  one  hand, 
tougher financing conditions and the drop in property prices have hit hard countries that have 
been  relying  on  financial  services  and  domestic  demand  in  recent  years,  mostly  Great 
Britain,  Spain  and  Ireland,  but  also  Estonia.  On  the  other  hand,  the  crisis  has  not  spared 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2009
countries that have been focusing on industrial production exports, primarily Germany, but 
also Sweden and Finland. Thus, the political choices of the Member States vary as well. 
Different  conditions  for  countries  borrowing  from  financial  markets  make  up  an 
additional problem in the EU.  General  distrust  in  the  global  financial  markets  as  well  as 
growing  fiscal  deficits,  expanding  government  debts  and  insecure  growth  prospects  have 
caused investors to become more risk-averse. As a result, the spread between the yields of 
government  bods  in  the  EU  has  notably  widened.  Some  Member  States  must  pay  higher 
interest compared to a couple of years ago when they wish to borrow. This makes it harder 
to finance state expenditures. 
Based  on  the  above,  the  EU's  economic  policy  measures  to  exit  the  crisis  can  be 
divided into three large categories that were agreed upon in the European Economic 
Recovery Plan at end-2008.  
The shorter-term goal is to stop the downturn and to stabilise the economy. In longer term, it 
is necessary to restore the confidence of enterprises, households and financial markets in 
the growth potential of the European economy. 
The short-term economic policy objective to reinforce aggregate demand by monetary 
and fiscal policy measures belongs to the first category. The ECB has lowered interest 
rates and considerably increased money market operations, i.e., the total volume of short-
term loans to banks. In addition, EU countries have agreed to support the economy in 2009 
and 2010 by raising fiscal expenditure in the total amount of 1.8% of GDP. However, this is 
constrained  by  rapidly  expanding  deficits  and  external  debts.  Therefore  it  is  important  that 
EU  Member  States  make  already  plans  for  reducing  fiscal  deficit  in  the  next  years.  The 
European  Commission  stresses  that  in  the  current  complicated  economic  environment  the 
Stability and Growth Pact is still relevant. The longer-term objective in the EU is to achieve 
fiscal balance or surplus. 
Second of all, it is extremely important to restore confidence in the financial sector. 
The minimum rate of guaranteed deposits in the EU was raised to 50,000 euro already in 
2008.  Thereafter  Member  States  have  agreed  upon  common  principles  to  support  the 
banking  system.  At  the  end  of  2008  Member  States  put  the  main  focus  on  the  banks' 
liabilities  side  to  ensure  banks  would  be  able  to  finance  their  operations  also  in  a  more 
adverse market situation. To this end many countries have offered collaterals to loans taken 
by  banks,  i.e.,  the  state  guarantees  the  repayment  of  loans  taken  by  banks.  In  several 
countries the government has made contributions to banks' capital and acquired holdings in 
commercial  banks.  At  the  beginning  of  this  year  a  common  accord  was  reached  on  the 
principles  to  be  implied  in  the  case  of  bad  loans  if  necessary.  Up  to  now,  the  guarantees 
promised  to  the  banking  sector,  primarily  by  older  Member  States,  amount  to  some  three 
billion  euro,  which  is  about  24%  of  GDP.  In  addition,  countries  such  as  Ireland,  the 
Netherlands and Great Britain, have injected a lot of national capital into their banks. In Great 
Britain, for example, it has become necessary to segregate bad loans. 
Third of all, to maintain economic growth potential, Member States should implement 
the  structural  reforms  set  out  in  the  Lisbon  Strategy.  The  reforms  help  reinforce 
competitiveness,  i.e.,  increase  the  flexibility  of  the  economy  and  the  labour  market.  The 
European economic policy must take into account that external demand and exports may not 
bounce back to the recent levels for several years. Therefore, the EU should start making 
even more use of the possibilities of its large domestic market. In Member States that have 
so far been focusing on exports this may mean an increase in the share of services, changes 
in employment, and more flexible forms of work. 
Thus, it can be said the principles agreed upon in the EU give the Member States all 
the  possibilities  for  exiting  the  economic  crisis.  Fiscal  policy  in  the  EU  as  a  whole  is 
forecast to loosen around 5% of GDP in 2009 compared to "normal" times and the ECB has 
lowered the interest rate to 1.25%. Thus, the EU economy has already received a significant 
macroeconomic stimulus, which should lead the EU back to the growth track in 2010. This 
BIS Review 89/2009 
 3
will create the conditions needed for economic restructuring, but every country has to take 
the necessary steps itself. 
What are the measures that should be taken to help Estonia out of the crisis? 
Estonia is part of the EU and the single market, so the framework agreed upon in the 
EU is also suitable to our economic policy. The general principle we would like to stress is 
that we must strengthen our ties with Europe and the EU single market even more. This is 
essential  for  ensuring  the  stability  and  development  of  the  Estonian  economy  and  the 
financial sector. In order to overcome the crisis, the stability and possibilities offered by the 
EU and the single market are vital to Estonia. 
The speed of overcoming the crisis depends on the flexibility of Estonia's enterprises 
and  their  success  in  reorganising  production  and  activities,  considering  changes  in 
the world and in the EU market. The task of the state is to create conditions supporting the 
reorganisation  and  investment.  Estonia's  economy  has,  in  fact,  already  displayed  a  rather 
good ability to adjust. The main changes include labour market adjustments and decelerating 
wage growth. This is definitely a difficult, but highly necessary process, which requires state 
support in the form of both a well-functioning and efficient unemployment insurance system 
and retraining possibilities. If we rely on strong macroeconomic policy, the principles of an 
open  economy  and  future-looking  investment,  Estonia  will  continue  to  have  all  the 
possibilities for defeating the crisis. But what are the national economy level measures the 
government should take and how should they support the financial system? 
Here I start with a firm standpoint that the fixed exchange rate of the kroon to the euro 
is the pillar of Estonia's economic policy and the accession to the euro area as soon 
as possible is its logical continuation. The experience of the past half a year show that 
monetary policy that is based on the fixed exchange rate and the currency board supports 
economic stability also in more difficult times. But how does the fixed exchange rate help us 
overcome the crisis? 
First  of  all,  it  helps  stabilise  inflation  expectations  and  stop  price  rises.  Price 
corrections after the accession to the EU were sharper then we expected. The opening of the 
labour market and price rises of many goods in the global market had a strong impact on 
Estonia. This stage, which was, in a sense, unavoidable and paradoxically also the result of 
successful  reforms  at  the  start  of  the  century,  is  now  over.  The  price  level  is  expected  to 
decline somewhat both this and next year. 
Second  of  all,  the  currency  board  arrangement  brought  about  a  relatively  fast 
correction in several sectors of the economy, which displayed clear signs of overheating 
after  the  accession  to  the  EU.  The  fixed  game  rules  in  banking,  the  economy  and  policy 
arising  from  the  fixed  exchange  rate  and  the  currency  board  notably  contributed  to 
smothering excessive euphoria already prior to the global crisis.  
Third of all, the fixed exchange rate is the pillar of our financial system as well. 
As  a  result  of  all  this,  the  vulnerabilities  of  the  Estonian  economy  have  decreased 
significantly.  This  will  enable  us  to  concentrate  on  measures  supporting  economic  growth 
once the crisis is over. I would like to stress once again that in a small and open economy 
like Estonia, the fixed exchange rate based policy is the best way to ensure the stability of 
money for both enterprises and households. Confidence in our own money is one of the most 
important factors in defeating the crisis.  
Thus,  joining  the  euro  area  will  be  a  logical  continuation  to  our  current  monetary 
policy and accelerate exiting the crisis. It is clear the adoption of the euro will offset the 
risks  that  have  been  overly  amplified  in  the  current  market  situation.  Moreover,  the 
changeover will reinforce the credibility of Estonia's financial system and the banks operating 
here. To sum up, Estonia's accession to the euro area is the country's short-term economic 
policy priority, which increases confidence in Estonia's economy. 
4 
 BIS Review 89/2009
Like we have said before, Estonia has all the possibilities for meeting the Maastricht criteria 
already at the end of 2009. 
The stability and credibility of the banking groups operating here, supported by close 
cooperation  between  Baltic  and  Nordic  countries  also  help  Estonia  overcome  the 
crisis.  
Banks in Estonia have sufficient funds to support restructuring in both the business sector 
and  the  entire  economy.  Eesti  Pank's  analyses  confirm  that  the  current  capitalisation  is 
sufficient  to  cover  possible  larger  loan  losses  without  banks  having  to  include  additional 
capital.  The  resources  of  banks  allow  their  lending  decisions  to  be  based  on  favourable 
medium-term  and  longer-term  economic  outlooks,  since  Estonia's  economic  convergence, 
i.e., the movement of our income level towards that of EU richer countries, will continue also 
in the future. 
Thus,  the  goal  of  banking  and  financial  sector  policy  is  cooperation  with  the  home 
countries of the banks operating in the EU and Estonia to ensure the functioning of 
the  common  banking  market  and  group-level  stability.  The  steps  taken  by  the  home 
countries of the banks operating in Estonia have considered the interests of the entire group 
and thus supported financial stability in Estonia. In this light it has to be emphasised that the 
measures  to  support  the  economy  approved  in  Estonia  allow  state  aid  also  in  a  situation 
where financial markets no longer function normally. But the main aim of the state support 
measures  is  to  organise  the  financing  of  starting  and  exporting  enterprises.  The  total  debt 
burden of Estonia's enterprises is relatively big and a decline in the total volume of debt in 
2009 is a natural reaction to previous years' rapid increase. 
The sustainability of fiscal policy is very important for restoring confidence in Estonia 
and adopting the euro. When looking at the changes made in the budget this year and at 
the  new  fiscal  strategy,  it  has  to  be  pointed  out  that  the  support  of  fiscal  policy  to  the 
economy was remarkable in 2008. The state budget swung from a 2.7% surplus to a deficit 
in the course of one year. This year, the share of state expenditures in GDP may rise to 43%. 
Thus,  it  is  important  to  ensure  fiscal  sustainability  this  year  and  also  in  the  next  years. 
Thereafter reserves must be restored. In Eesti Pank's estimate this means an extra 7 billion 
kroon cut in addition to the curtailments already made. 
Actions related to fiscal policy must be decisive, but thoroughly considered. I am not 
so pessimistic as to absolutely agree with the opinion that the government has reached the 
stage where it faces just "bad and very bad solutions". But it is also clear that there is no 
simple or simplified way to rekindle growth. Measures need to be taken on both the revenue 
and the expenditure side. But I think it should be kept in mind that it is state expenditure that 
has soared over the past years. On the other hand, the tax burden that has been relatively 
stable so far is one of the main strengths of the Estonian economy, leaving sufficient room 
for private initiative. 
To conclude, I will repeat the main message of Eesti Pank's spring forecast. According 
to the current outlooks, the economy should stabilise in the second half of this year 
and it may start growing again either at the end of 2009 or at the beginning of 2010. 
However, all forecasts continue to be insecure. If our main trading partners' growth recovered 
faster, it would also give impetus to Estonia's economic activity, whereas a protracted global 
economic downswing would put a drag on rekindling growth here. Recent days' messages 
from  the  world  have  been  slightly  more  optimistic  after  several  months  of  bad  news.  It  is 
thought the large support packages have finally started to render results. This requires even 
more urgently that countries be ready to take stapes to ensure long-term growth potential. It 
has  happened  before  in  the  world  that  economic  crises  have  been  defeated  by  creating 
assumptions for a new crisis. 
Thank you for your attention! 
BIS Review 89/2009 
 5
