Glenn Stevens: Challenges for economic policy 
Address  by  Mr  Glenn  Stevens,  Governor  of  the  Reserve  Bank  of  Australia,  to  The  Anika 
Foundation Luncheon, supported by Australian Business Economists and Macquarie Bank, 
Sydney, 28 July 2009. 
I thank Kathryn Ford for assistance in preparing this address.  
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  Reserve 
Bank of Australia’s website.  
 Thank you all for coming today, and thank you to Macquarie Bank for their financial support, 
and the Australian Business Economists for their logistical support for today’s function. 
Those of you who were here at last year’s Anika Foundation lunch may have noticed that I 
have selected the same title today.1 The challenges have changed in nature, but there are no 
fewer of them. The first part of my remarks will be about the general set of issues confronting 
policymakers in key economies. They are not about Australia, unless specifically noted. I 
will devote time to Australia-specific issues in the second part. 
Global challenges 
A year ago, the international financial crisis was unfolding, but had not, at that point, spun out 
of control. The global economy had reached the peak of a long, strong upswing, which had 
stretched capacity and seen a wide range of raw materials and energy prices reach very high 
levels. Strange as it may now seem in light of subsequent events, a wave of concern about 
inflation swept financial markets in the middle of last year. 
Many countries were grappling with the lift in oil prices, which were reaching their peak last 
July.  That  was  starting  to  reduce  growth  but  also  push  up  the  general  level  of  consumer 
prices in the advanced countries. In many emerging economies, strong growth had pushed 
up inflation significantly, even apart from food and energy prices. 
Australia was experiencing high inflation too, a result of the expansionary impact of a once-
in-fifty-years terms-of-trade rise in an economy already close to full employment. We were 
also  being  affected  by  the  dampening  forces  of  the  financial  events,  though  by  less  than 
countries whose banks were closely involved in the problem lending areas. 
Since then, inflation rates have trended down in most countries. One thing that helped this 
was that the rapid final lift in oil prices during the first half of 2008 was reversed by the end of 
the year. Much of the cumulative increase that had occurred over the preceding five years, 
however, remains in place. Broadly parallel trends can be seen in other resource prices. 
All  of  that  suggests  a  significant  structural  rise  in  demand  for  energy  and  resources  has 
occurred, as a result of the cumulative growth of the emerging world. This seems more likely 
to be a feature of the international economy for some time than to go away. If so, it has to be 
accommodated by the advanced industrial countries that, hitherto, have had access to those 
resources  on  favourable  terms.  Such  an  accommodation  can  be  made,  over  time,  via 
responses to higher prices in terms of efficiency gains, structural change in economies and 
so  on.  But  it  is  as  well  to  recognise  that  an  adjustment  has  to  be  made.  This  could  well 
remain  something  of  a  medium-term  challenge  for  economic  policies  in  the  relevant 
countries. 
                                                 
1 
The Anika Foundation was established in 2005 to raise funds for the purposes of supporting research into 
adolescent depression and suicide. For details, see http://www.anikafoundation.com. 
BIS Review 93/2009 
 1
At a cyclical frequency, the global economic downturn has taken the pressure off prices for 
goods and services for the time being. Most likely, inflation rates in the developed world will 
continue to be low for a while. Some observers worry about deflation. 
For the past nine months or so, the key imperative has been to stabilise financial systems, 
and  to  support  demand  during  a  process  of  de-leveraging,  so  as  to  halt  an  incipient 
downward  spiral  of  falling  asset  prices,  contracting  credit,  slumping  spending,  further 
deflationary pressure on prices, and so on. Probably in some of the most important countries, 
this support will need to remain in place for a while yet. Once demand is on a self-sustaining 
path of expansion, the support can be removed. 
At  a  longer  frequency,  on  the  other  hand,  the  aggressive,  and  in  places  unconventional, 
policy responses to the contraction in demand are seen by some observers as increasing the 
risk of inflation. The essential reasons for such concerns boil down to some fairly basic fiscal 
and monetary notions. 
Fiscal  deficits  are  very  large  in  some  countries  now,  and  look  like  remaining  so  for  some 
years. Public debt is rising quickly in many countries. For the G7 countries, gross public debt 
will probably exceed 100 per cent of GDP within the next year. Some major central banks 
have  expanded  their  balance  sheets  dramatically,  purchasing  government  debt  and/or 
private securities in order to give additional impetus to efforts to support financial systems 
and aggregate demand. 
It  is  not  that  the  fiscal  burdens  are  unprecedented:  there  are  periods  in  history  in  which 
deficits and debts were this large, or even much larger. They were mostly, however, war-time 
precedents,  and  wars  have  tended  to  be  inflationary  for  the  combatants.  Likewise,  large-
scale expansions of central bank balance sheets have usually been seen as a fairly sure way 
of debasing the value of a currency. 
So  at  present,  we  have  the  unusual  situation  where  some,  who  look  at  the  prospective 
deficits and debt burdens, combined with ‘unconventional’ monetary policy measures, worry 
about  high  inflation  down  the  road,  even  as  others  worry  about  the  possibility  of  deflation 
over a shorter time horizon, as a result of large-scale overcapacity. 
Logically, subject to one or two important assumptions, there must exist a path that avoids 
both  these  unpalatable  alternatives  –  deflation  and  inflation.  Finding  that  path  is  the 
challenge for policymakers around the world over the next several years. 
Faced with a large downturn like this, it was the right thing to do to allow budgets to go into 
deficit.  Over  time,  though,  there  will  obviously  need  to  be  fiscal  consolidation.  This  will  be 
easiest where the fiscal measures taken were temporary: it would be a matter mainly of not 
repeating the measures. Where more permanent measures were enacted, it will be more of a 
hard grind to get onto the path of sustainability. 
In some countries, moreover, the legacy of the excesses of the earlier part of this decade, 
and  of  the  steps  needed  to  cope  with  their  subsequent  unwinding,  is  likely  to  be  quite 
persistent.  Some  major  country  governments  have  assumed,  one  way  or  another,  a 
significant  part  of  the  obligations  associated  with  earlier  poor  decisions  by  lenders  and 
investors. Moreover, the level of potential output in some economies may have taken a step 
down,  which  will  make  the  path  back  to  fiscal  sustainability  more  difficult  to  reach.  In  the 
countries  concerned,  there  was  no  alternative  to  these  actions;  inaction  would  have  been 
more  costly.  Nonetheless,  all  of  this  suggests  that,  in  those  countries,  constraints  on 
economic policy are likely to last for some time. 
The higher debt burdens will limit the extent to which worthwhile structural spending levels 
can be maintained for other things – like in health, education, urban infrastructure and so on. 
Moreover, the capacity to respond with fiscal policy to another economic downturn, should 
there be one, would be much more limited. 
2 
 BIS Review 93/2009
Over  time,  these  constraints  will  tend  to  become  more  apparent.  Of  course  they  might  be 
disguised for a while under conditions of higher inflation. Indeed, the potential attraction of 
the ‘inflation tax’ as a fiscal device is precisely why some worry about inflation, given the size 
of budget deficits in some countries. 
The  main  safeguard  that  stands  between  debt  holders  and  that  outcome  is  the  agreed 
framework for monetary policy, which is, with some differences in detail, in place pretty much 
everywhere.  Its  key  components  are  a  strong  focus  on  medium-term  price  stability  and 
sufficient operational independence for central banks to pursue that goal. 
This framework will require central banks to remove the exceptional accommodation being 
supplied  at  present,  in  due  course.  Getting  the  timing  of  that  right  will  not  be  easy.  In  the 
major countries, the calibration of even conventional policies has probably been dislodged by 
the sequence of events, not to mention the almost total lack of comparable history against 
which to calibrate the unconventional measures. 
But  while  achieving  a  successful  ‘exit’  will  be  quite  a  challenge,  the  chances  will  be 
maximised under the sorts of policy frameworks currently in place in most countries. For a 
key  assumption  behind  the  notion  that  the  ideal  path  between  deflation  and  inflation  can 
even  be  found  is  that  inflation  expectations  remain  anchored.  Were  they  to  start  to  drift 
upwards, policymakers could be presented with an unenviable situation of gathering inflation 
and ongoing weakness in real economic activity. Their choices would be very bleak indeed in 
that world. 
So, expectations remain key. It would, therefore, be a mistake to weaken commitments to 
clearly understood goals for inflation, of either the explicit or implicit type. 
Assuming  the  present  set  of  monetary  frameworks  remains  in  place,  then,  the  real 
constraints will have to be faced squarely. This only reinforces the importance of maximising 
productivity growth. The households of the Western world are currently feeling that they can 
no longer consume as they did, in part because the earlier spending is now seen to have 
been based on an unrealistic set of assumptions about long-run income and wealth. To that 
extent, there is no real way around a period of adjustment involving lower consumption for a 
while. 
But  the  adjustment  could  nonetheless  be  eased  if  a  better  foundation  for  optimism  about 
future income could reasonably be established. Productivity is the key to that. In fact it is the 
only real basis for it. 
Of course, finding more productivity is easier said than done. But one key element will be to 
maintain open and competitive markets for goods and services, since they are most likely to 
spur the innovation that raises productivity. It is a bit disturbing, in this context, that the World 
Trade Organization reports a pick-up in trade-restricting decisions by governments in recent 
times. The challenge for governments is to resist these tendencies. That, of course, is not a 
new challenge, but it is as important as ever. 
Part of the way ahead will, at some point,  involve winding back the extensive government 
guarantees (and in some cases extensive public ownership) of financial institutions around 
the world. These measures were necessary last October in the extreme uncertainty of the 
time, and played a critical role in stabilising confidence in the core of the financial system, 
and re-opening key capital markets. But they are undesirable as a permanent feature of the 
landscape. 
Countries  that  issued  very  generous  or  even  unlimited  guarantees  of  deposits  will want  to 
make  sure  such  steps  truly  were  emergency  measures,  by  scaling  them  back  to  a  more 
sustainable  set  of  deposit  insurance  arrangements.  Likewise,  it  would  be  desirable  that 
guarantees for wholesale raisings in capital markets lapse into disuse as conditions improve. 
To  date,  in  excess  of  US$800  billion  of  government-guaranteed  debt  has  been  issued  in 
public markets by banks around the world. An unknown additional sum has been placed into 
private hands directly. 
BIS Review 93/2009 
 3
Taking  account  of  the  additional  debt  governments  are  issuing  for  regular  fiscal  purposes, 
plus the funding for bank rescue packages, the shape of global capital markets is changing 
significantly. Government and government-guaranteed debt of one form or another is rapidly 
increasing  globally.  This  has  been  accommodated  so  far  because  it  has,  by  and  large, 
matched investors’ shifting risk preferences. Certainly people will worry, longer term, about 
increases  in  long-term  interest  rates  potentially  ‘crowding  out’  private  borrowers.  To  date, 
though,  long-term  rates  remain  historically  pretty  low  for  public  borrowers,  despite  the 
prospect  of  very  large  debt  issuance.  They  have  increased  somewhat,  but  this  is  best 
understood as an unwinding of the extreme risk aversion of 2008 and early 2009. 
But the longer-term question is whether, even without adverse effects on borrowing costs, we 
would  really  want  to  keep  moving  in  the  direction  of  a  world  where  the  bulk  of  debt  is 
government-issued  or  government-guaranteed.  It  seems  to  me  that  that  could  easily  be  a 
world  in  which  investors  end  up  being  no  more  discerning  about  risk  and  return  than  the 
buyers  of  CDOs  a  few  years  ago,  and  in  which  banks  themselves  ultimately  rely  on  the 
guarantees  to  an  inappropriate  or  even  dangerous  extent.  More  generally,  while  some 
countries do need significant regulatory reforms in the financial sector, do we want to throw 
away the genuine advances of risk management and globalisation of the past generation? 
Surely the better world for the decades ahead is one where a global financial system, having 
been stabilised at a time of crisis by public intervention (at major cost to shareholders and 
incumbent managers as well as taxpayers), plays its proper role of capital allocation and risk 
management. To be sure, it failed to perform as promised in the recent past. But it would be 
preferable, in my judgement, to work at making the system more effective in doing that job, 
than to retreat into the financial repression of an earlier state of the world. 
Finding a way to combine efficiency and stability in the way we need is a major challenge. 
The regulatory arbitrages and skewed incentives of the past need to be corrected. The likely 
pro-cyclicality  of  the  regulatory  standards  needs  moderation.  Work  is  well  under  way  on 
those fronts. Most importantly, the global policymaking community will have to grapple more 
effectively with the problem of entities that are ‘too big to fail’, but potentially ‘too big to save’, 
especially  where  their  activities  cross  national  borders.  This  is  probably  the  most  taxing 
financial regulatory problem of our time. 
For their part, banks will need to reduce their reliance on the extended guarantees and stand 
on their own feet before too much longer. The banks of the United States and Europe are 
starting down this path on their wholesale issuance, having recognised that it is in their own 
interests to do so. It would make sense for Australian banks, which have accounted for 10 
per cent of global issuance of government-guaranteed bank debt over the past nine months, 
to step up their efforts to do likewise. 
Australian challenges 
Since I have now mentioned the Australian situation, I will go on to talk about challenges for 
economic policies at home. 
The flexibility to use macroeconomic policies, and other measures such as guarantees for 
deposit-taking  institutions,  has  been  used  to  support  demand  and  maintain  confidence, 
through  the  period  of  maximum  global  economic  contraction.  To  date,  because  of  those 
actions, earlier sensible management (public and private) and a degree of good fortune, the 
Australian economy and our financial system have been travelling rather better than those of 
most of our peers through the crisis and the initial economic aftermath. 
Six months ago, my own view was that the biggest risk to the Australian economy was an 
unwarranted loss of confidence in our medium-term prospects. Late last year, survey after 
survey pointed to a major battening down of the hatches by businesses across the country. 
This  was  quite  understandable,  and  in  some  respects  eminently  logical  at  the  level  of  the 
4 
 BIS Review 93/2009
individual enterprise. But the risk was that these actions, in bringing on the very weakness 
that everyone feared, could set off a cycle of further weakening in demand and output. 
Now,  however,  it  looks  like  confidence  has  recovered  some  ground.  Economic  conditions 
remain very difficult in some sectors. But surveys now suggest that many businesses have 
found  that  the  worst  has  not  occurred,  and  are  perhaps  thinking  about  their  medium-term 
strategies for the next expansion. They are tending to try to hang on to employees who were 
recruited and trained at some expense and who will be needed in the future under conditions 
of stronger demand. Many listed companies are taking the opportunity to raise new equity, 
strengthening balance sheets. The fact that they can tap the markets for those funds, by the 
way, says something about the underlying resilience of the system. 
Consumer confidence has also recovered a lot of ground. In fact in recent readings it has 
been  at  or  above  long-term  averages.  This  should  not  be  entirely  surprising.  Households 
have  seen  significant  gains  from  the  various  fiscal  packages  as  well  as  declining  petrol 
prices.  For  indebted  households,  there  has  been  a  very  large  reduction  in  debt  servicing 
costs as a result of easier monetary policy. Against that, unemployment has been rising, and 
a great deal of prominence has been given in public discussion to forecasts that it will rise 
further, with associated predictions that this will weaken confidence and demand and so on. 
To date, however, the rise in unemployment has been a little slower than earlier feared, and 
the  effect  of  the  more  positive  factors  for  households  has,  so  far,  outweighed  fears  of 
unemployment.  
In  addition,  the  decline  in  interest  rates,  together  with  the  additional  grants  for  first-home 
buyers,  has  seen  a  significant  pick-up  in  demand  for  housing  finance.  The  value  of  loan 
approvals has risen by about a third since the low point in the middle of 2008. In contrast to 
developments in so many other countries, house prices are tending, if anything, to rise, and 
arrears  rates  on  the  bulk  of  mortgages  remain  very  low  by  historical  and  international 
standards. In fact, across some portfolios arrears rates have declined in recent months. 
We  cannot  claim  that  Australia  has  avoided  any  downturn  at  all.  It  appears  at  this  stage, 
however, that the downturn we are having may turn out not to be one of the more serious 
ones  of  the  post-War  era,  in  contrast  to  the  experiences  of  so  many  other  countries.  It  is 
becoming more common for Australians to see the glass as half full than as half empty. Put 
another way, we can much more easily imagine upside risks to the outlook, to balance out 
the downside ones, than was the case six months ago. 
So far, so good. But what challenges lie ahead? And how should we respond to them? 
Just as it would have been a mistake nine months ago to write-off our long-term economic 
prospects at the height of the financial turmoil, it would be a mistake now to lapse into the 
comfortable assumption that easy prosperity will come our way. 
The pace of global growth, and the easy availability of credit, seen in the period up to 2007 
was not the norm. It is unlikely to be seen again any time soon. The path to economic health 
for the major countries of the world will still be a difficult one, because the legacy of the crisis 
will cast a shadow for some time. Major international banks will remain diminished in stature 
and balance sheet capability, and will be required to devote more capital to their strategies in 
the  future.  If  global  regulators  have  their  way,  the  world  will  be  characterised  by  less 
leverage,  and  scarcer  and  more  expensive  credit,  than  in  the  earlier  period.  We  here  in 
Australia have to accept that fact and accommodate it in our thinking. 
One thing this presumably means is that the prominence of household demand in driving the 
expansion from the mid 1990s to the mid 2000s should not be expected to recur in the next 
upswing.  The  rise  in  household  leverage,  the  much  lower  rate  of  saving  out  of  current 
income, and the rise in asset values we saw since the mid 1990s, are far more likely to have 
been features of a one-time adjustment, albeit a fairly drawn-out one, than of a permanent 
trend.  Moreover  the  risks  associated  with  those  trends  going  too  far  are  apparent  from 
BIS Review 93/2009 
 5
events in other countries. These risks have been reasonably contained so far in Australia – 
but it would be prudent not to push our luck here. 
A  very  real  challenge  in  the  near  term  is  the  following:  how  to  ensure  that  the  ready 
availability and low cost of housing finance is translated into more dwellings, not just higher 
prices.  Given  the  circumstances  –  the  economy  moving  to  a  position  of  less  than  full 
employment,  with  labour  shortages  lessening  and  reduced  pressure  on  prices  for  raw 
material inputs – this ought to be the time when we can add to the dwelling stock without a 
major run-up in prices. If we fail to do that – if all we end up with is higher prices and not 
many more dwellings – then it will be very disappointing, indeed quite disturbing. Not only 
would  it  confirm  that  there  are  serious  supply-side  impediments  to  producing  one  of  the 
things  that  previous  generations  of  Australians  have  taken  for  granted,  namely  affordable 
shelter,  it  would  also  pose  elevated  risks  of  problems  of  over-leverage  and  asset  price 
deflation down the track. 
Over  the  medium  term,  the  emergence  of  China  (and  other  countries  such  as  India)  will 
continue, and will offer opportunities for Australia. Plenty of observers, the RBA among them, 
have  been  saying  this  for  years.  But  China’s  emergence  also  presents  challenges.  If 
commodity  prices  do  stay  at  their  current  relatively  high  levels  on  the  back  of  strong 
emerging world demand, the mineral extraction sector and all those parts of the Australian 
economy that service it and feel its flow-on effects, will expand. Other sectors will, relatively, 
contract over time. That is to say, the structural adjustment issues that faced us a year and a 
half ago, and which have received less attention since then, would resume. These sorts of 
adjustment in the economy have industrial, geographical and social dimensions. 
Moreover,  if  we  are  more  integrated  into  China’s  expansion,  we  will  be  similarly  more 
exposed  to  the  consequences  of  whatever  might  go  wrong  in  that  country.  So  our 
understanding of how the Chinese economy works, and of what risks may be accumulating 
there, will need continual work. 
To conclude, challenges abound for policymakers, for private firms and for individuals. The 
fact that we have managed to get through the past nine months in reasonable shape ought to 
give  us  some  quiet  confidence  in  our  capacity  to  meet  the  current  set  of  ‘crisis’-related 
issues. But many years of careful work is the price of being able to ride out crises and benefit 
from the ensuing period of growth. We will need to re-invest in all that over the years ahead. 
Thank you once again for coming today, and for your support of the Anika Foundation. 
6 
 BIS Review 93/2009
