Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Thrift banks – moving forward through 
responsive, responsible banking 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas),  at  the  Annual  Convention  of  the  Chamber  of  Thrift  Banks, 
Makati City, 13 March 2009. 
 Ambassador  Alfredo  Yao,  Immediate  Past  President,  Mr.  Pascual  Garcia  III,  Incoming 
President  of  the  Chamber  of  Thrift  Banks,  Distinguished  officers  and  members  of  the 
Chamber,  colleagues  from  the  BSP,  members  of  the  media,  special  guest,  ladies  and 
gentlemen, Good morning. 
It  is  always  a  pleasure  to  keynote  the  Chamber’s  annual  convention.  This  year,  you  have 
certainly chosen a very appropriate and constructive theme – “Thrift Banks: Moving Forward 
Through Responsive, Responsible Banking”. I see being responsive and responsible as two 
sides  of  the  same  coin  –  one  side  balances  and  completes  the  other.  To  illustrate,  if  you 
were only reactive to changes around you but not mindful of the impact of your actions on 
those around you, that could lead to discord. If, on the other hand, you are fully aware only of 
your own obligation, without being sensitive to changes in your surroundings, that could lead 
to  stagnation.  You  have  to  be  both  –  responsive  and  responsible  –  to  be  able  to  push 
forward.  
A convention’s theme is only as good as the actions that will spring forth from it. So I ask the 
question,  what  can  the  public  expect  from  a  responsible  and  responsive  thrift  banking 
industry?  
The  thrift  banking  industry  should be  able  to make  the  convention  theme  come  to  fruition, 
despite the distractions of the current crisis. Ladies and gentlemen, you have a gem of an 
opportunity to build upon a stable foundation. Through the difficult reforms that together we 
had  put  in  place  over  the  last  few  years,  our  banking  system  has  remained  sound, 
considering the scope and enormity of the current global financial crisis. In particular,  
• 
The  banking  industry’s  balance  sheet  grew  in  2008,  despite  stressed  global 
conditions, while both NPL and NPA ratios remained relatively stable. This is critical 
when one recalls what it was like in the early months of the Asian Financial crisis 
when comparable ratios were rising in large discrete increments. 
While profitability has and could be under further pressure, the capital of the banking 
system  as  a  whole  is  considerably  well  above  international  norms  and  our  own 
prudential standards.  
In  addition,  our  real  GDP  growth  of  4.6%  in  2008  was  not  only  notable  vis-à-vis 
other economies, it was further supported by the continuing deceleration in inflation, 
which in February stood at 7.3%. 
On the external front, our Gross International Reserves is growing (all-time high of 
$39.3 billion in February), the BOP was in surplus in 2008 and will also be in surplus 
in 2009, and remittances from overseas Filipinos continue to flow, even though the 
Peso has lost some ground since last year.  
   In sum, the banking system continues to be fundamentally sound and stable, and operates in 
a macroeonomic environment that has stood resilient.  
Given these, the material question that needs to be asked is: what do all of these banking 
and economic indicators mean for your public?  
BIS Review 29/2009 
 1
Perhaps, it would be useful to go back to the law which created thrift banks. The Thrift Bank 
Act of 1995 says that thrift banks are supposed to “promote agriculture and industry and at 
the same time place within easy reach of the people the medium to long-term credit facilities 
at reasonable cost”. In other words, it is about developing a targeted economic activity and 
providing term financing. 
Building on this mandate, the thrift banking industry has developed itself, so as to offer far 
more services and products to its banking public.  
Today,  under  clear  guidelines  and  appropriate  approvals,  thrift  banks  can  perform  trust 
operations,  act  as  a  Foreign  Currency  Deposit  Unit  (FCDU),  open  domestic  and  foreign 
letters of credit, engage in quasi-banking activities and undertake, where allowed, derivative 
activities. These new functions are proof of the continuing progress of the industry, led by 
your  hardworking  officers  and  directors  of  the  Chamber.  Recently,  the  Monetary  Board 
approved  the  lifting  of  the  requirement  to  execute  a  Surety  Agreement  by  any  single 
stockholder, natural or juridical, owning more than 50 percent of the voting stock of a bank 
with  an  approved  rediscounting  line  with  the  BSP.  This  was  with  the  expressed  intent  of 
facilitating the faster processing of rediscounting loans. Thee total rediscounting budget has 
also been trebled to P60 billion and the loan value increased from 80 to 90 percent. 
Herein  lies  the  real  challenge  of  your  convention  theme.  To  provide  responsible  and 
responsive  banking  services,  different  types  of  banks  must  be  able  to  cater  to  the  varied 
needs  of  differentiated  constituents.  It’s  not  simply  a  matter  of  having  access  to  as  many 
product types, but how one maximizes that privilege to serve his public best. 
In the context of our financial infrastructure, we have commercial banks, thrift banks, rural 
banks, and cooperative banks. We have do-it-all institutions like universal banks. In terms of 
products, we have created curious concoctions like a “quasi-bank” which in the vernacular 
translates  to  “parang  bangko”  and  “deposit  substitutes”  which  some  have  described  as 
“deposito na rin”.  
Clearly,  thrift  banks  share  many  of  the  facilities  and  services  that  your  commercial  bank 
brethren can employ. In fact all of the recently-BSP approved functions and products that you 
could enter into are similarly possible for your counterparts in the commercial and universal 
banking industry.  
Thrift banks are also like rural banks, in that thrift banks remain positioned for the financing 
requirements of the general public across the archipelago.  
Now,  however,  with  commercial  banks  positioned  at  the  corporate  high  end  and  the  rural 
banks  addressing  the  needs  of  the  countryside,  that  leaves  the  “viable  middle”  as  your 
natural  market.  Ladies  and  gentlemen,  you  are  well-positioned  to  take  the  cudgels  for  the 
MSME sector, including the microfinance sector. I urge you to appreciate that you are much 
closer to SMEs which represent the backbone of the Philippine economy. Instead of seeing a 
disadvantage in allowed and disallowed activities, I encourage you to see the advantage of 
your  target  market.  This  is  not  to  be  taken  as  a  response  to  the  on-going  crisis.  It  goes 
beyond the challenges of the current environment. It is to clearly define your target market, 
and towards that be responsive and responsible.  
Where does this leave you from a strategic and tactical stand point? One easy option is to 
continue  what  you  are  already  doing.  As  of  September  2008,  about  59  percent  of  the 
industry’s loan portfolio was in real estate, business activity and loans to individuals. Another 
option, is for you to increase your loan portfolio for manufacturing and construction, two vital 
industry  segments  that  could  help  ensure  that  our  domestic  economy  continues  to  grow 
above long-term trend.  
What is really critical for thrift banks at this juncture is to determine how to incorporate the 
new facilities and offer new services to your public. With newer tools and more opportunities, 
I  expect  that  beyond  improving  your  loan  industry  mix,  the  thrift  banking  industry  would 
expand its balance sheet and continue the improvement in your NPL ratios. As of September 
2 
 BIS Review 29/2009
2008,  I  see  P482  billion  in  total  assets,  P334  billion  in  peso  deposits  and  an  NPL  ratio 
(inclusive  of  IBL)  of  6.6  pct.  These  provide  useful  benchmarks  against  which  we  envision 
significant improvements this time next year.  
Ladies and gentlemen, I will not pretend that the road that lies ahead is free and clear for all 
of us. We live in a global market that is experiencing a global shock and to a large extent 
then, achieving improvements in our balance sheets is something we have to work for.  
Perhaps,  the  biggest  threat  for  us  moving  forward  is  if  we  persist  to  traverse  the  road  of 
financial risk without having a clear idea of our target market. If we try to become everything 
to everyone, we become lost in a sea of look-alikes. However, if we specialize too much, we 
narrow our target markets that it may become untenable for us to continue.  
Let  me  then  ask  you  the  same  question:  what  do  all  of  these  challenges  mean  to  your 
banking public? In answering this question, the key lies not with the public, your customers, 
your clients. Instead, it remains with you and your ability to balance yourselves within myriad 
needs.  The  way  forward  is  for  your  institutions  to  develop  core  competencies  in  various 
facets to allow you to co-exist with other financial institutions in a competitive world. There 
too is no denying that each one of us needs to define and live within our target market. For 
thrift  banks,  let  me  once  again  encourage  you  to  focus  on  MSMEs  even  though  in  many 
respects the label of “SME” is itself a simplification of complex requirements from evolving 
clients. 
Going back to the convention theme, I felt it was necessary to ask the difficult question: What 
do all these mean for your public, your customers, your clients? If our financial market is to 
make  headway  with  the  banking  public,  this  is  the  question  that  always  and  continuously 
should  be  asked.  Remember,  the  evolution  of  the  structure  of  our  financial  market  must 
constantly be guided by the best interest of the public that this market serves. 
I realize that we can all move forward more expeditiously only within the confines of a strong 
and  stable  financial  and  macroeconomic  environment.  This  is  why  the  BSP  endeavors 
through its policies to create an operating framework where financial markets could efficiently 
function. It will, however, be important to remember that the relative strength and stability that 
our markets enjoy today have come about through the lessons from our own past. The BSP 
together with the banking industry will remain steadfast in our reform effort.  
If we are to serve our public, we must continue to be responsive to their needs and to ensure 
that  we  act  responsibly,  mindful  of  the  trust  bequeathed  by  our  public  on  us.  The  term 
“fiduciary  responsibility”  is  not  just  a  mantra  that  is  conveniently  brought  out  as  the  need 
arises but it is instead a social contract with our most basic constituent. 
This is the way forward and this is the high bar that must be set if we are to see responsive 
and responsible banking bear fruit. 
I have seen our market rise with resiliency when it was down. I have every bit of confidence 
to know that it will find the answer to the difficult questions when our present position is that 
of relative strength. It is after all, all about who we are who we serve, and, now is the time to 
show what we are made of. 
Thank you very much and good morning. 
BIS Review 29/2009 
 3
