Pentti Hakkarainen: Future of retail banking – more competition needed 
Background paper by Mr Pentti Hakkarainen, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Finland, for 
the  Panel  Session  at  the  Joint  Conference  of  the  European  Central  Bank  and  the 
Netherlands  Bank  on  “Retail  payments:  integration  and  innovation”,  Frankfurt  am  Main, 
25-26 May 2009. 
Views expressed are personal and do not necessarily represent the views of the Bank of Finland.  
   The major challenges for retails banking 
Today almost all retail banks in the European region are universal banks which, in addition to 
making loans, taking deposits and processing payments, also provide wealth management 
services, brokerage and even corporate finance including not only debt and equity issues but 
also  M&A  consultancy.  Several  underlying  trends  influence  the  business  conditions  in  the 
retail  banking  market.  These  factors  pushing  development  of  the  banking  business  have 
existed already quite some time.  
• 
First is new technology, which has brought modern channels for delivering financial 
services; ATMs, internet, mobile phones and increasing use of telecommunication in 
general.  
Secondly  the  borders  between  different  businesses  and  different  countries 
have become less clear and less imperative. Insurance companies are providing 
long-term  savings  and  investment  products.  Likewise,  banks  have  entered  into 
insurance  business,  mainly  but  not  only  in  the  life-insurance  field.  Traditionally, 
banking was regulated nationally and retail banking in particular was seen as a very 
local  business,  but  in  recent  years  several  banks  have  entered  into  new  markets 
out-side their country of origin.  
Thirdly,  heavy  fixed  investments  make  it  more  difficult  to  enter  the  banking 
industry.  Starting  a  banking  business  has  meant  high  fixed  investment  costs  in 
technology,  hardware  and  software,  in  brand  creation  etc,  although  once  running, 
business  causes  relatively  low  marginal  operating  costs.  Thus  getting  bigger, 
acquiring new clients and market share has been crucial for all retail banks. Also the 
optimal  use  of  equity  capital  has  pushed  for  increases  in  size  and  volumes. 
However,  the  impact  of  size  on  costs  is  far  from  being  a  trivial  and 
straightforward issue. There is plenty of academic research on this topic, but this 
literature  has  failed  to  reach  any  consensus  on  the  optimal  size  of  a  banking 
institution.  Optimal  size  may  depend  on  possibilities  to  outsource.  Now  there  are 
more common IT-solutions and available at much lower costs to banks than before.  
One challenge is the dependence of banks on cross-subsidization, especially of payment 
services. This practice may have made it more difficult for niche players to enter the market 
because  obviously  one  cannot  cross-subsidize  between  products  unless  one  provides  a 
large number of diverse services. Cross-subsidization has led to a situation where customers 
have got some services, such as payment services, entirely free or by paying just a modest 
fee, whereas transaction deposits are paid a very low rate of interest. Hence, customers pay 
for their payment services implicitly rather than explicitly, by accepting a deposit rate that is 
far  below  the  risk-free  return  available  elsewhere.  One  may  wonder  why  this  has  come 
about. Without going too deeply into the matter I just want to refer to a dissertation thesis by 
Dr Juha Tarkka, Advisor to the Board in the Bank of Finland, according to which this cross 
subsidization  may  be  a  fully  rational  response  to  prevailing  conditions  for  three  different 
BIS Review 64/2009 
 1
reasons;  the  taxation  treatment  of  “free  services”,  price  discrimination  between  customers 
under imperfect competition, and customers' uncertainty of their service requirements.1  
This cross-subsidization may now become more difficult if interest rates remain low for 
a long period of time; the difference between market rates and the rate paid to transaction 
accounts must be narrow if market rates are close to zero, implying that attracting deposits 
by  offering  free  payment  services  would  no  longer  be  a  profitable  strategy.  If  this  cross-
subsidization is no longer possible, banks must adapt themselves to a new situation where 
they should find new ways to cover the costs of services given. 
Thus,  the  old  way  of  doing  business  –  even  in  traditional  retail  banking  –  is  changing. 
Increasing competition is crucial for improving efficiency. Today’s main theme is therefore of 
utmost importance for increasing productivity in retail banking. 
Productivity  improvement  in  banking  has  been  substantial.  In  my  country,  Finland,  for 
instance,  banks  invested  heavily  in  information  technology  in  the  70’s  and  80’s  when  the 
regulations of the time directed competition to service and quality competition. When a very 
severe banking crisis hit the Finnish banking industry in the 90s, banks had to make good 
use  of  their  technological  capabilities.  They  more  than  halved  the  work  force  from  about 
55,000  to  about  25,000  over  a  five-year  period,  while  increasing  banking  activities  and 
volumes. 
According to econometric estimations made at the Bank of Finland a couple of years ago by 
Dr  Karlo  Kauko  and  Dr  Leena  Mörttinen,  productivity  improvement  in  Finnish  banking 
improved by 9-10% a year over the decade 1995-2004.2 Hence, each bank had to be able to 
compete against rivals that are improving their cost efficiency at a rate seldom seen in other 
industries.  
When reducing costs instead of building up new operations, it is imperative to outsource all 
such  activities  where  there  are  more  efficient  service  providers  available.  Information 
technology and payment processing in particular is just such an example. It is here where the 
benefits of scale can be brought on. According to a Bank of Finland study of a few years ago, 
doubling  the  scale  of  payment  processing  activities  brings  down  the  average  unit  cost  of 
transactions by almost 60 per cent.3  
Outsourcing  has  implications  for  competition  and  competitive  strategy.  The  more  common 
systems  there  are  in  use,  the  less  important  role  these  systems  have  in  terms  of  mutual 
competition.  We  have  seen  how  IT  infrastructure  and  payment  processing  have  become 
increasingly  commoditised  and  outsourced  and  the  importance  of  these  scale-intensive 
activities for competitive strategies diminishes. Illustrative examples include the Dutch iDEAL 
online payment –solution, which is jointly used by several major banks in the Netherlands, 
and Crosskey Solutions, which has provided a retail banking solution to several rather small 
and recently established Nordic banks.  
                                                 
1   Tarkka,  Juha:  Approaches  to  Deposit  Pricing,  A  Study  in  the  Determination  of  Deposit  Interest  Rates  and 
Bank Service Charges; Bank of Finland Studies E:2, Helsinki 1995. 
2   Kauko,  Karlo:  Pankkien  kustannustehokkuus:  havaintoja  Suomesta  (Bank  cost  efficiency;  observations  with 
Finnish  Data,  available  in  Finnish)  Bank  of  Finland  Financial  Markets  Department  working  paper  1/2006 
Mörttinen,  Leena:  Rahoitusjärjestelmän  vakaus  ja  tehokkuuden  mittaaminen;  (Financial  stability  and 
measuring  of  efficiency,  available  in  Finnish)  Bank  of  Finland  Financial  Markets  Department  working  paper 
1/2006. 
3   Khiaonarong, Tanai, Payment systems efficiency, policy approaches, and the role of the central bank. Bank of 
Finland Discussion Papers 1/2003. 
2 
 BIS Review 64/2009
Banks can better refocus on other things: collecting and acquiring customer information and 
local conditions – especially on the credit side of the retail banking market.4 Recent problems 
with schematic credit scoring systems have certainly reminded the banks of the value of real 
customer information and better selection of customers. 
Whenever  one  discusses  the  future,  it  has  to  be  borne  in  mind  that  we  live  in  a  highly 
uncertain  world;  economic,  political  and  technological  factors  may  or  may  not  develop  the 
way we have been led to expect. However, there is one future development both banks and 
other institutions will certainly face in developed countries: population ageing.  
According to the forecast by Statistics Finland, 10% of the Finnish population will be over 75 
in 2020, and about 20% over 65. Other developed countries will face a similar situation. This 
change  in  the  nature  of  the  customer  base  will  deeply  affect  the  business  environment  of 
retail  banks.  Demographics  will  affect  the  structure  of  demand  for  different  types  of  retail 
financial  services;  there  will  be  less  demand  for  housing  and  student  loans,  whereas  the 
demand for, say, reverse mortgages will strengthen.  
Ageing  may  also  have  an  impact  on  which  delivery  technologies  are  successful.  Home 
banking may be what old people prefer, but only if the technology is convenient and stable 
enough  to  be  attractive  to  the  elderly.  Have  banks  prepared  themselves  for  this  highly 
predictable future development? In Finland 37% of people over the retirement age normally 
pay  their  bills  by  internet.  Moreover,  today’s  young  people  are  the  elderly  of  tomorrow, 
bringing their skills with them.  
The  current  financial market  turmoil  is,  at  least  in  the  short  and  medium  term,  the  most 
obvious  challenge  bring  with  it  fundamental  repercussions.  The  main  issue  is  naturally  a 
more  difficult  business  environment  due  to  the  deleveraging  process  and  a  consolidating 
financial  sector.  Clearly  there  is  overcapacity,  which  is  melting  away  and  banks’  position 
becomes thus tighter.  
The role of central banks in the field of retail banking and payment systems 
The  role  of  central  banks  is  and  should  remain  rather  limited  in  retail  payment  systems. 
Central  banks  can  promote  a  beneficial  and  competition-friendly  environment  for  retail 
banking and payment services in particular as overseers and regulators. Their concerns are 
the integrity and reliability of the systems, not forgetting efficiency. Their role is important as 
a  catalyst  for  both  change  and  improvement.  Nevertheless,  they  should  not  provide  retail 
payment  related  services  themselves.  If  that  is done  as  a legacy  from  the  past, it may  be 
wise  to  wind  such  activity  down.  A  public  authority  should  not  engage  in  competitive 
activities,  and  definitely  not  subsidize  its  own  service  production,  which  would  crowd  out 
private enterprise.  
National differences in payment habits are significant, even within Europe still. This is why 
we  have  the  SEPA  programme,  which  aims  at  greater  harmonization  of  basic  banking 
services in the Euro area countries. The national systems vary in terms of efficiency as well. 
In  cases  of  "not  that  efficient  retail  banking  environment",  there  is  an  important  role  for  a 
central bank. One of its responsibilities is to oversee the functioning of financial markets and 
an important part of that task is also to strive at an efficient and credible payments system. In 
this kind of environment a central bank plays an important role as a catalyst for improving 
and enhancing competition.  
                                                 
4   The impact of bank organization on credit risk is analysed by e.g. Hyytinen, Ari: Essays on Bank Screening 
and  Market  Power  in  Loan  Markets;  Helsinki  School  of  Economics  and  Business  Administration  A-182, 
Helsinki 2000. 
BIS Review 64/2009 
 3
Central banks should monitor developments in the retail financial industry also for monetary 
policy  reasons.  Dr  Jukka  Vesala,  head  of  department  at  the  Finnish  Financial  Supervisory 
Authority, has noted in a study of his that efficiency and competition in banking may be 
relevant  to  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy.5  The  transmission  of  central  banks'  policy 
rates  to  deposit  and  lending  rates  is  probably  more  efficient  if  competition  is  effective  and 
banks have achieved a high level of cost efficiency. In such an environment, customer rates 
would  be  less  dependent  on  banks'  market  power  and  cost  structures.  Consequently,  the 
relative importance of market rates as a determinant of customer rates would increase.  
Scope for a more integrated concept of retail banking 
One has to emphasize once more the importance of effective competition in the field of retail 
banking and payment business. There are several reasons why competition, especially entry 
by foreign banks in retail banking markets, is hampered still today. National laws and rules 
still exist. Incumbent retail banks have enjoyed a protected competitive position and naturally 
they are reluctant to renounce that. 
In order to open markets for proper competition, efficient integration and standardisation 
of  the  payment  infrastructure  is  to  be  implemented  rapidly.  Always  there  are  forces 
trying  to  maintain  the  current,  established  way  of  doing  business.  Banks  have  invested 
heavily in their processing systems and may be reluctant to renounce their legacy systems.  
Further  international  integration  and  standardisation  would  naturally  bring  additional 
benefits.  We  already  see  global  integration  and  service  provision  in  the  area  of  credit  and 
payment cards – even though problems remain in the credit card industry, in particular their 
pricing.  In  today’s  banking  markets  however,  more  international  integration  and  effective 
competition go hand in hand.  
Customers  use  payment  systems  in  the  context  of  their  real  transactions.  Nobody  would 
enjoy  initiating  payments.  Services  must  be  suited  for  customers'  shopping  habits.  In  all 
shopping – whether just ordinary traditional or the increasingly popular online shopping – a 
quick  and  secure  payment  is  of  high  value.  Credit  cards  have  been  widely  used,  but  they 
were not designed for internet, and fraud has become a widespread problem. Many people 
either have no cards, or they hesitate to use  this means of payment online for reasons of 
security. Some arrangements are already in place, but there would be still demand for pan-
European  or  even  global  retail  payment  systems  specifically  designed 
for 
e-commerce. A good system or standard could be used irrespective of the home country or 
house bank of the payer and the payee, and be both secure and reasonably priced for both 
parties. If an online shop operates with very narrow margins, it would obviously be reluctant 
to accept payments through a system that charges, say, 2% of the payment.  
What is needed to make our retail banking and payments independent of time and place, in 
other words, mobile – and hopefully globally? We have already available e-services such as 
e-mails, e-maps and e-pictures. In the field of retail banking and payments we still need 
global  standards  to  guarantee  appropriate  security  and  user-friendly  way  of  using 
services. These two are critical criteria. The third important criterion is the cost of service 
usage. The two first criteria should be taken care of by authorities and retail banks, and their 
cooperation.  The  third  is  tackled  by  allowing  –  and  perhaps  enhancing  –  competition.  It  is 
obvious, that if retail banks and incumbent players are not capable of moving ahead, new 
entrants will gradually take over this business.  
Thus, we can conclude that the potential demand for a truly integrated system and also the 
technological possibilities are there. The future retail market for payment services should be 
                                                 
5   Vesala, Jukka: Technological Transformation and Retail Banking Competition: Implications and Measurement; 
Bank of Finland Studies E:20, Helsinki 2000. 
4 
 BIS Review 64/2009
international, at least at the European level. The well known SEPA initiative of a Single Euro 
Payment Area is contributing to that goal. One challenge is naturally cultural differences in 
retail  banking  and  in  payment  habits  in  particular.  Until  now,  limited  competition  and 
nationally  protected  monopolies  with  several  implicit  entry  barriers  have  dominated  the 
market.  
Cultural differences in payment habits 
One  obstacle  we  face  here  is  how  to  overcome  the  existing  cultural  differences  in  retail 
banking and in payment habits in particular. Even within the euro area we still today have 
very different ways of making payments. We can see that fundamental terms and conditions, 
to  say  nothing  of  the  actual  payment  tools,  vary  a  lot.  In  some  countries  the  usage  of 
electronic payments are overwhelmingly in use by the man in the street while in some other 
countries retail payments are still carried out in bank branches and with cash transfers.  
Regarding cultural differences I experienced a nice paradox in Nice when I opened a bank 
account  some  years  ago.  I  was  offered  cheques  which  would  have  been  free  of charge.  I 
said that I didn’t need cheques (I hadn’t needed them since the 70’s) but I would rather use 
online  services,  upon  which  the  bank  teller  informed  me  that  there  is  an  additional  fee 
charged for internet services. In Finland it is entirely opposite; internet services are free. The 
nice paradox is in the pricing of banking services: in Finland some people argue that when 
clients are doing all the work by self-service it shouldn’t be charged for, and in France when 
asking  how  there  is  such  a  fee  for  doing  work  on  behalf  of  bank  tellers  through  using  my 
internet, the answer was that “your account is in your use whenever you want and you are 
not limited to services in bank offices” i.e. the internet service brings additional value to you 
in the form of convenience of using your own bank account.  
However  it  is  likely  that  when  customers  are  offered  the  use  of  a  user-friendly  and 
secure means of handling their banking needs, change is rapid. One could just ask, for 
example, how many customers would like to queue in a bank branch to get services which 
could be taken care of with one’s mobile phone. The change in customer behaviour has been 
fast and fundamental in countries where banks have offered modern services to their clients.  
Financial turmoil and changing supervision 
The  current  financial  market  turmoil  will  speed  up  developments  in  the  long  term,  by 
focusing banks on efficiency and cost control. In the short run the situation may be different. 
Many  rescue  packages  offered  to  troubled  institutions  have  been  nationally  rather  than 
internationally  coordinated,  which  has  led  to  a  re-fragmentation  of  markets.  After  some 
painful examples of losses incurred following expansion to foreign markets, banks are now 
concentrating  more  on  their  home  market.  Moreover,  there  may  be  some  hindrances  to 
investing  in  new  ways  of  doing  business,  due  to  weakening  profitability.  However,  in  the 
medium to long run, banks in general are facing pressures to improve productivity, and it will 
become increasingly difficult for weak players to prevent entry from abroad. Banks have to 
squeeze costs to safeguard profitability on a sustainable basis.  
There is also a danger that the financial turmoil gives rise to regulatory nationalism, in the 
sense that the priority of openness of the national banking market to international competition 
goes down. Less competition may be thought to reduce the risks of the national “safety nets” 
offered to banks. Let me just say that it would be a great setback if the financial crisis we 
have  experienced  would  lead  to  a  refragmentation  of  the  international  banking  market  in 
general  and  the  postponement  of  the  emerging  international  retail  banking  market  in 
particular. It is a task for policy makers to ensure that the crisis management measures and 
revised  regulations  support  the  continued  international  integration  of  banking  services, 
instead of reversing the process.  
BIS Review 64/2009 
 5
Part of the way forward is the work towards increased cooperation in financial supervision, 
which is on both the EU and the global agenda, now even more prominently than before the 
crisis. The authorities should, while focusing on cooperation in the field of better prudential 
regulation  and  supervision,  not  forget  the  parallel  goal  of  a  more  unified,  convenient  and 
efficient international payment infrastructure. 
Future competition 
Now, we have three factors contributing to more competition among retail banks when 
running their businesses and payment services in particular; the financial market turmoil and 
its impacts leading to tight profitability, the new ways of doing business with a threat of new 
potential entrants growing competition, and, finally, the new technologies which allow bank 
customers to bypass old payment methods. 
Although  it  is  the  case  that  payment  processing  should  standardise  and  become 
commoditised,  and  although  transparency  of  pricing  is  important  for  customers,  we  should 
not expect retail banking as a whole to become an arms’ length mass industry in the future. 
The customer relationship is still the ultimate source of value for banks – perhaps even 
increasingly so when factors such as distance and market fragmentation fade and cannot be 
used as engines of market power.  
The  value  of  relationship  information  became  clear  when  some  years  ago  some  new 
companies  –  entirely  outside  the  financial  sector,  such  as 
telecommunications 
companies  –  thought  about  entering  the  banking  business.  The  business  looked  very 
attractive. Telecommunications operators were presented with new possibilities through fast 
growing internet and mobile phone business. Client bases were exploding and new potential 
business  undertakings  proliferating.  There  were  even  ideas  that  telecom  companies  could 
take care of retail bank clients, if not establishing a bank of their own, then through the use of 
their  web  sites  and  online  shops,  which  would  house  several  service  providers.  These 
schemes  did  not  carry  the  day.  Relinquishing  their  client  information  to  the  hands  of  an 
outside company would have meant that the respective banks would have given away one of 
their main assets.  
Through multichannel client service, including internet online services and mobile banking 
services,  we  enter  a  new  world.  There  banks  take  more  and  more  care  of  customers’ 
management of finances and in much wider sense all housewifery. Already today quite many 
households  have  their  financial  accounting  practically  entirely  in  their  house-bank.  In  its 
monthly bank statement one sees how much money and from where it has come, how one’s 
wealth has been used, how savings are accumulated and how debts are paid. Several banks 
provide financial planners to their individual customers through online net service. Banks can 
easily  widen  their  services  further  in  this  area.  Banks’  electronic  archives  can  be  given 
over to households’ use for depositing wills and testaments, prenuptial contracts and deeds 
of  estate  inventory,  deeds  of  distribution  etc.  It  is  obvious  that  with  a  credible  bank, 
consumers are willing to use that service. In some countries this might be against national 
regulations, but in Finland, especially in certain rural areas, banks have traditionally offered 
some legal services.  
Fast  development  of  mobile  phones  into  more  personal  electronic  devices  including 
identification information and appropriate systems for using it in a safe and secure way will 
give a great potential to further developing efficiency in banking and to combining different 
services in new and value-creating ways. Already today, mobile smart phones are like PCs 
when it comes to information handling capabilities. New potential ways of using your smart 
phone  concern  not  only  payments  but  also  all  areas  of  retail  banking  and  wealth 
management.  In  your  smart  phone  you  will  have  all  your  personal  financial  information 
available  and  will  be  able  to  do  business  with  your  bank  online  without  any  limitations  on 
information  entered  separately  or  on  other  intermediary  company  such  as  credit  card 
companies. 
6 
 BIS Review 64/2009
