Axel A Weber: The role of forecasting for central banks 
Keynote address by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the 
conference on “Forecasting and monetary policy”, organised by the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
Freie  Universität  Berlin  and  the  Viessmann  European  Research  Centre,  Berlin,  23  March 
2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great pleasure for me to participate in this conference and to be able to share with you 
some views on what contribution forecasting can make to monetary policy. 
The role of forecasting in the Eurosystem 
1  
The  reason  why  central  bankers  have  a  strong  interest  in  forecasting  is  straightforward: 
because  of  substantial  and  variable  lags  in  the  monetary  policy  transmission  mechanism, 
central banks cannot influence current inflation and output. Given these time lags, it is widely 
recognised  that  monetary  policy  should  be  forward-looking  and  take  a  medium-term 
perspective.  Furthermore,  the  publication  of  forecasts  helps  to  anchor  the  expectations  of 
firms  and  households,  thereby  making  the  central  bank  more  effective  in  fulfilling  its 
objective.  As  a  consequence,  forecasts  for  inflation,  output  and  other  macroeconomic 
variables are an essential input in the monetary policy decision-making process. 
Forecasting also has an important role to play in the Eurosystem, albeit a less prominent one 
than in central banks pursuing an inflation-targeting strategy. The Eurosystem’s Governing 
Council  bases  its  comprehensive  assessment  of  the  risks  to  price  stability  and  its  policy 
decisions on a broad spectrum of information provided by two analytical tools: the economic 
analysis and the monetary analysis. The monetary analysis assesses medium to long-term 
developments  in  inflation  based  on  the  well-established  relationship  between  money  and 
prices  over  long  horizons.  Monetary  analysis  takes  into  account  developments  in  a  wide 
range of monetary indicators including M3, its components and counterparts, notably credit, 
and  measures  of  excess  liquidity.  The  economic  analysis  identifies  short  to  medium-term 
risks to price stability. It includes regular monitoring of a broad set of non-monetary economic 
and financial variables, such as developments in overall output, labour market developments 
and financial market indicators. Projections of key macroeconomic variables carried out by 
Eurosystem staff are also an integral part of the economic analysis..  
Of  course,  differences  in  strategy  mean  forecasts  play  a  somewhat  different  role  in  the 
Eurosystem than at central banks pursuing an inflation targeting strategy: For example, it is 
important  to  note  that  these  forecasts  are  carried  out  under  the  sole  responsibility  of  the 
Eurosystem  staff,  not  the  Governing  Council.  In  contrast  to  decision-making  bodies  at 
inflation-targeting  central  banks,  such  as  the  Bank  of  England’s  MPC,  the  ECB  Governing 
Council exerts no influence on the forecasts and their assumptions. In our two-pillar strategy, 
forecasts do not represent an all-encompassing tool – as would be the case for pure inflation 
targeters. Instead, projections are merely one input factor in the economic analysis, which, 
together  with  the  monetary  analysis,  supports  the  robustness  of  the  Governing  Council’s 
assessment of risks to price stability. 
Despite  these  differences  in  monetary  policy  strategy,  the  Eurosystem  publishes  its 
projections  for  inflation  and  output  four  times  a  year.  This  is  done  for  reasons  of 
transparency, and, not least, to better guide expectations of future monetary policy actions. 
In addition, many national central banks (NCBs) in the euro area, including the Bundesbank, 
have  started  publishing  their  national  GDP  and  inflation  projections  as  part  of  their 
communication  strategy.  These  projections  are  a  useful  by-product  of  the  Eurosystem’s 
BIS Review 36/2009 
 1
regular  staff  projections,  which  are  carried  out  jointly  by  the  ECB  and  the  NCBs  Central 
banks therefore have a natural interest in applying the best forecasting methods available. 
Economic and research departments at central banks aim to incorporate the latest academic 
developments in forecasting methods into their forecasting practice – provided they turn out 
to be an improvement on the existing procedures. 
Against  this  backdrop,  I  would  like  to  discuss  some  of  the  developments  that  have  lately 
been  of  interest  in  the  Eurosystem  and  at  the  Bundesbank.  First,  I  will  touch  on  recent 
developments  in  short-term  forecasting  and  then  elaborate  on  the  uncertainty  and  risk  of 
macroeconomic forecasts. 
information 
from  experts.  With  respect 
Recent progress in short-term forecasting 
2  
To enhance policy effectiveness, the Eurosystem has spent a lot of resources on developing 
forecast methods and models and, as a result, we have seen substantial progress in recent 
years. 
Let  me  start  by  saying  that  there  is  as  yet  no  unique  or  best  approach  to  forecasting  in 
central banks; in general, however, central banks try to pursue full-information strategies. In 
many  cases,  the  forecast  procedure  may  be  best  described  as  model-based  forecasting 
complemented  by  valuable 
to  model-based 
forecasting,  most  central  banks  have  adopted  a  so-called  “suite-of-models”  approach. 
Instead  of  relying  on  just  one  model,  they  employ  a  large  variety  of  different  econometric 
models  and  a  broad  set  of  monitored  time  series.  The  suite-of-models  approach  has  the 
advantage that it takes into account model uncertainty to some extent and does not neglect 
potentially important information. 
As for the individual design of a central bank’s forecast model, it may differ with respect to 
variable  coverage,  econometric  rigour  and  the  economic  theory  it  incorporates.  Basically, 
however,  macroeconomic  variables  can  be  predicted  in  two  different  ways:  structural 
macroeconometric  models,  which  include  traditional  multi-equation  models  and  DSGE 
models, and short-term forecast models, usually based on time-series analysis. 
Although structural macroeconometric models remain workhorses used for forecasting and 
policy  simulations,  short-term  forecast  models  have  received  increasing  attention  in  the 
Eurosystem in recent years. Why is the short-term horizon so important? For the reasons I 
have already mentioned, monetary policy decisions require timely information on the current 
state  of  the  economy.  Such  information  is  not  always  available,  however.  GDP  as  an 
important indicator of macroeconomic activity is, for instance, released with a considerable 
time delay and only once a quarter. In Germany, GDP is released about five to six weeks 
after the end of the reference quarter. For example, we expect the Federal Statistical Office 
to release first-quarter GDP data on 15 May 2009. 
To allow an assessment of developments in real activity in the current quarter, the central 
bank’s  economists  must  therefore  provide  a  so-called  “nowcast”.  Hundreds  of  variables 
including  high-frequency  indicators  are,  in  principle,  available  for  this  purpose.  Think,  for 
instance, of financial or survey data. But as policy-makers pursue a full-information strategy, 
central bankers would like to sum up the (at times conflicting) information content of all these 
variables into a single measure. 
The  workhorse  models  (structural multiple-equation  models  and  DSGE  models)  are  based 
on  quarterly  data  only  and  are  therefore  ill-suited  to  evaluate  the  vast  amount  of  high-
frequency  data  available.  By  contrast,  modern  short-term  forecast  models  are  well  able  to 
process large datasets. What is more, they can also deal with datasets that are unbalanced 
because  data  is  sampled  at  different  frequencies  (monthly  –  quarterly)  or  is  subject  to 
different  publication  lags,  leading  to  missing  observations  at  the  end  of  the  sample  (the 
“ragged edge” of multivariate data). 
2 
 BIS Review 36/2009
The  most  prominent  recent  examples  of  such  short-term  models  are:  large  factor  models, 
mixed-frequency  state-space  models,  bridge  equations,  or  mixed-data  sampling  (MIDAS) 
regressions. Unlike structural macro models and DSGE models, these models are not based 
on economic theory, but on modern time-series econometrics. Research in the Eurosystem 
and  at  the  Bundesbank  shows  that  exploiting  mixed-frequency  data  is  indeed  useful  for 
forecasting, as balancing the data and time aggregation to quarterly frequency would lead to 
a loss of information at the end of the sample.1 Furthermore, it has been shown that these 
models  work  particularly  well  for  short  horizons,  whereas  structural  macroeconometric 
models or DSGE models tend to perform well in the medium and long term.2  
This  highlights  that  short-term  models  are  not  substitutes  for  traditional  macroeconometric 
and DSGE models. However, they do add another piece of valuable information to the entire 
forecasting  process.  To  my  mind,  short-term  models  should  therefore  be  regarded  as 
complementary tools in the large “suite of models” used within central banks. 
 future  shocks 
to  endogenous  variables  (eg  shocks 
Uncertainty and risk in macroeconomic forecasts 
3  
While the central tendency of a forecast, the point forecast, generally receives most public 
attention,  forecast  uncertainty  and  forecast  risks  are  two  other  important  features  in 
forecasting exercises. Uncertainty and risk are two different things. I am therefore going to 
cover them separately. 
Point forecasts are surrounded by uncertainty, and knowledge about the degree of forecast 
uncertainty  is  essential  for  decision-makers.  Basically,  we  can  identify  five  sources  of 
forecast uncertainty: 
• 
Uncertainty  about 
consumption or labour demand),  
Uncertainty  about  assumptions  concerning  exogenous  variables  (eg  assumptions 
about oil prices and exchange rates),  
Uncertainty about model parameters (eg marginal propensity to consume),  
Uncertainty about data (eg revisions of GDP) and  
Uncertainty about models (eg linear or non-linear effects of oil prices on GDP).  
• 
• 
• 
Ranking these sources of forecast uncertainty according to their importance is a difficult task, 
since their impact depends on the variable and the forecast horizon being studied. Moreover, 
the  effects  of  these  sources  of  forecast  uncertainty  are  not  independent  of  each  other. 
Finally,  an  extremely  large  variety  of  models  would  be  needed  to  evaluate  the  effects  of 
model  uncertainty.  However,  in  a  given  model,  uncertainty  about  future  shocks  and 
assumptions  concerning  exogenous  variables  often  turn  out  to  be  greater  contributors  to 
aggregate uncertainty than uncertainty about parameters and data. 
Although  the  sources  of  forecast  uncertainty  are  known,  forecast  uncertainty  is  of  course 
itself  uncertain,  and  must  therefore  be  estimated.  Many  forecasting  institutions  convey 
information  about  forecast  uncertainty  by  using  projection  ranges  when  publishing  their 
forecasts.  In  practice, a  variety  of  measures  of  uncertainty  can  be  used  to  compute  these 
projection ranges: 
to 
                                                 
1   See  Schumacher  C  and  J  Breitung  (2008),  Real-time  forecasting  of  German  GDP  based  on  a  large  factor 
model with monthly and quarterly data, International Journal of Forecasting, 24, 368-398; Marcellino M and C 
Schumacher (2007), Factor-MIDAS for now- and forecasting with ragged-edge data: A model comparison for 
German GDP, Deutsche Bundesbank Discussion Paper No 34/07. 
2   See  Wang,  MC  (2009),  Comparing  the  DSGE  model  with  the  factor  model:  an  out-of-sample  forecasting 
experiment, Journal of Forecasting 28, 167-182. 
BIS Review 36/2009 
 3
  Dispersion of board members’ point forecasts (eg Federal Reserve),  
Confidence  intervals  based  on  past  forecast  errors  and  the  judgement  of  board 
members (eg Bank of England) and  
Dispersion  measures  derived  from  past  forecast  errors,  such  as  the  mean  of 
absolute past forecast errors (eg Bundesbank and, until recently, Eurosystem staff 
projections).  
the  ranges  of 
The computation of Eurosystem staff projection ranges was changed in autumn of last year. 
Instead of deriving them from past forecast errors, these ranges are now based on Bayesian 
Vector  Autoregressions  (BVARs)  that  account  for  shock  and  estimation  uncertainty.  The 
ranges are conditional on assumptions on several exogenous variables such as oil prices, 
exchange rates and foreign demand. 
In  general,  model-based  projection  ranges  have  two  possible  advantages  over  calculating 
uncertainty  based  on  past  errors.  If  the  sample  of  forecast  errors  is  small,  the  uncertainty 
about past forecast uncertainty can be large. Moreover, in the case of structural change, past 
forecast  uncertainty  can  be  a  misleading  measure  of  future  forecast  uncertainty.  But  the 
structural change can be incorporated into a model from which uncertainty is derived. 
However,  model-based  projection  ranges  also  have  two  major  disadvantages.  First,  the 
effects  of  model  uncertainty  are  ignored.  Second,  information  not  contained  in  the  model 
variables,  which  is  typically  incorporated  into  the  forecast  by  means  of  subjective 
adjustments by the forecaster, is ignored. 
How to best represent forecast uncertainty is still the subject of intensive discussions in the 
Eurosystem, and a final decision has yet to be taken. Furthermore, it should be taken into 
account that forecast uncertainty may vary markedly over time, so that neither past forecast 
uncertainty  nor  the  forecast  uncertainty  derived  from  models  is  always  a  good  basis  for 
assessing  current  forecast  uncertainty.  This  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  the  forecast 
uncertainty  conveyed  by 
the  Eurosystem  staff  projections  may  be 
supplemented with a qualitative assessment by the ECB Governing Council. (For example, in 
December  2008,  when  year-end  uncertainty  was  rising,  the  Governing  Council  concluded 
that  in  its  “view  …,  the  economic  outlook  remains  surrounded  by  an  exceptionally  high 
degree of uncertainty.”). 
In addition to uncertainty, forecasts might be subject to upward or downward risks. That is, 
realised data might be more or less likely to come in above the point forecast than below the 
point forecast. Information about risks can be of great relevance to decision-makers. If risks 
to price stability lie on the upside, this could, for example, call for a more restrictive policy 
response than risks on the downside. 
As  in  the  case  of  forecast  uncertainty,  the  risks  to  the  forecast  are,  of  course,  difficult  to 
quantify and have to be estimated. To begin with, these estimations often rely on subjective 
assessments  of  risks.  These  assessments  can  start  with  input  variables  (eg  risks  to  oil 
prices, exchange rates or the output gap), which are then aggregated to determine the risk to 
the  relevant  variable  (such  as  inflation  or  output).  However,  risks  might  also  reflect  the 
asymmetry of views in a decision-making body. For example, the views held by a minority 
within such a body could represent a risk. 
Forecasting  institutions  convey  information  about  forecast  risks  in  different  ways:  in  a 
quantitative manner, they are communicated by the shape of a density forecast (eg Bank of 
England) and in a qualitative manner, they are communicated verbally (eg ECB Governing 
Council). 
While  quantitative  risk  statements  appear  more  precise  at  first  glance,  it  should  not  be 
forgotten  that,  in  general,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  forecast  risks  to  a  forecast.  It  either 
requires correct assumptions to be made about the risks to the input variables and correct 
aggregation,  in  other  words,  a  correct  model.  Or  it  requires  the  asymmetry  of  views  in  a 
4 
 BIS Review 36/2009
decision-making body to correctly reflect the true asymmetry of the forecast density. Doubts 
have  been  expressed  as  to  whether  these  requirements  can  be  fulfilled  in  a  satisfactory 
manner.3 I am therefore rather sceptical about the ability to forecast macroeconomic risks in 
a  precise,  quantitative  manner.  To  my  mind,  assessing  risks  only  in  a  qualitative,  verbal 
manner strikes a good balance between expressing our view on the degree of uncertainty 
related  to  the  forecast  and,  at  the  same  time,  showing  an  awareness  of  the  general 
limitations of risk assessments. 
Current assessment of economic development 
4  
Forecasting  risk  and  uncertainty  is  currently  of  particular  interest  to  central  bankers,  as 
forecast uncertainty has reached a comparatively high level. Because the scale and speed of 
the  current  economic  downturn  is  unlike  anything  seen  in  the  last  few  decades,  forecast 
uncertainty can at present be incorporated into econometric analyses to a limited extent only. 
Conversely, “judgement-based risk management” has become extremely important. 
However,  despite  an  active  exchange  between  modellers  and  macroeconomic  experts, 
economic forecasts for 2009 and 2010 have repeatedly been revised downward since last 
autumn as downside risk has been realised both in the euro area and globally. Yet from now 
onwards, with substantial macroeconomic stimulus under way and extensive financial system 
rescue schemes in place, the risks to the economic outlook in the euro area should become 
more  balanced.  On  the  one  hand,  confidence  and  growth  effects  may  be  stronger  than 
anticipated as a result of the enormous scale of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies 
worldwide. On the other hand, there remains, of course, the risk that the economic downturn 
in the euro area might become more severe than the staff projections indicate, for instance 
because of negative feedback effects from the financial system. Nevertheless, the degree of 
uncertainty surrounding the outlook for both the economy and inflation remains substantial. 
In order to fulfil our mandate and to contribute to financial stability and sustainable economic 
growth,  the  Eurosystem  has  been  providing  unlimited  liquidity  support  to  the  euro-area 
banking system since October last year. The Governing Council has decided to continue the 
non-standard liquidity support beyond the end of 2009 in any case. As a direct consequence 
of this ample supply of liquidity, the Eurosystem has augmented its balance sheet by more 
than 600 billion euro since the start of the financial crisis in August 2007. At the same time, 
our monetary policy operations are having a visible effect on overnight money market rates in 
the  euro  area.  Furthermore,  the  ECB  Governing  Council  has  cut  interest  rates  sharply  to 
unprecedented levels. And we still have room to cut interest rates further. 
But it is essential to bear in mind that an expansionary monetary policy comes at the price of 
creating a breeding ground for future risks to price stability. It might therefore prove useful to 
keep at hand instruments that enable us to reverse our monetary policy stance at the first 
signs of a recovery of the financial sector. 
Conclusion 
5  
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  I  have  highlighted  some  aspects  that  lie  at  the  heart  of  each  and 
every central bank engaged in forecasting, and I have mentioned a number of issues that are 
particularly relevant to the state of play in the Eurosystem in general and the Bundesbank in 
particular. 
I hope that our conference will help stimulate further research into forecasting. The diversity 
of modelling approaches as well as their empirical testing enriches the wealth of experience 
                                                 
3   See Knüppel, M and G Schultefrankenfeld (2008), How informative are Risk Forecasts? An Examination of the 
Bank of England’s Risk Forecasts, Bundesbank Discussion Paper 14/2008. 
BIS Review 36/2009 
 5
available to monetary policymakers. This helps to draw further conclusions for a robust and 
successful monetary policy in a continuously evolving economic landscape and, hence, helps 
to maintain price stability in the long run. 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 36/2009
