Jean-Claude Trichet: Interview with China Finance 
Interview by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the ECB Interview with China Finance, 16 
February 2009. 
 China  Finance:  At  ten  years,  how  would  you  assess  the  successfulness  of  Euro  both  in 
terms of bringing about benefits to the Eurozone economy and as an international currency?  
Mr  Trichet:  Since  the  introduction  of  the  euro,  fellow  Europeans  have  enjoyed  a  level  of 
price stability which previously had been achieved in only a few of the euro area countries. 
This  price  stability  is  a  direct  benefit  to  all  citizens.  It  protects  incomes  and  savings,  and 
helps to bring down borrowing costs, thus promoting investment, job creation and prosperity 
over the medium and long term. The single currency has been a factor of dynamism for the 
European economy.  
In  recent  months  we  have  seen  another  benefit  of  the  euro:  the  financial  crisis  is 
demonstrating that in turbulent financial waters it is better to be on a large, solid and steady 
ship rather than on a small vessel.  
However, the euro was not created to either compete with any other international currency. 
We are not campaigning for the international use of the euro. The euro was created in order 
to achieve the single European market. For me, the greatest success is the fact that, after 
having  promised  the  citizens  that  the  euro  would  be  equal,  in  terms  of  stability  and  the 
maintenance of value, to the previously most solid currencies, we have fulfilled this promise 
effectively. 
China  Finance:  What  needs  to  be  done  to  meet  the  challenges  to  the  credibility  of  Euro 
posed by persistent dispersions of inflation, current account deficit and public finance among 
the member economies?  
Trichet: The first 10 years of the euro has brought low levels of inflation overall in the euro 
area, lower than the levels in the individual countries before. The existing differences are no 
bigger than if you compare differences in price levels, for example, between various states in 
the United States, which is as you know similar in size to the euro area. The single currency 
also  enhanced  price  transparency,  increased  trade,  and  promoted  economic  and  financial 
integration within the euro area and with the rest of the world.  
As for public finances, the Stability and Growth Pact was created precisely to substitute for a 
more  uniform  fiscal  arm  of  the  euro  area.  As  you  are  aware,  there  was  an  agreement 
reached  in  the  EU  late  last  year  to  provide  fiscal  stimulus  corresponding  to  the  current 
economic slowdown, however, on behalf of the Governing Council I reiterated several times 
that these packages should be provided by countries only if they have the leeway granted in 
the SGP. 
China  Finance:  In  view  of  the  increasing  interests  of  adopting  Euro  from  non-member 
countries  in  times  of  financial  turmoils,  how  do  you  see  the  need  to  balance  between  the 
expansion of the Eurozone and maintaining its stability?  
Trichet: As said before, the financial crisis certainly reemphasised the value of belonging to 
a  large,  single  currency  area.  However,  I  do  not  see  this  as  a  matter  of  balancing  – 
expansion  can  only  take  place  while  maintaining  stability.  The  Maastricht  criteria  will  not 
change  and  this  is  in  the  interest  of  both  the  euro  area  as  a  whole  and  the  individual 
candidate  countries.  Let  me  only  add  that  2009  January  did  not  only  see  the  10th 
anniversary of the euro, but also the joining of the 16th member state, namely Slovakia, to 
the  euro  zone.  If  you  consider  that  we  started  with  11  countries  in  1999,  this  certainly 
demonstrates that the euro area is open to newcomers.  
BIS Review 18/2009 
 1
China  Finance:  How  effective  is  monetary  easing  measures  by  the  ECB  in  mitigating  the 
economic recession in Europe? Do you see more room to maneuver in case the economic 
prospects continue to get worse?  
Trichet: First, let me remind you that we have, in all circumstances, to deliver price stability 
in  line  with  our  definition  “less  than,  but  close  to,  2%”.  Secondly,  the  present  unlimited 
provision of liquidity at a fixed rate and with a one-week, one-month, three-month and six-
month  duration  can  certainly  be  described  as  a  non  standard  measure.  The  extension  of 
eligibility in our collateral framework is also another non standard measure, particularly as it 
was already very broad and flexible. In particular, as a result of these decisions we have also 
expanded our balance sheet on a scale that would have been unthinkable before the crisis: 
around 55% in the last 12 months. Experience has demonstrated that we have to prepare for 
exceptional situations, and I would not exclude anything, and equally I will not pre-commit to 
anything ex ante. We'll always look at the situation on the basis of our own analysis, taking 
everything into account. 
China  Finance:  The  EU  member  countries  have  endorsed  somewhat  coordinated  fiscal 
stimulating packages. What's your view on the impact of large scale fiscal stimulus on the 
short and medium term growth and on the soundness of government finance in view of the 
Stability  and  Growth  Pact?  Indeed  some  Euro  members  sovereign  debts  have  been 
downgraded recently as they are seen as overindebted. How serious negative impacts could 
this have on the credibility of the monetary union, given that the ECB has no fiscal power? 
Trichet:  The  most  recent  forecast  of  the  European  Commission  shows  that  this  year  the 
budget deficit in the euro area countries will reach an average of 4%, with 7 countries out of 
the  16  above  the  3%  threshold.  Its  important  to  emphasise  that  this  situation  should  be 
temporary and reversed as soon as possible. 
It should not be forgotten that the rules of the SGP are very important for the cohesion of the 
euro  area.  These  rules  are  also  underpinned  by  strong  financial  and  economic  principles. 
Governments have to take into account the fact that if their citizens consider that the fiscal 
policy of their government would not be sustainable in the long term, confidence would drain 
away. And in such a case, when confidence is lacking, additional public expenditure will not 
have a positive effect on growth. 
On the second question, following an episode in which the pricing of risks was, in general, 
too low, markets now have a tendency to overvalue risks. But it does not affect the euro as a 
currency. Rather, it is clear that the single currency has proved to be an anchor of confidence 
and stability during this crisis. If you think back to the European currency turbulence and its 
consequences in 1992 and 1993, you can imagine what consequences the crisis of recent 
months would have had for the euro area without the euro – both on the interest rate markets 
and on the exchange markets. 
China  Finance:  What  challenges  do  the  US  quantitative  easing  policy  pose  for  the  Euro 
area?  What's  your  assessment  on  the  need  for  coordination  on  economic  and  monetary 
policies  between  the  major  economies  in  bringing  about  an  early  recovery  of  the  global 
economy? 
Trichet: I believe that all central banks are doing what is necessary for the economic area 
they are responsible for and responding to the requirements of the specific conditions. I do 
not see the point in comparing one central bank’s actions with the other. As I said before, the 
ECB’s  open  market  operations  and  collateral  framework  of  today  are  already  in  a  “non-
standard” mode and its measures can be interpreted as a way of additional “non standard 
risk taking”. 
At the same time, we have a very close co-operation with our colleagues on the other side of 
the Atlantic, which proved to be useful precisely in the times we are living. The international 
meetings, in particular the global economy meeting of central bank governors and the G20, 
provide  regular  forum  for  a  thorough  and  open  discussion  between  the  participating 
2 
 BIS Review 18/2009
Governors,  particularly  with  Governor  Zhou,  who  plays  a  very  important  role  in  these 
meetings. 
China Finance: To what extent do you see the need to reform the international monetary 
system and the global financial regulatory system in the light of lessons learned so far from 
the ongoing financial crisis? 
Trichet:  The  current  crisis  stands  out  because  it  affects  the  heart  of  the  global  financial 
system.  Its  root  cause  was  a  wide-spread  underassessment  of  the  quantity  of  risks  and 
marked an undervaluation of the price of risks in the global financial system, especially in the 
most advanced economies. One of the reasons why this could happen was the widely held 
view  that  regulation  should  not  stifle  financial  innovation  and  that  markets  knew  best  and 
could – for the most part – regulate themselves adequately. The turmoil has shown that this 
attitude was deeply misleading. When the turmoil set in, many financial institutions realised 
that  their  risk  management  systems  were  not  as  reliable  and  robust  as  they  had  believed 
them to be and, indeed, should have been. 
We have always been in favour of a very close relationship between the central bank and the 
banking  surveillance  authorities.  We  said  that  long  before  any  new  problems,  any  new 
difficulties.  We  had  a  Governing  Council  position  close  to  the  start  of  the  ECB,  which  we 
made  public.  We  also  strongly  believe  that  better  coordination  for  big  cross-border 
institutions is absolutely necessary. 
Some avenues have already been suggested by Ecofin, the Council of Finance Ministers in 
the  EU.  The  European  Parliament  has  also  carried  out  several  works.  The  European 
Commission  set  up  the  De  Larosiére  group,  a  high  level  working  group,  to  make 
recommendations. One of the European Parliament’s suggestions is that the ECB could play 
a  particular  role  in  this  domain  for  the  coordination  of  surveillance  for  cross-border 
institutions.  In  the  US  the  Federal  Reserve  has  a  surveillance  responsibility  which 
concentrates very much on the big cross-border institutions. I see similar suggestions coming 
from the private sector and from the industry. As President of the ECB’s Governing Council I 
have no position of the Governing Council, but I am impressed by the mark of confidence in 
the ECB, demonstrated by the previous suggestions. 
In any case, the fragility, not only of global finance but of the international economy itself, is 
something that we should not accept as a normal feature of the globalized market economy. 
A new concept of strong resilience at a global level is of the essence. 
China  Finance:  The  recent  revised  GDP  data  indicates  that  China  has  become  the  third 
largest economy in the world. What opportunities and challenges do you see posed by the 
increased role of China in the world?" 
Trichet:  The  progress  of  the  Chinese  economy  is  absolutely  striking.  I  have  myself  the 
memory of the city of Peking at the beginning of the 80’s. And I can measure how difficult it is 
for today’s visitors to imagine what Peking or any other Chinese big city looked like only 25 
years  ago.  This  remarkable  success  of  the  Chinese  society  and  the  Chinese  economy  is 
profoundly changing China as well as it contributes to a profound change of the world. China 
is called to take all the global responsibilities which are the counterpart of its economic and 
financial global influence. 
BIS Review 18/2009 
 3
