Svein Gjedrem: Financial crisis – lessons from the Nordic experience 
Article  by  Mr  Svein  Gjedrem,  Governor  of  Norges  Bank  (Central  Bank  of  Norway),  in  the 
Financial Times, 3 February 2009. 
 With the financial crisis gathering strength and spreading to the real economy, it is instructive 
to  learn  the  lessons  from  the  Nordic  crisis  of  the  mid-1990s.  There  are  some  important 
similarities today: but also some important differences. 
The financial strength of the banks, and hence their ability to continue to supply a steady flow 
of financing, can be bolstered in either of two ways: by injecting capital; or by removing high-
risk loans from the banks’ balance sheets – and in turn creating a “bad bank”. In the Nordic 
banking crisis 20 years ago, we did both, and learned three important lessons: 
First, government crisis resolution measures do not have to be costly for the taxpayer. The 
state injected equity capital, while private share capital was written down on the basis of a 
realistic assessment of loan losses. This ensured that the equity capital injected by the state 
could  benefit  from  upside  opportunities.  In  Norway,  the  state  assumed  100  per  cent 
ownership of the three largest banks. The board of directors and senior management in each 
bank were replaced. Then, in the years following the crisis, the state gradually sold its shares 
in the nationalised banks – at a profit. 
Second, it is not always necessary to take the bad loans off the banks’ balance sheets. In 
Norway, the banks dealt with the problem loans themselves, and there is good reason to try 
to achieve this, where possible: the originating banks themselves are the best placed to deal 
with the problem loans. However, this presupposes that the problem loans account for only a 
limited proportion of total lending, so that the banks are able to continue to operate normally. 
Sweden and Finland established a “bad bank” that took over the high-risk loans. But this was 
in most cases done only after the state had nationalised the banks and was thereby able to 
control the kinds of loans that were transferred to the “bad bank”. 
Third, banking crises do not need to be prolonged. In the Nordic economies the prompt and 
extensive  writing  down  of  problem  loans  and  recapitalisation  of  the  banks  limited  the 
economic  downturn,  which  lasted  only  around  a  few  years.  This  experience  stands  in 
contrast to that of Japan, where loan losses were recognised too slowly, with substantial and 
decade-long consequences for economic developments. 
All  that  said,  however,  the  challenges  facing  banks  today  require  a  broader  set  of 
instruments than those used by the Nordic authorities 20 years ago, for two main reasons: 
First,  the  situation  for  banks  is  more  complex.  The  authorities  have  to  distinguish  more 
clearly between insolvent banks and banks that are solvent but in need of more capital in 
order to increase lending. The lessons from the Nordic banking crisis can be drawn on for the 
insolvent banks. For the solvent banks, the challenge is to maintain their lending capacity. 
This is particularly important given that other credit markets are not functioning normally, so 
that it is difficult, or impossible, for businesses to acquire funding directly from bond markets. 
But  without  more  capital,  the  banks  are  not  willing  to  accept  new  loans  on  their  balance 
sheets. The main challenge facing the authorities today therefore is to ensure that solvent 
banks increase their financial strength and thereby their lending capacity. At the same time, it 
is important to have an exit strategy so that capital injections today do not translate into an 
increase in state ownership when the crisis is over. 
Second, cross-border banking has been increasing. Twenty years ago, all the main Nordic 
banks were national banks. Today, for example, four of the five largest banks in Norway are 
foreign-owned (three branches and one subsidiary). A national authority cannot be expected 
to bolster the financial strength of branches of foreign banks: indeed, it could be complicated 
BIS Review 12/2009 
 1
to  do  this  even  for  foreign-owned  subsidiaries.  While  we  were  able  to  choose  national 
solutions  to  the  banking  crisis  20  years  ago,  any  effective  solution  to  today’s  situation  will 
require an internationally harmonised approach. 
As  today’s  financial  crisis  progressively  gets  resolved,  it  will  be  necessary  to  start  the 
process  of  preventing  future  crises.  This  will  require  substantial  reform  of  the  regulatory 
framework. Banks will have to strengthen their capital and their liquidity buffers. And financial 
regulation must have a less pro-cyclical effect. The objective must be to enable the banks to 
curb the impact of shocks on the economy, rather than to amplify them, as is the case now, 
where negative spirals are generated between the financial system and the real economy. 
Because  of  the  global  character  of  today’s  financial  crisis,  the  authorities  must  work  in 
concert to find solutions, both in terms of recapitalisation of the banks and regulation of the 
financial sector. 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2009
