Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Strengthening relations between Indonesia and 
Malaysia 
Remarks by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Launch of 
PT. Bank Muamalat Indonesia, The Malaysian Branch and First Islamic Investment Bank Ltd, 
Kuala Lumpur, 5 March 2009. 
 It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  on  this  occasion  of  the  launch  of  the  Malaysian 
branch of PT. Bank Muamalat Indonesia, and its subsidiary, First Islamic Investment Bank 
Ltd., established under the Malaysia International Islamic Financial Centre (MIFC) initiative to 
operate  foreign  currency  Islamic  financial  business  in  Malaysia.  This  is  a  significant 
development  as  it  represents  the  first  Indonesian  financial  institution  in  the  Malaysian 
financial system. Indeed, this occasion signifies a further step forward towards strengthening 
the bilateral, financial and economic relations between Indonesia and Malaysia. The setting-
up  of  these  two  institutions  in  Kuala  Lumpur  would  contribute  towards  accelerating  the 
financial  linkages  that  will  underpin  the  expanding  trade  and  investment  ties  between 
Indonesia  and  Malaysia.  As  the  largest  Islamic  bank  in  Indonesia,  we  will  also  have  the 
opportunity to leverage on our respective strengths and expertise and to mutually reinforce 
the benefits to be gained from this development. 
Potential of Islamic finance amid slower economic growth in the region  
Cumulatively, the total output of the ASEAN economies amounts to USD1.3 trillion while total 
trade  of  the  ASEAN  region  now  amounts  to  USD1.4  trillion.  The  growth  of  the  ASEAN 
economies is no longer only export driven but for several years now has been driven by a 
growing domestic economy. In this current environment, most ASEAN economies have been 
adversely  affected  by  the  spill  over  effects  of  the  global  financial  crisis.  Sharp  declines  in 
export  earnings  are  being  experienced.  The  economies  of  ASEAN  and  greater  Asia, 
however, have the potential to strengthen further their domestic economies. Indeed, in doing 
so this would contribute towards reducing further the global imbalances. In addition, being 
diverse economies we are also able to take advantage of the complementarities that exists in 
the region. This is reflected in the increased intra-regional trade and intra-regional investment 
flows. Intra-regional trade as a ratio of total trade of the region has increased from 30% in 
1990 to 40% in 2007. Intra-regional investment flows now account for 12% of the region's 
foreign  direct  investment.  With  a  total  population  of  575  million,  ASEAN  also  has  greater 
potential to increase its economic interface with the larger economies in greater Asia.  
The current financial crisis is expected to accelerate the financial and economic integration in 
Asia.  This  should  be  viewed  positively,  not  only  towards  the  unwinding  of  the  global 
imbalances, but also because this has the potential to contribute towards global growth. The 
banking  sector  in  ASEAN  and  the  greater  Asian  region  will  have  an  important  role  in 
facilitating this trend. Islamic banking in particular, which is a form of financial intermediation 
that is directly linked to trade and investment flows, has significant potential to facilitate this 
process.  
Islamic finance requires all financial transactions to be supported by an underlying economic 
activity. There is now a renewed focus in the global community on generating real economic 
activity, generating jobs and generating overall financial stability. Following the developments 
that have led to the current global financial crisis, there is a greater recognition for the need 
to reduce the decoupling of the expansion of financial transactions and the growth of the real 
economy. This is in fact a fundamental requirement in Islamic finance thereby resulting in a 
close link between financial and real flows.  
BIS Review 26/2009 
 1
In Malaysia, the Islamic banking sector continues to progress, recording double digit growth 
over the recent 8 years with an average annual growth rate of 20% in terms of assets. As at 
the end of 2008, Islamic banking has increased its share of assets in the banking sector to 
17.4%. The assets share of the takaful industry grew at 23% per annum in the recent five 
years,  with  family  and  general  takaful  capturing  11%  and  7%  respectively,  of  the  overall 
insurance sector.  
The MIFC initiative has focused on promoting Malaysia as an international Islamic financial 
hub, in particular in sukuk origination, foreign currency business, takaful, research and talent 
development.  There  has  been  a  growing  number  of  MIFC  players  with  diverse  business 
activities that range from international Islamic banking business in foreign currency to Islamic 
fund and wealth management, takaful and sukuk origination. The global sukuk market has 
expanded by an annual growth rate of 40%. Despite a slowdown in the sukuk issuance in 
2008,  there  was  still  an  estimated  USD20  billion  issuance  taking  place,  with  Malaysia 
remaining as the main issuer in the global market. 
The  prospect  of  Islamic  finance  continues  to  remain  positive  despite  the  more  challenging 
international  environment.  The  global  financial  crisis  has  resulted  in  heightened  calls  for 
more  transparent  forms  of  banking  that  are  subject  to  stricter  governance  and  risk 
management practices. There are also greater demands for increased regulation. Following 
the  financial  reform  that  may  take  place,  the  world  may  see  a  banking  system  that  is 
significantly different from before to the crisis. Many of the features currently being discussed 
are in fact explicitly embedded in the Shariah requirements. The in-built check and balances 
in  Islamic  banking  avoids  the  excesses  and  over  leveraging,  a  feature  precipitating  the 
current financial crisis. Ensuring that the Shariah requirements are embraced in its entirety is 
vital to ensuring the robustness and resilience of Islamic finance. 
Islamic finance must also draw upon the lessons derived from the current crises. It is vital 
that the regulatory regime based on the prudential standards issued by the Islamic Financial 
Services Board be implemented. This will further ensure the stability and soundness of the 
system.  Liquidity  management  in  the  Islamic  financial  system  and  the  institutional 
arrangements  for  resolution  are  among  the  other  areas  that  need  further  development.  Of 
critical  importance  is  for  the  board  and  management  of  Islamic  financial  institutions  to 
institute  higher  standard  of  leadership  and  a  comprehensive  governance  culture  and 
framework. 
Mutual recognition in Shariah and human capital challenges 
On this occasion, I would like to touch on two areas confronting Islamic finance firstly on, the 
issue of mutual recognition in Shariah and secondly the human capital development in 
the industry. Malaysia takes cognisance of the diversity of Shariah views within the region 
and among jurisdictions. Although Islam welcomes diversity of views, there is also a need to 
promote greater harmonisation among jurisdictions on the specific issues relating to Islamic 
finance.  Such  convergence  is  important  for  the  long-term  sustainability  of  the  sector. 
Malaysia has taken the initiative to organise Regional Shariah Scholars Dialogue in 2006 and 
2008 as part of the efforts to foster greater engagement among the Shariah scholars in the 
region. Indonesia has been active in these dialogues. Moving forward, the newly established 
International Shariah Research Academy (ISRA) has been entrusted to intensify the regional 
Shariah  Dialogues  as  well  as  to  enhance  further  the  international  engagement  among 
Shariah scholars in our pursuit for Shariah harmonisation. Most encouraging is the greater 
appreciation and understanding that has been achieved in these deliberations of the Shariah 
practices that are peculiar to the respective jurisdictions.  
The  demand  for  skills  in  Islamic  finance  throughout  this  region  and  other  international 
financial centres has generated further growth in Islamic finance. In this regard, Malaysia has 
also  embarked  on  several  initiatives  towards  creating  a  supply  of  qualified  human  capital 
both in Shariah and Islamic finance. The International Centre of Education in Islamic Finance 
2 
 BIS Review 26/2009
(INCEIF) is  established to be a premier university in Islamic finance, to offer postgraduate 
qualifications in Islamic finance as well as the Chartered Islamic Finance Professional (CIFP) 
qualification. CIFP is the world's first Islamic professional qualification and it is accredited as 
a  Masters  degree  level  equivalent.  Recently,  INCEIF  produced  its  first  batch  of  32  CIFP 
graduates from nine countries, of which three are from Indonesia.  
INCEIF has also entered into strategic partnership with Universiti Airlangga in Surabaya and 
Universiti Indonesia in Jakarta where the CIFP programmes are now being taught. Through 
these strategic alliances, the efforts would be directed to jointly produce high-calibre talent 
that have the combination of knowledge in Shariah and finance.  
It is our hope that PT. Bank Muamalat Indonesia would consider Malaysia as a platform for 
securing foreign currency business ventures in the region and contribute to the development 
of Islamic finance in Malaysia. I am confident that the international Islamic banking segment 
of Islamic finance in both countries will continue to make significant strides, in particular to 
bring to the next level the development of an international money market platform that allows 
for greater participation from a wider international financial community offering product suites 
that are denominated in other currencies and structured in a manner that would meet a wider 
range of applications and purposes. On this note, I wish to congratulate PT. Bank Muamalat 
Indonesia on the official launch of PT. Bank Muamalat Indonesia of the Malaysian branch to 
conduct foreign currency business as an International Islamic Bank under the MIFC initiative. 
I also wish to congratulate the newly established First Islamic Investment Bank Ltd., licensed 
under the Labuan Offshore Financial Services Authority. 
BIS Review 26/2009 
 3
