Usha Thorat: Sustaining growth potential – focus on key sectors 
Keynote address by Ms Usha Thorat, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
inaugural  session  of  the  "Conclave  of  CEOs  and  CFOs"  organised  by  Institute  of  Public 
Enterprise & NMDC Ltd, CII (AP) & CEO Clubs India, Hyderabad, 11 September 2009. 
The contribution by Shri Rajib Das in preparing this keynote address is acknowledged. 
 I am privileged to speak before this learned audience at this conclave on the theme of “Top 
priorities  of  the  new  regime  –  Growth  strategies”.  The  topic  is  of  special  relevance  for 
emerging economies like ours, particularly in the current context. 
As is well recognised, the Indian economy has enormous growth potential, and can be one of 
the  economic  powerhouses  in  the  current  millennium.  The  economic  dominance  of  India 
along with China looks all the more likely in view of the shift in the epicentre of growth to 
emerging Asia after the crisis. While concerns about current global turmoil and its impact on 
macro-economic  risks  is  much  talked  about  and  is  also  relevant,  we  should  not  be  losing 
focus from the longer-term issues and agenda to address the welfare of our people. 
In  my  address  today,  I  would  raise  some  of  the  issues  that  are  relevant  to  the  banking 
system  for  sustaining  our  growth  potential.  But,  before  doing  that,  a  brief  macro  overview 
could be useful. 
The growth rate of 8.8 per cent average in the Indian economy during 2003-08 the highest 
ever recorded is only next to China, in the contemporary world. The high growth emanated 
from the upsurge in domestic savings rate (23.5 per cent in 2001-02 to 37.7 per cent in 2007-
08)  supporting  the  step  up  in  investment  rate  (from  22.8  per  cent  to  39.1  per  cent)  in  an 
environment  of  moderate  inflation  and  macro-economic  stability.  However,  contagion  from 
the  global  economic  crisis  brought  the  growth  rate  down  to  6.7  per  cent  in  2008-09  with 
growth in the second half of 2008-09 at 5.8 per cent largely because of lower export demand 
and shrinking foreign liquidity. The economy is unlikely to revert back to trend growth soon, 
as  recession  in  the  advanced  economies  would  persist  with  global  growth  projected  to 
contract by 1.4 per cent by the IMF with a more sizeable fall in world trade by 12 per cent. 
The Indian economy is expected to grow by 6 per cent as per the latest assessment made by 
the RBI. GDP growth in the first quarter of 2009-10 is broadly consistent with that (6.1 per 
cent). 
The current focus is to bring back the economy to the high growth path as a key means to 
ensure  higher  living  standard  for  all.  The  Planning  Commission  in  the  Eleventh  Five  Year 
Plan  Document  (2007-12)  identified  a  number  of  priorities  to  fasten  an  inclusive  growth 
process so that the economy can grow at a rate of around 9 per cent during the plan period. 
One of the key requirements of growth is capital formation and for this it is imperative that 
more  and  more  of  household  savings  are  directed  to  financial  savings  thereby  facilitating 
capital formation. Currently financial savings constitute 48.5 of total household savings. If this 
share is to go up, there is need for much greater penetration of the banking, insurance and 
capital market products in the country. The policy of financial inclusion is therefore critical for 
greater capital formation to ensure higher and sustained growth. 
I would like to specifically touch upon the issues of ensuring adequate credit for agriculture, 
MSME  and  infrastructure,  all  of  which  are  critically  important  to  achieve  sustainable  and 
inclusive growth. These are rightly placed as growth engines in the current workshop. 
BIS Review 107/2009 
 1
Agriculture 
After  recording  robust  and  above  trend  growth  during  2003-08,  overall  agriculture  output 
decelerated during 2008-09 despite a record level of food grains production at 233.9 million 
tonnes.  Higher  production  was  aided  by  rabi  output,  while  kharif  output  was  affected  by 
floods in some states. Production of coarse cereals, pulses, oilseeds, showed slippage and 
output of sugarcane and cotton declined over the year. Diversification of Indian agriculture 
towards horticulture, livestock and fisheries has been evident for some years with their joint 
share  reaching  close  to  60  per  cent  of  the  agriculture  and  allied  GDP.  Allied  sector  is 
expected  to  grow  between  5  per  cent  and  6  per  cent  during  2008-09.  Although  there  has 
been a drop in the share of agriculture in the GDP from 36.4 per cent in the 1980s to around 
17.0  per  cent  now,  the  number  of  people  dependent  on  agriculture  for  their  food  and 
livelihood remains largely unchanged at nearly 60 per cent underscoring the importance of 
agriculture to sustain growth in the country. 
Various studies predict that in the long term, the increased demand due to population growth 
and  rising  per  capita  income,  would  outstrip  the  supply  of  cereals,  pulses,  edible  oil  and 
sugar.  Key  issues  that  need  addressing  in  this  context  have  been  identified  as  follows. 
Firstly,  irrigation  is  the  key  to  the  removal  of  Indian  agriculture’s  dependence  on  the 
monsoons. The actual net irrigated area in the country is 62.31 MH, which is only 43% of the 
net  sown  area  of  the  country.  Secondly,  yield  comparisons  of  major  crops  over  the  last  3 
decades shows mixed results. While wheat yield has increased from 82% to 93% of world 
average, paddy yield has stagnated and maize yield has drastically dropped by 98% to 40% 
of  world  average.  Third,  the  average  size  of  farm  holdings  has  steadily  declined.  Out  of 
India’s 116 million farmers, about 60% have less than 1 hectare and together they farm just 
17%  of  the  land.  Thus,  many  of  the  very  small  farms  are  subsistence  holdings  with  low 
investment and low productivity. Fourth, the imbalance in the use of nitrogen–phosphorus–
potassium  (NPK)  fertilizers  is  creating  problem  of  soil  degradation  and  adversely  affecting 
productivity. Fifth, the increasing subsidies have suppressed investments. 
Gross capital formation in agriculture relative to agriculture and allied GDP improved slightly 
from 11.2 per cent in 1999-2000 to 14.2 per cent in 2007-08. The rise is largely contributed 
by the public sector whose share rose from 6.0 per cent 1999-2000 to 8.2 per cent in 2006-
07; the corresponding share from the private sector fell from 10.2 per cent to 7.0 per cent. 
From point of view of agricultural credit, the broad policies followed are:  
• 
Mandating that 18% of commercial bank credit is lent to agriculture of which at least 
13.5 % has to be for direct agriculture. Policy of doubling of agricultural credit in three 
years started in 2004-05. 
With effect from 2006-07, GOI has provided interest rate subsidy for crop loans given 
by public sector banks RRBs and cooperative banks. The rate has been increased 
from 2% to 3%. Subsidies for the last three years amounted to Rs. 6,019 crore. 
Strengthening of the regional rural banks and rural cooperative credit structure. 
Greater  branch  expansion  in  rural  and  semi  urban  areas  and  encouraging  use  of 
intermediaries and IT solutions for greater banking penetration. 
RIDF  investments  against  shortfall  of  priority  sector  and  weaker  section  lending. 
Cumulative disbursement till June 2009 was Rs. 58,041 under the various RIDF since 
its inception in 1995-96. 
Debt waiver program of the Union Budget for 2008-09 resulted in write off of loans for 
farmers enabling them to re access the banking system. 
    The policies have led to significant increase in share of agricultural credit to agriculture and 
allied  GDP  from  22.7  per  cent  in  2004-05  to  33.3  per  cent  in  2008-09.  The  compounded 
annual growth rate of agriculture credit was 28.4 per cent during 2003-08 as compared to 
2 
 BIS Review 107/2009
24.5  per  cent  for  overall  bank  credit  in  this  period.  The  fact  that  overall  private  capital 
formation  in  agriculture  has  declined  during  this  period  would  suggest  that  most  of  the 
incremental  credit  has  gone  for  production  and  not  for  investment.  This  is  an  issue  which 
needs  more  study  to  understand  the  factors  that  are  impeding  private  capital  formation  in 
agriculture.  These  would  be  obviously  closely  linked  to  the  factors  identified  as  impeding 
growth in agriculture. 
Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) 
While  non  financial  factors  may  be  more  important  in  the  agricultural  sector,  in  the  MSE 
sector,  credit  is  a  vital  input  for  growth.  As  per  the  data  on  micro  and  small  enterprises 
(MSEs) in the Annual Report of Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, 2006-07, 
the sector accounted for around 39 per cent of total industrial production, 34 per cent of the 
exports  in  the  industrial  sector  and  around  35  per  cent  of  total  employment  among  units 
engaged  in  manufacturing  and  services.  The  sector  registered  a  robust  annual  average 
growth in value of output, exports and employment at 16.8 per cent, 20.0 per cent and 4.4 
per  cent,  respectively  during  the  expansionary  phase  of  2003-07,  before  showing  signs  of 
slowing down in 2007-08 particularly in respect of employment growth to 2.9 per cent. 
According to the Annual Report of Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, 2006-
07, fixed investment in the sector constituted 37.8 per cent of the value of production from 
the sector in 2005-06 (decline sharply from 59.9 per cent in 1999-2000 and 51.6 per cent in 
2002-03). Credit to the sector as share of GDP of the sector however rose marginally from 
55.0 per cent in 1999-2000 to 56.7 per cent in 2006-07. In terms of overall bank credit, credit 
to  MSEs  declined  from  14.5  per  cent  in  1999-2000  to  7.2  per  cent  in  2006-07.  Although 
annual growth rate of credit to this sector was more than 20.5 per cent in this period, credit to 
the system as a whole grew by 30.3 per cent. Share of MSE increased to 11.4 per cent in 
2008-09, but this is not comparable with the past data because of definition changes. 
The problems cited by MSE borrowers in obtaining access to bank finance are insistence on 
collaterals/guarantees, limited outreach of banks, rigid approaches, high interest and other 
costs, complex documentation, lack of supporting business development services and so on. 
From the banker’s point of view, the critical factors affecting credit delivery to this sector are 
low equity base, absence of marketing tie up, diversion of funds, poor management and book 
keeping,  higher  NPAs,  mounting  of  receivables  due  to  delay  in  payment  of  bills especially 
during downturn. 
The major policies in regard to credit delivery to this sector  
• 
Measures to increase flow of credit leading to almost three fold increase in the credit 
to this sector from public sector banks from Rs.67,600 crore as on March 31, 2005 to 
Rs.1,90,958 crore as on March 31, 2009. 
Inclusion of MSE (as per revised definition ) in priority sector with sub limits for the 
micro units. 
Stipulation that collateral should not be taken for loans up to Rs.5 lakh to MSE units. 
Providing credit guarantee for collateral free loans from the Credit Guarantee Trust 
Fund administered by SIDBI. 
  The  sector  attracted  funding  from  all  categories  of  banks  in  the  boom  period  2003-08.  As 
many leading manufacturers in the automobile and other sectors started sourcing their inputs 
and supplies from the small enterprises, banks and NBFCs found that lending to such small 
enterprises was good business. In many cases the banks were already financing the large 
manufacturers and could tie up the delivery and recovery mechanism through them. Hence 
the model that came to be called invoice financing or channel financing led to surge in credit 
to  the  small  enterprises.  However,  at  the  time  of  the  down  turn,  the  receivables  and 
BIS Review 107/2009 
 3
inventories  piled  up  with  the  small  units  and  banks  were  chary  of  lending  more  to  them 
leading to difficulties for many units. It was at this stage that the GOI and RBI took several 
measures  to  ensure  holding  on  operations  and  support  for  the  units  affected.  Banks  were 
advised  on  October  31,  2008  to  consider  restructuring  of  the  dues  of  MSEs  wherever 
warranted,  and  continue  to  disburse  loans  against  the  sanctioned  limits.  Special  refinance 
limits  for  assisting  the  MSE  sector  were  introduced  and  SIDBI  was  provided  a  limit  of  Rs 
7000  crore.  State  Level  Bankers’  Committee  (SLBC)  convenor  banks  were  advised  to 
organise  special  meetings  to  address  the  problems  of  the  MSE  sector.  Regional  /Zonal 
Offices of banks advised to closely monitor flow of credit to MSEs and also institute a help 
desk at key centres. 
Unlike  the  larger  companies, small  enterprises  access  to capital  markets  for  raising  equity 
and  long  term  funds  is  limited.  Further,  such  units  require  handholding  and  business 
development and support services in the initial stages. Very often, they also need assistance 
to  prepare  project  reports  and  proper  accounts.  For  new  ventures  without  track  record, 
venture capital or start up funding is mostly through friends and relatives and this is an area 
where the demand far exceeds the supply. Delay in or inadequate working capital can derail 
operations.  For  dealing  with  large  numbers,  banks  need  bulk  risk  scoring  models  and  IT 
capacities. The transaction cost need to be reduced if the overall cost of raising funds has to 
be reduced. While many banks have specialised branches and schemes for facilitating quick 
processing  and  sanctions  to  the  sector,  there  are  huge  expectations  from  banks  as  also 
several challenges before them. 
Infrastructure 
The  Eleventh  Five  Year  Plan  envisages  stepping  up  of  the  gross  capital  formation  in 
infrastructure from 5 per cent of GDP in 2006-07 to 9 per cent of GDP by end of the Plan 
period  in  2011-12,  which  could  be  critical  for  achieving  the  9  per  cent  growth.  It  has 
estimated  an  investment  requirement  of  US$  502.88  billion  (Rs.20,11,521  crore)  in 
infrastructure, around 30 per cent (about 6 lakh) of which is expected to be financed by the 
private sector. 
Banks’ exposure to infrastructure lending has grown nearly fourfold since March 2005, from 6 
per cent to about 9.25 percent of bank credit in March 2009. While public investment would 
dominate  the  sector,  the  challenge  is  to  attract  private  funding  to  this  sector.  In  most 
countries, infrastructure financing has taken place by the government itself or with explicit or 
implicit  guarantees  from  the  State.  To  attract  private  investment,  many  countries  have 
offered policy guarantees, refinance and maturity extension guarantees, viability gap funding 
etc. Credit insurance was also provided by monoline insurers. 
Multifaceted risks are involved in bank-funding of infrastructure viz. asset liability mismatches 
–  leading  to  liquidity  and  interest  rate  risks  –  which  could  translate  to  credit  risk, 
implementation  delays  leading  to  cost/  time  over  runs,  expected  cash  flows  based  on  use 
and cost recovery not materialising, financial conditions of ultimate purchaser of the services 
becoming  uncertain  despite  cash  flows  being  escrowed,  concentration  risk  of  too  many 
projects being executed by the same group and so on. In India, implementation risk and user 
charges  recovery  risk  are  perceived  to  be  more  relevant.  Unbundling  of  risk  through 
structured products have to be carefully thought through out to avoid undue leveraging and 
building of risk in the banking system or in interconnected entities as the recent global crisis 
has so eloquently demonstrated. 
RBI  has  provided  a  number  of  measures  for  facilitating  infrastructure  finance,  such  as 
allowing  banks  to  enter  into  take-out  financing  arrangement,  freedom  to  issue  long  term 
bonds  for  financing  infrastructure,  some  relaxation  of  single  and  group  borrower  limits  for 
additional  credit  exposure  in  infrastructure  sector,  flexibility  to  invest  in  unrated  bonds  of 
companies engaged in infrastructure activities within the overall ceiling of 10 percent of non-
SLR securities, excluding from capital market exposure promoters’ shares in the SPV of an 
4 
 BIS Review 107/2009
infrastructure project, permitting banks to extend finance for funding promoter’s equity where 
the proposal involves acquisition of share in an existing company engaged in implementing 
or  operating  an  infrastructure  project  in  India.  We  have  recently  revised  the  definition  of 
commercial real estate by linking it to source of repayment rather than the collateral so that 
hotels  hospitals  SEZ  projects  of  certain  types  etc  can  be  classified  as  not  falling  under 
commercial real estate (CRE). 
To  stimulate  public  investment  in  infrastructure,  a  special  purpose  vehicle  –  India 
Infrastructure Finance Company Limited (IIFCL) was set up for providing long-term financial 
assistance to infrastructure projects. The Union Budget for 2009-10 announced that IIFCL in 
consultation  with  banks  will  evolve  “take  out  financing”  scheme  to  facilitate  lending  to  the 
infrastructure sector. To ease the financing constraints for infrastructure projects under the 
PPP  mode,  the  Government  has  decided  that  IIFCL  would  refinance  60  per  cent  of 
commercial  bank  loans  for  PPP  projects  in  critical  areas  over  the  next  fifteen  to  eighteen 
months. IIFCL was authorised to raise Rs.10,000 crore through Government guaranteed tax 
free bonds by the end of 2008-09 and an additional Rs.30,000 crore on the same basis as 
per  the  requirement  in  2009-10.  The  refinancing  option  is  expected  to  leverage  bank 
financing  for  PPP  programmes  to  the  extent  of  about  Rs.1,00,000  crore.  Given  the  huge 
financing requirement of the infrastructure sector, IIFCL needs to assume direct credit risk. 
Further IIFCL could explore leveraging their capital and budgetary allocation for raising tax 
free bonds to provide credit enhancements, risk mitigants, back stop liquidity and take out 
financing thereby attracting more private funding (including bank funding) for infrastructure. 
As infrastructure projects are of huge size and are very often executed by few large groups, 
bank  funding  is  necessarily  limited  because  of  exposure  limit  requirements.  A  suggestion 
sometimes made is to relax exposure limits – especially the group limit – where the projects 
are executed by an entity through an SPV and cash flows emanating from the project are 
separately escrowed. Exposure limits for groups are intended to minimise concentration risk. 
It is difficult to envisage that problems faced by groups will not spill over to the associated 
entities or vice versa or that the support from the group is not a factor that encouraged the 
financing  in  the  first  instance.  In  any  event  the  issue  is  whether  additional  risk  requires 
additional safeguards and this is something we are examining. Having said that, borrowers 
too need to accept the fact that their requirements cannot be met by a few banks or banking 
system and they will have to explore syndicated structures and corporate bond issuances for 
their large project requirements.  
In this context, it is argued by some that for development of corporate bond market, banks 
should  provide  credit  substitutes  such  as  guarantees.  Experience  of  other  countries, 
particularly Korea and China has not been encouraging – while the former has made its bond 
market  a  “no  bank  guarantee”  market,  the  latter  is  stated  to  be  placing  curbs  on  such 
guarantees.  The  current  regulatory  policies  in  India  do  not  allow  banks  to  guarantee 
corporate bonds. There are several reasons for this. Issuance of a tradable bond with 100 
per cent bank guarantee inhibits the development of corporate bond market in many ways. 
First, such a product places the entire risk of the exposure on the banking system and is akin 
to a bond issued by a bank itself. Second it distorts the pricing of corporate bonds. Third, 
such  a  practice  also  discourages  institutional  and  retail  investors  to  appraise  and  assume 
credit risk. Any credit enhancement or protection needs to be offered and priced separately. 
A  policy  framework  for  introduction  of  credit  derivatives  is  being  developed  taking  into 
account the lessons learnt from the global crisis. 
There is also a view that corporate bond markets will only develop if RBI allows repos in such 
bonds. At the outset it must be recognised that development of the long term corporate bond 
requires long term institutional investors such as insurance companies and pension funds. 
Several  measures  are  being  taken  by  the  Government  to  promote  insurance  and  pension 
sectors. While , to some extent banks can undertake the maturity transformation, to mitigate 
the risk of such transformation beyond acceptable limits, the only option is for government 
BIS Review 107/2009 
 5
itself or government entities like IIFCL to provide appropriate risk mitigants till natural long 
term institutional investors emerge in a big way.  
To come back to repos in corporate bonds, RBI has already set out the pre-conditions for 
allowing  repos  in  corporate  bonds:  viz.,  an  efficient  and  safe  settlement  system  based  on 
DvP and availability of fair prices. The permission to the clearing houses of the exchanges to 
open  a  transitory  pooling  account  with  the  RBI  is  the  first  step  taken  to  provide  an 
environment for an efficient and safe settlement system. Draft guidelines for allowing repos in 
corporate  bonds  will  be  placed  shortly  on  RBI’s  website  for  wider  dissemination  and 
comments. 
Take out financing is one method of addressing the ALM issue. Some argue that take out 
financing  has  not  worked  because  of  the  higher  capital  requirements  that  needs  to  be 
maintained,  both  by  the  financial  entity  offering  the  asset  for  takeout  as  also  the  bank 
financing the infrastructure. In case of organisations like IIFCL offering take out, this should 
not be an issue. However we are having a relook at this constraint. 
Issuance  of  long  term  bonds  by  banks  with  special  incentives  for  investors  is  another 
suggestion that is made for addressing the problem of asset liability mismatch. While this is 
being examined, it needs to be mentioned that the recent introduction of the 10 year future 
on the exchanges can perhaps help in developing products to mitigate the interest rate risk 
for infrastructure projects. 
To conclude, there is need to address the non credit issues in agricultural credit, credit and 
credit plus issues in MSE financing and a variety of innovative risk mitigants in infrastructure 
financing  to  make  sure  that  the  Indian  banking  system  can  play  its  due  role  in  capital 
formation  in  these  three  vital  sectors  of  the  economy  so  critical  for  sustainable  inclusive 
growth. 
References 
Reserve Bank of India (2009): Annual Report 
Planning Commission (2008): 11th Five Year Plan – 2007-12 
Government of India (2009): Economic Survey, 2008-09, Ministry of Finance 
Government of India (2009): Annual Report, Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises  
6 
 BIS Review 107/2009
