Ewart S Williams: Infusing financial literacy into the school curriculum  
Opening  remarks  by  Mr  Ewart  S  Williams,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, at  the presentation of certificates for participant of the workshop “Infusing financial 
literacy into the school curriculum” hosted by the National Financial Literacy Programme and 
the Ministry of Education, Port-of-Spain, 7 August 2009. 
 I am truly delighted to be part of this ceremony which, for me, represents the formalization 
of a strategic partnership between the Ministry of Education and the Central Bank – a 
partnership dedicated to raising the level of financial literacy in the country. 
As you know from its inception, the National Financial Literacy Programme (NFLP) initiated 
a  schools  programme  which  ran  concurrently  with  our  regular  work-place  and  public 
programmes. Under our schools programme, the NFLP undertook financial literacy sessions 
in  almost  every  primary  school  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago.  For  this  school  year,  we  did  488 
primary  schools  covering  27,860  students.  Also,  as  part  of  this  programme  we  have  just 
concluded  a  secondary  schools  pilot  programme  with  seven  (7)  secondary  schools 
involving 930 students. 
The completion of the Train the Trainer Teachers’ Workshop initiates a bold new phase in 
our  programme  as  it  (hopefully)  signals  the  formal  inclusion  of  financial  literacy  as  a 
permanent part of the secondary schools curriculum. 
As you may know ladies and gentlemen, the ongoing international financial crisis has brought 
home to countries all over the world the critical importance of financial education in schools. 
In  the  U.S.  there  is  a  growing  consensus  among  policy-makers  (and  educators)  that 
country’s  lack  of  financial  sophistication  was  one  cause  of  the  current  economic 
problems.  These  policymakers  point  to  the  fact  that  the  economic  recession  found  too 
many households buried in debt, stuck with unaffordable mortgages, with far too-little 
savings and stung by huge investment losses. 
Back home, while we in the Bank were always convinced of the benefits of financial literacy 
to our people and to our national aspirations, the severe economic slowdown with which we 
are  now  confronted,  as  well  as  the  recent  challenges  in  our  financial  sector,  have 
underscored  to  us  the  need  to  ramp  up  the  financial  literacy  programme  –  in  fact,  to 
make it more of a crusade. 
Current economic circumstances for example, have forced families to make ends meet, to 
plan  and  budget  their  incomes,  and  generally  to  make  difficult  consumer  choices  –  a 
situation for which many people are not prepared. 
As for our own financial crisis, if there is one thing that Fantasy Tours, HCU, CLICO and 
CIB  had  in  common,  it  is  that  “if  it  is  too  good  to  be  true,  it  is,  and  may  probably  be 
fraudulent. 
Any institution that offers you rates of return that are way out of line with the market, is more 
than likely taking you for a ride. 
And while, through our NFLP, we will continue our work with adults to shift how they think 
about personal finance and to help change their habits, the benefits of working with young 
people  and  in  their  schools  are  overwhelming  –  the  rationale  is  simple  “catch  them 
early and change their path going into adulthood”. 
It  is  clear  for  instance  that  we  need  to  start  early  to  help  our  children  understand  the 
relationship between risk and return. 
BIS Review 96/2009 
 1
Our schools are an excellent place to teach our children how compound interest works 
– that it is great for depositors, but will extend the life and cost of your loan if you are the 
borrower. 
Our schools should teach our children the basics of debt and credit; how dangerous your 
credit  card  could  be,  about  the  importance  of  paying  your  bills  on  time  and  the 
implications of having bad credit. Teaching these concepts in school will save our children 
considerable hardships in adulthood. 
We  must  recognize  ladies  and  gentlemen,  that  financial  literacy  is  a  life  skill  and  we 
usually learn life skills from our parents or through the school system. But in many cases 
our  parents  lack  the  financial  education  themselves.  Thus  the  important  role  for  our 
schools. 
Teachers  I  would  like  to  commend  you,  the  teachers,  who  have  participated  in  these 
workshops, for sacrificing a week of your vacation in the interest of your pupils and hopefully 
in your own interest since, I hope, you became more financially literate yourselves. I am 
grateful that you opted to spend the week with us. I am told that from the moment the notice 
was published in the newspapers, there was an immediate and enthusiastic response and 
that you continued to demonstrate that enthusiasm throughout the workshops by your active 
participation and by your advice and your input all of which helped to make the programme 
more meaningful. The dedication that you have shown in this initiative puts a lie to the notion 
that our teachers lack commitment. All of you are a credit to your profession. We at the 
Central Bank are grateful to the principals of the four schools which were the venues for the 
workshops  –  San  Fernando  East  Secondary;  Chaguanas  North  Secondary;  Valencia  High 
School and St. Joseph’s College, St Joseph; we are grateful to Petrotrin, who has been one 
of our strongest supporters and sponsors from the inception of the programme. Our gratitude 
also to Mr. Lloyd Ince and the staff of the Consulting Interface Ltd (TCIL) who trained 
and managed the volunteers as well as to our regular facilitators, without whom the NFLP 
would be hard pressed to meet the demand for sessions in communities and to the public. To 
the four facilitators who conducted the workshops over the past two weeks, I say a special 
thank you. 
My sincere gratitude also to the Ministry of Education which has been a fervent supporter 
and  active  participant  in  our  programme.  If  the  Central  Bank’s  NFLP  currently  enjoys  any 
success  in  the  schools,  it  is  as  a  result  of  the  unstinting  collaboration  of  the  Ministry, 
principals and teachers. 
Ladies and gentlemen, we in the Bank have always seen our role as initiating, and nurturing 
the  National  Financial  Literacy  Programme,  then  passing  it  on  to  others  to  guarantee  the 
programme’s  sustainability.  Accordingly,  the  infusion  of  the  programme  into  the 
secondary  school  curriculum  is  indeed  a  step  in  the  right  direction.  Let  me  assure  the 
Ministry of Education of our continued support and collaboration in an expanded programme 
to infuse financial literacy into the school curriculum at every level. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I thank you. 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2009
