José Manuel González-Páramo: Managing risk – the role of the central 
bank in a financial crisis 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at Risk Europe 2009, Frankfurt am Main, 4 June 2009. 
 1.  
Introduction1
Ladies and gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  be  speaking  here  at  Risk  Europe  2009.  Over  the  last  few 
years  this  annual  conference  has  succeeded  in  gathering  together  the  brightest  minds  in 
both academia and financial practice in the area of risk management, offering interesting and 
topical discussions and providing valuable insights into future developments in this field. And 
I’m sure you will agree with me when I say that the challenges faced by risk managers in the 
financial world have rarely been more complex than they are at present. I would like to focus 
today  on  how  a  central  bank  can  help  the  risk  management  community  to  address  these 
challenges. I will also highlight the restrictions that I see in central banks’ operational leeway. 
However, I will not consider the macro-prudential role of a central bank, recognising that this 
is a topic large enough to merit a separate discussion.  
A few years ago, it would probably have been unusual for a central banker to be giving a 
speech at a conference on risk. Today, we know that central banking and risk management 
are  very  much  interconnected.  First,  central  banks  have  played  a  key  role  worldwide  – 
through their operations in financial markets – in alleviating the implications of the dramatic 
intensification of banks’ liquidity risk since the summer of 2007. It is no exaggeration to say 
that central banks have become the best friends of banks’ liquidity risk managers. Second, 
central banks have learned that their own financial risk management is crucial if they are to 
deliver,  in  a  prudent  manner,  the  best  possible  liquidity  support  for  strained  markets  and 
financial institutions.  
While central banks have certainly done a lot, there are no shortage of proposals for other 
things that central banks should do. Having the ability to create unlimited purchasing power 
at  short  notice  without  being  constrained  by  internal  liquidity  considerations,  central  banks 
have often been regarded as having limitless power to resolve economic crises.  
Such  discussions  concerning  the  limits  on  central  banks’  ability  to  intervene  –  and  the 
dangers if these limits are ignored – are not new. One of the most famous discussions on 
this topic is Milton Friedman’s presidential address to the American Economic Association in 
1968, entitled “The role of monetary policy”.2 The address consisted of three main sections: 
the first on “What monetary policy cannot do”; the second on “What monetary policy can do”; 
and finally a third on “ How should monetary policy be conducted?” 
While opinions on monetary policy have changed a lot since 1968, I would like to follow the 
structure  of  Friedman’s  address  –  focusing,  however,  on  central  banks’  policies  for  the 
management of financial crises.  
                                                 
1  
I am very grateful to U. Bindseil and E. Tabakis for their valuable contributions, and to I. Alves and M. Stubbe 
for comments. 
2   Friedman,  M.  (1968),  “The  role  of  monetary  policy:  Presidential  address  to  the  American  Economic 
Association”, American Economic Review 58(1), pp. 1-17. 
BIS Review 69/2009 
 1
What central banks cannot do to help contain a financial crisis 
2.  
Central banks have no comparative advantage in credit risk management. To cite just one 
example,  a  study  published  by  the  Bank  for  International  Settlements  in  2008  on  the 
management  of  foreign  exchange  reserves3  remarks  that  central  banks  have  traditionally 
had  a  low  level  of  tolerance  as  regards  credit  risk,  and  therefore  have  limited  expertise  in 
credit risk management. While this is partly explained by the need to hold highly liquid foreign 
exchange  reserves  for  intervention  purposes,  it  is  also  due  to  the  reputational  costs 
perceived  as  being  associated  with  a  credit  event.  Even  when  assessing  the  credit  risk  of 
financial institutions in their own jurisdiction, for instance their regular counterparties in open 
market operations, central banks do not have access to any privileged information available 
to banking supervisory authorities – or if they do, they are prevented from using it through the 
establishment of Chinese walls. Consequently, central banks should not take on credit risk 
unless there are good reasons for doing so in terms of providing necessary liquidity services 
or  it  is  required  in  order  to  re-establish  an  effective  transmission  mechanism  for  monetary 
policy.  
Central banks have been made independent in order to fulfil a well-defined mandate. Hence, 
they must not take inappropriate decisions which could have a direct and significant impact 
on the allocation of public money – for instance taking excessive amounts of credit risk onto 
their own balance sheets. Market risks should also be contained, and this can be achieved 
through sound risk management. Very substantial risk taking, subsidies and recapitalisation 
must be reserved for elected governments. In theory, one could assess central banks’ ability 
to take financial risk onto their balance sheets by considering the adequacy of their capital 
and  other  financial  buffers.  However,  in  practice,  one  should  also  take  into  account  the 
idiosyncratic features of central banks when compared with private financial institutions, such 
as  the  fact  that  their  ability  to  issue  legal  tender  also  contributes  to  their  resilience  by 
guaranteeing a future stream of income. Furthermore, however a central bank’s risk budget 
is set, in specific institutional set-ups the range of measures adopted by a central bank in a 
financial crisis could – provided that the independence of the central bank is preserved – be 
further  extended  if  a  government  guaranteed  those  operations  that  led  to  risks  exceeding 
that budget. These two points mean that a line must be drawn in terms of the financial risk 
taken by a central bank. This line is not merely quantitative in nature. It is also determined by 
the goals to be achieved by the specific measures adopted by a central bank. While it could 
be argued that the government could take the necessary risks associated with the provision 
of  support  in  terms  of  financial  stability,  the  central  bank  remains  responsible  for  the  risks 
incurred  by  measures  associated  with  monetary  policy  geared  towards  ensuring  price 
stability. These two goals may sometimes converge – for example when the impairment of 
the  transmission  mechanism  for  monetary  policy  needs  to  be  addressed  using  measures 
which will, at the same time, improve the resilience of the financial system. 
When  intervening  to  provide  liquidity,  a  central  bank  must  avoid  favouring  certain  sectors 
over  others  in  terms  of  liquidity  support.  It  must  avoid  distorting  competition  or  otherwise 
hindering  the  efficient  allocation  of  resources.  While  the  central  bank  should  therefore  be 
very careful in its market interventions, this is not an argument in favour of inactivity. On the 
contrary,  when  asymmetric  information  –  owing,  for  example,  to  a  lack  of  market 
transparency or the opacity of certain financial instruments – threatens the functioning of a 
particular market segment, there may be grounds for the central bank to intervene. In such 
cases, intervention may be what is needed to restore market efficiency.  
                                                 
3   “FX reserve management: trends and challenges”, BIS Papers, No 40, May 2008. 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2009
What central banks can do to help contain a financial crisis 
3.  
It follows logically from the points I have just made that the central bank, as the only player 
that  has  no  liquidity  constraints,  can  and  should  help  to  overcome  a  liquidity  crisis  by 
injecting additional cash into the system. In doing so, it should use all available instruments, 
but should not take on excessive credit risk. Its objective of providing the financial system 
with adequate amounts of liquidity needs to be carefully weighed against the need to avoid 
central  bank  losses  or  the  moral  hazard  of  encouraging  excessive  risk  taking  by  financial 
institutions. 
Lending against adequate collateral is one of the main ways in which major central banks 
can  provide  liquidity.  If  such  lending  is  conducted  on  the  basis  of  a  carefully  designed 
collateral management framework (with eligibility criteria and risk control measures being of 
particular importance), central banks can continue to inject considerable amounts of liquidity 
into the system without necessarily exposing themselves to additional risk. This is because, 
in entering into a repurchase agreement with a counterparty, the central bank is exposed to 
counterparty risk, but does not itself take on default risk. It can therefore unilaterally select 
the  collateral  it  accepts,  imposing  haircuts  on  that  collateral  which  its  counterparties  are 
expected to accept. Haircuts safeguard the value of the collateral pledged to the central bank 
by protecting against liquidation risk and market risk, as well as mark-to-market losses owing 
to an increase in the credit risk implied by the collateral.  
In  addition  to  haircuts,  the  central  bank’s  capabilities  in  terms  of  valuation  and  credit 
assessment are of crucial importance in an environment in which, owing to the market not 
functioning properly, central banks act as a backstop for financial activities. In normal times, 
market participants establish standards for credit quality and prices to which both buyers and 
sellers have an incentive to adhere. In instances when markets break down and investors 
disappear, central banks should, to the extent possible, consider stepping in to temporarily 
replace the industry as a market-maker of last resort. While the central bank could always 
compensate for poor valuation and credit assessment capabilities by means of draconian risk 
control  measures  (e.g.  by  imposing  very  large  haircuts),  this  would  result  in  the  poor 
performance of its policy function of helping to overcome the liquidity crisis. 
The central bank’s flexibility in terms of its collateral management framework should be used 
wisely.  In  the  presence  of  a  liquidity  crisis  or  a  credit  crunch,  financial  institutions  find  it 
difficult  to  fund  their  assets.  Credit  lines  are  reduced  or  eliminated  as  other  participants, 
faced with uncertainty, refuse to take on counterparty risk. Indeed, central banks are the only 
market participants that can afford to be counter-cyclical in their behaviour. They continue to 
lend as before, being aware that both counterparty and collateral risks have increased. This 
“inertia”  in  central  banks’  behaviour  in  the  money  market  was  described  in  W.  Bagehot’s 
“Lombard  Street”,  in  which  he  advised  the  central  bank  to  continue  lending  “on  what  in 
ordinary times is reckoned a good security”4. In fact, the ECB has gone beyond “inertia” in 
the current crisis in order to mitigate the systemic liquidity risk faced by the financial system 
in  the  wake  of  Lehman  Brothers’  failure.  It  has  increased  its  lending,  with  financing  now 
offered at extended maturities of up to one year5, and has even temporarily expanded the list 
of collateral accepted in its credit operations.6
As I have said, in a crisis central banks face a trade-off that may prevent them from engaging 
in  bolder  measures,  notably  as  regards  the  need  to  contain  moral  hazard.  A  constant 
concern for central bankers is the issue of how to prevent public resources being directed to 
                                                 
4   Bagehot, W. (1872), “Lombard Street: A description of the money market”. 
5   ECB press release of 7 May 2009 entitled “Longer-term refinancing operations”. 
6   ECB  press  release  of  15  October  2008  entitled  “Measures  to  further  expand  the  collateral  framework  and 
enhance the provision of liquidity”. 
BIS Review 69/2009 
 3
institutions  that  have  engaged  in  inappropriate  risk  taking.  Were  that  to  happen,  not  only 
would it appear that those institutions were being rewarded for their poor risk management 
performance, but other financial institutions would, indirectly, be encouraged to behave in a 
similar way in the future. This can be avoided if the central bank pays due attention to its own 
risk management practices, making sure that risk taking on its own balance sheet remains 
limited and is always well controlled. This approach allows an abstract idea (i.e. the need to 
prevent moral hazard) to be translated into a concrete policy constraint (i.e. the control of risk 
taking associated with liquidity-enhancing measures).  
In  conclusion,  central  banks  should  aim  to  provide  liquidity  in  whatever  ways  they  can, 
without taking on excessive financial risk. The better the central bank’s risk management, the 
better the liquidity services the central bank can provide for a given risk budget; or, the other 
way round, the less risk it will have to take on for a given set of liquidity services. 
How central banks can help to overcome the financial crisis 
4.  
On  the  basis  of  the  previous  considerations,  a  number  of  concrete  measures  can  be 
regarded as natural responsibilities of central banks in general, and the ECB in particular. 
• 
The  primary  objective  of  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  is  the  maintenance  of  price 
stability. Interest rate policies should remain geared towards that primary objective, 
with  a  clear  distinction  being  made  between  the  monetary  policy  stance  and  the 
management of the banking system’s need for liquidity. 
A  central  bank  can  provide  liquidity  to  the  banking  system  as  a  whole  through  its 
regular open market operations. These can be extended in terms of the maturity of 
the lending operations and relaxed in terms of their tender procedures, depending on 
the  nature,  depth  and  expected  duration  of  a  liquidity  crisis.  Furthermore,  financial 
institutions have access to standing lending facilities, which are normally provided to 
banks at a penalty rate.  
Collateral policies should at the very least obey the principle of central bank “inertia” 
in a crisis – i.e. they should not be tightened. They can even be loosened, provided 
that an appropriate risk management framework guards against both financial risk for 
the central bank and moral hazard. Again, the precise measures implemented by a 
central  bank  will  depend  on  the  nature,  depth  and  expected  duration  of  a  liquidity 
crisis. 
Extraordinary liquidity measures can be complemented by non- standard monetary 
policy measures, such as the outright purchase of securities. One example of such a 
measure is the covered bond portfolio programme announced today. Such purchases 
have a longer-lasting impact on the balance sheet of the central bank, making it all 
the more important that a carefully designed risk control framework be put in place. 
Furthermore,  the  central  bank  can  provide  emergency  liquidity  assistance  to 
individual banks in so far as these are illiquid but not insolvent. This must be done in 
close  cooperation  with  supervisory  authorities,  in  order  to  ensure  that  informed 
decisions  are  made  and  public  resources  are  used  wisely.  Admittedly,  the  chain 
reactions that can be triggered by liquidity problems mean that it is sometimes difficult 
to determine whether a financial institution that requires liquidity assistance remains 
inherently solvent. 
On specific occasions some central banks have also played an important role as a 
catalyst for private rescue measures (as was the case, for example, in the role played 
by the Federal Reserve System in the bailing out of Long-Term Capital Management 
in 1998). 
     4 
 BIS Review 69/2009
Central banks’ impact on the functioning of the markets  
5. 
Furthermore,  central  banks  should  make  an  active  contribution  to  improved  market 
transparency, first and foremost by supporting market initiatives in this regard and thereby 
helping to support the identification and analysis of systemic risks.  
For  instance,  securitisation  could  be  made  more  transparent,  leading  to  the  availability  of 
better,  more  accurate  information  on  the  value  of  underlying  assets  –  particularly  loans. 
Improving  the  infrastructure  used  by  issuers  and  investors  to  exchange  information  on 
complex financial products would increase transparency and foster market innovation, while 
reducing systemic risk. 
Without  such  initiatives,  important  market  segments  could  fail  to  recover  from  the  severe 
decline  in  activity  caused  by  the  current  crisis.  Such  markets  are  important  in  allowing 
financial  institutions  to  secure  asset- based  funding,  expand  lending  and  better  distribute 
risk. They contribute to the efficiency of the economic system, and so a failure to revive them 
would entail considerable social costs.  
Conclusions 
6.  
Let me conclude as I started – i.e. by following Milton Friedman in determining what a central 
bank both can and cannot do in a financial crisis.  
• 
Central banks’ ability to contribute to the stability of the financial system is based on 
their  unique  capacity  to  create  liquidity  without  constraints.  Consequently,  a  central 
bank can make a substantial contribution to the resolution of a liquidity crisis through 
the provision of adequate amounts of liquidity. 
But  there  are  also  things  that  a  central  bank  cannot  and  should  not  contribute  to. 
Besides  the  general  need  for  such  measures  to  be  fully  compatible  with  monetary 
policy, a central bank’s ability and willingness to take on financial risk is the deciding 
factor when it comes to drawing a red line between what the central bank can and 
cannot do. This line is drawn both in terms of the goals that specific measures are 
designed  to  achieve  (which  should  be  compatible  with  the  mandate  of  the  central 
bank)  and  in  terms  of  the  level  of  risk  taken  (which  should  be  compatible  with  the 
ability  of 
financial 
independence).  
The idiosyncrasies of certain institutional set-ups have allowed some central banks to 
consider  extending  their  remit  backed  by  the  issuance  of  government  guarantees. 
The need to preserve the independence of the central bank and a clear division of 
labour are the overarching considerations in this respect. In any case, the quality of 
the central bank’s financial risk management is crucial to the services it can deliver 
without crossing this red line. 
Finally,  a  central  bank  can  act  as  a  catalyst  in  fostering  market  developments  that 
improve  transparency,  improve  risk  management  standards  and  encourage  the 
revival of dysfunctional markets. 
to  absorb  risk  without 
the  central  bank 
jeopardising 
its 
   With these remarks on the role of central banks in a financial crisis, I wanted to explain how I 
perceive  the  role  of  our  institutions:  their  responsibilities,  but  also  their  limitations.  Just  as 
importantly, I wanted to emphasise the importance of risk management considerations – in 
line with the theme of this conference – in determining central bank policies in the area of 
crisis management. We can add this to the long list of reasons why advances in the field of 
risk management, pursued in conferences such as this, will be essential in preventing and – 
should it prove necessary – managing financial crises in the future.  
Thank you very much for your attention. 
BIS Review 69/2009 
 5
