Hirohide Yamaguchi: Recent economic and financial developments and 
the conduct of monetary policy  
Speech by Mr Hirohide Yamaguchi, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at a meeting with 
business leaders, Hakodate, 22 July 2009. 
 Introduction 
I am honored to have this opportunity to speak today before business leaders in Hakodate 
and the Donan area. 
I  would  like  to  express  my  gratitude  for  your  cooperation  in  interviews  with  staff  from  the 
Hakodate  Branch  and  in  the  Bank  of  Japan's  surveys.  Information  obtained  from  these 
interviews and surveys is very valuable and utilized fully in appropriately assessing economic 
and financial developments and conducting monetary policy. 
Hakodate  is  a  city  that  opened  the  door  to  modernization  and  internationalization  by 
becoming one of the first ports in Japan to engage in international trade. It has played an 
extremely important role in Hokkaido's economy as well as that of Japan as a whole. The 
Bank established a local office in Hakodate in 1893, which is now the Hakodate Branch, the 
second oldest of the existing branches after the Osaka Branch. This was two years before 
the establishment of the Hakodate Chamber of Commerce and Industry. I believe  that the 
fact that the Hakodate Branch has been able to continue its central banking operations here 
for more than a century owes much to the understanding of and support from the business 
community as well as the people of the area in general. 
About  ten  years  after  the  opening  of  the  Bank's  local  office  in  Hakodate,  a  man  named 
Ryokichi  Kawada  came  to  Hakodate  to  serve  as  the  executive  of  a  local  shipbuilding 
company. He worked at the company while establishing a farm in the town that is now called 
Nanae.  He  began  growing  Irish  potatoes,  which  are  suitable  for  cultivation  in  Hokkaido's 
climate,  and  devoted  his  life  to increasing  their  popularity.  Since  he  held  the  title  of  baron 
(danshaku),  which  he  had  received  from  his  father,  the  potatoes  were  named  danshaku 
potatoes, and they have since become one of Hokkaido's well-known products. You may well 
be familiar with this story, but I think it is less well known today that his father was Koichiro 
Kawada, the third Governor of the Bank, who established the local office in Hakodate. I was 
very interested to learn of this connection between the Bank and Hakodate. 
Before exchanging views with you, I would like to talk about the current state of and outlook 
for  Japan's  economy,  and  explain  how  the  Bank  has  been  conducting  monetary  policy  to 
deal with the severe economic conditions since last autumn. 
I. 
Economic and financial developments in Japan 
The current state of Japan's economy 
A.  
I would like to talk first about the current state of Japan's economy. 
The deterioration of economic conditions in Japan that began last autumn was so sharp and 
substantial that it was described as "falling off a cliff." Fortunately, economic conditions have 
recently begun to stop worsening. The Bank holds Monetary Policy Meetings (MPMs) every 
month, where the Policy Board members, at present eight including the Governor, discuss 
economic  and  financial  developments,  and  decide  on  the  guideline  for  monetary  policy 
conduct for the immediate future. At the July meeting held last week, the Bank judged that 
Japan's economic conditions have stopped worsening.  
BIS Review 94/2009 
 1
Let me elaborate somewhat on the background to this assessment. 
The main factor that has caused economic conditions to stop worsening is the recovery in 
exports  and  production,  especially  of  automobiles  and  electrical  machinery.  Exports  and 
production  of  automobiles  are  showing  a  clearer  recovery  trend  due  mainly  to  progress  in 
adjustments of inventories, especially those held abroad. More firms have recently started to 
increase  their  production,  especially  of  hybrid  cars,  reflecting  a  measure  to  promote  the 
purchase  of  new  automobiles  introduced  in  April  2009.  Orders  for  electronic  parts  from 
overseas have increased sharply since the beginning of this spring against the background 
of progress in inventory adjustments both at home and abroad and measures to stimulate 
domestic demand being taken in China, and thus their production has picked up. There has 
been  a  particularly  large  improvement  in  orders  for  parts  used  in  flat-panel  televisions, 
cellular  phones,  and  personal  computers.  Production  of  not  only  electronic  parts  but  also 
finished  goods,  particularly  flat-panel  televisions,  has  recently  increased.  Some  expect 
production to be on a relatively steady growth path due mainly to a boost to sales from the 
"eco-point  system"  –  whereby  consumers  who  buy  eco-friendly  electrical  appliances  are 
given points that can be exchanged for other goods. I am informed by the Hakodate Branch 
that  capacity  utilization  has  begun  to  rise  among  manufacturers  of  electronic  parts  in 
Hakodate, who had to reduce their production substantially some time ago. 
Public  investment  is  also  increasing,  reflecting  the  implementation  of  the  economic  policy 
package since the previous fiscal year. The value of public works contracted started to rise 
year on year in the January-March quarter of 2009, and recorded an increase of more than 
10 percent in April-May. The value of public works contracted in the Donan area has recently 
picked up as well. 
On the other hand, domestic private demand, namely, business fixed investment and private 
consumption, has continued to weaken amid persisting sluggishness in corporate profits and 
the worsening employment and income situation. Looking at the June Tankan (Short-Term 
Economic Survey of Enterprises in Japan) released earlier this month, firms' fixed investment 
plans  for  fiscal  2009  decreased  by  almost  20  percent  year  on  year.  Regarding  private 
consumption,  sales  of  electrical  appliances  have  increased  and  the  number  of  new 
passenger-car registrations has recently picked up. However, sales at department stores and 
supermarkets  have  continued  to  be  on  a  declining  trend.  Outlays  for  travel  have  also 
continued  to  decline.  As  these  developments  show,  a  sharp  drop  in  exports  since  last 
autumn  and  the  subsequent  decrease  in  production  have  started  to  adversely  affect 
domestic private demand with a lag. At present, a recovery in exports and production and the 
weakness in business fixed investment and private consumption seem to be in a tug of war. 
The outlook for Japan's economy 
B. 
I would now like to move on to the outlook for Japan's economy. 
As I mentioned earlier, there are currently both upward and downward pressures in Japan's 
economy. Regarding which will prevail, the Bank's baseline scenario projects that the upward 
pressure will outweigh the downward, leading the economy to start recovering from the latter 
half  of  fiscal  2009.  Global  financial  markets  are  expected  to  regain  stability  and  overseas 
economies  to  start  to  recover,  and  in  Japan  the  aggressive  fiscal  and  monetary  policy 
measures are likely to have positive effects. In addition to an increase in exports, business 
fixed investment and private consumption are therefore expected to be on a gradual recovery 
path. 
Stock prices have continued to fluctuate, but appear to have picked up from the sluggishness 
observed  some  time  ago.  The  Nikkei  225  Stock  Average  has  recently  been  around  9,500 
yen,  up  by  more  than  30  percent  compared  with  early  March  when  it  recorded  the  lowest 
level  since  the  bursting  of  the  bubble.  According  to  the  Economic  Watchers  Survey  and 
Consumer Confidence Survey, the pessimism of firms and households regarding economic 
conditions  has  subsided  since  this  spring.  The  June  Tankan  also  showed  that  business 
2 
 BIS Review 94/2009
sentiment, especially of manufacturing firms, has stopped deteriorating. These survey results 
seem to basically reflect recent signs of a leveling out of the economy and expectations of 
positive effects from various policy measures. 
Nevertheless,  the  question  whether  the  degree  of  improvement  in  the  sentiment  of  the 
market and the public is consistent with the capability of Japan's economy to recover – in 
other words, the strength and sustainability of Japan's economic recovery – warrants further 
examination. 
I  have  outlined  developments  in  exports  and  production  to  show  that  economic  conditions 
have  recently  stopped  deteriorating,  and  now  I  would  like  to  talk  about  factors  underlying 
these  developments.  There  are  three  main  factors.  First,  inventory  adjustments  are 
proceeding  at  a  relatively  rapid  pace  both  at  home  and  abroad.  Second,  a  variety  of 
aggressive fiscal and monetary policy measures and measures to stabilize financial systems 
are being implemented around the globe. And third, extreme concerns about the economic 
outlook are beginning to subside. However, obviously, none of these factors will guarantee 
continuous and autonomous economic recovery, in other words, a recovery in private final 
demand.  For  instance,  large-scale  fiscal  policy  measures  can  temporarily  mitigate  the 
economic downturn, but cannot be relied on forever. The recovery path of Japan's economy 
depends greatly on whether private final demand – exports, consumption, and business fixed 
investment  –  recovers  strongly  in  a  sustainable  manner  without  any  help  from  fiscal  and 
other policy measures after the completion of current inventory adjustments. 
On  this  point,  I  believe  that  at  present  there  is  still  significant  uncertainty  for  the  following 
reasons. 
The  first  is  that  future  developments  in  Japan's  final  demand  will  be  greatly  influenced  by 
overseas economic conditions. Since the emergence of the subprime mortgage problem in 
the summer of 2007, the financial positions of U.S. and European financial institutions have 
deteriorated significantly due mainly to a fall in the prices of securitized products, and these 
institutions are still in the process of disposing of impaired assets. Under the circumstances, 
if the sluggishness in corporate profits is protracted or if asset prices continue to decline, the 
capital  strength  of  financial  institutions  may  be  reduced  further  and  their  lending  attitudes 
may become more cautious, thereby leading to a further deterioration in overseas economic 
conditions. This phenomenon is described as an "adverse feedback loop operating between 
financial and economic activity," in which financial and economic activity adversely influence 
each  other  to  bring  about  a  spiraling  economic  downturn.  Since  last  year,  the  adverse 
feedback loop has become a major problem especially in the United States and Europe. If 
this phenomenon intensifies again in overseas economies, exports may decline and thereby 
adversely affect Japan's economic activity. I will explain the adverse feedback loop in detail 
later in my remarks. 
The second reason is that it is uncertain to what extent a change in firms' medium- to long-
term growth expectations will affect the economy – in other words, how firms' outlook for the 
economy  will  change  and  how  this  will  influence  business  fixed  investment  and  ultimately 
private consumption. If the recovery in overseas economies is delayed or overseas economic 
conditions  deteriorate  unexpectedly,  firms  may  become  more  cautious  about  the  future 
economic  outlook.  In  that  case,  given  that  firms  draw  up  business  and  personnel 
recruitment/reduction plans based on their economic outlook, business fixed investment may 
decrease  further  and  private  consumption  may  remain  sluggish  due  to  a  worsening 
employment situation. 
There  are  several  other  factors  that  increase  the  uncertainty  about  the  economic  outlook, 
and there is in fact a possibility that economic conditions may improve more than expected. 
The  Bank's  assessment,  however,  is  that  the  downside  risks  to  the  economy,  especially 
those that I mentioned earlier, warrant particular attention. The Bank will continue to carefully 
examine overall economic activity, including these risks, at each MPM. 
BIS Review 94/2009 
 3
Price developments 
C.  
I  have  talked  so  far  mainly  about  economic  activity,  and  would  like  to  turn  now  to 
developments in prices. 
All of you may recall the surge in the prices of crude oil and crops through the summer of 
2008. At that time, the year-on-year rate of change in the consumer price index (CPI) for all 
items excluding fresh food recorded an increase of around 2.5 percent. This was the highest 
rate  in  the  16  years  since  June  1992,  if  we  exclude  the  effect  of  a  change  in  the  rate  of 
consumption tax. However, it began to moderate in the autumn reflecting the declines in the 
prices  of  petroleum  products  and  the  stabilization  of  food  prices,  and  has  recently  turned 
negative. The year-on-year rate of decline in the CPI will likely accelerate for the time being, 
partly due to the price rise observed last year, but is expected to moderate from the latter half 
of fiscal 2009 through fiscal 2010 against the backdrop of a moderate recovery of economic 
activity. 
Price  stability  is  conceptually  a  state  where  various  economic  agents  including  firms  and 
households  can  make  decisions  regarding  economic  activity  such  as  investment  and 
consumption without being concerned about fluctuations in the level of prices. The level of 
price changes that firms and households usually presuppose when making their decisions is 
therefore important. This level is influenced greatly by past experiences – that is, the level of 
price increases which firms and households have actually experienced in the past. In Japan, 
inflation  has  been  markedly  low  over  the  past  several  decades  relative  to  other  major 
countries. For example, the average year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI since 1985 is 
0.7 percent, while it is around 3 percent in the United States and the United Kingdom. Taking 
into  account  factors  such  as  the  record  of  low  inflation,  the  level  of  inflation  that  each 
member  of  the  Policy  Board  currently  understands  as  being  consistent  with  price  stability 
over the medium to long term is "a year-on-year rate of increase in the CPI falling in a range 
approximately  between  0  to  2  percent,  with  most  members'  median  figures  at  around  1 
percent." 
Some of you might question how the projection that the CPI will remain negative for the time 
being  should  be  understood  against  the  Bank's  understanding  of  price  stability  I  just 
mentioned. On this point, I would first like to emphasize that price stability is a medium- to 
long-term concept. When the economy is hit by a significant shock as at present, large short-
term swings in the actual rate of price change cannot be avoided. What I would like to stress 
here is that the Bank believes that preventing price declines from leading the economy into a 
deflationary  spiral  is  most  important.  A  deflationary  spiral  is  a  vicious  circle  in  which  price 
declines  lead  to  deterioration  in  economic  conditions,  and  this  in  turn  causes  further  price 
declines. As I mentioned earlier, the Bank's baseline scenario projects that the rate of decline 
in  prices  will  accelerate  temporarily,  but  will  moderate  from  the  latter  half  of  fiscal  2009 
against the backdrop of a recovery of economic activity. The Bank therefore thinks it unlikely 
at  present  that  prices  will  continue  to  decline  and  thereby  lead  Japan's  economy  into  a 
deflationary spiral. 
Developments in corporate financing 
D.  
Next, I would like to talk about recent developments in corporate financing. 
The Bank's current assessment of financial conditions is that, while remaining generally tight, 
they have continued to show signs of improvement. Immediately after the failure of Lehman 
Brothers, raising funds from the CP and corporate bond markets became extremely difficult 
and  interest  rates  rose  sharply.  However,  issuing  conditions  for  CP  and  corporate  bonds 
have  improved  steadily:  the  issuing  rates  on  CP  and  corporate  bonds  have  declined 
significantly; and the number of firms issuing corporate bonds has been increasing. Funding 
conditions  have  been  on  a  recovery  trend,  especially  among  large  firms,  because  the 
increase  in  demand  for  working  capital  has  receded  against  the  backdrop  of  the  recent 
reduction  of  inventories  and  also  because  firms'  demand  for  additional  liquidity  observed 
4 
 BIS Review 94/2009
since  last  autumn  has  stopped  increasing.  In  the  case  of  small  firms,  the  emergency 
guarantee  scheme  implemented  by  the  government  has  been  underpinning  their  funding 
conditions. In fact, various surveys including the June Tankan show that both large and small 
firms  see  their  financial  positions  and  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions  as  having 
improved slightly. 
On the other hand, issuance of corporate bonds by firms with low credit ratings has remained 
subdued. Moreover, a large number of firms have continued to see their financial positions 
as  weak  and  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions  as  severe,  although  firms'  financial 
situation in these regards has begun to improve slightly. 
With regard to future developments in corporate financing, there is uncertainty about whether 
these  signs  of  improvement  will  become  widespread.  The  financial  positions  of  Japanese 
financial  institutions  remained  relatively  stable  even  after  the  emergence  of  the  subprime 
mortgage problem. Unlike in the United States and Europe, failures of financial institutions 
have not occurred in Japan. Nevertheless, the financial statements of financial institutions for 
fiscal 2008 showed net losses for the first time in five years for major and regional banks and 
in six years for shinkin banks, mainly due to a decline in net operating profits and an increase 
in losses on securities. Although the outcome depends on future developments in economic 
activity as well as in corporate profits, we cannot rule out the possibility that the assessment 
of firms' credibility by financial institutions and market participants may become more severe. 
In  that  case,  lending  attitudes  of  financial  institutions  might  become  more  cautious,  and 
conditions for corporate financing might not recover fully. The Bank will therefore continue to 
examine developments in corporate financing, with the assistance of our branch network. 
Adverse feedback loop operating between financial and economic activity 
II.  
If you will bear with me, let me take a moment to explain in more detail the phrase "adverse 
feedback loop operating between financial and economic activity," which I mentioned earlier. 
Although  it  may  sound  unfamiliar,  it  is  a  key  phrase  for  understanding  the  current  global 
economic downturn and in making economic forecasts. In the explanation that follows, for the 
sake  of  clarity,  I  will  substitute  "financial  institutions"  for  "financial  activity"  and  "economic 
conditions" for "economic activity."  
Financial  institutions  must  comply  with  many  regulations,  including  the  Banking  Act,  to 
ensure  their  soundness.  This  is  because  they  have  a  financial  intermediation  function  to 
provide  firms  and  households  with  funds  that  have  been  entrusted  to  them  by  depositors. 
One of these regulations requires financial institutions to hold capital above a certain level 
that corresponds to the total amount of risk they take, for example, the probability of failures 
among the firms they lend to. To put it another way, financial institutions cannot take risks 
exceeding a certain level that is calculated based on the amount of capital they hold. Given 
that no firm is guaranteed never to fail, some degree of risk is always attached to loans that 
financial  institutions  extend  to  firms.  They  are  required  to  control  the  amount  they  lend  so 
that the total amount of risk they take does not exceed the level permitted.  
If  a  bank's  capital  decreases  as  a  result  of  it  incurring  a  large  amount  of  losses  due  to  a 
decline in stock prices or a failure of a firm it has lent to, the total amount of risk the bank can 
take will decrease accordingly. In this case, the bank will become more cautious than before 
in  extending  loans  that  are  accompanied  by  risk.  From  the  standpoint  of  firms,  loans  will 
become  less  available.  Should  this  lead  to  a  reduction  in  business  operations  at  a  large 
number of firms, overall economic conditions will deteriorate in consequence. Some of these 
firms  may  go  bankrupt  due  to  a  deterioration  in  their  business  conditions.  If  this  occurs, 
banks'  capital  will  decrease  further  due  to  resolution  of  the  losses  incurred  through  the 
failures of the firms the banks lent to. This will lead to a further tightening in banks' lending 
attitudes  and  bring  about  further  failures  and  deterioration  in  economic  conditions.  Thus, 
tighter  lending  attitudes  resulting  from  decreases  in  capital  lead  to  a  deterioration  in 
economic  conditions,  and  this  in  turn  brings  about  a  further  deterioration  in  economic 
BIS Review 94/2009 
 5
conditions  through  further  decreases  in  capital  and  tightening  in  lending  attitudes.  This 
vicious circle is the phenomenon described by the phrase "adverse feedback loop operating 
between financial and economic activity."  
In addition to bank loans, which I have just used as an example, firms, especially large ones, 
sometimes acquire funds in the CP and corporate bond markets. In addition, in the case of 
small  to  medium-sized  firms,  they  sometimes  acquire  funds  from  business  partners  and 
parent  companies  –  so-called  trade  credits.  Investors  that  provide  funds  in  the  CP  and 
corporate bond markets and firms that provide trade credits to other firms also cannot take 
excessive  risks  in  order  to  maintain  their  financial  soundness.  In  other  words,  an  adverse 
feedback  loop  may  be  initiated  not  only  through  bank  loans,  but  also  through  practically 
every channel of financial activity, including financial markets and trade credits.  
The  current  world  economic  downturn  is  to  a  considerable  extent  due  to  the  adverse 
feedback loop operating between financial and economic activity. Financial institutions in the 
United  States  and  Western  Europe,  already  faced  with  a  substantial  deterioration  in  their 
financial  positions  after  the  emergence  of  the  subprime  mortgage  problem,  became  even 
more risk averse as a result of the financial market turmoil caused by the failure of Lehman 
Brothers.  In  some  countries,  especially  in  the  United  States,  an  adverse  feedback  loop 
intensified, with the effects of a decline in real estate prices and increases in delinquencies of 
consumer  loans  reflecting  the  deterioration  in  economic  conditions  becoming  additional 
factors. Furthermore, the adverse feedback loop has spread across borders and oceans to 
become a global phenomenon because, for the last several years, large financial institutions 
and  investors  in  the  United  States  and  Western  Europe  have  been  assuming  a  role  in 
intermediating  funds  to  emerging  economies,  in  Central  and  Eastern  Europe  and  Latin 
America for example.  
As these consequences show, the impact of the adverse feedback loop on the economy is 
extremely  large.  In  addition,  the  adverse  feedback  loop  is  compounded  by  the  following 
complex issues that make it very difficult for policymakers to deal with.  
The  first  issue  is  that  an  adverse  feedback  loop  can  intensify  suddenly  without  clear 
forewarning. It is therefore difficult to anticipate, and required policy responses are likely to 
be  delayed.  Even  if  losses  incurred  by  financial  institutions  expand  due  to  the  declines  in 
stock prices and failure of firms they lend to, the financial intermediation function of financial 
institutions will not immediately be impaired as long as they hold sufficient capital to absorb 
these losses. The risk-taking capability of financial institutions will gradually decline, but at 
this stage, the situation will remain, so to speak, a "touch of fever" as in a cold, since ample 
physical strength, measured by the amount of capital, remains. However, when the amount 
of losses relative to capital reaches a certain critical point, financial institutions will become 
very sensitive to their lack of capital and may become acutely cautious in taking risks. It is 
like  the  persistence  of  fever  bringing  about  a  decline  in  physical  strength  that  suddenly 
causes the sickness to take a turn for the worse. If an economic downturn should cause such 
symptoms  to  prevail  among  financial  institutions,  an  adverse  feedback  loop  will  intensify 
rapidly. Policymakers including central banks need to keep a close eye, from an early stage, 
on how economic developments are affecting the physical strength and financial positions of 
financial institutions, namely, their capital and lending attitudes, through frequent exchange 
of information with the financial institutions and market participants.  
The  second  issue  is  that  once  an  "adverse  feedback  loop"  starts  to  intensify,  it  becomes 
extremely  difficult  to  stop.  When  financial  and  economic  activity  falls  into  a  vicious  circle, 
attending to only one side of the problem will not provide a real solution. A comprehensive 
policy response is required. For example, reductions in interest rates and increases in public 
spending, both to stimulate the economy, will become necessary in addition to measures to 
restore stability in the financial system, such as the bolstering of financial institutions' capital 
bases and the disposal of impaired assets.  
6 
 BIS Review 94/2009
In Japan, the "adverse feedback loop" was not grasped as a dire issue for some time after 
the bubble burst in the early 1990s. However, the financial strength of financial institutions 
was gradually undermined during this period, and there was a sudden intensification of an 
adverse  feedback  loop  in  the  latter  half  of  the  1990s.  Belatedly  at  that  point,  public  funds 
were injected into financial institutions for the first time. The first injection, however, was not 
sufficient to dampen the "adverse feedback loop," and a number of additional measures and 
years  were  required  thereafter  for  the  financial  intermediation  function  and  economic 
conditions  to  recover  fully.  Never  forgetting  this  bitter  experience,  we  should  take  every 
opportunity to share this lesson with policymakers abroad.  
In the current downturn, voices warning about an intensification of the adverse feedback loop 
were  also  frequently  heard  when  Japan  experienced  a  sharp  decline  in  stock  prices  this 
spring. Fortunately, however, the situation so far has not advanced to that stage despite the 
significant deterioration in economic conditions. One reason for this may be the fact that the 
financial condition of Japan's financial institutions remains relatively stable. In addition, the 
government's emergency guarantee scheme that takes on a portion of credit risks in place of 
private financial institutions and a framework established by the revision of law in December 
2008 to enable injection of public funds into financial institutions seem to be contributing to 
forestall  an  intensification  of  the  adverse  feedback  loop.  Furthermore,  the  Bank  has 
introduced  measures  such  as  purchases  of  stocks  held  by  banks  and  provision  of 
subordinated loans to banks. The measures we have taken are aimed at providing financial 
institutions  with  means  to  secure  necessary  capital  even  if  they  become  concerned  about 
increases  in  credit  risks  and  a  fall  in  stock  prices,  thereby  ensuring  smooth  functioning  of 
financial intermediation.  
In  the  United  States  and  Europe,  various  policy  actions  have  also  been  taken  in  quick 
succession  since  last  autumn  by  central  banks  and  governments  faced  with  a  rapidly 
developing  large-scale  adverse  feedback  loop.  In  the  United  States,  measures  to  restore 
stability  in  the  financial  system,  such  as  an  injection  of  public  funds  and  purchases  of 
impaired assets, and large-scale fiscal measures, totaling around 75 trillion yen, are being 
implemented. The Federal Reserve has also introduced various aggressive monetary easing 
measures,  including  reductions  in  its  policy  interest  rate.  Although  the  situation  remains 
fragile given the continued declines in the prices of residential and commercial properties, it 
is  hoped  that  the  adverse  feedback  loop  will  gradually  be  mitigated  with  the  help of  these 
policy actions.  
Let  me  point  out  another  issue  regarding  the  relationship  between  financial  and  economic 
activity. What I have discussed so far is declining financial and economic activity in the phase 
of  an  economic  downturn.  In  the  phase  of  an  economic  expansion,  the  opposite 
phenomenon may occur. For example, if capital increases due to an accumulation of profits 
reflecting  an  economic  expansion,  the  risk-taking  capability  of  financial  institutions  will 
increase.  And  if  this  induces  financial  institutions  to  adopt  aggressive  lending  attitudes, 
economic  conditions  will  be  boosted  further.  Thus,  changes  in  the  capital  of  financial 
institutions  are  a  factor  amplifying  business  cycles  both  upward  and  downward  through 
changes in their lending attitudes. Given the experience of both the current sharp economic 
downturn and the overheating of the world economy that preceded it, a wide range of issues, 
including  the  degree  to  which  financial  institutions  should  be  regulated,  are  being  hotly 
debated internationally to moderate the amplification of business cycles.  
The Bank's conduct of monetary policy  
III.  
I  have  so  far  explained  the  situation  of  Japan's  economy  and  its  prospects  with  some 
reference to economic developments overseas. I will turn now to the subject of recent policy 
conduct by the Bank, some aspects of which I have already mentioned. Since last autumn, 
the  Bank  has  taken  a  number  of  measures  in  view  of  the  substantial  deterioration  in 
BIS Review 94/2009 
 7
in 
risks, 
taking 
investors  become  excessively  cautious 
economic conditions and tight financial conditions. I will refer here only to the most important 
ones.  
First, there have been policy interest rate reductions. The Bank has reduced its target for the 
policy interest rate – the uncollateralized overnight call rate – from 0.5 percent to 0.1 percent. 
Reduction of the policy interest rate is the most conventional policy action taken by central 
banks  to  increase  demand  in  the  economy.  Usually,  when  central  banks  alter  their  policy 
interest  rates,  it  is  assumed  that  this  will  influence  longer-term  interest  rates  in  financial 
markets  and  firms'  funding  rates.  If,  however,  financial  markets  are  unstable  or  financial 
institutions  and 
financial 
intermediation will not function properly, and the effects of the reduction in the policy interest 
rate will not spread to the whole economy as intended.  
The  turmoil  in  the  U.S.  and  European  financial  markets  that  stemmed  from  the  failure  of 
Lehman Brothers has had various negative effects on Japanese financial markets since last 
autumn. In the money market, where financial institutions exchange funds with each other, 
interest  rates  remained  elevated  due  to  an  increase  in  funding  pressures.  In  the  CP  and 
corporate  bond  markets,  providers  of  funds  practically  disappeared,  and  this  has  led  to  a 
tightening  in  overall  corporate  financing.  Faced  with  this  situation,  the  Bank  introduced  a 
number of additional measures in order to ensure that the effects of reduction in the policy 
interest rate were fully felt in the economy.  
One of the additional measures is the aggressive provision of funds to ensure stability in the 
money market. Specifically, the range of collateral that financial institutions can submit to the 
Bank to borrow funds has been expanded and the amount of Japanese government bonds 
that the Bank purchases from financial institutions has been increased. The Bank thinks that, 
if financial markets stabilize as a result of the Bank providing sufficient liquidity to financial 
institutions, the positive effects of the decline in interest rates will spread more smoothly and 
corporate funding will be made more secure. 
Another  is  measures  to  facilitate  corporate  financing.  In  view  of  the  sharp  decline  in 
transactions and a substantial rise in interest rates in the CP and corporate bond markets, 
the  Bank  introduced  a  scheme  to  purchase  CP  and  corporate  bonds  from  financial 
institutions. In addition, the Bank introduced a scheme to provide financial institutions with 
unlimited funds against the value of collateral, such as CP, corporate bonds, and loans on 
deeds, at a low interest rate. Owing partly to these measures, corporate funding conditions 
have improved as can be seen in reactivation of transactions and the decline in interest rates 
in  the  CP  and  corporate  bond  markets.  These  measures,  however,  are  not  exclusively 
favoring  large  firms  issuing  CP  and  corporate  bonds.  If  funding  conditions  of  large  firms 
improve, the positive effects of the policy actions will spread to small to medium-sized firms 
through improvements such as an easing of conditions of trade credits in terms of interest 
rate and maturity.  
These  measures  to  facilitate  corporate  financing,  while  they  have  been  introduced  as 
necessary  measures  in  view  of  financial  and  economic  conditions  in  Japan,  are  highly 
exceptional for a central bank. Outright purchases CP and corporate bonds inevitably involve 
the Bank taking on credit risks of individual firms. They may, therefore, exert negative effects 
on the Bank's balance sheet, which forms the basis for confidence in the money the Bank 
provides. In addition, if the Bank should intervene excessively in a particular market, there is 
a concern that it might distort market functioning, whereby funds are efficiently allocated, due 
to  excessive  concentration  of  transactions  in  particular  issues  purchased  by  the  Bank. 
Furthermore, if these supporting measures are maintained for too long, there is a possibility 
that  the  economy  will  overheat,  resulting  in  large  fluctuations  in  economic  conditions  and 
prices.  
Therefore, to decide when and how these exceptional policies should be withdrawn is also 
an  important  policy  issue.  When  making  decisions,  not  only  should  developments  in 
corporate financing and financial markets and effects of these policy measures be assessed 
8 
 BIS Review 94/2009
carefully,  but  also  it  is  important  to  plan  an  exit  in  a  way  that  market  participants  can 
anticipate and not bring about unnecessary market disturbances.  
For this reason, an expiry date was set for these measures from the beginning. Originally, 
when the Bank began these measures, such as the outright purchases of CP, the expiry date 
set was at the end of March this year. However, given that conditions in financial markets 
and corporate financing were extremely tight in the run-up to the fiscal year-end and that this 
situation  was  expected  to  continue  for  the  time  being,  in  February  the  expiry  date  was 
extended to the end of September this year. At the MPM held last week, the expiry date of 
measures to facilitate corporate financing was extended further to the end of December. This 
was because the Bank judged that facilitating corporate financing was still necessary given 
that,  while  there  were  continued  signs  of  improvement,  financial  conditions  remained 
generally tight.  
The  Bank  will  decide  whether  to  terminate,  alter,  or  further  extend  these  measures  by  the 
end of December, which is the new expiry date. The Bank will, without any predetermined 
view,  carefully  assess  developments  in  corporate  financing  and  financial  markets,  and  will 
decide, at an appropriate timing, whether the support offered by the current measures is still 
necessary.  
Closing remarks 
So  far  I  have  explained  Japan's  economic  situation  and  the  Bank's  policy  responses.  In 
closing, I would like to say a few words about my impression of the economy of this region.  
Local economies in Japan are in a difficult situation, faced with many structural issues such 
as a declining and aging population. I fully understand that, in this situation, restructuring the 
business model for the future is easier said than done. With regard to Hakodate, however, it 
is blessed with a famous night view as well as many other excellent tourist attractions such 
as  Goryokaku,  Yunokawa  hot  springs,  and  Onuma  National  Park.  In  addition,  there  is  not 
only  the  key  industry  of  processing  marine  products  but  also  industrial  bases  such  as 
shipbuilding,  electronic  parts  manufacturing,  and  dairy  products.  Furthermore,  the  port  of 
Hakodate links these tourist attractions, products, and technologies with other parts of Japan 
as  well  as  overseas,  and  the  area  enjoys  high  potential  as  a  center  of  transportation  and 
logistics. Developing new businesses utilizing these advantages, despite the big challenges, 
offers  great  opportunities.  With  a  sense  of  expectation,  I  look  forward  to  your  active 
involvement and to further economic development of this region.  
The Bank will continue to firmly support the economic activity of the nation's regions from the 
financial  side  and  to  exert  its  utmost  efforts  as  the  central  bank  to  facilitate  the  return  of 
Japan's economy to a sustainable growth path with price stability. Thank you very much for 
your attention.  
BIS Review 94/2009 
 9
