Ewald Nowotny: Combating the crisis – the role of central banks 
Opening remarks by Mr Ewald Nowotny, Governor of the Austrian National Bank, at the 37th 
Economics Conference of the Austrian National Bank, Vienna, 14 May 2009. 
 the 
to  welcome  you 
the  37th  Economics  Conference  of 
Dear Chancellor Faymann, 
Ladies and gentlemen: 
I  am  very  pleased 
to 
Oesterreichische Nationalbank here in Vienna. 
We are honored that Werner Faymann, Austria’s Federal Chancellor, has found the time to 
address the participants of this year’s Economics Conference, despite his packed schedule. 
He will be our first speaker today. 
Let me also say a few words of welcome to this morning’s other high-level speakers: Arnout 
Wellink,  President  of  De  Nederlandsche  Bank  and  Chairman  of  the  Basel  Committee  on 
Banking Supervision; and Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank. 
Thank you very much for coming to Vienna – we are delighted to have you here. 
Let me add that I am very pleased to see that so many delegates have joined us today. In 
this year of all years, I find it particularly important to get together with you all to exchange 
views and to seek out the opinions of renowned national and international experts, of whom 
we  have  been  able  to  win  an  impressive  mix  for  this  conference.  We  have  designed  our 
conference  to  look  “Beyond  the  Crisis”;  today  and  tomorrow,  we  will  thus  discuss  the 
challenges of making “Economic Policy in a New Macroeconomic Environment.” While the 
general public has, quite understandably, been focusing on the immediate impact of crisis, 
we  wish  to  refocus  the  debate  by  discussing  above  all  the  medium-  and  long-term 
perspectives that arise for economic policymaking. 
Let me thank all speakers and panel discussion participants in advance for the contributions 
they  are  going  to  make,  as  well  as  our  staff  members  for  the  efforts  they  have  put  into 
organizing this event. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
We are currently finding ourselves in a very special constellation: On the one hand we are 
faced with growth projections that are severely dampened by the crisis – a fact we need to 
take very seriously. After all, euro area GDP growth is forecast to shrink by 4% in 2009, and 
output growth in Germany by 6%. On the other hand, signs of stabilization are beginning to 
emerge, especially in the financial sector. As a case in point, the iTraxx credit derivates index 
for Europe – a prominent risk measure – sank by 19% in April compared with March, while 
the U.S. iTraxx went down by 16%. Corresponding risk measures for the Republic of Austria 
have  also  improved  substantially.  In  Europe,  the  issuing  volume  of  corporate  bonds  was 
roughly four times as high in the first four months of 2009 as in the first four months of 2008; 
and  other  indicators,  too,  for  instance  order  intake  figures,  point  toward  recovery.  At  the 
recent  IMF  Spring  Meeting  there  was,  incidentally,  a  buzz  about  the  emergence  of  “green 
shoots” of economic recovery. And at the BIS meeting this week there was even talk of a 
“forest of green shoots” sprouting in China. 
Current economic conditions around the world, which are characterized by problems in the 
global  banking  sector  and  a  sharp  global  economic  contraction,  have  created  tremendous 
challenges  for  policymakers.  A  major  challenge  is,  of  course,  the  dimension  the  current 
financial  crisis  has  reached.  Another  challenge  is  how  to  ensure  the  effectiveness  of  the 
economic policy response. 
BIS Review 81/2009 
 1
With  regard  to  the  dimension  of  the  crisis,  there  is  a  broad  consensus  among  economic 
policymakers and economists today – unlike at the time of the crisis in the 1930s – that it 
takes strategically coordinated macroeconomic policies to respond to a situation in which the 
tensions  in  financial  markets  and  the  contraction  of  the  real  economy  are  mutually 
reinforcing. The underlying rationale of measures – and thus, the consensus – must be to 
boost aggregate demand, strengthen bank balance sheets and revive and sustain the flow of 
credit. The key to effectively counteracting the economic contraction triggered by the crisis is 
to find the right mix of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies. Central banks, thus, play a 
pivotal role in this process. 
Last year, above all in the period following the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September, 
central  banks  around  the  globe  moved  to  take  a  number  of  nonstandard  measures  in 
implementing  monetary  policy;  they  also  used  new  instruments,  on  top  of  the  traditional 
framework, to provide liquidity to the banking system. You will all remember the headlines 
the  sheer  dimension  of  these  measures  made.  Against  this  backdrop  it  makes  sense  to 
revisit the fundamentals of monetary policy. 
Modern central banks are economic policy institutions with a clearly defined target, namely 
the primary goal of maintaining price stability. As you all know, the Eurosystem has defined 
price stability as an increase of the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices of close to, but 
below 2% in the euro area over the medium term. Modern central banks enjoy a high degree 
of  independence  from  political  influence,  which  supports  them  in  reaching  the  goal  of 
maintaining price  stability.  Their  main  policy  instrument  is  the  key  interest  rate  or,  in  other 
words, the rate at which credit institutions may borrow from them. 
In  addition,  central  banks  are  responsible  for  safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system.  The  key  channel  for  meeting  this  responsibility  is  the  provision  of  liquidity  to  the 
banking sector. Central banks stand ready to use both types of instruments in times of crisis. 
In  response  to  the  current  crisis,  the  traditional  monetary  policy  instruments  have,  indeed, 
been used widely. Since last October, the ECB has lowered its key interest rate by a total of 
325 basis points. At the same time, the Eurosystem has also widely used its framework of 
liquidity-providing  instruments.  Moreover,  this  framework  has  been  expanded  to  include 
instruments  that  would  not  be  typically  used  under  normal  circumstances,  such  as  the 
provision of liquidity with a maturity of up to one year, or the provision of liquidity in foreign 
currency (such as U.S. dollar and Swiss franc) in the form of swaps with the Federal Reserve 
System and other central banks. 
Both  measures  –  interest  rate  policy  measures  and  liquidity-providing  measures  –  have 
helped ease tensions in the interbank lending market and have been instrumental in meeting 
the challenge of safeguarding the stability of the financial system. At the same time, I would 
like  to  stress  that  both  types  of  measures  are  compatible  with  the  ECB’s  price  stability 
objective, as both inflationary pressures and inflation risks have decreased substantially in 
the course of the crisis. Any concerns that the current monetary policy stance may push up 
inflation in the time ahead are, therefore, unfounded. Neither short-term inflation expectations 
nor  forecasts  of  the  degree  of  capacity  utilization  (output  gaps)  in  the  real  economy,  and 
neither credit growth figures nor money supply measures are, at present, signaling inflation 
risks. It goes without saying that we are closely monitoring developments to be able to take 
action fast, if need be. In the near term, we see some signs that price levels might go down 
in individual euro area countries, which we interpret as an unwinding of increases seen last 
year in an environment of soaring energy prices. The producer price index for the euro area, 
in fact, dropped by 3.1% from March 2008 to March 2009. Let me stress, however, that over 
the medium term I see neither the risk of deflation, nor the risk of inflation.  
In  times  of  crisis  it  may  happen  that  the  traditional  instruments  of  monetary  policy  don’t 
suffice, or that they become blunt. This is particularly true of the key interest rate, which may 
eventually approach the lower boundary of zero. Yet, in such a situation, there are still other 
measures to which central banks may turn. 
2 
 BIS Review 81/2009
One possibility would be to widen money supply and to use the additional funds to purchase 
assets such as government bonds, but also commercial bonds, instruments issued by other 
banks  or  other  financial  assets.  The  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB,  for  instance,  most 
recently – in its meeting on May 7, 2009 – created the possibility for the Eurosystem to buy 
euro-denominated  covered  bonds  issued  in  the  euro  area,  and  made  the  EIB  an  eligible 
counterparty to the Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations. 
Yet, while central banks play a key role in providing economic policy responses to the current 
financial crisis, it takes a wider strategic framework to stage an effective overall response – it 
also  takes  expansionary  fiscal  policies  to  fight  the  crisis  effectively.  It  is  important  for  the 
public  sector  to  counteract  developments  rather  than  exacerbate  conditions  through 
restrictive  fiscal  policies  in  a  situation  in  which  all  components  of  aggregate  demand  – 
consumption, investment and exports – are contracting. 
At the same time, it is important to agree in advance on an exit strategy from expansionary 
fiscal  policies,  to  readjust  those  policies  and  redirect  them  toward  a  clearly  defined  fiscal 
consolidation path as soon as the economy starts to recover on a sustainable basis. There is 
broad  consensus  among  economists  on  the  need  to  adopt  an  exit  strategy  –  also  among 
policymakers in Austria, I presume. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Up  to  now,  I  have  outlined  why  central  banks  play  a  key  role  in  economic  policymaking 
during the current crisis. To do their job, they may use a range of instruments, provided the 
outcome  is  compatible  with  the  price  stability  goal.  So  far  I  have  focused  on  central  bank 
policy in general, and on the policy of the ECB and the Eurosystem in particular. 
I would now like to focus even more specifically on the OeNB, which – being a Eurosystem 
central bank – naturally plays a special role in this context. After all, it fulfills a broad range of 
tasks  that  are  crucial  both  in  implementing  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  and  in 
managing the crisis at the national level. 
All departments of the OeNB play a role in combating the crisis, either directly or indirectly. 
The OeNB is responsible for implementing the Eurosystem’s monetary policy operations in 
Austria, and for providing emergency liquidity assistance to banks based in Austria. As an 
expert  organization,  it  provides  a  high  degree  of  know-how,  comprehensive  analyses  and 
high-quality data for the ECB and for the OeNB’s partner organizations in Austria. In addition, 
the OeNB plays a direct role in safeguarding financial stability in its capacity as the national 
banking supervisor. 
The  know-how  of  the  ECB  and  of  the  national  central  banks  of  the  Eurosystem  and  their 
capacity to act are crucial for the smooth functioning of the money and financial system. This 
is even more true in crisis situations, such as we witness at present. 
The instruments of central banks are the more effective the better they are integrated in a 
comprehensive  macroeconomic  strategy,  alongside  fiscal  policy  measures.  Using  those 
instruments  to  take  concrete  economic  and  monetary  policy  action  presupposes  the 
existence of strong institutions with a pronounced capacity to act, which the OeNB has got. 
In times like these, the OeNB’s capacity and know-how are of particular importance, and we 
are well aware that we have a big responsibility to meet. 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Allow  me  to  draw  a  simile  to  conclude:  To  excel  in  central  banking,  we  need  to  have  the 
courage to rush in like firefighters, and we need to be as vigilant as policemen. Right now we 
are busy fighting a large fire that has spread across the world; and I would say we have been 
doing a good job in getting the fire under control. At the same time I can assure you that we 
have seen to it that money and lending market operations continue to run smoothly, and that 
we promote the resumption of sustainable growth and preserve price stability. 
BIS Review 81/2009 
 3
This brings me to the end of my introductory remarks. To conclude, I look forward to having a 
day and a half with you to discuss these critical and timely issues of economic policy from a 
multitude  of  perspectives.  I  hope  you  will  find  our  Economics  Conference  a  useful  and  an 
insightful event. 
4 
 BIS Review 81/2009
