José De Gregorio: Lessons and challenges on financial regulation 
Introductory remarks by Mr José De Gregorio, Governor of the Central Bank of Chile, at the 
conference  “Financial  Regulation:  Lessons  from  the  Recent  Global  Crisis”,  Santiago, 
17 August 2009. 
I am very grateful to Luis Opazo for his contribution to this presentation. 
 What went wrong? This question has been at the center of recent discussions in academic, 
practitioner  and  political  circles,  and  will  probably  stay  with  us  for  several  years.  This 
conference is a step forward towards finding answers to this question. Specifically, the main 
purpose of the conference is to discuss those aspects of regulation that may have triggered 
or amplified the current crisis, and those aspects of regulation that in some countries have 
contributed to financial resilience. 
The  Chilean  financial  system,  as  well  as  those  of  many  other  developing  countries,  has 
shown to be very resilient. Nevertheless, we also need to be involved in the discussions on 
building  a  safer  financial  system.  Our  countries  have  a  lot  to  say  on  balancing  financial 
innovation and financial soundness. 
The global economy shows some signs of recovery, but it is not evident that the crisis and its 
effects have fully unfolded. More likely, they will continue to evolve for some time. However, 
it  is  not  too  early  to  discuss  these  topics.  Hence,  we  hope  that  the  presentations  and 
discussions  of  this  morning  will  shed  light  on  the  directions  for  regulatory  change  in  the 
upcoming years. 
Causes of the financial turbulences and their implications on financial regulation 
The subprime crisis is the result of the convergence of several elements at the same time – 
what  some  observers  have  called  a  “perfect  storm.”  Trying  to  keep  things  simple,  the 
element  that  triggered  this  crisis  lies  in  the  U.S.  mortgage  sector  and  a  process  of  rapid 
financial  innovation.  In  this  regard,  the  banking  industry  contributed  to  the  lending  and 
housing  boom  as  follows.  First,  the  traditional  banking  model  –  hold  loans  until  they  are 
repaid – was replaced by a distribution model, where loans are pooled, tranched, and finally 
sold via securitization to other financial investors, thus this process led to banks’ off-loading 
risk. Second, the funding of highly leveraged financial intermediaries with short term liabilities 
increased  throughout  this  period,  which  exposed  those  intermediaries  to  potential  stress 
derived from changes in market liquidity conditions.  
As  we  all  know,  the  originate  and  distribute  model  led  to  the  fast  development  of 
securitization  markets  characterized  by  an  ever-increasing  supply  of  complex  financial 
instruments. Given the course of events, these turned out to be quite difficult to value. On 
this  last  point,  the  rating  agencies  are  involved,  as  they  are  responsible  for  assessing  the 
credit  quality  of  such  instruments,  which  is  an  essential  piece  of  information  for  investors. 
Nowadays,  these  institutions  are  also  under  public  scrutiny  regarding  their  capacity  and 
incentives to correctly evaluate risk. 
My  impression  is  that  the  fundamental  causes  of  the  current  crisis  were  the  same  market 
failures that have played key roles in many previous financial or banking crises, which we all 
know  well  from  our  previous  experience  in  emerging  markets.  The  first  of  these  are  the 
distortions  in  financial  intermediaries’  behavior  introduced  by  implicit  or  explicit  bailout 
expectations.  The  second  are  the  intrinsic  vulnerabilities  of  financial  intermediaries  that 
finance long term (or illiquid) assets with short term debt. 
BIS Review 97/2009 
 1
What differs in the current crisis is the way in which these components showed up. As for 
excessive risk taking, the mechanism to deal with it was the securitization of high risk loans, 
which  allowed  banks  to  sidestep  capital  regulations  by  either  creating  off-balance-sheet 
agents  or  by  bringing  back  loans  packaged  into  highly  rated  assets,  with  low  capital 
requirements. As for short term funding of long term (or illiquid) assets in the current crisis, 
this was prevalent in investment banks, SIVs and conduits. 
Hence, the lessons to be learned from the current crisis fall into two categories. The first are 
broad  reforms  that  seek  to  align  incentives  and  reduce  the  vulnerabilities  of  financial 
intermediaries.  Higher  capital  requirements,  a  broader  regulatory  scope,  and  reforms  to 
management  incentive  schemes  are  all  in  this  category.  These  are  all  important  aspects. 
However, the devil is on the details, and the exact way they should be implemented is yet to 
be defined. For example, it has been argued that “systemic” financial institutions should be 
more closely supervised and be subject to a more stringent set of regulations. How exactly to 
define systemic institutions, and who should deem an institution systemic is far from clear. 
Closely  related  reforms  are  those  aimed  at  reducing  interdependence  and,  therefore,  the 
systemic  nature  of  institutions.  The  push  towards  central  counterparties,  in  particular  for 
derivatives, falls in this category. 
The second category of reforms encompasses those directly related to the specifics of the 
subprime crisis. I would like to offer some comments on these issues. In particular, I would 
like to comment on a) accounting methods; b) liquidity; and c) rating agencies. 
Accounting methods and valuation 
At the onset of the financial turbulences, there were strong concerns on how precise was the 
information  reported  by  banks,  how  large  were  the  losses,  and  who  was  bearing  these 
losses. This uncertainty was a critical factor in the shutdown of key financial markets. The 
International  Accounting  Standards  Board  (IASB)  and  the  Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB) 
have been working and promoting recommendations on accounting and disclosure standards 
for off-balance-sheet investment vehicles, and fair value methods, among others. However, 
these “information” requirements by themselves are not enough, and other measures could 
be  necessary,  such  as  forcing  originators  and  other  agents  to  hold  part  of  the  risk  of  the 
assets created. 
Liquidity 
The  current  financial  turbulence  has  highlighted  that  for  the  banking  sector  liquidity 
considerations are as relevant as solvency issues. In spite of this, most of the attention in 
banking  regulation  has  been  focused  on  solvency  (Rochet,  2008).  However,  some  steps 
have  been  taken  in  this  direction  by  the  BIS  in  terms  of  contingent  liquidity  demand  and 
related  triggers  associated  with  off-balance-sheet  positions  (BIS,  2008).  The  literature  has 
identified several elements that could generate externalities related to liquidity, and therefore 
could justify some degree of regulation, where the main arguments are linked to asymmetric 
information  and  market  incompleteness.1  Moreover,  policies  put  in  place  by  central  banks 
after  September  2008  have  made  moral  hazard  concerns  for  liquidity  management  more 
pressing. 
Nonetheless, there are still open questions as to the kind of regulation to reduce the potential 
consequences of the imperfections in this area. There are no straightforward answers on this 
matter.  Some  pending  questions  are:  Should  a  capital  charge  be  put  in  place  for  liquidity 
                                                 
1   Allen and Gale (2000), Freixas and Rochet (2000), and Morgan, (2002). 
2 
 BIS Review 97/2009
risk? Is it necessary to impose an additional liquidity requirement to intra-day liquidity needs? 
Should central banks act as the lender of last resort in this market?  
Credit rating agencies 
The  role  played  by  risk  rating  in  the  subprime  crisis  is  also  an  important  corollary  to  the 
current  crisis.  To  illustrate  why  some  authors  have  gone  as  far  as  calling  this  “the  credit 
rating crisis” (Benmelech and Dlugosz, 2009) consider that before the crisis more than half of 
the  structured  finance  securities  rated  by  Moody’s  carried  an  AAA  rating  and,  during  the 
period 2007-2008, the tranches rated by Moody’s that were downgraded was close to thirty 
six thousand, where nearly one third of downgraded tranches bore the AAA rating. 
This is a complex issue, especially due to the prevailing incentives in this sector. A recurrent 
area  of  criticism  on  the  incentives  side  is  the  simultaneous  role  of  advisor  and  issuers  of 
ratings. But the spectrum of potential conflict areas could be broader, and thus more efforts 
must be devoted to understanding in detail the operation and linkages of this industry. 
Final comments 
The subprime crisis has opened a debate on the risks of financial innovation. It reminds us 
that  higher  levels  of  sophistication  do  not  guarantee  the  normal  operation  of  the  financial 
system. A reasonable level of regulation, control and monitoring is required. I think we should 
move forward in innovation processes, as they are positive, but we must move forward with 
caution. It is important to implement policy changes gradually to provide an adequate level of 
information and transparency that will ensure an adequate assessment of the risks involved. 
It  is  also  crucial  to  review  in  detail  the  incentives  and  potential  conflicts  of  interest  arising 
from the new tools and processes.  
Another  aspect  that  needs  to  be  addressed  is  the  role  of  adequate  control  systems  and 
financial risk management. A proper system of financial risk control and management must 
start  by  defining  policies  at  the  highest  level,  the  board  of  directors.  It  also  requires  the 
involvement of senior management in tracking and monitoring risk. And, ultimately, it needs 
the development of an organizational culture that is capable of properly combining the goals 
of profitability and leadership with risk sensitivity. In this regard, a topic that is central to the 
discussion of financial reforms is the overall structure of incentives of financial intermediaries. 
I believe this is an issue that all players in the financial system must follow with care. 
As a result of the current problems, we will observe more regulation in financial markets and 
everyone,  even  those  of  us  not  at  the  center  of  these  difficulties,  must  remain  watchful. 
Problems of moral hazard, transparency and new ways to meet the requirements of central 
banks to provide liquidity are leading to a review of regulatory frameworks at the international 
level. We must be aware that more regulation leads to the search of ways of avoiding them, 
which  may  end  up  threatening  financial  stability.  This  last  dimension  must  be  taken  into 
account  in  the  analysis  and  regulatory  proposals,  which  obviously  introduces  an  extra 
element of complexity in this area. 
Thank you. 
References 
Allen F. and D. Gale (2000). “Financial Contagion”, Journal of Political Economy, 108(1). 
Benmelech  E.  and  J.  Dlugosz  (2009).  “The  Credit  Rating  Crisis”,  NBER  Working  Paper, 
15045.  
Freixas X., Parigi B. and J. Rochet (2000). “Systemic Risk, Inter-Bank Realtions and Liquidity 
Provision by the Central Bank”, Journal of Money and Credit Banking, 32(2). 
BIS Review 97/2009 
 3
Morgan  D.  (2002).  “Rating  Banks:  Risk  and  Uncertainty  in  an  opaque  Industry”,  American 
Economic Review, 92(4). 
Rochet  J.  (2008).  “Liquidity  Regulation  and  the  Lender  of  Last  Resort”,  Financial  Stability 
Review, Banque de France, February. 
4 
 BIS Review 97/2009
