Philipp Hildebrand: The Swiss National Bank’s ability to act in the crisis 
Summary of a speech by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of 
the  Swiss  National  Bank,  at  the  Executive  MBA  HSG,  Universität  St  Gallen,  St  Gallen, 
21 January 2009. 
The complete speech can be found in German on the Swiss National Bank’s website (www.snb.ch). 
 The global financial system is in the midst of the biggest crisis of the postwar years. Above 
all,  the  crisis  is  the  most  complex  of  this  period.  Problems  in  the  US  sub-prime  mortgage 
market led to the breakdown of both markets and general trust. In particular, the interbank 
market, the nerve centre of the financial markets, froze up for several months. Governments 
and central banks managed to prevent the financial system from collapsing. The interbank 
market has been revived and risk premia have come down from their former record levels. In 
the  meantime,  however,  the  financial  crisis  has  worked  its  way  through  into  the  real 
economy, which is now moving into a sharp downturn. 
In  order  to  fight  the  crisis,  the  central  banks  have  lowered  their  key  interest  rates 
aggressively. The instrument of the Swiss National Bank (SNB), the repo rate, has practically 
reached zero. However, this certainly does not mean that the SNB is incapable of action. If 
needed, there are other options available. The National Bank can extend the terms of repo 
transactions  or  give  consideration  to  the  purchase  of  government  and  corporate  bonds. 
Where necessary, the SNB may also, for example, sell an unlimited amount of Swiss francs 
against  foreign  currency  in  order  to  prevent  an  appreciation  of  the  Swiss  franc  or  even  to 
bring about a devaluation of the national currency.  
The SNB is very well aware that the determined route it is pursuing in fighting this historic 
crisis is associated with long-term risks. At the same time, it is firmly convinced that the risks 
involved in not following this course would be considerably greater. In this spirit, it is facing 
up to the task of fighting the crisis while at the same time maintaining a watch on the long-
term aspects. At some point, the moment will come when the National Bank decision-makers 
will need the courage to do what is right in the long term even if it is not popular in the short 
term. 
BIS Review 6/2009 
 1
