Ben S Bernanke: Federal Reserve programs to strengthen credit markets 
and the economy 
Testimony by Mr Ben S Bernanke, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington, DC, 10 February 2009. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 Chairman  Frank,  Ranking  Member  Bachus,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I 
appreciate this opportunity to provide a brief review of the Federal Reserve's various credit 
programs, including those relying on our emergency authorities under Section 13(3) of the 
Federal Reserve Act. I will also discuss the Federal Reserve's ongoing efforts to inform the 
Congress and the public about these activities.  
Federal Reserve programs to strengthen credit markets and the economy 
As  you  know,  the  past  18  months  or  so  have  been  extraordinarily  challenging  for 
policymakers  around  the  globe,  not  least  for  central  banks.  The  Federal  Reserve  has 
responded forcefully to the financial and economic crisis since its emergence in the summer 
of  2007.  Monetary  policy  has  been  especially  proactive.  The  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee  (FOMC)  began  to  ease  monetary  policy  in  September  2007  and  continued  to 
ease in response to a weakening economic outlook. In December 2008, the Committee set a 
range of 0 to 25 basis points for the target federal funds rate. 
Although the target for the federal funds rate is at its effective floor, the Federal Reserve has 
employed at least three types of additional tools to improve the functioning of credit markets, 
ease financial conditions, and support economic activity.  
The first set of tools is closely tied to the central bank's traditional role of providing short-term 
liquidity  to  sound  financial  institutions.  Over  the  course  of  the  crisis,  the  Fed  has  taken  a 
number  of  extraordinary  actions,  including  the  creation  of  a  number  of  new  facilities  for 
auctioning  short-term  credit,  to  ensure  that  financial  institutions  have  adequate  access  to 
liquidity. In fulfilling its traditional lending function, the Federal Reserve enhances the stability 
of our financial system, increases the willingness of financial institutions to extend credit, and 
helps to ease conditions in interbank lending markets, reducing the overall cost of capital to 
banks.  In  addition,  some  interest  rates,  including  the  rates  on  some  adjustable-rate 
mortgages,  are  tied  contractually  to  key  interbank  rates,  such  as  the  London  interbank 
offered rate (Libor). To the extent that the provision of ample liquidity to banks reduces Libor, 
other borrowers will also see their payments decline. 
Because  interbank  markets  are  global  in  scope,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  also  approved 
bilateral currency liquidity agreements with 14 foreign central banks. These so-called swap 
facilities have allowed these central banks to acquire dollars from the Federal Reserve that 
the foreign central banks may lend to financial institutions in their jurisdictions. The purpose 
of  these  liquidity  swaps  is  to  ease  conditions  in  dollar  funding  markets  globally. 
Improvements in global interbank markets, in turn, promote greater stability in other markets 
at home and abroad, such as money markets and foreign exchange markets. 
The  provision  of  short-term  credit  to  financial  institutions  exposes  the  Federal  Reserve  to 
minimal  credit  risk,  as  the  loans  we  make  to  financial  institutions  are generally  short-term, 
overcollateralized, and made with recourse to the borrowing firm. In the case of the currency 
swaps, the foreign central banks are responsible for repaying the Federal Reserve, not the 
BIS Review 15/2009 
 1
financial  institutions  that  ultimately  receive  the  funds,  and  the  Fed  receives  an  equivalent 
amount of foreign currency in exchange for the dollars it provides foreign central banks. 
Although the provision of ample liquidity by the central bank to financial institutions is a time-
tested  approach  to  reducing  financial  strains,  it  is  no  panacea.  Today,  concerns  about 
capital, asset quality, and credit risk continue to limit the willingness of many intermediaries 
to extend credit, notwithstanding the access of these firms to central bank liquidity. Moreover, 
providing  liquidity  to  financial  institutions  does  not  directly  address  instability  or  declining 
credit availability in critical nonbank markets, such as the commercial paper market or the 
market for asset-backed securities. 
To address these issues, the Federal Reserve has developed a second set of policy tools 
which  involve  the  provision  of  liquidity  directly  to  borrowers  and  investors  in  key  credit 
markets.  For  example,  we  have  introduced  facilities  to  purchase  highly  rated  commercial 
paper  at  a  term  of  three  months  and  to  provide  backup  liquidity  for  money  market  mutual 
funds. In addition, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury have jointly announced a facility –
expected to be operational shortly – that will lend against AAA-rated asset-backed securities 
collateralized by recently originated student loans, auto loans, credit card loans, and loans 
guaranteed  by  the  Small  Business  Administration.  Unlike  our  other  lending  programs,  this 
facility  combines  Federal  Reserve  liquidity  with  capital  provided  by  the  Treasury.  If  the 
program  works  as  planned,  it  should  help  to  restart  activity  in  these  key  securitization 
markets and lead to lower borrowing rates and improved access in the markets for consumer 
and small business credit. This basic framework could also be expanded to accommodate 
higher volumes as well as additional classes of securities, as circumstances warrant. 
These  special  lending  programs  have  been  set  up  to  minimize  credit  risk  to  the  Federal 
Reserve. The largest program, the commercial paper funding facility, accepts only the most 
highly rated paper. It also charges borrowers a premium, which is set aside against possible 
losses. As just noted, the facility that will lend against securities backed by consumer and 
small-business  loans  is  a  joint  Federal  Reserve-Treasury  program;  capital  provided  by  the 
Treasury from the Troubled Asset Relief Program will help insulate the Federal Reserve from 
credit losses (and the Treasury will receive most of the upside from these loans).  
The Federal Reserve's third set of policy tools for supporting the functioning of credit markets 
involves  the  purchase  of  longer-term  securities  for  the  Fed's  portfolio.  For  example,  we 
recently  announced  plans  to  purchase  up  to  $100  billion  of  the  debt  of  government-
sponsored enterprises (GSEs), including Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and the Federal Home 
Loan Banks, and up to $500 billion in agency-guaranteed mortgage-backed securities (MBS) 
by midyear. The objective of these purchases is to lower mortgage rates, thereby supporting 
housing activity and the broader economy. 
The Federal Reserve is engaged in an ongoing assessment of the effectiveness of its credit-
related tools. Measuring the impact of our programs is complicated by the fact that multiple 
factors affect market conditions. Nevertheless, we have been encouraged by the responses 
to these programs, including the reports and evaluations offered by market participants and 
analysts.  Notably,  our  lending  to  financial  institutions,  together  with  actions  taken  by  other 
agencies, has helped to relax the severe liquidity strains experienced by many firms and has 
been associated with considerable improvements in interbank lending markets. For example, 
we  believe  that  the  aggressive  liquidity  provision  by  the  Fed  and  other  central  banks  has 
contributed to the recent declines in Libor and is a principal reason that liquidity pressures 
around  the  end  of  the  year--often  a  period  of  heightened  liquidity  strains--were  relatively 
modest.  There  is  widespread  agreement  that  our  commercial  paper  funding  facility  has 
helped  to  stabilize  the  commercial  paper  market,  lowering  rates  significantly  and  allowing 
firms access to financing at terms longer than a few days. Together with other government 
programs, our actions to stabilize the money market mutual fund industry have also shown 
some  measure  of  success,  as  the  sharp  withdrawals  from  funds  seen  in  September  have 
given way to modest inflows. And our purchases of agency debt and MBS seem to have had 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2009
a significant effect on conforming mortgage rates, with rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages 
falling  close  to  a  percentage  point  since  the  announcement  of  the  program.  All  of  these 
improvements have occurred over a period in which the economic news has generally been 
worse than expected and conditions in many financial markets, including the equity markets, 
have worsened. 
We evaluate existing and prospective programs based on the answers to three questions: 
First, has normal functioning in the credit market in question been severely disrupted by the 
crisis?  Second,  does  the  Federal  Reserve  have  tools  that  are  likely  to  lead  to  significant 
improvement in function and credit availability in that market, and are the Federal Reserve's 
tools the most effective methods, either alone or in combination with those of other agencies, 
to address the disruption? And third, do improved conditions in the particular market have the 
potential  to  make  a  significant  difference  for  the  overall  economy?  To  illustrate,  our 
purchases  of  agency  debt  and  MBS  meet  all  three  criteria:  The  mortgage  market  is 
significantly  impaired,  the  Fed's  authority  to  purchase  agency  securities  gives  us  a 
straightforward  tool  to  try  to  reduce  the  extent  of  that  impairment,  and  the  health  of  the 
housing market bears directly and importantly on the performance of the broader economy. 
is 
"unable 
the  borrower 
The use of authorities under Section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act 
Section  13(3)  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Act  authorizes  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  to  make 
secured  loans  to  individuals,  partnerships,  or  corporations  in  "unusual  and  exigent 
circumstances"  and  when 
to  secure  adequate  credit 
accommodations  from  other  banking  institutions."  This  authority,  added  to  the  Federal 
Reserve Act in 1932, was intended to give the Federal Reserve the flexibility to respond to 
emergency conditions. Prior to 2008, credit had not been extended under this authority since 
the  1930s.1  However,  responding  to  the  extraordinarily  stressed  conditions  in  financial 
markets, the Board has used this authority on a number of occasions over the past year. 
Following  the  Bear  Stearns  episode  in  March  2008,  the  Federal  Reserve  Board  invoked 
Section 13(3) to make primary securities dealers, as well as banks, eligible to borrow on a 
short-term  basis  from  the  Fed.2  This  decision  was  taken  in  support  of  financial  stability, 
during  a  period  in  which  the  investment  banks  and  other  dealers  faced  intense  liquidity 
pressures.3  The  Fed  has  also  made  use  of  the  Section  13(3)  authority  in  its  programs  to 
support the functioning of key credit markets, including the commercial paper market and the 
market for asset-backed securities. In my view, the use of Section 13(3) in these contexts is 
well justified in light of the breakdowns of these critical markets and the serious implications 
of those breakdowns for the health of the broader economy. As financial conditions improve 
and  circumstances  are  no  longer  "unusual  and  exigent,"  the  programs  authorized  under 
Section  13(3)  will  be  wound  down,  as  required  by  law.  Other  components  of  the  Federal 
Reserve's  credit  programs,  including  our  lending  to  depository  institutions,  liquidity  swaps 
with  other  central  banks,  and  purchases  of  agency  securities,  make  no  use  of  the  powers 
conferred by Section 13(3). 
In a distinct set of activities, the Federal Reserve has also used its Section 13(3) authority to 
support government efforts to stabilize systemically critical financial institutions. The Federal 
                                                 
1   The Federal Reserve invoked this provision twice in the 1960s to authorize lending but no credit was drawn. 
2   Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New  York.  The  New  York  Fed's  Open  Market  Desk  engages  in  trades  on  behalf  of  the  Federal  Reserve 
System to implement monetary policy. 
3   Most other major central banks already provide short-term credit to a broader range of financial institutions, so 
in  making  this  change,  the  Fed  was  conforming  to  international  practice  for  the  period  of  the  financial 
emergency. 
BIS Review 15/2009 
 3
Reserve  collaborated  with  the  Treasury  to  facilitate  the  acquisition  of  Bear  Stearns  by 
JPMorgan Chase & Co. and to prevent the failure of the American International Group (AIG), 
and we worked closely with the Treasury and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to 
help to stabilize Citigroup and the Bank of America. In the cases of Bear Stearns and AIG, as 
part of a strategy to avoid impending defaults by the companies, the Federal Reserve made 
loans against pools of collateral. 
Activities  to  stabilize  systemically  important  institutions  seem  to  me  to  be  quite different  in 
character from the use of Section 13(3) authority to support the repair of credit markets. The 
actions  that  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Treasury  have  taken  to  stabilize  systemically 
critical firms were essential to protect the financial system as a whole, and, in particular, the 
financial  risks  inherent  in  the  credits  extended  by  the  Federal  Reserve  were,  in  my  view, 
greatly outweighed by the risks that would have been faced by the financial system and the 
economy  had  we  not  stepped  in.  However,  many  of  these  actions  might  not  have  been 
necessary  in  the  first  place  had  there  been  in  place  a  comprehensive  resolution  regime 
aimed  at  avoiding  the  disorderly  failure  of  systemically  critical  financial  institutions.  The 
Federal Reserve believes that the development of a robust resolution regime should be a top 
legislative priority. If the specification of this regime were to include clear expectations of the 
Federal Reserve's role in stabilizing or resolving systemically important firms--a step we very 
much  support--then  the  contingencies  in  which  the  Fed  might  need  to  invoke  emergency 
authorities could be tightly circumscribed.  
Transparency and disclosure 
I would like to conclude by discussing the Federal Reserve's ongoing efforts to inform the 
Congress and the public about its various lending programs. 
I firmly believe that central banks should be as transparent as possible, both for reasons of 
democratic accountability and because many of our policies are likely to be more effective if 
they  are  well  understood  by  the  markets  and  the  public.  During  my  time  at  the  Federal 
Reserve,  the  FOMC  has  taken  important  steps  to  increase  the  transparency  of  monetary 
policy, such as moving up the publication of the minutes of policy meetings and adopting the 
practice of providing longer-term projections of the evolution of the economy on a quarterly 
basis. Likewise, the Federal Reserve is committed to keeping the Congress and the public 
informed about its lending programs and balance sheet. For example, we continue to add to 
the  information  shown  in  the  Fed's  H.4.1  release,  which  provides  weekly  detail  on  the 
balance  sheet  and  the  amounts  outstanding  for  each  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  lending 
facilities.  Extensive  additional  information  about  each  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  lending 
programs  is  available  online,  as  shown  in  the  appendix  to  this  testimony.  Pursuant  to  a 
requirement included in the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act passed in October, the 
Fed also provides monthly reports to the Congress on each of its programs that rely on the 
Section  13(3)  authorities.  Generally,  the  Fed's  disclosure  policies  are  consistent  with  the 
current best practices of major central banks around the world. 
That  said,  recent  developments  have  understandably  led  to  a  substantial  increase  in  the 
public's  interest  in  the  Fed's  balance  sheet  and  programs.  For  this  reason,  we  at  the  Fed 
have  begun  a  thorough  review  of  our  disclosure  policies  and  the  effectiveness  of  our 
communication. Today I would like to mention two initiatives. 
First, to improve public access to information concerning Fed policies and programs, Federal 
Reserve  staff  are  developing  a  new  website  that  will  bring  together  in  a  systematic  and 
comprehensive  way  the  full  range  of  information  that  the  Federal  Reserve  already  makes 
available,  supplemented  by  new  explanations,  discussions,  and  analyses.  Our  goal  is  to 
have this website operational within a few weeks. 
Second, at my request, Board Vice Chairman Donald Kohn has agreed to lead a committee 
that will review our current publications and disclosure policies relating to the Fed's balance 
4 
 BIS Review 15/2009
sheet and lending policies. The presumption of the committee will be that the public has a 
right  to  know,  and  that  the  nondisclosure  of  information  must  be  affirmatively  justified  by 
clearly articulated criteria for confidentiality, based on factors such as reasonable claims to 
privacy, the confidentiality of supervisory information, and the effectiveness of policy. 
Thank you. I will be pleased to respond to your questions.  
Appendix: Online Sources of Information on the Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet and 
Lending Programs 
Information Regarding Recent Federal Reserve Actions 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Information Regarding Recent Federal 
Reserve Actions," website. 
H.4.1 Statistical Release 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  H.4.1  Statistical  Release,  "Factors 
Affecting  Reserve  Balances  of  Depository  Institutions  and  Condition  Statement  of  Federal 
Reserve Banks." 
Open Market Desk Annual Report 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  Markets  Group  (2009).  "Domestic  Open  Market 
Operations  during  2008  (392  KB  PDF),"  report  prepared  for  the  Federal  Open  Market 
Committee, January. 
Agency Discount Notes 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  (2008).  "Statement  Regarding  Planned  Purchases  of 
Agency Debt," press release, September 19. 
Agency Purchase Program 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  (2008).  "FAQs:  Purchasing  Direct  Obligations  of 
Housing-Related GSEs," website, December 3. 
Agency Mortgage-Backed Securities Purchase Program 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  (2008).  "FAQs:  MBS  Purchase  Program,"  website, 
December 30. 
Term Primary Credit 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2007).  "Federal  Reserve  Board 
Discount Rate Action," press release, August 17. 
Term Auction Facility 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2007).  "Federal  Reserve  and  Other 
Central Banks Announce Measures Designed to Address Elevated Pressures in Short-Term 
Funding Markets," press release, December 12. 
------------ (2009). "Term Auction Facility Questions and Answers," website, January 12. 
BIS Review 15/2009 
 5
Primary Dealer Credit Facility 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2008). "Federal Reserve Announces Establishment of 
Primary Dealer Credit Facility," press release, March 16. 
------------  (2008).  "Primary  Dealer  Credit  Facility:  Frequently  Asked  Questions,"  website, 
December 8. 
Term Securities Lending Facility 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  (2008).  "Term  Securities  Lending  Facility:  Frequently 
Asked Questions," website, December 2. 
TSLF Options Program 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  (2008).  "SOMA  TSLF  Options  Program:  Frequently 
Asked Questions," website, December 2. 
Asset-Backed Commercial Paper Money Market Mutual Fund Liquidity Facility 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2008).  "Board  Approves  Two  Interim 
Final Rules in Connection with Initiative to Provide Liquidity to Markets by Extending Loans 
to  Banking  Organizations  to  Finance  Their  Purchases  of  High-Quality  Asset-Backed 
Commercial Paper (ABCP) from Money Market Mutual Funds," press release, September 19. 
Commercial Paper Funding Facility 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2009). "Commercial Paper Funding Facility: Frequently 
Asked Questions," website, January 23. 
Money Market Investor Funding Facility 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  (2009).  "Money  Market  Investor  Funding  Facility: 
Frequently Asked Questions," website, January 7. 
Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  (2009).  "Term  Asset-Backed  Securities  Loan  Facility: 
Frequently Asked Questions," website, February 6. 
Bear Stearns 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  (2008).  "Statement  on  Financing  Arrangement  of 
JPMorgan Chase's Acquisition of Bear Stearns," press release, March 24. 
------------  (2008).  "Summary  of  Terms  and  Conditions  Regarding  the  JPMorgan  Chase 
Facility," press release, March 24.  
American International Group (AIG) 
Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2008).  "Federal  Reserve  Board  and 
Treasury Department announce restructuring of financial support to AIG," November 10. 
6 
 BIS Review 15/2009
Citigroup 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
and U.S. Department of the Treasury (2008). "Joint Statement by Treasury, Federal Reserve, 
and the FDIC on Citigroup," joint press release, November 23. 
------------ (2008). "Summary of Terms," term sheet, November 23. 
Bank of America 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 
and  U.S.  Department  of  the  Treasury  (2009).  "Treasury,  Federal  Reserve,  and  the  FDIC 
Provide Assistance to Bank of America," joint press release, January 16. 
------------ (2009). "Summary of Terms," term sheet, January 15. 
Supplementary Financing Program 
U.S.  Department  of  the  Treasury  (2008).  "Treasury  Announces  Supplementary  Financing 
Program," press release, September 17. 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2008). "Statement Regarding Supplementary Financing 
Program," statement, September 17. 
Central Bank Liquidity Swaps 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008). "Federal Reserve, Banco Central 
do Brasil, Banco de Mexico, Bank of Korea, and Monetary Authority of Singapore Announce 
the Establishment of Temporary Reciprocal Currency Arrangements," press release, October 
29. 
------------ (2008). "Federal Reserve and Other Central Banks Announce Further Measures to 
Address Elevated Pressures in Funding Markets," press release, September 18. 
------------  (2008).  "Federal  Reserve  and  Reserve  Bank  of  New  Zealand  Announce  the 
Establishment  of  a  Temporary  Reciprocal  Currency  Arrangement,"  press  release,  October 
28. 
------------ (2008). "Federal Reserve and Other Central Banks Announce Additional Measures 
to Address Elevated Pressures in Funding Markets," press release, September 24. 
------------ (2007). "Federal Reserve and Other Central Banks Announce Measures Designed 
to Address Elevated Pressures in Short-Term  Funding Markets," press release, December 
12. 
Selected Federal Reserve System Speeches and Articles  
Bernanke, Ben S. (2009). "The Crisis and the Policy Response," speech at Stamp Lecture, 
London School of Economics, London, England, January 13. 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2008). "Federal Reserve Policies in the Financial Crisis," speech at the 
Greater Austin Chamber of Commerce, Austin, Texas, December 1. 
Evans, Charles (2009). "Economic Update," speech, January 15. 
Fettig,  David  (2008).  "The  History  of  a  Powerful  Paragraph:  Section  13(3)  Enacted  Fed 
Business Loans 76 Years Ago," The Region, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, June. 
topic  regards 
Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  San  Francisco  (2009).  "Fed  Views"  (the 
unconventional monetary policy actions and the economic outlook), Economic Research and 
Data website, January 8. 
BIS Review 15/2009 
 7
Plossser, Charles (2009). "The Economic Outlook and Some Challenges Facing the Federal 
Reserve," speech, January 14. 
Willardson,  Niel  (2008).  "Actions  to  Restore  Financial  Stability:  A  Summary  of  Recent 
Federal Reserve Initiatives," The Region, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, December. 
8 
 BIS Review 15/2009
