Nout Wellink: Supervisory arrangements – lessons from the crisis 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  44th  SEACEN  Governors’  Conference  2008 
“Preserving monetary and financial stability in the new global environment”, Kuala Lumpur, 
6 February 2009. 
 When former US President Bush welcomed G20 world leaders in Washington last November 
to  discuss  the  financial  crisis,  neither  French  President  Sarkozy  nor  German  chancellor 
Merkel had the honour of sitting next to him at the formal dinner. In fact, none of the Western 
leaders  had.  As  a  clear  display  of  the  shifting  balance  of  economic  power,  President  Hu 
Jintao of China and President Lula da Silva of Brazil sat either side of Bush. Evidently the 
world economic order is changing. Emerging economies are catching up with the developed 
world at great speed. As a result, preserving monetary and financial stability – the theme of 
this conference – is an ever more global challenge that requires global cooperation. 
The  financial  turmoil  has  underlined  the  importance  of  better  coordination  among  public 
authorities at the international level. From the start of the crisis in August 2007, central banks 
across  the  world  have  engaged  in  large-scale  coordinated  actions  to  support  liquidity 
conditions in the global money markets. More recently, national governments have acted to 
shore up the capital base of individual financial institutions. Regrettably, but understandably, 
they did so in a largely uncoordinated way. Given the many cross-border externalities that 
are involved, increased coordination of national measures is clearly desirable, be they capital 
injections  or  state  guarantees.  In  spite  of  authorities’  efforts,  uncertainty  in  the  financial 
markets  remains  unusually  high,  and  stabilizing  financial  systems  is  still  our  top  priority. 
Nonetheless,  it  is  not  too  soon  to  think  about  how  we  can  prevent  and  mitigate  future 
financial crises. 
Indeed,  in  light  of  weaknesses  revealed  by  the  financial  crisis,  the  Basel  Committee  has 
developed a series of proposed enhancements to strengthen the Basel II framework. These 
enhancements will help ensure that banks’ risks, whether on- or off-balance sheet, are better 
reflected in minimum capital requirements, risk management practices and disclosures to the 
public. Another issue the Committee is currently addressing is procyclicality, or the possibility 
that regulatory requirements amplify an economic cycle. This is a difficult issue as there are a 
variety of factors at play – such as loan loss provisioning – that influence procyclicality. And, 
we should not forget that banking tends to be a cyclical business irrespective of regulatory 
requirements. Nonetheless, the Basel Committee has begun a comprehensive review of the 
potential  procyclicality  of  the  Basel  II  framework.  The  objective  is  to  promote  adequate 
capital  buffers  over  the  credit  cycle  and  to  mitigate  the  risk  that  the  minimum  capital 
requirement magnifies the procyclicality of the financial system. Under discussion are ways 
to promote a high quality Tier 1 capital buffer that banks would increase in good times and be 
allowed to use in difficult times. Supervisors are also reviewing the need to supplement the 
current risk-based approaches with simple, transparent gross measures of risk. This would 
constrain the amount of leverage banks could have in good times and therefore also contain 
the degree of deleveraging in bad times. 
Let  me  now  turn  to  lessons  that  can  be  drawn  from  the  financial  crisis  with  regards  to 
supervisory  arrangements.  Over  the  past  one  and  a  half  years  supervisory  arrangements 
around the world have been put to the test. These real stress tests have provided us with 
important insights into the pros and cons of different supervisory arrangements. And, though 
there  is  no  single  optimal  supervisory  arrangement,  three  lessons  can  be  drawn.  First,  as 
macroprudential  supervision  and  microprudential  supervision  strongly  overlap,  central 
bankers  and  prudential  supervisors  should  cooperate  closely  and  continuously.  Second, 
financial supervisors need to step up international cooperation, simply because the financial 
BIS Review 12/2009 
 1
industry  is  particularly  internationalized.  Third,  while  prudential  and  conduct  of  business 
supervision  are  distinctly  different,  they  are  complementary  and  should  both  receive  due 
attention. Separating prudential and conduct of business supervision institutionally helps to 
keep both supervisory goals in clear sight. 
As financial sectors today are more concentrated, more integrated and more exposed to the 
financial markets than ever before, problems at individual institutions are increasingly likely to 
have systemic consequences. Indeed, during the financial crisis we saw several examples, 
most notably the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008 which had a truly systemic 
impact.  These  events  have  demonstrated  that  the  distinction  between  macro-  and 
microprudential  stability  is  hypothetical  in  practice.  Therefore,  there  is  an  urgent  need  for 
close  and  continuous  cooperation  between  macro-  and  microprudential  supervisors,  of 
course  with  due  observance  of  the  relevant  legal  provisions.  Such  cooperation  can  be 
achieved  in  different  institutional  settings.  Also  when  the  central  bank  plays  no  role  in 
microprudential supervision, extensive micro-macro cooperation can be and in fact should be 
organized. 
The  need  for  effective  interplay  between  central  banks  and  supervisors  is  particularly 
pressing  in  times  of  crisis.  In  the  Netherlands,  increasing  cooperation  was  relatively 
straightforward, because DNB has both central banking and supervisory functions under one 
roof.  To  the  best  of  my  knowledge,  the  same  holds  for  most  SEACEN  central  banks.  In 
response to the crisis, several working groups have been established within DNB, bringing 
together supervisory and central banking expertise to work on multifaceted problems. One 
particular  multidisciplinary  challenge  concerned  the  recent  capital  injections  by  the  Dutch 
State. To determine the amount of capital that needed to be injected in well-known financial 
institutions like Aegon and ING, we were able to draw on the extensive expertise available in 
our organization. Another example of information-related synergies concerns liquidity. During 
the  crisis,  supervisory  information  on  the  liquidity  arrangements,  sources  of  funding  and 
financial position of Dutch banks proved essential in obtaining a clear picture of their liquidity 
pressures. Note that the information synergies have also worked the other way round. Insight 
into  financial  market  developments  and  information  from  payment  systems  and  monetary 
policy  operations  have  been  extremely  valuable  for  the  performance  of  supervisory  tasks. 
Contacts  with  major,  market-leading  intermediaries  have  also  been  useful  for  producing 
timely and meaningful information on major trends and sentiments in the financial system. 
While cooperation between central bankers and prudential supervisors naturally intensifies in 
periods of financial stress, more cooperation is also desirable in boom times, when the seeds 
for later bursts are sown. When confidence levels are high and perceived risk levels are low, 
authorities should act to mitigate the build-up of systemic financial vulnerabilities. In the past 
we have been pretty good in analysing risks to financial stability. We have failed however in 
effectively  translating  our  analyses  into  concrete  risk-mitigating  actions.   Indeed,  we  have 
been  aware  of  large  global  imbalances  for  some  time.  But  little  was  done  about  it.  While 
global macroeconomic conditions are not at the origin of the crisis, they have contributed to 
it. 
Related to this, I believe that the macroprudential orientation of regulatory regimes, notably 
that of the Basel II framework, needs to be enhanced. Tight supervision of individual financial 
institutions will certainly remain crucial, but supervisors will also need to devote resources to 
understanding  interactions  among  financial  institutions  and  linkages  within  the  financial 
system at large. This includes understanding how banks’ major business lines are linked into 
the broader credit intermediation process and where pockets of risk concentrations may be 
emerging  in  the  financial  system.  A  more  comprehensive  approach  to  supervision  and 
regulation  will  enable  supervisors  to  focus  their  limited  resources  on  those  activities  that 
contribute most towards counteracting the build up of risk in the banking system. In setting 
our  goals  however,  we  must  be  realistic.  It  is  not  realistic  to  believe  that  we  can  prevent 
financial  crises  completely,  as  crises  are  a  fact  of  life.  What  we  can  do  is  create  a  more 
resilient financial system, thereby decreasing the frequency and severity of financial crises. 
2 
 BIS Review 12/2009
Since financial institutions and systems are part of an integrated global financial system, we 
need to go beyond more micro-macro cooperation at the national level. In this respect, it is 
encouraging  that  the  FSF  and  IMF will  intensify  their cooperation  at  the  global  level,  each 
complementing the other’s role. The IMF will report on its monitoring of financial stability risks 
to FSF meetings, and in turn will seek to incorporate relevant FSF conclusions into its own 
bilateral and multilateral surveillance work. A similar initiative is envisaged at the European 
level, where the European System of Central Banks Banking Supervision Committee and the 
Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS) will intensify cooperation. 
Supervisors will also need to step up their cooperation. In line with the recommendations by 
the  Financial  Stability  Forum,  so-called  colleges  of  supervisors  have  been  established  for 
several major cross-border financial groups. These colleges include all relevant supervisors 
and  promote  cooperation  on  ongoing  supervisory  issues.  DNB  is  currently  chairing  global 
supervisory  colleges  for  Aegon  and  ING.  In  fact,  only  two  weeks  ago,  we  hosted  the  ING 
college in Amsterdam. Colleges of supervisors are also promoted on the European level. In 
response to the growing integration of Europe’s banking industry and to the specific nature of 
trans-national  banking  groups,  ECOFIN  Finance  Ministers  have  called  for  the  set-up  of 
colleges  of  supervisors.  Furthermore,  the  European  Commission  has  set  up  a  “high  level” 
group headed by former Bank of France Governor Jacques de Larosière, to bring forward 
ideas  on  strengthening  EU  financial  supervision.  There  are  two  possible  outcomes.  Either 
cooperation will intensify gradually – building forth on existing institutions such as CEBS –, or 
cooperation  will  intensify  abruptly  –  creating  a  European  Financial  Supervisory  Authority. 
More  will  be  known  shortly,  as  the  De  Larosière  group  is  set  to  give  its  first  advice  next 
March. 
Let me now turn to a third lesson from the crisis, which is related to the difference between 
prudential and conduct of business supervision. While prudential supervisors’ main concern 
is the safety and soundness of financial institutions, conduct of business supervisors first and 
foremost strive for a fair and transparent market. Undeniably both types of supervision are 
important and in fact they are generally reinforcing. Let me give an example to illustrate this. 
In  the  United  States,  home  loans  were  extended  to  very  risky  borrowers,  with  little  or  no 
income  and  few,  if  any,  assets.  From  a  conduct  of  business  perspective,  these  US 
consumers  were  not  treated  fairly.  Had  this  practice  been  stopped  in  time  by  the  relevant 
conduct of business supervisor, we would have fewer problems now. Unfortunately practice 
did  not  stop,  but  rather  worsened.  And  now  these  US  mortgages  are  awfully  problematic 
from a prudential point of view. 
That  being  said,  prudential  and  conduct  of  business  supervision  can  also  be  conflicting. 
Prudential supervisors work most effectively behind the scenes. This contrasts with conduct 
of business supervision, which benefits from being in the public eye. Publicity helps to warn 
off  consumers,  investors  and  the  industry  from  misconduct  and  wrongful  practices.  If  both 
types of financial supervision are exercised by the same organization, there is the risk that an 
inappropriate  balance 
integrated  supervisory  authorities, 
arrangements  can  and  should  be  made  to  ensure  the  necessary  amount  of  resources  is 
allocated  to  both  types  of  supervision.  Establishing  such  arrangements,  however,  can  be 
rather challenging in practice. Indeed, a key finding of the UK FSA’s internal audit review in 
light  of  Northern  Rock  was  that  too  many  resources  had  been  allocated  to  conduct  of 
business supervision, and too few to prudential risks. 
In  the  Netherlands,  and  also  in  Australia,  the  danger  that  either  prudential  or  conduct  of 
business supervision will be overlooked has been addressed institutionally. In our objective-
based  supervisory  arrangement,  prudential  and  conduct  of  business  supervision  are 
performed by two separate institutions. The former type of supervision is the responsibility of 
DNB; the latter is the remit of the Dutch conduct of business supervisor, the Authority for the 
Financial Markets. Consequently, our institutional set-up leads to a transparent consideration 
of prudential interests on the one hand and conduct of business interests on the other. Let 
me  give  a  clear  example  to  illustrate  this  point.  Some  years  ago  a  Dutch  subsidiary  of  a 
is  struck.  Therefore, 
in 
BIS Review 12/2009 
 3
foreign  bank  had  neglected  its  duty  of  care.  From  a  conduct  of  business  perspective,  the 
bank had to be penalized for this. It was clear, however, that this would entail the end of the 
bank. Therefore, DNB had extensive talks with the Authority for the Financial Markets on this 
issue, as interests clearly conflicted. These talks ultimately led to the consideration that the 
bank had to be penalized for not being compliant with conduct of business regulations, as 
long as this would not endanger the stability of the financial system. An objective-based set-
up thus promotes a transparent consideration of interests. 
In  addition,  linking  the  regulatory  objectives  to  the  supervisory  structure  also  improves 
supervisory  efficiency.  In  particular,  a  major  advantage  of  objectives-based  supervision  is 
that  responsibilities  are  consolidated  in  areas  where  natural  synergies  take  place.  While 
prudential  supervisors  focus  on  risks  and  the  management  of  risks,  conduct  of  business 
supervisors concentrate their efforts on disclosure issues and sales and marketing practices. 
Confidence in objective-based supervision has been supported by the US Treasury Blueprint 
for a modernized financial regulatory structure, which states “an objective-based regulatory 
approach would represent the optimal regulatory structure for the future”. 
Let me conclude. I began my speech with the changing world economic order. Indeed, the 
balance of power is shifting. Emerging economies will produce and consume an increasing 
share  of  world  economic  output.  With  more  economic  and  political  power  comes  more 
responsibility. In this respect, the increasingly active role of emerging countries in addressing 
global problems is encouraging. One important challenge we all face now concerns global 
financial stability. To promote financial stability now and in the future, cooperation between 
macroprudential  supervisors  and  microprudential  supervisors  should  be  strengthened. 
Especially  when  the  good  times  return  –  and  they  will  –  this  will  prove  challenging.  The 
international cooperation between financial supervisors should also intensify, as the current 
financial crisis has clearly shown. Regarding the different objectives of financial supervision, 
recent experiences have reinforced the arguments in favour of objective-based supervision. 
4 
 BIS Review 12/2009
