Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The Quest for the Holy Grail? – European 
financial integration – achievements and hurdles 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the Workshop on “Securing the Future Critical Financial ICT-Infrastructure 
(CFI)”, organised by Parsifal, Frankfurt, 16 March 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen1, 
It is a great pleasure for me to speak here at the Parsifal Workshop on securing the future 
critical  financial  information  and  technologies  infrastructure.  Parsifal,  the  acronym  of  your 
project,  brings  to  mind  the  eponymous  hero  of  a  major  medieval  German  epic  poem.  His 
quest for the Holy Grail has captivated generations of readers across Europe. Likewise, the 
quest for European financial integration has engaged policy makers, market participants and 
academia. We may not be the Knights of the Round Table of King Arthur’s court at Camelot, 
but we may use their determination and wisdom in their quest as an example in  our work 
towards more integrated financial systems.  
Today I would like to focus my remarks on market infrastructures and their importance for 
achieving  a  truly  integrated  European  financial  market.  I  will  first  explain  the  economic 
rationale  behind  the  ECB’s  interest  in  financial  integration.  I  will  then  explain  through 
concrete  examples  how  a  well  integrated  market  infrastructure  for  payment  and  securites 
settlement  represents  a  conditio  sine  qua  non  for  financial  integration.  Together  with  the 
achievements I will also highlight the areas which need further progress. 
1.  
The Holy Grail of financial integration 
Analogously  to  the  Holy  Grail,  which  was  believed  to  have  magical  properties,  one  could 
argue that financial integration brings many, almost magical, economic benefits. But let me 
explain briefly, why the economic benefits of financial integration are far from magic, but real.  
The  financial  system  plays  an  essential  role  in  the  functioning  of  modern  economies:  by 
efficiently allocating resources across space and time, it is instrumental to ensure long-term 
non-inflationary  growth.  Furthermore,  from  a  central  banking  perspective,  the  financial 
system represents the primary channel through which monetary policy affects the economy. 
A  stable  and  efficient  financial  system  enhances  the  smooth  and  effective  transmission  of 
monetary  policy  throughout  the  economy.  It  also  affects  consumption,  savings  and 
investment decisions, which are a crucial ingredient for the conduct of monetary policy. 
The  issue  of  financial  integration  is  of  particular  importance  for  the  ECB,  as  financial 
integration  not  only  contributes  to  the  smooth  and  effective  transmission  of  the  single 
monetary policy throughout the euro area, but also to the smooth operation of the underlying 
payment  systems.  Financial  integration  also  increases  the  depth  and  liquidity  of  financial 
markets, and consequently enhances the resilience of the European financial system. It also 
offers greater scope for geographical risk diversification, promoting consumption and income 
risk sharing. 
Integrated financial markets also help to realise the full economic potential of the European 
Union,  as  recalled  in  the  Lisbon  strategy.  Financial  integration  contributes  to  the 
                                                 
1  
I am very grateful to Monika Hempel and Simone Manganelli for their valuable input to this speech. 
BIS Review 30/2009 
 1
development  of  the  financial  system  by  increasing  competition  and  expanding  markets, 
which results in lower intermediation costs and a more efficient allocation of capital. These 
effects, in turn, raise the potential for long-term non-inflationary economic growth.  
For  all  these  reasons  the  ECB  is  closely  monitoring  the  degree  of  integration  and 
development of euro area financial markets. Since 2005, we have been publishing indicators 
of  financial  integration  in  the  euro  area,  together  with  a  report  providing  an  overall 
assessment  of  the  degree  of  financial  integration  in  the  main  financial  market  segments, 
ranging  from  retail  loans  to  wholesale  equity  trading.  Besides  monitoring  and  raising 
awareness  about  the  state  of  European  financial  integration,  the  ECB  contributes  to  the 
enhancement of financial integration by providing central banking services (as in the case of 
payment systems), giving advice on the legislative and regulatory framework, and acting as a 
catalyst for private sector activities. 
According to our definition of financial integration – which underpins our quantitative analysis 
–  financial  markets  are  considered  integrated  if  all  agents  face  the  same  set  of  rules,  are 
treated equally and have equal access to financial products. If these conditions are satisfied, 
any price difference between two identical assets should be immediately arbitraged away by 
rational  agents.  Reflecting  the  most  recent  advances  in  research,  we  have  developed  a 
number of quantitative indicators based both on quantities and prices. 
Until the start of the financial crisis, the degree of financial integration has been continuously 
increasing,  although  at  different  speed,  across  the  various  market  segments.  The  money 
market – where banks lend to each other on a very short term – appeared to be the most 
integrated. Also, government and corporate bond markets have been quite integrated, too. In 
contrast, equity and retail banking markets are the least integrated. 
Three  conclusions  stand  out  in  this  regard.  First,  integration  is  typically  more  advanced  in 
those markets that are closer to the single monetary policy. Second, wholesale markets tend 
to  be  more  integrated  than  retail  markets.  Third,  market  integration  is  correlated  with  the 
degree of integration of the related underlying market infrastructures such as payments and 
securities settlement systems.  
2.  
Challenges in the quest for financial integration 
Any quest has its challenges and the greater the challenge the greater the fascination of the 
quest.  The  Holy  Grail  was  believed  to  be  kept  in  a  mysterious  castle  surrounded  by  a 
wasteland and hardly accessible. The questing knights had to go through all sort of mental 
and physical tests. Lack of integration reflects more prosaically the existence of barriers to 
cross-border activities. While the physical efforts necessary for our quest are certainly less 
demanding,  overcoming  these  barriers  still  requires  considerable  mental  energy  and 
intellectual power. 
We can classify the obstacles to financial integration in three main categories: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
psychological / informational, 
regulatory, and 
technical. 
Recent  research  shows  that  there  are  psychological  and  cultural  barriers  to  financial 
integration we cannot neglect. For instance, economists have found empirical evidence that 
cultural differences between two countries lead to less trade between those countries, less 
portfolio investment and less direct investment. Besides cultural and psychological reasons, 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2009
information  frictions  seem  to  have  a  negative  effect  on  financial  integration.  This  type  of 
obstacles  can  be  removed  only  in  the  long  run  through  appropriate  education  and  the 
emerging of a common European culture.  
The second barrier to financial integration is of a regulatory and legal nature. Although the 
introduction  of  the  euro  has  arguably  been  the  single  most  important  force  behind  the 
evolution  of  European  financial  markets  over  the  past  two  decades,  it  has  been  preceded 
and followed by a series of key policy initiatives aimed at creating a level playing field across 
the  euro  area.  The  importance  of  these  initiatives  in  the  process  of  financial  integration 
should  not  be  understated:  they  are  continuously  shaping  the  legislative  architecture  and 
technical infrastructure on which financial markets operate. 
According  to  our  definition  of  financial  integration,  a  necessary  condition  for  financial 
integration  is  the  removal  of  any  legislative  or  regulatory  differences  which  discriminate 
agents on the basis of their location. Many of the efforts at the European level – in particular 
the Financial Services Action Plan and the subsequent White Paper on EU financial services 
policy  for  the  years  2005-2010  –  have  been  directed  at  the  removal  of  barriers  to  cross-
border  activities.  EU  policy-makers  have  devoted  considerable  efforts  to  removing  the 
remaining regulatory and technical obstacles.  
As to the third – the technical – barrier to financial integration, a cornerstone of an integrated 
financial market is the availability of suitable market infrastructures for transferring funds and 
securities within and between countries. After all, the availability of reliable and safe payment 
and securities settlement mechanisms for the transfer of funds and securities is a  conditio 
sine qua non for the majority of economic interactions – no payment, no trade. Due to the 
very rapid growth in the volume and the value of payment transactions stemming from the 
money, foreign exchange and securities markets, the importance of payment and securities 
clearing  and  settlement  infrastructures  has  grown  considerably  over  the  last  two  decades. 
Ultimately, an integrated infrastructure will allow market players such as banks and service 
providers  and  the  final  customers  to  realise  cost  savings  by  fostering  economies  of  scale. 
They will also allow them to benefit from increased speed and easier handling of transactions 
due 
increased 
competition  will  spur  innovation,  better  services  and  lower  prices.  This  will  lead  to  greater 
efficiency and safety of the capital markets and, ultimately, as I have argued before, to higher 
levels of non-inflationary economic growth.  
the  harmonisation  and  streamlining  of  procedures.  Furthermore, 
to 
European policy makers and the Eurosystem in particular have devoted great efforts to the 
establishment  of  a  common  payment  and  securities  settlement  infrastructure.  In  the 
following, I will identify and discuss three areas in which the Eurosystem has taken an active 
role in the integration of payment and securities settlement infrastructure in Europe: 
First, I will talk about the infrastructure for large-value payments. Large-value payments are 
mainly interbank payments. They are usually time critical, and due to their high value, their 
orderly  settlement  is  essential  for  the  proper  functioning  of  financial  markets.  Since  the 
introduction  of  the  euro,  a  high  level  of  integration  in  the  European  large-value  payment 
clearing and settlement infrastructure has been achieved thanks to the establishment of the 
large-value payment system of the Eurosystem, TARGET/TARGET2. 
Second, I will examine the European retail payment market. Retail payments are payments 
between  non-financial  institutions,  e.g.  private  households,  non-financial  corporations  or 
government agencies. The integration of the European retail payments market has yet to be 
achieved. For example, some payment instruments – such as the direct debit – available at 
national level are not yet available in a cross-border context. The creation of a Single Euro 
Payments  Area  (SEPA)  will  enable  customers  to  make  cashless  payments  throughout  the 
euro area with a single set of payment instruments from a single bank account, regardless of 
BIS Review 30/2009 
 3
their  location.  The  Eurosystem  considers  the  SEPA  as  an  extremely  important  project  for 
European financial integration and is fostering this process by acting as a catalyst.  
Third,  I  will  look  at  the  integration  of  the  securities  market  infrastructure  in  Europe.  More 
particularly, I will address the post-trading infrastructure, i.e. the infrastructure for the actual 
transfer of funds and securities within and across countries. Like the retail payment market, 
the  European  securities  settlement  infrastructure  has  remained  highly  fragmented  despite 
the establishment of the single currency. To overcome the fragmentation, the Eurosystem in 
its operator role has launched the TARGET2 Securities project.  
For each of these three areas, I will elaborate on the achievements made or expected to be 
made in relation to European financial integration, but also point out the threats and potential 
hurdles. 
2.1  
The grail within reach – TARGET/TARGET2 as a positive example where 
integration has been achieved 
Before  the  introduction  of  the  euro  in  January  1999,  only  domestic  large-value  payment 
systems existed. These were operated by central banks or commercial banks. Central banks 
have been offering real-time gross-settlement (RTGS) systems to the commercial banks for 
large-value  interbank  transfers  because  these  systems  are  required  for  the  settlement  of 
monetary policy operations. 
Given  that  the  first  RTGS  systems  were  created  with  the  aim  of  meeting  domestic 
requirements, they were rather diverse in nature and not necessarily suited to the needs of a 
single  currency  area.  The  prevalent  way  for  making  cross-border  payments  within  the  EU 
was  via  correspondent  banking,  at  higher  costs  and  delays  compared  to  national 
transactions. 
To enable the conduct of a single monetary policy, any difference between payments within 
and  across  countries  in  the  euro-area  had  to  be  eliminated.  Thus,  the  Eurosystem  set  up 
TARGET as a decentralised system, interlinking the existing national RTGS systems of the 
EU  Member  States  into  a  single  system.  In  TARGET2,  which  went  live  in  May  2008,  the 
decentralised structure of the TARGET system was replaced by a single technical platform. 
As  a  result,  we  have  come  within  reach  of  the  grail  by  having  an  integrated  and  highly 
efficient  large-value  payments  landscape  in  Europe  today.  Indeed,  TARGET2  is  the  first 
market  infrastructure  to  be  completely  integrated  and  harmonised  at  the  European  level. 
There is unanimous agreement that the integration of the large value payment systems has 
been  instrumental  to  the  integration  of  money  markets  and  wholesale  banking  activities  in 
Europe.  TARGET2  processes  a  daily  average  of  nearly  400,000  transactions,  for  a  daily 
average value of 2.6 trillion euro. 
faces 
Along with its success in integrating and harmonising large-value payments at the European 
level,  TARGET2 
two  challenges.  First,  payment  and  securities  settlement 
infrastructures  in  general  have  become  more  vulnerable  because  of  their  ever-increasing 
reliance  on  fast  evolving  electronic  data-processing  and  telecommunications  technology. 
Here, the present workshop and the Parsifal project in general are expected to contribute to 
the  protection  of  financial  infrastructures  by  ensuring  trust,  security  and  reliability  of 
information and telecommunications technology.  
Second,  payment  and  securities  settlement  infrastructures  are  increasingly  interconnected 
through  a  wide  array  of  complex  relationships.  As  a  result,  the  smooth  functioning  of  an 
individual 
functioning  of  other  related 
infrastructures. To address this issue, the main central banks of the world published a report 
on  the  interdependencies  of  payment  and  settlement  systems  in  summer  last  year  and 
infrastructure  often  depends  on 
the  smooth 
4 
 BIS Review 30/2009
provided  a  series  of  suggestions  to  system  operators,  financial  institutions,  and  service 
providers, but also to central banks and other authorities, on how to increase the resilience of 
global payment and settlement infrastructure. 
2.2  
Still a long way to reach the grail – SEPA as an area where integration has yet 
to be achieved 
Let  me  elaborate  now  on  the  harmonisation  and  consolidation  of  the  European  retail 
payment market which – unlike the large-value payments – is still in its early stages. Despite 
the introduction of the common currency, payment habits – such as the use of cash versus 
cashless  payment  instruments  –  still  vary  widely  across  the  euro  area.  In  some  countries, 
cash payments still make up more than 90% of retail transactions by households, in others, 
the advantages of cashless payments have driven down cash usage considerably. In some 
countries,  cheques  are  still  widely  used,  while  in  others,  they  have  been  phased  out 
altogether.  Likewise,  retail  clearing  and  settlement  is  organised  differently  in  the  various 
countries, reflecting local tradition and business preferences. 
As market forces alone were not enough to remove these entrenched national differences, 
the  banking  industry  joined  forces  in  their  quest  for  market  integration  and  launched  the 
Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA) initiative in 2002. The primary objective of this initiative 
is to achieve a fully integrated market for retail payment services in the euro area with no 
distinction between national and cross-border payments. More easily said, the aim is to have 
one set of pan-European payment instruments (credit transfer, direct debit and cards) which 
replace  the  current  national  ones.  The  Eurosystem  strongly  supports  the  SEPA  by  closely 
monitoring  the  developments  and  providing  guidance  to  the  market.  For  instance,  the 
Eurosystem  publishes  regularly  a  progress  report  on  the  SEPA,  assessing  what  has  been 
achieved,  analysing  obstacles  and 
the  relevant 
stakeholders. 
issuing  messages 
threats  and 
to 
Let me focus on the first two instruments, the credit transfer and the direct debit. With the 
introduction of the SEPA Credit Transfer (SCT) on 28 January 2008, the first pan-European 
retail  payment  instrument  has  become  available.  Almost  all  banks  active  in  the  payment 
business in Europe (i.e. about 4,500 banks) adhere to the SCT scheme, i.e. they are able to 
offer  and  process  the  SCT.  Likewise,  most  retail  payment  infrastructures  that  were 
processing  credit  transfers  in  euro  have  become  SCT  scheme-compliant,  i.e.  they  offer 
clearing and settlement of the SCT.  
Preparations  for  the  second  European  payment  instrument,  the  SEPA  Direct  Debit  (SDD), 
are ongoing. While the design of both the core service and the business-to-business service 
are finalised, solutions are required for practical implementation issues such as the ongoing 
legal  validity  of  existing  direct  debit  mandates,  reachability  of  direct  debit  payees  and  in 
particular the multilateral interchange fee (MIF), i.e. a transaction fee payable from the payer 
bank to the payee bank. The need for such transaction fee is challenged by DG-COMP of the 
European  Commission.  The  banking  sector,  the  European  Commission  and  the  European 
Central Bank have been working towards a solution for some time, and the issue needs be 
resolved urgently so as not to endanger the launch of the SDD on 1 November 2009.  
Despite the fact that the SEPA project has been ongoing for about seven years and that a lot 
of  product  design  and  standardisation  work  has  been  undertaken  and  completed 
successfully, the practical implementation and adoption of the SEPA, which is the ultimate 
litmus test of the success of the integration of retail payments in the euro area, is slow. For 
instance,  after  being  in  existence  for  over  a  year,  only  about  1.9  %  of  total  credit  transfer 
BIS Review 30/2009 
 5
volume in the euro area are SCT transactions.2 Banks see the responsibility on the side of 
corporations and public administrations to bring the critical mass of payments to the SEPA 
environment. In this context, I am very pleased to report that the ECB has migrated all its 
payments  for  salaries,  bills  etc.  to  SEPA  payments  right  from  the  start  of  the  SEPA  in 
January 2008. Corporations and public administrations claim that they can see the benefits 
of the SEPA, but still take a cautious approach towards the actual implementation. One of 
the  major  difficulties cited  relates  to  obtaining  IBAN  and  BIC  information.  I  expect  that  the 
provision  of  good  quality  services  for  deriving  IBAN  from  national  account  numbers  and 
reliable directory services will help to overcome this obstacle. 
To  break  this  circle  of  wait  and  see,  a  general  understanding  among  most  SEPA 
stakeholders has been established that it is important to have a plan by when the European 
payment  instruments  (i.e.  the  SCT  and  the  SDD)  will  replace  the  national  payment 
instruments.  We  need  a  migration  end  date  from  which  on  onwards  only  the  European 
payment  instruments  will  exist.  We  all  know  that  it  is  inefficient  and  costly  if  two  schemes 
continue to run in parallel for a prolonged period of time. Dual processing does not generate 
the economies of scale that the SEPA is able to deliver and hampers stakeholders in fully 
reaping  its  benefits.  Maintaining  national  instruments  implies  that  fragmentation  along 
national  borders  is  preserved,  and  that  the  integration  of  the  European  retail  market  has 
failed.  Thus,  working  towards  the  establishment  of  a  migration  end  date  is  deemed  of  the 
utmost importance to make the SEPA a success.  
2.3  
Paving the way to the grail – 2 Eurosystem projects that will foster integration 
of securities settlement infrastructure in Europe 
the  retail  payment  market, 
The last area I want to bring to your attention is the state of play in the securities settlement 
infrastructure.  Like 
the  European  securities  settlement 
infrastructure  has  remained  highly  fragmented  despite  the  establishment  of  the  single 
currency. Owing to, among other things, the large number of settlement systems, EU cross-
border settlement costs are still much higher than domestic ones. At the same time, demand 
for an integrated European settlement infrastructure has been increasing.  
The TARGET2 Securities project aims at paving the way towards the grail by overcoming the 
current fragmentation of the securities settlement infrastructure. It is a technical platform for 
the  central  securities  depositories  (CSDs),  which  will  maintain  legal  relations  with  their 
customers, including custody and notary functions. 
TARGET2  Securities  will  provide  a  single  harmonised  venue  where  all  EU  assets  can  be 
exchanged  for  euro  with  standardised  communications  protocols.  Furthermore,  it  will 
eliminate  the  financial  exposure  in  cross-CSD  settlement  through  central  bank  money 
settlement. It will thus increase the efficiency of collateral management and provide position 
takers with the ability to optimise their financing across all EU assets in euro.  
TARGET2 Securities will constitute a major step forward in the delivery of a single integrated 
securities infrastructure in Europe. The TARGET2 Securities project is currently in the phase 
of defining the General Functional Specifications, which will be ready by the end of 2009. It 
will  be  followed  by  the  development  phase  and  subsequently  the  testing  and  migration 
phase. The envisaged go-live of the system is 2013. 
In parallel to the TARGET2 Securities project, the Eurosystem launched the CCBM2 project 
(Correspondent  Central  Banking  Model).  CCBM2  will  be  a common  platform  for  managing 
Eurosystem collateral, i.e. the assets pledged to the Eurosystem as security for its central 
                                                 
2   Figure of January 2009. 
6 
 BIS Review 30/2009
bank  credit  operations,  both  on  a  national  and  pan-European  basis.  CCBM2  will  be  fully 
compatible  with  TARGET2  and  TARGET2  Securities.  This  creates  synergies  in  the 
settlement of collateral for Eurosystem credit operations and the release of the related credit 
to the financial institutions. 
3.  
Conclusion 
European financial markets have come a long way in the integration process. The progress 
achieved so far, however, leaves no room for complacency, as the recent disruptions caused 
by the financial crisis clearly warn us. The forthcoming ECB report on financial integration – 
which has a special focus on the effects of the 2007-2008 financial turmoil on the state of 
financial integration in the euro area – provides clear evidence that the financial turmoil has 
considerably  affected  the  latest  observations  of  the  integration  indicators.  The  usual 
indicators of financial integration – such as the cross-country standard deviations of money 
market rates, or government bond spreads – deteriorated gradually over the past year, with a 
dramatic acceleration in the last months of 2008. When comparing the available indicators 
for cross-country data with those built on national data, we see that interbank rates shows 
signs  of  divergence  for  all  transactions,  but  more  pronounced  for  cross-border  ones.  This 
suggests the presence of heightened credit and liquidity risks everywhere, but possibly larger 
for cross-border counterparties.  
Given the impact of the current financial turmoil on the functioning of the financial market, it is 
of utmost importance to act in a concerted and co-ordinated manner to restore the proper 
functioning  of  the  financial  system.  The  competent  authorities  need  to  be  vigilant  that 
instability does not stop or even reverse the financial integration process. The Eurosystem is 
following market developments very closely and it has been particularly proactive in money 
markets. It played an essential re-intermediation role, which was instrumental to support the 
functioning and integration of the money markets during the crisis period.  
Payment  and  settlement  systems  have  shown  a  remarkable  resilience  to  the  shocks  that 
have hit the financial world over the past two years. They have played a role of safe haven, 
as  market  participants  could  rely  on  their  smooth  functioning  and  operation.  The  financial 
turmoil should reinforce our conviction that a well functioning, stable and integrated payment 
and  securities  settlement  infrastructure  represents  a  cornerstone  of  the  whole  European 
financial  integration  process.  The  current  crisis  should  not  be  taken  as  an  excuse  to  slow 
down  the  ongoing  work  on  the  market  infrastructure,  on  SEPA,  TARGET2  Securities, 
CCBM2.  In  order  to  exploit  its  full  potential,  banks  and  central  banks  need  to  implement 
harmonised systems, schemes and procedures. Such an integrated and harmonised system 
would lead to larger economies of scale, greater innovation and better services. Therefore, it 
is precisely because of the financial turmoil that we need to strengthen our efforts towards 
providing more integrated, efficient, safe and reliable market infrastructures as backbones of 
our financial system. 
The fascination of the Holy Grail may be due to its very elusiveness. In contrast to that, and 
despite the recent setback, bringing the European financial integration process to completion 
remains an attainable goal. Like the Knights of the Round Table, we – market participants 
and policy-makers – need to stand up in front of these difficulties and respond to the financial 
crisis  by  supporting  trust  in  the  financial  infrastructures  and  use  their  potential  for  further 
integrating the financial market. 
BIS Review 30/2009 
 7
