K C Chakrabarty: Global crisis – genesis, challenges and opportunities 
unleashed 
Inaugural address by Dr K C Chakrabarty, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at 
the  21st  Anniversary  Convention  of  the  Association  of  Professional  Bankers,  Sri  Lanka, 
Colombo, 25 September 2009. 
The assistance provided by Mr. S. Pattnaik in preparation of the address is gratefully acknowledged. 
 Mr. Ajith Nivard Cabraal, Governor, Central Bank of Sri Lanka; Mr. Ajantha Madurapperuma, 
President,  Association  of  Professional  Bankers  –  Sri  Lanka;  Distinguished  guests  and 
members of the Association of Professional Bankers, Ladies and Gentlemen: 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  and  privilege  for  me  to  be  here  today  for  this  21st  Anniversary 
Convention of the Association of Professional Bankers of Sri Lanka. At the outset, I would 
like  to  thank  Mr.  Ajantha  Madurapperuma,  the  President  of  the  Association  and  all  its 
members for extending the invitation and providing me this opportunity to share my views on 
a  theme  which  has  tested  the  competence  and  conventional  wisdom  of  policy  makers, 
bankers and market participants all around the world, as the complex nature and severity of 
the global crisis has been truly unprecedented.  
It is indeed heartening to note that Sri Lanka like many emerging markets, has weathered the 
crisis  without  any  significant  stress  on  its  financial  system,  though,  the  country’s  growth 
outlook, like many other countries, was affected by the varied effects of the contagion from 
the crisis. In terms of financial outlook, according to the IMF, Sri Lanka’s economic growth for 
2009  could  be  around  3  percent  compared  to  6  percent  in  2008,  even  though  other 
estimates, including that of the Central Bank suggests that growth could remain in the range 
of  3.5  to  4.5  per  cent.  Inflation  condition  has  also  been  improving,  as  the  annual  average 
inflation rate has continued to decline since November, 2008 and recorded a single digit level 
of 8.5 per cent in August 2009, which is the lowest since 2006. The recent revision in rating 
outlook  by  the  S&P  from  “negative”  to  “stable”  corroborates  the  improving  outlook  for  the 
economy. I am optimistic that the Sri Lankan economy and the banking sector will perform 
well and will be on a high growth trajectory in time to come.  
In this age of globalisation, sound national policies pursued in any country alone may not be 
enough to ensure sustainable high growth with stability. Understanding the opportunities and 
risks  associated  with  globalisation  and  developing  national  and  global  architectures  to 
enhance the benefits of globalisation while containing the risks, therefore, represent a major 
challenge  for  the  policy  makers.  Every  financial  crisis,  notwithstanding  the  associated 
ravages, has to be also seen in terms of the opportunities it offer like exposing the limitations 
of the existing systems, cleansing the financial systems of activities and markets entities that 
work  towards  misuse  of  the  systems  for  maximizing  personal  returns,  and  certainly  in  this 
process open up new business opportunities. I would like to share with you certain important 
aspects of the crisis, before sharing with you the Indian experience in terms of the impact of 
the crisis and the way forward. 
The genesis of the crisis 
The sudden manifestation of the crisis in 2007 was the result of two important fundamental 
macroeconomic imbalances that persisted for too long; one, the monetary policy of the Fed 
Reserve  in  the  Greenspan  era  and  second,  the  growing  global  imbalances.  Both  these 
factors  were  clear  precursors  of  unsustainable  bubbles,  which  were  ignored  in  general 
because of the pre-crisis phase of high global growth with low inflation.  
BIS Review 116/2009 
 1
Growing bubbles 
The Fed’s monetary policy stance before the crisis created the general impression over time 
that the interest of capital in a free market economy can never be at risk. That encouraged 
the  use  of  high  leverage  as  a  source  of  sustainable  high  profits  from  bubbles.  Fed’s 
monetary policy has widely been highlighted by now for its role in supporting the growth of 
two  most  unpleasant  things  –  speculation  and  leverage  –  which  in  turn  contained  the 
potential for a severe financial crisis.  
The global imbalances 
The safe haven appeal of the US dollar as the key international currency, and the assured 
high return on financial investment in the capital market in the US during the Greenspan era 
led  to  a  situation  where  the  US  continuously  maintained  large  and  growing  unsustainable 
current account deficits. Countries around the world with current account surpluses or large 
foreign  exchange  reserves  kept  investing  in  the  US.  Despite  the  crisis,  and  the  resultant 
forced correction in imbalances to some extent, this global problem could persist even after 
the crisis. 
The buildup to the crisis - role of more proximate factors 
Leverage 
Use  of  leverage  merged  as  the  sure  means  to  maximize  income  in  the  US  economy. 
American  household  and  corporate  debt  had  increased  significantly  before  the  crisis.  One 
recent  University  of  Chicago  study  highlights  how  the  size  of  household  debt  and  house 
prices moved together in the US, and every increase in house prices induced further growth 
in debt for consumption purpose. For every one dollar increase in house prices, the increase 
in  debt-financed  consumption  rose  by  25  to  30  cents.  The  wealth  effect  of  asset  price 
increases, thus, seemed to be much more significant than what was perceived earlier by the 
policy  makers.  Correction  in  asset  prices,  thus,  led  to  an  intense  deleveraging  process. 
Assets  prices  and  leverage  represent  two  important  variables  that  must  be  constantly 
monitored, as risk from both of them to the financial system could be significant.  
Deterioration in credit standards 
The deterioration in credit standards facilitated by the sustained easy monetary policy stance 
and  deregulation  induced  opportunity  for  shifting  of  credit  risk  through  securitisation, 
contributed to growth in credit to sub-prime segments. It is often argued that easy access to 
liquidity  alone  could  not  have  led  to  deterioration  in  credit  standards.  Securitisation  and 
innovations  linked  to  such  securities  opened  up  the  option  to  shift  credit  risk  in  sub-prime 
loans to the markets and thereby free the pressure on banks’ capital, which in turn led to the 
significant weakening in standards for credit assessment.  
Emergence of shadow banks – and the tendency to circumvent regulations  
Many leading international banks started/sponsored off-balance sheet Structured Investment 
Vehicles (SIVs) to freely undertake activities which were not possible otherwise because of 
regulatory  norms  for  banks,  like  capital  adequacy  and  management  of  liquidity  risks.  The 
SIVs, in turn, faced no such constraints, and could borrow freely from the short-term Asset 
Backed Commercial Paper (ABCP) market and take large leveraged positions in papers like 
CDOs/CLOs whose valuation and liquidity were most unknown. In the pre-crisis period, these 
SIVs  or  shadow  banks  generated  good  profits  for  the  sponsoring  banks.  Once  the  crisis 
started, the sponsoring banks had to take the losses of the SIVs. The tendency to circumvent 
regulation  but  still  do  something  that  is  perfectly  legal  (like  sponsoring  SIVs  to  undertake 
2 
 BIS Review 116/2009
certain  activities)  suggests  that  regulation  alone  cannot  address  all sources  of  risks  to  the 
financial systems. 
Financial innovations 
Earlier,  it  was  not  easy  to  securitise  any  type  of  loan,  like  sub-prime  loans,  and  create  a 
market for them. The financial engineers of the Wall Street, however, found the answer in 
two  things:  First,  by  creating  information  asymmetry  by  converting  the  pool  of  difficult  to 
market loans into Collateralised Debt Obligations (CDOs), and second, creating market for 
different tranches based on “ratings”. Thus, a “AAA” rated CDO could be created out of cash-
flows  linked  to  sub-prime  loans.  In  the  post  crisis  period,  some  have  questioned  the 
relevance of such innovations in any financial market. Innovations need to be encouraged for 
enhancing  market  efficiency,  but  market  efficiency  cannot  be  achieved  without  proper 
information.  
Financial systems became too complex and the potential vulnerabilities escaped 
supervisory focus 
The role of complexity in financial systems in causing the crisis has been deftly explained by 
Landau (2009). Complexity increased from two sides, first, the structured products (whose 
valuation  could  be  hard  to  establish),  and  second,  the  rising  interdependence  between 
financial institutions, market players and counterparties. The nature of this interdependence 
was too complex to be monitored by any regulator, and the dynamics of the interactions also 
kept changing in constant search of higher returns through new innovations and regulatory 
arbitrage.  
Three points are particularly important to note in this context: (a) Information is critical for any 
advanced  efficient  market,  however  “Complexity”  led  to  loss  of  information;  some  of  the 
innovations  in  effect  destroyed  information;  (b)  Complexity  gave  rise  to  higher  uncertainty, 
making financial systems highly unpredictable and (c) Uncertainty led to “flight to quality and 
hoarding  of  liquidity”,  which  precipitated  the  crisis.  When  everybody  runs  for  cover  to 
minimise the loss, the “collective action problem” accentuates the market stress.  
Pressure on capital and the severe credit squeeze  
As the prices of toxic papers witnessed free fall (in some cases the value of certain CDOs fell 
to below 30 cents a dollar, and stock prices also fell significantly), the losses for the banks 
having exposure to such papers rose significantly, and the capital buffer turned increasingly 
inadequate, creating concerns of insolvency. Banks, given the capital adequacy requirement, 
have to either raise fresh capital, or contract their balance sheet size, when capital comes 
under  pressure  because  of  application  of  mark-to-market  (MtM)  related  losses  in  a  falling 
market for financial instruments held in the investment portfolio of banks. In the testimony of 
William  M  Isaac  before  the  US  sub-committee  on  Capital  Markets,  Insurance  and 
Government  Sponsored  Enterprises  dated  March  12,  2009  it  was  pointed  out  that  “…MtM 
losses destroyed $ 500 billion of capital in the financial system. Because banks can lend 10 
times of capital, MtM losses destroyed $ 5 trillion of lending capacity”, leading to a severe 
credit squeeze. The sub-prime crisis, thus, had all the ingredients to deliver a serious global 
recession. 
From financial crisis to a synchronised global recession 
In  view  of  the  strong  interactions  between  the  financial  system  and  the  real  economy,  a 
financial crisis often gives rise to an “adverse feedback loop”. As risk taking capacity of the 
banks  erodes  with  pressure  on  capital,  and  as  greater  risk  aversion  leads  to  tighter  credit 
standards, flow of money for financing real activities becomes difficult. This was seen in both 
BIS Review 116/2009 
 3
money  market  and  credit  market  in  the  advanced  economies.  When  leading  Wall  Street 
banks were feared to fail, inter-bank market had to freeze, due to generalised lack of trust. 
The credit market, in turn, witnessed severe pressure on the capacity to lend; moreover, the 
deleveraging process gathered steam over time, where everybody wanted to minimise the 
losses.  The  real  economic  activity  decelerated  as  aggregate  demand,  particularly  private 
consumption and investment demand shrank under the pressure of deleveraging, wealth loss 
associated with falling asset prices, increasing unemployment, and deteriorating climate for 
investment and employment.  
As  the  real  effects  of  the  financial  crisis  magnified  over  time  and  the  initial  decoupling 
perception  turned  out  to  be  a  myth,  the  IMF  revised  its  global  growth  outlook  for  2009 
downwards  repeatedly  from  3.9  per  cent  in  July  2008  to  -1.4  per  cent  in  July  2009.  The 
volume of world trade has also been projected to contract by 12.1 per cent in 2009. It is the 
serious real costs of a financial crisis that has led to large scale use of fiscal and monetary 
policy stimulus all over the world.  
In  view  of  the  adverse  feedback  loop  in  the  advanced  economies,  policies  have  aimed  at 
addressing  both  financial  stress  and  the  economic  recession,  since  addressing  any  one 
would not weaken the vicious loop. Lower interest rates, ample liquidity and fiscal stimulus 
have been used to contain the adverse real effects; while for restoring stability to the financial 
system, measures like raising the capital of banks and financial institutions and addressing 
the impaired assets have been adopted.  
The Indian economy before the global crisis 
India had emerged as a leading emerging market economy (EME) by the time when the sub-
prime crisis started. The average GDP growth of 8.8 per cent during the 5 year period 2003-
08  was  not  only  one  of  the  highest  in  the  world  in  the  recent  period,  but  it  had  also 
permanently raised India’s growth trajectory to a higher level. There was a clear structural 
transformation, driven by reforms, globalisation and significant increase in domestic savings 
and  investment  rates,  which  helped  in  boosting  both  investment  and  productivity  driven 
growth  in  the  system.  More  importantly,  inflation  in  India  averaged  at  about  5.3  per  cent 
during this high growth period.  
The macroeconomic environment remained stable and resilient to external shocks, despite 
rising degree of openness and significant reforms. Sustainable current account deficits in the 
balance of payments and surges in capital flows during this period had led to increase in the 
country’s foreign exchange reserves to more than USD 315 billion by May 2008, which had 
significantly enhanced the capacity of India to face any potential external sector vulnerability 
arising  from  the  global  crisis.  Domestic  savings  rate  had  increased  from  23.5  per  cent  of 
GDP in 2001-02 to 37.7 per cent in 2007-08, which facilitated the step up in investment rate 
from 22.8 per cent to 39.1 per cent during the corresponding period. Because of the Fiscal 
Responsibility  and  Budget  Management  (FRBM)  Act,  the  fiscal  position  was  also  on  a 
healthy  consolidation  path.  Given  the  sound  macro-financial  conditions,  India  was  better 
placed than many EMEs to face the global crisis, even though over time it became evident 
that the perception of decoupling was a myth. 
The impact of the global crisis on India 
Three  channels  of  contagion  –  namely  trade,  capital  flows  and  deteriorating  confidence  – 
affected  the  real  sector  of  the  economy.  The  immediate  concern  after  the  Lehman 
bankruptcy,  however,  was  to  assess  the  exposure  of  the  domestic  financial  system  to  the 
failing  institutions  and  the  falling  asset  prices  in  the  financial  systems  of  the  advanced 
countries.  
4 
 BIS Review 116/2009
No direct and limited indirect exposure of the Indian banking system to the financial 
crisis 
The  banks  in  India  did  not  have  any  direct  exposure  to  the  US  sub-prime  market.  Some 
banks, however, had indirect exposure through their overseas branches and subsidiaries to 
the  US  sub-prime  markets  in  the  form  of  structured  products,  such  as  collateralised  debt 
obligations  (CDOs).  Some  of  the  banks,  with  exposures  to  credit  derivatives,  had  to  book 
MTM  losses;  the  impact  though  was  not  very  significant  and  banks  had  made  adequate 
provisions to meet the MTM losses on such exposures. Moreover, the banks in general had 
maintained high levels of capital adequacy ratio.  
Once  the  risk  from  the  financial  system  was  assessed  to  be  limited,  the  policy  priorities 
focused on dealing with the problem of global illiquidity spiral for ensuring orderly and well 
functioning  markets.  Given  the  strong  interactions  between  financial  markets,  financial 
institutions and the real economy, ensuring normal functioning of markets assumed critical 
significance. The financial markets - in particular the stock market, the money market and the 
forex market – reflected the heat of the global contagion. 
Liquidity pressure 
Global  liquidity  scare  and  credit  squeeze  led  to  constrained  access  to  funds  for  Indian 
entities,  and  some  of  the  corporates  shifted  their  demand  for  funds  to  local  markets.  The 
pressure on the balance of payments, led by net capital outflows in the third quarter of 2008-
09  and  the  associated  intervention  sales  by  the  RBI  in  the  forex  market  also  implied 
corresponding withdrawal of domestic liquidity from the banking system, which the RBI had 
to more than offset by expanding liquidity against domestic assets in its balance sheet. Net 
capital flows declined from US$ 108.0 billion in 2007-08 to US$ 9.1 billion in 2008-09. India's 
foreign  exchange  reserves  declined  by  US$  58.0  billion,  of  which  US$  37.9  billion  was  on 
account  of  valuation  changes,  and  the  remaining  US$  20.1  billion  decline  reflected  the 
financing needs of the BoP. Thus, with less than 10 per cent of the available stock of forex 
reserves,  the  balance  of  payments  pressures  from  a  severe  global  contagion  could  be 
contained. 
The liquidity demand, however, increased in general after the Lehman incident in September 
2008.  In  view  of  the  funding  inter-linkages  between  NBFCs  (non-banking  financial 
companies),  mutual  funds  and  commercial  banks,  when  the  contagion  from  the  global 
financial crisis created selling pressures in the stock markets in India, the liquidity needs of 
the  financial  system  as  a  whole  had  to  be  addressed  by  the  Reserve  Bank.  The  global 
deleveraging  process  created  selling  pressures,  as  foreign  investors  could  meet  liquidity 
needs in the advanced markets by selling in domestic markets. Heavy redemption pressure 
on  mutual  funds  started  in  September  2008,  as  several  investors,  especially  institutional 
investors,  started  redeeming  their  investments  in  liquid  funds/money  market  funds.  Mutual 
funds  are  major  subscribers  to  CPs  and  debentures  issued  by  the  NBFCs,  besides  CDs 
issued  by  banks.  The  rollover  of  maturing  short-term  instruments  floated  by  NBFCs  for 
having regular access to market funding became difficult. The tightening liquidity conditions 
also made banks somewhat reluctant to lend to NBFCs. 
The financial market pressures 
Global  illiquidity  spiral  increased  volatility  in  the  financial  markets,  and  restoring  orderly 
conditions  in  the  financial  markets  became  critical  to  contain  the  spread  of  contagion  into 
other sectors of the economy. The Indian rupee, which stood at 39.99 per US dollar as at 
end-March 2008, depreciated and moved in a narrow range of Rs. 42-43 per US dollar from 
the  third  week  of  May  to  the  middle  of  August  2008.  It  depreciated  sharply  thereafter, 
breaching the level of Rs.50 per US dollar on October 27, 2008, and touching the low of Rs. 
52.09 per US dollar on March 5, 2009. The BSE Sensex fell to a low of 8160 on March 9, 
2009, witnessing a decline of 60.9 per cent from the peak of 20,873 on January 8, 2008. The 
BIS Review 116/2009 
 5
overnight call money rate, which had jumped to 13 per cent on September 16, 2008 touched 
a peak of 19.8 per cent on October 10, 2008, and the access to liquidity from the RBI through 
LAF (Liquidity Adjustment Facility) repo crossed Rs. 900 billion. The RBI, thus, had to meet 
the liquidity needs, in both domestic and foreign currency so as to ensure smooth functioning 
of the markets.  
The response from the Reserve Bank of India 
We are aware that a central bank must pay attention to money and credit growth. The crisis 
has also brought to the fore that asset prices have a significant role in the economy and the 
price buildup cannot be ignored by a central bank. It is important that sub-sectors which are 
displaying  incipient  problems  be  treated  differently.  Preserving  soundness  of  the  regulated 
financial  institutions,  ensuring  orderly  market  conditions  and  containing  the  pace  of 
deceleration in growth warranted introduction of adequate and timely policy measures by the 
RBI.  As  WPI  headline  inflation  declined  sharply  from  the  peak  of  12.9  per  cent  in  August 
2008 (to 0.8 per cent by end-March 2009 and then to the negative territory since June 2009), 
that  created  enough  space  for  the  RBI  to  pursue  the  objectives  of  growth  and  financial 
stability,  by  creating  and  sustaining  ample  liquidity  in  the  market.  Measures  aimed  at 
expanding the rupee liquidity included significant reduction in the cash reserve ratio (CRR), 
reduction  of  the  statutory  liquidity  ratio  (SLR),  opening  a  special  repo  window  under  the 
liquidity  adjustment  facility  (LAF)  for  banks  for  on-lending  to  the  non-banking  financial 
companies  (NBFCs),  housing  finance  companies  (HFCs)  and  mutual  funds  (MFs),  and 
extending a special refinance facility, which banks can access without any collateral. 
Measures aimed at managing forex liquidity included upward adjustment of the interest rate 
ceilings on the foreign currency non-resident (banks) [FCNR(B)] and non-resident (external) 
rupee  account 
the  external  commercial 
borrowings (ECB) regime, allowing the NBFCs and HFCs access to foreign borrowing and 
allowing corporates to buy back foreign currency convertible bonds (FCCBs). In response to 
the knock-on effects of the global economic crisis on the Indian economy, between October 
11,  2008  and  June  29,  2009  the  Reserve  Bank  reduced  CRR  by  a  cumulative  400  basis 
points  to  5.0  per  cent  of  NDTL  (injecting  thereby  Rs.1.6  trillion  to  the  banking  system), 
lowered  repo  rate  by  425  basis  points  to  4.75  per  cent  from  9  per  cent,  and  adjusted  the 
reverse  repo  rate  downwards  by  275  basis  points  from  6.0  per  cent  to  3.25  per  cent. 
Potential liquidity made available by RBI is about Rs.5.6 trillion, or equivalent of 9 percent of 
India’s GDP. 
[NR(E)RA]  deposits,  substantially  relaxing 
The impact of RBI’s measures in restoring orderly conditions in the financial markets 
Responding to the ample liquidity created and sustained by the RBI, the interbank call rate 
reverted  to  within  the  LAF  corridor,  and  since  November  2008  the  RBI  is  again  into 
absorption mode, signifying the persistence of surplus in the market. In the recent months 
the daily average reverse repo absorption has been about Rs.1.2 trillion. The exchange rate 
has also appreciated from the low of around Rs.52 per US dollar in March 2009 to around 
Rs. 48 per US dollar in last few months. Quick restoration of normalcy to money and forex 
market, thus, contributed significantly to avoid any stress in the financial system as a source 
of  risk  to  the  real  economy.  Despite  a  sound  financial  system  and  normally  functioning 
markets, however, the global contagion affected the growth prospects of the economy. 
Growth deceleration and the fiscal stimulus 
In the last two quarters of 2008-09, GDP growth in India decelerated to 5.8 per cent, driven 
by sharp moderation in private consumption demand and weakness in investment demand, 
primarily  on  account  of  the  impact  of  heightened  uncertainty  on  consumer  and  investment 
6 
 BIS Review 116/2009
confidence.  Given  the  capacity  already  created  for  about  9  per  cent  growth,  decline  in 
aggregate  demand  widened  the  output-gap  (i.e.  the  actual  fell  below  the  potential),  which 
warranted  adequate  expansion  in  Government  demand  to  moderate  the  pace  of  the 
slowdown. This, though, involved deliberate temporary deviation from the fiscal consolidation 
process  embodied  in  the  Fiscal  Responsibility  and  Budget  Management  (FRBM)  Act.  The 
deviation  from  the  fiscal  consolidation  path  was  evident  from  the  revision  to  the  Centre’s 
fiscal deficit target from 2.5 per cent of GDP in the budget to 6.2 per cent in the budget for 
2008-09.  The  combined  fiscal  deficit  (Centre  and  States),  including  the  special  securities 
issued to oil marketing and fertiliser companies, reached 10.7 per cent of GDP in 2008-09. 
The net market borrowings of the Centre and States jumped to Rs.3.46 trillion (7.0 per cent 
of GDP) in 2008-09 from Rs.1.66 trillion (3.8 per cent of GDP) in 2007-08. The expansionary 
fiscal stance had to be sustained in 2009-10 to support a faster economic recovery, which 
was reflected in further increase in budgeted net borrowing programme (of the Centre and 
states taken together) to Rs.5.38 trillion in 2009-10. 
The  Reserve  Bank,  as  the  manager  of  the  borrowing  programme  of  the  Government,  has 
ensured smooth completion of the large borrowings so far, and its accommodative monetary 
stance, given the subdued demand for credit from the private sector has largely helped in 
this regard. To help in faster recovery, revival in demand for credit from the private sector 
would be important, and the RBI has been highlighting to the commercial banks the need for 
improving  the  flow  of  credit  for  all  genuine  productive  activities,  without  compromising  on 
credit quality. Certain counter-cyclical regulatory changes have also been effected to support 
this objective, which include reduction in general provisioning requirement, relaxation on risk 
weights for certain assets, and temporary restructuring option for certain loans. 
The emerging policy challenges and the balance of risks to the growth outlook 
Early  return  to  the  fiscal  consolidation  path,  and  exit  from  the  expansionary  fiscal  and 
accommodative monetary policy remain the key challenge. The challenge has to  be seen, 
however,  in  the  context  of  the  ultimate  objective,  which  is  faster  and  durable  recovery  in 
growth.  The  costs  of  delay  in  timely  exit  are  being  discussed  now;  but  there  are  costs  of 
delay in economic recovery as well. The policy choices are becoming increasingly complex 
for  the  RBI,  as  signs  of  recovery  in  growth  are  still  tentative,  whereas  inflation  is  clearly 
firming up.  
In  terms  of  recent  signs  of  improving  growth  prospects,  one  could  see  the  recovery  in 
industrial output during April-July 2009, GDP growth for the first quarter of 2009-10 at 6.1 per 
cent turning out to be better than 5.8 per cent experienced during the last two quarters of 
2008-09, higher relative growth in core infrastructure sector during April-July 2009, revival in 
capital  inflows,  strong  recovery  in  the  stock  market  over  the  end  March  2009  level,  and 
increasing IPOs with large over-subscription. The downside risks include the impact of the 
deficient monsoon on agricultural growth, decline in exports for the 10th successive month 
up  to  July  2009  because  of  the  persistent  global  recession,  decline  in  tourist  arrivals  in 
August  2009-partly  on  account  of  the  swine  flu  fear,  and  more  importantly  the  rising 
inflationary  pressures  that  could  limit  the  scope  for  sustained  growth  supportive  monetary 
policy stance. The RBI’s current growth outlook remains at 6 per cent with an upward bias. 
The medium-term objective, though, is to revert to the high growth path of around 9 per cent. 
This growth trajectory also should be inclusive with low and stable inflation. 
Opportunities in the post crisis period 
Every  major  crisis  exposes  the  limitations  and  rigidities  of  the  existing  systems,  thereby 
creating  compelling  pressures  on  the  authorities  to  reform  and  restructure.  This  global 
financial  crisis  will  provide  the  trigger  for  major  revamping  of  the  financial  stability 
architectures  around  the  world,  besides  fostering  better  governance  of  the  globalization 
BIS Review 116/2009 
 7
  process and encouraging relevant cooperation among national policy makers. The key areas 
that could strengthen the financial stability architecture, as agreed in the recent G-20 meeting 
in London, include: 
• 
More and better quality capital as the best first line of defense against financial crisis; 
introduction  of  countercyclical  buffers  during  good  times  to  strengthen  resilience 
during bad times; and use of a leverage ratio as an element of the Basel framework 
while further strengthening the risk based capital requirement.  
Consistent  and  coordinated  implementation  of  international  standards,  including 
Basel II, to prevent the emergence of new risks and regulatory arbitrage, particularly 
with regard to Central Counterparties for credit derivatives, oversight of credit ratings 
agencies and hedge funds, and quantitative retention requirements for securitisation.  
Convergence  towards  a  single  set  of  high-quality,  global,  independent  accounting 
standards  on 
loan-loss  provisioning,  off-balance  sheet 
exposures and the impairment and valuation of financial assets.  
Stronger regulation and oversight for systemically important firms.  
instruments, 
financial 
• 
For countries like India and Sri Lanka, the growth opportunities are almost limitless, given our 
current levels of development from where we have to catch up with the welfare and income 
levels of the advanced economies. Large sections of the population contribute much below 
their potential because of lack of opportunities, and if the policy environment could recognize 
the gaps and provide the right opportunities with appropriate incentives, the growth prospects 
could improve significantly. A global crisis of this magnitude does not help in creating and 
expanding opportunities for around more than 2 billion population in the world who live under 
abject  poverty.  That  is  an  important  reason  why  countries  like  India  and  Sri  Lanka  must 
demand  a  better  global  governance  system  to  manage  the  challenges  of  globalisation. 
Moreover, the ambitious fail-proof financial stability architecture that may emerge in the post-
crisis period should also emphasize financial inclusion, since financial system is a potential 
key  channel  for  offering  the  opportunity  that  could  make  a  large  section  of  the  population 
realise their potential. India has the opportunity to reap the demographic dividend, because 
of  its  demography  in  favour  of  a  large  young  population;  estimates  suggest  that  by  2020 
average age of the Indian population could be as low as 30. The demographic dividend, it 
has been viewed, could become a demographic curse, unless opportunities are created for 
everybody,  with  a  sense  of  participation  by  all  in  the  development  process.  Finance, 
therefore,  has  a  key  role  in  addressing  this  challenge,  unlike  the  role  of  finance  we 
experienced  in  the  financial  systems  of  the  advanced  economies  where  a  few  could 
maximize individual returns but easily socialize the costs of their actions. 
Concluding observations 
We have a collective responsibility in ensuring a sound and stable financial system, so as to 
be  able  to  contribute  better  to  sustainable  growth  and  economic  development.  The  link 
between  finance  and  growth  must  be  strengthened,  and  we  must  realise  that  finance  is  a 
means to economic growth and development; it is not an end in itself. The tendency among 
some to use the financial systems as a casino must be curbed, both through strengthened 
regulations and better management of distorted incentives among market participants. 
It is not easy to draw the optimal line between right regulations andfree markets. No regulator 
would  deliberately  stifle  financial  innovations  unless  the  perceived  risks  outweigh  the 
benefits. In a free market economy, however, financial innovations may be driven by what 
the  market  wants,  rather  than  by  what  may  be  necessary  for  the  economy.  Freedom 
increases  the  scope  for  misuse,  but  freedom  is  also  necessary  for  promoting  growth  and 
providing opportunities. Financial crises have been the results of actions of human beings, 
who  are  driven  by  greed  and  the  dangerous  drive  to  remain  ahead  of  the  peers  in  the 
8 
 BIS Review 116/2009
financial market by maximizing returns through destructive financial engineering. No amount 
of regulatory response, whether at the national or global level, thus, could be a guarantee 
against  future  crises  as  long  as  human  beings  have  to  manage  and  run  the  financial 
systems. 
Way back in 1936 Keynes had highlighted the role of “Animal Spirit” in human beings, i.e. 
their spontaneous optimism, the spontaneous urge for action rather than inaction. In 2009, 
we have now the book by Akerlof and Shiller titled “Animal Spirits: How human psychology 
drives the economy, and why it matters for global capitalism”, where they highlight the role of 
“non-economic motives” in explaining the crisis. Much of the prosperity in market economies 
has been possible because of the animal spirit, and regulations should not suppress animal 
spirit, just because of the potential risks of instability and crisis. The excesses in the financial 
systems often create a natural process of creative destruction, which surfaces in the form of 
a crisis to ensure a forced clean-up of the systems. In the process of evolution of financial 
systems, regulatory and supervisory architectures help in preventing crises as long as sound 
principles  are  generally  adhered  to.  When  unsound  practices  lead  to  a  crisis,  the  creative 
destruction  process  makes  the  systems  not  only  to  recover  from  the  crisis  but  also  to 
become more robust and full-proof. The global crisis has offered the opportunity to revisit the 
conventional wisdom in many areas and the future approach to financial sector reforms as 
well as supervision must be guided by the primary objective of making the financial sector 
serve  the  needs  of  the  real  economy.  I  do  hope  that  all  of  us  will  take  advantage  of  the 
opportunities  unleashed  in  various  sectors  and  move  towards  the  direction  of  “inclusive 
growth”. 
Thank you. 
References 
Akerlof,  George  A.  and  Robert  J.  Shiller  (2009),  “Animal  Spirits:  How  human  psychology 
drives the economy, and why it matters for the global capitalism”, Princeton University Press. 
Batra, Ravi (2005), “Greenspan’s Fraud: How two decades of his policies have undermined 
the global economy”, Macmillan. 
Fleckenstein, William A (2008), “Greenspan Bubbles: The Age of Ignorance at the Federal 
Reserve”, McGraw Hill. 
Greenspan, Alan (2009), www.centralbanking.com (Central Banking News Desk, 09.09.09). 
Keynes, John Maynard (1936), “The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money”, 
London and New York. 
Landau, Jean-Pierre (2009), “Complexity and the Financial Crisis”, Deputy Governor of the 
Bank of France, Speech delivered at the Conference organized by Bank of France and the 
Deutsche Bundesbank on June 08, 2009. 
Mian, Atif R and Amir Sufi (2009), “House Prices, home equity based borrowing, and the US 
household leverage crisis”, Chicago Booth Research Paper No.09-20, July 5. 
Smaghi,  Lorenzo  Bini  (2008),  “Financial  Stability  and  Monetary  Policy-  Challenges  in  the 
Current Turmoil”, Speech delivered at the ECB, CEPS joint event with Harvard law School on 
the EU-US Financial System at New York on April 04, 2008. 
Subbarao, D. (2009), “Global financial crisis – questing the questions”, JRD Tata Memorial 
Lecture at the meeting of The Associated Chambers of Commerce and Industry of Indio at 
New Delhi on July 31, 2009. 
BIS Review 116/2009 
 9
