Fatos Ibrahimi: Development of small and medium-sized enterprises in 
Albania  
Speech  by  Mr  Fatos  Ibrahimi,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  meeting  of 
launching  the  "Program  on  the  Development  of  the  Small  and  Medium-sized  Enterprises", 
Tirana, 20 January 2009. 
 Your Excellency Mr. Ambassador, 
Honourable Mr. Ministers, 
Honourable participants, 
It is a special pleasure for me to attend this event and I avail myself of the opportunity to 
greet  on  behalf  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  this  joint  recent  initiative,  between  the  Ministry  of 
Economy  and  the  Italian  Collaboration.  The  financial  support  of  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises  has  a  particular  importance  for  the  development  of  this  project  and  for  the 
release of managing abilities of the economic units. The financing of small enterprises, for 
the  small  developing  economies,  is  a  worthy  opportunity  to  increase both  the  employment 
and the economic activity based on the initiative, ideas and producing capabilities of small 
groups  or  of  distinguished  individuals,  who  owns  the  courage  and  knowledge  to  generate 
material  goods  and  to  increase  the  welfare  of  the  society.  The  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises in Albania, over the transition period, have been growing with quick steps, hence 
showing up as a distinguished characteristic of the whole Albanian transition, having survived 
to  the  domestic  economic  difficulties  as  the  fall  of  pyramid  schemes  or  other  problems 
related to the reforms and the process of completing the institutional and legal framework. 
The  contribution  of  small  enterprises  to  the  growth  of  service,  construction,  trade  and 
agriculture sectors, where micro-enterprises compose the largest part of this group, has been 
obviously significant for the short-term and stable revival of the Albanian economy. 
These enterprises have provided a substantial input to the decrease of unemployment and to 
the rise of productivity in the aforementioned economic activities, with a considerable impact 
for the quick growth of the Albanian economy. The domestic economy is noticeably improved 
over the last decade and the progress made over an expanded period of these last years 
reflects a positive and relatively stable macroeconomic environment. The growth rhythms of 
real GDP, are assessed as plausible, and in general higher compared to the other countries 
of the region. The consumer price level as well, has resulted in compliance with the target of 
the central bank for the price stability. “The calmness” of the external factors that struck the 
supply  reaction  and  the  domestic  macroeconomic  stability,  provided  the  inflation  rate  be 
normalised  within  the  targeted  limits.  The  developments  occurring  in  the  exchange  rate 
already are perceived as stable compared to its high fluctuations characterising the ’90s. In 
the view of domestic currency against the main foreign currencies basket, LEK has appeared 
with appreciation tendencies on continual basis during an extensive period, thus acting as a 
softer against the imported inflation. 
Estimations  carried  out  at  the  Bank  of  Albania  reveal  that  the  relative  high  growth  of  real 
GDP during the period 2003-2007 is endowed to the rise of work productivity as well as to 
the increase of investments in the economy. 
Simultaneously,  banking  system  is  expanded  with  detectable  and  confident  steps.  The 
situation appears also pleasurable regarding banking credit to the private sector. Business 
credit  has  played  the  main  contribution  to  the  enlargement  of  banking  credit  portfolio,  by 
66%. The augmentation of this portfolio is considered to have impacted positively the growth 
of economic activity for the main sectors. In September 2008, credit portfolio was dominated 
from the lending to trade sector (around 25%), to construction (around 15%) and to industry 
(over  than  15%).  The  credit  to  small  and  medium-sized  enterprises  as  at  November  2008 
BIS Review 7/2009 
 1
resulted  at  60%  higher  than  the  year  end  2006,  based  on  the  calculations  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania, hence being a ratio over the half of the bank total credit granted to the business. 
Thus, crediting activity of banking system has supported the growth in the main sectors of 
economy  and  has  assisted  to  the  further  deepening  of  the  financial  intermediation.  This 
support  is  identified  in the  larger  geographic  expansion  of  them  as  well  as  in  the  services 
gamma and the improvement of products supplied by the financial system. 
The today initiative is a significant event, to sustain the growth of financing for this vital part 
of  the  economy  and  it  will  help  to  soften  the  negative  impacts  of  the  world  economy 
slowdown. I encourage the banking system and the other players of the market to undertake 
similar  initiatives  in  order  to  not  impede  the  financing  of  small  projects,  which  owns  the 
possibility to be transformed into profitable enterprises. At the same time to maintain a stable 
and  long-term  progress  of  the  country,  in  line  with  its  European  aspirations,  the  banking 
system  should  go  on  the  way  toward  the  perfection  of  service  versus  the  clients,  the 
intensification of communication and public education. 
Bank of Albania believes that the sources of the stable growth for the mid-term and long-term 
period  consist  not  only  on  the  encouragement  of  the  work  productivity  increase  or  of  the 
investments in industry and construction, but also in other strategic sectors. For the Albanian 
economy as a developing economy, domestic investments and foreign direct investments in 
strategic  sectors  as  tourism  and  infrastructure  shall  be  a  real  foundation  to  the  economic 
growth.  The  positive  chain  effects  are  expected  to  be  reflected  on  the  preservation  of  the 
steady  growth  rhythms.  Hence,  the  overall  macroeconomic  stability  will  be  seen  as  a 
precondition in promoting the further intensification of the domestic and foreign investments. 
At the closure, the continuation of reforms and of the indispensable structural improvements 
will  bring  about  positive  and  long-term  outcomes  for  the  establishment  of  a  more  secure 
climate for the domestic and foreign business investments. 
Thanking  you  once  again  for  the  invitation,  I  wish  you  good  proceedings  of  this  important 
event for the development of the business in Albania. 
2 
 BIS Review 7/2009
