Masaaki Shirakawa: International banks amid global financial crisis 
Address by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Information Forum 
of the International Bankers Association, Tokyo, 27 January 2009. 
 Introduction 
1. 
I  am  honored  to  be  given  the  opportunity  today  to  address  the  Information  Forum  of  the 
International Bankers Association (IBA). I was told that this is the first time for the Governor 
of the Bank of Japan to address the Forum of this Association. And it might be an opportune 
moment,  perhaps  the  most  appropriate  in  your  25-year  history,  when  the  turmoil  in  global 
financial and capital markets remains and financial institutions and central banks are faced 
with various challenges. 
As  an  association  of international  financial groups,  commercial  banks,  securities  firms  and 
representative  offices  in  Japan,  the  International  Bankers  Association  was  established  25 
years  ago.  Since  then  it  has  been  making  efforts  to  exchange  views  between  member 
financial  institutions  and  to  enhance  their  dialogue  with  the  Japanese  authorities.  Through 
those activities, the association has contributed substantially to the development of Japan’s 
economy  and  financial  markets.  Before  starting  my  speech,  I  express  my  respect  for  the 
efforts you have been making over the years. 
In  my  speech  today,  I  will  briefly  refer  to  the  roles  that  international  banks  including  other 
financial  institutions  play  in  Japan.  I  will,  then,  look  back  on  the  developments  in  financial 
markets  at  home  and  abroad  since  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  followed  by  policy 
responses  by  the  Bank  of  Japan  and  lessons  for  the  activities  of  international  banks, 
especially the importance of liquidity management. In conclusion, I will touch on the roles and 
challenges of the Bank of Japan to ensure financial system stability. 
Roles of international banks in Japan 
2.  
I begin with talking about the history of international banks in Japan. While the National Bank 
Act  was  enacted  in  Japan  in  1872  and  the  Bank  of  Japan  was  established  in  1882, 
international banks first operated in Japan in 1863, five years before the Meiji Restoration. 
Last year marked a memorable 150th anniversary of treaty of commerce between Japan and 
western countries, and for Japan that started international trade at the end of the Edo era, a 
means of trade settlement with overseas countries was needed first. At the time, it was the 
international banks in Japan that carried out the trade settlement functions by way of foreign 
exchange.  Yukichi  Fukuzawa,  who  is  on  a  ten  thousand  yen  bill  and  the  leading  educator 
toward  the  end  of  the  Edo  era  and  the  Meiji  era,  sailed  across  the  Pacific  Ocean  to  the 
United  States  in  1860 as  a  member  of  an  official  mission  of  Japanese  government.  In  his 
autobiography, he referred to an episode that cash bags filled with travel expenses were torn 
in a great storm and greenbacks were scattered inside the cabin. Only four years later, on a 
government’s mission to Europe in 1864, the international banks in Japan prepared foreign 
exchange  money  orders  so  that  the  mission  members  could  cover  their  travel  expenses 
without  physically  carrying  cash.  While  it  is  only  a  small  episode  in  the  beginning  of  the 
modern banking system in Japan, it demonstrated that international banks were the pioneers 
of modern financial services in Japan. 
Since then, international banks have played important roles in Japan’s financial markets in 
various  aspects  including  adoption  of  new  financial  techniques,  discovery  of  new  markets, 
and introduction of advanced risk management. In fact, while the share of international banks 
in  loans  and  deposits only  accounts  for  about  one  percent,  the latest survey  conducted  in 
April  2007  showed  that,  the  share  of  international  banks  was  67%  in  foreign  exchange 
BIS Review 10/2009 
 1
transactions  and  68  %  in  derivatives  transactions.  The  share  is  also  high  in  call  market 
funding and, especially before the outbreak of the subprime mortgage loan problem in the 
summer of 2007, it amounted to about 40%. 
The presence of international banks is also evident in terms of the banking operations of the 
Bank of Japan. The Bank currently has current account transactions with 64 banks and 18 
securities  firms  which  are  from  other  countries.  The  international  banks’  settlements  using 
current accounts of the Bank are about 17 trillion yen in value and about 13,000 in number of 
transactions  per  business  day,  which  are  13%  and  25%  of  the  total,  respectively. 
Furthermore, international banks play a key role in daily open market operations by the Bank. 
For example, in the Bank’s primary funds-supplying operations against pooled collateral at 
the head office, there are 17 international banks in 39 eligible counterparties. 
At  the  same  time,  the  increased  presence  of  international  banks  suggests  that  the 
developments  in  overseas  financial  markets  and  the  activities  of  overseas  financial 
institutions are exerting a stronger influence than in the past on the host country’s economy. 
A good example is the recent developments in Central and Eastern European countries. In 
those countries, European banks outside the region have recently played important roles in 
the  financial  systems.  However,  amid  the  current  crisis,  those  European  banks’  lending  to 
local firms declined rapidly and that partly accounted for the deterioration of economic activity 
in that region. 
Such situation is, to some degree, also relevant to Japan. International banks have been the 
dominant liquidity provider to Japan’s real estate market for the last several years. However, 
since around autumn 2007, real estate business of those international banks rapidly shrank, 
which  led  to  a  decline  in  transactions  in  the  real  estate  market.  In  addition,  international 
banks  have  been  showing  a  strong  presence  in  the  field  in  which  Japanese  financial 
institutions  have  not  been  necessarily  involved  enough,  such  as  securitization  business, 
private  equity  business  for  bad  loans,  M&As,  and  long-term  lending  to  local  governments. 
However, the presence has been changing as international banks’ liquidity constraints have 
become acute. 
3.  
Financial and capital markets since the collapse of Lehman Brothers 
Global economy and global financial markets 
Now  let  me  turn  to  the  developments  in  global  financial  and  capital  markets.  Since  the 
collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  the  global  economy  and  financial  markets  have  changed 
dramatically.  The  fourth  quarter  figures  for  GDP,  industrial  production,  and  exports  have 
started  to  be  released  in  various  countries,  and  a  sharp  decline  that  could  be  indeed 
expressed as “jump off a cliff” has been witnessed simultaneously worldwide. The Bank of 
Japan  released  last  week  the  economic  outlook,  and  the  median  forecast  of  Japan’s 
economic  growth  for  fiscal  2009  among  Policy  Board  members  was  substantially  revised 
downward from 0.6% as of end-October 2008 to -2.0%. 
The principal factor behind the simultaneous and rapid slump of the global economy since 
autumn last year was the mounting global financial crisis triggered by the collapse of Lehman 
Brothers. 
The  first  phenomenon  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  was  the  growing  concern  for 
counterparty  risk  in  funding  markets  and  associated  malfunctioning  of  those  markets. 
Consequently, the volume of transactions plunged and market liquidity declined not only in 
uncollateralized  markets,  but  also  in  collateralized  ones  such  as  foreign  exchange  swap 
market.  Against  such  a  backdrop,  the  functioning  of  credit  market  declined,  and  private 
economic agents suffered in their fund-raising. Banks faced liquidity concern in addition to 
the losses and the capital shortage, and their lending stance became cautious. The declined 
functioning of the financial system exerted a negative impact on economic activity, which in 
2 
 BIS Review 10/2009
turn  adversely  affected  the  asset  quality  of  financial  institutions  and  investors.  What  is 
happening now is the adverse feedback loop between the financial system and the economy. 
The global economy is facing difficult challenges, and such a situation is attributable to the 
phenomenon that leverages markedly increased around the globe in the periods preceding 
the  current  financial  crisis.  Consequently,  what  is  necessary  now  is  the  unwinding  of 
excessive leverages, or de-leveraging, so to speak. Without that, it is difficult to expect full-
fledge recovery of the global economy. At the same time, if de-leveraging evolves rapidly and 
the provision of credit to private firms and household sector shrinks substantially, economic 
activity contracts sharply. To bring the global economy back onto a sustainable growth path, 
a  delicate  balance  would  be  required  between  encouraging  unwinding  of  excessive 
leveraging and preventing that unwinding from evolving too rapidly within a short period of 
time. 
Domestic financial markets 
The  turmoil  in  global  financial  markets  also  had  a  substantial  impact  on  Japan’s  financial 
markets. Before the collapse of Lehman Brothers, both the short-term money market and the 
credit  market  in  Japan  were  relatively  stable,  reflecting  the  fact  that  Japan’s  financial 
institutions’ exposure to structural products was relatively small. Rather, such relative stability 
increased  the  attractiveness  of  Japan’s  financial  markets  internationally  as  fund-raising 
markets, and yen funding by non-residents became active during the preceding periods up to 
the collapse of Lehman Brothers, as shown in issuing samurai bonds 40 percent more year-
on-year basis. However, situation of domestic financial markets literally changed dramatically 
by the collapse of Lehman Brothers. 
The first change was the funding difficulties of international banks in the yen money market 
due to growing concern for counterparty risk. In the uncollateralized call market, funding by 
international  banks  became  difficult  amid  declining  market  liquidity,  and  the  two-tiering  of 
interest rate emerged that the funding rates of international banks became higher relative to 
domestic  financial  institutions.  Also  in  the  collateralized  money  market,  such  as  the  repo 
market,  the  tendency  to  avoid  transactions  with  international  banks  became  widespread. 
After the burst of the bubble economy, concerns were expressed about the creditworthiness 
of  Japan’s  financial  institutions  in  overseas  markets  and  they  faced  a  so-called  Japan 
premium in dollar funding in late 1990s. The opposite took place this time. 
The second change is the distortion of pricing, or dislocation, due to the decline in market 
liquidity. That is obvious at a glance by looking at JGB’s yield curve, the pricing of the floating 
rate  JGB  and  inflation-linked  JGB,  and  swap  spread  which  is  the  difference  between  the 
swap  rate  and  JGB  yield.  Before  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  international  investors 
including  hedge  funds  played  a  role  of  market  liquidity  provider  through  arbitrage 
transactions. However, after the collapse, their arbitrage transactions became inactive due to 
the decline in risk-taking capability, and market liquidity declined substantially. 
The third change is the declined functioning of domestic CP and corporate bond markets. In 
the CP market, issuance suddenly became difficult and the issuing rate has risen to a level 
above  that  of  the  financial  crisis in  1998.  In  the  corporate  bond  market,  issuance  by  firms 
rated  single  A  or  below  has  virtually  been  suspended.  In  addition,  the  new  issuance  of 
samurai bonds, which had been steady up to last summer, remained almost suspended. 
Policy responses by the Bank of Japan 
4.  
In response to those rapid changes in conditions, the Bank has been promptly taking various 
measures since last autumn. 
The  measures  taken  by  the  Bank  are  classified  broadly  into  three  categories.  The  first 
category  is  the  cut  of  the  policy  rate.  The  Bank  lowered  its  target  for  the  uncollateralized 
BIS Review 10/2009 
 3
overnight call rate last October and December by 0.2 percent, respectively, to 0.1 percent. 
The second category is various measures to ensure financial market stability. The substantial 
provision of yen liquidity and US dollar funds-supplying operations fall into this category. The 
third  category  includes  measures  to  facilitate  corporate  financing.  Those  include  the 
expansion  of  eligible  collateral  related  to  corporate  debts,  and  special  funds-supplying 
operations  to  facilitate  corporate  financing,  which  are  low  interest  rate  funds-supplying 
operations against corporate debts as collateral. In addition, while extraordinary for a central 
bank,  the  Bank  starts  outright  purchases  of  CP  from  the  end  of  this  month.  While  the 
measures  I  have  just  mentioned  are  all  important,  let  me  explain  in  more  detail  about  the 
policy measures to maintain financial market stability and outright purchases of CP. 
Substantial liquidity provision to ensure stability of financial markets 
What is crucially important in a financial crisis is to maintain financial system stability. In that 
regard, Japan has a bitter experience. In autumn 1997, the default of a mid-sized securities 
firm in the interbank money market triggered rapid shrinking in market transactions. Once the 
confidence, which is basic premise of financial market transactions, collapses, its recovery 
takes  time,  resulting  in  substantial  damage  to  the  economy.  The  developments  in  global 
financial markets and the global economy since the collapse of Lehman Brothers bring me a 
sense of deja vu of what happened in Japan 10 years ago but on a worldwide scale. 
To maintain financial market stability amid financial crisis, substantial liquidity provision by a 
central bank is indispensable. In that regard, the Bank has taken various measures. 
First, the Bank has been striving for aggressive liquidity provision to maintain the stability of 
the domestic yen fund market. The introduction of a facility to pay interests on the reserves in 
October last year enabled the Bank to aggressively provide yen liquidity, without affecting the 
level of the call rate that is set based on monetary policy considerations. 
Second,  the  Bank  started  US  dollar  funds-supplying  operations  in  Japan.  The  US  dollar 
provision by central banks of countries other than the United States had been conducted by 
the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank since the end of 2007. Given that 
functioning  of  foreign  exchange  swap  market  also  declined  in  Japan  since  the  collapse  of 
Lehman Brothers, the Bank started the US dollar-supplying operations, in close coordination 
with  the  U.S.  and  other  major  central  banks.  The  Bank  obtained  necessary  US  dollars 
through  swap  transactions  with  the  Federal  Reserve.  In  the  current  global  financial  crisis, 
swap transactions between central banks have been used for securing non-dollar currencies 
as well, and, as a temporary measure until the end of April 2009, the Bank of Japan and the 
Bank of Korea increased the maximum amount of the bilateral yen-won swap arrangement 
from three billion US dollars equivalent to twenty billion US dollars equivalent. The temporary 
increase strengthened the Bank of Korea’s capacity to immediately supply yen funds when 
Korean financial institutions urgently need the yen. 
Measures to facilitate corporate financing 
For central banks, those liquidity provisions are orthodox responses to a financial crisis. By 
contrast, the outright purchases of CP entail an effect of facilitating corporate financing and 
containing the contraction of economic activity through mitigating the fear of liquidity dry-up, 
which firms worry. In fact, since the announcement of the measure in December, the issuing 
environment of CP has somewhat improved. However, the outright purchases of CP are an 
extraordinary measure in that a central bank directly shoulders credit risk of individual firms. 
The  premise  of  free  market  economy  is  that  central  banks  provide  liquidity  at  large,  and 
private financial institutions and financial markets perform the function of individual resources 
and credit allocations. For that reason, it is essential to clarify the basic principles in what 
cases  a  central  bank  carries  out  such  extraordinary  measures.  The  first  principle  is  that  a 
significant  decline  in  the  market  functioning  of  corporate  financing  is  observed,  leading  to 
tight  corporate  financing  conditions  on  the  whole.  The  second  principle  is  that  the  outright 
4 
 BIS Review 10/2009
purchases  of  corporate  financing  instruments  are  judged  necessary  in  light  of  the  Bank’s 
mission to ensure price stability and financial system stability. 
Even  in  the  cases  in  which  a  central  bank’s  outright  purchases  of  corporate  financing 
instruments  are  judged  as  necessary,  based  on  the  principles  I  have  just  mentioned,  very 
careful design is required in actual implementation. Deep involvement  of a central bank in 
credit  allocation  of  individual  financial  markets  and  individual  firms  might  lead  to  a 
paradoxical consequence, such that markets which are functioning relatively normally would 
be  impaired  by  the  central  bank’s  own  action.  In  that  regard,  it  is  not  the  case  that  more 
purchases  are  more  effective.  In  addition,  if  the  central  bank  incurs  losses,  it  might 
undermine confidence of general public in the central bank’s policy conduct and ultimately in 
the  currency.  Keeping  those  points  in  mind,  the  Bank  has  laid  out  three  elements  to  be 
considered.  The  first  element  is  a  perspective  of  neutrality,  which  prevents  discretionary 
credit allocation to individual firms. The second is to conduct the purchases for a necessary 
period  and  on  an  appropriate  scale.  That  would  ensure  that  the  purchases  are  a  bridging 
measure  until  the  market  function  recovers.  The  third  is  to  ensure  the  Bank’s  financial 
soundness. Since the losses of the purchases impose costs on taxpayers, it is important to 
avoid the concentration of credit risks in a specific firm. 
The  specifics  of  the  CP  purchasing  scheme  is  as  follows.  From  the  first  perspective  of 
neutrality for credit allocation, the Bank will purchase from financial institutions that are the 
counterparties of the Bank by fair and transparent means of competitive auctions. In addition, 
from the second perspective, the purchases will be conducted for a limited time up to March 
this year, and the Bank uses an auction in which somewhat a high minimum bid rate is set. 
The minimum bid rate is set to be more favorable than the market interest rates when the 
market  is  malfunctioning,  but  not  more  favorable  than  the  market  interest  rates  of  normal 
times.  With  this  setting,  bids  will  naturally  decrease  in  number  as  the  market  function 
recovers. In addition, from the third perspective of ensuring the Bank’s financial strength, the 
Bank will purchase a-1 rated CP that are eligible as the Bank’s collateral, with setting upper 
limits by each individual firm. Keeping in mind that the outright purchases could be a means 
of meeting firms’ funding needs including the redemption of corporate bonds toward the end 
of a fiscal year, the total amount to be purchased is set so as not to exceed three trillion yen 
and will be temporarily conducted until the end of March this year. The actual purchases of 
CP will start this month. In addition, the Bank is now considering the outright purchases of 
corporate bonds with a remaining maturity of up to one year. 
5.  
Lessons for financial institutions’ international activities: importance of 
liquidity management 
Next, by changing the subject, in light of the impact of the current global financial crisis on 
financial  institutions’  businesses,  especially  on  international  activities  including  those  of 
overseas bases, let me consider what kind of lessons should be drawn. Here I focus on the 
importance of liquidity management, which is deemed particularly important. 
The importance of liquidity management 
The first lesson is that, it is necessary to keep remembering that a notion “liquidity is always 
there”  would  not  hold.  In  retrospect,  a  situation  that  could  be  characterized  as  “abundant 
liquidity” continued for several years preceding the current crisis. Here, “abundant liquidity” 
does not only mean the level of cash, but also includes a sense of reassurance that one can 
obtain funds anytime and a sense of reassurance for market liquidity that financial assets can 
be  sold  anytime  at  prevailing  market  price.  However,  as  the  current  financial  crisis  has 
shown,  liquidity  could  suddenly  dry  up.  Once  liquidity  concern  arises,  the  forced  selling  of 
assets occurs as market participants rush to obtain fund liquidity, and the market price will 
diverge from the value of cash flow that the corresponding assets generate. That suggests 
BIS Review 10/2009 
 5
that profits and capital position will be affected by the extent of liquidity as well. In designing 
business models, financial institutions need to recognize the possibility of liquidity dry-up. 
Liquidity management in overseas bases 
The  second  lesson  is  the  importance  of  establishing  a  liquidity  management  system  of 
international  banks  that  conduct  businesses  at  bases  other  than  home  countries.  As 
mentioned  before,  liquidity  cannot  always  be  obtained,  which  reassures  the  importance  of 
retail  deposits  that  are  relatively  stable  funding  source.  In  that  regard,  for  internationally 
active financial institutions, it would not be easy to take such retail deposits from customers 
in countries they operate. In terms of funding structure in Japan, international banks rely their 
funding on foreign exchange swaps, repo transactions, and fund transfer from head offices in 
home countries through intra-office accounts. In any event, the funding in currency other than 
home currency eventually depends heavily on funding conditions in the market. Such line of 
thinking suggests that it is extremely important that the foreign exchange swap market, which 
converts home currency into another country’s currency, is operating normally. The striking 
change in global financial markets after the collapse of Lehman Brothers was the decline in 
the functioning of not only the uncollateralized fund market but also of the foreign exchange 
swap  market,  which  made  it  difficult  to  obtain  funds  in  foreign  currency,  regardless  of 
individual financial institution’s creditworthiness. 
Smooth liquiditiy management by a financial institution cannot be achieved only by using its 
own  cash,  deposits,  and  borrowing  capability.  It  also  depends  on  the  condition  of  market 
liquidity of financial assets. However, if a financial institution tries to secure its liquidity level 
sufficient enough to cope with an extreme stress situation, the financial institution has to hold 
sizable  amount  of  risk  free  and  short-term  financial  assets  and  thus  cannot  pursue  its 
intrinsic  function  of  financial  intermediation.  In  that  context,  liquidity  management  by  a 
financial institution itself, market-level efforts to maintain market liquidity, and proper exercise 
of  the  lender  of  last  resort  function  by  a  central  bank,  would  be  the  three  indispensable 
factors.  With  respect  to  liquidity  management  by  a  financial  institution  itself,  the  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision released a guidance paper on liquidity management last 
September, and there it presented sound practices for enhancing liquidity management by 
conducting appropriate liquidity management, including that of foreign currencies, according 
to the characteristics of each market in which financial institutions operate. 
Importance of improving market infrastructure 
The  third  lesson  is  the  importance  of  improving  the  infrastructure  of  the  market  and  the 
payment  and  settlement  system,  which  is  derived  from  the  aforementioned  perspective  of 
maintaining  market  liquidity.  The  sudden  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  brought  a  state  of 
turmoil into the Japanese financial markets. In particular, the number of settlement failures 
increased in the JGB repo market, which contributed to declining liquidity in the JGB market. 
However, without the efforts in recent years by the market participants and the central banks 
to improve the infrastructure of the market and the payment and settlement system including 
the  establishment  of  clearing  mechanism  in  the  securities  market  such  as  the  Japan 
Government Bond Clearing Corporation (JGBCC), default in the repo market might have had 
a contagion effect on the entire JGB market and the market turmoil could have been much 
more severe. A good example is the scheme for foreign exchange settlement, which is called 
“CLS,” or Continuous Linked Settlement. The  CLS links the payment systems of countries 
and makes a simultaneous payment of a pair of currencies associated with foreign exchange 
trading, which reduces foreign exchange settlement risk. 
While it is hard to win understanding in normal times, the experience since the collapse of 
Lehman  Brothers  suggests  the  importance  of  a  scheme  to  properly  manage  counterparty 
risk. Given the current situation, its importance is recognized anew. At present, in order to 
reduce counterparty risk in the OTC derivatives trading, the discussion on establishing post-
6 
 BIS Review 10/2009
trading  arrangements  for  derivatives  has  also  started  in  Japan.  The  Bank  expects  private 
financial market participants to tackle those issues, and will also actively keep supporting the 
efforts of the market participants to improve the infrastructure of the market and the payment 
and settlement system and to review the market practices. 
The role of the Bank of Japan toward financial system stability 
6.  
The current financial crisis has highlighted various issues and challenges about the conduct 
of  monetary  policy  by  central  banks,  and  the  role  of  financial  institution  supervision  and 
regulation. Let me mention three points about the role of the Bank toward the stability of the 
economy and the financial system. 
A macroprudential perspective 
First is the importance to have a macroprudential perspective in the conduct of policies, be it 
monetary  policy  or  regulation  and  supervision  of  financial  institutions.  To  ensure  financial 
system  stability,  the  main  premise  is  that  financial  institutions  themselves  manage  risks. 
However, the risks inherent in the financial system do not necessarily equal the sum of the 
risks  of  individual  financial  institutions.  Let  me  take  an  example  of  residential  mortgage-
backed  securities  (RMBSs),  securitized  products  that  have  residential  mortgages  as 
underlying  assets,  which  triggered  the  global  financial  crisis.  For  individual  investors,  the 
risks seem to be diversified, thanks to securitization technology, but, if housing prices decline 
on national basis, the risk diversification effect will not work. In addition, it cannot be ignored 
that market liquidity is supported by the entry of many investors attracted by the continuing 
increase  in  housing  prices.  In  other  words,  in  recognizing  necessary  amount  of  capital, 
financial institutions need to take into account liquidity as well. In that context, it is extremely 
important not only to monitor the individual risks of financial institutions or products, but also 
monitor  the  risks  inherent  in  the  financial  system  as  a  whole  from  a  macroprudential 
perspective.  In  such  recognition,  the  Bank  has  been  recently  making  efforts  to  conduct 
research  from  a  macroprudential  perspective  and  disseminate  information,  and  part  of  the 
efforts  is  contained  in  our  Financial  System  Report.  The  Bank  would  like  to  continue  to 
strengthen and exercise its macroprudential function. 
On-site examination and off-site monitoring 
Second  is  the  importance  of  grasping  precisely  the  conditions  of  individual  financial 
institutions, together with holding a macroprudential perspective that I have just mentioned. 
Economic  growth  eventually  materializes  by  combining  labor  and  capital  equipment  in  an 
optimal  way  and  utilizing  the  fruits  of  technological  innovation.  The  function  of  financial 
intermediation supports that process from the financial side. Given this line of thinking, it is 
important  to  steadily  understand  how  funds  are  used  for  what  purposes  and,  in  doing  so, 
whether financial institutions are conducting proper liquidity management. The Bank of Japan 
conducts  both  on-site  examination  and  off-site  monitoring,  and  for  the  central  bank  as  a 
lender of last resort, the current crisis obviously showed the importance that the central bank 
has  hands-on  knowledge.  In  that  regard,  close  liquidity  monitoring  by  the  Bank  has  been 
effective in maintaining the relative stability of Japan’s financial markets. 
In the case of international banks, the Bank’s on-site examination and off-site monitoring are 
conducted for their Japanese branches. However, to find out the potential risk factors and to 
properly evaluate their impact, the Bank needs to deepen the understanding of the financial 
groups’ entire management policy and risk management strategy, the status of the bases in 
Japan within the group, and the governance structure. For those who are here today, I would 
like to seek your understanding and cooperation, more than ever, on the importance of the 
Bank’s on-site and off-site monitoring. 
BIS Review 10/2009 
 7
International cooperation 
Third is the importance of international cooperation. Major central banks have been closely 
exchanging  views  and  information  not  only  at  Governor  levels  but  also  at  staff  levels  with 
respects  to  various  areas  such  as  market  operation,  financial  supervision,  and  settlement 
system. Such cooperation has become greater in the current crisis. The close cooperation is 
not only with the United States and Europe, but also with Asian countries. As expressed in 
the word “globalization,” it is true that financial markets are heading toward standardized and 
seamless  ones.  At  the  same  time,  it  is  also  another  fact  that  plenty  of  seam  and  lumpy 
factors remain. For that reason, the importance of information exchange and cooperation in 
the area of central banking business would be increasing further. 
The Bank of Japan would like to communicate closely with you, conduct appropriate policy 
responses, and actively support market participants’ efforts toward financial system stability. 
Your cooperation is highly appreciated. Thank you very much. 
8 
 BIS Review 10/2009
