Yves Mersch: The crisis – point of view of a central banker 
Speech by Mr Yves Mersch, Governor of the Central Bank of Luxembourg, on the occasion 
of the conference "Bank crisis, then and now", organised by the Chamber of Commerce and 
the Swedish Embassy, Luxembourg, 8 July 2009. 
 I will start by drawing parallels between the current recession and the Great Depression of 
the 1930s. It appears that the world is undergoing an economic and financial shock as big as 
the shock of 1929-1930. Fortunately, we have benefitted from past experience and lessons 
since the Great Depression. As a result, the policy response has been much more rapid and 
effective. In keeping with the principles of crisis management, the goal of aggressive policy 
decisions is to limit the propagation of the crisis and mitigate its impact on the real economy. 
I will describe the reaction of the Eurosystem to the crisis. Consequently, I will examine the 
evolution of output in the euro area and consider the ECB’s macroeconomic projections and 
recommendations for a successful and efficient resolution of the crisis. Lastly, I will discuss 
proposals to mitigate and minimize the occurrence of future crises and threats to economic 
and financial stability. 
The crisis now and the Great Depression 
Globally,  the  current  crisis  path  is  tracking  the  Great  Depression’s.  Eichengreen  and 
O’Rourke have drawn parallels between the current crisis and the Great Depression from a 
 BIS Review 90/2009 
 1
global  perspective.1  While  the  evidence  suggests  that  both  crises  originated  in  the  United 
States, they were transmitted internationally through mechanisms involving trade and capital 
flows, financial linkages and commodity prices. Although it was hoped that Europe and Asia 
could  decouple  from  the  spreading  economic  contagion,  this  view  turned  out  to  be  too 
optimistic. The graphs on the current slide show that, so far, the world industrial production 
path continues to follow closely that of the 1930s decline, while exhibiting no clear evidence 
of widespread “green shoots”. Despite early indications that world trade and stock markets 
appear  to  have  stabilized,  for  the  moment  they,  are  still  following  paths  far  below  the 
historical levels of the Great Depression’s. 
In contrast to the Great Depression, however, the policy response and its impact so 
far allows for some cautious optimism. Experience with crises since the Great Depression 
suggests that this crisis, and its subsequent resolution, require measures taken both at the 
national  and  international  levels.  Those  measures  include  a  prudent  monetary  policy  and 
diverse  economic  policies  that  target  a  range  of  issues,  from  trend  growth  to  the  labour 
market. This time, interest rates have been cut more rapidly and to a lower level than during 
the Great Depression.2 While monetary expansion was more rapid in the run-up to the 2008 
crisis than during the 1925-29 period, the global money supply continues to increase rapidly, 
unlike in 1929 when it leveled off and underwent a subsequent catastrophic decline.3 Finally, 
fiscal  policy  has  also  been  far  more  aggressive  and  targeted  this  time.  As  a  result,  it  is 
already possible to witness some signs of stabilization in economic conditions. 
Response by the Eurosystem 
The  Eurosystem  reacted  to  the  crisis  promptly  and  decisively  by  easing  monetary 
policy  and  embarking  on  a  range  of  “non-standard”  policy  measures.  Several 
exceptional decisions were taken as early as August 9, 2007, long before the true extent of 
the  crisis  became  apparent.  While  preserving  the  overall  objective  of  price  stability,  the 
Eurosystem’s  operational  framework  has  been  modified  and  an  exceptional  set  of  non-
standard policy tools has been adopted. To ease banks’ balance sheet constraints and avoid 
a  “credit  crunch”  and  the  emergence  of  a  systemic  crisis,  the  following  measures, 
unprecedented in nature, scope and magnitude, were adopted: 
• 
The  standard  monetary  policy  tool,  the  interest  rate  on  the  main  refinancing 
operations of the ECB, was lowered 325 basis points since October 2008, which is 
the largest cut ever implemented over such a short period in Europe. The key interest 
rate now stands at 1%, the lowest level since the launch of the Euro. 
Shortly  after  the  breakout  of  the  crisis  in  2007,  the  Eurosystem  provided  additional 
temporary liquidity to banks with immediate liquidity needs.4 In effect, the ECB was 
the first central bank to embark on “non-standard” liquidity management. 
The Eurosystem also engaged in the provisioning of foreign currency swaps with the 
United States Federal Reserve System, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the 
National Bank of Switzerland and the Bank of Canada. Thanks to these agreements, 
euro  area  banks  were  able  to  obtain  foreign  exchange  liquidity  against  collateral 
                                                   
1   “A Tale of Two Depressions”, June 2009, http://www.voxeu.org/index.php?q=node/3421. 
2   Top right graph: GDP-weighted average of central bank discount rates for 7 countries: US, UK, ECB, Japan, 
Sweden, Poland. 
3   Bottom right graph: Money supply for a GDP-weighted average of 19 countries accounting for more than half 
of world GDP in 2004. 
4   The market was provided with €95 billion within few hours through a fixed rate operation with full allotment. 
Overnight lending of the same kind continued over the following three days. 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2009
     eligible  in  Eurosystem  operations.  The  frequency,  volume  and  maturity  of  these 
refinancing operations were continuously increased during 2008. 
Following the default of Lehman Brothers and a virtual halt of interbank trading, the 
Eurosystem switched to a new mode of liquidity provision adopting a “fixed-rate full 
allotment”  tender  procedure  in  open  market  operations.  Thus,  banks  have  been 
granted essentially unlimited liquidity at the key policy interest rate. This is in contrast 
to the practice in normal times, when a predetermined amount of central bank credit 
is auctioned in refinancing operations with short maturity. The interest rate would be 
determined through the competition among bidders. 
In May 2009 the Governing Council extended the maturity range of liquidity-providing 
operations, introducing a new one-year operation.5 
Before onset of the crisis, the list of assets that the Eurosystem accepted as collateral 
was  relatively  large  compared  to  that  of  other  central  banks.  The  Eurosystem  now 
accepts even wider range of securities as collateral.6 
Unlimited  refinancing  against  a  wide  range  of  collateral  at  longer  maturities  was 
coupled  with  an  extended  list  of  counterparties  in  the  Eurosystem's  refinancing 
operations.  More  than  1700  counterparties  were  eligible  before  the  crisis  and  this 
number  rose  even  further  after  changes  in  the  operational  framework  were  agreed 
upon in October 2008. Most recently, the list was extended to include the EIB. 
The last unconventional element of monetary policy added in May 2009 was outright 
purchases of euro-denominated covered bonds issued in the euro area. Before the 
crisis, banks in the euro area used covered bonds as a major source of funding of a 
longer-term nature than the ECB's refinancing operations. However, the market was 
virtually abandoned after the intensification of the crisis last autumn.7 
The positive impact of the measures adopted since the start of the crisis is becoming 
apparent. Money market rates have fallen to record lows in June, reflecting the first one-year 
refinancing operation executed by the Eurosystem. Similarly, loan interest rates charged by 
banks  have  declined.  This  suggests  that  crucial  elements  of  the  monetary  policy 
transmission mechanism continue to work. The Eurosystem's balance sheet shrunk to 15% 
of GDP in May 2009 from its peak of 19% of GDP in December 2008. This appears to be the 
result  of  increasing  money  market  activity,  at  least  at  short  maturities,  and  a  sign  of 
improving confidence. 
Recovery in the euro area 
While  surrounded  by  an  unusual  degree  of  uncertainty,  ECB  macroeconomic 
projections  expect  a  moderate  recovery  in  the  euro  area  in  2010.  The  accompanying 
graph  shows  that  during  the  first  quarter  of  2009,  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area 
weakened considerably. 
                                                 
5   The June auction saw a record demand for €442 billion which may suggest the persistence of some funding 
strains. 
6   The total value of these eligible securities is currently about €12 trillion, or 130% of euro area GDP. 
7   Already the announcement of the program before any purchases were carried out was positively accepted in 
the market and lead to a wave of new issuances and lower spreads. 
BIS Review 90/2009 
 3
 in 
the 
labour  markets; 
However, confidence indicators hint to subtle signs of improvement at very low levels. This 
suggests that the decline in economic activity over the remainder of this year will decelerate, 
and  after  a  stabilization  phase,  moderate  positive  quarterly  growth  rates  are  expected  by 
mid-2010. The recovery will be driven by the macroeconomic stimulus and other measures 
designed to restore the normal functioning of the financial system. For the moment, the risks 
to the economic outlook appear balanced. On the positive side, the macroeconomic stimulus 
might have stronger effect than anticipated and confidence might improve more quickly than 
expected. On the other hand, a range of adverse factors might flatten the recovery path, e.g. 
feedback effects from the turmoil in financial markets on the real economy and vice versa; 
relatively  more  unfavorable  developments 
intensification  of 
protectionist  pressures  or  adverse  developments  in  the  world  economy  stemming  from  a 
disorderly correction of global imbalances. 
Past  experience  shows  that  financial  crises  cause  deep  economic  crises  that  can 
lower the level and growth rate of potential output for a significant period of time. In 
some cases, there has been a protracted loss in output in the aftermath of the slump. For 
example in the case of Finland and Sweden, the recovery of real GDP towards the pre-crisis 
trend level took more than 8 years. A downward shift in the level of potential output might 
occur, for instance, through scrapping or stronger discounting of previous investment (e.g. in 
the automobile and financial sector), or through depreciation of human capital in case of an 
increase in structural unemployment. In addition, there is no guarantee that the economy will 
return to its pre-crisis long-run trend potential output growth rate. The experience of Japan 
suggests that the crisis might have a lasting impact not only on the level of GDP, but also on 
its potential growth rate. A longer term moderation of the rate of growth of potential output 
may occur if a deep recession reduces the growth rate of labour in the long run. This can 
happen if some groups in the labour force are discouraged over time from participating, or if 
the trends in migration flows are reduced. In addition, more restrictive lending practices and 
higher  risk  premia  might  slow  down  investment.  Finally,  there  is  a  risk  that  protectionist 
measures could distort the efficient international allocation of capital. 
The crisis has highlighted the urgency of structural reforms in the labour and product 
markets to limit the crisis’ negative impact on output and employment. The crisis may 
become  a  catalyst  for  the  implementation  of  structural  reforms  to  increase  labour  force 
participation,  enhance  the  flexibility  of  the  labour  market,  improve  human  capital,  increase 
4 
 BIS Review 90/2009
competition in goods and services markets and boost investment in R&D. Reforms can affect 
the level and/or trend growth of the potential output. Without such measures, it might take a 
politically inacceptable amount of time to return to pre-crisis output levels and trend growth 
rates. 
Towards more robust financial framework 
As  stated  earlier,  from  the  early  stages  of  the  ongoing  financial  turbulence,  public 
authorities have sought to identify the weaknesses in the financial system and draw 
lessons to inform policy changes. Policy actions have been geared toward maintaining the 
effective  functioning  of  intermediation  services,  and  to  reinforcing  the  resilience  of  the 
financial  system  and  safeguarding  its  integrity.  In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  highlight  the 
crucial role that central banks and governments from around the globe have played since the 
deepening  of  the  crisis  in  the  autumn  of  2008,  a  period  during  which  the  strains  in  the 
financial sector started to spillover into the real economy. 
Unstable financial markets prompted central banks and governments to take a number 
of  exceptional  measures  beyond  guaranteeing  continued  access  to  liquidity.  Short- 
and medium-term policy objectives were not only to guarantee continued access to liquidity. 
In  fact,  policy  measures  also  swiftly  sought  to  deal  with  impaired  assets  as  well  as 
recapitalizing  viable  institutions  and  swiftly  resolving  non-viable  ones.  It  is  remarkable  that 
this  happened  despite  the  absence  of  a  common  EU  framework  for  crisis  management. 
Governments, for their part, organized a second line of defense against what was qualified 
by the ECB as “systemic solvency risk”. The main measures have included recapitalizations, 
guarantees,  and  asset  support  schemes  for  an  estimated  total  commitment  of  nearly  24 
percent of euro area GDP.8
Beyond  the  short-  and  medium-term  issues,  the  current  crisis  has  highlighted 
substantial structural weaknesses in many areas of the financial system, both in the 
micro and the macro domains. Therefore, many issues are currently under consideration 
at  the  national  and  international  levels  with  the  objective  of  putting  in  place  coordinated, 
focused, and consistent long-term policies to build the foundations of a more resilient global 
financial system. I would like to concentrate on two dimensions which are very relevant from 
a central bank’s perspective, namely liquidity supervision and macro-prudential supervision. 
The crisis has brought to the front the importance of macro-liquidity risk in the global 
financial  system  and  the  need  of  regulating  and  supervising  it.  Any  threat  to  liquidity 
supply has the potential to create adverse effects that can disrupt both the economy and the 
smooth operation of the financial system by triggering discreet changes in asset prices, in the 
capital base of financial institutions, and thus by feedback, onto banks’ funding capacity. As a 
result,  interbank  markets  can  now  become  a  source  of  turbulences,  or  even  exacerbate  a 
crisis, if fundamental uncertainty makes it too costly for banks to assess counterparty risk. 
Until  recently,  public  authorities  did  not  pay  sufficient  attention  to  liquidity  supervision. 
However,  some  governments,  such  as  that  of  Luxembourg,  have  begun  to  close  this 
deficiency  gap.  The  law  of  24th  October  2008  attributes  to  the  Banque  centrale  du 
Luxembourg (BCL) the responsibility of monitoring the general liquidity situation of markets 
as  well  as  evaluating  financial  market  operators’  liquidity  risk.  In  this  context,  liquidity 
supervision by the BCL will be complementary to the prudential supervision carried out by 
the  Commission  de  Surveillance  du  Secteur  Financier  (CSSF)  and  will  require  a  close 
cooperation with the supervision authority 
The crisis has also shown the limits of the financial stability paradigm that restricts 
central banks’ involvement in financial stability to safeguarding the financial system 
                                                 
8   ECB Financial Stability report, June 2009, p. 88. 
BIS Review 90/2009 
 5
and to acting as ultimate providers of emergency liquidity. There is now an international 
consensus that a central bank is well placed to contribute to macro-prudential analysis given 
its inherent function as monetary authority. While micro- and macro-prudential analyses are 
both  tools  used  to  promote  financial  stability,  they  differ  markedly  in  approach  and 
methodology.  Macro-prudential  analysis  treats  aggregate  risk  as  endogenous  and,  unlike 
micro-prudential  analysis,  is  therefore  not  focused  on  the  analysis  and  surveillance  of 
individual  financial  institutions.  For  this  reason,  it  evaluates  systemic  risk  and  considers 
correlations  and  common  exposures  across  institutions  rather  than  within  institutions. 
Contributing to financial stability using such an approach is a natural extension of a central 
bank’s  mandate  under  the  EU  Treaty.  Macro-prudential  supervision  includes  developing 
early warning systems for the analysis and detection of systemic risk as well as conducting 
macro stress-testing exercises on the financial sector. This suggests that central banks can 
readily  undertake  an  active  advisory  role  on  financial  regulation  and  supervision  issues. 
Despite a central bank’s natural involvement in macro-prudential supervision there still exists 
a  need  for  close  cooperation  with  micro-prudential  supervisors  since  effective  macro-
supervision is effected through micro-supervisor’s actions. In addition, and reminiscent of the 
argument in favor of a “twin-peaks” supervisory framework as suggested by the de Larosière 
Group report, central banks’ assessments of macro-prudential risks should be reflected in the 
actions of micro-prudential supervisors. 
Macro-prudential  supervision  will  be  enhanced  by  addressing  the  unintended 
consequences  of  pro-cyclicality  in  financial  markets.  Pro-cyclicality  recognizes  several 
institutional  and  non-institutional  sources.  Institutional  sources  of  pro-cyclicality  include 
leverage  and  the  increase  in  market-sensitive  valuation  techniques  such  as  value-at-risk, 
procyclical haircuts, triggers in over-the-counter derivative contracts, use of mark-to-market 
valuation  techniques  even  in  illiquid  markets,  as  well  as  upfront  recognition  of  profits  in 
structured products even though some risks were retained. During the crisis, pro-cyclicality 
exacerbated  asset  price  changes  as  financial  institutions  attempted  to  sell-off  assets  once 
they  had  exceeded  their  leverage  ratios,  which  in  turn  resulted  in  lowered  market  prices. 
Capitalization  requirements  and  accounting  regulations  subsequently  initiated  a  negative 
feed-back  loop  which  was  intensified  by  adverse  developments  in  the  credit  markets  as 
institutions  were  required  to  mark  their  trading  books  to  market.  As  a  result,  it  became 
necessary for them to either sell more assets to maintain adequate capitalization levels or to 
reduce their loan values. What started as a liquidity problem quickly turned into a solvency 
problem. In this respect, policy measures require a revision of the pro-cyclical elements of 
the Basel II guidelines; the use of stress tests in lieu of value-at-risk for new risks or products 
with a short history; the use of “dynamic provisioning” as introduced by the Bank of Spain, an 
approach  that  involves  building  up  anti-cyclical  buffers  during  expansions  and  offers  the 
possibility  of  drawing  them  down  during  recessions.  In  fine,  the  pro-cyclical  effects  arising 
from  the  interplay  between  leverage  and  valuation  need  to  be  assessed  from  a  financial 
stability perspective. 
Common,  EU-wide  stress  testing  of  the  overall  banking  sector  is  another  area  of 
regulation in which central banks can perform an important role. The objective of stress 
testing is to assess the resilience of the banking sector along with its ability to absorb shocks. 
Whereas  supervisory  authorities  remain  responsible  for  stress  testing  of  banks  on  an 
individual basis, central banks would conduct analyses in order to determine aggregate need 
for  capital  and  liquidity  requirements.  These  testing  procedures,  based  on  common 
scenarios, would focus on macroeconomic shocks and the resulting response of the banking 
sector. The tests would focus on credit risk, equity price risk, foreign exchange risk, interest 
rate  risk  and  liquidity  risk.  As  an  example  of  the  stress  testing,  the  recent  ECB  exercise 
shows that euro area 16 Large and Complex Banking Groups (LCBGs) are forecast to lose 
approximately  200  billion  Euros  due  to  credit  risk  exposures,  a  figure  that  illustrates  the 
importance of stress testing national banking sectors (see text chart). Additional simulations 
performed by the ECB show that to meet a Tier 1 capital ratio of 10 percent, 47 billion Euros 
in additional capital would be required by the group of 16 LCBGs. If instead of raising capital, 
6 
 BIS Review 90/2009
the  same  set  of  banks  reduced  risk-weighted  assets,  simulations  show  that  risk-weighted 
assets should shrink 469 billion Euros. Shortfalls and deleveraging would be even larger on 
the basis of leverage ratios, such as the core Tier 1 to tangible assets. Finally, last April, the 
EFC requested the CEBS to coordinate EU-wide stress testing of the banking sector. These 
exercises, built on common scenarios derived from the ECB adverse scenario, are designed 
to assess the resilience of banks and the implications for financial stability of the EU banking 
system as a whole on a consistent and comparable manner. 
 
 
The  regulatory  paradigm  that  relies  on  self  regulation  has  proven  to  be  insufficient. 
Recent proposals for a new regulatory framework put forward by the de Larosière Group and 
the Obama administration are poised, along with the work by central banks and supervisory 
authorities,  to  enhance  the  stability  of  the  international  financial  system.  These  proposals 
offer  several  important  steps  towards  a  more  robust  financial  sector  regulation.  In  June  of 
this year, the European Council voiced its agreement in favor of the creation of a European 
Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) whose mission will be to monitor and assess risks to financial 
stability in the EU financial system. This decision followed the publication of the de Larosière 
Report  on  25  February  2009,  the  Commission  Communication  of  27  May  2009  and  the 
ECOFIN Council conclusions of 9 June, 2009. The ESRB will deliver quarterly assessments 
of risks to financial stability and policy recommendations. To carry out this task, the ESRB 
will  require  a  wide  range  of  information  from  both  macro-  and  micro-prudential  analysis. 
These data would be obtained from the national supervisory authorities and national central 
banks.  Additionally,  impact  assessments  would  draw  on  information  resulting  from  stress-
testing  exercises.  This  new  framework  poses  a  strategic  challenge  for  the  Eurosystem 
because of issues pertaining to administrative support, logistical support and support in the 
form of expertise for the ESRB. 
Many European central banks and international organizations are about to implement 
permanent  organizational  changes  as  a  result  of  the  crisis;  enhanced  coordination 
and cooperation will be unavoidable components of the new nascent regulatory and 
supervisory  framework.  In  combination  with  more  effective  and  strengthened  regulation, 
BIS Review 90/2009 
 7
level, 
frameworks  are 
financial  stability 
central banks need to enhance their mission of ensuring financial stability. Although this will 
require  more  resources  and  the  development  of  expert  knowledge,  it  is  necessary  to 
strengthen  the  financial  system.  For  its  success,  it  will  also  require  support  in  terms  of 
macroprudential supervision and coordination at both the EU and international levels. At the 
EU 
largely  national  with  an  EU  umbrella 
superstructure  to  facilitate  cooperation,  but  which  has  been  found  wanting  in  terms  of 
efficiency, of ex-ante compatibility between micro-prudential and financial stability objectives, 
of a mismatch between responsibilities and accountability in crisis management, of the lack 
of a crisis resolution framework for systemic banks, and of deposit guarantee schemes not 
fully consistent with the single financial market. Thus EU financial stability will be enhanced 
by  developing  a  commonly  shared  philosophy  concentrated  not  on  what  the  system  can 
deliver, but on what it should deliver within the single market. At the international level, the 
crisis made clear that there has been a deficit of multilateral surveillance, and thus, the IMF 
reform  and  setting  up  an  operational  framework  for  joint  work  with  other  international 
organizations and fora constitute inescapable tasks. 
I wish to conclude on a positive note: The crisis may be a “welcome” opportunity to gather 
the  political will  to  put  in  place  long-needed  structural  reforms  in  good,  service  and  labour 
markets with the objective of offsetting the possibly lasting negative impact of the crisis on 
trend growth. Similarly, the crisis can be a golden opportunity to put in place the foundations 
of  a  more  robust  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework  in  line  with  the  large  number  of 
reform proposals currently discussed. 
8 
 BIS Review 90/2009
