William C Dudley: The case for TIPS – an examination of the costs and 
benefits  
Remarks  by  Mr  William  C  Dudley,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Federal 
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  Inflation-Indexed 
Securities and Inflation Risk Management Conference, New York, 10 February 2009. 
 Welcome to the New York Fed and to this timely conference on inflation-indexed securities 
and inflation risk management. Before discussing "The Case for TIPS", I would like to thank 
conference  organizers,  participants,  panelists  and  supporting  Bank  staff  for  planning  and 
putting together today's event.  
In  particular,  I  wanted  to  thank  John  Campbell  for  his  contribution  to  making  today's 
conference a reality and I expect that his involvement will heighten attention to this subject 
and  stimulate  additional  research  from  the  academic  community  on  the  topics  we  discuss 
here.  
Over  the  past  year,  Treasury  has  been  evaluating  the  costs  and  benefits  of  the  TIPS 
program. Some research studies on this topic have concluded that the incremental financing 
costs  associated  with  the  TIPS  program  have  been  substantial;  leading  some  to  conclude 
that  the  costs  may  outweigh  the  benefits.  Today’s  program,  which  includes  a  panel 
discussion  on  the  welfare  benefits  of  inflation-protected  securities,  should  help  to  broaden 
our knowledge on this topic. 
As the title of my speech suggests, today I am going to lay out the reasons why I, along with 
my colleagues Jennifer Roush and Michelle Steinberg Ezer, believe that the benefits of the 
TIPS program exceed the costs of the program. 
Before saying anything more, let me emphasize that the views I express today are my own 
and those of my co-authors and, therefore, may not represent the views of my colleagues on 
the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee.  Also,  let  me  note  that  Jennifer  and  Michelle  are  the 
main authors of this paper. I have ridden along on their coattails. My main contribution was to 
slow down completion as I had to fit in my very modest contributions around the unfolding 
financial  crisis!  Finally,  you  may  be  wondering  why  this  is  my  first  speech  since  I  have 
become president – an odd subject to choose, perhaps, given the ongoing financial crisis? 
The answer is a simple one, our paper and this conference have been in train for a long time. 
It is just a coincidence that the conference and my becoming president of the New York Fed 
have happened to arrive at about the same time. 
The logic of issuing inflation-protected securities is straightforward. Wouldn’t some investors 
pay a premium – that is, accept a lower expected return – in exchange for guaranteed, full 
compensation  for  inflation?  Because  the  United  States  and  a  number  of  other  countries 
decided  that  the  answer  was  likely  to  be  “yes,”  they  developed  an  inflation-indexed 
government debt market.  
Has the program been a good development from the perspective of the U.S. Treasury? What 
about from the public’s perspective?  
A good starting point for answering these questions is to account for the costs and benefits of 
the  program  relative  to  an  appropriate  counterfactual.  For  example,  we  might  start  by 
comparing  the  difference  in  funding  costs  to  the  Treasury  of  TIPS  versus  a  program  of 
comparable duration nominal Treasuries.  
But we should also be careful not to ignore other potential benefits of the TIPS program. As 
we see it, these potential benefits include: 
BIS Review 14/2009 
 1
    the  provision  of  a  virtually  risk-free  investment  that  provides  value  to  risk-averse 
investors,  
access  to  a  market-determined  measure  of  inflation  expectations  that  can  help 
inform the conduct of monetary policy,  
greater  diversification  of  the  Treasury’s  funding  sources,  which  presumably  has 
favorable implications for the Treasury’s overall funding costs, and  
the potential for TIPS issuance to reduce the variability of the U.S. government’s net 
financial position and provide an explicit incentive for the fiscal authorities to conduct 
policy with an eye toward the consequences of inflation.  
Although  it  is  difficult  to  quantify  these  benefits,  we  argue  that  they  are  meaningful  and 
should not be ignored in evaluating the benefits of the TIPS program. 
Turning  first  to  the  issue  of  measuring  the  impact  of  TIPS  issuance  on  the  government’s 
funding  costs,  this  could  be  done  simply  by  comparing  the  ex-post  costs  of  a  program  of 
TIPS issuance to the costs of a comparable program of nominal Treasury issuance. Studies1 
of this sort have typically shown that TIPS issuance has resulted in a higher net cost to the 
Treasury. Unfortunately, although this methodology is attractive in its simplicity, it has some 
flaws  that  undercut  its  usefulness  in  reaching  conclusions  about  the  attractiveness  of  the 
TIPS program. 
The  problem  with  an  ex-post  analysis is  that  it  depends critically  upon  the  performance  of 
inflation over the period in question. If inflation turns out to have been meaningfully different 
than what was expected at the time of TIPS issuance, then this difference – the so-called 
“inflation surprise” – can be important in affecting the relative costs of TIPS versus nominal 
Treasury issuance. If inflation turns out to be higher than expected, then TIPS issuance will 
likely look to have been more expensive than nominal Treasury issuance. If inflation turns out 
lower, an ex-post analysis will likely show a savings from the TIPS program. 
Over  the  long  run  –  and  I  mean  the  very  long  run  –  there  should  be  roughly  as  many 
downward surprises in inflation performance as upward surprises. But within any relatively 
short period, such as the last decade, this certainly does not need to be the case. In other 
words,  over  such  a  short  period,  the  outcome  of  an  ex-post  analysis  can  be  heavily 
influenced by which of the two sides – the Treasury or investors – was the lucky recipient of 
the net inflation surprise that occurred over the period in question. For example, in countries 
such as the United Kingdom, where inflation declined following the inception of an inflation-
linked  debt program,  ex-post  studies  generally suggest  that  these  programs  have  reduced 
financing costs for these countries. 
The fact that the Treasury saved or lost money ex-post is thus not a very reliable guide as to 
whether  the  strategic  decision  to  implement  a  TIPS  program  has  been  a  good  idea.  The 
relevant question is whether the Treasury obtained the financing it needed at a lower ex-ante 
cost.  If  the  experiment  were  to  be  run  thousands  of  times  drawing  from  the  underlying 
distribution  of  possible  inflation  outcomes,  would  Treasury’s  costs  have  been  lower,  on 
average, with TIPS or with nominal Treasuries? To conclude on the basis of one coin flip or 
roll of the dice as ex-post analysis essentially does surely is not the best way to evaluate the 
respective costs of TIPS issuance versus nominal Treasuries. 
Thus,  we  need  to  focus  on  the  underlying  factors  that  determine  the  ex-ante  difference  in 
costs. 
                                                 
1   See Sack and Elsasser (2004), Roush (2008). 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2009
There are two primary factors2 underlying the relative cost differences: 
1) 
the  compensation  investors  require  to  hold  a  security  that  is  less  liquid  than  its 
nominal counterpart, termed the illiquidity premium, and  
the insurance value they attach to obtaining protection against inflation risk, known 
as the inflation risk premium. 
2) 
With regard to the first factor, when investors are worried about their ability to resell TIPS in a 
liquid secondary market, they require compensation for holding the securities compared with 
more liquid alternatives. This illiquidity premium tends to drive up TIPS yields and increase 
the Treasury’s borrowing costs. 
The second factor works in the opposite direction. To the extent that investors are willing to 
pay for inflation protection, they would purchase TIPS at a price above that implied by their 
expected  payment  stream.  As  such,  inflation  risk  premiums  result  in  lower  expected 
borrowing  costs  for  the  government  and  savings  for  the  TIPS  program  compared  with 
nominal issuance. 
To  determine  which  factor  has  been  historically  dominant,  we  conduct  an  ex-ante  cost 
analysis: We compare the amount that the Treasury received for inflation compensation at 
auction with an observable measure of the inflation expectations of TIPS investors that is not 
contaminated by premiums for inflation risk or liquidity differentials. Unfortunately, we don’t 
have a perfect measure of expected inflation. Nevertheless, we may be able to get close. We 
do  have  estimates  of  expected  inflation  from  other  sources  –  such  as  the  Survey  of 
Professional Forecasters (SPF) conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia. If 
such measures do indeed reflect the inflation expectations of investors, then we can conduct 
a reasonably accurate ex-ante analysis. 
TIPS analysts often talk about a concept they call the breakeven inflation rate. Essentially, 
this is the realized inflation rate that would cause investors to come out the same in terms of 
total compensation regardless of whether they had bought TIPS or nominal Treasuries. 
The difference between the auction breakeven inflation rate and the SPF forecast yields a 
measure of the net savings or loss incurred by the Treasury that is independent of forecast 
errors. It is also equal to the net value of the illiquidity and inflation risk premiums associated 
with  each  TIPS.  Our  analysis,  which  covers  TIPS  auctions  through  April  2008,  found  that 
prior  to  2004,  the  breakeven  inflation  rate  was  below  the  SPF.  This  indicates  that  the 
illiquidity  premiums  exceeded  the  inflation  risk  premium  over  this  period.  However,  since 
2004, we find that breakeven inflation rates were approximately equal to expected inflation, 
indicating  that  investors  were  roughly  indifferent  between  the  benefit  of  being  protected 
against inflation risk versus the cost in terms of the greater illiquidity of TIPS relative to on-
the-run nominal Treasuries. Thus, on an ex-ante basis, it appeared that the cost of issuing 
TIPS was about equal to the cost of issuing nominal Treasuries. 
To determine the impact of the illiquidity premium and inflation risk premium on these results, 
we  decomposed  our  ex-ante  analysis,  comparing  the  breakeven  rate  of  inflation  excluding 
the  illiquidity  premium  in  TIPS  yields3  to  the  SPF  forecast.  This  comparison  yields  an 
                                                 
2  
In addition to these primary factors, TIPS yields also reflect the taxation difference between TIPS and nominal 
issues,  the  convexity  difference  between  real  and  nominal  yields  and  the  price  of  the  embedded  deflation 
floor. 
3   We used the illiquidity premium in TIPS yields estimated in D’Amico, Kim and Wei (2008). D’Amico, Kim and 
Wei calculated the liquidity component for five- and ten-year TIPS yields, which we used to adjust the auction 
prices for 5- and 10-year TIPS issues. For twenty- and thirty-year TIPS issues, we assumed that the liquidity 
component is equal to the component for a ten-year security, which in the event that these securities are less 
liquid than the ten-year note, understates this effect and thus underestimates the risk premium at this horizon. 
For further information, see Dudley, Roush and Steinberg Ezer (2008). 
BIS Review 14/2009 
 3
estimate of the premium investors were willing to pay for inflation protection at previous TIPS 
auctions. We found an average risk premium estimate of 47 basis points over our sample 
period. This suggests that the TIPS program does satisfy a real demand that is not met by 
nominal Treasuries. 
It also suggests that if the Treasury were to take steps to shrink the illiquidity premium by, for 
example,  improving  secondary  market  trading  in  TIPS,  this  would  shift  the  cost-benefit 
analysis more firmly in TIPS direction.  
A change in the TIPS illiquidity premium can have a notable impact on ex-ante cost analysis. 
For  example,  at  the  time  this  speech  was  written,  the  10-year  TIPS  breakeven  rate  was 
approximately 1.10 percent, compared to the SPF forecast of 2.50 percent. This is in contrast 
to  the  end  of  our  sample  period,  which  showed  them  to  be  about  equal.  This  means  that 
today TIPS issuance is not very compelling. But it is important to emphasize that this shift 
has  occurred  at  a  time  when  the  preference  for  liquidity  is  especially  strong,  benefitting 
nominal  Treasuries  versus  TIPS.  When  the  market  turmoil  subsides  and  this  illiquidity 
premium shrinks, one might expect TIPS to again move ahead on an ex-ante basis. 
So, at this point, the TIPS versus nominal issuance debate is inconclusive. But that’s before 
we  have  included  some  of  the  other  considerable  –  although  more  difficult  to  quantify  – 
benefits associated with TIPS issuance.  
Let me now discuss some of these other benefits.  
Inflation hedge for households 
First,  TIPS  offer  a  benefit  to  investors  because  they  have  less  risk  than  any  other  asset 
class. With virtually no credit risk or inflation risk, TIPS are one of the safest of investments.4 
For investors that want such safety, TIPS offer significant benefits. Furthermore, the ability 
for investors to choose the amount of inflation risk they hold may result in a more optimal 
allocation of risk among investors with different tolerances.5 How much is this worth? Is the 
value  of  this  completely  captured  in  the  relative  interest  costs  of  TIPS?  Probably  not, 
because  the  relative  interest  costs  between  TIPS  and  nominal  Treasuries  are  set  at  the 
margin.  We  think  there  is  some  value  in  having  a  high-quality  hedge  to  inflation  risk, 
especially one that is available to less sophisticated investors.  
Improved monetary policy 
The second noteworthy benefit from the TIPS program is that it helps improve the conduct of 
monetary policy. Foremost, the program provides up-to-date information about the evolution 
of inflation expectations and real interest rates. Because keeping inflation expectations well-
anchored is so important in keeping inflation itself in check, real-time measures of inflation 
expectations  may  lead  to  better  monetary  policymaking.  This,  in  turn,  should  improve 
macroeconomic  performance.  Although  this  is  very  difficult  to  quantify  in  terms  of  value,  I 
think  it  is  safe  to  say  that  in  a  $14  trillion  economy,  even  a  modest  improvement  in 
performance generates large dollar benefits. 
U.S.  policymakers  focus  on  a  variety  of  inflation  expectation  measures,  including  private 
surveys  of  inflation  expectations  and  market  based  measures,  such  as  TIPS  breakeven 
inflation rates. But in practice, the value of the survey-based measures is limited by the lack 
                                                 
4   There  is  some  inflation  basis  risk  in  that  TIPS  are  based  on  the  non-seasonally-adjusted  consumer  price 
index,  and  a  household’s  expenditure  basket  might  differ  from  the  basket  in  the  CPI.  Also,  pension  and 
endowment liabilities may be more closely related to other inflation or wage measures than the CPI. 
5   See Campbell and Shiller, 1996. 
4 
 BIS Review 14/2009
of timeliness – new data become available only monthly, quarterly or about every six weeks. 
Also,  real  money  isn’t  riding  on  the  accuracy  of  the  survey  responses.  In  contrast,  the 
comparison between nominal Treasury and TIPS yields represents the consensus of market 
participants. 
For  these  reasons,  policymakers  rely  importantly  on  the  long-term  inflation  expectations 
proxied by the difference between nominal Treasury note and TIPS yields. 
So,  how  much  is  this  tool  worth?  Of  course,  it  is  very  difficult  to  say.  Perhaps,  we  would 
flatter ourselves and think that we could do just as well without such a market-based, real-
time measure of inflation expectations. But I doubt it. After all, inflation expectations, when 
untethered,  are  very  difficult  to  re-anchor.  TIPS  help  make  it  easier  to  keep  inflation 
expectations in check. 
Improved fiscal policy 
The third less quantifiable benefit of TIPS is that the program may create incentives that can 
improve  the  conduct  of  fiscal  policy.  TIPS  provide  an  explicit  incentive  for  the  fiscal 
authorities to conduct policy with an eye toward the consequences for inflation. The public’s 
recognition  of  this  incentive  may  help  hold  down  inflation  expectations  and  cause  inflation 
expectations to be more firmly anchored.  
In addition, TIPS may give the Treasury access to a broader investor base, which also may 
reduce  the  Treasury’s  overall  borrowing  costs.  The  comparison  between  the  prevailing 
interest  rates  on  TIPS  versus  nominal  Treasuries  provides  insight  into  the  relative  costs 
associated  with  issuing  a  marginal  dollar  of  debt.  But  just  as  important  is  whether  TIPS 
issuance, by displacing nominal Treasury issuance, reduces the level of interest rates that 
the  Treasury  pays  on  its  nominal  issuances.  This  would  occur  if  TIPS  were  not  perfect 
substitutes for nominal Treasury securities and if the demand for nominal Treasuries were 
downward sloping – that is, not completely elastic. 
The first condition almost certainly holds given the different attributes of TIPS versus nominal 
Treasuries. If they were perfect substitutes, then there would not be a liquidity premium for 
nominal  Treasuries  relative  to  TIPS.  The  second  condition  seems  likely  to  hold  since 
numerous studies have found that an increase in the net amount of Treasury borrowing leads 
to higher expected borrowing costs for the Treasury. 
How big might this effect be? That’s difficult to estimate. A few studies6 have found that an 
increase in supply in a particular segment of the Treasury yield curve has contributed to a 
rise in yields. As a result, by issuing securities in a segmented TIPS market, the Treasury 
may  keep  realized  yields  on  bill  and  nominal  coupon  securities  lower  than  they  otherwise 
would have been. 
The last noteworthy fiscal benefit from TIPS issuance is the fact that it reduces risk to the 
U.S. government in terms of the variability of its net financial position. The rate of inflation 
influences both the cost of TIPS and the government’s tax receipts. Thus, some level of TIPS 
issuance may reduce the variability of the government’s net financial position. This, in turn, 
should  lead  to  a  more  regular  and  predictable  pattern  of  issuance,  which  should  help 
minimize interest costs. 
In summary, our analysis of the ex-ante costs of the TIPS program and the more difficult-to-
measure benefits suggests that TIPS issuance provides at least a modest net benefit to the 
Treasury.  So,  now  I  want  to  turn  to  a  related  question:  Are  there  ways  to  increase  the 
benefits? 
                                                 
6   See Fleming (2002), Krishnamurthy (2002), Laubach (2003). 
BIS Review 14/2009 
 5
I  would  be  willing  to  make  two  modest  suggestions  here.  First,  it  may  make  sense  to 
emphasize longer-dated TIPS issuance rather than shorter-dated issuance. Analytically, the 
logic goes as follows. Inflation uncertainty is likely to increase at longer time horizons. Thus, 
investors are likely to pay a greater premium for inflation protection at longer-time horizons. 
This  implies  that  the  cost  savings  associated  with  TIPS  are  likely  to  be  greater  for  longer 
maturities rather than shorter maturities. 
This  prediction  is  supported  by  empirical  studies  that  have  examined  the  premium  that 
investors pay for inflation protection both in the United States and elsewhere. For example, a 
study by Brian Sack of Macroeconomic Advisors finds that forward breakeven inflation rates 
increase as maturity lengthens. In contrast, the level of survey-based measures of inflation 
expectations  is  quite  constant  beyond  a  time  horizon  of  a  few  years.  This  means  that  the 
difference between forward breakeven inflation and inflation expectations climbs as the time 
horizon  extends.  This  strongly  suggests  that  the  premium  investors  pay  for  inflation 
protection increases as maturities lengthen. 
Second, it may make sense to structure the TIPS program in a way that would help reduce 
the illiquidity premium associated with TIPS relative to on-the-run nominal Treasuries. Some 
of  the  current  illiquidity  premium  is  likely  to  shrink  as  financial  markets  stabilize.  However, 
further improvements may require a change in either the structure of the TIPS program or the 
secondary market trading environment. 
On that note, I leave you with two outstanding questions: 
1) 
What are the best ways for the U.S. Treasury and the trading community to improve 
secondary market liquidity in TIPS? 
Given  that  TIPS  appear  attractive  for  the  U.S.  Treasury,  what  is  the  optimal 
allocation of the Treasury’s liability portfolio between TIPS and nominal securities? 
2) 
Thank you for your attention. 
6 
 BIS Review 14/2009
