John Hurley: Recent economic developments in Ireland and the outlook 
for the economy 
Opening statement by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank and Financial Services 
Authority of Ireland, at the presentation of the Annual Report 2008, Dublin, 14 July 2009. 
 Introduction 
You are all very welcome to this press briefing to mark the publication of the Annual Report 
of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland.  
I am joined today by my colleagues Tony Grimes (Director General), Brian Halpin (Deputy 
Director General) and Tom O’Connell (Assistant Director General, Economics). 
The  Annual  Report  2008,  which  as  you  know  is  my  last  as  Governor,  documents  our 
activities  and  presents  our  annual  accounts.  Actions  that  were  taken  in  response  to  the 
unprecedented  crisis  in  both  international  financial  markets  and  particularly  the  domestic 
financial  system  dominated  our  activities  in  2008  and  2009-to-date.  Notwithstanding  this, 
significant projects across the Bank’s main functional areas, many of which were committed 
to under the Bank’s strategic plan, were either advanced or completed during the year. Our 
annual accounts show that the Central Bank’s profit for the year amounted to €364.2 million. 
After transfers to reserves, surplus income of €290.1 million has been paid to the Exchequer 
this year. The Bank’s balance-sheet assets as at December 2008 amounted to €116.1 billion, 
a significant increase on 2007 due to substantially higher liquidity support by the Bank, on 
behalf of the Eurosystem, to credit institutions located in Ireland.  
In my statement today, I will review economic and financial market developments, both here 
and abroad, and outline the significant actions that have already been taken by policymakers 
here  to  restore  the  health  of  the  banking  system;  to  put  the  public  finances  on  a  sound 
footing; to restore competitiveness; and to reform our regulatory system. While we remain in 
a  very  difficult  and  challenging  environment,  these  responses  will  promote  recovery. 
Nonetheless, recovery is likely to be gradual and is dependent on policy remaining focussed 
on dealing with the issues that I have outlined. 
International developments  
Since the publication of our previous Annual Report this time last year, the turmoil in financial 
markets  has  developed  into  a  full-blown  crisis  and  policy-makers  everywhere  have  taken 
unprecedented steps to restore stability to their banking systems so as to limit the damage to 
the real economy. The manner in which the financial turmoil intensified significantly across 
the  world  last  autumn  following  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers  has  been  extensively 
documented.  History  shows  us  that  downturns  in  economic  activity  that  are  preceded  by 
problems in the banking sector tend to be longer in duration and, partly because of this, more 
severe  than  those  caused  by  other  factors.  This  is  proving  to  be  the  case  both  here  and 
abroad. 
Since  last  September,  deteriorating  financial  market  conditions  and  intense  strains  on  the 
financial  sector  led  to  sharp  declines  in  economic  sentiment  internationally.  Trade  and 
financial  channels,  meanwhile,  transmitted  the  resulting  weakness  in  demand  across  the 
globe. As a result, we have experienced one of the steepest and most synchronised global 
downturns  for  many  decades,  with  economic  activity  contracting  sharply  in  both  the  final 
quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009. Following a contraction of around 1½ per cent 
this year, the IMF now expects global growth of 2½ per cent in 2010, somewhat higher than 
their previous projection of just under 2 per cent. Nevertheless, by historical standards this 
BIS Review 88/2009 
 1
the  unsecured  money  market  showing 
will  be  a  modest  performance  and,  given  the  nature  and  scale  of  the  crisis  we  have 
experienced, the recovery is likely to be gradual, extended and uneven across regions. The 
IMF, meanwhile, see the risks to their growth outlook as still being tilted on the downside. 
The fact that some recovery may be in prospect over the next year or so primarily reflects the 
unprecedented response of policy-makers to the crisis.  
There has been an improvement in investor sentiment over the last number of months, with 
equity  markets  recovering  somewhat,  sovereign  and  financial  credit  default  swap  (CDS) 
spreads  narrowing  and 
tentative  signs  of 
improvement.  However,  financial  markets  remain  quite  fragile  reflecting  caution  over  the 
prospects of an early economic recovery.  
Turning  to  the  euro  area,  the  Eurosystem  has  responded  to  the  crisis  in  several  very 
significant ways. The Governing Council of the ECB has cut the main refinancing rate by a 
cumulative 325 basis points since last October bringing it to its lowest level on record at 1 per 
cent. This has had a very significant effect in lowering borrowing costs for households and 
firms  across  the  region,  including  here  in  Ireland.  A  range  of  innovative  non-conventional 
policy measures have also been adopted, particularly in terms of liquidity provision. Under 
the Eurosystem’s revised operational framework including the full allotment policy, banks can 
access  unlimited  liquidity  against  suitable  collateral  at  a  fixed  rate  for  up  to  12  months.  In 
addition, this month the Eurosystem has started a programme that will see it purchase up to 
€60  billion  of  covered  bonds  issued  by  banks  in  the  euro  area;  this  will  help  an  important 
market sector, and again will be of benefit to banks in Ireland and support credit provision 
here. Looking ahead, as I have already said, the pace of global recovery is expected to be 
gradual  and  downside  risks  to  the  global  outlook  remain.  Against  this  backdrop  monetary 
policy must continue to provide support to the real economy for as long as is necessary, and 
policy rates should only be increased once there are clear signs that a sustainable recovery 
has begun.  
Irish economic developments and policy issues 
Given the highly open nature of the Irish economy and the character of economic growth in 
the years preceding 2007, Ireland was both exposed and vulnerable to the global financial 
and economic shocks that have emerged.  
After  more  than  a  decade  of  very  strong  growth,  domestic  economic  activity  turned  down 
sharply over the course of 2008. Economic growth had become quite unbalanced in the past 
few  years  as  building  and  construction  activity  had  reached  unsustainable  levels  with 
property prices increasing beyond their fundamental levels. The current economic downturn 
reflects the interaction of a series of negative influences, both domestic and external, which 
have  reinforced  each  other  and,  cumulatively,  have  had  a  significant  dampening  effect  on 
activity.  
As  has  been  the  case  elsewhere,  the  pace  of  deterioration  in  economic  activity  has 
worsened  since  last  autumn.  The  exceptionally  elevated  stress  in  financial  markets  that 
followed the collapse in Lehman Brothers triggered a sharp fall in consumer and business 
sentiment across the globe. This prompted a marked heightening of precautionary behaviour 
on the part of households and firms. In Ireland, this was reflected in consumers reining back 
spending even further and firms responding to the changed economic environment by cutting 
production and acting quickly to lower costs. With exports weakening, this has accelerated 
the fall-off in demand and has been reflected in a sharp rise in unemployment.  
While we are still finalising our next quarterly forecasts, it now looks as if GDP will contract 
by  -8.3  per  cent  this  year  (a  small  improvement  on  the  figure  published  in  the  Annual 
Report). Next year the level of contraction is likely to be around 3 per cent for the year as a 
whole with some gradual recovery emerging later in the year but unlikely to take hold until 
2011. The contraction in activity has already led to a significant rise in unemployment, which 
2 
 BIS Review 88/2009
will  not  begin  to  reverse  until  the  recovery  gains  some  momentum.  Reflecting  this, 
unemployment is forecast to average around 13 per cent this year and 15 per cent in 2010. 
One  consequence  of  the  downturn  in  growth,  however,  has  been  a  sharp  turnaround  in 
inflation. The consumer price index is forecast to fall by around 4 per cent this year and to be 
broadly flat next year (the HICP index, which does not include mortgage interest payments, 
is projected to fall by close to 1½ per cent this year with a further modest fall in 2010).  
While major initiatives have been taken to stabilise the financial sector, and I will comment on 
these shortly, we also need to restore stability in other areas and chart a path that will in time 
ensure a sustainable recovery in economic growth. In particular, the importance of reversing 
the deterioration in cost competitiveness and in fiscal imbalances cannot be overstated.  
With regard to competitiveness in recent years, economy-wide productivity gains have been 
very  modest  and  labour  cost  increases  have  been  relatively  high  compared  with  our  main 
trading partners. This has led to a substantial erosion of the country’s competitiveness. This 
deterioration is now being addressed and many firms have taken action to reduce their costs, 
with a view to regaining competitiveness and protecting output and employment. While this 
has undoubtedly been painful, it nevertheless reflects encouraging evidence of the flexibility 
and realism that is needed if the economy is to maintain the maximum possible number of 
jobs  in  the  short  term  while  placing  Ireland  in  a  favourable  position  to  benefit  from  an 
eventual recovery in world demand. This type of flexibility must embrace all sectors of the 
economy.  
On the fiscal side, the deterioration in the public finances is a cause for serious concern. The 
Government  has  agreed  with  the  European  Commission  to  correct  our  Excessive  Deficit 
position by 2013 and it is crucial that these targets are met. The Government’s introduction of 
a public sector pension levy and the Supplementary Budget are steps that have been taken 
to  this  end.  Bringing  the  public  finances  back  into  balance  is  necessary  to  restore 
macroeconomic stability and to ensure international confidence in the economy on which, as 
a small open economy, we are so dependent.  
As the bulk of the fiscal problem is of a structural or underlying nature, a cyclical recovery in 
economic growth cannot be relied on to restore order to the public finances. Experience, both 
here  and  overseas,  suggests  that  the  best  way  to  restore  fiscal  balance  is  to  place  more 
emphasis  on  reducing  expenditure  rather  than  increasing  taxation.  Therefore,  while  some 
broadening  of  the  tax  base  is  necessary,  it  is  desirable  that  the  primary  focus  of  fiscal-
consolidation  measures  should  be  on  reductions  in  public  spending.  The  Commission  on 
Taxation and the Special Group on Public Service Numbers and Expenditure Programmes 
will help identify measures that will improve the budgetary situation in coming years. Painful 
as  they  are,  these  measures  are  necessary  to  restore  confidence,  to  deal  with  financing 
concerns and to underpin the medium-term growth potential of the economy.  
The banking sector  
Internationally,  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system  has  improved  somewhat  in  recent 
months,  largely  as  a  result  of  government  and  central  bank  support.  Nonetheless, 
vulnerabilities  remain  and  financial  conditions  are  tight.  Against  this  background,  funding 
conditions  remain  very  challenging  for  Irish  banks  and  this  is  reflected  in  their  significant 
recourse  to  the  Eurosystem,  which  is  of  particular  value  to  the  country  at  this  time. 
Domestically,  the  contraction  in  the  real  economy  and  a  continuing  weak  property  market 
have meant that banks have incurred substantial loan impairments. In addition, earnings are 
likely  to  remain  relatively  subdued  in  the  near  term  because  of  higher  loan  provisions, 
increased  funding  costs,  the  pass-through  of  lower  ECB  policy  rates  and  competition  for 
deposits.  Overall,  our  banking  system,  similar  to  those  elsewhere,  continues  to  face 
significant challenges. However, the inherent problems that need to be addressed are much 
clearer now, and significant actions are being taken to help the system recover.  
BIS Review 88/2009 
 3
The Government through the various steps that have been taken has shown its commitment 
to do whatever is necessary to support financial stability. Our approach has broadly followed 
a similar path to others. The introduction of a state guarantee for bank liabilities was taken to 
stabilise the funding situation. Under this scheme, the authorities significantly increased their 
engagement  with  each  covered  institution  and  this  permitted  the  authorities  here  to  move 
quickly to recapitalise the main domestic banks in order to ensure their viability, to support 
the supply of credit to the real economy, and to address market participants’ requirements for 
banks to maintain higher core Tier 1 capital ratios than before the crisis. During this time, it 
was necessary to take Anglo Irish Bank into public ownership to protect the stability of the 
wider financial system. Most recently, the authorities have addressed banks’ non-performing 
assets  through  the  decision  to  establish  the  National  Asset  Management  Agency  (NAMA) 
and have decided to put in place a new regulatory system.  
Irish  banks  have  substantial  exposures  to  land  and  development  loans,  which  creates 
uncertainty about their capital positions, and ultimately affects their ability to provide credit to 
the  real  economy.  NAMA  will  remove  these  problem  assets  from  banks’  balance  sheets, 
thereby  renewing  confidence  in  the  Irish  banking  system,  and  creating  the  conditions 
whereby credit can flow in sufficient volumes to impact positively on the domestic economy. 
The  pricing  of  these  assets  is  a  key  issue  which  must  balance  restoring  the  role  of  the 
banking  sector  in  the  real  economy  with  value  for  the  taxpayer.  When  the  current  crisis 
comes to an end, the structure and shape of the banking system, both here and abroad, is 
likely  to  be  very  different.  In  Ireland,  the  successful  operation  of  NAMA  is  likely  to  be  an 
important catalyst in this respect as the banks that emerge may well be smaller. This should 
allow for a more focussed and consolidated banking sector.  
Foremost  among  the  lessons  to  be  learned  from  our  experience  during  this  crisis  is  that 
regulation needed to be significantly enhanced in response to the turmoil that we have seen. 
I  welcome  the  Government  decision  to  establish  a  unified  central  bank  and  regulatory 
structure which will be responsible for both the supervision of individual firms and the stability 
of the wider financial system. The transition to these new arrangements is at an advanced 
stage  –  a  high-level  implementation  group  is  already  working  on  the  fine  details, including 
preparatory  work  on  the  relevant  legislation.  The  recruitment  process  to  fill  key  senior 
positions in the new structure is well underway. This is not a debate that is unique to Ireland. 
Significant  reforms  have  been  announced  very  recently  in  Europe,  the  US  and  UK.  In 
particular,  the  reforms  at  European  level  with  the  creation  of  a  European  Systemic  Risk 
Board mirror what is being implemented here. 
Within this new structure, the system of regulation will be different in a number of ways. This 
will arise both from changes in the global regulatory environment and in the manner in which 
regulation  is  implemented  in  Ireland.  The  international  regulations  dealing  with  capital 
requirements, 
liquidity,  provisioning  and  accounting  standards  under  which  banks 
everywhere  operate  will  be  revised,  in  significant  part,  to  address  issues  that  have  arisen 
with respect to capital adequacy and liquidity. Within this framework, there will be more focus 
on  banks’  business  models,  strategies  and  risks  while  also  raising  the  profile  of  corporate 
governance issues. Regulators will be on-site attending a selection of credit, treasury, audit 
and  board meetings  while  also  requiring  significantly  broader  and  more  timely  information. 
Regulating for consumer protection by way of codes of practice and conduct of business will 
continue to be a priority.  
A key element in the successful implementation of this new approach will be up-skilling of 
staff. As part of this, the process of recruiting specialists with significant industry experience 
to supplement our existing skills is well underway. In summary, this new regulatory system 
will  result  in  more  focussed  oversight  of  the  financial  sector  and  will  enhance  Ireland’s 
reputation as an international financial services centre. 
4 
 BIS Review 88/2009
Conclusion  
The crisis that we have experienced since last autumn is the most serious to have hit the 
global  financial  sector  since  the  Great  Depression.  It  has  combined  with  a  number  of 
domestic vulnerabilities to create a particularly difficult situation for this country. In the course 
of this statement, I have dealt with the various actions that have been taken to restore the 
health  of  the  banking  system,  to  put  the  public  finances  on  a  sound  footing,  to  restore 
competitiveness  and  to  reform  our  regulatory  system.  These  actions  have  been  significant 
and necessary and it is imperative that we persevere with them. 
My colleagues and I are happy to take any questions now. 
BIS Review 88/2009 
 5
