Duvvuri Subbarao: Statistics and statistical analysis at the Reserve Bank 
of India 
Inaugural address by Dr Duvvuri Subbarao, Governor of the Reserve Bank of India, at the 
third Annual Statistics Day Conference of the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, 2 July 2009. 
 I am delighted to be here today to inaugurate this third Annual Statistics Day Conference of 
the Reserve Bank. It has now become a tradition for us to mark the Statistics Day as a tribute 
to  late  Professor  P.C.  Mahalanobis  and  his  colossal  contribution  to  the  development  of 
statistics  in  India,  both  as  an  academic  discipline  and  as  a  tool  for  public  policy.  The 
Mahalanobis  model  of  development  planning,  based  as  it  was  on  statistical  data  analysis, 
marked  an  important  milestone  in  India’s  development  history.  The  large-scale  sample 
survey techniques, as practised today, owe their foundation to the pioneering work done by 
Prof. Mahalanobis. The Reserve Bank is happy to honour the memory of Prof. Mahalanobis 
on this Statistics Day. 
This year’s Statistics Day is important for another reason. It is a part of the several learning 
events  we  are  planning  over  the  course  of  2009-10  to  mark  the  Reserve  Bank’s  Platinum 
Jubilee. I have no doubt that improving our understanding of statistical analysis and learning 
of  the  best  practices  in  this  area  will  help  the  Reserve  Bank  deliver  on  its  mandate  much 
better. 
We are privileged to have a person of the eminence of Prof. T.N. Srinivasan at this year’s 
Statistics Day. Prof. Srinivasan, currently the Samuel C. Park Jr., Professor of Economics at 
Yale,  has  very  distinguished  academic  credentials  and  is  acknowledged  as  one  of  the 
leading authorities in the world on trade and development. A significant amount of his work 
has involved statistical analysis, and we look forward to learning from his scholarship and his 
analytical insights during this Conference. 
I also want to take this opportunity to acknowledge three of our special guests. Prof. J. K. 
Ghosh, presently a professor of statistics at Purdue University, was formerly the Director of 
the Indian Statistical Institute. He is a world renowned authority on Bayesian statistics. Prof. 
Arijit Chaudhuri of the Indian Statistical Institute is among the foremost experts in surveys. 
Prof.  Chaudhuri  extended  the  scope  of  survey  methodologies  in  the  area  of  multi-stage 
sampling,  designing  complex  surveys,  randomized  response  surveys  and  small  area 
estimation. Finally, and importantly, we have with us Dr. Wilbert van der Klaauw, Assistant 
Vice  President  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank,  New  York.  Dr.  Klaauw  is  heading  the  Fed’s 
project team on inflation expectations, an area of keen interest, and may I add, perplexing 
challenge, to central banks around the world.  
Once again, a very warm welcome to all of you to this Annual Conference. 
Three challenges 
Statistics  and  statistical  analysis  are  central  to  a  lot  of  what  we  do  in  the  Reserve  Bank. 
Many of the decisions that we have to make and judgments that we have to form are based 
on analysis and interpretation of data. Quite evidently, we are often plagued by incomplete, 
inconsistent or non-timely data. All of inductive learning is a progression along the intellectual 
hierarchy  –  from  data  to  information  to  knowledge  to  wisdom.  The  relevance  and 
effectiveness of our policy judgments, therefore, depend crucially on the quality of data and 
the  efficacy  of  analysis  and  interpretation.  It  is  important,  therefore,  for  public  policy 
institutions like the Reserve Bank of India, to focus on statistics and statistical analysis. To 
give  this  task  a  specific  focus,  I  would  like  to  highlight  three  challenges  in  the  area  of 
statistical analysis and interpretation that this Conference can address. 
BIS Review 84/2009 
 1
First, what are the gaps in the official data and data analysis and how do we bridge them? 
The quality of data that various official agencies, both in India and abroad, collect depends 
critically upon the completeness and accuracy of the responses. Significant non-responses 
and time-varying pattern of responses can provide misleading information and result in sub-
optimal  policy  responses.  But,  how  do  we  get  credible  and  complete  data,  and  that  too  in 
good  time?  In  a  liberalised  economic  environment,  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  mandate 
submission  of  data  or  responses  to  surveys  by  official  fiat  or  regulatory  prescription.  Also, 
with globalisation, it is becoming increasingly difficult to get credible and timely information 
on  cross-border  flow  of  goods,  services  and  capital.  The  first  challenge,  therefore,  is  what 
steps  do  the  official  data  agencies  need  to  take  to  ensure  that  data  are  comprehensive, 
consistent and timely? 
Second, our official statistical agencies have made several efforts to improve the collection 
and  dissemination  of  statistics.  Yet,  there  is  scope  for  significant  improvement  in,  for 
example,  the  construction  of  WPI  or  IIP,  where  the  coverage  baskets  have  to  be  more 
representative of target populations. Given the fast pace of changes in the structure of the 
economy in the face of deregulation, liberalisation, and competitive forces, it is important that 
the  various  indices  such  as  WPI  or  IIP,  which  attempt  to  capture  the  underlying 
developments  in  the  economy,  are  refined  and  updated  on  a  continuous  basis  to  provide 
timely information to the policymakers. 
Third, in the context of more open economies and improvements in communication, market 
dynamics have become sensitive to data releases and information dissemination. All of us 
are  aware  of  how  market  participants  oftentimes  misinterpret  information,  triggering 
considerable volatility in markets. We can help manage expectations and perceptions better 
by  focussing  attention  on  data  standards  as  well  as  improving  the  quality  of  our  statistics 
education. This is the third challenge. 
I hope this Conference will come up with some specific thoughts on how we may address 
these above challenges. 
Statistical surveys done by RBI  
Since this seminar is focussed more narrowly on statistical surveys, let me briefly comment 
on the surveys done by the Reserve Bank. We do regular periodical surveys as well as need-
based ad hoc surveys. Our surveys in the external sector cover foreign liabilities and assets, 
software  exports  and  non-resident  deposits,  etc.  In  the  banking  sector,  the  surveys  cover 
distribution  of  credit  and  deposits,  composition  and  ownership  of  deposits,  international 
banking statistics, and the like. In the corporate sector, the survey of performance of private 
corporate  business  sector,  conducted  since  1951-52,  has  been  of  considerable  interest  to 
analysts.  
The  Reserve  Bank  has  also  introduced  several  new  surveys  to  support  monetary  policy 
formulation.  These  include  the  industrial  outlook  survey,  inflation  expectations  survey  for 
households,  survey  of  inventories,  order  books  and  capacity  utilization  and  survey  of 
professional forecasters.  
We are also working on a survey for housing start ups. The biggest challenge for us here has 
been  collecting  information  from  each  state/city  on  building  permits  and  coming  up  with  a 
reliable matrix of house-start coefficients. The special value of these new surveys is that they 
include information from key actors, they are forward-looking and the results are available in 
quick time. Such survey results provide useful and timely inputs for the conduct of forward-
looking macro-policies.  
2 
 BIS Review 84/2009
Statistics in the RBI's work 
At the Reserve Bank, honing our skills and improving our database is a constant endeavour. 
We have achieved some satisfactory progress, but there are daunting challenges still. Let me 
illustrate by giving five problems that we confront in the area of data analysis.  
Data revisions 
(i)  
Measuring the economy remains a complex task and data uncertainty is a fact of life. Data 
revisions are a legitimate part of statistical compilation and dissemination. However, here in 
India, data revisions and systemic biases in data revisions are more frequent and common 
place.  Most  economies  have  to  contend  with  an  uncertain  future;  here,  in  India,  we  are 
having to contend with an uncertain past as well. This uncertainty poses a challenge for all 
economic policy, particularly for monetary policy, where we have to look ahead by looking 
back.  Monetary  policy  transmission  in  developing  economies  such  as  ours  is  inhibited  by 
structural factors and this vulnerability is exacerbated by the uncertain information context. 
The conduct of monetary policy will be better served by more firm data and less revisions. 
How do we ensure that?  
Inflation measurement 
(ii)  
Price stability, defined as low and stable inflation, is a key objective of our monetary policy in 
India. In the context of our multiple objectives, inflation containment emerged as a primary 
concern of the Reserve Bank during the period 2006-08 – initially in the context of domestic 
demand pressures, which in 2008, were augmented by globally-induced supply shocks. Pre-
emptive  monetary  measures,  in  conjunction  with  fiscal  and  other  supply-side  measures, 
helped  to  contain  inflation  and  inflation  expectations.  Since  the  second  half  of  2008-09, 
domestic inflationary pressures, as measured by wholesale price index (WPI) inflation, have 
eased on the back of sharp correction in international oil and other commodity prices. In the 
context of the sharp decline in headline WPI inflation, there have been calls for reduction in 
the policy rate and the overall domestic interest rate structure. While policy rates have indeed 
been  lowered  and  bank  deposit  and  lending  rates  have  also  come  down,  albeit not  to  the 
same extent, it needs to be recognised that alternative measures of consumer price index 
(CPI)  inflation  have  continued  to  rule  at  elevated  levels.  For  example,  currently,  the  WPI 
inflation is in negative territory – a sign that could be misinterpreted as the economy being in 
deflation even when there is no contraction in aggregate demand – while the inflation rates 
from the four CPIs are in the range of 9-10 per cent. 
In  India,  given  the  heterogeneity  of  the  economic  structure  and  large  differences  in 
consumption baskets, we have four consumer price indices, apart from the wholesale price 
index. Given the relatively low income levels, food items constitute a very large proportion of 
the consumption basket and this is reflected in their weights in the CPI indices (46-70 per 
cent) relative to the WPI index (27 per cent). Fuel group has a weight of 14 per cent in WPI 
but only in the range of 6-8 per cent in the consumer price indices. Commodities like metals 
and products have a significant weight (8 per cent) in the WPI, but are not directly included in 
the CPIs. Thus, differences in the weights of the items included in the various indices, along 
with  divergent  price  movements,  not  only  create  a  wedge  between  the  different  inflation 
measures but also move them in different directions.  
Such divergences in alternative inflation measures complicate the conduct of monetary policy 
in  India.  Accordingly,  the  Reserve  Bank  looks at  all  the  measures  of  inflation,  both  overall 
and disaggregated components, in conjunction with other economic and financial indicators, 
to assess the underlying inflationary pressures. 
In this context, the new price indices contemplated by the Government – CPI (Urban) and 
CPI (Rural)  – would be helpful. Furthermore, WPI with a more recent base and enhanced 
coverage, including that of the service sector, may pave the way for a producers’ price index 
BIS Review 84/2009 
 3
(PPI).  The  Reserve  Bank  has  been  constantly  engaged  in  the  refinements  of  the  various 
price  indices  and  would  continue  to  provide  the  necessary  support  to  the  Government  to 
bring about further improvements in the measurement of inflationary conditions.  
Information on leading indicators for business cycles 
(iii)  
Given  the  well-known  lags  in  monetary  policy  transmission  that  I  referred  to  earlier,  it  is 
important for monetary policy to be forward looking. Timely and reliable information on the 
likely evolution of economic activity and inflationary conditions and an ongoing assessment 
of  the  transmission  lags  are  important.  While  these  issues  are  relevant  for  all  economies, 
they are more pertinent for emerging market economies (EMEs), like India, undergoing rapid 
structural  transformation.  In  the  wake  of  the  fast  pace  of  structural  transformation,  the 
transmission lags are subject to constant change. Similarly, the magnitude of key variables 
such as investment, output and inflation in response to monetary policy impulses is likely to 
vary  over  time.  In  view  of  these  specific  additional  complexities  in  the  transmission 
mechanism  in  the  EMEs,  like  India,  it  is  important  to  develop  robust  lead  indicators  of 
economic activity. 
The Reserve Bank set up a Working Group in 2001 and a Technical Advisory Group in 2006 
to get expert advice on development of leading economic indicators for the Indian economy. 
We are now compiling a composite leading indicator (CLI) on a regular basis as an input for 
monetary  policy  formulation.  Economic  and  financial  conditions  can  change  quickly  over  a 
very short period of time, as evidenced by the ongoing global financial crisis. We, therefore, 
need a renewed focus on assessing cyclical conditions through leading indicators, including 
supportive  research  on  macroeconomic  linkages,  time  series  and  seasonal  adjustment, 
business  cycle  analysis,  short-term  business  indicators,  sensitivity  analysis,  and  detailed 
analysis  of  quarterly  results  of  the  financial  and  non-financial  companies  to  assess  the 
impact on the real sector. The slew of surveys initiated by the Reserve Bank over the past 
few years have been very helpful and these would have to be further expanded/strengthened 
as warranted.  
Financial soundness indicators 
(iv) 
The global financial crisis has brought into focus the importance of targeting financial stability 
as  an  explicit  variable.  Even  as  policy  makers  and  regulators  are  still  grappling  with  the 
precise definition and quantitative indicators of financial stability, there is a reasonable clarity 
on  the  symptoms  of  financial  instability.  The  responsibility  for  ensuring  financial  stability 
implicitly rests with the central bank. 
One of the several tools required for monitoring financial stability is stress testing – a term 
that has now become widely used – but variedly understood. The United States has recently 
published  the  results  of  its  stress  tests  with  very  positive  outcomes  in  terms  of  shaping 
expectations and shoring up market confidence. Europe too is undertaking stress tests. As 
part of the self assessment done by our Committee on Financial Sector Assessment (CFSA), 
we too performed stress tests for the banking sector which showed that our banks are safe, 
healthy and operating prudently. 
The stress tests done by the CFSA are a good beginning, but admittedly rudimentary. We 
need  to  refine  both  our  database  and  our  analytical  capabilities  for  stress  tests.  This  is 
another challenge for the Reserve Bank on the data and analysis side. 
Data on employment 
(v)  
Finally,  I  come  to  a  major  gripe.  Globally,  trends  in  employment  are  one  of  the  most 
important  inputs  in  setting  monetary  policy  response.  Unfortunately,  we  do  not  have  any 
reliable  nation-wide  statistics  on  employment.  Data  on  factory-sector  employment  are 
available from Annual Survey of Industry, but with a large lag that makes it virtually useless 
4 
 BIS Review 84/2009
for  monetary  policy  purposes.  Farm  sector  employment  data  are  also  available  at  poor 
frequency  and  with  long  lags.  Non-farm  pay  rolls  capture  employment  trends  in  some 
economies.  But,  in  India,  data  on  organised  sector  employment,  as  obtained  from 
employment  exchanges,  cover  a  very  small  part  of  the  workforce.  Against  this  backdrop, 
timely and accurate information on employment conditions will enhance our understanding of 
inflationary dynamics in the economy, and thereby improve the conduct of monetary policy.  
Conclusion 
I  realise  that  I  have  covered  a  wide  canvas.  Even  if  somewhat  incoherent,  I  have  tried  to 
present to you the challenges the Reserve Bank  faces in its everyday work in the area of 
collection, analysis, interpretation, use and dissemination of statistics. I am aware that this 
one-day seminar cannot find conclusive answers to all these questions, but I do hope your 
expertise and insights will take us closer to solutions. 
I wish this seminar all the best. 
BIS Review 84/2009 
 5
