José Manuel González-Páramo: Liquidity, funding and solvency – policy 
responses and lessons 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the Universidad de Alcalá de Henares, Madrid, 16 January 2009. 
 1. 
Introduction 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
It  is  a  great  pleasure  for  me  to  participate  in  this  Conference  of  Universidad  Alcalá  de 
Henares,  together  with  so  many  distinguished  speakers,  and  share  with  you  some 
considerations  about  the  responses  of  the  Eurosystem  and  other  public  authorities  to  the 
financial  market  crisis  as  well  as  on  some  of  the  lessons  that  we  have  drawn.  I  am  very 
grateful to the organisers – Foro de Economía del Centro de Políticas Públicas UAH and, in 
particular, its director Rodrigo Rato – for giving me the opportunity to address you today.  
After  one  year  and  a  half  from  the  start  of  the  turmoil,  the  international  financial  system 
continues to undergo a period of severe adjustment. The global money and credit markets 
are still impaired by the effect of high uncertainty about the solidity of financial and banking 
institutions and their ability to withstand the consequences of both the vulnerabilities at the 
root of the current crisis (such as the exposures to the US sub-prime mortgage market) and 
new  shocks  stemming  from  the  ongoing  slowdown  in  economic  activity.  Indeed,  the 
deterioration in credit supply conditions, together with falling asset prices, exceptionally high 
uncertainty and declining confidence, has fed back into economic activity, leading to a severe 
worsening of the outlook for economic growth in both developed and emerging countries. 
Of  particular  concern  for  central  banks  is  the  persistence  of  tensions  in  global  money 
markets, where market liquidity has come under severe stress and term interest rate spreads 
remain at levels that – though significantly lower than three months ago – are nevertheless 
elevated  by  historical  standards.  Other  important  segments  of  the  global  financial  system, 
such  as  the  markets  for  equities,  bonds  and  commodities,  have  also  entered  a  period  of 
considerable turbulence and stress.  
In my intervention today, I will focus on what the ECB has done from the beginning of the 
financial  market  turmoil  to  contribute  to  the  smooth  functioning  of  the  euro  area  money 
markets and to mitigate funding shortages of euro area banks. 
The financial market turmoil and policy responses from the Eurosystem  
2.  
The  turmoil  over  the  last  year  and  a  half  has  hung  on  our  economies  like  a  dark  cloud, 
prompting  central  banks  and  other  public  authorities  to  undertake  measures  that  have  in 
some  cases  been  historically  unprecedented  in  scope  and  number.  As  a  somewhat 
anecdotal illustration to this point, I have recently noticed that a document kept by staff at the 
ECB listing the main actions taken by major central banks in response to the turmoil since 
September  2008  only,  already  exceeds  thirty  pages  of  concise  descriptions  of  policy 
initiatives and specific interventions.  
More  generally,  in  order  to  understand  the  actions  by  central  banks  and  other  public 
authorities  in  response  to  the  financial  turmoil,  it  is  better  to  position  them  against  the 
background of the different moments of the turmoil in which they were taken. Indeed, it is 
possible to distinguish three main phases from the turmoil:  
1. 
From its start in August 2007 to the rescue of Bear Stearns in March 2008; 
BIS Review 6/2009 
 1
2. 
From  the  post-rescue  of  Bear  Stearns  to  the  bankruptcy  of  Lehman  Brothers  in 
September 2008; and 
from the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers to date. 
3. 
To the risk of oversimplifying, I would say that the first phase of the turmoil was dominated by 
concerns  about  market  liquidity  and  their  interaction  with  funding  liquidity  at  individual 
institutions;  during  the  second  phase,  it  became  increasingly  evident  that,  as  a  result  of 
protracted market and funding illiquidity, adverse liquidity-solvency spirals with the potential 
to undermine the viability of specific banking business models were at work; finally, following 
the  default  by  Lehman  Brothers,  widespread  concerns  about  the  solvency  of  banking  and 
other financial institutions have become predominant. Policy responses have evolved during 
the various phases of the turmoil so as to address the increasing difficulties.  
 First phase of the financial market turmoil: August 2007-March 2008 
2.1 
During  the  first  phase  of  the  turmoil,  the  Eurosystem  responded  to  the  challenges  mostly 
through a combination of operational measures in the field of euro liquidity management and 
increased  communication  to  the  public.  This  phase  also  saw  the  start  of  significant 
international  cooperation  among  central  banks  to  mitigate  funding  shortages  in  the  global 
money markets.  
In line with its historical practice and institutional responsibilities, the key objectives pursued 
by the Eurosystem’s liquidity management during this first phase were two: 
1. 
to steer the overnight money market rate as close as possible to its central policy 
rate (the minimum bid rate in the main refinancing operations), so as to implement 
the monetary policy stance chosen by the Governing Council; and 
to ensure the smooth functioning of the money market, also at term maturities, by 
facilitating access to liquidity to solvent credit institutions.  
2. 
In  particular,  by  pursuing  the  second  objective,  the  Eurosystem  aimed  to  contribute  to  re-
establishing  confidence  among  market  participants  and  to  safeguarding  financial  stability, 
while  also  supporting  the  appropriate  functioning  of  the  monetary  policy  transmission 
mechanism. Contributing to the stability of the financial system is among the tasks assigned 
to  the  Eurosystem  by  the  Treaty  establishing  the  European  Union  under  Article  105(5). 
Ensuring the smooth functioning of the money market is crucial for central banks since the 
short-term segments of the money market represent the first step along the mechanism of 
transmission  of  monetary  policy  impulses,  and  their  impairment  may  complicate  the 
signalling and implementation of the desired policy stance. 
What did the Eurosystem do in practice? In practice the Eurosystem engaged in more active 
liquidity  management  and  adjusted  its  modalities  of  liquidity  provision  to  the  euro  area 
banking sector.  
As an illustration of more active liquidity management, let me recall our intervention right at 
the beginning of the market turmoil. The problems that originated in the exposure of many 
financial  institutions  worldwide  to  the  US  sub-prime  mortgage  market  started  simmering  in 
international  financial  markets  in  the  spring  of  2007.  In  money  markets  the  impact  of  the 
turmoil was initially felt mainly in the longer-dated unsecured inter-bank market and in non-
government repurchase agreement (repo) transactions. Tensions eventually spilled over to 
the very short-term money markets (i.e. below one-week) in the summer, at first in the US 
dollar market, where banks – particularly, the European institutions – encountered difficulties 
in raising short-term liquidity, and on 9 August 2007 to the short-term euro money market.  
After  it  became  clear  that  there  was  the  risk  of  an  imminent  gridlock  in  the  euro  money 
market,  the  ECB  released  a  communication  stating  its  readiness  to  contribute  to  orderly 
conditions  in  the  euro  money  market.  The  ECB  then  put  its  money  where  its  mouth  is  by 
2 
 BIS Review 6/2009
providing  EUR  95  billion  on  an  overnight  basis  to  the  euro  area  banking  sector  through  a 
fine-tuning operation conducted as a fixed rate tender with full allotment.  
This operation marked the start of a new phase in which the Eurosystem would make some 
adjustments to its liquidity supply practices in two main directions:  
1. 
the  weekly  refinancing  operations  within 
Under its so-called front-loading policy, it modified the time profile for the provision 
of  euro 
the  reserve 
maintenance period; and  
it made adjustments to the modalities of distribution across instruments, particularly 
by raising the maturity of its refinancing operations, increasing the frequency of fine-
tuning operations and occasionally applying different tender specifications to some 
operations. 
liquidity  via 
2. 
The  front-loading  policy  was  introduced  to  accommodate  a  change  in  the  time  pattern  of 
liquidity  demand  from  the  banking  sector  within  each  reserve  maintenance  period, 
particularly with the emergence of strong precautionary demand in the early weeks of each 
period.  
Indeed,  under  normal  circumstances,  the  ECB  calibrates  its  liquidity  provision  in  order  to 
satisfy the liquidity deficit of the euro area banking sector under the assumption that banks 
as a whole prefer to fulfil their reserve requirements smoothly, i.e. by holding – in aggregate 
terms – the same level of current account holdings with the central bank on each day of the 
reserve  maintenance  period.  As  a  result,  the  ECB  normally  allots  at  the  weekly  main 
refinancing operations an amount of liquidity that is close to its “benchmark” estimate of the 
expected liquidity needs of the banking sector. This practice has functioned well in the past, 
when it has normally delivered short-term interest rates close to the target policy rate. 
However,  at  the  start  of  the  turmoil,  banks  became  increasingly  reluctant  to  lend  to  each 
other on unsecured terms, both out of concerns about credit risk and out of fears of being 
confronted  with  adverse  liquidity  shocks  and,  as  a  consequence,  preferred  fulfilling  their 
reserve requirements relatively early in the maintenance period.  
In  order  to  accommodate  the  increased  demand  for  liquidity  buffers  by  banks  and  also  to 
prevent  upward  pressure  on  interest  rates  at  the  beginning  of  the  reserve  maintenance 
period,  the  Eurosystem  increased  the  amount  of  liquidity  supplied  in  the  operations 
conducted at the beginning of the period, while later reducing it in the following weeks so as 
to keep the average supply of liquidity unchanged.  
At  the  same  time,  the  ECB  decided  to  increase  the  amount  of  refinancing  provided  via 
longer-term refinancing operations with a view to smoothening conditions in the term money 
market. This decision was accompanied by a reduction in the amounts allotted at the weekly 
main  refinancing  operations  in  order  to  keep  the  total  amount  of  outstanding  liquidity 
constant. 
Just  to  illustrate  the  importance  of  the  shift  in  the  maturity  composition  of  the  ECB’s 
refinancing operations, let me quote a few figures. In the summer of 2007, just before the 
outbreak  of  the  turmoil,  the  ECB  typically  provided  about  2/3  of  its  euro  liquidity  (around 
EUR300  bn)  via  the  main  refinancing  operations,  with  the  rest  (around  EUR150  bn)  via 
operations  with  a  three-month  maturity.  At  the  end  of  the  first  phase  of  the  turmoil,  the 
relative importance of the operations was almost inverted (with MROs accounting for roughly 
EUR180 bn versus EUR270 bn for the longer-term operations). 
As mentioned above, the ECB increased the frequency of operations to respond with greater 
sensitivity  to  shifts  in  the  demand  for  reserves  and  also  occasionally  adjusted  the  tender 
specification  of  its  operations,  particularly  on  9  August  when  –  given  the  large  amount  of 
uncertainty  about  the  severity  of  market  illiquidity  –  it  was  deemed  more  efficient  to  move 
from the standard variable-rate tender without pre-announced allotment to a fixed-rate tender 
BIS Review 6/2009 
 3
with full allotment. A key difference between these two tender specifications is that under full-
allotment, the amount of liquidity provided is entirely driven by demand.  
Similarly, in order to address concerns about funding shortages over Christmas and the year-
end, on the occasion of the two-week main refinancing operation conducted on 18 December 
2007,  it  was  decided  to  shift  from  a  variable-rate  tender  to  a  quasi-fixed  rate  with  pre-
announced full allotment.  
As mentioned earlier, during this first phase the Eurosystem aimed to keep the overall level 
of refinancing provided to the banking sector at levels close to those prevailing just before 
the turmoil (roughly around EUR450 bn). This desire to stabilise average liquidity over the 
reserve  maintenance  period  reflected  the  Eurosystem’s  longstanding  policy  of  providing  to 
the banking system only the amount of liquidity needed to smoothly fulfil their liquidity deficit 
over each maintenance period.  
Explaining  that  the  average  level  of  refinancing  provided  to  the  market  remained  constant 
was  also  important  to  dispel  some  occasional  confusion  in  press  reports  about  the 
implications of the liquidity interventions of the ECB. In particular, press reports occasionally 
argued  that  the  ECB  had  increased  the  amount  of  refinancing  made  available  to  the  euro 
area  sector  based  on  somewhat  impressionistic  calculations  and  comparisons  (e.g.  by 
adding up allotment at overnight operations on different days or by comparing the scale of 
the  ECB  operation  with  those  of  central  banks  operating  under  completely  different 
operational frameworks).  
These reports were occasionally accompanied by warnings that in responding to the financial 
market tensions, the ECB and other major central banks may not be taking “moral hazard” 
considerations into account.  
The ECB made it clear from the start of the turmoil that it attached large importance to the 
issue of the possible effects on future incentives and behaviour of banks of its actions, while 
noting  that  concerns  about  moral  hazard  should  nevertheless  not  prevent  from  providing 
appropriate  policy  responses  to  the  turmoil.  More  specifically,  in  the  euro  area  concerns 
about sowing the seeds of moral hazard were mitigated by the observation that the ECB had 
not made changes to its existing operational framework from the start of the turmoil. 
Indeed, although by changing the amounts and time patterns of liquidity provision and the 
occasional conduct of extraordinary refinancing operations, the ECB had departed from past 
regularities followed in the steering of liquidity conditions, it had not made structural changes 
to its existing operational framework that may be rightly or wrongly seen as aiming to provide 
relief to any specific financial institutions or sectors bearing substantial losses as a result of 
past imprudent risk taking.  
Indeed, the ECB’s more active management of liquidity conditions was achieved by making 
few changes to its traditional way of using instruments and tools that were already part of its 
operational  arsenal  from  the  start  of  the  turmoil.  Moreover,  the  focus  of  the  ECB’s 
interventions  was  to  adjust  aggregate  liquidity  conditions  so  as  to  continue  to  deliver  the 
desired  monetary  policy  stance  and  to  provide  support  to  the  money  market  and  banking 
sector  from  a  systemic  perspective  rather  than  with  the  purpose  of  supporting  specific 
institutions in trouble. 
The  ability  to  respond  to  the  challenges  posed  by  the  turmoil  using  the  existing  toolbox 
reflected three key features of the Eurosystem’s operational framework: (1) it grants access 
to central bank liquidity to a very large range of counterparties; (2) it accepts a rather wide 
spectrum of private and public collateral in its refinancing operations and marginal lending 
facility;  and  (3)  it  conducts  open  market  operations  on  a  relatively  large  scale,  partly 
reflecting the level of reserve requirements. Thus, unlike other central banks, from the start of 
the turmoil the Eurosystem was in a position to reach a large number of financial institutions 
and to mitigate their funding liquidity risks, thereby providing support to the money market as 
a  whole,  without  the  need  to  make  significant  amendments  to  its  framework.  The  large 
4 
 BIS Review 6/2009
spectrum of assets accepted as collateral represented an additional channel through which 
the  Eurosystem  helped  to  mitigate  the  refinancing  risk  of  categories  of  assets  for  which 
secondary market liquidity had basically dried up, since they could be used as collateral in 
credit operations of the Eurosystem. 
The  ECB’s  liquidity  interventions  were  also  accompanied  by  an  intensification  of  its 
communication  policy.  A  key  objective  of  communication  efforts  was  to  reassure  market 
participants  and  the  public  at  large  about  the  ECB’s  full  awareness  of  the  severe 
deterioration of liquidity conditions in money markets and its preparedness to act in order to 
preserve  orderly  conditions  in  money  markets.  In  addition,  increased  communication  was 
requested by the rather technical nature of issues related to liquidity management and the 
relative  lack  of  familiarity  of  the  general  public  with  them,  also  in  order  to  prevent  and 
occasionally  correct  misunderstandings  about  the  scale,  modalities  and  objectives  of  the 
Eurosystem’s liquidity operations. 
As regards the objectives of such operations, it was important to continuously remind market 
participants and the financial press that, under the Eurosystem’s institutional set-up (further 
reinforced  by  some  changes  to  the  operational  framework  in  2004),  decisions  on  liquidity 
operations are separated from considerations on monetary policy stance. In fact, in the euro 
area changes in liquidity conditions are directed to implement the stance of monetary policy 
chosen by the General Council, as summarised by the ECB official rates (which are explicitly 
communicated to the public through the regular press release on monetary policy decisions), 
and under no circumstances can be interpreted as signalling changes in such stance.  
From  the  first  day  it  opened  its  doors,  the  ECB  has  stuck  to  this  principle  –  the  so-called 
separation  principle  –  for  reasons  of  accountability,  transparency  and  efficiency  in  the 
implementation  of  its  monetary  policy.  The  need  to  remind  the  public  of  the  separation 
between monetary policy formulation and implementation became essential in the course of 
the  first  phase  of  the  turmoil  against  the  background  of  strong  inflationary  pressures  and 
rising risks to price stability.  
In  addition  to  operational  responses  on  the  euro  market,  the  Eurosystem  further 
strengthened  its  cooperation  with  other  central  banks,  first  by  means  of  enhanced 
information sharing and collective monitoring of market developments and later on through 
coordinated steps to provide liquidity to euro area banks in what was, to my knowledge, the 
first  systematic  and  multilateral  initiative  of  central  bank  co-operation  in  the  money  market 
field, a market which is central to the implementation of a central bank’s monetary policy.  
More specifically, in order to address the concerns of euro area banks on the availability of 
their funding denominated in US dollars, in December 2007 the ECB agreed with the Federal 
Reserve System a currency arrangement (swap line) in connection with their US dollar Term 
Auction Facility (TAF). Under this agreement, two operations with a maturity of one-month 
amounting to USD 10 billion each were initially conducted, subsequently renewed in January 
and expanded in mid March to USD 15 billion each, while announcing that the USD funding 
operation would continue for as long as needed.  
The TAF operations proved very successful, as they met with strong demand from market 
participants  and  succeeded  in  mitigating  the  liquidity  shortages  in  the  global  term  money 
markets.  
Second phase of the financial market turmoil: March 2008-September 2008 
2.2  
The start of the second phase of the turmoil was marked by the rescue of Bear Stearns by 
JP Morgan with the support of the Federal Reserve. This event provided a clear example of 
the  potential  impact  of  protracted  market  illiquidity  on  funding  illiquidity  and,  ultimately, 
solvency  for  individual  financial  institutions,  whose  business  activities  depended  in  many 
different ways from the viability and strength of the originate-to-distribute banking business 
model.  
BIS Review 6/2009 
 5
Such concerns related in the first place to large banks reliant on wholesale markets for the 
funding  of  their  lending  activities.  Indeed,  many  large  banks  had  become  increasingly 
dependent on interbank borrowing, both unsecured and collateralised, short and long-term 
debt, and, as an ultimate line of defence, on the sale of marketable securities rather than on 
retail  deposits,  which  made  them  vulnerable  to  the  persisting  of  disruptions  in  financial 
markets.  
Moreover, there was increasing concern that – as the experience of Bear Stearns had shown 
– the range of systemically relevant institutions had become broader, so that not only large 
traditional banks but also non-depository financial institutions, such as investment banks and 
primary dealers, played a systemic role in maintaining market liquidity in a broad range of 
unsecured  and  secured  markets.  If  such  institutions  faced  funding  liquidity  constraints, 
market  liquidity  would  be  widely  affected,  with  potential  negative  repercussions  for  the 
banking sector and, ultimately, for systemic financial stability.  
In the euro area the Eurosystem reacted to the deterioration in money market conditions by 
intensifying its provision of euro liquidity to the domestic banking sector and by strengthening 
its cooperation with the Fed in order to expand the supply of USD liquidity to the euro area 
banks. The focus of the Eurosystem during this phase was to support market liquidity as a 
means  of  mitigating  funding  liquidity,  ultimately  contributing  to  preventing  that  solvent 
institutions became unable to continue operating. 
As part of the enhancement of euro liquidity provision, the Eurosystem continued to shift the 
maturity composition of its refinancing operations from the weekly maturities to longer-term 
maturities.  Specifically,  it  increased  the  number  of  3-month  variable-rate  tenders  and 
diversified the maturity structure of its longer-term operations by introducing auctions with a 
6-month maturity.  
The  gradual  expansion  in  the  size  of  longer-term  refinancing  operations  aimed  to  mitigate 
funding risks by providing banks with a stable source of liquidity at term  maturities, with a 
view also to preventing tensions in term markets from spilling over to the short-term money 
markets.  Overall,  the  split  between  main  refinancing  and  longer-term  operations  shifted 
slightly  toward  the  second  category  in  the  course  of  the  second  phase  of  the  turmoil.  In 
addition,  the  average  maturity  of  the  refinancing  operations  rose  as  a  result  of  the 
introduction of operations with a six-month maturity. By the end of this phase of the turmoil, 
the split between the longer-term refinancing operations between the three- and six-month 
maturities was EUR250 bn versus EUR50 bn. 
In the course of this phase, the scale of the joint initiative among the Fed, the ECB (and the 
Swiss  National  Bank)  was  substantially  expanded.  First,  in  May  2008  it  was  decided  to 
almost double the size of the allotment (to USD 28 bn) at the one-month auctions of USD 
liquidity, and also decided that the auctions would be regularly conducted with a bi-weekly 
frequency.  At  the  end  of  August,  the  USD  operations  were  further  expanded,  with  the 
addition of operations with three-month duration (with allotments of USD 10 bn each, while 
reducing  the  allotment  of  the  one-month  operations  to  USD  20  bn).  As  a  result  of  this 
expansion,  in  the  summer  of  2008,  the  cooperation  between  the  ECB  and  the  Fed  in  the 
context of the TAF made funding amounting to USD50 bn available to euro area banks on a 
regular basis, also at the problematic term maturities. 
Third phase of the financial market turmoil: September 2008 to date  
2.3 
In September 2008 the financial market turmoil entered a more critical phase following the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers. In response to the renewed tensions, the Eurosystem stepped 
up  its  efforts  to  support  the  appropriate  functioning  of  the  euro  money  markets  and  to 
alleviate both the euro and the USD funding needs of euro area banks. In particular, it took 
some  exceptional  measures  aiming  to  facilitate  unlimited  access  by  solvent  banks  against 
adequate collateral to euro and USD liquidity operations. In addition, the ECB adjusted its 
6 
 BIS Review 6/2009
monetary  policy  stance  in  response  to  the  change  in  the  outlook  for  medium  term  price 
stability.  
A key contribution to easing liquidity tensions in the euro money markets was provided by the 
decision  on  8  October  to  temporarily  change  the  tender  procedure  in  the  weekly  main 
refinancing operations to fixed rate tender with full allotment, which – as earlier mentioned – 
implies  that  the  allotment  at  the  refinancing  operations  is  fully  determined  by  the  level  of 
demand. This was followed on 15 October by the decision, taken in the context of initiatives 
undertaken by the EU authorities, to temporarily extend the fixed-rate tender procedure with 
full allotment also to the longer-term refinancing operations.  
As  a  result  of  these  decisions,  euro  area  counterparties  can  now  borrow  as  much  euro 
liquidity as they wish both at the weekly and at some key term maturities, against a set of 
eligible  assets  accepted  as  collateral  that  has  also  been  temporarily  expanded.  Other 
measures taken in the last quarter of 2007 included the temporary expansion of the number 
of  counterparties  eligible  to  participate  in  fine-tuning  operations  and  the  introduction  of  a 
special term (roughly, one-month) refinancing operation. 
The  decision  to  temporarily  relax  the  criteria  for  eligibility  as  collateral,  while  continuing  to 
apply adequate risk control measures, was related to the significantly increased role played 
by  the  ECB  in  providing  liquidity.  During  the  first  two  phases  of  the  turmoil  (and  a  fortiori 
under normal circumstances), the wide range of assets eligible as collateral guarantees that 
availability of collateral does not become a constraint for banks’ participation at the ECB’s 
credit operations.  
Indeed, historically, there has been a significant degree of over-collateralisation in the euro 
area.  For  instance,  in  2007  the  average  value  of  eligible  collateral  posted  with  the 
Eurosystem exceeded EUR1.1 trillion, more than twice the average amount of outstanding 
credit at policy operations. However, since the start of the current phase of the turmoil, the 
amount of refinancing operations provided by the Eurosystem has significantly increased and 
now  exceeds  EUR800  billion  at  the  euro  liquidity  operations  (and  also  the  size  of  the 
collateralised  dollar  operations  has  significantly  increased).  In  addition,  the  increase  in  the 
average  duration  of  the  ECB  refinancing  operations  implies  that  collateral  may  remain  on 
average locked-in for longer periods. Thus, while a significant degree of overcollateralisation 
remains,  it  was  regarded  appropriate  to  temporarily  expand  the  collateral  set  in  order  to 
further facilitate the access to euro liquidity of solvent banks.  
Following the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the ECB further strengthened cooperation with 
other central banks in order to facilitate the access of euro area banks to liquidity in USD and 
Swiss  Francs.  On  18  September,  the  ECB  announced  the  expansion  of  its  USD  liquidity 
operations in collaboration with the Fed by adding operations with an overnight maturity and 
increasing the size of the allotment at the existing one-month and three-month operations, 
overall more than doubling the overall size of its temporary USD liquidity provision (to USD 
110  bn).  This  was  followed  by  a  further  expansion  to  USD  240  billion  at  the  end  of 
September (with the introduction of a one-week operation). 
Finally, on 15 October the ECB announced (together with Bank of England and the Swiss 
National Bank) that, in the context of its cooperation with the Fed to provide euro area banks 
with USD liquidity, it would conduct operations at the various maturities at fixed interest rates 
and with full allotment. On 15 October the Eurosystem also entered into an agreement with 
the Swiss National Bank in order to facilitate the provision of liquidity denominated in Swiss 
Francs to euro banks. At the same time, in the past few months the Eurosystem has signed 
agreements  with  the  central  banks  of  several  European  countries  in  order  to  improve  the 
provision of euro liquidity to their banking sectors. 
Overall, the scope of the decisions taken in October 2008 should not be underestimated. As 
a result of such decisions, euro area banks can now borrow from the ECB as much euro and 
USD liquidity as they wish, also at some key term maturities, of course against eligible euro-
denominated  collateral.  The  new  set  of  temporary  measures  provide  an  important 
BIS Review 6/2009 
 7
contribution  to  mitigating  the  funding  risks  of  solvent  banks  in  the  euro  area,  while  also 
contributing to restore confidence among market participants in the current environment in 
which  money  markets  remain  under  stress  and  the  traditional  channels  of  liquidity 
transmission are impaired. While it is too early to assess the impact of such measures, there 
is evidence that these operations have had a positive on the term spreads, which have now 
moderated  from  the  peaks  recorded  right  after  the  Lehman  Brothers’  bankruptcy  (though 
they still remain at high levels by historical standards). 
The more recent measures by the ECB should also be seen in conjunction with the important 
initiatives (mostly based on capital injections in exchange for equity and on the provision of 
state guarantees) recently taken by national governments of the EU, US and other areas of 
the world to support their domestic financial and banking systems.  
It  is important  to  notice that,  as  a  result  of  its enhanced  liquidity  interventions  in euro  and 
other currencies (notably, in USD) during the present phase of the turmoil, the Eurosystem 
has  significantly  increased  its  involvement  in  financial  intermediation  in  the  euro  area. 
Indeed, the Eurosystem has moved from the situation before the start of the turmoil in which 
it provided banks only with as much liquidity as necessary to implement its monetary policy 
stance,  with  the  intermediation  being  performed  by  the  market,  to  the  present  condition  in 
which it effectively intermediates liquidity flows among banks in order to mitigate dysfunctions 
of money markets.  
To illustrate this point, it is useful to distinguish between gross and net liquidity provided by 
the  Eurosystem.  Under  normal  circumstances,  there  is  no  much  difference  between  these 
two notions since the recourse to the deposit facility is limited and fine-tuning operations are 
not frequent. By contrast, there is at present a significant difference between gross and net 
liquidity, with the total level of refinancing provided by the Eurosystem exceeding EUR800 
billion, against over EUR300 billion held by banks at the marginal deposit facility. 
Taking  up  a  significant  intermediation  role  to  guarantee  the  orderly  functioning  of  our 
economy  was  essential  in  the  wake  of  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  when  an 
unprecedented deterioration in the degree of public confidence in the banking sector of most 
developed  economies  seemed  to  fundamentally  undermine  their  ability  to  perform  its 
institutional financial intermediation function. The gravity of the situation required prompt and 
extensive actions by central banks and public institutions, also through concerted initiatives. 
And  as  long  as  money  markets  remain  dysfunctional,  it  is  crucial  for  the  Eurosystem  to 
continue  to  provide  as  much  liquidity  as  needed  in  order  to  ease  tensions  in  the  impaired 
money  markets,  with  a  view  to  ensuring  that  access  to  liquidity  of  solvent  banks  is  not 
disrupted,  thereby  also  contributing  to  safeguarding  financial  stability.  However,  this  is  not 
the  ideal  long-term  solution  in  a  market-oriented  economy  like  the  euro  area.  It  may 
discourage  the  resumption  of  normal  inter-bank  trading  activity.  It  also  potentially  implies 
increased financial risks for the Eurosystem (which are nevertheless taken care of through 
adequate risk control measures). All of this explains why the Eurosystem looks forward to the 
reactivation  of  inter-bank  lending  and  to  banks  resuming  their  traditional  intermediation 
activity.  
In this context, it was decided on 18 December to restore to 200 basis points the corridor of 
standing  facility  rates  around  the  central  policy  rate  (the  rate  of  the  main  refinancing 
operation)  that  had  been  temporarily  narrowed  by  100  basis  points  at  the  height  of  the 
tensions in the global money markets following the collapse of Lehman Brothers, but may be 
creating disincentives to inter-bank lending. 
Finally, it should be recalled that from the start of the current phase of the market turmoil, the 
ECB  has  significantly  adjusted  its  monetary  policy  stance  in  response  to  changes  in  the 
outlook for price stability in the euro area.  
On 8 October, the ECB announced a 50 basis point reduction (to 3.75%) in its key policy rate 
– the interest rate on the main refinancing operation – in a move coordinated with five other 
8 
 BIS Review 6/2009
major  central  banks  (Bank  of  Canada,  Bank  of  England,  the  Federal  Reserve,  Sveriges 
Riksbank and Swiss National Bank). The decision to ease monetary conditions in the euro 
area (and, more generally, at the global level) was warranted by the previous moderation in 
inflationary  pressures  and  inflationary  expectations,  partly  reflecting  weakening  economic 
activity,  a  marked  decline  in  the  prices  of  energy  and  other  commodities  and  increasing 
downside  risks  to  future  economic  growth,  in  turn  reflecting  to  a  large  extent  the 
intensification and broadening of the financial turmoil.  
This coordinated interest rate cut was unprecedented by historical standards and was very 
much  welcomed  as  a  sign  of  the  strong  commitment  of  the  international  central  banking 
community to addressing the macroeconomic implications of the financial market turmoil.  
Additional reductions by 50 basis points (to 3.25%) on 6 November and by 75 basis points 
(to  2.5%)  on  4  December  were  decided  against  the  background  of  a  further  alleviation  of 
risks  to  price  stability  at  policy-relevant  horizons  at  a  time  of  a  rapid  and  significant 
deterioration in the outlook for economic growth in the euro area, and a further alleviation of 
upside risks to price stability at the policy-relevant medium-term horizon.  
Taken together, these monetary policy decisions amount to a cumulative reduction by 175 
basis  point  in  the  euro  area  policy  rate  in  slightly  less  than  two  months.  This  pace  of 
monetary loosening is certainly unprecedented for the euro area, but fully consistent with the 
ECB’s strategy and with its primary mandate of delivering medium term price stability. 
At  yesterday’s  meeting,  the  Governing  Council  decided  to  reduce  the  ECB  official  interest 
rates by further 50 basis points (lowering the rate on the main refinancing operations to 2%). 
This  decision  was  taken  against  the  background  of  a  continuing  decline  in  inflationary 
pressures, particularly reflecting the deterioration of the economic outlook. Indeed, the latest 
economic  data  releases  and  survey  information  provide  additional  evidence  that  the  euro 
area is experiencing a significant slowdown, largely related to the effects of the intensification 
and  broadening  of  the  financial  turmoil,  at  a  time  when  the  level  of  uncertainty  remains 
exceptionally high. Looking forward, both the economic and monetary analysis suggest that, 
after the latest decision, the outlook for risks to medium-term price stability in the euro area is 
broadly balanced.  
Some lessons from the turmoil  
3.  
One year and a half after the start of the turmoil, we can start drawing key lessons from the 
turmoil in a number of fields. Let me here focus on a selected number of issues related to 
liquidity management, the regulatory and supervisory frameworks of our economies as well 
as on domestic and international cooperation in various policy areas. 
As  regards  lessons  for  liquidity  management,  in  the  past  it  was  common  wisdom  among 
central  banks  that  there  is  no  unique  way  to  implement  monetary  policy.  However,  the 
protracted turmoil in money markets and other financial markets over the last year and a half 
has shown that there are certain key operational features that facilitate the implementation of 
monetary policy under stress. In particular, in order to distribute reserves effectively when the 
inter-bank  lending  is  impaired,  central  banks  should  be  capable  of  providing  access  to 
collateralised  lending  operations  to  a  wide  set  of  counterparties  against  a  broad  range  of 
collateral and on a large scale. Whether those features should become part of the regular 
operational  framework  or  are  introduced  on  demand  in  distressed  market  conditions  is 
ultimately the choice of each individual central bank.  
The  turmoil  has  also  demonstrated  that,  under  stressed  conditions  in  financial  markets, 
global  channels  for  distributing  liquidity  across  borders  may  become  seriously  impaired, 
which is a major source of liquidity risk for international banks with funding needs in different 
currencies. As extensively discussed in this speech, during the current turmoil central banks 
have  addressed  this  problem  by  substantially  expanding  the  scope  of  their  coordinated 
liquidity injections, which have played an effective role in easing tensions at the short-term 
BIS Review 6/2009 
 9
transmitted  around  the  globe  almost  simultaneously.  Through  the 
end of the global money markets and in instilling confidence in market participants about the 
commitment of the world’s major central banks to addressing such tensions.  
Additional work is under way in the central banking community to investigate the opportunity 
of  establishing  regular  cross-border  mechanisms  to  counter  problems  in  the  international 
circulation  of  liquidity,  especially  at  a  time  of  emergency,  for  instance  through  the 
establishment of standing currency swap lines or the introduction of the possibility to accept 
foreign-currency  denominated  assets  as  collateral.  Whereas  such  measures  appear 
desirable  in  order  to  strengthen  the  ability  of  central  banks  to  ease  liquidity  pressures  for 
large  internationally  active  banks  under  emergency  conditions,  they  may  also  imply 
additional legal and financial risks for the conduct of monetary policy operations that need to 
be fully assessed before taking any decisions.  
While cooperation in the field of liquidity management on an unprecedented scale has been 
certainly  one  of  the  hallmarks  of  public  responses  to  the  current  turmoil,  another  example 
without precedents of central bank coordination was the decision by the ECB and other five 
major central banks to ease global monetary conditions on 8 October 2008. Commentators 
and observers have wondered whether this concerted policy decision may be the beginning 
of a new era of increased international monetary policy coordination in response to economic 
and financial globalisation.  
It is important to stress that this coordinated interest rate cut was taken in a specific context 
and  with  a  specific  objective.  There  was  extraordinary  uncertainty  at  the  time  about  the 
economic outlook and strong evidence that upside risks to price stability had diminished at 
the global level. The coordinated cut addressed the need to respond to a common shock that 
was  being 
joint 
communication, the international central banking community provided a signal of its strong 
commitment to responding to the macroeconomic implications of the financial market turmoil.  
There  is  no  doubt  that  over  the  past  three  decades  the  trade,  economic  and  financial 
linkages  among  the  different  regions  of  the  work  have  grown  tighter  and  tighter,  and  of 
course  policy-makers  take  this into account  in  the  design  of  their  policies.  However,  when 
talking about international policy coordination, it is important to define clearly what we mean. 
Policy coordination does not mean, of course that all central banks need to adopt the same 
policy  stance  for  the  entire  world  and  certainly  it  cannot  not  be  a  surrogate  for  domestic 
macroeconomic  prudence  nor  weaken  the  commitment  of  each  central  bank  to  its 
institutional  objective.  Indeed,  I  believe  that  the  effectiveness  of  the  coordinated  monetary 
policy move on 8 October was very much enhanced by the public’s trust in the commitment 
of each of the central banks involved to fulfilling its own mandate.  
International  policy  coordination  is  better  understood  as  the  continuous  cooperation  and 
exchange  of  information  at  both  staff  and  decision-making  levels,  shared  experienced  and 
mutual  understanding  and  trust,  which  very  much  lies  on  the  consensus  among  central 
banks that monetary policies geared towards domestic price stability, sound public finances 
and  flexible  economic  structures  create  the  conditions  for  long-term  economic  growth  and 
financial stability.  
As regards lessons for our regulatory and supervisory frameworks, there are key challenges 
that  need  to  be  addressed  in  order  to  prevent  that  the  crisis  that  currently  affects  our 
economies  may  repeat  itself  in  the  future.  In  the  current  environment,  the  focus  of  reform 
efforts  in  this  area  is  to  formulate  comprehensive  policy  responses  to  the  financial  market 
turbulence and to effectively and timely implement the agreed measures.  
In this respect there are a number of reforms and initiatives that have been put forward at the 
European and international level, notably by the ECOFIN Council and the Financial Stability 
Forum (FSF), and have been more recently reflected in the declaration of the G20 summit on 
Financial Markets and the World Economy last 16 November.  
10 
 BIS Review 6/2009
As  part  of  these  initiatives,  many  efforts  have  been  made  to  address  three  key  specific 
issues that are of especial importance from a longer-term perspective:  
1. 
2. 
mitigating procyclicality stemming from the current regulatory framework;  
correcting  distorted  incentives  that  bias  financial  systems  towards  short-termism; 
and 
enhancing  transparency  by  improving  the  availability  of  data  important  from  a 
financial stability perspective.  
3. 
Information  should  be  available  concerning 
First,  there  is  a  need  to  mitigate  procyclical  effects  stemming  from  the  current  regulatory 
framework.  A  number  of  potential  sources  need  to  be  investigated,  including  capital 
requirements,  accounting  standards,  banks’  compensation  schemes  and  provisioning 
regimes. In this context, important work is to be carried out by the FSF.  
Second, the ongoing crisis is a most dramatic example of the tendency for financial markets 
and institutions to reward short-term profits at the detriment of long-term performance. The 
excessive focus on short-term profits has resulted in imprudent risk-taking behaviour and a 
significant underestimation of so-called “tail events”, i.e. events that have low probability but 
imply  high  risks  if  they  occur  (that  have  turned  out  to  be  far  less  unlikely  than  previously 
assumed). In this context, there is a need to create an incentive framework that adequately 
assesses and rewards performance over the medium to longer term.  
Third, the availability of information regarding the main risks to the financial system needs to 
be  significantly  enhanced. 
institutions, 
instruments  and  markets  that  are  currently  unregulated,  but  whose  risk-taking  behaviour 
gives rise to financial stability concerns, given their potential systemic impact. In particular, 
the turmoil has shown that there is a need for a more broad, frequent and timely exchange of 
information  as  well  as  strengthened  cooperation  and  coordination  among  competent 
authorities, particularly among central banks, supervisors and regulators.  
In  the  current  context,  there  are  a  number  of  initiatives  aiming  at  strengthening  the 
cooperation among authorities on this front. For instance, on the crisis prevention side, there 
is agreement on the need to reinforce multilateral surveillance. To this end, the FSF and the 
IMF  will  intensify  their  cooperation  with  a  view  to  enhancing  the  assessment  of  financial 
stability risks on a global scale. In the EU context, the same is envisaged for the Committee 
of European Banking Supervisors and the Banking Supervision Committee of the European 
System of Central Banks.  
These initiatives should also be reflected at national level. Indeed, strengthening cooperation 
and  exchange  of  information  between  central  banks  and  supervisory  authorities  can 
effectively  exploit  the  synergies  between  the  macro-  and  micro-prudential  approaches  and 
contribute to establishing a more efficient framework for the identification and monitoring of 
risks to financial stability.  
On the crisis management side, it is important to ensure that the central banks’ operational 
framework  is  sufficiently  flexible  to deal  with  extraordinary  situations  and  that  cross-border 
arrangements among supervisors for dealing with weak banks are sufficiently robust. This is 
particularly pressing given the global nature of financial markets and the emergence of large 
cross-border  groups  spanning  across  a  large  number  of  jurisdictions  and  thus  being 
supervised by a multitude of national authorities.  
In the context of the increasing cross-border activities of financial institutions, coordination is 
particularly  important,  given  that  the  institutional  setting  for  financial  stability  remains 
predominantly  based  on  national  competences.  Recent  measures  in  the  EU,  including  the 
compulsory establishment of colleges of supervisors for all cross-border banks, are important 
steps in the right direction.  
Further substantial improvements can be envisaged, in particular as a result of the ongoing 
work by the High-Level Group set up by the European Commission under the chairmanship 
BIS Review 6/2009 
 11
for 
of Mr. Jacques de Larosière. This High-Level Group has been given the mandate to submit 
proposals to strengthen European supervisory arrangements covering all financial sectors by 
looking  also  at  the  allocation  of  tasks  between  the  national  and  the  European  levels.  It  is 
expected to present its recommendations in February 2009, in time for the preparation of the 
Spring 2009 European Council.  
The Eurosystem’s longstanding position has been that there is no optimal arrangement for 
the  organisation  of  supervision.  Different  models 
the  allocation  of  supervisory 
responsibilities can be envisaged and implemented. What really matters is that, regardless of 
the  model  adopted,  there  exists  a  very  close  and  smooth  interplay  between  the  central 
banking  and  the  supervisory  communities.  The  experience  of  the  Eurosystem  during  the 
market turmoil has very much confirmed how important it is for central banks to have a close 
working relationship with supervisors and full access to supervisory information in order to 
fulfil their institutional tasks. 
Overall,  there  is  room  for  improvement  in  the  current  institutional  set-up  for  banking 
supervision in the euro area and, more generally, in Europe. In particular, measures could be 
envisaged  in  order  to  improve  coordination  mechanisms  across  countries,  especially  for 
large cross-border institutions. This is one of the issues that may be examined by the High-
Level  Group  and  has  been  discussed  by  the  European  Parliament.  There  are  several 
hypotheses under discussion, including some involving an increased role of the ECB and the 
Eurosystem in banking supervision, but at the current stage the Governing Council has not 
taken  a  position.  Article  105(6)  of  the  EC  Treaty  explicitly  mentions  the  possibility  of 
assigning  to  the  ECB  specific  tasks  relating  to  the  prudential  supervision  of  banking 
institutions. In this sense, we are institutionally prepared to contribute to the implementation 
of future recommendations. However, as I have just mentioned, at the current stage there 
are  still  several  options  under  consideration  and  the  Governing  Council  needs  to  continue 
examining them before coming to firm conclusions. 
More  generally,  the  turmoil  has  also  stressed  the  importance  of  increased  coordination 
among  all  the  relevant  public  authorities  at  the  European  and  international  level.  Indeed, 
many  governments  have  announced  concerted  action  plans  aiming  to  support  financial 
systems that complement the initiatives in the field of liquidity management undertaken by 
central banks. These concerted plans reflect the increasingly consensual view that the global 
nature of the financial tensions requires a common understanding among governments of the 
factors at the root of the tensions and coordinated actions to address them.  
The framework for such concerted action plans consists of some common core principles on 
how to address liquidity, funding and solvency problems (e.g. ensuring appropriate liquidity, 
facilitating the funding of banks through various means, providing additional capital resources 
to 
recapitalisation  of  distressed  banks,  ensuring  appropriate 
implementation of accounting rules, and enhancing cooperation among European countries) 
agreed by the representatives of the countries signing the public commitments in the last few 
months by the G7 and G20, Ecofin and the governments of the euro area. The Statement 
from the G-20 Summit, which has importantly extended policy coordination to large emerging 
economies,  has  also  indicated  more  general  principles  for  the  reform  of  the  international 
financial systems and the improvement of the global financial architecture. 
institutions, 
financial 
Concluding remarks 
4.  
The current crisis affects key financial markets – the credit and money markets – that are 
essential for the orderly functioning of our economies. This is why from the start of the turmoil 
public authorities – both in the euro area and in other parts of the world – have reacted with 
determination 
financial  stability  and 
destabilising our economic systems.  
from  undermining 
turbulences 
to  prevent 
the 
12 
 BIS Review 6/2009
In  particular,  the  Eurosystem  has  substantially  enhanced  its  provisions  of  central  bank 
liquidity in order to support the orderly functioning of money markets and prevent that solvent 
financial institutions of systemic relevance may be weakened by protracted market illiquidity. 
Central banks all over the world have also increasingly engaged in large-scale coordinated 
actions in order to support liquidity conditions in global money markets. 
More recently, central bank actions have been accompanied by a number of systematic and 
comprehensive  measures  taken  by  national  governments  and  parliaments,  in  a  concerted 
fashion,  in  order  to  support  the  domestic  and  international  banking  and  financial  systems. 
Among  these  measures,  we  should  single  out  the  plans  for  recapitalisation  of  financial 
institutions and the provision of guarantees to the banking sector in a number of European 
countries.  
The magnitude of the liquidity-provision schemes by the Eurosystem together with the large-
scale actions plans by other public authorities have proved effective in avoiding a meltdown 
of global finance, particularly in the wake of the collapse of Lehman Brothers. However, there 
is no room for complacency as regards the structural strength of our financial systems and, 
by extension, of our entire economic systems.  
While important work is underway to remove some of the factors at the root of the current 
crisis, it is crucial to increase our efforts to implement those urgent reforms, especially to the 
regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks,  that  are  needed  in  order  to  anchor  the  global 
financial system and, ultimately, our economic welfare to sound foundations. 
BIS Review 6/2009 
 13
