Zhou Xiaochuan: Issues related to the global financial crisis 
Address  by  Mr  Zhou  Xiaouchuan,  Governor  of  the  People's  Bank  of  China,  at  the  Global 
Think-tank Summit, Beijing, 3 July 2009.  
 Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It is a great pleasure to attend the Global Think-tank Summit organized by the China Center 
for  International  Economic  Exchanges  (CCIEE).  I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to 
discuss  issues  related  to  the  global  financial  crisis,  possible  post-crisis  scenarios  for 
international economic adjustments and policy responses by national governments.  
1. 
Pay adequate attention to the micro causes of the current crisis and 
strengthen regulation.  
The causes for the outbreak of this crisis were very complex. Factors both at the macro and 
micro levels had played some roles. We have heard about a lot of discussions, or even over-
emphasis, from some parts of the world, on the impact of macro factors. However, the crisis 
originated from Wall Street and many indisputable facts have established that micro factors 
had  played  an  overwhelmingly  important  role  in  causing  this  crisis,  including  pro-cyclical 
factors at the micro level, problems with credit rating agencies, mark to market and fair value 
accounting  rules,  problems  with  financial  institutions  including  lax  lending  standards, 
excessive leverage and deficient corporate governance, frivolous development of derivative 
products, chaos in the originate-to-distribute models of asset securitization, and etc. These 
glaring problems have exposed the great havoc caused by inadequate regulation and should 
deserve adequate attentions and dramatic remedial measures.  
Distribution of global imbalances  
2. 
There  are  macro  factors  among  the  causes  of  current  crisis.  To  what  extent  these  factors 
contributed  to  the  crisis  has  always  been  subject  to  dispute,  including  the  role  of  global 
imbalances. In the view of traditional Chinese philosophy, imbalance is a state of normalcy 
and  balance  is  only  a  relative  concept.  The  current  global  imbalances  have  a  counter-
intuitive  feature.  That  is,  in  relative  terms,  low-income  countries  have  high  savings  rates 
whereas rich people in the high-income countries have consumed beyond their means.  
Some advocate that both China with too much savings and the U.S. with too little of it should 
make adjustments. We want to make efforts towards this end, but it is not plausible to over-
estimate  the  impact  of  the  two  countries.  There  is  no  available  data  on  the  flow  of  global 
savings.  We  have  found  the  following  graph  of  current  account  positions  of  the  major 
economic blocks. I have used it earlier this year when speaking at an event hosted by Bank 
Negara Malaysia.  
On this graph, China’s current account surplus, though large, is just a part of the global total. 
Oil  exporters,  Japan  and  other  Asian  economies  all  have  a  significant  share  in  the  global 
surplus. Among the deficit or low saving countries, the share of U.S. deficit is very large. The 
East and Central European countries account for a very small share of the total deficit. Other 
economies do not have a prominent share in global imbalances.  
In recent years, this matter has received a lot of attentions. The IMF (International Monetary 
Fund)  has  organized  a  series  of  discussions,  and  the  focus  has  shifted  from  balance  of 
payments surplus to savings gluts. It is comforting to see that the household savings rate has 
gone  up  to  almost  7  percent  in  the  U.S.  as  recently  as  this  last  May.  Whether  this  is  a 
sustainable  long-term  trend  remains  a  question  for  prudent  judgment.  Generally  speaking, 
BIS Review 85/2009 
 1
structural adjustment is never easy. In addition, the U.S. has a problem of public deficit. How 
the US healthcare reform will unfold, a matter that the international community follows with 
great interest may shape the future trend of U.S. savings rates.  
 
 The distribution of savings in China  
3.  
People outside China need a better insight into the high savings rate in China. The general 
view is that China consumes too little and has to consume more. The following chart shows 
that the income distribution during China’s economic transition has contributed to the savings 
pattern.  
The share of China’s household savings in GDP has been quite stable. It was 20.3 percent in 
1992 and 20 percent in 2007. Though once hitting a low of 17 percent, it basically remains 
around 20 percent. The share of corporate savings in GDP was 11.3 percent in 1992, and 
doubled  to  22.9  percent  by  2007.  Meanwhile,  the  share  of  government  savings,  namely 
public sector savings in GDP was 4.4 percent in 1992, and nearly doubled to 8.1 percent by 
2007.  Given  the  comparatively  small  size  of  the  government  savings,  surging  corporate 
savings played a more important role.  
High corporate savings in China are closely related to the large rural labor surplus. Seeking 
opportunities to better realize their productivity, surplus rural labor has gradually found jobs in 
coastal and urban areas, in industrial and the service sectors. This, as matter of fact, is part 
of  the  urbanization  process.  Labor  cost  has  remained  and  will  remain  comparatively  low 
before the process is completed. During this process, the choice of staying on farms or going 
to cities depends mainly on the comparative advantages and benefits of farming and working 
in cities. Other policy related factors, however, are relatively insignificant.  
Due  to  the  equity  ownership  structure,  employees  only  receive  a  small  proportion  of 
corporate profits, which have maintained at high levels. To solve this problem, the 17th Party 
Congress  stated  in  its  report  that  conditions  would  be  created  to  enable  more  people  to 
receive  incomes  from  properties  and  investments.  For  the  same  reason,  part  of  the  state-
owned  common  equity  is  transferred  to  the  national  social  security  fund  when  a  company 
goes public. Greater efforts are needed to enable the public to share the corporate profits.  
2 
 BIS Review 85/2009
In China’s structural adjustments, the optimal choice is to expand household consumption, 
which  will  directly  enhance  the  domestic  demand  and  lower  the  savings  rate.  This  is, 
however,  easier  said  than  done.  While  the  current  income  distribution  structure  cannot  be 
dramatically  changed  in  the  short  term,  the  second-best  choice  is  to maintain  and  expand 
investments,  and  channel  investments  to  sectors  and  areas  to  achieve  efficient  but  not 
wasteful  allocations.  This  way,  the  residual  savings,  namely,  total  savings  net  of  total 
investments  (savings  surplus),  will  not  be  so  large,  and  will  not  have  a  major  impact 
internationally.  Apparently,  over-investment  in  industries  leads  to  overcapacity.  However, 
with  urbanization  still  a  long  way  to  go,  there  is  enormous  investment  potentials  in  the 
process.  Urbanization  will  prepare  China  for  its  demographic  migration,  consumption 
expansion and the development of the service sectors. After all, China’s urbanization will go 
on for many years to come.  
  Analysis of several scenarios of rebalancing the global economy  
4.  
There  can  be  a  number  of  scenarios  for  rebalancing  the  global  economy  through 
adjustments, and the analyses and policy implications for different scenarios are different.  
A  lot  of  discussions  focus  on  the  first  and  also  the  most  desirable  scenario.  Both  the 
household  savings  rate  and  overall  savings  rate  in  the  U.S.  keeps  going  up,  and  Chinese 
household  consumption  keeps  rising,  leading  to  a  correction  of  the  global  imbalances. 
Indeed,  this  is  the  most  ideal  scenario,  but  not  easily  realizable,  because  structural 
adjustments involve quite a lot difficult issues. Furthermore, we cannot, based on the latest 
short-term data, jump to the conclusion that this problem can be easily solved.  
In the second scenario, U.S. household savings rate goes up, and thus the U.S. consumes 
fewer  Chinese  products.  Subsequently,  China  will  see  greater  excess  capacity,  lower 
equipment utilization, job losses, and a path for slower GDP growth. We need to avoid this 
situation  with  our  best  efforts.  A  variation  of  this  scenario  may  be  that,  inflation  in  China 
BIS Review 85/2009 
 3
causes  effective  RMB  exchange  rate  movements  in  real  terms  and  thus  resulting  in  the 
completion of the adjustment process.  
A  third  scenario  sees  higher  household  savings  rate  in  the  U.S.  and  moderately  stronger 
consumption  in  China.  Also  in  this  scenario,  China’s  investment  in  urbanization  increases. 
Together these will reduce the savings glut and its outflow. We can assume that this leads to 
rapid  developments  in  urban  infrastructure,  housing  and  the  service  sectors,  supporting 
future consumption and employment. This is another acceptable outcome. But this requires 
appropriate  reform  for  the  modus  operandi  of  investment  and  for  financing  instruments  to 
support  urbanization.  For  example,  we  have  been  discussing  for  years  whether  local 
governments should be allowed to issue municipal bonds to finance infrastructure projects.  
In  the  fourth  scenario,  though  higher  U.S.  savings  rate  reduces  demand  for  Chinese 
products, China successfully moves part of its excess capacity, including its manufacturing 
capacity,  to  other  developing  countries  through  its  Going  Global  investment  strategy.  In 
terms  of  South-North  relations,  this  will  help  facilitate  industrialization  and  raise  future 
consumptions in developing countries. This scenario is also a step in the right direction. By 
then, China’s trade surplus will no longer be a major problem. A major test will be whether 
the U.S. will still run large deficits against other developing countries.  
In  the  fifth  scenario,  the  U.S.  fails  to  shore  up  its  aggregate  savings  rate,  its  healthcare 
reform falters, and its public consumption remains high. In contrast, the adjustment efforts in 
China are successful. Part of its excess capacity is relocated to other developing countries, 
its foreign trade reaches relative equilibrium, or its savings surplus, if any, is diverted to other 
countries instead of flowing to the U.S. At that time, the U.S. may still run trade deficits and 
have savings flow problems with Vietnam and other developing countries, and oil-producing 
countries.  
A sixth scenario is the last thing we want to see. Here, all adjustment efforts are made in 
vain, the economic imbalances persist, and trade protectionism escalates.  
There may be other scenarios. This list is by no means exhaustive. We may end up seeing 
some combination of several scenarios listed above. I personally think we need to be aware 
of  the  difficulties  and  should  not  be  over-idealistic.  A  practical  way  forward,  which  is  a 
combination  of  several  scenarios  above,  may  be  that  continued  reform  leads  to  stronger 
consumption and significant progress of urbanization in China. In this case, given the high 
savings  rate  in  China,  we  may  still  maintain  residual  savings.  If  any,  I  wish  this  to  flow  to 
other  developing  countries.  This  will  need  the  support  of  the  international  financial  system 
including  the  international  monetary  system,  to  help  improve  the  global  productivity  and 
income distribution, and drive broader global growth. We also want to emphasize that this 
growth  should  be  green  in  nature.  Furthermore,  from  a  demographic  point  of  view, 
developing countries will generate tremendous demand for the world.  
Personal views  
5.  
First, global imbalances are an important and difficult subject matter; however, in addressing 
the  financial  crisis,  we  cannot  afford  to  ignore  the  flawed  micro-level  mechanisms  and  the 
importance of regulatory overhaul. We should prevent this micro focus from getting off-track.  
Second,  it  is  necessary  to  look  into  the  causes  and  features  of  the  global  imbalances,  its 
interaction  with  the  global  development  patterns,  varying  development  stages  of  different 
countries  and  their  income  distributions.  One  cannot  expect  a  simple  and  straightforward 
instrument to work the miracle of structural adjustment.  
Third, based on the above scenario analysis, we should strive to achieve Scenario 1, avoid 
Scenarios 2 and 6, and do more research on Scenarios 3, 4 and 5. To this end, institutional 
reform needs to be designed and pursued along the direction of desirable outcomes to bring 
about the desirable changes.  
4 
 BIS Review 85/2009
The scientific view on development conceived and established by the Party and the Chinese 
government covers many aspects of the needed reforms and restructuring, including putting 
the  people  first,  expanding  consumption  and  domestic  demand,  environmental-friendly 
growth,  promoting  urbanization,  developing  the  service  sectors,  trade  and  investment 
facilitation and etc. Since the outbreak of the crisis, China has sped up economic structural 
adjustment, expanded domestic demand, and made a lot of efforts to mitigate the impacts of 
the crisis and to sustain development. Though the quest for specific rules and routes toward 
sustainability involves trial and error, experimentation and knowledge renewal, I’m confident 
that, as long as all countries work together, we will pull out of the crisis and find a path to 
sustainable and scientific development.  
BIS Review 85/2009 
 5
