Mark Carney: Canada’s economic outlook and framework for 
unconventional monetary policy 
Opening statement by Mr Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank of Canada, to the Standing 
Senate Committee on Banking, Trade and Commerce, Ottawa, 6 May 2009. 
 Good afternoon, Mr. Chairman and committee members. Before Paul and I begin to answer 
your  questions,  allow  me  to  take  a  moment  to  review  some  of  the  highlights  and  the 
conclusions  from  our  latest  Monetary  Policy  Report,  released  on  23  April.  In  particular,  I 
would  like  to  outline  for  you  some  of  the  details  from  the  Bank's  framework  for 
unconventional monetary policy, which was published as an annex to the latest MPR. 
The economic outlook 
• 
       These are difficult economic times, with the Canadian economy being buffeted by an 
intense  and  synchronized  global  recession.  In recent  months,  that  global  recession 
has  been  exacerbated  by  delays  in  implementing  measures  to  restore  financial 
stability around the world.  
G-20  policy-makers  are  now  responding  to  the  global  crisis  with  a  renewed 
commitment  to  concrete  initiatives  and  comprehensive  plans.  Our  base-case 
projection is that these policies will be implemented in an effective and timely manner, 
and their impact will reach full force next year. Discussions in Washington at the end 
of April were consistent with that outlook.  
As  a  result  of  the  current  global  economic  and  financial  situation,  the  Bank  now 
projects that the Canadian recession will be deeper than we projected in the January 
MPR Update. Our return to growth will be delayed by one quarter, to the end of 2009, 
and our recovery will be somewhat more gradual.  
The broad outlines of the Canadian outlook are the same as those in January, but its 
profile has shifted.  
Canada's real GDP is projected to decline by 3.0 per cent this year, and growth is 
expected to resume in the autumn and accelerate to 2.5 per cent in 2010, and 4.7 per 
cent in 2011.  
Our outlook for inflation is broadly consistent with that in January. Total inflation will 
temporarily fall below zero in 2009, but core and total CPI inflation are expected to 
return to the Bank's 2 per cent inflation target in the third quarter of 2011.  
In  that  context,  on  21  April  the  Bank  lowered  the  policy  interest  rate  by  1/4  of  a 
percentage  point  to  1/4  per cent,  or  25 basis  points,  which  is  judged  to  be  the 
effective lower bound  of the policy rate. Conditional on the outlook for inflation, the 
Bank has committed to holding this rate at 1/4 per cent until the end of June 2010. I 
will elaborate on this conditional commitment in a moment.  
In total, since December 2007, we have cut interest rates by 425 basis points to their 
historic lows and lowest possible levels. It is the Bank's judgment that this cumulative 
easing, together with the conditional commitment to keep rates low for a considerable 
period, is the appropriate policy stance to move the economy back to full production 
capacity and to achieve the 2 per cent inflation target.  
BIS Review 552009 
 1
A framework for conducting monetary policy at low interest rates 
• 
However,  these  are  uncertain  times  and  if  additional  stimulus  were  to  become 
necessary, the Bank retains considerable flexibility in the conduct of monetary policy 
at low interest rates.  
We have outlined in detail how we would use that flexibility in conducting monetary 
policy at the effective lower bound, in the framework published in our recent MPR. In 
this  document,  we  describe  the  unconventional  instruments  that  are  available,  the 
principles that would govern our use of these tools – should we decide to apply them 
–  and  the  exit  strategies  that  we  would  employ  when  these  instruments  were  no 
longer necessary.  
The three key instruments we have identified for conducting monetary policy at the 
effective lower bound include: conditional statements about the future path of policy 
interest  rates;  quantitative  easing,  which  involves  the  creation  of  central  bank 
reserves  to  purchase  financial  assets;  and  credit  easing,  which  includes  outright 
purchases of private sector assets.  
If  required,  these  instruments  could  be  used  separately  or  in  tandem  to  improve 
financial conditions in order to support aggregate demand and ultimately achieve the 
inflation target.  
As you are aware, the Bank deployed the first instrument on 21 April. As a result of 
our conditional commitment to keep rates at 25 basis points through the end of June 
2010,  interest  rates  across  the  maturity  horizon  of  the  commitment  fell.  They  also 
dropped relative to those in the U.S.  
Let  me  reiterate  that  the  Bank's  conditional  commitment  is  not  a  guarantee.  It  is 
conditional on the outlook for inflation. We will always set our policy rate at a level 
consistent with achieving our 2 per cent inflation target over the policy horizon.  
Similarly,  if  the  Bank  were  to  deploy  either  quantitative  easing  or  credit  easing,  it 
would act in a deliberate fashion based on the following principles:  
(i) 
The focus of these operations would be to improve overall financial conditions 
in order to support aggregate demand and achieve the inflation target.  
Asset  purchases  would be  concentrated  in  maturity  ranges  in  order  to  have 
the maximum impact on the economy.  
Actions would be taken in as broad and neutral a manner as possible.  
The Bank would act prudently, mitigating the risks to its balance sheet and 
managing its ultimate exit from such strategies at an appropriately measured 
pace.  
(ii) 
(iii) 
(iv) 
If  we  were  to  use  these  unconventional  policy  measures,  the  Bank  would  closely 
monitor a number of indicators to assess their effectiveness.  
The  most  important  would  be  the  effect  on  overall  financing  conditions  faced  by 
households and businesses.  
Other indicators would be used to judge the direct impact of a particular instrument. 
For example:  
o 
The effectiveness of conditional statements about the future policy rate can be 
judged by their impact on longer-term interest rates. As I mentioned a moment 
ago, we saw almost immediately the impact of our 21 April policy interest rate 
announcement.  
BIS Review 55/2009
         2 
 o 
o 
o 
o 
The effectiveness of quantitative easing would be judged in the first instance 
by a change in the yield curve and more generally by movements in broader 
financial conditions.  
That  of  credit  easing  would  be  judged  by  reductions  in  risky  spreads  and 
increased issuance activity.  
Changes  in  credit  terms  and  in  the  conditions  faced  by  firms  can  also  be 
assessed  using  the  Bank's  Business  Outlook  Survey  and  its  Senior  Loan 
Officer Survey.  
In  addition,  the  Bank  has  constructed  measures  of  borrowing  costs  and  an 
overall financial conditions index for the economy.  
To enhance transparency, the Bank now offers a comprehensive website that details 
credit conditions in Canada. The link can be found on the left side of our home page.  
The unwinding of the Bank's various facilities and its acquisition of assets – or the exit 
strategy – would be guided by the Bank's assessment of conditions in credit markets 
and the inflation outlook.  
A  number  of  exit  alternatives  are  available,  including  a  natural  runoff  through  the 
maturing of assets, the refinancing of acquired assets, and asset sales.  
Finally,  the  framework  also  describes  how  the  Bank  would  communicate  its  use  of 
unconventional  policy  measures.  Press  releases  on  each  fixed  announcement  date 
would  remain  focused  on  the  target  overnight  rate  and  on  conditional  statements 
about the future direction of policy rates.  
The press release would also indicate any intention to carry out purchase programs 
and the approximate size of purchases. The Bank would explain the broad objectives 
of  any  purchases  and  how  they  are  to  be  financed.  Detailed  operational  decisions 
would be communicated in separate announcements.  
Press  releases  on  fixed  announcement  dates  and  Monetary  Policy  Reports  would 
continue  to  provide  an  ongoing  assessment  of  the  economy  and  the  outlook  for 
inflation. Speeches and parliamentary appearances, such as this one, would provide 
additional  venues  for  reporting  on  the  details  of  the  Bank's  conduct  of  monetary 
policy.  
As  always,  the  Bank  reserves  the  right  to  announce  policy  measures  in  periods 
between fixed announcement dates to address exceptional circumstances.  
We welcome the opportunity, following my remarks, to discuss with your committee 
this framework and its potential role in achieving the Bank's inflation target.  
        Conclusion 
• 
• 
 Allow me to conclude with a few words on the outlook for the Canadian economy.  
While  there  remains  a  high  degree  of  uncertainty  –  particularly  with  the  Canadian 
economy  dependent  on  forces  beyond  our  borders  –  we  remain  confident  in  the 
prospects of eventual economic recovery in Canada.  
This recovery should be supported by the following factors:  
- 
- 
- 
the gradual rebound in external demand;  
the end of the stock adjustments in Canadian and U.S. residential housing;  
the strength of Canadian household, business, and bank balance sheets;  
BIS Review 552009 
 3
  our relatively well-functioning financial system and the gradual improvement in 
financial conditions in Canada;  
the past depreciation of the Canadian dollar;  
stimulative fiscal policy measures; 
the timeliness and scale of the Bank's monetary policy response.  
With that, Mr. Chairman and committee members, Paul and I would be pleased to answer 
your questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 55/2009
