Amando M Tetangco, Jr: RBAP – sustaining reforms for an economically 
vibrant countryside 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the inaugural dinner for the newly elected RBAP Officers 
and Board of Directors, Manila, 14 July 2009. 
 The leadership of the Rural Bankers Association of the Philippines (RBAP) led by President 
Omar  Andaya  and  immediate  past  president  Mitch  Gomez,  the  officers  and  members  of 
RBAP, good evening.  
I am delighted to be part of this inaugural dinner celebrating your new set officers at RBAP. 
To me, this seamless transition in the association’s leadership is a strong indication that the 
rural banking sector will continue the many significant initiatives that have characterized the 
past year. United, your initiatives under RBAP have kept the rural banking sector resilient in 
the midst of a particularly challenging environment.  
Let us therefore give the RBAP leadership a well-deserved round of applause!  
Indeed,  the  past  year  was  full  of  challenges,  for  the  economy  in  general  and  for  the  rural 
banking sector in particular. And yet, latest available figures indicate that the rural banking 
sector continues to perform relatively well. It appears that our rural bankers have turned this 
period of challenges as an opportunity to further strengthen your institutions.  
Thus, even with the series of bank closures affiliated with one group, total capitalization of 
the  rural  banking  sector  actually  improved  further  from  P24.8  billion  in  December  2008  to 
P25.4 billion as of March 2009.  
Less measurable, but no less important, is RBAP’s success in maintaining public confidence 
in  rural  banks  in  the  face  of  successive  bank  closures.  Through  vigilance  and  proactive 
measures, RBAP ensured that your clients understood that these high profile bank closures 
basically involved a single group that is not representative of the management of other rural 
banks.  
I  also  wish  to  acknowledge  RBAP’s  pioneering  work  on  inclusive  banking  through 
technological  and  product  innovations,  as  well  as  your  continuing  efforts  to  be  more 
responsive  and  efficient  in  serving  your  clients.  In  particular,  the  rural  banking  sector 
continues to expand its operating network to reach more clients.  
What  we  have  today,  therefore,  is  a  more  solid and  more  inclusive  rural  banking  industry. 
And  so,  once  again,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  let  us  celebrate  our  rural  banking  sector  with 
another round of applause!  
However there is much more that we have to accomplish and we are looking at RBAP’s new 
set of officers and members of the board of directors to provide leadership for this.  
Among others, it is important to sustain reforms we have started. In this context, your banks’ 
risk management infrastructure should be a priority. This is the infrastructure that allows you 
to  identify  risks  and  to  act  on  these  in  a  responsive  manner.  In  the  case  of  rural  banks, 
particular  focus  must  be  given  to  credit  risks  and  liquidity  risks,  because  your  position  as 
community-based financial institutions magnifies these risks.  
Equally important is your commitment to maintain strong capital positions. Banks must fully 
appreciate  that  capital  adequacy  is  not  merely  a  compliance  issue,  but  is  central  to  the 
prudent control of leverage. Banks must have sufficient buffer for risks which could turn into 
losses.  While  we  will  not  dictate  your  specific  allocation  decisions,  maintaining  capital 
BIS Review 89/2009 
 1
adequacy  above  the  BSP’s  regulatory  floor  rate  of  10%  is  itself  reflective  of  a  bank’s 
commitment towards prudential control and financial governance. 
I am sure you have heard me discuss these key reform issues in other occasions. However, 
for as long as we have not reached our desired destination, I assure you, you will continue to 
hear from me on these issues.  
You can also be sure that the Bangko Sentral will continue to do its part toward creating the 
appropriate  policy  and  regulatory  environment  that  enables  more  innovations,  greater 
efficiency,  better  risk  management,  stronger  capitalization,  improved  disclosure  and 
transparency  practices,  and  enhanced  corporate  governance  standards  in  the  banking 
system.  High  on  our  agenda  is  to  open  doors  for  you  in  housing  microfinance  and 
microinsurance, as well as possibly grant you more flexibility to use non-bank agents as a 
way to expand your reach.  
We  are  also  looking  at  the  use  of  independent  rating  agencies  to  attest  to  your  inherent 
strength  and  secure  market  credibility.  We  are  also  designing  a  program  with  PDIC  to 
encourage mergers and acquisitions through targeted financial incentives to would-be “white 
knights” of rural banks.  
Ladies and gentlemen. The rural banking sector has stood up well to the difficult challenges 
of the past.  
Now,  I  look  forward  with  optimism  to  the  future  of  our  rural  banks.  While  I  am  sure  rural 
banks will be facing new challenges moving forward, I am heartened by the fact that we are 
on  the  same  page  insofar  as  the  need,  and  the  wisdom,  of  adhering  to  good  governance 
principles; of implementing appropriate policies for credit and liquidity risks management; and 
of working on having stronger capital positions.  
We  all  know,  the  path  toward  these  goals  will  be  complex;  but  if  our  rural  banks  remain 
committed  in  serving  their  role  as  catalyst  and  enabler  of  productive  activities  in  the 
countryside, I am confident that the rural banking sector will contribute a lot toward ensuring 
balanced and sustainable economic growth in our country.  
This  calls  to  mind  how  the  great  artist  Michelangelo  responded  to  comments  about  this 
genius in completing his Sistine Chapel masterpiece. He said: “If you knew how much work 
went into it, you would not call it genius.”  
Ladies  and  gentlemen.  A  lot  of  work  is  clearly  ahead  of  us.  But  if  we  are  committed  and 
focused, it will be a matter of time before our coordinated efforts create a strong and lasting 
foundation for a healthy, resilient and vibrant rural banking sector. Together, let us continue 
to walk the path of sustained reforms.  
Again, my congratulations and best wishes to the leadership of RBAP.  
Mabuhay ang ating rural banks! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas!  
Thank you all and good evening. 
2 
 BIS Review 89/2009
