Jean-Claude Trichet: Credible alertness revisited 
Intervention  by  Mr  Jean-Claude  Trichet,  President  of  the  European  Central  Bank,  at  the 
symposium  on  “Financial  stability  and  macroeconomic  policy”,  sponsored  by  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 22 August 2009. 
 It is a pleasure to be part of such a distinguished panel.  
In my remarks today, I will discuss three topical issues facing central banks, in particular in 
the  light  of  recent  events:  the  relationship  between  asset  prices  and  monetary  policy;  the 
effectiveness  of  our  standard  interest  rate  instrument;  and  the  design  of  non-standard 
monetary policy measures such as the ECB’s enhanced credit support. The ongoing financial 
crisis has highlighted the importance of old issues and raised some new questions, for which 
I will try to offer an ECB perspective. Exactly four years ago, here in Jackson Hole, I spoke 
about  “credible  alertness”  in  monetary  policy.1  Today  it  seems  opportune  to  revisit  this 
concept in light of recent events.  
“Leaning against the wind” and monetary analysis 
The  best  way  to  manage  a  crisis  is  to  avoid  it.  Given  the  important  role  played  by  asset 
markets in recent macroeconomic dynamics, the experience of the past few years has given 
renewed  impetus  to  the  debate  on  asset  prices  and  monetary  policy.  Would  making 
monetary policy more responsive to asset market developments have avoided the financial 
crisis?  More  generally,  should  monetary  policy  “lean  against  the  wind”  of  surging  asset 
prices? 
The academic debate on this issue is ongoing. For instance, there is currently disagreement 
regarding  the  appropriate  models  and  simulations  to  use  when  weighing  up  the  pros  and 
cons  of  such  an  approach.2  Within  policy-oriented  discussions,  there  has  been  scepticism 
about leaning against the wind for three reasons.3 First, there have been reservations about 
the  possibility  of  identifying  asset  price  misalignments  or  “bubbles”  in  real  time.  Second, 
doubts  have  been  expressed  regarding  the  ability  of  interest  rate  increases  of  a  plausible 
magnitude to contain surging asset prices once these have achieved a momentum of their 
own. Third, it has been argued that any damage to the economy stemming from an asset 
price correction can be contained by prompt and aggressive easing of monetary policy. 
What  have  recent  events  taught  us  about  leaning  against  the  wind?  Allow  me  to  address 
each  of  these  three  reservations  in  turn,  beginning  with  the  identification  of  asset  price 
misalignments in real time. 
A number of central bankers were pointing to the underpricing of risk and the excessive pace 
of credit expansion in 2006 and 2007.4 While remaining prudent as regards our qualification 
of the situation, many of us felt uneasy about the growing financial imbalances emerging in 
that  period.  The  increasing  risks  identified  by  the  ECB’s  monetary  analysis  from  2005 
                                                 
1   Trichet (2005). 
2   Bernanke and Gertler (1999); Cechetti et al. (2000); Goodhart and Hofmann (2006); Campbell (2008). 
3   See, for example, Kohn (2007) and ECB (2005). 
4   See, for example, the article in the Financial Times of 29 January 2007 with the headline: “Prepare for Asset 
Repricing,  Warns  Trichet”.  The  article  reported  my  view  as:  “‘We  are  currently  seeing  elements  in  global 
financial markets which are not necessarily stable,’ [Trichet] said, pointing to the ‘low level of rates, spreads 
and risk premiums’ as factors that could trigger a repricing.” 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 1
onwards,  with  money  and  credit  growth  accelerating  to  double-digit  levels,  are  well 
documented.5 All of this suggests that it was clearly not impossible to identify (albeit not with 
precision) the emergence of financial imbalances and misalignments in the pricing of risks – 
and therefore also in the pricing of assets – in the years preceding the crisis.  
Research findings increasingly support this view. Work at the BIS and the ECB shows that 
monetary and credit indicators can provide an early warning where asset price developments 
are unsustainable.6 Of course, such indicators are not perfect. There is undoubtedly a risk of 
mistakenly  leaning  against  asset  price  developments  that  are  justified  on  fundamental 
grounds.  But  policy-makers  continually  confront  such  informational  problems.  Many 
indicators used prominently in the formulation of policy decisions are subject to revision and 
difficult to measure in real time. Indicators of asset price misalignments are no different. But I 
do not believe that such difficulties should be seen as a fundamental obstacle to making an 
assessment of the risks posed by excessive asset price developments on the basis of the 
information available to us.  
Turning  to  the  second  reservation  expressed  in  the  literature:  what  of  the  assertion  that 
interest rate increases will be unable to halt an asset price surge? Prima facie, to the extent 
that an asset price bubble promises to deliver large capital gains, a small change in policy 
interest rates is unlikely to alter the balance between the costs of financing the bubble and 
the expected profits from investing in it. From this perspective, a policy of leaning against the 
wind would appear to have limited value.  
It is interesting to see, however, that recent research identifies channels through which even 
a small change in policy rates can have important implications. For example, the profitability 
of  financial  institutions  that  systematically  borrow  short  and  lend  long  can  be  significantly 
affected  by  even  a  small  change  in  policy  interest  rates,  triggering  the  closing-out  of 
leveraged positions and the moderation of asset price growth.7 To the extent that policy rate 
changes break private sector herding behaviour or reveal central bank intentions and private 
information, even a small change in policy rates can have a significant impact on asset price 
developments.8 Such research suggests that a policy of leaning against the wind may have 
greater impact than previously thought. 
Turning to the third reservation: what of the alternative approach – i.e. waiting until an asset 
bubble bursts and then easing policy aggressively so as to contain the adverse effects on 
real activity and inflation? Recent experience has clearly demonstrated the limitations of such 
a strategy. Unprecedented policy action has failed to prevent a sharp fall in economic activity 
in  the  context  of  the  financial  crisis.9  Moreover,  an  ex  ante  approach  of  this  kind  risks 
creating moral hazard on a large scale, thereby helping to place the system in a metastable 
situation,  i.e.  a  state  of  potential  unstability.  By  contrast,  a  strategy  of  leaning  against  the 
wind  could  reduce  moral  hazard:  by  behaving  more  symmetrically,  a  central  bank  can 
encourage more responsible behaviour on the part of investors and make a crisis less likely.  
Over  the  past  few  years,  both  experience  and  developments  in  the  literature  appear  to 
support a shift in favour of the adoption of some form of leaning against the wind. However, 
having spent 16 years facing the successive challenges of operational central banking, I am 
doubtful  that  such  a  strategy  can  be  implemented  in  a  mechanical  way.  The  uncertainties 
remain  too  great,  and  perhaps  always  will.  What  is  required  is  a  significant  degree  of 
                                                 
5   Fischer et al. (2008). 
6   Borio  and  Lowe  (2002);  Detken  and  Smets  (2004);  Adalid  and  Detken  (2007);  Alessi  and  Detken  (2009); 
Gerdesmeier et al. (2009). 
7   Adrian and Shin (2008). 
8   See, for instance, Hoerova et al. (2009). 
9   Kohn (2008). 
2 
 BIS Review 103/2009
judgement, embedded in a rule-based framework for policy making, which encapsulates the 
essence of leaning against the wind without suggesting that central banks are in a position to 
manage closely – much less target – developments in asset prices.  
In  the  case  of  the  ECB,  the  medium-term  orientation  of  our  two-pillar  monetary  policy 
strategy  calls  on  us  to  consider  the  implications  that  financial  imbalances  and  asset  price 
misalignments  and  their  unwinding  have  as  regards  the  outlook  for  price  developments  at 
longer  horizons.  Given  that  our  mandate  requires  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  on  an 
ongoing  and  continuous  basis,  rather  than  at  any  specific  arbitrary  horizon,  we  consider  it 
important to monitor the slow accumulation of unsustainable financial imbalances which pose 
a threat to macroeconomic and price stability over the longer term. Maintaining a medium-
term  orientation,  keeping  a  close  eye  on  monetary  and  credit  dynamics,  and  adopting  a 
broader,  stability-oriented  view  of  policy  making  –  which  are  key  elements  of  the  ECB’s 
monetary policy strategy – supports this approach. 
Our monetary analysis provides us with a framework within which to assess the dynamics of 
asset  prices,  money  and  credit  from  a  medium-term  perspective.  For  example,  monetary 
analysis was decisive in our decision to keep the ECB policy rate at 2%, instead of reducing 
it further, in the summer of 2004 and to start raising it in late 2005. On both occasions, the 
strength of money and credit growth in the euro area, with liquidity already ample, pointed to 
risks  to  price  and  macroeconomic  stability  over  the  medium  term  that  went  beyond  those 
identified by standard forms of economic analysis. One of these risks was the sustainability 
of  asset  price  developments.10  These  policy  decisions  were  taken  in  the  face  of  some 
criticism  from  those  who  regarded  monetary  indicators  as old-fashioned,  including  parts  of 
academia. However, with the (admittedly considerable) benefit of hindsight, most observers 
now take the view that such decisions were correctly timed and appropriately judged. 
More generally, it was always foreseen that the close monitoring of monetary developments 
would  provide  a  framework  for  addressing  asset  price  misalignments.11  However,  viewing 
asset  price  dynamics  through  the  lens  of  monetary  developments  integrates  them  into  an 
overall  framework  directed  towards  the  achievement  of  our  goal:  price  stability.  One 
particular  focus  of  our  monetary  analysis  is  the  low-frequency  trend  in  money  and  credit 
developments  and  the  associated  emergence  of  imbalances.  This  focus  allows  us  both  to 
assess  risks  to  price  stability  in  the  medium  to  long  term  and,  simultaneously,  to  embed 
some implicit leaning against excessive money, credit and asset price growth in our interest 
rate decisions.  
As  part  of  our  strategic  decision  to enhance  monetary  analysis,12  the  ECB  has  conducted 
research  looking  at  monetary  and  credit  developments  so  as  to  better  understand  their 
impact  on  macroeconomic  outcomes.  Interaction  with  asset  price  dynamics  plays  an 
important role in this work.13 Increasingly, the results of this research are being integrated 
into our regular assessment of monetary developments, which is one source of input for our 
policy decisions.  
My  understanding  is  that  the  importance  of  monitoring  money  and  credit  developments  is 
generally recognised by central bankers and more and more also by academia. Of course, 
recognising  their  importance  does  not  necessarily  simplify  the  task  of  interpreting  those 
                                                 
10   For example, in several of the Introductory Statements in 2005 and 2006 at the press conferences following 
Governing Council meetings, I noted, in the context of strong loan growth (for example, in December 2005), 
that 
to  be  monitored  closely” 
(http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2005/html/is051201.en.html). 
in  a  number  of  housing  markets  need 
“price  dynamics 
11   For example, reference is made to such considerations in EMI (1997) in the context of a discussion  of the 
main elements of the ECB’s monetary policy strategy. See also Issing (2002). 
12   Stark (2007). 
13   See, for instance, Christiano et al. (2008) and De Santis et al. (2008). 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 3
developments.  Experience  has  shown  that  ongoing  financial  innovation  complicates  the 
interpretation of the monetary data. This remains a substantial practical challenge – but one 
that must be addressed. Making the analysis of money and credit developments operational 
is a key area for new research.  
A year ago, here at Jackson Hole, Tobias Adrian and Hyun Song Shin argued that structural 
changes  to  the  financial  system  require  the  definition  of  new  monetary  indicators.14  There 
has  recently  been  a  focus  on  the  build-up  of  leverage  within  the  financial  sector,  through 
loans between banks and loans to various special-purpose financing vehicles, some of which 
may be located offshore. This kind of approach forms part of the comprehensive assessment 
of  monetary  developments  undertaken  at  the  ECB,  which  extends  well  beyond  the 
monitoring of headline aggregates.15 We recognise that considerable progress still needs to 
be  made.  However,  overall,  our  maintenance  of  both  the  statistical  basis  for  monetary 
analysis and the necessary staff expertise at a time when the value of such work was being 
very  much  called into question  has,  in  my  view,  helped  us  significantly  in  taking  important 
decisions in recent years.16  
Taking everything into account, I would say that we feel encouraged to continue relying on 
our  two-pillar  strategy,  noting  that  considerable  further  progress  still  needs  to  be  made  in 
various areas of research that are part of our enhancement of monetary analysis.17
Credibility, alertness and steady-handedness 
I will now turn to my second topic: the effectiveness of interest rate decisions. Even in the 
face of the exceptional challenges of recent years, the standard interest rate instrument has 
remained a crucial component of the central bank armoury as regards monetary policy.  
Our  interest  rate  decisions  should  be  judged  on  their  effectiveness,  understood  as  the 
contribution  they  make  to  the  achievement  of  the  ECB’s  objective  of  maintaining  price 
stability. Effectiveness requires that policy decisions be transmitted to the economy, so as to 
influence  private  price-setting  behaviour  and  thus  developments  in  the  price  level.  In  this 
respect, understanding the transmission mechanism of monetary policy is crucial. There is a 
considerable amount of academic literature in this area,18 to which researchers at the ECB 
have contributed in important ways.19
In this literature, it is widely recognised that households and firms’ spending decisions are 
affected  by  longer-term  interest  rates,  rather  than  the  very  short-term  rates  steered  in 
monetary policy operations. Moreover – especially in a bank-based financial system, such as 
that  of  the  euro  area  –  many  borrowers’  decisions  are  influenced  by  bank  lending  rates, 
rather  than  market  rates.  Consequently,  in  order  to  be  effective,  policy  rate  changes  must 
influence rates at longer maturities and be passed through to rates on bank loans.  
Viewed from this perspective, conferring a degree of persistence on developments in policy 
rates may be crucial.20 A central bank with a reputation for implementing persistent interest 
rate changes will be able to convince market participants that an initial interest rate change 
                                                 
14   Adrian and Shin, op cit . 
15   Some stylised facts are established in ECB (2008). 
16   Stark (2008). 
17   Papademos (2008). 
18   See, for example, Bernanke and Gertler (1995), Christiano et al. (1999) and Woodford (2003), as well as the 
references therein. 
19   See, for example, Angeloni et al. (2003), and Smets and Wouters (2003). 
20   Goodfriend (1991); Rudebusch (1995); Woodford (1999, 2003). 
4 
 BIS Review 103/2009
will be maintained for some time and/or followed by additional changes in the same direction. 
Such expectations will have a strong, immediate impact on the money market yield curve at 
longer maturities, since money market rates are largely determined by expectations of future 
policy rates. Persistent policy changes are also more likely to affect bank lending rates, since 
a persistent rate change is more likely to be passed through. Both channels will allow the 
effectiveness of changes in the policy rate to be enhanced.21
Of course, when taking our decisions, we are not mechanically bound by such observations 
on monetary policy, despite the intellectual elegance of the underlying models. Nevertheless, 
I  can  recognise  the  pattern  of  the  ECB’s  interest  rate  decisions  in  this  stylised 
characterisation. The lower-frequency component of the interest rate cycle – which is driven 
by long-lasting or persistent developments in policy rates – influences economic behaviour 
and,  ultimately,  the  evolution  of  price  developments  much  more  than  the  high-frequency 
component  associated  with  the  exact  timing  and  magnitude  of  any  one  policy  decision. 
Whether  interest  rates  increase  by  25  or  50  basis  points  in  one  month  or  another  is  less 
important  than  our  ability  to  steer  the  longer-maturity  rates  of  relevance  to  spending 
decisions. While the former may dominate ECB watchers’ commentaries, it is the latter that 
gives us the leverage to stabilise longer-term inflation expectations and fulfil our mandate. 
With  this  consideration  in  mind,  our  approach  has  often  been  characterised  as  “steady-
handed”.  The  ECB  has  acquired  a  reputation  for  moving  interest  rates  in  a  steady  and 
persistent  fashion  over  time.  This  is  a  conscious  choice.  Such  deliberate  and  persistent 
moves strengthen transmission, thereby proving effective in achieving our objective of price 
stability.  
When  a  central  bank  enjoys  a  reputation  for  implementing  monetary  policy  in  a  steady-
handed  fashion,  private  sector  expectations  of  future  interest  rates  will  move  in  a  manner 
consistent  with  policy-makers’ 
to  a  policy 
announcement or measure. As a result, changes in policy rates will have significantly larger 
effects  on  aggregate  demand  and  future  price  developments  than  would  otherwise  be  the 
case. By implication, less extreme changes in policy interest rates will be necessary in order 
to achieve our goal. Our reputation for steady-handed – and thus effective – policy action will 
be bolstered. And more effective policy action will contribute to a successful track record in 
terms of meeting our objective, thereby delivering price stability. 
An effective monetary policy need not, therefore, be an “activist” monetary policy, at least to 
the extent that activism is understood to imply significant immediate changes to policy rates 
in response to individual pieces of short-term economic “news”. While a central bank must 
always be ready to act in response to shocks that threaten price stability, a steady-handed 
approach, involving a modest initial change in policy rates followed by further moves in the 
same direction, may prove more effective. Therefore, criticising a central bank that is acting 
with  a  steady  hand  for  being  “behind  the  curve”  rather  misses  the  point:  a  gradualist 
approach of this kind may be the most effective antidote to the threat to price stability. 
These considerations are all fairly general in nature. Yet they become especially important if 
policy rates threaten to become constrained by a lower bound. Even if the policy rate were to 
be constrained in this way, “flattening the yield curve” by reducing longer-term interest rates 
would  ease  monetary  conditions  if  the  outlook  for  price  developments  required  it.22  In  this 
context, the ability to signal the persistence of policy rate changes is particularly valuable.  
intentions  at  all  maturities 
in  response 
                                                 
21   Woodford  (1999)  states  that  “one  straightforward  way  to  [ensure  the  effective  transmission  of  changes  in 
short-term policy rates so as to stabilise inflation] is to establish a reputation for maintaining interest rates at a 
higher level for a period of time once they are raised – or even for following initial small interest-rate changes 
by  further  changes  in  the  same  direction,  in  the  absence  of  a  change  in  conditions  that  makes  this 
unnecessary.” Note the emphasis placed on conditionality at the end of the excerpt. This is developed below. 
22   Krugman (1998); Reifschneider and Williams (2000); Bernanke and Reinhart (2004). 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 5
That being said, I have always stressed that steady-handedness should not be confused with 
lethargy, incapacity or an unwillingness to act. If the risks to price stability over the medium 
term change significantly, it is incumbent upon the central bank to ensure that its monetary 
policy stance is adjusted immediately, in order to address this change in the assessment of 
risk. Policy-makers must always be ready to act promptly and decisively when this is required 
by  a  change  in  the  situation.  Delay  for  its  own  sake  is  never  a  good  basis  for  policy 
decisions.  
Choosing  whether  to  change  policy  rates  requires  permanent  alertness.  If  a  new  threat  to 
price stability emerges, this must be identified promptly. Policy action can then be taken to 
ensure the achievement of the central bank’s objective. However, in deciding how to adjust 
the policy stance in order to achieve this goal, conferring persistence on the policy rate may 
be desirable, to the extent that this maintains and strengthens transmission. 
How  should  such  persistence  be  communicated?  Signalling  the  persistence  of  a  policy 
change by stating that the new level of policy rates will be maintained “come what may” is 
problematic. An unconditional commitment of this kind runs directly counter to the need to 
maintain the flexibility to act in response to changing conditions in the future.23 A statement 
of this kind will either (a) undesirably constrain the ability to respond to new circumstances as 
they emerge, or (b) simply be ignored when a new shock occurs. In the case of the former, 
the policy stance will not be appropriate and price stability will be placed at risk. In the case 
of the latter, the reputation and credibility of the central bank will suffer: its communication 
will be ineffective. Neither outcome is desirable. This argumentation forms the basis for my 
oft-repeated  statement  at  the  ECB’s  monthly  press  conferences  to  the  effect  that  the 
Governing Council “never precommits”.24  
At the same time, avoiding any unconditional commitments does not mean that one cannot 
communicate as regards the policy outlook. On the contrary, it means making a fundamental 
statement,  namely  that  future  decisions  will  be  guided  only  by  the  assessment  of  risks  to 
price stability, without having to announce the level or path of policy interest rates foreseen 
over the coming months.  
There appears to be a puzzle here. At first sight, the need to maintain a readiness to act in 
the  face  of  changing  circumstances  appears  to  run  counter  to  the  need  for  steady-
handedness in policy decisions. How can one always stand ready to change policy rates to 
contain  new  threats  to  price  stability  while  simultaneously  maintaining  a  reputation  for 
conferring persistence on developments in interest rates? 
As  I  argued  on  a  previous  occasion  here  at  Jackson  Hole,  to  understand  this  apparent 
paradox, we have to assemble not two, but three building blocks providing insight into the 
ECB’s conduct of monetary policy.25  
• 
First,  policy  decisions  focus  on  the  maintenance  of  price  stability  over  the  medium 
term.  This  supports  our  credibility,  understood  in  terms  of  the  solid  anchoring  of 
private medium and longer-term inflation expectations at levels consistent with price 
stability. 
Second,  we  behave  in  a  steady-handed  manner,  conferring  persistence  on 
developments  in  short-term  interest  rates  so  as  to  strengthen  the  transmission  of 
monetary policy. 
                                                  
23   Buiter  (1981)  contains  a  more  general  discussion  of  the  benefits  of  “contingent  rules”  (i.e.  those  involving 
conditionality) over “fixed rules” (i.e. those involving unconditional commitments). 
24   See,  for  example,  the  question  and  answer  session  at  the  ECB  press  conference  held  on  2  April  2009  ( 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2009/html/is090402.en.html). 
25   Trichet (2005). 
6 
 BIS Review 103/2009
 And  third,  we  are  never  precommitted  as  regards  the  future  level  or  path  of  policy 
rates.  On  the  contrary,  policy  rates  are  always  conditional  on  the  evolution  of  the 
outlook 
thereby  remain  alert  and  maintain  a 
comprehensive  and  up-to-date  assessment  of  the  economic  environment  and  are 
always ready to act decisively and promptly if the need arises in order to achieve our 
objective. 
for  price  developments.  We 
Credibility  helps  to  understand  the  interplay  between  alertness  –  i.e.,  in  particular,  the 
absence  of  any  precommitment  –  and  steady-handedness.  It  means  that  there  are  no 
question  marks  regarding  the  capacity  to  act  with  full  independence  if  and  when  this 
becomes necessary. It therefore allows a central bank’s interest rate decisions to have the 
maximum impact, whatever the circumstances, and helps a central bank to achieve its goal – 
i.e. price stability – with a satisfactory degree of economy of means. Even more importantly, 
because credibility consolidates the anchoring of inflation expectations, the interplay between 
steadiness and alertness is self-reinforcing. A posture of permanent alertness relying on the 
ongoing  vigilance  of  the  central  bank  strengthens  the  solidity  of  the  anchoring  of  inflation 
expectations.  And  in  this  perspective,  steady-handedness  itself  appears  to  be  both  a 
consequence  as  well  as  a  cause  of  the  better  anchoring  of  inflation  expectations.  Not 
surprisingly, the anchoring of inflation expectations appears to be at the centre of a “virtuous 
self-reinforcing  triangle”,  the  vertices  of  which  are  credibility,  alertness  and  steady-
handedness. 
A stance of credible alertness is, in my view, one of the most important features of monetary 
policy in “normal times” – to the extent that the concept of “normal times” has a meaning for 
central  bankers!  It  is  even  more  useful  when  we  suddenly  encounter  very  exceptional 
circumstances, as has been the case since mid-2007 and especially since September 2008. 
The  features  of  such  exceptional  circumstances  are  not  only  that  they  occur  largely 
unexpectedly or that they make inference based on past observations inadequate, but also 
that  the  complex  intertwining  of  economic  relationships  characterising  this  turbulent  period 
can hardly be captured by our mostly linear models. These are times in which the “flap of a 
butterfly’s  wings”  causes  tornadoes  (chaos  theory).26  Quickly  recognizing  the  limitations  of 
our analytical tools during these episodes is essential in order to avoid making inappropriate 
decisions. 
One can identify three important reasons for “heightened alertness” in periods of turbulence 
of the “Lorenzian” type. Firstly, to the extent that very small initial changes are capable of 
triggering extremely large changes after a sufficient period of time, it is essential to quickly 
establish  a  lucid  diagnosis  and  swiftly  take  the  decisions  necessary  to  avoid  as  much  as 
possible adverse future developments. 
Secondly, a common feature in the development of highly turbulent episodes is that central 
banks  have  to  cope  with  abnormally  rapid  modifications  in  the  economic  and  financial 
environment. These changes might be highly unexpected, erratic and trigger abrupt changes 
in  the  risks to  price  stability.  In  such  exceptional  circumstances,  credible  alertness  is  vital, 
and swift decision-making should not be hampered by ex ante considerations other than the 
delivery of price stability, and, by way of consequence, the anchoring of inflation expectations 
is of the essence. 
Indeed – and this is the third reason – the risk of unanchoring inflation expectations, whether 
upward  or  downward,  is  particularly  acute  in  such  circumstances.  Thus,  it  is  all  the  more 
important to make  very  clear to markets that, ex ante, they can always map the expected 
path of the policy rates relative to the evolution of macroeconomic conditions on the basis of 
the unambiguous goal of very solidly anchoring inflation expectations. 
                                                 
26   Lorenz (1972). 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 7
Some of these points can be illustrated in the context of the recent financial turmoil. Let us 
take  the  decision  to  increase  rates  in  July  2008,  11  months  after  the  turbulence  began  in 
August 2007. This decision was criticised ex post by some people, particluarly following the 
intensification of the crisis in mid-September 2008, two and a half months after our decision. I 
take it that in the perspective of credible alertness, it has been an important and opportune 
decision. The risks to price stability had increased significantly by the end of the first half of 
2008. Perhaps paradoxically in a period of financial turbulence, we also saw medium-term 
inflation expectations beginning to rise, signalling a serious risk of the unanchoring of these 
expectations.  Our  decision  demonstrated  our  determination  to  continue  solidly  anchoring 
inflation expectations including in the turbulent circumstances that we had to cope with. This 
demonstration  of  alertness  proved  extremely  useful  in  the  period  that  followed,  after  mid-
September,  when  we  had  to  guard  against  both  deflationary  risks  in  the  short  term  and 
inflationary risks in the medium and longer term.  
After  the  acute  intensification  of  the  crisis  (and  following  the  reduction  of  the  ECB’s  policy 
rates in October 2008), nominal yields at two and three-year maturities fell in the euro area, 
as shown in Figure 1. This partly reflected private expectations that the cut in policy rates 
would prove persistent. At the same time, as revealed by the developments in break-even 
rates  illustrated  in  Figure  2,  private  expectations  regarding  euro  area  inflation  remained 
correctly anchored, even at these relatively short horizons. By implication, real rates at such 
maturities  fell  substantially,  as  shown  in  Figure  3.  To  the  extent  that  real  rates  are  the 
relevant  determinant  of  private  spending  –  as  canonical  models  of  transmission  would 
suggest  –  the  evidence  points  to  significant  monetary  easing  in  the  euro  area.  This  very 
significant monetary easing was made possible by changes to the policy rate that were of a 
magnitude permitting us not to run into lower-bound constraints.27
Of course, extracting relevant information from financial market prices – as is implicit in these 
charts  –  is  particularly  difficult  at  times  of  market  turmoil,  when  liquidity  premia  and  safe-
haven  effects  may  be  larger  than  normal.  Such  caveats  imply  a  need  for  caution  when 
interpreting  these  developments.28  Nonetheless,  the  evidence  supports  the  view  that  a 
central bank’s ability to ease monetary conditions – and thereby support the stabilisation of 
inflation and output – is significantly enhanced by its ability to anchor private expectations.  
The effectiveness of the ECB’s interest rate decisions is reflected in the continued credibility 
of the ECB’s monetary policy. Notwithstanding the substantial economic and financial shocks 
experienced  recently  in  the  euro  area,  longer-term  private  inflation  expectations  have 
remained securely anchored at levels consistent with price stability. By way of illustration, the 
average  private  inflation  forecast  at  the  six  to  ten-year  horizon  (as  collated  by  Consensus 
Economics)  was  1.9%  in  June  2009.  Ten-year  break-even  inflation  rates  derived  from 
indexed bonds also hovered at levels just below 2% (see Figure 4). Even at the peak of the 
crisis,  there  was  no  discernible  doubt  that  the  ECB  would  maintain  price  stability  over  the 
medium to longer term.  
That  being  said,  it  must  be  stressed  that  there  are  at  least  two  important  reasons  why 
deflationary  risks  in  the  euro  area  and  in  other  economies  have  been  smaller  than  in  the 
United States. Firstly, the US economy was at the epicentre of the dramatic intensification of 
the global financial crisis in mid-September last year, and the nature and magnitude of the 
real economic shocks it had to cope with were formidable. Secondly, the flexibility of the US 
economy  –  which  is  one  of  its  major  assets  in  many  respects  –  also  means  that  very 
                                                 
27   See  the  discussion  in  the  question  and  answer  session  at  the  ECB  press  conference  held  on  7  May  2009 
(http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/pressconf/2009/html/is090507.en.html). 
28   While these caveats are important, measures of private inflation expectations derived from surveys – which 
should be immune to liquidity and safe-haven effects – would tell a similar story. 
8 
 BIS Review 103/2009
significant price movements, including downward movements, are more conceivable than in 
many other economies, including the euro area.  
I am profoundly convinced that, in these dramatic circumstances, central banks in general, 
and particularly those on either side of the Atlantic, have demonstrated remarkable unity of 
purpose and equally remarkable effectiveness in highly adverse circumstances. They did not 
necessarily take the same decisions, because they were not in the same situation as already 
pointed out.29 Also to be mentioned in this respect are the significant differences between the 
financial structures of the two economies, as highlighted in Figure 5. 
Non-standard measures: Enhanced credit support 
I  will  now  turn  to  the  third  element  of  my  remarks,  concerning  the  ECB’s  enhanced  credit 
support. At times of turmoil and stress – when conventional channels for the transmission of 
monetary policy are blocked or impaired – central banks may need to act, possibly forcefully, 
so as to ensure that their policy decisions remain effective.  
Our  non-standard  measures  should  be  viewed  in  this  light.  We  define  “enhanced  credit 
support” as meaning the special and primarily bank-based measures that are being taken to 
enhance the flow of credit above and beyond what could be achieved through policy interest 
rate  reductions  alone.  These  measures  were  introduced  to  complement  the  reduction  of 
interest  rates,  with  the  aim  of  ensuring  that  the  easing  of  financial  conditions  triggered  by 
policy  rate  cuts  was  fully  transmitted  to  firms  and  households  at  a  time  of  turmoil  when 
financial markets and institutions were not functioning normally.  
When significant tensions first emerged in the money market in early August 2007, the ECB 
was  in  the  vanguard  of  moves  to  address  the  problem.  More  specifically,  on  9  August  – 
within  hours  of  the  tensions  first  becoming  apparent  –  we  conducted  a  special  liquidity 
operation,  providing  €95  billion  to  the  market  that  same  day.  Other  special  operations 
followed  in  subsequent  days.  Thus,  the  ECB  was  the  first  central  bank  to  engage  in  non-
standard measures in response to the turmoil. The response was significant and rapid. Better 
evidence of the ECB’s alertness and readiness to act would be hard to find.  
Since  then,  we  have  adopted  various  other  non-standard  measures  with  the  aim  of 
maintaining the flow of credit to households and companies. These non-standard measures 
represent  our  policy  of  enhanced  credit  support  for  the  euro  area.  There  are  five  main 
elements of this approach:30 the introduction of full allotment at fixed rates in the provision of 
central  bank  liquidity  via  Eurosystem  operations;  the  lengthening  of  the  maturity  of  our 
operations, which now extend up to one-year operations; the further expansion of the list of 
assets  that  we  accept  as  collateral  in  our  operations;  the  provision  of  liquidity  in  foreign 
currencies, notably US dollars provided by the Federal Reserve; and finally, the purchase of 
€60 billion of covered bank bonds in order to revive this market segment, which is important 
in Europe.  
I would like to highlight in this context the very close cooperation that has been established 
between  central  banks.  Without  such  trustful  cooperation,  global  events  could  have  been 
much more dramatic. This is particularly true for the period following the intensification of the 
crisis  in  mid-September  2008.  Being  in  Jackson  Hole,  it  is  natural  for  me  to  mention  very 
warmly  the  link  established  between  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  ECB  to  supply  foreign 
exchange on both sides of the Atlantic. In my view, this cooperation played a very important 
role in stabilising European financial markets.  
                                                 
29   See, for example, “Financial/economic structure and monetary policy” in Trichet (2009b). 
30   For more details, see Trichet (2009a). 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 9
The set of measures described above has fundamentally eased banks’ liquidity constraints in 
the  euro  area,  thereby  supporting  the  extension  of  credit  and  the  rolling  over  of  maturing 
loans,  even  in  challenging  market  conditions.  One  distinguishing  feature  of  these  non-
standard measures is their focus on the banking system, reflecting the bank-centric structure 
of the financial sector in the euro area (see Figure 5).31  
The ECB’s approach contributed to contain the rise in money market spreads last autumn, 
before  helping  to  reduce  them  substantially  thereafter  (see  Figure  6).  However,  such 
measures alone were far from being sufficient in order to normalise conditions in the market. 
To the extent that ongoing tensions reflected financial institutions’ need to take into account 
losses, increase capital and address a general lack of confidence, other public authorities – 
fiscal authorities, supervisors and regulators – and, ultimately, banks themselves needed to 
act. Further progress in this regard remains urgently required.32
Against this background, it is crucial that central banks act to build and sustain confidence, 
which is a scarce commodity in times of crisis. Policy-makers must always display sang froid 
–  if  I  may  use  a  French  synonym  for  “steady-handedness”  –  and  keep  their  composure, 
particularly  in  the  most  demanding  and  turbulent  of  times.  The  design  of  the  ECB’s  non-
standard measures reflects these concerns. To the extent possible, they are a continuation 
of our operational framework prior to the emergence of market turmoil. Moreover, from the 
outset,  they  have  recognised  the  need  for  a  credible  exit  strategy,  so  as  to  ensure  the 
independence  of  the  ECB  and  the  credibility  of  its  focus  on  price  stability.  The  Governing 
Council will ensure that the measures taken are quickly unwound and the liquidity provided is 
absorbed once the macroeconomic environment improves. 
Concluding remarks 
The  exceptional  challenges  faced  over  the  past  two  years  have  required  monetary  policy 
action  unprecedented  in  terms  of  its  nature,  scope  and  magnitude.  Very  demanding 
circumstances have called for bold – yet solidly anchored – action as events have unfolded. 
We believe that what I would call the “virtuous triangle” of credibility, alertness and steady-
handedness  –  jointly  serving  to  solidly  anchor  inflation  expectations  –  has  served  us  well 
both in periods of relative calm and in very demanding and challenging uncharted territory.  
Before coming, I read the conclusions I presented here in Jackson Hole exactly four years 
ago  with  some  anxiety,  as  you  can  imagine…  I  saw  that,  fortunately,  risks  ahead  had  not 
been  omitted:  “We  have  to  stand  ready  at  any  time  to  weather  the  materialisation  of  new 
risks. […] Being intellectually and conceptually ready is extremely important.” Now that we 
have a better idea of the dramatic ways in which risk can materialise in the present global 
economy, we are all, more than ever, convinced that being “intellectually and conceptually 
ready” means doing all that we can, in our own area of responsibility, to prevent the repetition 
of  such  dramatic  events.  This  is  the  very  demanding  immediate  task  of  the  international 
community. And now that we see some signs confirming that the real economy is starting to 
get out of the period of “free fall” – which does not mean at all that we do not have a very 
bumpy  road  ahead  of  us  –  the  largest  mistake  we  could  make  would  be  to  forget  the 
importance and the urgency of this task.  
                                                 
31   Trichet (2009b). 
32   Reinhart and Rogoff (2008, 2009) are important reminders that financial crises can have deep and long-lasting 
consequences especially on employment and asset prices. 
10 
 BIS Review 103/2009
References 
Adalid, R. and C. Detken (2007). “Liquidity shocks and asset price boom/bust cycles,” ECB 
working paper no. 732. 
Adrian,  T.  and  H.S.  Shin  (2008).  “Liquidity,  monetary  policy,  and  financial  cycles,”  Current 
Issues in Economics and Finance, FRB New York (January). 
Alessi, L. and C. Detken (2009). “'Real time' early warning indicators for costly asset price 
boom/bust cycles: a role for global liquidity,” ECB working paper no. 1039. 
Angeloni, I., A. Kashyap and B. Mojon (2003). Monetary policy transmission in the euro area, 
Cambridge University Press. 
Bernanke, B.S. and M. Gertler (1995). “Inside the black box: The credit channel of monetary 
policy transmission,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, pp. 27-48.  
Bernanke,  B.S.  and  M.  Gertler  (1999).  “Monetary  policy  and  asset  price  volatility,”  in  New 
challenges for monetary policy, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 77-128. 
Bernanke,  B.S.  and  V.R.  Reinhart  (2004).  “Conducting  monetary  policy  at  very  low  short-
term interest rates,” American Economic Review 94(2), pp. 85-90. 
Borio, C. and P. Lowe (2002). “Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: Exploring the 
nexus,” BIS working papers no. 114. 
Buiter,  W.H.  (1981).  “The  superiority  of  contingent  rules  over  fixed  rules  in  models  with 
rational expectations,” Economic Journal 91, pp. 647-670. 
Campbell, J.Y. (2008). Asset prices and monetary policy, Chicago University Press. 
Cechetti, S., H. Genberg, J. Lipsky and S. Wadhwani (2000). “Asset prices and central bank 
policy: What to do about it?” Geneva Reports on the World Economy 2.  
Christiano, L.J., M. Eichenbaum and C.L. Evans (1999). “Monetary policy shocks: What have 
we 
in  J.B.  Taylor  and  M.  Woodford,  Handbook  of 
macroeconomics, Elsevier, pp. 65-148. 
Christiano, L., R. Motto and M. Rostagno (2008). “Two reasons why money and credit may 
be useful in monetary policy,” in A. Beyer and L. Reichlin (eds.) The role of money: Money 
and monetary policy in the twenty-first century, ECB, pp. 56-82. 
Detken,  C.  and  F.  Smets  (2004).  “Asset  price  booms  and  monetary  policy,”  in  H.  Siebert 
(ed.), Macroeconomic policies in the world economy, Springer.  
De  Santis,  R.A.,  C.A.  Favero  and  B.  Roffia  (2008).  “Euro  area  money  demand  and 
international  portfolio  allocation:  a  contribution  to  assessing  risks  to  price  stability,”  ECB 
working paper no. 926. 
ECB (2005). “Asset price bubbles and monetary policy,” Monthly Bulletin (April) pp. 47-60. 
ECB  (2008).  “Box  2:  Recent  developments  in  the  balance  sheets  of  euro  area  credit 
institutions,” Monthly Bulletin (December) pp. 25-28. 
EMI  (1997).  “The  single  monetary  policy  in  Stage  Three:  Elements  of  the  monetary  policy 
strategy of the ESCB”. 
Fischer, B., M. Lenza, H. Pill and L. Reichlin (2008). “Money and monetary policy: The ECB 
experience  1999-2006,”  in  A.  Beyer  and  L.  Reichlin  (eds.)  The  role  of  money:  Money  and 
monetary policy in the twenty-first century, ECB, pp. 102-175. 
Gerdesmeier, D., B. Roffia and H-E. Reimers (2009). “Asset price misalignments and the role 
of money and credit,” ECB working paper no. 1068. 
Goodfriend,  M.  (1991).  “Interest  rates  and  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy,”  Carnegie-
Rochester Series on Public Policy 34(1), pp. 7-30. 
to  what  end?” 
learned  and 
BIS Review 103/2009 
 11
Goodhart,  C.  and  B.  Hofmann  (2006):  House  prices  and  the  Macroeconomy,  Oxford 
University Press. 
Hoerova, M., C. Monnet and E. Temzelides (2009). “Money talks: Information and monetary 
policy,” ECB working paper series forthcoming. 
Issing,  O  (2002),  “Why  stable  prices  and  stable  markets  are  important  and  how  they  fit 
together”,  First  Conference  of  the  Monetary  Stability  Foundation,  5  December  2002, 
Frankfurt/Main 
Issing,  O.  (2009).  “In  search  of  monetary  stability:  the  evolution  of  monetary  policy”,  BIS 
working paper series, March, no. 273 
Kohn,  D.L.  (2007).  “Monetary  policy  and  asset  prices,”  in  Monetary  policy:  A  journey  from 
theory to practice, ECB, pp. 43-51. 
Kohn,  D.L.  (2008).  “Monetary  policy  and  asset  prices  revisited,”  speech  at  the  Cato 
Institute’s Twenty-sixth Annual Monetary Policy Conference. 
Krugman,  P.  (1998).  “It's  Baaack!  Japan's  Slump  and  the  Return  of  the  Liquidity  Trap,” 
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 98(2), pp. 137-187.  
Lorenz,  E.  N.  (1972).  “Does  the  flap  of  a  butterfly’s  wings  in  Brazil  set  off  a  tornado  in 
Texas?”,  Speech  before  the  American  Academy  for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  29 
December. 
Papademos,  L.  (2008),  “The  role  of  money  in  the  conduct  of  monetary  policy”,  Beyer  and 
Reichlin (eds.), The role of money and monetary policy in the twenty-first century, European 
Central Bank. 
Reifschneider,  D.  and  J.C.  Williams  (2000).  “Three  lessons  for  monetary  policy  in  a  low 
inflation era,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking 32(4), pp. 936-966. 
Reinhart,  C.  and  K.  Rogoff  (2008).  “This  Time  Is  Different:  A  Panoramic  View  of  Eight 
Centuries of Financial Crises”, NBER Working Paper 13882. 
Reinhart, C. and K. Rogoff (2009). “The Aftermath of Financial Crises”, American Economic 
Review: Papers & Proceedings 99(2), pp. 466-472. 
Rudebusch, G.D. (1995). “Federal Reserve interest rate targeting, rational expectations, and 
the term structure,” Journal of Monetary Economics 35(2), pp. 245-274. 
Smets,  F.  and  R.  Wouters  (2003).  “An  estimated  dynamic  stochastic  general  equilibrium 
model of the euro area,” Journal of the European Economic Association 1, pp. 1123-1175. 
Stark,  J.  (2007).  “Enhancing  the  monetary  analysis,”  speech  at  the  CFS  conference  “The 
ECB and its watchers IX”, http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2007/html/sp070907_1.en.html. 
Stark,  J.  (2008).  “The  contribution  of  monetary  and  financial  statistics  to  the  conduct  of 
monetary policy,” in A strategic vision for statistics: Challenges for the next ten years, ECB, 
pp. 43-52. 
Trichet,  J.C.  (2005).  “Monetary  Policy  and  ‘Credible  Alertness’,”  in  The  Greenspan  era: 
Lessons for the future, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp. 523-45. 
Trichet,  J.C.  (2009a).  “The  ECB’s  enhanced  credit  support,”  Keynote  address  at  the 
University 
economic 
seminar, 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2009/html/sp090713.en.html. 
Trichet, J.C. (2009b). “The financial crisis and our response so far,” Keynote address at the 
Chatham 
Forum, 
http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/key/date/2009/html/sp090427.en.html. 
Woodford, M. (1999). “Optimal monetary policy inertia,” Manchester School 67(0), pp. 1-35. 
Financial 
Munich 
Global 
House 
of 
12 
 BIS Review 103/2009
Woodford,  M.  (2003).  Interest  and  prices:  Foundations  of  a  theory  of  monetary  policy, 
Princeton University Press. 
  BIS Review 103/2009 
   13
   14 
 BIS Review 103/2009
 BIS Review 103/2009 
   15
