Ben S Bernanke: The Federal Reserve’s balance sheet 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Richmond  2009  Credit  Markets 
Symposium, Charlotte, North Carolina, 3 April 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website. 
 In ordinary financial and economic times, my topic, "The Federal Reserve's Balance Sheet," 
might not be considered a "grabber." But these are far from ordinary times. To address the 
current  crisis,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  taken  a  number  of  aggressive  and  creative  policy 
actions, many of which are reflected in the size and composition of the Fed's balance sheet. 
So,  I  thought  that  a  brief  guided  tour  of  our  balance  sheet  might  be  an  instructive  way  to 
discuss the Fed's policy strategy and some related issues. As I will discuss, we no longer live 
in a world in which central bank policies are confined to adjusting the short-term interest rate. 
Instead,  by  using  their  balance  sheets,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  other  central  banks  are 
developing new tools to ease financial conditions and support economic growth.  
Some principles for balance sheet policy 
Before I get into the details of our balance sheet and how it reflects various Federal Reserve 
initiatives,  I  would  like  to  note  some  general  considerations  that  have  been  important  in 
shaping  our  policy  approach.  As  you  know,  financial  markets  and  institutions  both  in  the 
United States and globally have been under extraordinary stress for more than a year and a 
half. Relieving the disruptions in credit markets and restoring the flow of credit to households 
and  businesses  are  essential  if  we  are  to  see,  as  I  expect,  the  gradual  resumption  of 
sustainable  economic  growth.  To  achieve  this  critical  objective,  the  Federal  Reserve  has 
worked closely and cooperatively with the Treasury and other agencies. Such collaboration is 
not unusual. We have traditionally worked in close concert with other agencies in fostering 
stable  financial  conditions,  even  as  we  have  maintained  independent  responsibility  for 
making monetary policy. 
Though we have been creative in deploying our balance sheet, using a multiplicity of new 
programs  (and  coining  a  multiplicity  of  new  acronyms,  I  might  add),  we  have  done  so 
prudently. As much as possible, we have sought to avoid both credit risk and credit allocation 
in  our  lending  and  securities  purchase  programs.  As  I  will  discuss  further  today,  the  great 
majority  of  our  lending  is  extremely  well  secured.  And  our  programs  have  been  aimed  at 
improving  financial  and  credit  conditions  broadly,  with  an  eye  toward  restoring  overall 
economic  growth,  rather  than  toward  supporting  narrowly  defined  sectors  or  classes  of 
borrowers. 
In  pursuing  our  strategy,  which  I  have  called  "credit  easing,"  we  have  also  taken  care  to 
design our programs so that they can be unwound as markets and the economy revive. In 
particular, these activities must not constrain the exercise of monetary policy as needed to 
meet  our  congressional  mandate  to  foster  maximum  sustainable  employment  and  stable 
prices. 
We  are  also  committed  to  working  with  the  Administration  and  the  Congress  to  develop  a 
new  resolution  regime  that  would  allow  the  U.S.  government  to  effectively  address,  at  an 
early stage, the potential failure of systemically critical nonbank financial institutions. As this 
audience  well  knows,  the  lack  of  such  a  regime  greatly  hampered  our  flexibility  in  dealing 
with  the  failure  or  near-failure  of  such  institutions  as  Bear  Stearns,  Lehman  Brothers,  and 
American International Group (AIG). 
BIS Review 43/2009 
 1
The principles I have just noted were recently formalized in a joint Federal Reserve-Treasury 
statement.1  Those  principles  are:  (1)  that  the  Fed  will  cooperate  closely  with  the  Treasury 
and other agencies in addressing the financial crisis; (2) that the Fed in its lending activities 
should avoid taking credit risk or allocating credit to narrowly defined sectors or classes of 
borrowers;  (3)  that  the  Fed's  independent  ability  to  manage  monetary  policy  must  not  be 
constrained by its programs to ease credit conditions; and (4) that there is a pressing need 
for  a  new  resolution  regime  for  nonbanks  that,  among  other  things,  will  better  define  the 
Fed's  role  in  preventing  the  disorderly  failure  of  systemically  critical  financial  institutions.  I 
welcome the clarity that this public statement  brings to the principles underlying our policy 
strategy during this very difficult period. 
The balance sheet as a tool of monetary policy 
The  severe  disruption  of  credit  markets  that  began  late  in  the  summer  of  2007  and  the 
associated tightening in credit conditions and declines in asset prices have weighed heavily 
on economic activity here and abroad. The Federal Reserve has responded by aggressively 
easing  short-term  interest  rates,  beginning  in  September  2007.  In  October  2008,  as  the 
financial crisis intensified, the Federal Reserve participated in an unprecedented coordinated 
rate  cut  with  other  major  central  banks.  At  its  December  2008  meeting,  the  Federal  Open 
Market  Committee  (FOMC)  reduced  its  target  for  the  federal  funds  rate  close  to  its  lower 
bound,  setting  a  target  range  between  0  and  1/4  percent.  And,  with  inflation  expected  to 
remain  subdued  for  some  time,  the  Committee  has  indicated  that  short-term  interest  rates 
are  likely  to  remain  low  for  an  extended  period.  With  conventional  monetary  policy  having 
reached its limit, any further policy stimulus requires a different set of tools.  
The  Federal  Reserve  has  been  a  global  leader  in  developing  such  tools.  In  particular,  to 
further  improve  the  functioning  of  credit  markets  and  provide  additional  support  to  the 
economy,  the  Fed  has  established  and  expanded  a  number  of  liquidity  programs  and 
recently  initiated  a  large-scale  program  of  asset  purchases.  These  actions  have  had 
significant effects on both the size and composition of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet. 
Notably, the balance sheet has more than doubled, from roughly $870 billion before the crisis 
to roughly $2 trillion now. In the remainder of my remarks, I will walk you through the major 
components of the Fed's balance sheet, which is a convenient way to discuss the range of 
policy tools the Fed is employing and some of the issues we are confronting in our policy 
decisions.  
An excellent source of information on our balance sheet, by the way, is a new section of the 
Board's website, entitled Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet.2 This section 
brings together much diverse information about the Fed's balance sheet, including some only 
recently  made  available,  as  well  as  detailed  explanations  and  analyses.  Serious  Fed 
watchers should add this link to their online favorites list. 
Let me begin with the asset side of our balance sheet. For decades, the Federal Reserve's 
assets  consisted  almost  exclusively  of  Treasury  securities.  Since  late  2007,  however,  our 
holdings  of  Treasury  securities  have  declined,  while  our  holdings  of  other  financial  assets 
have  expanded  dramatically.  It  is  useful  to  group  the  Federal  Reserve's  assets  into  three 
broad categories: (1) short-term credit extended to support the liquidity of financial firms such 
as depository institutions, broker-dealers, and money market mutual funds; (2) assets related 
to programs focused on broader credit conditions; and (3) holdings of high-quality securities, 
                                                 
1   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Department of the Treasury (2009), "The Role of the 
Federal  Reserve  in  Preserving  Financial  and  Monetary  Stability:  Joint  Statement  by  the  Department  of  the 
Treasury and the Federal Reserve," joint press release, March 23. 
2   Credit and Liquidity Programs and the Balance Sheet is available on the Board's website. 
2 
 BIS Review 43/2009
notably  Treasury  securities,  agency  debt,  and  agency-backed  mortgage-backed  securities 
(MBS).3  As  I  will  discuss  later,  the  Federal  Reserve  also  has  provided  support  directly  to 
specific  institutions  in  cases  when  a  disorderly  failure  would  have  threatened  the  financial 
system.  
Liquidity programs for financial firms 
The first of these categories of assets – short-term liquidity provided to financial institutions – 
totals  almost  $860  billion  and  today  represents  nearly  45  percent  of  the  assets  on  our 
balance  sheet.  These  loans  are  made  to  sound  institutions,  are  fully  secured,  and  are  for 
maturities  no  greater  than  90  days,  usually  less.  Thus,  they  are  very  safe.  The  main 
components of this category are lending to commercial banks and primary dealers, as well 
as currency swaps with other central banks to support interconnected global dollar funding 
markets.4 
From its beginning, the Federal Reserve, through its discount window, has provided credit to 
depository  institutions  to  meet  unexpected  liquidity  needs,  usually  in  the  form  of  overnight 
loans. The provision of short-term liquidity is, of course, a long-standing function of central 
banks. In August 2007, conditions in short-term bank funding markets deteriorated abruptly, 
and bank funding needs intensified sharply. In response to these developments, the Federal 
Reserve reduced the spread of the primary credit rate – the rate at which most institutions 
borrow at the discount window – relative to the target federal funds rate, and also made it 
easier for banks to borrow at term. However, as in some past episodes of financial distress, 
banks were reluctant to rely on discount window credit to address their funding needs. The 
banks'  concern  was  that  their  recourse  to  the  discount  window,  if  it  became  known,  might 
lead  market  participants  to  infer  weakness  –  the  so-called  stigma  problem.  The  perceived 
stigma of borrowing at the discount window threatened to prevent the Federal Reserve from 
getting much-needed liquidity into the system.  
To  address  this  issue,  in  late  2007,  the  Federal  Reserve  established  the  Term  Auction 
Facility  (TAF),  which,  as  the  name  implies,  provides  fixed  quantities  of  term  credit  to 
depository institutions through an auction mechanism. The introduction of this facility seems 
largely to have solved the stigma problem, partly because the sizable number of borrowers 
provides  anonymity,  and  possibly  also  because  the  three-day  period  between  the  auction 
and auction settlement suggests that the facility's users are not relying on it for acute funding 
needs  on  a  particular  day.  As  of  April  1,  2009,  we  had  roughly  $525  billion  of  discount 
window credit outstanding, of which about $470 billion had been distributed through auctions 
and the remainder through conventional discount window loans. 
Like  depository  institutions  in  the  United  States,  foreign  banks  with  large  dollar  funding 
positions were also experiencing powerful liquidity pressures. This unmet demand for dollars 
was spilling over into U.S. markets, including the federal funds market. To address this issue, 
the  Federal  Reserve  has  cooperated  with  foreign  central  banks  in  establishing  what  are 
known as reciprocal currency arrangements, or liquidity swap lines. In these arrangements, 
the  Federal  Reserve  provides  dollars  to  foreign  central  banks  which  they,  in  turn,  lend  to 
banks  in  their  jurisdictions.  Credit  risk  is  minimal  in  these  arrangements,  as  the  foreign 
central bank is responsible for repayment, rather than the institutions that ultimately receive 
the funds; in addition, the Fed receives foreign currency from its central bank partner of equal 
value  to  the  dollars  lent.  Liquidity  provided  through  such  arrangements  peaked  ahead  of 
                                                 
3   Agency debt, in this instance, is debt issued by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and the Federal Home Loan Banks. 
Agency MBS are backed by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and Ginnie Mae. 
4   Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York.  
BIS Review 43/2009 
 3
year-end  2008  but  has  since  declined  as  pressures  in  short-term  funding  markets  have 
eased; the outstanding amount currently stands at about $310 billion. 
In addition, following the sharp deterioration in market conditions in March 2008, the Federal 
Reserve used its emergency lending authority to provide primary dealers access to central 
bank credit. Primary dealers can obtain short-term collateralized loans from the Fed through 
the Primary Dealer Credit Facility, or PDCF. The PDCF, which is closely analogous to the 
discount  window  for  commercial  banks,  currently  has  about  $20  billion  in  borrowings 
outstanding.  Another  program  for  primary  dealers,  called  the  Term  Securities  Lending 
Facility, lends Treasury securities to dealers, taking investment-grade securities as collateral. 
The  primary  dealers  then  use  the  more-liquid  Treasury  securities  to  obtain  private-sector 
funding. Extensions of credit under this program, which currently total about $85 billion, do 
not  appear  as  distinct  assets  on  the  Fed's  balance  sheet,  because  the  Federal  Reserve 
continues to own the Treasury securities that it lends. 
As  I  mentioned,  the  provision  of  liquidity  on  a  collateralized  basis  to  sound  financial 
institutions is a traditional central bank function. This so-called lender-of-last-resort activity is 
particularly useful during a financial crisis, as it reduces the need for fire sales of assets and 
reassures  financial  institutions  and  their  counterparties  that  those  institutions  will  have 
access  to  liquidity  as  needed.  To  be  sure,  the  provision  of  liquidity  alone  cannot  address 
solvency problems or erase the large losses that financial institutions have suffered during 
this  crisis. Yet  both  our  internal  analysis  and market  reports  suggest that  the  Fed's  ample 
supply of liquidity, along with liquidity provided by other major central banks, has significantly 
reduced funding pressures for financial institutions, helped to reduce rates in bank funding 
markets,  and  increased  overall  financial  stability.  For  example,  despite  ongoing  financial 
stresses, funding pressures around year-end 2008 and the most recent quarter-end appear 
to have moderated significantly. 
Before leaving this category of assets, I should mention briefly the Fed's actions to ensure 
liquidity  to  another  category  of  financial  institution,  money  market  mutual  funds.  In 
September, a prominent money market mutual fund "broke the buck" – that is, was unable to 
maintain a net asset value of $1 per share. This event led to a run on the other funds, which 
saw  very  sharp  withdrawals.  These  withdrawals  in  turn  threatened  the  stability  of  the 
commercial  paper  market,  which  depends  heavily  on  money  market  mutual  funds  as 
investors. Following the long-standing principle that the central bank should lend into a panic, 
the Federal Reserve established two programs to backstop money market mutual funds and 
to  help  those  funds  avoid  fire  sales  of  their  assets  to  meet  withdrawals.  Together  with  an 
insurance  program  offered  by  the  Treasury,  the  Fed's  programs  helped  end  the  run;  the 
sharp withdrawals from the funds have been replaced by moderate inflows. Although credit 
extended to support money funds was high during the intense phase of the crisis in the fall, 
borrowings have since declined substantially, to about $6 billion. 
Direct lending to borrowers and investors 
A second set of programs initiated by the Federal Reserve – including the Commercial Paper 
Funding Facility (CPFF) and the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF) – aims 
to  improve  the  functioning  of  key  credit  markets  by  lending  directly  to  market  participants, 
including ultimate borrowers and major investors. The lending associated with these facilities 
is currently about $255 billion, corresponding to roughly one-eighth of the assets on the Fed's 
balance sheet. The sizes of these programs, notably the TALF, are expected to grow in the 
months ahead.  
The  commercial  paper  market  is  a  key  source  of  the  short-term  credit  that  American 
businesses use to meet payrolls and finance inventories. Following the intensification of the 
financial crisis in the fall, commercial paper rates spiked, even for the highest-quality firms. 
Moreover, most firms were unable to borrow for periods longer than a few days, exposing 
both firms and lenders to significant rollover risk. By serving as a backstop for commercial 
4 
 BIS Review 43/2009
paper issuers, the CPFF was intended to address rollover risk and to improve the functioning 
of this market. Under this facility, the Fed stands ready to lend to the highest-rated financial 
and  nonfinancial  commercial  paper  issuers  for  a  term  of  three  months.  As  additional 
protection against loss, and to make the facility the last rather than the first resort, the CPFF 
charges borrowers upfront fees in addition to interest. Borrowing from this facility peaked at 
about $350 billion and has since declined to about $250 billion as more firms have been able 
to issue commercial paper to private lenders or have found alternative sources of finance. 
Conditions in the market have improved markedly since the introduction of this program, with 
spreads  declining  sharply  and  with  more  funding  available  at  longer  maturities.  Market 
participants tell us that the CPFF contributed to these improvements.  
Most  recently,  the  Federal  Reserve  launched  the  TALF,  which  is  aimed  at  restoring 
securitization  markets,  now  virtually  shut  down.  The  closing  of  securitization  markets,  until 
recently an important source of credit for the economy, has added considerably to the stress 
in credit markets and financial institutions generally. Under the TALF, eligible investors may 
borrow  to  finance  their  holdings  of  the  AAA-rated  tranches  of  selected  asset-backed 
securities.  The  program  is  currently  focused  on  securities  backed  by  newly  and  recently 
originated auto loans, credit card loans, student loans, and loans guaranteed by the Small 
Business Administration. The first TALF subscription attracted about $8 billion in total asset-
backed securities deals and used about $4.7 billion in Federal Reserve financing. Over time, 
the  list  of  securities  eligible  for  the  TALF  is  expected  to  expand  to  include  additional 
securities, such as commercial mortgages, as well as securities that are not newly issued. 
Relative to the Fed's short-term lending to financial institutions, the CPFF and the TALF are 
rather unconventional programs for a central bank to undertake. I see them as justified by the 
extraordinary  circumstances  in  which  we  find  ourselves  and  by  the  need  for  central  bank 
lending  practices  to  reflect  the  evolution  of  financial  markets;  after  all,  a  few  decades  ago 
securitization  markets  barely  existed.  Notably,  other  central  banks  around  the  world  have 
shown increasing interest in similar programs as they address the credit strains in their own 
countries.  These  programs  also  meet  the  criteria  I  stated  at  the  beginning  of  my  remarks 
regarding  credit  risk  and  credit  allocation.  Credit  risk  is  very  low  in  both  programs;  in 
particular,  the  TALF  program  requires  that  loans  be  overcollateralized  and  is  further 
protected by capital provided by the Treasury. Both programs are directed at broad markets 
whose  dysfunction  impedes  the  flow  of  numerous  types  of  credit  to  ultimate  borrowers; 
consequently, I do not see these programs as engaging in credit allocation – the favoring of a 
particular sector or a narrow class of borrowers over others. 
Purchases of high-quality assets 
The  third  major  category  of  assets  on  the  Fed's  balance  sheet  is  holdings  of  high-quality 
securities,  notably  Treasury  securities,  agency  debt,  and  agency-backed  MBS.  These 
holdings currently total about $780 billion, or about three-eighths of Federal Reserve assets. 
Of  this  $780  billion,  holdings  of  Treasury  securities  currently  make  up  about  $490  billion. 
Some of these Treasury securities are lent out through the Term Securities Lending Facility 
that I mentioned earlier. Obviously, these holdings are very safe from a credit perspective. 
Longer-term  securities  do  pose  some  interest-rate  risk;  however,  because  the  Federal 
Reserve finances its purchases with short-term liabilities, on average and over time, that risk 
is mitigated by the normal upward slope of the yield curve. 
The Fed's holdings of high-quality securities are set to grow considerably as the FOMC, in an 
attempt  to  improve  conditions  in  private  credit  markets,  has  announced  large-scale  open-
market  purchases  of  these  securities.  Specifically,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  purchase 
cumulative amounts of up to $1.25 trillion of agency MBS and up to $200 billion of agency 
debt by the end of the year, and up to $300 billion of longer-term Treasury securities over the 
next six months. The principal goal of these programs is to lower the cost and improve the 
availability of credit for households and businesses. As best we can tell, so far the programs 
BIS Review 43/2009 
 5
are having the intended effect. For example, 30-year fixed mortgage rates, which responded 
very little to our cuts in the target for the federal funds rate, have declined 1 percentage point 
to  1-1/2  percentage  points  since  our  first  MBS  purchase  program  was  announced  in 
November. Over time, lower mortgage rates should help to improve conditions in the housing 
market,  whose  persistent  weakness  has  had  a  major  impact  on  economic  and  financial 
conditions  more  broadly,  and  will  improve  the  financial  condition  of  some  households  by 
facilitating refinancing. In addition, open-market purchases should benefit credit markets by 
adding liquidity and balance sheet capacity to the system.  
Support for specific institutions 
In  addition  to  those  programs  I  have  just  discussed,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  provided 
financing  directly  to  specific  systemically  important  institutions.  With  the  full  support  of  the 
Treasury, we used emergency lending powers to facilitate the acquisition of Bear Stearns by 
JPMorgan Chase & Co. and also to prevent default by AIG. These extensions of credit are 
very different than the other liquidity programs discussed previously and were put in place to 
avoid  major  disruptions  in  financial  markets.  From  a  credit  perspective,  these  support 
facilities carry more risk than traditional central bank liquidity support, but we nevertheless 
expect to be fully repaid. Credit extended under these programs has varied but recently has 
accounted for only about 5 percent of our balance sheet. That said, these operations have 
been  extremely  uncomfortable  for  the  Federal  Reserve  to  undertake  and  were  carried  out 
only because no reasonable alternative was available. As noted in the joint Federal Reserve-
Treasury  statement  I  mentioned  earlier,  we  are  working  with  the  Administration  and  the 
Congress  to  develop  a  formal  resolution  regime  for  systemically  critical  nonbank  financial 
institutions, analogous to one already in place for banks. Such a regime should spell out as 
precisely as possible the role that the Congress expects the Federal Reserve to play in such 
resolutions. 
Liabilities 
Having reviewed the Federal Reserve's main asset accounts, let me now touch briefly on the 
liability  side  of  the  balance  sheet.  Historically,  the  largest  component  of  the  Federal 
Reserve's  liabilities  has  historically  been  Federal  Reserve  notes  –  that  is,  U.S.  paper 
currency.  Currency  has  expanded  over  time  in  line  with  nominal  spending  in  the  United 
States  and  demands  for  U.S.  currency  abroad.  By  some  estimates,  a  bit  over  one-half  of 
U.S. currency is held outside the country. 
Other  key  liabilities  of  the  Federal  Reserve  include  the  deposit  accounts  of  the  U.S. 
government  and  depository  institutions.  The  U.S.  government  maintains  a  "checking 
account" with the Federal Reserve – the so-called Treasury general account – from which 
most  federal  payments  are  made.  More  recently,  the  Treasury  has  established  a  special 
account  at  the  Federal  Reserve  as  part  of  its  Supplementary  Financing  Program  (SFP). 
Under this program, the Treasury issues special Treasury bills and places the proceeds in 
the  Treasury  supplementary  financing  account  at  the  Federal  Reserve.  The  net  effect  of 
these operations is to drain reserve balances from depository institutions.  
Depository institutions also maintain accounts at the Federal Reserve, of course, and over 
recent  months,  as  the  size  of  the  Federal  Reserve's  balance  sheet  has  expanded,  the 
balances held in these accounts have increased substantially. The large volume of reserve 
balances outstanding must be monitored carefully, as – if not carefully managed – they could 
complicate  the  Fed's  task  of  raising  short-term  interest  rates  when  the  economy  begins  to 
recover or if inflation expectations were to begin to move higher. We have a number of tools 
we can use to reduce bank reserves or increase short-term interest rates when that becomes 
necessary. First, many of our lending programs extend credit primarily on a short-term basis 
and thus could be wound down relatively quickly. In addition, since the lending rates in these 
6 
 BIS Review 43/2009
programs are typically set above the rates that prevail in normal market conditions, borrower 
demand for these facilities should wane as conditions improve. Second, the Federal Reserve 
can  conduct  reverse  repurchase  agreements  against  its  long-term  securities  holdings  to 
drain bank reserves or, if necessary, it could choose to sell some of its securities. Of course, 
for any given level of the federal funds rate, an unwinding of lending facilities or a sale of 
securities would constitute a de facto tightening of policy, and so would have to be carefully 
considered  in  that  light  by  the  FOMC.  Third,  some  reserves  can  be  soaked  up  by  the 
Treasury's Supplementary Financing Program.  Fourth, in October of last year, the Federal 
Reserve received long-sought authority to pay interest on the reserve balances of depository 
institutions. Raising the interest rate paid on reserves will encourage depository institutions to 
hold reserves with the Fed, rather than lending them into the federal funds market at a rate 
below the rate paid on reserves.5 Thus, the interest rate paid on reserves will tend to set a 
floor on the federal funds rate. 
The  FOMC  will  continue  to  closely  monitor  the  level  and  projected  expansion  of  bank 
reserves  to  ensure  that  –  as  noted  in  the  joint  Federal  Reserve-Treasury  statement  –  the 
Fed's efforts to improve the workings of credit markets do not interfere with the independent 
conduct  of  monetary  policy  in  the  pursuit  of  its  dual  mandate  of  ensuring  maximum 
employment and price stability. As was also noted in the joint statement, to provide additional 
assurance  on  this  score,  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  Treasury  have  agreed  to  seek 
legislation to provide additional tools for managing bank reserves. 
Conclusion 
These are extraordinarily challenging times for our financial system and our economy. I am 
confident that we can meet these challenges, not least because I have great confidence in 
the  underlying  strengths  of  the  American  economy.  For  its  part,  the  Federal  Reserve  will 
make responsible use of all its tools to stabilize financial markets and institutions, to promote 
the extension of credit to creditworthy borrowers, and to help build a foundation for economic 
recovery.  Over  the  longer  term,  we  also  look  forward  to  working  with  our  counterparts  at 
other  supervisory  and  regulatory  agencies  in  the  United  States  and  around  the  world  to 
address the structural issues – some of which have been discussed in this conference – that 
have led to this crisis so as to minimize the risk of ever facing such a situation again. 
                                                 
5   The interest rate on reserves did not establish a hard floor on the federal funds rate during the short period 
between the time that payment of interest on reserves was introduced and the FOMC's decision to bring the 
federal funds rate target close to zero. Possible reasons were the unfamiliarity of banks with the program, the 
fact that some institutions are not legally eligible to receive interest on reserve balances and were therefore 
willing to lend funds in the federal funds market at a rate below the rate paid by the Fed, and the reluctance of 
banks to use scarce balance sheet space to arbitrage the difference between the federal funds rate and the 
rate paid on reserves. We expect these problems to be reduced with time.  
BIS Review 43/2009 
 7
