Radovan Jelašić: Effects of the financial crisis on Central and Eastern 
Europe  
Speech  by  Mr  Radovan  Jelašić,  Governor  of  the  National  Bank  of  Serbia,  at  the  "Global 
Crisis  in  Europe  and  Central  Asia"  panel  discussion  of  the  IMF  and  WB  Spring  Meeting, 
Washington, 24 April 2009. 
 Dear ladies and gentlemen, 
Central and eastern Europe has gone through an unbelievable development during the last 
two decades in all aspects: politically, economically and socially. But the financial crisis has 
thrown much of that progress into doubt. Some brave but at the same time unpopular steps 
urgently need to be taken by the governments of the region. If these choices are not made 
immediately,  the  region’s  macroeconomic  and  social  stability  will  be  at  risk.  Democracy, 
during  the  next  couple  of  months,  will  undergo  its  first  major  test  since  the  beginning  of 
transition. 
First,  most  CEE  countries, 
including  Serbia,  greatly  underestimated  and  are  still 
underestimating the problems they will face in 2009 and 2010, as our economic models – 
built on foreign direct investments, foreign borrowing and, for the regional members of the 
European  Union,  additional  funds  from  Brussels  –  need  a  complete  overhaul.  Today’s 
problems cannot, and should not, be solved just by relying on financing from the IMF, WB 
and  EU.  Instead  we  need  a  long  overdue  adjustment,  with  fiscal  and  structural  reforms, 
including pension, healthcare and education reform for which IMF and WB should play a key 
role.  “Premature  welfare  states”  as  Janos  Kornai  would  call  it,  based  on  now  scarce  and 
expensive foreign funding, nose-diving FDIs and reduced budgetary incomes, are going to 
face an abrupt end all over the region. 
Second, banks that are majority owners of the CEE’s banking sector are hesitating to take 
the support of their respective governments as well as the IFIs. The level of exposure in the 
CEE region is definitely not commensurate with the level of recapitalization carried out up till 
now. In the meantime, the banking sector was never ever more important than at this crucial 
junction of the transition process. Now its time to prove if Mark Twain was right by saying that 
bankers are people who offer you an umbrella when the sun is shining and want it back when 
it is raining. The so-to-say “taking away of the umbrella” is taking place despite the fact that 
margins are at the level not seen during this decade! 
Third, regulators in the CEE countries have limited tools to act proactively due to the fact that 
a majority of the banks are owned by institutions headquartered in the EU. The home – host 
cooperation, let us be honest, has proven to be basically ineffective in this crisis as it a) has 
no predefined rules and procedures, b) is very slow, c) is burdened with legal issues such as 
confidentiality.  
What do I expect at the end of 2009?  
I  am  afraid,  nothing  good.  Fiscal  income  will  deteriorate  even  further  while  the  shadow 
economy  will  gain  in  importance.  Governments  will  focus  almost  exclusively  on  financing 
current consumption (wages and pensions), even through accumulation of fresh debt, while 
capital investments will be substantially cut back. Banks will face a deteriorating loan portfolio 
and  will  spend  most  of  their  time  with  a)  refinancing  or  restructuring  problematic  debt,  b) 
provide  fresh  loans  to  government  c)  cut  back  operating  costs  and  d)  hoard  substantial 
amount  of  liquidity  as  a  precautionary  measure.  Illiquidity  in  the  economy  will  increase 
substantially,  partly  also  due  to  much  faster  submission  of  promissory  notes  for  early 
payment  by  creditors.  As  there  is  no  chapter  11  type  of  creditors’  protection  scheme,  the 
BIS Review 51/2009 
 1
number of bankruptcies will increase as well. Interest rates will remain high despite the fact 
that central banks will lower reference rates. Last but not least, current account deficit will 
moderate substantially, although that would additionally lower budget revenues! Respective 
authorities in the CEE countries can only alleviate but not turn around this downward spiral. 
We need first the world economy the bottom out, particularly the EU, in order for the CEE 
countries to see the light at the end of the tunnel.  
testing,  and 
the  carrying  out  of  stress 
But what could be and should be done urgently? 
First, governments must get fiscally much more prudent. As the region cannot wait for better 
times in order to implement long-overdue structural reforms, there is no alternative but under 
crisis  conditions  to  undertake  the  very  unpopular  steps.  I  fully  support  the  idea  that  EU 
support is conditional to an IMF program, although I do have a problem understanding why 
the level of support between EU members, candidates and potential EU candidate countries 
is so substantial. Brussels should consider not only the economic implications of a support to 
potential candidates but the political as well. 
Second,  bankers  must  be  convinced  to  a)  take  additional  capital  and  b)  continue  lending. 
Under current circumstances, I see a crucial role of home supervisors that should convince 
(push)  the  banks  to  take  additional  capital.  I  find  it  to  some  extent  peculiar  that  host 
supervisors  and  subsidiaries  of  banks  headquartered  in  the  EU,  as  a  part  of  the  Vienna 
initiative,  agreed  regarding 
if  necessary, 
recapitalization. But such an exercise is not foreseen in the home country. In addition to that, 
lending should be revived as well, but for this, I admit, I do not have a ready made formula 
how to do it. 
Third,  the  Vienna  initiative  should  be  extended  to  the  entire  region  as  I  in  Belgrade  could 
sleep  much  more  calmly  if  the  majority  of  the  countries  would  have  such  an  agreement. 
Once we have finalized our deal, I hope in a matter of days, the deal makers should focus on 
all other countries as spill over effect is very large: a rumor regarding any bank in Serbia or 
Croation circulates in the region in matter of hours and could cause irreversible damages. 
Fourth IFIs’ money should start rolling – as we are entering a crucial time period of the crisis 
in the second half of this year. Time of statements, commitments, letters of intent etc. is over; 
banks,  investors,  debtors  need  nothing  more  but  money.  The  proof  of  the  pudding  is  in 
eating, and this is now the time to proof what do the IFIs stand for. 
Last but not least, politicians in the region must manage realistic expectations and get ahead 
of  the  curve.  This cannot  and  should  not  be  done  by  Brussels  (EU)  or  Washington  (IMF  / 
WB). Politicians in most of the countries do look down to the local population although they 
are pretty much aware how this crisis will affect them. It is finally time to be proactive, serious 
and stop spreading false expectations. 
The situation today in the region, to some extent, is even more serious than at the beginning 
of the transition process: this time tough reforms must be made just for, in the best case, to 
maintain the current standard of living! 
2 
 BIS Review 51/2009
