Kevin M Warsh: Defining deviancy 
Speech  by  Mr  Kevin  M  Warsh,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Institute  of  International  Bankers  Annual  Meeting,  New  York, 
16 June 2009. 
 In a seminal essay delivered about 16 years ago, Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan offered a 
striking  view  of  the  degradation  of  standards  in  society.1  He  observed  that  deviancy  – 
measured  as  increases  in  crime,  broken  homes,  and  mental  illness  –  reached  levels 
unimagined by earlier generations. As a means of coping with the onslaught, society often 
sought  to  define  the  problem  away.  The  definition  of  customary  behavior  was  expanded. 
Actions once considered deviant from acceptable standards became, almost immaculately, 
within bounds.2  
Society moves on, as it were. Well-meaning efforts are periodically made to treat its failings. 
But if these efforts prove less than successful, citizens and policymakers alike tend to grow 
increasingly accustomed to the unfortunate statistics. Every bit the reformer throughout his 
decades of public service, Moynihan seemed reluctantly resigned to society's construct: "In 
this sense, the agencies of control often seem to define their job as that of keeping deviance 
within bounds rather than that of obliterating it altogether."3  
Given the financial crisis, deep contraction in the real economy, and extraordinary fiscal and 
monetary responses, I cannot help but wonder what constitutes deviance in economic terms 
in 2009 and beyond. What level of real economic output and unemployment is expected and, 
more important, accepted? And what level of volatility constitutes the "new normal"?4 As I will 
discuss, we must be wary of macroeconomic policies that – in the name of stability – may 
have the effect of lowering trend growth and employment rates.  
In Moynihan's framework, will we in the official sector be accepting of periods of significant 
financial and economic distress, however infrequent? That is, will deviancy be defined down 
with the understanding that a rare crisis is the price for dynamic, robust economic growth? Or 
will  the  official  sector  say,  "Never  again  –  not  on  our  watch,"  and  become  less  tolerant  of 
deviations in economic and financial conditions? Under the mantle of reforming capitalism, 
will policymakers instead define deviancy up, and seek to guarantee stability in our economic 
affairs?  
I suspect that, for a time, policymakers will be more attracted to this latter path. Stability is a 
fine goal, but it is not a final one. Long after panic conditions have ended, stability threatens 
to displace economic growth as the primary macroeconomic policy objective. But we must 
recognize that the singular pursuit of stability, however well intentioned, may end up making 
our economy less productive, less adaptive, and less self-correcting – and in so doing, less 
able to deliver on its alluring promise. This fate, however, does not have to be ours. The U.S. 
economy is capable, in my judgment, of delivering more.  
                                                 
1   Daniel  Patrick  Moynihan  (1993),  "Defining  Deviancy  Down:  How  We've  Become  Accustomed  to  Alarming 
Levels of Crime and Destructive Behavior," American Scholar, Winter. 
2   The views  expressed herein  are my  own  and do not  necessarily reflect the views  of other members of the 
Board of Governors or of the Federal Open Market Committee. I am grateful for the valuable assistance of 
Karen Dynan and Nellie Liang of the Board staff who contributed to these remarks. 
3   See Moynihan, "Defining Deviancy Down," note 1. 
4   See Mohamed El-Erian (2009), "A New Normal," Pimco Secular Outlook, May. 
BIS Review 75/2009 
 1
The Growth Experiment5
This most recent boom and bust is not, as they say, our country's first rodeo, but it may turn 
out to be the most consequential since World War II. And, here, I am not just talking about 
the near-term peak-to-trough changes in growth and employment levels, which are likely to 
prove significant.  
Policymakers  are  revealing  new  policy  preferences  and  prescriptions  –  fiscal  policy,  trade 
policy,  regulatory  policy,  and  monetary  policy,  chiefly  among  them.  Long  after  the  official 
recession  ends,  the  choices  being  made  may  significantly  alter  the  contour  of  the  U.S. 
economy. The harder question that remains is whether these changes will prove beneficial.  
From the mid-1980s through 2007, U.S. real gross domestic product (GDP) growth averaged 
more than 3 percent per year, and was less volatile than in previous decades. The average 
unemployment  rate  was  less  than  5-3/4  percent,  a  full  percentage  point  less  than  in  the 
previous 15 years. Most notable was the realized acceleration in labor productivity in the mid-
1990s.  
The  bipartisan,  pro-growth  policies  that  predominated  during  this  period  contributed 
meaningfully  to  these  gains.  Tax  and  spending  decisions  generally  sought  to  expand  the 
economic  pie.  Trade  policies  were  aimed  at  opening  new  markets  to  U.S.  products  and 
services, and removing barriers domestically. Regulatory policies permitted failure, and relied 
in equal parts on capital requirements, regulatory standards, and, no less important, market 
discipline.  As  a  result,  businesses  were  well  positioned  to  adopt  new  efficiency-enhancing 
technologies and processes to excel in the pro-growth environment. These policies helped 
drive significant productivity gains, and remarkable U.S. and global prosperity.6  
I do not mean to suggest that the period that preceded the crisis was a golden age. It wasn't. 
Even  during  this  seemingly  enviable,  secular  period  of  prosperity,  the  U.S.  recessions  of 
1990-91  and  2001  remind  us  that  periodic,  cyclical  weakness  occurs.  The  labor  markets 
deteriorated during these downturns, and at great costs to many families and communities. 
But these periodic deviations were accepted, in some sense, by the body politic. There were 
lessons  to  be  learned,  reforms  to  be  implemented,  and  public  and  private  practices  to  be 
improved upon. But the broad outlines of the growth experiment forged on, and were judged 
by most to be largely a success.  
Hence, the relative stability that earned the Great Moderation its enduring moniker is not, in 
my  view,  the  greatest  economic  accomplishment  of  the  past  few  decades.  The  acclaim 
should  be  assigned  to  the  resulting  economic  boom  that  massively  increased  economic 
output  and  living  standards.  Maximum  sustainable  growth,  not  stability  per  se,  was  the 
predominant policy goal. Strong growth, of course, was made possible, in part, by the low 
volatility that marked the period.7 Firms choose to invest more, for example, in less volatile 
economic conditions. But, pro-growth policies were the coin of the realm.  
                                                 
5   The term "Growth Experiment" was coined two decades ago to describe certain pro-growth tax policies. See, 
for example, Lawrence B. Lindsey (1990), The Growth Experiment: How the New Tax Policy Is Transforming 
the U.S. Economy (New York: Basic Books). I, however, am referencing a broader range a macroeconomic 
policies. 
6   Since  1980,  the  performance  of  the  world  economy  has  proved  strong.  Real  world  GDP  grew  by 
approximately 145 percent from 1980 to 2007, a compound average of about 3.4 percent per year (Becker 
and  Murphy  (2009)).  They  also  contend  that  even  if  the  current  recession  were  to  be  deeper  and  more 
prolonged  than  contemplated  by  the  most  pessimistic  forecasters,  global  annual  growth  rates  would  still 
average better than 2.7 percent from 1980 to 2010, with per capital incomes rising a total of about 40 percent 
over  the  period.  See  Gary  Becker  and  Kevin  Murphy  (2009),  "Do  Not  Let  the  'Cure'  Destroy  Capitalism," 
Financial Times Magazine, March 19. 
7   Whether by good fortune or good policy, between the start of the Great Moderation in the mid-1980s and the 
end of 2007, the standard deviation of annualized quarterly real U.S. GDP growth was 2.1 percent, less than 
half as large as its value over the two previous decades. 
2 
 BIS Review 75/2009
But, as I remarked to another group of international financiers more than two years ago: "The 
Great Moderation…is neither a law of physics nor a guarantee of future outcomes. It is only a 
description  –  an  ex  post  explanation  of  relative  prosperity.  If  policymakers  and  market 
participants presume it to be an entitlement, it will almost surely lose favor."8 Well, warnings 
notwithstanding, it was treated like an entitlement by far too many in the private and public 
sector, and as a result, lost considerable favor.  
The Panic of 2008 
Has  the  experience  of  the  last  20  months  caused  the  findings  of  the  vaunted  growth 
experiment  to  be  fundamentally  revised?  During  this  recent  period  of  turmoil,  the 
imponderable, or what was previously thought to be virtually impossible, happened with great 
speed and force and frequency.9 Asset prices plummeted, and market volatility reached its 
highest  level  in  decades.  Financial  market  functioning  was  deeply  impaired  across  most 
asset classes and geographies. As a result, the U.S. economy endured a sudden stop. In the 
final quarter of last year and the first quarter of this year, private employment registered the 
largest  two-quarter  percent  decline  since  the  mid-1970s,  and  real  GDP  saw  the  most 
dramatic decline in a half-century.  
These data are clearly indicative of significant deviance, and justifiably raise questions about 
the success of the growth experiment. Policymakers are rightly disposed to react, respond, 
and  revisit  the  presumed  record  of  accomplishment.  In  revising  the  historical  record, 
however,  we  should  not  too  hastily  discount  the  preceding  period  of  prosperity.  We  must 
avoid a classic case of what behavioral economists term "availability bias," when decisions 
made are influenced disproportionately by more recent events.  
Ultimately,  I  will  leave  it  to  economic  historians  to  assess  whether  the  Panic  of  2008  was 
more  anomalous  than  the  period  of  prosperity  that  preceded  it.  I  believe  that  the 
categorization  of  recent  events  as  deviant,  ultimately,  will  depend  on  what  happens  next. 
That is, if policy changes cause future economic performance to suffer, then the boom of the 
last generation may, regrettably, turn out to be more exceptional than the bust. 
The Stability Experiment 
That  new  policies  are  being  implemented  during  a  period  of  economic  turmoil  is  no 
coincidence.  These  new  preferences  reveal  much  about  the  type  of  economy  to  which 
policymakers  aspire.  And  to  be  clear,  the  stability  experiment  appears  well  intended.  It 
aspires  to  manage  the  economy  with  greater  care  and  more  expansive  and  effective 
regulation,  as  well  as  a  larger  and  more  persistent  role  for  government  action,  and  an 
increase in home bias in global commerce.  
Advocates of the stability experiment – each  guided by their own compass – seem all too 
inclined to announce that the growth experiment has ended, and to conclude that the results 
are deeply disappointing. They seem to prefer to define deviancy up, wishing to assure an 
uncertain  citizenry.  If  government  policies  are  corrected,  and  private  practices  are  made 
more  prescriptive,  they  argue,  the  ship  of  state  can  ensure  that  the  real  economy  avoids 
rough  seas  altogether.  The  political  economy  confirms  the  policy  response:  Policymakers 
may pay greater attention to insuring against rare bad events – to which they could be held 
to account – than to allowing scores of great things to flourish.  
                                                 
8   Kevin  Warsh  (2007),  "Market  Liquidity:  Definitions  and  Implications,"  speech  delivered  at  the  Institute  of 
International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington, March 5. 
9   Kevin  Warsh  (2009),  "The  Panic  of  2008,"  speech  delivered  at  the  Council  of  Institutional  Investors  2009 
Spring Meeting, Washington, April 6. 
BIS Review 75/2009 
 3
As I mentioned at the outset, stability, in the sense of lower macroeconomic volatility, is a 
fine objective, but it is not a final one. The conduct of monetary policy, for example, aims to 
achieve price stability throughout the economic cycle. But central bankers do so because we 
believe it is the precursor to strong and sustainable growth. If other policies – notably, those 
for fiscal, regulatory, and trade – treat stability as the ultimate objective, then we might find 
ourselves with lower growth and diminished economic potential.  
Reform  efforts  are  sorely  needed,  and  practices  demand  marked  improvement.  But 
policymakers are wise to resist the hubris that most recently afflicted actors in the financial 
sector. 
I describe this mix of new pro-stability policies as an experiment for good reason. It might 
deliver  on  its  promise  of  lower  volatility,  lower  unemployment,  and  higher  growth  over  the 
course of a generation. But, it might not. The costs of the stability experiment might turn out 
to  be  large.  Necessarily  and  hastily  crafted  when  the  financial  crisis  began,  the  stability 
experiment  is  likely  to  survive  far  longer  than  the  panic  that  preceded  it.  It  is  surging  in 
popularity  and  is  likely  to  grow  in  application,  particularly  if,  as  I  suspect,  the  economic 
picture disappoints.  
Incipient recovery 
Since  mid-March  of  this  year,  financial  conditions  have  continued  to  improve.  Panic 
conditions  are  showing  signs  of  retreat.  Asset  prices  are  rebounding,  searching  for  a  new 
equilibrium from their panic-induced depths – both in the United States and across the vast 
majority of our trading partners. And this improvement in markets coincided with the arrival of 
the proverbial green shoots of spring. This gloss of recovery is appealing, of course, and not 
only to central bankers.  
I,  like  you,  am  rooting  for  the  positive  trend  to  continue.  But,  in  my  estimation,  the  rather 
indiscriminate bounce off the bottom – across virtually all assets and geographies – may be 
more  indicative  of  a  one-time  reset,  which  may  or  may  not  be  complete.  I  would  be  more 
comfortable  going  forward  if  we  observe  more  dispersion  in  the  valuations  of  particular 
assets and greater differentiation across asset classes and geographies.  
The  panic's  hasty  retreat  should  not  be  confused  with  robust  recovery.  For  economic 
performance will turn ultimately on the force of private final demand; and for now, it remains 
weak.  Real  consumer  spending  rose  only  modestly  in  the  first  quarter  of  this  year,  after 
dropping  sharply  in  the  second  half  of  last  year.  Businesses  reduced  real  spending  at  an 
annual rate of more than 35 percent and continued to cut their workforces. Real exports fell 
at an annual rate of close to 30 percent.  
The trauma experienced by businesses and consumers coming out of the panic should not 
be underestimated. Notwithstanding recent encouraging signs that the contraction is abating, 
I  would  expect  business  capital  expenditures  and  consumer  spending  to  continue  to 
disappoint for the next several quarters. Even if, as I expect, the United States emerges from 
this  recession  sooner  than  our  advanced  foreign  trading  partners,  I  am  still  very  cautious 
about predicting a sustained run-up in net exports so soon after the virtual collapse of global 
trade. 
Exceptional  fiscal  expenditures,  by  their  own  terms,  are  intended  to  replace  shortfalls  in 
aggregate demand. And recent extraordinary monetary policy actions are intended to lower 
risk-free rates and grow balance sheet capacity to help offset the pullback by private financial 
intermediaries.  But  financial  markets  may  extract  penalty  pricing  if  fiscal  authorities  are 
unable to demonstrate a credible return to sustainable budgets. And they are unlikely to look 
kindly  on  monetary  authorities  unless  they  decidedly  and  unambiguously  chart  their  own 
independent  paths.  The  Federal  Reserve  should  not  –  and  will  not  –  compromise  another 
kind of stability – price stability – to help achieve other government policy objectives. 
4 
 BIS Review 75/2009
On balance, I would not be surprised if these countervailing forces – unprecedented public 
support and underwhelming private demand – fight to a draw by the fourth quarter. But the 
scale  of  stimulus  and  the  recent  blow  to  the  real  economy  are  both  lacking  precedent,  so 
predicting  the  victor  is  tough  business.  Of  course,  the  extraordinary  monetary  and  fiscal 
support may prove more efficacious in the near term than I expect, leading to a continued 
easing  in  credit  conditions,  a  slowdown  in  the  rate  of  deleveraging,  improved  inventory 
levels, and better quarterly economic statistics. Even so, the benefits of stimulus are likely to 
wane. More important, unemployment rates, in my judgment, are likely to remain higher and 
linger longer than in recent recessions. The "jobless recovery" may prove to be a familiar and 
vexing refrain. As a wise Stanford mentor of mine coined many years ago, "The economist's 
lag is a politician's nightmare."10
Medium-term prospects 
The rebalancing of U.S. GDP and global demand is likely to require some patience. During 
the  transition,  there  may  well  be  political  impetus  for  still more-aggressive  macroeconomic 
policies.  In  evaluating  new  measures,  however,  policymakers'  predominant  interest  should 
be  ensuring  the  credibility  of  their  fiscal  and  monetary  frameworks.  For,  if  macroeconomic 
policies were to become unanchored, or misunderstood by markets, continued government 
aggressiveness could prove counterproductive.  
The  global  economy  runs  the  risk  of  being  mired  in  a  period  of  slower  growth  for  several 
years  to  come.  Some  portion  of  the  subpar  economic  performance  may  be  owed  to  the 
normal  capital  and  labor  reallocations  that  take  place  during  recoveries.  And  given  the 
serious  misallocations  that  marked  the  onset  of  this  recession,  there  is  good  reason  to 
believe that the period of reallocation will be deeper and last longer. A reduction in the size of 
the finance and housing industries, for example, is well under way. Efforts to forestall those 
changes, in my judgment, are unlikely to succeed as promisingly as advertised. But perhaps 
a larger risk is that changes in public policies may, in the pursuit of stability, hold down the 
growth of the U.S. economy over this period.  
Simple textbook models tell us that a nation's output is the product of the number of hours 
worked and the output produced per hour. In thinking about the medium-term prospects for 
the economy, I find it useful to consider these two factors separately. 
Output per hour, or productivity, is the secret sauce to U.S. economic growth and to rising 
living  standards,  but  I  fear  that  the  recipe  may  have  lost  some  key  ingredients.  Growth  in 
labor productivity arises when a firm's workers use more and better physical capital, or when 
firms become more efficient at converting inputs into output. Innovation plays a key role, both 
because it directly boosts efficiency and because firms' decisions to invest in physical capital 
tend  to  depend  on  the  underlying  pace  of  innovation.  In  addition,  in  today's  economy,  the 
productivity of many firms relies heavily on intangible, or intellectual, capital; although hard to 
measure, intangible capital appears to also be tied to innovation. 
To  be  concrete,  from  1995  through  2007,  U.S.  labor  productivity  growth  in  the  nonfarm 
business  sector  averaged  about  2-1/2  percent  per  year,  a  marked  improvement  from  the 
1-3/4 percent pace that marked the prior quarter century. This period of rapid growth in labor 
productivity  was  driven  by 
in 
management processes, and remarkable advances in technology. Looking ahead, if policy is 
less encouraging of capital accumulation, or returns to innovations are constrained by policy, 
we may find a material reduction in the growth rate of productivity and living standards.  
investments,  significant 
improvements 
large  capital 
                                                 
10   See  George  Shultz  (1993),  Turmoil  and  Triumph:  My  Years  as  Secretary  of  State  (New  York:  Charles 
Scribner's Sons). 
BIS Review 75/2009 
 5
The  level  of  support  that  the  financial  system  is  capable  of  providing  also  remains  highly 
uncertain. Private financial institutions are now understandably slow to create new products 
that connect savers and investors. Although it is undesirable to revert to the excessive risk-
taking  that  preceded  the  crisis,  current  financial  practices  seem  suboptimal  in  promoting 
economic  growth.  Furthermore,  repeated  interventions  by  the  public  sector  run  the  risk  of 
causing systemically significant institutions to operate more like public utilities than efficient 
allocators of capital and proper arbiters of liquidity. 
Productivity may also suffer at the hand of policies that discourage trade. Trade enhances 
productivity  by  promoting  efficient  specialization,  permitting  economies  of  scale,  and 
increasing the potential returns to innovation.11 However, the bipartisan consensus favoring 
free trade appears broken, with each political party internally divided on the question. Given 
the contention, however imprecise, that Anglo-American-style capitalism caused the turmoil, 
there may be a shortage of credible and persuasive voices to fight the growing global tide of 
economic isolation.  
As for hours worked, the other key determinant of output, the risks seem unmistakable. We 
have  grown  accustomed  to  falling  natural  rates  of  unemployment  during  the  last  two 
decades.  Even  when  unemployment  spiked  during  recent  recessions,  the  prevailing  rate 
found  its  way  to  still  lower  levels.  According  to  most  economists,  the  non-accelerating 
inflation  rate  of  unemployment  (NAIRU)  was  in  the  neighborhood  of  5  percent  prior  to  the 
financial crisis.  
Looking  ahead,  I  could  well  imagine  that  the  natural  rate  of  unemployment  trends  higher. 
Historically, small businesses have tended to be the largest drivers of new job creation. But 
how  they  will  respond  if  macroeconomic  policies  favor  stability  over  growth  is  difficult  to 
predict.  The  answer  may  ultimately  depend  on  their  access  to  growth  capital  and  liquidity 
given the changing mix of public policies and private practices. 
More generally, I believe that the dynamism of the U.S. economy contributed critically to pre-
crisis levels of employment. The remarkably low level of the NAIRU was made possible in 
part by the extraordinary churn in jobs seen in the U.S. economy. For example, over the 12 
months preceding the start of the recession in December 2007, although 62 million people 
lost their jobs, 63 million jobs were created. Policies aimed at limiting the range of economic 
outcomes do not, in my view, keep unemployment rates low. These policies make it more 
costly  for  firms  to  adjust  the  size  of  their  workforces,  thereby  making  employers  more 
reluctant to hire.  
Gauging  trend  growth  in  output  and  employment  is  essential  to  the  proper  conduct  of 
monetary  policy.  Broad  changes  in  macroeconomic  policies  may  make  it  more  difficult  for 
central bankers to make such calculations. To the extent changed policies reduce potential 
growth, or raise the natural rate of unemployment beyond recent estimates, it is more difficult 
to  make  good  and  timely  policy.  We  must  keep  a  keen  eye  on  these  risks  as  conditions 
evolve. 
Ironically, the longer that output and employment disappoint, the more attractive the gloss of 
stability may become. As a result, we should evaluate the benefits and costs of the stability 
experiment with a keen eye to guard against downside risks for the real economy. 
                                                 
11   For a discussion of the benefits of trade in the modern global economy, see W. Michael Cox and Richard Alm 
(2007), "The Best of All Worlds: Globalizing the Knowledge Economy,"  in  Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas: 
2006 Annual Report (Dallas: FRB Dallas). 
6 
 BIS Review 75/2009
Longer-term prospects 
I  have  not  lost  confidence  in  the  inherent  innovation,  creativity,  and  dynamism  in  the  U.S. 
economy. Nor have I lost confidence in the inherent good sense of our citizens. If the stability 
experiment  fails  to  deliver  on  its  promise  of  higher  employment  and  better  economic 
performance, then policymakers ultimately will change their prescriptions yet again. And so, 
in the long term, after the final results of the U.S. experiments with growth and stability are 
finally tabulated, the broader U.S. experiment in democratic capitalism will endure – and our 
economy will emerge stronger than ever.  
BIS Review 75/2009 
 7
