Axel A Weber: Challenges for monetary policy in the financial crisis 
Speech by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, at the Konstanz 
Seminar on Monetary Theory and Policy, Island of Reichenau, 28 May 2009. 
 Introduction 
1 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I am very honoured to have been invited once more to hold a policy session at the Konstanz 
Seminar on Monetary Theory and Policy. I not only enjoy the beautiful surroundings of the 
Isle of Reichenau and Lake Constance, I am also looking forward to productive discussions. 
The financial crisis may dominate the discussions  of this year’s conference as a matter of 
course. My contribution will not be an exception in this respect as I shall be commenting on 
the challenges to monetary policy in the financial crisis. In particular, I shall be raising the 
questions of whether we are currently experiencing changes in the transmission process of 
monetary policy and of the longer-term lessons that we should draw from the financial crisis. 
The transmission process of monetary policy in the euro area 
2  
When  thinking  about  the  longer-term  lessons  for  monetary  policy  to  be  drawn  from  the 
financial crisis, we very quickly hit upon a topic that has always been a key point of interest to 
all  central  bankers  and,  by  extension,  the  subject  of  decades  of  theoretical  and  empirical 
research: the monetary policy transmission process. Understanding this is a prerequisite for 
the  design  of  monetary  policy  since  the  transmission  process  describes  how  monetary 
impulses are transmitted to the real sector – that is how they influence economic activity and 
finally inflation. For the following it is helpful to decompose the transmission process into a 
stylised way so that it can be conceived as consisting of different channels, through which 
monetary impulses are transmitted to the real economy. As the world is always in a state of 
flux,  the  relative  importance  and  the  composition  of  these  channels  do,  however,  vary  to 
some  extent.  Consequently,  as  technological  progress  and  constant  change  are  key 
characteristics of modern economies, the whole transmission mechanism may be  evolving 
over  time.  The  constant  evaluation  of  how  monetary  (and  other)  impulses  transmit  into 
inflation rates remains one of the key tasks of monetary policy. 
Before  turning  to  specific  questions  concerning  the  transmission  process  that  have  arisen 
especially  during  the  financial  crisis,  I  would  like  to  make  some  more  general  remarks  on 
whether  and  how  the  transmission  process  could  have  changed  throughout  the  past  two 
decades  before  the  crisis.  Prominent  candidates  for  driving  forces  behind  such  a  potential 
change are globalisation, the creation of EMU and financial development. As I have already 
mentioned,  the  literature  is  ample  and  monetary  transmission  has  been  discussed  and 
analyzed  in  detail  before.  Therefore,  it  is  not  my  intention  to  deliver  a  comprehensive 
overview of this strand of research. Instead, I will outline some driving forces that could have 
changed specific transmission channels, such as the exchange-rate, the interest-rate and the 
credit channel in the euro area. In doing so, I shall provide examples of the dependency of 
the monetary transmission on structural change and point out some identification problems 
that arise. 
Exchange rate channel 
2.1  
Concerning  the  exchange  rate  channel,  there  are  theoretical  arguments  for  its  strength 
having either increased or decreased in recent years. On the one hand, the creation of the 
single currency has led to a weaker exchange rate channel of monetary policy in euro area 
countries  because  nominal  exchange  rate  changes  within  the  euro  area  have  simply 
BIS Review 65/2009 
 1
disappeared.  On  the  other  hand,  the  increase  in  international  trade  and  integration  on  a 
global scale has heightened the relative importance of the exchange rate, which, in turn, has 
fostered the role of the exchange rate in the transmission mechanism.  
A priori the net effect is open and can only be determined empirically. However, the evidence 
is  mixed.  For  example,  there  is  some  evidence  that  the  exchange  rate  channel  may  have 
become more powerful in the monetary union.1 However, there is also some evidence that 
removing the exchange-rate risk for intra euro area trade combined with a stronger monetary 
policy  commitment  to  stabilising  inflation  and  output  may  have  led  to  aggregate  economic 
activity and inflation becoming more muted in their response to monetary policy shocks.  
Interest rate channel 
2.2  
Theoretical considerations as well as empirical results point mainly to a stronger and faster 
pass-through  from  policy  rates  to  other  interest  rates  due  to  increased  competition  among 
different  financial  market  segments  and  an  ongoing  consolidation  process  in  the  banking 
system. Both results in a closer link between different interest rates and thereby increase the 
speed at which changes in monetary policy rates are transmitted to other financial variables 
and to the real economy. Moreover, the deepening of financial markets we have witnessed in 
the period before the financial crisis is likely to have enhanced the role of expectations. This 
has led to monetary policy impulses spreading more rapidly from the money market to other 
market segments of the financial system.  
However, there is also an ongoing debate on whether international financial integration could 
have eroded the influence of monetary policy on national long-term interest rates. Indeed, at 
a first glance, the high degree of synchronisation between movements in long-term nominal 
interest  rates  across  key  industrial  countries  in  recent  years  supports  this  hypothesis. 
However, this co-movement in long-term interest rates might also be the outcome of global 
shocks  which  affect  different  countries  in  much  the  same  way  and,  therefore,  prompting 
similar national monetary policy responses. In this case, the co-movement in national long-
term interest rates does not necessarily imply that central banks no longer exert an influence 
on their domestic long-term rates. 
Credit channel 
2.3  
The credit channel consists of several sub-channels with the bank lending channel and the 
balance sheet channel probably being the ones that have been most analyzed. Whereas the 
bank lending channel concentrates on the supply of bank loans, the balance sheet channel 
looks at the effects of monetary policy on the overall supply of funds via borrowers’ net worth.  
As  concerns  the  bank  lending  channel,  a  number  of  studies  document  that  financial 
innovation – such as securitisation or credit derivatives – have led to banks becoming more 
flexible  in  reacting  to  monetary  policy.  More  specifically,  they  may  have  become  able  to 
better isolate their loan costumers from restrictive monetary policy impulses.2 Consequently, 
financial developments may have made the bank lending channel less important. However, 
to the extent that credit protection through credit derivatives is associated with an increase in 
bank credit supply the importance of the bank lending channel has not necessarily changed. 
3 For example, the possibility of transferring credit risk may not result in reducing risk from a 
                                                 
1   See  Boivin,  Giannoni,  Mojon,  “How  Has  the  Euro  Changed  the  Monetary  Transmission?”,  NBER  Working 
Paper No W14190. 
2   See  for  example  Altunbas,  Gambacorta  and  Marques-Ibanez  (2007),  “Securitisation  and  the  Bank  Lending 
Channel”, ECB Working Paper No. 838. 
3   See for example Hirtle (2007), “Credit  Derivatives  and Bank Credit Supply”, Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York Staff Report No 276. 
2 
 BIS Review 65/2009
specific activity (such as lending) may increase that activity. In such a case, monetary policy 
would  still  operate  through  a  bank  lending  channel  as  capital  requirements  would  still  be 
effective.  
According  to  the  balance  sheet  channel,  possible  interest  rate  changes  influence  the 
creditworthiness  of  borrowers  via  the  evaluation  of  their  assets.  Creditworthiness,  in  turn, 
influences  the  premium  that  borrowers  have  to  pay  for  external  financing,  and,  thus, 
economic activity. While the analysis of the balance sheet channel was originally applied to 
non-financial institutions, the deepening of financial markets, along with financial innovations, 
has presumably extended its importance to the household sector as well as to the banking 
sector.  With  respect  to  the  household  sector,  financial  liberalisation  and  innovation  have 
generally  facilitated  borrowers’  access  to  standardised  credit  and  thereby  heightened  the 
importance of asset prices in the households’ balance sheet. Consequently, households, too, 
have become more sensitive to interest rate and asset price volatility. It should be clear by 
now that the credit channel, in particular, is not only complex but also sensitive to changes in 
the financial sphere. 
Methodological issues 
2.4  
At  this  point,  I  would  like  to  draw  your  attention  to  two  methodological  issues.  When 
discussing the likely effects of individual channels, it should be kept in mind that the empirical 
identification of changes regarding a particular transmission channel has to deal with at least 
the  following  two  fundamental  problems:  First,  it  may  be  technically  very  demanding. 
Challenges  are  posed  not  only  by  the  empirical  identification  of  the  transmission  channel 
which  is  of  interest.  Isolating  the  driving  factors  of  specific  channels  from  other  potential 
influences is usually a difficult task, too. Second, findings about the change of an individual 
channel  do  not  allow  any  conclusions  to  be  drawn  about  a  likely  change  in  the  overall 
effectiveness of monetary policy, as causes and effects might interact and either reinforce or 
weaken  each  other.  Therefore,  it  is  reasonable  to  complement  the  partial  approach  by 
considering  the  transmission  process  as  a  whole.  This  is  because  only  a  macroeconomic 
perspective  allows  conclusions  to  be  drawn  about  the  potential  overall  changes  in  the 
monetary transmission process in the euro area. 
The financial crisis and changes in monetary policy transmission 
3  
But let me now turn to the current financial crisis and its potential implications for monetary 
policy  transmission.  The  shocks  we  have  experienced  during  the  financial  crisis  have  not 
only caused the deepest global recession since World War II but also severely harmed the 
interbank market. It is evident that in the short-term the monetary policy transmission process 
is being affected by these events. More specifically, two questions arise: 
• 
“How does the transmission process work in times of financial turmoil like those we 
are currently observing?” 
“Will  the  transmission  process  change  in  the  long-run  as  a  result  of  the  financial 
crisis – and if so, how?” 
 Current changes 
3.1  
There are two reasons why it is important for us to carefully observe changes in monetary 
transmission  resulting  from  the  financial  crisis.  The  first  reason  is  that  such  observations 
might teach us new details and characteristics of the transmission process in general, as the 
financial crisis is providing us with a rich and interesting database. However, insights of that 
kind will be of more use to us in the long-run. What is most important at present is to observe 
the functioning of the credit lending and interest rate channels. That is, to what extent and 
BIS Review 65/2009 
 3
under what conditions banks lend to non-financial institutions and whether they pass on the 
enhanced terms of financing which they have been given by a looser monetary policy. 
Credit channel  
When we try to detect changes in the lending behaviour of banks using the available data on 
credit  contracts,  we  are  confronted  with  the  technical  problem  of  separating  credit  supply 
from  credit  demand.  In  this  respect,  the  Eurosystem’s  Bank  Lending  Survey  (BLS),  which 
was introduced six years ago, is a very helpful tool because it provides qualitative information 
on  the  lending  behaviour  of  the  surveyed  banks.  It  has  proved  to  be  very  valuable  in  the 
current  financial  crisis  because  it  supplies  us  with  some  information  that  can  be  used  to 
judge whether the euro area economy is facing a credit crunch or not.  
The results of the BLS for Germany show that credit standards for loans to enterprises and, 
to  a  lesser  extent,  also  loans  to  households,  have  been  tightened  on  average  by  the 
surveyed institutions since the outbreak of the financial crisis in summer 2007. There was a 
marked tightening in the credit standard for loans to enterprises, however, in the third quarter 
of 2008, after the collapse of Lehman Brothers.  
According to the surveyed institutions, refinancing costs and balance sheet constraints have 
been  playing  a  major  role  in  developments  in  credit  standards  since  the  beginning  of  the 
financial crisis. However, in the two most recent survey rounds, in which there was a very 
marked  tightening  of  credit  standards,  additional  factors  were  in  play:  the  impact  of  the 
deterioration in the general economic situation and the increasing importance of industry or 
firm-specific developments.  
Interest rate channel  
In  order  to  examine  the  extent  to  which  financial  institutions  have  passed  on  their  lower 
short-term refinancing costs in the current situation, the Deutsche Bundesbank has analysed 
financial institutions’ short-term interest rates for corporate and housing loans.4 The reason 
for  focusing  solely  on  the  short-term  interest  rate  is  that  the  longer-term  refinancing 
behaviour of financial institutions may have changed markedly in the course of the financial 
crisis. Consequently, conventional measures for long-term refinancing conditions that have 
been used in the past may no longer be suitable.  
Comparing the development in the three-month money market rate (EURIBOR) from the end 
of September 2008 until the end of March this year with changes in short-term bank lending 
rates,  we  find  that  financial  institutions  have  passed  on  roughly  80%  of  their  refinancing 
advantage  to  borrowers  from  the  corporate  sector  and  around  60%  to  house  owners. 
Moreover,  up  to  now,  this  analysis  gives  no  evidence  that  the  interest  rate  pass-through 
since fall 2008 is happening more hesitantly than in the period before the crisis.  
Long-run changes 
3.2  
As concerns possible long-run changes to the transmission process, it is certainly much too 
early to draw firm conclusions. Hence, please allow me to share some of my thoughts on this 
issue  with  you.  Most  obviously,  we  might  see  a  reversal  of  some  of  the  changes  in  the 
transmission process that took place in the period before the financial crisis. For example, 
insofar  as  the  importance  of  securitisation  in  banks’  financing  declines,  changes  in  the 
transmission process triggered by securitisation will go partly into reverse. In addition to this, 
the financial crisis has drawn the attention of researchers and policymakers to a new aspect 
of the transmission process that might have been neglected in the past: that is the dealing 
with risk.  
                                                 
4   Deutsche Bundesbank, Monthly Report, May 2009. 
4 
 BIS Review 65/2009
financial 
institutions 
(finance  perspective),  which  emphasises 
In this context, a debate on a possibly new channel of monetary policy – known as the risk-
taking channel – has evolved, based on a paper by Borio and Zhu5, published in 2008.6 The 
risk-taking  channel  tries  to  capture  the  consequences  of  risk  for  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  process  by  linking  two  possible  perspectives  in  our  financial  system:  The 
perspective  of 
the 
measurement and evaluation of risk. And the perspective of financial regulators and central 
banks (economics perspective), which focuses on the financing conditions in an economy.  
As the mechanisms through which monetary policy might influence market participants’ risk-
taking are complex, at least three dimensions have been attributed to the risk-taking channel. 
The  first  dimension  is  closely  connected  to  the  balance  sheet  channel  which  I  mentioned 
earlier. It takes into account the fact that monetary policy might influence the evaluation of 
collateral,  asset  prices  and  cash  flows,  thereby  changing  risk  behaviour  in  an  economy. 
According to the second dimension, risk-taking by market participants is influenced via their 
target returns. More specifically, in the case of rigid nominal target returns, a tight monetary 
policy  can  induce  a  wedge  between  nominal  returns  that  are  achievable  in  the  financial 
markets and the nominal target returns of market participants. This – in combination with an 
ample range of investment possibilities – might trigger a “search for yield process”: market 
participants  invest  in  riskier  assets  in  order  to  achieve  satisfying  returns.  Finally,  the  third 
dimension  of  the  risk-taking  channel  links  the  communication  of  monetary  policy  to  higher 
risk-taking.  This  link  can  either  work  through  the  desired  effect  of  good  monetary  policy 
communication,  which  is  known  as  the  “transparency  effect”  as  enhanced  transparency 
might reduce the uncertainty about future monetary policy and through this the risk-premia. 
Or  –  and  this  is  the  case  that  monetary  policy  should  wish  to  avoid  –  market  participants 
might increase their risk-taking if they take into account the fact that monetary policy will be 
relaxed in the case of decreasing asset prices in a financial downturn. In this case – the so-
called insurance effect – market participants are implicitly insured against downside risks and 
therefore tend to take excessive risk. Hence, we have to deal with a classic moral hazard 
problem. The questions that follow on from these rather theoretical considerations are “What 
empirical  evidence  do  we  have  on  this  transmission  channel?”  and  “What  lessons  should 
monetary policy draw from its existence?” 
Empirical evidence 
Some observations seem to confirm the existence of the risk-taking channel. The economic 
boom that began in 2002 was characterised by the coexistence of low monetary policy rates, 
very high asset prices and unusually low short-term risk perception. This suggests that the 
first dimension of the risk-taking channel was at work. In addition, a comprehensive “search 
for yield” process could also be observed in this market environment – that is the risk-taking 
channel worked via its second dimension of rigid nominal target returns. Concerning the third 
dimension  of  the  risk-taking  channel,  simple  observation  is  not  very  helpful  because  it 
requires  the  empirical  identification  of  the  two  effects.  While  the  transparency  effects  is 
difficult  to  isolate  from  other  effects  which  are  at  work,  there  is,  however,  some  empirical 
evidence for the insurance effect.7
Apart  from  this,  empirical  research  on  the  risk-taking  channel  is  in  its  early  stage  and  is 
consequently  rather  thin  on  the  ground.  Therefore,  we  do  not  yet  have  firm  empirical 
evidence for the existence and the relative importance of the risk-taking channel. However, 
recent  ECB  research  shows  for  the  euro  area  that  low  interest  rates  soften  bank  lending 
                                                 
5   See Borio, Zhu (2008), “Capital regulation, risk-taking and monetary policy: a missing link in the transmission 
mechanism?”, BIS, Working Papers No 268. 
6   The existence of a risk-taking channel was first discussed several years ago by Borio and Lowe (2002), and 
Rajan (2005). 
7   See for example, BIS 77th Annual Report (2007). 
BIS Review 65/2009 
 5
standards. As loan characteristics are typically not adjusted for increased risk, banks tend to 
have  a  lower  risk  aversion  when  low  interest  rates  prevail  for  a  long  time.8  Two  further 
research papers that are worth to be mentioned have found evidence of a risk-taking channel 
for Spain and Bolivia, using ex ante and ex post loan characteristics to model risk-taking.9 10
Longer-term lessons for monetary policy 
4  
Although, there is a strong need for further research at the risk-taking channel so that the 
right lessons for monetary policy can be drawn, there are some considerations that we can 
already  take  into  account.  In  particular,  the  notion  we  obtain  from  the  risk-taking  channel 
about the way monetary policy can influence market participants’ risk perception supports the 
call for a more symmetric monetary policy across asset price cycles. Such a more symmetric 
approach would treat boom and bust episodes not as isolated events but would try to look 
through the financial cycle. To be more specific, a more symmetric policy would also realise 
implicit risks in times when money and credit growth is dynamic, asset prices go up and risk 
perceptions  decline,  possibly  creating  a  need  to  act  despite  current  inflation  rates  being 
sufficiently low. This, however, does not mean that monetary policy should downgrade the 
price stability objective for the sake of other objectives. Rather, it means that central banks 
should  take  a  longer-term  perspective  which  takes  due  account  of  the  future  inflationary 
consequences of such unfavourable developments.  
Here,  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy  already  possesses  such  a  stabilising 
element, in the shape of its monetary analysis, which is especially suited to analysing long-
term developments. The recent financial turmoil has shown that the often-criticised monetary 
and credit analysis has a valuable role to play in monetary policy analysis.  
Conclusion 
5  
Ladies and gentlemen,  
Today,  I  have  spoken  about  the  challenges  that  the  financial  crisis  is  posing  for  monetary 
policy in terms of the transmission process. Of course, this is not the only challenge which 
monetary policy is facing at present. It is, however, a very crucial one, as we should study 
the transmission process in order to learn from the current financial crisis. Research in this 
field of monetary policy is still in its infancy. Nevertheless, there are very promising research 
papers  that  have  already  pointed  out  some  key  questions.  As  we  are  dealing  with  a  very 
interesting field of research, I am sure that more work on this topic will follow. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
                                                 
8   See  Maddaloni,  Peydró-Alcalde,  Scopel  (2008),  “Does  Monetary  Policy  Affect  Bank  Credit  Standards?”, 
mimeo. 
9   See Jiménez et al. (2007) “Hazardous Times for Monetary Policy: What do Twenty-Three Million Bank Loans 
Say About the Effects of Monetary Policy on Credit Risk?”, CEPR Discussion Paper 6514. 
10   See  Ionnadou  et  al.  (2009),  “Monetary  Policy,  Risk-Taking,  and  Pricing:  Evidence  from  a  Quasi-Natural 
Experiment”, CentER Discussion Paper, 2009-31 S pp. 1-45. 
6 
 BIS Review 65/2009
