Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The crisis in perspective – is there really cause 
for alarm? 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Bank Marketing Association of the Philippines (BMAP): 
Banking and Business Forum, Manila, 3 March 2009. 
 The officers and members of the Bank Marketing Association of the Philippines (BMAP) led 
by  President  Ferdie  LaChica,  distinguished  speakers,  fellow  bankers,  our  friends  from  the 
media, special guests, good morning! 
I congratulate the leadership of the BMAP for taking the initiative to gather members of the 
financial  community  and  the  media  to  discuss  the  global  financial  crisis  and  its  possible 
impact  on  the  domestic  front.  Indeed,  we  should  welcome  activities  such  as  these  which 
promote  open  exchange  that  lead  to  better  understanding  of  critical  issues.  After  all,  we 
cannot  move  forward  together..  if  we  are  not  on  the  same  page  and  able  to  engage  the 
cooperation of our stakeholders at this crucial point in time.  
In this year’s forum, BMAP’s theme asks this NON-TRIVIAL question: “Is there really cause 
for alarm?”  
Well, let me share some information that will help you respond to this question.  
Among others, key economic and banking metrics indicate the following: 
• 
these 
The domestic economy has remained resilient, posting a 4.6% growth last year. This 
year, the Philippine economy is still expected to grow at a respectable range of 3.7% 
to 4.4%. That we are able to sustain growth under stressed global conditions with 
major  economies  undergoing  contraction  makes 
figures  particularly 
encouraging.  
Inflation continues to decline and is expected to further decelerate with the easing in 
the  price  of  oil  and  other  non-oil  commodities  in  the  world  market.  As  of  January 
2009, inflation stood at 7.1% from 8% in December 2008.  
Our currency remains competitive. Even as the peso lost much of the gains of 2007 
due  to  heightened  risk  aversion  towards  emerging  markets,  the  peso’s  fall  was 
nevertheless in line with the movement of other currencies in the region which also 
lost ground against the US dollar.  
The  country’s  external  position  remains  favorable.  As  of  end-January  2009,  the 
balance of payments yielded a surplus of US$1.7 billion while our gross international 
reserves  stood  at  US$39.2  billion.  The  current  GIR  level  is  sufficient  to  cover  six 
months  of  imports  of  goods  and  payments  of  services  and  income,  double  the 
international standard of three months and three times the size of debt falling due 
within a year. 
The banking system sustained its asset expansion with total resources growing by 
9.8%  to  reach  P5.6  trillion  as  of  end-November  2008.  Among  bank  assets,  loans 
(gross, and exclusive of interbank loans) posted a significant growth of 23.5%. This 
asset expansion was supported by a continued rise in deposit base which registered 
a 15.9% growth as of end November 2008.  
Worth noting is that this continued asset expansion has been accompanied by the 
steady improvement in asset quality as measured by both non-performing loans and 
non-performing  assets. From  a  peak  of  16.9% at  end-2001,  banks’  NPL  ratio  has 
     BIS Review 25/2009 
 1
 since dropped to a low single-digit level of 4.2% while NPA ratio improved to 5.5% 
as of end November 2008.  
The  banking  system  also  maintained  its  strong  solvency  position.  As  of  end-June 
2008, banks’ capital adequacy ratio (CAR) stood at 15.3% on a consolidated basis, 
comfortably  above  both  the  international  standard  and  the  BSP’s  minimum 
regulatory requirement. If there is one lasting lesson from past crises, it must be that 
capital  sufficiency  is  a  primordial  concern.  It  is  reassuring  then  that  the  present 
Capital Adequacy Ratio of our banks is at this level.  
Moving forward, what then are the challenges that we face?  
For our economy, the channels of vulnerabilities are exports and remittances. The impact on 
Philippine exports has already started to show with a 40.4% drop in December of last year. 
Remittances  are  holding  up  but  there  are  concerns  that  it  will  eventually  reflect  the  global 
slowdown. These two fronts ultimately affect consumption spending, which plays a big part in 
domestic economic growth.  
In the financial market, the potential weakening of corporate (exporters) and household (OF 
beneficiaries) balance sheets could lead to some deterioration in the quality of banks’ loan 
portfolios.  Individually,  local  banks  have  taken  logical  defensive  action  by  being  more 
cautious in lending and boosting their liquidity levels. The risk is that this could result in less 
credit for productive purposes, which would add to the pressure on the real economy players. 
This could lead to a negative feedback loop between the real and financial sectors.  
In other words, ladies and gentlemen, even as our economy remains on a growth track, the 
global crisis brings with it serious challenges. It would be cause for alarm, therefore, if we 
remain complacent. We need to plan; we need to act pre-emptively to create buffers that will 
protect us from the headwinds that will come our way.  
Among others, our Government has prepared a P330 billion economic stimulus program that 
includes higher infrastructure spending and enhanced social safety nets to support the most 
vulnerable segments of our population. The stimulus package, designed to adhere to the so-
called best principles of 4 T’s: spending that is timely, targeted, transparent, and temporary 
— should be supportive of sustainable and robust growth.  
In addition, the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas has implemented a series of measures to ensure 
continued  normal  operation  of  the  Philippine  credit  markets.  The  objective  is  to  avoid  the 
crippling credit crunch in the US and Europe that has triggered widespread dislocations in 
both business and households.  
Is there a specific role for BMAP? Yes, absolutely. 
As  the  marketing  and  communications  experts  in  your  respective  banks,  BMAP  members 
can  spearhead  a  concerted  effort  to  ensure  that  bank  stakeholders  are  kept  abreast  of 
market situation so that they can discern factual realities from fictional representations. The 
objective  is  to  inform  the  general  public  so  that  stakeholders  ─  your  depositors  and 
borrowers as well as your employees and stockholders ─ can make informed choices. The 
challenge  is  to  keep  working  on  this  patiently  and  faithfully  because  markets  continue  to 
evolve and transform. It is not enough that you do it once or twice; it should be a continuing 
commitment on your part. Among others, explain the fine print, provide clear directions on 
how  they  can  maximize  the  benefits  from  the  services  you  render,  make  your  banks 
accessible literally and figuratively, and be guided at all times by the good governance tenets 
of fairness, accountability, and transparency.  
It benefits no one if our depositors are unsure of their savings. Long-term savers, those who 
manage funds for their retirement or for future expenses such as our children’s educational 
needs  or  medical funding,  these  are  but  some  of  our constituents  who  can  always  benefit 
from better financial information.  
2 
 BIS Review 25/2009
For  your  borrowers,  continuing  dialogues  are  always  useful  and  productive  in  terms  of 
avoiding unwarranted shocks.  
Consumer rights must be protected. I therefore request the BMAP to take the lead in making 
sure that appropriate systems are in place to address complaints with utmost urgency. To 
me, one yardstick for BMAP’s success in this area is a decline in the number of complaints 
against banks that we receive at the Bangko Sentral. I look forward to stronger cooperation 
between us in this regard.  
I  also  count  on  BMAP  to  continue  supporting  Bangko  Sentral’s  various  initiatives  on 
economic  and  financial  education  covering  our  12  million  schoolchildren,  our  youth,  our 
Overseas  Filipinos  and  their  dependents,  and  the  public  in  general.  This  includes  “Tulong 
Barya Para sa Eskwela” and the integration of lessons in saving and money management in 
our public elementary school curriculum.  
One  of  our  objectives  is  to  make  saving  a  regular  habit  and  expand  our  deposit  base  to 
include children, the youth and unbanked adults. While our savings rate (or gross savings as 
a percent of GNP) has been on a steady uptrend – from 22.7 in 2000 to 27.9 as of 2007, we 
are behind other countries in the region. I ask the BMAP members therefore to apply your 
marketing and communications skills to move this program forward.  
Ladies and gentlemen. In good times and in bad, taking care of your clients and consciously 
growing  your  customer  base  are  challenges  BMAP  members  face.  This  being  the  case,  I 
believe there should be no cause for alarm if you have properly anticipated and planned for 
crisis, long before the onset of the global financial turmoil. Remember Noah? It wasn't raining 
when he built his ark. He hoped for the best, but prepared for the worst.  
As  professionals  in  your  field,  I  am  confident  BMAP  members  are  prepared  to  tackle  new 
concerns emerging from the global crisis, individually and collectively.  
Once again, congratulations to BMAP for organizing this forum.  
Mabuhay ang BMAP! Mabuhay ang Pilipinas!  
Maraming salamat sa inyong lahat. 
BIS Review 25/2009 
 3
