Kiyohiko  G  Nishimura:  Unconventional  policies  of  central  banks  – 
restoring market function and confidence 
Remarks by Mr Kiyohiko G Nishimura, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the Panel 
Session  "Monetary  Policy  Boundaries: Alternative  Instruments  and  Policy  Coordination"  at 
the  Money  and  Banking  Conference  2009,  Central  Bank  of  Argentina,  Buenos  Aires, 
1 September 2009. 
 Thank you, Chairman. It is an honor to be invited to this prestigious conference, and I am 
very grateful to Governor Redrado and the colleagues of the Central Bank of Argentina. I am 
particularly  delighted,  literally  thrilled,  to  come  to  Argentina,  the  land  of  silver  and  warm-
hearted people, for the first time in my life. 
The  topic  of  this  panel,  "Monetary  Policy  Boundaries:  Alternative  Instruments  and  Policy 
Coordination"  is  particularly  timely,  since  many  central  banks  including  the  Bank  of  Japan 
have already crossed conventional boundaries. They have been conducting unconventional 
policies since the current crisis erupted a couple of years ago. Some call them credit easing, 
and others describe them as quantitative easing. This kind of nomenclature is eye-catching, 
but it is sometimes a distraction, hiding the real picture of what the central banks have done. 
In fact, if we look at these unconventional policies from a functional viewpoint, they all have 
this in common: the desire to counteract market dysfunction and confidence erosion. 
In this short presentation, I will first explain what we, the major central banks have done to 
prevent market meltdown. Then, from this experience, I will extract four practical principles of 
unconventional policies that should be borne in mind. Finally, based on these principles, I will 
point out possible fallacies in assessing these unconventional policies, especially at the time 
economic conditions improve and seem to offer a glimmer of light at the end of the tunnel. 
Specifically, I will present five Don’ts for your consideration in contemplating a way out from 
the emergency measures. 
1.  
One  prerequisite  of  conventional  monetary  policy:  smoothly  functioning 
financial markets 
To  start  the  discussion  of  unconventional  policies,  it  is  worth  taking  a  few  moments  to 
consider what conventional monetary policies are. 
Two pillars of smooth-functioning financial markets 
In  a  stylized  framework  of  conventional  monetary  policies  in  developed  countries,  we  take 
well-functioning financial markets for granted. There are two pillars supporting their smooth 
function.  First,  the  various  segments  of  the  financial  markets  are  integrated  well  through 
smooth inter-market arbitrage, and thus we have relatively stable inter-market relationships 
of  interest  rates  called  yield  curves.  Second,  market  participants  have  confidence  in  the 
markets and thus counterparty risks are contained well. 
Assuming these well-functioning financial markets, the central bank sets the policy rate at a 
level consistent with its stated goal of price stability (and possibly other goals which vary with 
countries). The bank manages its liquidity provision to ensure that short-term market interest 
rates  are  in  line  with  the  policy  rate. The  change  in  the  policy  rate  affects  the  yield  curve 
structure with term and risk premiums. In this way, the central bank affects financial markets 
and financial intermediation, and ultimately exerts influence on prices and economic activity. 
Thus, well-functioning financial markets are prerequisites of conventional monetary policy. In 
fact, the functional breakdown of financial markets is the major culprit leading central banks 
BIS Review 102/2009 
 1
to take unconventional measures. We learned this fact from Japan’s so-called Lost Decade 
more than a decade ago and more strikingly, more painfully, from the current global financial 
turmoil.1
Three phases of financial markets’ functional breakdown in the current crisis 
Let  me  briefly  explain  how  markets  stopped  functioning  in  many  countries  in  the  current 
crisis.  Roughly  speaking,  there  were  three  phases,  though  their  timing  and  severity  were 
different from country to country. In the first phase, confidence in the markets was lost. The 
failure  and  the  fear  of  failure  of  large  international  financial  institutions  made  market 
participants fearful of the possibility of the failure of their counterparties. Counterparty risks 
were heightened and spread rapidly from market to market. In the second phase, we saw a 
severe dearth of arbitrage activities and consequent dislocations in many markets. Financial 
markets  became  severely  segmented  and  some  specific  markets,  such  as  the  US  asset-
backed securities markets, collapsed. Prices no longer provided sufficient information about 
market  conditions.  In  the  third  phase,  severe  strains  on  financial  markets  and  banking 
systems hampered financial intermediation as the losses on non-performing, legacy or toxic 
assets mounted, and thus a negative feedback loop kicked in between financial strains and 
real  economic  slumps.  In  short,  the  conventional  monetary  transmission  mechanism  broke 
down. 
2.  
Unconventional  policies:  coping  with  market  dysfunction  and  confidence 
erosion 
Given the severe adverse effects of market dysfunctions, the utmost policy priority of central 
banks  was  to  find  a  way  to  alleviate  market  dysfunctions  and  thus  to  enhance  financial 
intermediation,  thereby  restoring  the  monetary  transmission  mechanism.  This  is  what 
unconventional policies are all about. This means unconventional policies are not exotic but 
extensions of conventional policies. However, central banks had to go beyond their traditional 
role  as  a  liquidity  provider,  and  to  engage  themselves  in  complementing  and  enhancing 
market functions.2
Central banks’ response to market dysfunction 
This was in fact what four major central banks (Fed, ECB, BOE, BOJ) and others did during 
the last two years in addition to a series of policy rate cuts down to the proximity  to zero. 
Market  dysfunctions  and  severe  strains  on  a  banking  system  significantly  reduced  the 
effectiveness of an ultra-low policy rate, which was evident in our experience of Japan’s lost 
decade.  Thus,  unconventional  policies  were  devised  and  implemented  essentially  as 
measures  to  support  and  enhance  the  effects  of  ultra-low  policy  rates  on  prices  and 
economic activities. 
First, in order to ease confidence erosion and tension in money markets, the central banks 
conducted ample and enhanced liquidity provision by offering more frequent operations, to 
                                                  
1   For concise comparison of the two crises, see Nishimura, K. G., “ ‘The Past Does Not  Repeat Itself, But It 
Rhymes’: Four Lessons Learned from the Financial Crises,” Remarks at the Panel Session “Responding to 
the  Financial  Crises:  Lessons  Learned”  at  the  45th Annual  Conference  on  Bank  Structure  and  Competition 
sponsored  by 
line  at 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko0905a.pdf. 
In other words, central banks had to act as a “plumber” to fix broken and clogged pipes to facilitate liquidity 
going through the system. See Shirakawa, M., “Financial System and Monetary Policy Implementation: Long 
and Winding Evolution in the Way of Thinking,” Opening Speech at 2009 International Conference hosted by 
the 
at 
http://www.boj.or.jp/en/type/press/koen07/ko0905e.htm 
the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago  on  May  8,  2009,  available  on 
Economic 
Monetary 
available 
Studies, 
Institute 
and 
line 
for 
on 
2  
2 
 BIS Review 102/2009
more  counter  parties,  at  longer  maturities,  and  against  broader  collateral.  This  was  more 
applicable to the period of August 2007 to August 2008. 
Then,  as  the  erosion  of  confidence  intensified  after  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  and 
market  dysfunctions  and  financial  distress  became  more  pronounced,  the  central  banks 
began  intervening  in  specific  market  segments  to  support  market  functioning  by  measures 
including the introduction and expansion of asset purchase programs for commercial papers, 
corporate  bonds  and  government  debts.  Also,  the  Fed  expanded  swap  lines  with  other 
central banks to enable other central banks to provide further dollar liquidity. This was what 
largely took place in the period from September 2008 to March 2009. 
Currently  conditions  in  money  markets  have  improved  and  investors’  appetite  for  risk  has 
recovered to some extent and accordingly usage of some market-supporting facilities such 
as the Fed’s and BOJ’s commercial paper programs has declined markedly. 
As  an  example  of  central  bank  policy  actions  in  this  financial  crisis,  I  summarize  what  the 
BOJ did in the last two years in Chart 1. You can find a similar and sometimes longer list of 
policy actions at other central banks. 
Four practical principles to cope with market dysfunctions 
Unconventional policies entail microeconomic intervention and explicit risk-taking by central 
banks.  Thus,  these  policies  should  satisfy  two  basic  criteria.  First,  the  benefits  of  market 
intervention  should  outweigh  the  costs  of  distorting  resource  allocation.  Second,  central 
banks  should  have  a  sufficient  capital  buffer  of  their  own  and  appropriate  burden-sharing 
agreements or understandings with the government to guard against possible credit losses. 
The latter is of the utmost importance to maintain central banks’ credibility in pursuing price 
stability. 
Besides 
unconventional policies, which produced both differences and similarities among countries. 
four  practical  principles 
these  considerations, 
in  considering 
there  were 
Principle 1. Select and concentrate 
Although dysfunction was widespread, it was clear that no central bank had the operational 
capacity  and  capital  buffer  to  intervene  in  all  markets  showing  dysfunction.  It  was  also 
evident that some markets were more important than others for the purpose of restoring the 
monetary  transmission  mechanism.  Thus,  the  first  practical  principle  is  to  select  the  most 
important markets and most cost-effective interventions, and to concentrate on them. 
In practice, this required cross-checking of bottom-up and top-down considerations. Bottom 
up,  we  started  by  examining  the  degree  of  dysfunction  of  particular  financial  markets,  and 
then determined specific target segments of the markets for intervention. We worked out our 
specific intervention conditions and possible exit mechanisms. At the same time, top down, 
we  carefully  examined  the  pros  and  cons  of  allocative  distortion,  resource  constraints  and 
operational capabilities of the central bank, and capital constraint of the central bank if the 
intended measures exposed it to market and credit risks. The cross-checking of these two 
was particularly effective. 
The  immediate  corollary  of  this  principle  is  that,  firstly,  the  nature  and  the  magnitude  of  a 
particular central bank’s market intervention depends on the nature and the magnitude of its 
country’s  financial  market  breakdown,  and  secondly,  the  resulting  increase  in  the  balance 
sheet of a central bank differs considerably from country to country. Table 1 reports cross-
country  differences  in  corporate  finance.  In  the  United  States,  securities  markets  were  far 
more important than in Japan, and even financial institutions depend heavily on CP markets 
for their own finance. And the collapse of securities markets was widespread. Thus, the Fed 
was obliged to undertake massive and wide-ranging intervention. In contrast, the strain on 
the Japanese securities markets was mostly contained in CP and corporate bond markets, 
and we saw a relatively smooth transition from security market funding to bank borrowing. 
BIS Review 102/2009 
 3
Consequently, the Bank of Japan’s market intervention was limited to CP and corporate bond 
markets,  indirectly  through  the  banking  system,  which  was  still  functioning  relatively  well 
(Item  3  of  Chart  1,  measures  to  facilitate  corporate  financing).  Consequently,  the  Fed’s 
increase in balance sheets is far greater than the Bank of Japan’s, which is depicted in Chart 
2.  Europe’s  structure  of  corporate  finance  is  closer  to  Japan’s,  so  the  ECB’s  increase  in 
balance sheets was similar to the BOJ’s. 
Principle 2. Avoid further dysfunction 
When we are coping with market dysfunction in some markets, it is counterproductive to take 
action that undermines the functioning of other markets. That is, no policy measure should 
damage the incentive to trade actively in financial markets, especially if these markets’ full 
functioning is prerequisite for normalcy. The decision taken by many central banks to have a 
policy rate close to, but sufficiently above, zero is based on this consideration.3
Principle 3. Provide safety nets 
The current financial crisis has shown how devastating the erosion of market confidence can 
be. When confidence is eroded, investors are “excessively” averse to uncertainty (or the so-
called unknown unknowns), and become sensitive to any news having some bearing on the 
worst possible case scenario.4 Actions that may be rational at the level of individual market 
participants can lead to a "fallacy of composition," which prevents the markets from restoring 
their  functions.  Even  worse,  functional  breakdown  and  confidence  erosion  aggravate  each 
other. In this respect, a safety-net facility, which works like a put option to mitigate damages 
that  would  be  incurred  in  the  worst  possible  case,  is  likely  to  reduce  the  degree  of  this 
“excessive uncertainty aversion.” 
The measures to secure stability of the financial system (Item 4 of Chart 1) were intended to 
be the safety-net measures we are discussing here. Japanese banks held sizable amounts of 
corporate  stocks,  which  turned  out  to  impose  serious  risks  when  stock  prices  went  down 
sharply.  The  Bank  of  Japan  resumed  purchases  of  stock  held  by  financial  institutions  and 
began  to  provide  subordinated  loans  to  banks.  These  were  measures  to  help  banks  to 
reduce stockholding risk by selling their cross holding, and to improve their capital positions 
when  they  thought  it  was  necessary.  In  addition,  to  some  extent,  ample  liquidity  provision 
(Item 2 of Chart 1) could also be considered as a form of safety net. Also, outright purchases 
of CP and Corporate Bonds from eligible financial institutions (in Item 3) had this safety-net 
feature. Similar safety-net measures were also found in many countries.5
Principle 4. Design measures to be self-fading as conditions improve 
Unconventional  policy  measures  entail  possible  side  effects  distorting  resource  allocation. 
They also impose financial risks and possibly reputation risks on central banks. Accordingly, 
these unconventional measures should be temporary and designed to unwind themselves as 
market  functions  improve.  We  describe  measures  with  this  inbuilt  characteristic  as  self-
fading. 
                                                  
3  
4  
If short-term rates are flatly zero, few have incentive to trade in short term financial markets, and thus there is 
no  demand  for  traders.  In  this  way,  zero  rates  destroy  the  trading  infrastructure  including  the  know-how  of 
traders. 
If a decision maker’s confidence is “contaminated” or eroded in the sense that she thinks, though with a small 
probability (say ε), she is ignorant about the situation she faces, her rational behavior can be described as 
“maximin”  optimization.  In  the  maximin  optimization,  she  is  particularly  sensitive  to  the  worst  possible  case 
scenario. See, Nishimura, K. G., and H. Ozaki (2006), “An Axiomatic Approach to ε-contamination,” Economic 
Theory, Vol. 27, 2006, pp. 333-340. 
5   The Fed’s TALF is one example having this feature. 
4 
 BIS Review 102/2009
Some of the unconventional measures I have outlined have this characteristic. For example, 
the  term  of  outright  purchases  of  CP  and  corporate  bonds  is  substantially  higher  than  the 
“normal”  one,  though  lower  than  that  in  distressed  conditions.  Therefore,  as  conditions 
improve, market participants find it unprofitable to use these facilities, as exemplified in the 
recent decline in the usage of these facilities. 
Five don’ts in assessing unconventional policies  
3.  
Many of these unconventional policies are emergency measures: they are implemented as 
measures to enhance the effects of ultra-low policy rates on prices and economic activities 
under the condition of severe financial market dysfunctions. Thus, when market conditions 
improve, many of them will eventually be terminated. However, timing and sequencing are 
crucial: financial markets may still be severely segmented even though inter-market arbitrage 
starts again. Market participants’ confidence may be still fragile. In such circumstances, it is 
absolute  necessity  to  avoid  fallacies  and  misinterpretations  with  respect  to  assessing 
unconventional policies. I will present five Don’ts in order to avoid the fallacies which might 
otherwise mislead us. 
(1)  
Don’t take the central bank’s balance sheets as a measure of monetary easing 
First, do not assume the size of the central bank’s balance sheets is indicative of the degree 
of monetary easing. Many unconventional policy measures are designed to be selective and 
are tailored to a specific market dysfunction. Thus, there is no common yardstick evaluating 
all  market  intervention.  Moreover,  the  usage  of  unconventional  policy  facilities  declines  as 
market  functions  improve.  Shrinkage  of  a  central  bank’s  balance  sheet  reflecting  this 
mechanism  should  not  be  interpreted  as  a  monetary  tightening  but  rather  as  a  sign  of 
improving market conditions. 
Don’t look only at the segments of financial markets subject to intervention 
(2)  
Second,  do  not  look  at  the  conditions  of  only  those  segments  of  financial  markets  where 
intervention  has  taken  place.  In  fact,  there  might  be  spill-over  effects  to  other  segments. 
Given  resource  and  capital  constraints,  the  central  banks  target  their  market  interventions 
quite  specifically.  However,  in  so  doing,  central  banks  expect  positive  spill-over  effects  to 
other segments not so targeted. A good illustration of this lies in Japanese CP markets. We 
see improvements, as expected and hoped for, in the A2-rated CP market even though they 
are  not  eligible  for  the  BOJ’s  purchase  program.  The  A2-rated  CP  market  is  apparently 
affected by our purchase of A1-rated CP. 
is 
Don’t underestimate safety nets 
(3)  
Third,  do  not  underestimate  the  beneficial  effects  of  safety-net  measures  especially  when 
investors’  confidence 
investors  are 
“excessively” averse to uncertainty and tend to “wait and see” until they feel more confident 
about making market transactions. A “safety net” facility has some of the characteristics of 
insurance  or  put  options  and  thus  substantially  reduces  this  sort  of  uncertainty.  Just  as 
insurance is an umbrella for unexpected rain, a safety net builds confidence whether or not 
dire events come to pass. An underutilized facility does not necessarily mean it is ineffective 
or useless. 
fragile.  When  market  confidence 
is  eroded, 
Don’t ignore heterogeneity among countries and regions 
(4)  
Fourth,  do  not  ignore  heterogeneity  among  countries  and  regions.  It  is  not  the  case  that 
every  country  should  follow  a  common  sequence  of  policies  to  exit  from  unconventional 
policies.  Economists,  including  me,  have  a  tendency  to  ignore  statutory  differences  and 
BIS Review 102/2009 
 5
institutional  subtleties  among  countries  and  regions,  to  get  clear-cut  empirical  results  and 
policy recommendations. There are always pitfalls in this tendency, which we should be very 
careful to avoid. 
At the outset of my presentation, I described a stylized framework of conventional monetary 
policy  that  assumed  well-functioning  financial  markets.  However,  in  fact,  the  description  of 
well-functioning  financial  markets  there  is  an  idealized  one,  not  always  true  even  for 
developed  countries.  For  example,  Japanese  financial  markets  experienced  temporary 
segmentation  in  some  segments  from  time  to  time  even  before  the  current  crisis,  and  the 
BOJ  conducted  painstaking  market  operations.  An  immediate  corollary  of  this  is  that  an 
unconventional  policy  in  one  country  is  not  necessarily  unconventional  in  other  countries. 
The outright purchase of government bonds is a case in point. The Fed stated the purpose of 
purchasing  longer-term  Treasury  securities  is  “to  help  improve  conditions  in  private  credit 
markets” in March 2009; the BOE conducts its purchase of gilts as a means of “Quantitative 
Easing.”  However,  the  BOJ  has  been  conducting  outright  purchases  of  Japanese 
governments bonds as a traditional tool of market operation, to provide longer-term liquidity. 
0.5% ⇒0.3% (Oct. 08)⇒0.1% ( Dec.08)
Don’t assume a return to the way it was 
(5)  
Now I come to the last of the five Don’ts: Do not assume we will return to “the way it was.” 
Although the collapse of the global financial markets took place in a surprisingly short period 
of  time,  their  rebuilding  and  restructuring  is  likely  to  be  a  long  and  slow  process.  The 
“normalcy” to which we are returning is the one in which rebuilding and restructuring are still 
under way. Moreover, “the way it was,” that is, as financial markets were before the crisis, 
with high leverage and dubious securitized products, has been shown to be unsustainable. 
We live in a world of irreversibility, a world in which we cannot undo what we have done. Both 
financial markets and real economies have changed in an irreversible way. Now we have to 
be  flexible  enough  to  adjust  ourselves  to  this  changing  reality.  Thank  you  for  your  kind 
attention. 
 
(Chart 1) BOJ’s Policy Actions (Selected) 
  1. Reductions in policy interest rate
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
financing
Increase in frequency and size of CP repo 
operations (Oct. 08)
Introduction and expansion of special funds-
supplying operations to facilitate corporate 
financing* (Dec. 08, Feb. 09)
Introduction of  outright purchases of CP from 
eligible financial institutions (Jan. 09)
Introduction of  outright purchases of corporate 
bonds from eligible financial institutions (Feb. 
09)
financial markets
Introduction and expansion of US dollar funds-
supplying operations (Sep, Oct. 08)
Increase in outright purchases of JGBs
14.4 trillion yen/year⇒16.8 trillion yen/year (Dec. 
08)⇒21.6 trillion yen/year (Mar. 09)
lending facility (Oct. 08, Feb .09)
Introduction of  complementary deposit facility (Oct. 
08)
* Funds-supplying operations by which the Bank extends loans to its 
counterparties for an unlimited amount against the value of corporate debt 
submitted to the Bank as collateral by them at an interest rate equivalent to the 
target for the uncollateralized overnight call rate.
3. Measures to facilitate corporate 
4. Measures to secure stability of 
2. Measures to ensure stability in 
• Expansion of the JGB repo (Oct. 08) and securities 
• Broadening eligible collateral for funds supplying 
• Provision of subordinated loans to banks (Apr. 
• Expansion in the range of corporate debt as 
• Resumption of stock purchases held by 
operations (Jan, Feb, Apr, May 09) 
financial institutions (Feb. 09)
financial system
eligible collateral (Dec. 08)
       09)
6 
 BIS Review 102/2009
350
300
250
200
150
100
BOJ
FRS
ECB
BOE
Jun. 2007=100
(Chart 2) Central Banks’ Balance Sheets          
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(Table 1) Funding Sources of corporate finance 
(Amount outstanding, billion USD, End of 2007) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sources: BOJ, FRB, ECB and ONS. 
706
3,872
1,015
706
Japan
USA
Europe
CP, Bonds (A)
UK
50
Mar-07 Jun-07 Sep-07 Dec-07 Mar-08 Jun-08 Sep-08 Dec-08 Mar-09 Jun-09 Jul-09
Loans (B)
Ratio (A/B)
2,935
2,937
10,995
2,290
24%
132%
9%
31%
BIS Review 102/2009 
 7
