X P Guma: The role of monetary policy 
Address by Dr X P Guma, Deputy Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, to the IPM 
Annual Business Conference in association with NKR, Durban, 18 May 2009. 
 Introduction 
1. 
Mr Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, let me begin by thanking you for your invitation to me to 
participate in this meeting today: for me it is usually better to speak when asked than to ask 
to speak. 
The title of my talk today is well known to those who have an interest in and may be well 
versed  in  the  precepts  of  that  component  of  public  policy  which  is  known  as  “monetary 
policy”: that is, the use of monetary instruments to influence macro-economic outcomes. This 
is so because it was the topic chosen for the Presidential address delivered at the Eightieth 
Annual  Meeting  of  the  American  Economic  Association  on  December  29,  19671:  an 
Association  which  remains  one  of  the  foremost  scholarly  associations  of  the  Economic(s) 
profession;  and  has  been  the  scale  upon  which  many  nuggets  of  theoretical  insight  have 
been assayed. 
Theoretical  elegance  within  the  confines  of  the  spaces  occupied  by  trained  economists  is 
one thing: relevance to, and understanding by, a broader public whose lives are affected by 
the actions of Central Banks is another. My purpose today is to speak to the latter. 
The Friedman Statement 
peg interest rates for more than very limited periods; 
what monetary policy cannot do. 
what monetary policy can do. 
2.  
For my purpose today, the questions to which answers are required are, in the main, those to 
which the 1967 – address was directed, namely: 
i) 
ii) 
A  paraphrasing  of  Friedman  would  indicate  that  the  course  adopted  by  Central  Banks  in 
order to achieve a particular objective, cannot: 
(1) 
(2)  … peg the rate of unemployment for more than very limited periods. 
These are, as stated in the address, only two of the limitations of monetary policy which can 
be drawn from the “infinite world of negation”. To the list could be added many others: for 
example, easy finance for SMME’s, secure and guaranteed employment for all job seekers 
including  graduates  of  tertiary  institutions,  full  capacity  utilisation  for  airline  companies, 
unlimited connections for the cellular-less and infinite airtime for the connected2. 
But, monetary policy can: 
iii) 
iv) 
prevent money itself from being a major source of economic disturbance. 
Provide  a  stable  background  for  the  economy,  such  policy  being  the  primary 
responsibility of national central banks. 
                                                 
1   M. Friedman (1967) “The Role of Monetary Policy”; The American Economic Review, Vol. 58, No. 1 (Mar., 
1968), pp. 1-17. 
2   Those who attend the Monetary Policy Forums of the South African Reserve Bank (SARB) will have heard 
requests, indeed demands, for such interventions at various times. 
BIS Review 67/2009 
 1
Logically, therefore, if monetary policy is to provide a stable background for the economy, it 
must do so by deliberately employing its powers to that end. 
In all places: at all times? 
3. 
In stating the aforegoing, in free translation, I should not be misunderstood. I do not wish to 
imply  that  one  monetary  policy  is  always  and  everywhere  appropriate.  Such  a  rendition  of 
this narrative would do injustice not only to the principal author to whom I have referred but 
also  to  his  antecedents,  contemporaries  and  successors  most  of  whom  had  and  have, 
respectively, a keen sense of history. For it is the case that the political, economic, social and 
international environment of central banks is in constant flux. At the same time central banks 
are quite dissimilar in their constitutions. No two Banks are exactly alike.3 Nor is it the case 
that the issues to be addressed are identical at all times in all places. 
The central proposition remains, however: it is that monetary policy can do certain things; in 
particular, provide a stable background for the economy. In so doing, this policy will enable 
producers  and  consumers,  employers  and  employees  to  proceed  with  full  confidence  that 
one  aspect  of  an  otherwise  unknowable  future  is  predictable:  namely,  the  rate  of  price 
inflation, or its mathematical inverse, the purchasing power of money.4 In these conditions, 
entrepreneurs can plan and act; savers can save without fear that their savings will be wiped 
out  by  inflation  and  borrowers  can  borrow  in  orderly  markets  at  interest  rates  that  are  not 
unduly raised by inflation risk premia. 
Resolution of challenges in the real sector; for example skills shortages or drought – induced 
agricultural losses requires other policies: stated differently as old people here used to say 
“nobody can use another person’s teeth to smile”. So to end the analogy, the teeth which will 
bring a smile to the resolution of those issues cannot be drawn from the mouth of monetary 
policy. 
Is price stability enough? 
4.  
But this surely cannot be enough. For we all are aware of the strained circumstances of the 
international  economy  in  2009:  and  are  no  doubt  cognisant  of  the  impact  of  these 
developments on the prospects for the domestic economy. So, as William White asked two 
years ago, “Is Price Stability enough?5 And, the short response to this could be, in my view, 
“yes,  in  normal  circumstances.  No,  in  extra-ordinary  times”.  That,  after  all,  is  why  policy 
affords  some  discretion  to  the  policy-maker.  Slave-like  adherence  to  an  invariant  policy 
stance is unlikely to yield optimal outcomes when circumstances change dramatically – as 
they have in recent times. 
For this reason, principally, many central banks have accepted the distinction that may need 
to  be  drawn  between  price  stability  and  financial  stability.  That  these  are  not  synonyms  is 
evident from the evidence: the worst financial crisis in history has erupted to the detriment of 
global,  real  economic  activity;  and  did  so  in  the  United  States  of  America  despite  the  low 
rates of inflation that had been recorded there for some time6. 
                                                 
3   Courtney  N.  Blackman  (1999)  Central  Banking  in  Theory  and  Practice  Caribbean  Cent  for  Monetary 
Studies,St. Augistine, Trinidad. 
4  
In the Address, Friedman discussed the average level of prices; not the rate of price inflation. 
5  William R White (2008) in Bank for International Settlements (BIS) Papers No 45, March 2009 
6   For further discussion, see for example, Bernanke, Ben S. (2004) “The Great Moderation”, speech delivered 
at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, D.C., February 20. 
2 
 BIS Review 67/2009
On the other hand, the proposition that price stability and financial stability are not mutually 
exclusive,  indeed  are  linked  is  intuitively  appealing.  This  is  so  because  the  transmission 
mechanism of monetary policy in contemporary, market-oriented economic systems is based 
on the assumptions that: 
1. 
2. 
credit markets exist and operate efficiently; 
the policy rate of the central bank is the primary determinant of interest rates in the 
market for credit; 
there exist stable, rational and predictable relationships between money and credit, 
on the one hand; and a host of macro-economic variables on the other; and 
the  demand  for  and  supply  of  credit  are  brought  into  equilibrium,  in  part,  by  “the” 
interest rate. 
3. 
4. 
When credit markets cease to operate, or operate inefficiently, one of the channels through 
which  conventional  monetary  policy  operates  ceases  to  be,  or  becomes  increasingly  less, 
effective. 
There  then  arises  a  need  to  regain  financial  stability  because  financial  instability  has  the 
potential to cause significant macro-economic costs: it interferes negatively with production, 
consumption  and  investment  and  is  detrimental  to  broader  goals  of  sustainable  and 
sustained economic growth, full or rising employment and societal development. 
It may be necessary, therefore, for some institution, or college of institutions, to validate the 
often  unstated  assumptions  stated  above,  in  order  to  avoid  or  limit  financial  instability:  to 
enhance the efficiency of monetary policy. 
Such an authority should be able to, at minimum, 
identify systemic threats at an early stage; 
• 
• 
promote measures to reduce these threats; 
develop and test contingency plans and crisis preparedness; 
• 
in extreme cases, implement safety-net measures to support systematically important 
• 
financial institutions; 
maintain  confidence  in  financial  markets  and  resolve  the  efficient  functioning  of 
markets, 
 according to the International Monetary Forum (IMF); the Bank for International Settlements 
(BIS); and the G-20 – of which South Africa is a member7. 
5. In South Africa 
Many  countries  –  which  differ  in  size,  structural  features  and  development  level – have 
selected  inflation-targeting-with-floating  as  their  preferred  framework  for  pursuing  a  more 
independent  and  effective  monetary  policy.  According 
to  Frederic S. Mishkin  and 
Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel8,  this  choice  has  been  made,  typically,  by  instrument-independent 
central banks in open economies with a history of inflation, which need to establish a credible 
monetary anchor to promote price stability. 
                                                 
7   See  Mnyande, M.  (2009):  Remarks  at  the  launch  of  the  Financial  Stability  Review,  South  African  Reserve 
Bank (SARB), 6 March. SARB (2009) Financial Stability Review, March. 
8   See  F.S. Mishkin  and  K. Schmidt-Hebbel  (eds) Monetary  Policy  Under  Inflation  Targeting,  Central  Bank  of 
Chile: 2005. 
BIS Review 67/2009 
 3
This  framework,  typically,  coincided  with  the  end  of  experimentation  with  alternatives: 
including, in particular, intermediate exchange rate regimes, and monetary aggregates, as an 
intermediate target. 
Historically,  the  most  common  nominal  anchor  for  policy  involved  linking  the  value  of  the 
currency to gold (under the gold standard) or to a major currency. There followed a period, in 
the  1970’s,  during  which  monetary  aggregates  became  the  prevalent  nominal  anchor  for 
policy. When these became an increasingly unreliable anchor, some countries attempted to 
target the exchange rate – with mixed success9. 
At  present,  in  the  case  of  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (SARB),  as  is  well  known,  the 
primary goal of monetary policy is the achievement of price stability. Stated in the words of 
Section 224(1) of the Constitution of the Republic of South African, 1996, “The primary object 
of the South African Reserve Bank is to protect the value of the currency in the interest of 
balanced  and  sustainable  economic  growth  in  the  Republic”.  And  South  Africa  has  had 
experience  of  most  alternatives  –  including  the  gold  standard,  the  gold-dollar  standard, 
monetary  aggregates  and  an  eclectic  approach.  To  use  the  intemperate  language  of  the 
younger generation: been there, done that; got the T-shirt. 
As  has  been  stated  above,  it  is  possible  to  pursue  price  stability  using  alternative 
approaches: and, many have been tried. 
As has been observed elsewhere in this regard, “take away inflation targeting and we will still 
have  monetary  policy,  we  will  still  have  the  same  instruments  of  monetary  policy,  and  the 
Bank  will  still  have  a  constitutional  mandate  to  maintain  low  inflation”10,  in  the  interest  of 
balanced and sustainable economic growth in the Republic. 
Conclusion 
6.  
In conclusion, permit me to emphasise the following points: – The proposition stated in the 
Address,  to  which  I  have  made  reference,  that  our  economic  system  will  work  best  when 
economic agents can proceed with full confidence that the purchasing power of money will 
be protected remains central to the role that has to be assigned to monetary policy. In South 
Africa, this is a constitutional imperative. 
Recent developments have thrown into sharp relief the importance of financial stability: and 
some  broad  guidelines  have  been  suggested,  in  particular,  by  the  G-20 –  of  which  South 
Africa is a member – at the Summit held in London early in April 2009. At that Summit, the 
former Financial Stability Forum was transformed into the Financial Stability Board: and was 
enjoined, inter alia, to “pursue the maintenance of financial stability, enhance the openness 
and transparency of the financial sector, implement international financial standards … and 
agree to undergo periodic peer reviews”11. 
 
The  institutional  arrangements  for  accomplishing  this  will,  clearly,  differ  from  country  to 
country but will certainly not be onerous for South Africa as a great deal has already been 
done  in  this  regard.  Two  IMF/World  Bank  Financial  Sector  Assessment  Program  Studies 
have been concluded; the first in 2000 and the second in 2008. Supervision of banks has 
been undertaken consistently and the Basle II framework was implemented on the due date. 
                                                 
9   A useful review in this regard may be found in Charles Freedman and Douglas Laxton (2009) “Why Inflation 
Targeting?”, IMF Working Paper WP/09/86. 
10   Mboweni, T.T. (2008) “Monetary Policy, Inflation Targeting and Inflation Pressures”; Address to the Bureau 
for Economic Research Annual Conference, Johannesburg: 22 May. 
11   Declaration on strengthening the financial system. G-20 London Summit, 2 April 2009. 
4 
 BIS Review 67/2009
Moreover, within the SARB, the Financial Stability Department (FSD) has existed since the 
year 2000, its task being to identify possible threats to financial stability and suggest ways in 
which  these  could  be  mitigated.  Although  its  existence  cannot  guarantee  that  financial 
stability will be maintained, taken together with the existing framework which exists for the 
regulation and supervision of financial institutions, its work will assist the authorities to reduce 
the probability of systemic instability. 
Finally,  financial  markets  are  likely  to  remain  volatile  as  risk  aversion  and  optimism  about 
growth prospects fluctuate in response to emerging data and conflicting signals, as the most 
recent Monetary Policy Review of the SARB indicates. Dealing with this will require resolute 
application  of  monetary  policy  in  accordance  with  the  mandate  to  achieve  price  stability, 
within an inflation-targeting framework. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 67/2009 
 5
