Nout Wellink: Basel Committee initiatives in response to the financial 
crisis 
Remarks by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  before  the  Committee  on  Economic  and  Monetary 
Affairs of the European Parliament (ECON), Brussels, 30 March 2009. 
 Thank you, Madame Chairwoman and members of the Econ Committee, for this opportunity 
to share with you the Basel Committee’s strategy and initiatives to respond to the present 
financial crisis as it relates to the regulation, supervision and risk management of the banking 
sector. The work of the Basel Committee is consistent with and supports the initiatives of the 
Financial Stability Forum and the Leaders of the G20.  
In formulating responses to the financial crisis, it is necessary to address both the near term 
challenges  related  to  the  weakening  economic  and  financial  situation  and  the  long  term 
regulatory  structure  issues.  The  two  are  linked  and  we  need  to  manage  carefully  the 
transition from current measures to a more sustainable long term framework. 
With regard to the near term situation, it is clear that the banking sector has been at the heart 
of the adverse feedback loop between the financial and real side. We have moved from what 
I would call the mark-to-market and illiquidity phase of the crisis related to legacy assets to 
the fundamental credit cycle part of the crisis. This is associated with large write downs from 
corporate and retail lending books, and I believe this phase will continue to play out over the 
medium term.  
It is critical that supervisors have a comprehensive strategy to deal with both phases of the 
crisis and their associated impact on banks. That is essential if we are to restore stability to 
our financial systems and economies. When it comes to the long term, we need to establish 
a clear target for the future regulatory system which substantially reduces both the probability 
and  severity  of  a  crisis  like  the  one  we  currently  are  working  though.  By  providing  clarity 
about the future regulatory framework, we will help re-establish near term confidence, reduce 
the  risk  of  competitive  distortions  and  limit  the  degrees  of  uncertainty  for  the  public  and 
private sector. Also, by emphasising that these reforms will be phased in over an appropriate 
horizon, we reduce the risk that our own actions contribute to procyclicality in the system. In 
this  regard  our  plans  are  closely  aligned  with  the  views  expressed  in  the  de  Larosière 
Group’s report. This group’s report has been strongly appreciated by the Basel Committee. 
Let  me  now  say  a  few  words  about  the  steps  the  Basel  Committee  has  and  will  be 
undertaking to produce a more robust supervisory and regulatory framework for the banking 
sector.  Such a framework needs to have four key components:  
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
I would like to say a few words about each of these components. 
Strong regulatory capital, 
Robust standards for bank liquidity, 
Enhanced risk management, governance and supervision, and 
Better transparency 
Regulatory capital 
The Basel Committee, in a press release issued on March 12th following its recent quarterly 
meeting, underscored the importance of a strong capital base as a necessary condition for a 
strong banking sector. It stated that the level of capital in the banking system needs to be 
strengthened to raise its resilience to future episodes of economic and financial stress. The 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 1
Committee will do this through a combination of initiatives, which I will describe momentarily. 
Our press release also noted that the Committee will review the regulatory minimum level of 
capital, taking account of these initiatives. Our objective will be to arrive at a total level and 
quality  of  capital  that  is  higher  than  the  current  Basel  I  and  Basel  II  frameworks  and 
appropriate to promote the stability of the banking sector over the long run. This effort will be 
phased in over a time frame that will not aggravate the current stress. 
Building on the three pillars of the Basel II framework, we need to develop a more resilient 
capital framework that has multiple safeguards built into it. 
First, we need to improve risk coverage.  
One of the most procyclical dynamics has been the failure of risk management and capital 
frameworks  to  capture  key  exposures  in  advance  of  the  crisis.  For  example,  risks  arising 
from  securitisation  activities  –  especially  so-called  resecuritisations  –  as  well  as  certain 
trading  book  exposures  were  not  sufficiently  captured.  I  could  also  point  to  exposures  to 
complex financial instruments that experienced severe declines in value because of impaired 
liquidity. The Basel Committee’s response therefore is to enhance the Basel II framework so 
that risks are more comprehensively and more accurately covered. 
Second, there needs to be a solid capital base backing these risks.  
We  will  achieve  this  by  strengthening  the  quality,  consistency,  and  transparency  of  the 
highest forms of Tier 1 capital. It must be based on a clear definition of capital that needs to 
be transparent and it must be global to ensure competitive equality. The Basel Committee 
already has a strong foundation for such a definition, namely common equity and reserves. 
We  now  need  to  deal  with  the  many  differences  related  to  definitional  issues,  such  as 
deductions from capital and the treatment of prudential filters. 
Third, we need to address procyclicality.   
Procyclicality is a complex issue and it is the product of many factors. At the most basic level, 
it  is  the  result  of  animal  spirits,  which  produce  exuberant  behaviour  in  the  upswing  of  the 
cycle, and fear during the downturn. We cannot change this behaviour, but we can seek to 
dampen the channels through which it manifests itself. These include accounting and capital 
frameworks,  liquidity  regimes,  risk  management  and  compensation,  margining,  basic 
infrastructure,  transparency,  and  the  way  supervision  is  carried  out.  In  the  case  of  the 
regulatory  capital  regime,  we  need  to  address  any  excess  cyclicality  in  minimum 
requirements  over  the  credit  cycle  while  maintaining  appropriate  risk  coverage  and 
sensitivity.  The  Basel  Committee  has  put  in  place  a  process  to  systematically  assess  the 
quantitative impact of Basel II on the level and cyclicality of capital. We will take appropriate 
steps  if  the  results  of  our  capital  monitoring  suggest  the  capital  framework  is  unduly 
procyclical. 
But even more importantly, we need to build countercyclical buffers into capital frameworks 
and provisioning practices. This will help ensure that reserves and capital are built up during 
periods of earnings growth, so that they can be drawn down during periods of stress. The 
Committee  is  working  to  translate  this  important  principle  into  a  concrete  proposal.  The 
approach  needs  to  have  robust  standards  that  can  be  applied  at  the  global  level  and 
translated into national contexts. 
Finally, the capital framework needs to be underpinned by a non-risk based supplementary 
measure. This is particularly important as the Basel I-based floors are phased out. Just like 
we expect banks to manage to a variety of measures when they assess risk (such as net and 
gross  exposures,  VAR  and  stress  tests),  we  as  supervisors  also  must  not  constrain 
ourselves by evaluating risk through the lens of a single, risk based measure. We need the 
risk based measure to interact with a simple metric that can act as a floor and help contain 
the  build  up  of  excessive  leverage  in  the  banking  system,  one  of  the  key  sources  of  the 
current crisis. The Basel Committee is working to develop by year end a specific proposal in 
this  area. Key  principles  guiding  this  work  are  that  the  measure  must  be  simple  and 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2009
transparent,  and  it  must  address  issues  related  to  accounting  differences  and  off-balance 
sheet exposures, among others. Finally, it needs to interact with the risk based measure in a 
prudent but sensible manner.   
Once these different streams of work are further advanced, taken together they will form the 
basis for the Committee’s assessment of the appropriate level of minimum capital that should 
be put in place over the long term.   
But whatever we do – and this gets back to my link between the near and long term – we 
must  not  raise  global  capital  requirements  in  the  middle  of  this  crisis.  Capital  buffers  are 
there to be used and we must provide a clear road map where we are headed. 
Liquidity 
Let me now say a few words about our work on liquidity. Capital is a necessary condition for 
banking  system  soundness  but  by  itself  is  not  sufficient.  Of  equal  importance  is  a  strong 
liquidity base. Many banks that had adequate capital levels got into trouble because they did 
not manage their liquidity in a prudent manner. 
In response to these shortcomings, the Basel Committee last September issued its Principles 
of  Sound  Liquidity  Risk  Management  and  Supervision.  This  was  a  significant  step  toward 
setting  a  new  global  soundness  standard  for  what  constitutes  robust  liquidity  risk 
measurement, management and supervision. But this was only the first step. The next step is 
to  monitor  implementation  of  the  principles  and  we  have  put  in  place a  process  to  do  just 
that.  We  also  are  developing  benchmarks,  tools  and  metrics  that  supervisors  can  use  to 
promote more consistent liquidity standards for cross-border banks. 
Better risk management and supervision  
I have discussed the importance of having stronger global standards for capital and liquidity, 
but  this  is  not  enough.  If  firms  have  poor  governance  and  risk  management  cultures  or  if 
supervision is weak, then we could again find ourselves with the types of problems we are 
now facing.  
We propose to build on Basel II’s supervisory review process – Pillar 2 – to raise the bar for 
risk  management  and  supervision  practices. This  past  January,  the  Basel  Committee 
published for comment supplemental Pillar 2 guidance. The purpose of this guidance is to 
address the flaws in risk management practices revealed by the crisis, which in many cases 
were  symptoms  of  more  fundamental  shortcomings  in  governance  structures  at  financial 
institutions. The Committee will strengthen its supervisory guidance and the links to the Pillar 
2 review process. It is focusing on firm-wide governance and risk management; capturing the 
risk of off-balance sheet exposures and securitisation activities; more effectively managing 
risk concentrations; and providing incentives to better manage risk and returns over the long-
term, including compensation practices. 
Moreover, we need to move towards a macroprudential approach to supervision. What does 
this  mean?  In  our  discussions  in  the  Basel  Committee,  we  have  emphasised  the  need  to 
focus  supervision  not  just  on  the  soundness  of  individual  banks  but  on  broader  financial 
stability objectives. This should inform where we focus our limited supervisory resources and 
how we develop our supervisory and regulatory tools.  
Transparency  
One of the main amplifiers of the crisis was the lack of transparency regarding the risk profile 
of institutions and structured products. Moreover, the process by which these products are 
valued often lacks rigour. Lack of transparency about the risk profile of products and financial 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 3
institutions  caused  a  massive  retrenchment  by  investors  and  counterparties  further 
amplifying the deleveraging process.  
To help mitigate this behaviour, the third pillar of the Basel II framework – market discipline – 
sets out a series of required disclosures that are intended to complement the other two pillars 
of the Basel II framework. This should allow market participants to assess capital adequacy 
of  a  bank  through  key  pieces  of  information  on  the  scope  of  application,  capital,  risk 
exposure  and  the  risk  assessment  process.  The  Committee’s  January  proposals  for 
enhancing  Pillar  3  are  focused  on  disclosures  related  to  securitisation,  off-balance-sheet 
exposures  and  trading  activities.  We  believe  that  these  proposed  enhanced  disclosure 
requirements  will  help  to  avoid  a  recurrence  of  market  uncertainties  about  the  strength  of 
banks' balance sheets related to their capital market activities.  
Conclusion 
Taken together, the recent and planned initiatives of the Basel Committee should promote a 
more  robust  banking  sector  and  limit  the  risk  that  weaknesses  in  banks  amplify  shocks 
between  the  financial  and  real  sectors.  Because  our  measures  are  far  reaching  and 
ambitious, they will need to be phased in over a reasonable timeframe.  
I should also note the invitation to join the Basel Committee that we have extended recently 
to the BRIC countries – Brazil, Russia, India and China – as well as Australia, Korea and 
Mexico.  The  expansion  of  our  membership  will  help  enhance  the  global  reach  and 
acceptance of our standards. 
The efforts of the Basel Committee need to occur in a broader context of achieving the right 
balance between the scope and depth of regulation. Failure to produce adequate regulation 
for other "bank like" activities means that we in the banking sector will just be “pushing on a 
string”,  and  the  activity  will  simply  migrate  elsewhere.  I  therefore  strongly  welcome  the 
activities of other bodies like the G20, the Financial Stability Forum and the Joint Forum to 
ensure  that  all  sectors  are  subject  to  an  appropriate  degree  of  regulation,  oversight  or 
transparency  commensurate  with  their  systemic  significance.  The  Committee  will  actively 
contribute to these other efforts 
Finally,  Madame  Chairwoman,  I  would  like  to  thank  you  and  the  ECON  Committee  for 
holding this important meeting. The official sector is at a critical juncture and the actions we 
take in response will have a far-reaching and long-lasting effect. 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2009
