Nout Wellink: Crisis intervention and policies – effectiveness and the 
need for coordinated action 
Speech by Dr Nout Wellink, President of the Netherlands Bank and Chairman of the Basel 
Committee  on  Banking  Supervision,  at  the  ELEC  (European  League  for  Economic 
Cooperation) event, Amsterdam, 6 March 2009. 
 I am not telling you anything new if I say that the global financial system is ill, severely ill. 
Being ill is a concern, but in itself no cause for alarm. This time, however, there is something 
special  about  the  state  of  the  global  financial community.  Bank  by  bank,  sector  by  sector, 
and  country  by  country  have  been  infected.  The  current  financial  crisis  is  much  like  a  flu 
epidemic.  A  flu  epidemic  is  by  definition  drastic  and  difficult  to  fight.  Sometimes,  the  only 
option is to let the epidemic rage and focus on damage control, through intense coordination 
between the different emergency services. 
Damage  control  and  the  need  for  joint  action  also  apply  to  this  financial  crisis.  Despite 
extraordinary measures taken by authorities, the engine of the global financial system is not 
working  properly.  Market  conditions  are  still  fragile  and  banks’  access  to  key  markets 
remains problematic. Banks face ongoing pressure to deleverage by shrinking their balance 
sheet and reducing credit supply. The financial system has great difficulties in fulfilling its role 
as  intermediator.  Banks’  own  crisis  management  focuses  on  reducing  exposure  to  risky 
assets, securing more stable funding and increasing capital. That is important, but insufficient 
to  tackle  the  crisis.  In  the  meantime,  more  and  more  economies  are  in  recession.  So  the 
challenge to recover from the most serious financial crisis since the 1930s is immense. In 
this  setting,  I  will  discuss  the  recent  interventions  and  their  effectiveness,  and  the 
shortcomings in cross-border coordination. 
Most authorities have taken a host of measures to prevent the financial system from breaking 
down. We can distinguish four categories of support measures: 1) expansion of retail deposit 
insurance, 2) guarantees for bank liabilities other than deposits, 3) capital injections, and 4) 
purchases  or  guarantees  of  assets  held  by  banks.  These  measures  have  been 
complemented by generous central bank liquidity provisions and policy rate cuts. 
To date, Australia, Germany, Spain, the United Kingdom and the United States and also the 
Netherlands have carried out all four measures. More than a dozen countries have adopted 
at least three of these measures. It is striking that most authorities prefer the same measure. 
In the Western world, three quarters of the countries have expanded their deposit insurance 
scheme  and  introduced  guarantees  for  bank  liabilities  and  capital  injection  programmes. 
Asset  purchases  were  not  very  popular  until  recently,  but  have  now  been  arranged  by  a 
number of countries. 
More recently, many countries have concluded that bank rescue measures alone will not be 
sufficient  to  address  the  financial  crisis  and  hence  should  be  complemented  by  fiscal 
stimulus packages. So far, fifteen countries have announced such packages in the order of 
1-5% of GDP and China even announced a package of more than 10% of GDP. 
Despite the strong interventions, recovery of the banking system seems a long way off. So 
how effective are the interventions? Rather than risking a judgement while the crisis is still 
unfolding, I would like to stress that the resolution of the crisis is being complicated by its 
unique, international and complex nature. 
The  crisis  is  unique  in  that  it  has  presented  new  challenges  to  policymakers,  such  as  the 
drying-up of securitisation markets, the simultaneous deterioration in banks’ ability to sell or 
fund  assets,  and  the  wave  of  involuntary  re-intermediation  of  credits  on  banks  balance 
sheets. The key challenge is that the unknown is by definition difficult to address and resolve. 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 1
The crisis is international as it has a cross-border impact and affects all aspects of both the 
financial and the real economy. The right answer to this crisis is necessarily a global solution. 
But  recent  experiences  have  shown  that  the  coordination  of  national  responses  to  cross-
border crises is problematic for at least three reasons. Burden sharing is politically extremely 
difficult. The mandates and objectives of authorities are still mainly organized along national 
lines and may conflict. And thirdly, there are potential conflicts between national resolution 
regimes. Complexity and interdependencies within cross-border groups aggravate this. 
The crisis is complex because it was triggered by innovative and intransparent products and 
markets.  The  lack  of  adequate  information  has  raised  uncertainty  and  complicated  crisis 
resolution.  The  crisis  has  become  a  fast  moving  target,  especially  since  it  is  increasingly 
interacting with an economic recession. 
Due to the unique, international and complex nature of the crisis, its resolution has been a 
continuous  learning  process  for  policymakers.  Over  the  past  22  months,  traditional  crisis 
resolution frameworks have been only partially effective, and the crisis has uncovered some 
fundamental  weaknesses.  We  need  to  be  critical  about  the  effectiveness  of  measures,  to 
show flexibility amid changing circumstances, and continue to learn along the way. Let me 
illustrate this with three examples of advancing insights and lessons learned that have led to 
adjustments to, and extensions of, existing measures. 
Initially,  authorities  addressed  the  crisis  with  tailor-made  rescue  plans  for  troubled 
institutions.  However,  this  piecemeal  support  failed  to  prevent  a  rapid  erosion  of  market 
confidence,  especially  after  the  Lehman  failure.  Authorities  reacted  by  adopting  more 
systemic  approaches  to  prevent  bank  failures.  One  example  is  the  Troubled  Asset  Relief 
Program  in  the  United  States.  Another  is  the  common  rescue  framework  adopted  by  EU-
countries in October 2008. Under this framework, the EU countries committed themselves to 
fight  the  crisis  through  explicit  government  guarantees  on  retail  deposits,  guarantees  for 
bank  liabilities  and  capital  injections.  These  programmes  succeeded  in  halting  the 
deterioration  of  confidence  in  the  banking  sector:  bank  CDS  spreads  narrowed  across  the 
board  and  reached  a  permanently  lower  level  from  the  middle  of  October  onwards.  The 
lesson learned is that system-wide stress demands a systemic approach to reducing the risk 
of bank defaults. 
The learning effect is also true of government capital injections into banks. These measures 
have been much needed to avoid a collapse of the banking system. However, many of the 
capital  injections  have been  eroded  by  rising  losses  on  toxic  assets. This  has  prompted  a 
number  of  governments 
to  announce  asset  purchase  or  guarantee  programmes. 
Recapitalisation  of  troubled  institutions  is  not  sufficient  unless  authorities  tackle  the  asset 
problem on banks’ balance sheets simultaneously. 
Central  bank  measures  to  address  funding  pressures  by  banks  have  also  benefited  from 
advancing  insights.  Initially,  the  ECB  and  other  central  banks  resorted  to  existing  tools  to 
stabilize  overnight  interbank  rates.  But  the  need  for  longer-term  funding  operations  to 
address  bank’s  general  unwillingness  to  lend  in  term  interbank  markets  quickly  emerged. 
While central banks supported the money markets, the situation in the wholesale and debt 
funding  markets  became  critical.  Lending  by  non-bank  financial  institutions  and  across 
currencies  also  started  to  dry  up.  This  prompted  the  introduction  of  new  lending  facilities, 
arrange currency swap lines between central banks and widen the range of counterparties 
beyond  conventional  frameworks.  The  lessons  from  this  are  twofold.  First,  during  a 
prolonged  liquidity  crisis,  central  banks  might  need  to  shift  their  focus  more  towards  non-
traditional bank funding rather than just the money market. And second, when central banks 
are confronted with setbacks, they need to be pro-active to overcome those challenges. 
As I said, authorities implemented a number of policies to fight the pandemic. Some of those 
worked,  others  didn’t.  However,  each  of  the  measures  has  its  merits,  and  I  would  like  to 
stress  that  their  success  or  failure  are  a  matter  of  hindsight.  I  believe  authorities  did  their 
utmost in their response to the crisis at the beginning, given the challenges at that point in 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2009
time. But it got worse, far worse, and new, more drastic measures were needed. That doesn’t 
prove that initial policies and measures were wrong. Rather, it illustrates the determination of 
authorities to fight this crisis. 
But it also shows something else, that fighting this crisis demands international coordination. 
At best, uncoordinated nationally implemented measures may be effective in solving national 
problems.  But  a  number  of  those  measures  unintentionally  triggered  problems  in  other 
countries.  The  chain  effect  of  raising  the  deposit  guarantee  scheme  protection  is  a  clear 
example. The introduction of higher levels of depositor protection triggered a flow of savings 
out of other countries, forcing other governments to implement similar policies. Coordination 
could have prevented negative side effects. 
Many of the policies implemented to fight this crisis carry the risk of economic nationalism. 
Uncoordinated  national  policies  fail  to  take  into  account  the  complexity  of  the  financial 
system.  The  interconnectedness  of  the  financial  world  should  have  made  it  utterly 
unthinkable to act unilaterally. This does not just apply to measures targeting the soundness 
of financial institutions. In our integrated world any uncoordinated policy aiming to boost the 
economy,  might  cause  negative  externalities.  However  unintentionally,  uncoordinated 
measures  could  spark  a  period  of  real  protectionism.  The  net  effect  of  such  “beggar-thy-
neighbour” policies is a deepening crisis. Supranational authorities could and should play a 
bigger role. 
Enhanced coordination is not limited to governments, regulators or supervisors. During the 
financial  crisis  we  saw  several  cases,  most  notably  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers  in 
September 2008, which had a truly systemic impact. These events have demonstrated that 
the distinction between macro- and microprudential stability is hypothetical in practice. Both 
are  necessary.  Therefore  there  is  an  urgent  need  for  close  and  continuous  cooperation 
between macroprudential supervisors – central banks – and microprudential supervisors. 
To  be  frank,  I  don’t  think  the  crisis  is  anywhere  near  its  end.  But  I  do  think  it  is  time  to 
consider  what  shape  an  end  to  the  crisis  would  take.  Fighting  this  crisis  has  been  tough. 
Reversing  the  implemented  measures  will  require  exactly  the  same  coordination  and 
determination. 
And reversing those policies isn’t going to be easy. The same national interests that drove 
the uncoordinated remedies to fight this crisis are at stake. At the end of the crisis, when it is 
economically  justified  to  downsize  those  measures,  economic  nationalism  will  be  lurking 
again, albeit unintended. At the end of the crisis we may enter a period in which governments 
cannot  sell  their  stakes  in  banks  or  downsize  the  coverage  of  the  insurances  schemes, 
without the risk of putting their institutions at a comparative disadvantage to their protected 
peers abroad. It’s time to start thinking about a credible exit strategy. 
Again, coordination and timing are important. Selling or reducing stakes in banks too early 
could reduce investors’ and depositors’ faith in those banks. Getting out too late would cause 
a prolonged period of market disruption as institutions (partially) owned by governments are 
at a competitive advantage over privately owned banks. Prolonged government intervention 
hampers the healthy effects of competition. Normalization of the markets is far more difficult 
under those circumstances. 
Even if unintended and socially justifiable, substantial state interests in financial institutions is 
effectively  protectionism.  Guarantee  schemes  are  a  powerful  tool  to  create  confidence  in 
banks  and  protect  depositors,  but  the  downside  is  that  they  stand  in  the  way  of  market 
normalization. And the threat is not just that some governments may choose to maintain their 
policies longer than others. The terms and conditions of state withdrawal will materially affect 
a bank’s competitiveness vis-à-vis its peers. In other words, the level playing field is at risk. 
Everyone  can  rationally  envision  the  problems  of  downsizing  crisis  policies,  and  the 
subsequent reluctance of governments to reverse nationally orientated measures. Especially 
if this puts their financial institutions at a comparative disadvantage. Since all governments 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 3
are going to face this dilemma, the only way out is coordinated action. If we fail to coordinate 
towards  the  end  of  the  crisis,  distortions  will  emerge  and  some  governments  will  keep 
substantial  stakes  in  credit  institutions  for  a  long  time.  While  I  don’t  say  governments 
shouldn’t  hold  stakes  in  financial  institutions,  I  think  it  is  time  to  discuss  the  terms  and 
conditions, including the exit strategy. 
Fighting this crisis has been a learning process. And I guess we are still on the steep part of 
the learning curve. We have definitely experienced that it can always get worse, and to be 
prepared for that. We have seen that measures labelled as “too drastic” may at some point 
become the appropriate response. And we have learned that you can’t fight a crisis like this 
on your own. 
By  many  standards  this  crisis  has  been,  and  still  is,  an  extraordinary  series  of  events.  Its 
systemic  and  complex  nature  has  revealed  fundamental  weaknesses  in  the  crisis 
management  of  financial  institutions,  policymakers  and  supervisors  alike.  It  is  as  if  a  new 
aggressive  variety  of  the  flu  virus  has  suddenly  emerged  and  is  threatening  our  very 
existence. So, in the face of this pandemic, it is no surprise that we all had to improvise and 
to learn as we went along. 
Authorities  have  been  creative  in  their  responses  and  have  shown  great  commitment  in 
adjusting  to  new  challenges.  In  the  past  few  months  national  governments  have  acted  to 
protect  the  interest  of  depositors  of  individual  financial  institutions.  Regrettably,  but 
understandably, they did so in a largely uncoordinated way. The crisis has shown that cross-
border  coordination  remains  problematic.  While  governments  have  emphasized 
the 
importance  of  joint  action,  initiatives  to  bring  it  about  are  lacking  so  far.  International 
cooperation well beyond the current level is imperative if we are to put an end to this crisis. 
4 
 BIS Review 27/2009
