Svein Gjedrem: Ten years of inflation targeting strategy in Poland 
compared with the experience of other countries 
Presentation by Mr Svein Gjedrem, Governor of Norges Bank (Central Bank of Norway), at 
the  conference  "20  years  after  the  collapse  of  the  socialist  economy.  Transformation, 
economic  growth  and  convergence  in  Poland  and  other  Central  and  Eastern  European 
countries ", National Bank of Poland, Warsaw, 5 June 2009. 
 Thank you for the invitation to speak at your conference. It is a pleasure for me to be here in 
Warsaw on this occasion.  
Norges Bank was given an inflation targeting mandate in 2001. Inflation expectations have 
been well anchored around the 2.5 per cent target rate in recent years.  
We  practice  flexible  inflation  targeting.  The  credibility  of  our  inflation  target  has  enabled 
monetary  policy  to  support  a  stable  economic  growth  path.  However,  like  other  countries, 
Norway was hit by the international economic downturn that followed the financial crisis. The 
estimated growth rate for 2009 is minus one percent. 
Preceding the downturn, we went through a long period of low CPI inflation. Headline CPI in 
Norway  is  strongly  affected  by  fluctuating  energy  prices.  An  inflation measure  that  instead 
includes  trend  energy  prices,  CPIXE,  illustrates  how  the  inflation  rate  gradually  has  been 
approaching our target of 2.5 per cent.  
In this – until the fall of 2008 – rather benign macroeconomic environment, rising property 
prices,  high  credit  growth  and  a  low  saving  ratio  posed  a  policy  challenge  –  as  in  many 
countries.  A  high  leverage  ratio  makes  the  financial  system,  and  in  effect  the  whole 
economy, more sensitive to fluctuating asset prices.  
The present downturn in Norway was not triggered by moving asset prices, but rather by the 
international  downturn.  Still,  the  effect  of  the  international  downturn  on  our  economy  is 
probably stronger than it would have been with a better regulatory framework. 
A  consensus  is  emerging  internationally  that  new  tools  are  needed  in  order  to  make  the 
financial  system  more  robust  with  respect  to  macroeconomic  fluctuations.  Moreover,  the 
financial  system  should  help  dampen  rather  than  amplify  or  even  cause  fluctuations.  The 
new tools – macro-prudential policies – are needed regardless of the monetary policy regime 
in place in any given country. For Norway, as a small EU outsider, it is hard to see any better 
option than inflation targeting. Indeed, it has been a strength in the current downturn to have 
a credible inflation targeting regime in place.  
We have tried to have a long-term perspective on attaining the target. This was especially 
important when the economy was hit by a supply shock, and we needed to trade off reaching 
the inflation target and closing the output gap. Inflation was below target until last year. Now, 
hit by a demand shock and looking ahead, we know that a trade-off is absent – the economy 
needs  stimulus.  But  in  the  face  of  an  unusually  high  degree  of  uncertainty,  and  given  an 
unusually  large  shock,  I  believe  that  it  is  sensible  to  continue  to  be  patient.  We  still  try  to 
have a long-term perspective, and we will carefully consider the effects of measures already 
taken as we move along.  
Even with monetary policy able to counteract cyclical fluctuations to some extent, there is a 
limit  to  how  much  the  one  tool  at  the  central  bank’s  disposal  –  the  key  policy  rate  –  can 
accomplish.  Regulations  need  to  underpin  the  robustness  of  the  financial  system  with 
respect  to  cyclical  fluctuations.  Supply  side  policy  needs  to  support  the  capacity  of  the 
economy to absorb asset price fluctuations.  
BIS Review 69/2009 
 1
As  for  regulatory  reform  of  the  financial  sector,  I  believe  we  both  need  to  reconsider  the 
structural elements and we need some new discretionary features. In order to limit excessive 
credit  growth,  the  leverage  ratio  of  banks  should  be  contained,  with  higher  capital 
requirements.  
The procyclical effects of such capital requirements need to be addressed. Since profits fall 
during  a  recession,  capital  requirements  then  tend  to  be  more  binding,  reducing  credit 
availability  when  it  is  most  needed.  The  work  aimed  at  changing  the  procyclical  effects  of 
capital requirements is still in its infancy. Banks’ incentives to increase loan provisions during 
upturns  could  be  strengthened.  This  would  smooth  profits  and  hence  make  capital 
requirements less procyclical. Ideally, loan provisions should internalise some of the cyclical 
risk by being based on longer term risk assessments.  
In addition, one could reduce the procyclical effects of capital requirements more directly by 
making  the  capital  requirements  themselves  more  flexible  over  the  cycle.  Imposing  capital 
requirements  always  involves  a  trade-off  between  financial  stability  concerns  and  efficient 
capital allocation. In a downturn, when concern about the availability of credit may be greater 
than in an upturn, a temporarily reduced capital requirement may be justified. The condition 
must  be  that  the  buffer  is  built  up  again  during  the  upturn.  Such  time  variant  capital 
requirements would also be demanding to implement, however. It would leave the relevant 
authority with the discretion to assess the cyclical situation and impose appropriate capital 
requirements. The time horizon over which the economic outlook should be assessed would 
have to be several years, in order to cover the full cycle.  
As for ways to make the economy – in Norway and in a number of other countries – more 
robust  to  asset  price  fluctuations,  I  think  household  incentives  to  borrow  and  invest  in 
residential property should be reduced. Tax deduction of interest against income, combined 
with too low or non-existing property taxes, contribute to a high leverage ratio.  
Earlier,  I  spelled  out  some  challenges  involved  in  implementing  macro-prudential  policy 
measures. I did not mention the important international aspects of these issues. First, given 
banks’ cross-border activities, it is of particular importance to establish a level playing field 
and  avoid  competition  among  regulatory  authorities.  Lax  regulation  in  one  area  would 
undermine everybody’s efforts to reduce systemic risk.  
Second, in order for the economy to benefit from attempts to make the effect of regulations 
less pro-cyclical, discretionary elements of the system would have to be coordinated across 
borders.  
I believe the Nordic countries could be a good testing ground for macro-prudential policies. 
Nordic owned banks cover most of the market in the Nordic area, including the Baltic states. 
One  hurdle  that  one  would  have  to  overcome  would  be  different  cyclical  developments 
across Nordic countries. Capital requirements would need to be linked to customer location. 
For  example,  credit  to  Norwegian  firms  would  have  to  be  subject  to  a  higher  capital 
requirement  than  credit  to  Finnish  firms,  if  Norway  were  in  a  boom  and  Finland  in  a 
recession. I hope that this challenge can be solved and that the next recession will be met 
with a better macro-prudential framework in place. 
 
 
2 
 BIS Review 69/2009
  3
BIS Review 69/2009 
  4 
 BIS Review 69/2009
