Tarisa Watanagase: Creating sustainable financial inclusion 
Welcome remarks by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at 1st AFI 
Start-up Committee Meeting, Bangkok, 10 July 2009. 
 together.  Examples 
Deputy Governor, Director-General, Dr. Hannig, Colleagues,  
It is a pleasure to welcome all of you to Bangkok, which for some of you, I know is a long way 
from home. Thank you for making such an effort to be here. I cannot tell you enough how 
much your presence and participation in this meeting is appreciated. Though we have work 
to do this morning, I hope that you will also have a chance to enjoy your stay in Bangkok, 
including our sight-seeing tour this afternoon. 
At the AFI Public Announcement back in April where President Babatz and I had a chance to 
address the meeting as members of our Start-up Committee, I was delighted to see the kind 
of  positive  response  and  enthusiasm  shown  by  policy  makers  from  a  broad  spectrum  of 
countries.  Many  of  whom,  I  learned,  have  decided  to  jump  on  board  with  us,  making  AFI 
membership  grow  to  more  than  fifty  countries,  worldwide.  This  only  confirms  that  among 
many agenda laid on the table in international policy forums today, financial inclusion is the 
one agenda that we can all agree and give our full support to.  
As I said in that meeting, there are challenges ahead that, together, we must address in a 
cooperative manner, namely creating sustainable financial inclusion and ensuring the linkage 
between greater financial access and improvement in wellbeing. Please allow me to offer my 
initial thoughts on the subject.  
With wellbeing as the ultimate goal of policy makers, many policy building blocks need to be 
woven 
include  policies  on  career  development,  education, 
macroeconomic  stability  and  so  on.  While  these  policies  do  not  necessarily  fall  under  the 
mandates of financial regulators, efforts should be made to ensure that policy directions of all 
relevant institutions, government and private, are aligned.  
Closer  to  our  hearts  though,  are  policies  that  aim  to  improve  the  poor’s  capacity  to  be 
financially  included.  In  this  regard,  I  believe  that  there  must  be  at  least  three  key  policy 
ingredients, namely financial access, financial literacy and consumer protection.  
First, for access, there is a need to ensure that the range of basic financial services provided 
can address financial needs of the poor in all important aspects of their lives. For instance, 
we need to consider an “inclusive package” of credits, savings, transfers, and insurance that 
fit their livelihood.  
Secondly,  to  ensure  quality  of  usage,  we  need  to  enhance  financial  literacy.  With  higher 
financial  literacy,  the  poor  could  utilize  the  services  more  efficiently  and  productively,  for 
example, having the ability to turn received credits into income and savings and so on.  
Finally,  we  need  a  good  system  of  consumer  protection  in  order  to  ensure  fair  and 
transparent  provision  of  financial  services.  I  believe  that  financial  regulators  have  an 
important role to play in all three areas. The fact that we are all here today, already signifies 
our  commitment  to  addressing  such  issues,  thus  ascertaining  the  success  of  financial 
inclusion. Not just for our own sake, but also for the sake of our friends around the world. 
After  having  seen  this  morning’s  agenda,  I  am  certain  that  there  will  be  plenty  of  great 
discussions among us today. I myself am very interested to hear us take the current policy 
challenges further, arriving at how best we think AFI can play a role in tackling such issues. 
Of  course,  us  working  together  to  ensure  the  sustainability  of  the  AFI  community  together 
with our policy impact would also be key.  
BIS Review 87/2009 
 1
I look forward to discussing our proposals of potential AFI flagship projects, all of which, I 
believe would make significant contributions to the global efforts on financial inclusion. In this 
connection, the Bank of Thailand will be presenting our proposal on “Using survey data to 
design financial inclusion policy” for your consideration. The project findings would not only 
provide a useful international research contribution in the area of financial inclusion, but also 
an easily replicable exercise for anyone to conduct and repeat over time, thus adding to the 
stock of critical grass-root information on financial access.  
Finally, I also look forward to discussing with you on the governance and other related issues 
of our Start-up Committee. 
Without further ado, let us now give our attention to Alfred who will be updating us on AFI’s 
latest progress and lead us through the rest of today’s agenda. 
Thank you for your attention. Alfred, the floor is yours. 
2 
 BIS Review 87/2009
