Amando M Tetangco, Jr: The Philippine economy – facing up to the 
challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at a meeting, Makati, 11 August 2009. 
 Executive Director Robert Sears, executives of the American Chamber of Commerce of the 
Philippines, distinguished guests, ladies and gentlemen, good morning to all of you. 
It  is  a  pleasure  to  be  here  this  morning  to  share  with  you  the  experience  of  the  Bangko 
Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  in  responding  to  the  challenges  posed  by  the  recent  global  financial 
crisis,  taking  into  consideration  the  current  global  and  domestic  scenarios  and  emerging 
outlook. 
My short presentation will basically cover three parts: 
• 
• 
• 
First, a quick look at the global and domestic economic situations; 
Second, the latest outlook for the economy and some key challenges; and 
Lastly, the responses that the BSP undertook to mitigate the impact of the crisis and 
the BSP’s policy directions moving forward.  
Let  me  start  with  a  quick  review  of  what  is  happening  globally  and  domestically. 
In its latest World Economic Outlook (WEO) Update released in July 2009, the International 
Monetary  Fund  reported  that  the  world  economy  is  stabilizing,  helped  by  unprecedented 
macroeconomic  and  financial  policy  support  by  fiscal  and  monetary  authorities  worldwide. 
However, the recession is not yet over and the recovery is likely to be sluggish. 
As a result, global economic growth during 2010 is now projected to be about 0.5 percentage 
points  higher  than  projected  in  the  April  2009  issue  of  the  WEO.  However,  the  advanced 
economies as a group are projected to show a sustained pickup in activity only beginning the 
second half of 2010. 
A  closer  examination  of  some  high-frequency  indicators  like  industrial  production  and 
merchandise exports point to a return to a modest growth in global GDP beginning in the 2nd 
quarter of 2009. 
Similarly, we also see a favorable outlook for prices in general. The continued weakness of 
the  global  economy  for  the  past  several  months  has  put  a  downward  pressure  on  prices. 
Measures  of  both  headline  and  core  inflation  are  on  a  downward  trajectory,  for  the  global 
economy as a whole as well as for advanced economies and emerging market economies. 
Although there are stronger disinflationary forces in some regions of emerging economies, 
the  risk  of  a  sustained  deflation  is  expected  to  be  small,  as  core  inflation  and  inflation 
expectations in most major economies are still holding in the 1-2 percent range. 
Any sharp movements in commodity prices bear some watching if sustained. To date, food 
prices have been subdued so far, oil has been range-bound but metal prices are still surging. 
Based  on  a  composite  index  which  captures  credit  conditions  in  three  financial  market 
segments  (banking,  securities  markets,  and  exchange  markets),  there  has  been  a  marked 
decline  in  financial  stress  for  advanced  and  emerging  economies  since  the  beginning  of 
2009. 
Across Asia, output growth performance was mixed, with more open economies – such as 
Taiwan and Singapore – experiencing the brunt of the global economic downturn. 
BIS Review 98/2009 
 1
Domestically,  the  story  has  been  that  of  economic  resilience.  The  slowdown  in  economic 
activity  in  the  Philippines  thus  far  has  been  moderate  relative  to  that  of  some  other 
economies in the region. 
This resilience has been acknowledged by ratings agency Moody’s Investors Service when it 
upgraded  the  Philippines’  credit  rating  by  one  notch,  citing  the  country’s  healthy  financial 
system and resilience against the impact of the global recession. The country’s outlook was 
also changed to "stable" from "positive.“  
The slowdown in the growth of domestic output to 0.4 percent, in the first quarter of 2009, 
was  due  to  lower  growth  in  private  spending,  coupled  with  a  contraction  in  exports  and 
capital formation (year-on-year). 
Inflation  has  continued  to  ease.  The  slowdown  in  global  demand  has  led  to  lower 
international  oil  and  food  prices,  which  have  dampened  inflation  pressure  domestically  as 
well. 
Headline inflation had fallen to 0.2 percent in July, the lowest since March 1987. This brings 
the year-to-date average down to 4.3 percent which is within the target range for 2009. 
Similarly, core inflation, which excludes specific food and energy items to measure broader 
price pressures, also declined to 3.6 percent (July 2009) from 6.9 percent in January 2009. 
The downward trajectory of inflation was driven primarily by two factors: (1) base effects due 
to record-high prices of commodities last year and (2) relatively subdued demand. This trend 
may  have  reached  its  trough  in  July,  as  inflation  is  expected  to  rise  gradually  during  the 
remaining months of this year and the next, but still remain within target ranges for the policy 
horizon. 
Our external payments position continues to be manageable. The healthy external balance 
has been supported by steady levels of remittances of overseas Filipinos as well as higher 
services receipts, particularly from business process outsourcing. In turn, this has allowed us 
to build up our dollar reserves. One of the lessons we learned from the 1997 Asian financial 
crisis was the value of building up our international reserves for self insurance. 
Based on revised data, as of end-July 2009, our reserves have risen to US$40.0 billion. This 
is  enough  to  cover  about  6.9  months  of  imports  of  goods  and  payments  of  services  and 
income,  or  alternatively,  it  could  cover  our  short-term  external  debt  payments  about  three 
times over. 
Thus,  even  as  we  face  a  slowdown  in  external  demand,  the  stronger  external  liquidity 
position provides us some cushion against shifts in capital flows. 
Our financial markets are showing some signs of recovery. Credit spreads have narrowed, 
the  peso  has  stabilized  and  its  volatility  has  decreased,  and  the  stock  market  is  on  an 
upswing. 
Our banking system has remained sound and stable. 
The  banking  system’s  asset  base  has  been  expanding  steadily,  supported  by  sustained 
growth in deposits. As of end of April 2009, the total resources of the banking system stood 
at P5.8 trillion. 
Banks have been offloading their non-performing assets and problem loans. As a result, the 
NPL ratio is now at the pre-Asian crisis level of around 4.0 percent. 
Furthermore,  the  profitability  of  the  banking  system  has  remained  resilient,  although  with 
some moderation of late. 
Banks  have  remained  adequately  capitalized  at  levels  above  both  the  BSP-regulatory 
requirement of 10 percent and the international (BIS) standard of 8.0 percent. 
2 
 BIS Review 98/2009
Bank lending growth has remained healthy, in part reflecting the easing of monetary policy 
since the fourth quarter of 2008. Credit flows continued to support the productive sectors of 
the  economy  even  against  the  backdrop  of  tight  liquidity  conditions  in  global  financial 
markets. 
It is the BSP’s commitment to ensure that liquidity conditions are supportive of the spending 
and  investment  needs  of  firms  and  households,  while  keeping  a  watchful  eye  on  price 
stability. 
The recent lowering of the risks to inflation allowed the BSP to cut its policy rates by a total of 
200  basis  points  since  December  2008.  The  BSP’s  decision  to  ease  the  monetary  policy 
stance was based on the Monetary Board’s assessment that inflation would stay within target 
over the course of the policy horizon. 
This  200  basis-point  cumulative  reduction  in  the  policy  rate  will  help  stimulate  economic 
growth or help moderate the slowdown by bringing down the cost of borrowing and reduce 
the financial burdens on firms and households. This will help us avoid or at least mitigate the 
negative  feedback  loop  from  weakening  economic  conditions  to  the  functioning  of  the 
financial  sector.  Lower policy  rates  would  also  have  the  effect  of  shoring  up  business  and 
consumer confidence. 
The  latest  inflation  forecasts  continue  to  show  subdued  price  pressures,  with  headline 
inflation expected to settle at around the middle of the target range for 2009 and at the lower 
bound of the target range for 2010. On balance, downside pressures on prices predominate 
due  mainly  to  expectations  of  a  marked  deceleration  in  global  economic  activity,  which  is 
expected  to  continue  to  dampen  imported  inflation  and  inflation  expectations,  and  weaker 
domestic demand conditions. 
In addition to the reduction in its policy rates, the BSP also moved to ensure that there is 
sufficient liquidity in the system. The BSP: 
1. 
Enhanced  the  existing  peso  repurchase  agreement  (repo)  facilities  through  relaxed 
valuation and a broader list of acceptable collaterals; 
Established  a  US  dollar  repo  facility  to  augment  dollar  liquidity  in  the  foreign 
exchange  market  and  ensure  the  ready  availability  of  credit  for  imports  and  other 
legitimate funding requirements; 
Reduced the regular reserve requirement by two percentage points on 14 November 
2008; 
Liberalized  rediscounting  guidelines  which  include  increasing  the  rediscounting 
budget  to  P40  billion  in  14  November  2008  and  to  P60  billion  on  02  March  2009, 
aligning rediscounting rate with the RRP rate, easing the NPL ratio requirement and 
increasing loan value of all eligible papers; and 
Launched the Credit Surety Fund (CSF) Program which provides guarantee to small 
cooperatives to ensure continued access to financing of small businesses.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
The BSP has also acted swiftly to bolster confidence in the financial system, through timely 
communication and greater transparency. 
Moreover, to safeguard the confidence in the banking system, the Monetary Board approved 
on 30 October 2008 the guidelines allowing financial institutions to reclassify financial assets 
from  categories  measured  at  fair  value  to  those  measured  at  amortized  cost.  Financial 
institutions  were  allowed  to  reclassify  their  investments  in  debt  and  equity  securities  from 
their Held for Trading or Available for Sale categories to the Held to Maturity or the Unquoted 
Debt Securities Classified as Loans. 
The BSP also allowed banks not to deduct unrealized mark-to-market losses in computing 
for the 100 percent asset cover for FCDUs, effective until 30 September 2009). This reduced 
the need for banks to source dollars from the foreign exchange market. 
BIS Review 98/2009 
 3
What  lies  ahead  for  the  Philippine  economy?  In  the  succeeding  frames,  we  examine  the 
outlook for this year and the challenges ahead of us. 
This table shows the domestic outlook for 2009, based on the macroeconomic assumptions 
agreed upon by the Development Budget Coordination Committee. 
With the bottoming out of the crisis, the economy is forecast to grow moderately at a range 
between 0.8 and 1.8 percent in 2009 (GDP) to provide the backdrop for the improvement in 
growth prospects in the coming year. 
As mentioned earlier, inflation is expected to further decelerate in 2009. This has given some 
flexibility  to  monetary  policy  to  support  economic  activity,  as  long  as  inflation  remains  on 
target. 
In 2009, the BOP is expected to again post a surplus, supported in part by three factors: 
• 
Remittances which are expected to stay at the 2008 level, or possibly even surpass 
it a bit;  
Revenues  from  BPO  services  which  will  also  provide  some  lift  to  the  current 
account (actual revenues for 2008 reached US$6 billion). The BPO industry is poised 
to  grow  on  account  of  strong  demand  for  back  office,  engineering  and  financial 
services; and  
Export revenues, while still expected to contract, are showing some signs of life, i.e. 
the book to bill ratio has increased since February 2009.  
  The GIR as of end of July 2009 has already surpassed the target range for 2009. 
The peso which is assumed to stay at an average of between P46 to P49 per US dollar will 
be supported by the favorable external payments position. 
Inflation expectations remain well-anchored. 
The BSP survey of private economists indicates that the mean inflation forecasts to be at 3.5 
percent for 2009, 4.8 percent for 2010 and 4.8 percent in 2011. These were all lower than the 
forecasts in the previous quarters. 
Broadly, similar numbers are yielded by the Asia Pacific consensus forecasts: at 3.6 percent 
for 2009 and 4.4 percent for 2010. 
Given this scenario, what are the likely directions of the monetary policy going forward? 
The BSP’s policy thrusts will continue to be aimed at ensuring that the headway achieved in 
nurturing a resilient economy and a sound banking sector will be sustained even in the face 
of the challenges. 
First, on monetary policy, we will maintain vigilance over price developments, since this is the 
BSP’s  primary  mandate.  As  the  risks  to  the  domestic  economy  move  away  from  inflation 
toward  economic  growth,  we  have  had  more  flexibility  in  our  policy  settings.  The  BSP  will 
continue to pay close attention to signs of global demand recovery as well as to a possible 
build-up  in  commodity  price  pressures  over  the  medium  term,  with  a  view  to  undertaking 
timely action towards a non-inflationary recovery in economic activity. 
Moreover, the BSP stands ready to undertake policy actions that will strengthen the public’s 
confidence  in  the  financial  system.  We  will  sustain  key  reforms  that  will  strengthen 
capitalization,  supervision  and  market  discipline  for  greater  efficiency,  more  effective  risk 
management,  stronger  capital  base  and  improved  corporate  governance  standards  in  the 
banking system. 
In  the  external  sector,  our  policies  will  continue  to  be  directed  at  maintaining  a  market-
determined  exchange  rate  with  scope  for  occasional  official  action  to  address  sharp 
movement  in  the  exchange  rate;  maintaining  a  comfortable  level  of  reserves  as  self-
insurance; and ensuring the sustainability of our external debt. 
4 
 BIS Review 98/2009
Let me add a few notes on the likely path of monetary policy in the near term. 
As the global economy recovers, the eventual strengthening in domestic economic activity 
will  require  a  controlled  shift  in  the  direction  of  the  policy  stance  from  the  current  easing 
mode. 
The  timing  and  speed  of  the  shift  to  a  tighter  or  less  accommodative  policy  stance  will 
depend on the inflation outlook as well as on the sustained pick-up in real sector activity, as 
the full impact of prior fiscal and monetary stimulus takes effect. 
It is important to remember that the type of monetary easing undertaken so far by emerging-
economy central banks like the BSP has been more conventional compared to that by the 
central banks of advanced economies. Central bank balance sheets in advanced economies 
have grown more sharply in the past year as a result of unprecedented "quantitative" easing 
and  significant  credit  measures.  By  contrast,  we  relied  largely  on  conventional  easing 
measures  such  as  lower  policy  interest  rates  and  reserve  requirements  –  although  we  did 
implement liquidity enhancing measures as well. 
Looking further ahead, however, one important risk that we are seeing for monetary policy – 
apart  from  the  volatility  of  commodity  prices  –  is  the  potential  resumption  of  cross-border 
capital flows, which may complicate the shift to a tighter policy stance. 
The emerging signs of stabilization of global financial markets and economic conditions are 
expected  to  encourage  the  gradual  return  of  capital  flows  to  Asia.  With  the  ongoing 
realignment in risk perceptions, flows to emerging economies – particularly those with sound 
macroeconomic policy and good growth prospects – are expected to improve in the second 
half of 2009 and in 2010. 
Capital  inflows  help  relax  the  foreign  exchange  financing  constraint  of  the  domestic 
economy.  For  this  reason,  they  can  have  a  positive  impact  on  the  external  accounts, 
contribute  to  liquidity  expansion  and  help  lower  domestic  interest  rates.  However, 
policymakers  will  also  need  to  be  prepared  to  face  the  possibility  of  exchange  rate 
appreciation  and  increased  liquidity  growth,  along  with  associated  concerns.  The  key 
challenge  is  to  conduct  monetary  policy  so  as  to  ensure  that  the  additional  resources 
provided by rising foreign capital inflows do not lead to inflationary pressures or to asset price 
bubbles. 
As economic conditions improve and we enter another phase of the business cycle, policy 
imperatives come into the fore. 
The  challenge  is  to  address  the  inherent  procyclicality  of  the  financial  system  by 
strengthening 
long-term 
commitment  to  price  and  financial  stability  imposes  the  need  to  require  better  risk 
management within the financial system. On its part, the BSP has already issued its Internal 
Capital Adequacy Assessment Process (ICAAP) guidelines which aim to strengthen the risk 
culture within banks. Likewise, the BSP is in the process of beefing up its macro-surveillance 
capabilities.  Mindful  of  the  lessons  brought  by  the  global  financial  turmoil,  the  BSP  has 
stressed the need to operationalize the guidelines on liquidity risk management. Moreover, 
the  BSP  will  continue  to  monitor  proposed  further  enhancements*  and  adjustments  in  the 
Basel II framework to make capital requirements countercyclical. 
Another challenge is to sharpen the central bank’s communication toolbox to include not only 
management  of  expectations  but  also  management  of  risk  aversion.  The  key  point  is  to 
maintain  and  enhance  the  credibility  of  the  monetary  and  financial  policies  such  that 
expectations are well-anchored and concerns of risk aversion do not become self-fulfilling. 
Finally, I want to conclude my presentation by emphasizing that: 
• 
The full recovery of the global financial system may take some time; 
for  monetary  policy.  The 
the  macro-prudential 
framework 
BIS Review 98/2009 
 5
  With the global economy likely to be going at a sub-par rate for some time, the key 
challenge is to continue to provide support domestic demand. As monetary policy has 
eased, fiscal policy will also play a key role in sustaining domestic economic activity. 
The  BSP  will  continue  to  calibrate  its  actions  appropriately  to  help  achieve  faster 
recovery  of  the  domestic  economy  always  taking  into  consideration  the  inflation 
outlook.  
 -  Moody’s  Investors  Service  upgraded  the  Philippines’  foreign  and  local  currency 
government  ratings  to  Ba3  from  B1,  the  country  ceiling  for  foreign  currency  bank 
deposits to Ba3 from B1 and the country ceiling for foreign currency bonds to Ba1 from 
Ba3. The change in the foreign currency bond ceiling is based on a revised assessment 
of the risk of an external payments moratorium to low from moderate.  
-  The outlook on the ratings is stable. The upgrade was prompted by the relatively high 
degree  of  resiliency  exhibited  by  both  the  country’s  financial  system  and  external 
payments position in the face of the global financial and economic crises. International 
reserves of the central bank are at a historic high and exceptional policy measures have 
not been required to shield the banking system from global shocks.  
6 
 BIS Review 98/2009
