Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj: Meeting the challenges of growth 
Opening keynote plenary by His Excellency Rasheed Mohammed Al Maraj, Governor of the 
Central Bank of Bahrain, at the 5th Middle East Insurance Forum “Meeting the Challenges of 
Growth”, Manama, 8 February 2009. 
 Your Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, Good morning. 
It gives me a great pleasure to welcome you to Bahrain for the 5th Middle East Insurance 
Forum. This event is an opportunity for the insurance industry to meet and exchange views 
on  current  market  and  economic  conditions  that  have  a  direct  impact  in  our  insurance 
markets.  I  would  like  to  thank  the  organisers,  sponsors  and  speakers  for  supporting  this 
important gathering.  
This year’s theme for the Forum – “Growth Opportunities Beyond the Crisis” – is a reminder 
that  the  financial  landscape  has  changed  dramatically  since  the  last  time  this  Forum  was 
held.  
The  turning  point  in  the  global  financial  crisis  is  generally  agreed  to  have  been  the 
bankruptcy of the investment bank Lehman Brothers in the middle of September last year. 
This turned a problem that had been seen as primarily affecting the developed markets into a 
worldwide  phenomenon.  Previously  the  slowdown  was  expected  to  be  limited  to  the 
developed markets while the emerging markets continued their recent strong growth. After 
Lehman the slowdown began to affect all parts of the global economy. The crisis has been a 
stark reminder of how interconnected the world financial system and economy has become. 
Financial  sectors  have  also  become  more  interconnected.  While  most  comment  has 
concentrated  on  the  role  that  the  Lehman  bankruptcy  played  in  worsening  the  crisis,  we 
should  not  forget  that  the  events  surrounding  AIG  also  had  an  impact  on  global  financial 
markets.  In  other  words,  AIG  had  become  systemically  important  and  had  far  reaching 
implications outside the insurance industry.  
At the Central Bank of Bahrain, we believe that the recent experience of global financial crisis 
has  reinforced  that  our  top  priority  must  remain  our  duty  to  ensure  the  protection  of 
policyholders.  We  remain  truly  committed  to  foster  the  trust  and  confidence  that  insurers 
provide to their clients, particularly in times of need.  
From  a  regulatory  perspective,  the  CBB  has  taken  various  steps  to  ensure  that  a  stable 
insurance market continues to strive and prosper in our region. We are fortunate in Bahrain 
to have had significant growth in the level of gross premiums over the last several years. In 
2007, insurance premiums increased by more than 20% and the interim reports received for 
2008  appear  to  indicate  a  similar  trend.  We  remain  however  vigilant  and  through  ad  hoc 
reporting  have  kept  a  close  eye  on  insurance  licensees  to  ensure  the  soundness  of  the 
insurance market. Through the years, we have established an excellent relationship with the 
insurance  market  and  this  has  helped  tremendously  as  we  solicit  key  information  and 
feedback.  This  feedback  has  allowed  us  to  ensure  that  our  rules  are  kept  up  to  date  and 
flexible enough to deal with the dynamic nature of the insurance industry. 
To strengthen the insurance market, we need to have an ongoing dialogue with insurance 
firms  and  we  do  so  on  a  regular  basis  through  prudential  meetings  as  well  as  by  working 
closely  with  various  components  of  the  insurance  infrastructure  such  as  the  Bahrain 
Insurance Association (the BIA) and the Insurance Learning Center of the Bahrain Institute of 
Banking and Finance (the BIBF). Bahrain has also played a key role in the MENA region by 
hosting the GAIF conference last year and now having assumed its presidency for the next 
term. 
BIS Review 14/2009 
 1
Since  the  introduction  of  our  new  regulatory  framework  in  2005,  we  have  gradually 
implemented  our  rules  and  continue  to  believe  that  while  our  model  abides  with  the  best 
international  standards  as  promulgated  by  the  International  Association  of  Insurance 
Supervisors, it must also recognise the unique characteristics of our region. As an example, 
this is why we have taken the lead in tailoring our framework for the Takaful and retakaful 
markets.  
We believe that insurance firms should have proper public disclosures that reflect their true 
financial  positions.  The  disclosure  of  an  appropriate  level  of  technical  and  mathematical 
reserves must be in line with international actuarial standards. To reinforce our belief in the 
added value of using actuarial expertise, we are requiring all companies licensed by the CBB 
to produce on a regular basis a detailed actuarial report, outlining the basis of the liabilities 
appearing on companies’ balance sheet. These reports are reviewed and in some instances 
subject  to  further  scrutiny  should  we  believe  that  there  may  be  a  tendency  to  understate 
claims  liabilities  or  to  ignore  the  need  to  set  up  premium  deficiencies  where  products  are 
being priced well below profitable rates to “squeeze out” the competition. These tactics may 
have short term benefits but when the claims start exceeding the premiums and significant 
loss  ratios  emerge,  insurers  will  be  faced  with  decreasing  profit  margins  and  significant 
losses. 
At the same time, however, responsibility for ensuring the soundness of the industry does not 
only fall on regulators. It is also a vital responsibility of those running insurance businesses. 
The lessons of the global crisis will necessitate a clear direction from company management 
and the need to adapt and revamp business strategies if companies wish to pursue growth 
opportunities in the region. 
In this context, let me outline some of these strategies and business practices that insurers 
need to address. 
First, the events surrounding the AIG group have led to a tightening of reinsurance rates, a 
business aspect that is crucial in the smooth functioning of an insurance market. The current 
status  of  reinsurance  capacity  in  our  region  needs  to  be  scrutinized  and  companies  must 
adapt new strategies based on their current assessment of the reinsurance markets. 
Second,  as  insurance  providers,  companies  receive  funds  from  policyholders  up  front  and 
must make important investment decisions to ensure that liquidity needs are met when called 
upon  by  policyholders.  The  current  investment  climate  has  been  plagued  with  much 
uncertainty with many “sure” investments having disappeared from the financial landscape. 
Who could have imagined that Lehman Brothers would no longer be an active member of the 
financial  industry?  Companies  therefore  need  to  revamp  their  investment  strategy  to  cope 
with these changes. 
Third,  we  need  to  be  reminded  of  the  importance  of  having  in  place  a  good  corporate 
governance  regime.  Corporate  governance  is  a  key  component  in  ensuring  the  overall 
soundness of all companies, including insurance firms. The valuation of shares as well as 
public  disclosure  and  transparency  are  highly  dependent  on  management’s  approach  to  a 
sound framework of corporate governance. 
While it is sometimes tempting for those in the industry to view regulation as a burdensome 
imposition from outside, the financial crisis has been a reminder that markets need effective 
regulation if they are to operate properly. As a regulator, we at the CBB believe in creating a 
climate  that  encourages  the  development  of  a  strong  and  sound  insurance  sector.  In 
Bahrain, we have welcomed several new companies over the last few years, a testimony to 
the belief that we offer an environment where companies can explore growth opportunities. 
These new entrants, many from world class international insurance players, have provided 
further evidence that there are ways to tackle the low level of insurance penetration in the 
region by offering products uniquely tailored to meet the local demand. Several of these new 
entrants, have seen great advantages in setting up their regional headquarters in Bahrain, 
having access to significant markets in the region. 
2 
 BIS Review 14/2009
My remarks have highlighted key areas that insurance firms must focus on. I trust that this 
Forum  will  provide  you  with  the  opportunity  to  have  fruitful  discussions  over  the  next  two 
days. Additionally, I encourage all of you to look closely at your current business strategies 
and the need to possibly tailor them to the market changes that we are now facing. 
Thank you. 
BIS Review 14/2009 
 3
