Miguel Fernández Ordóñez: Recent decisions adopted by the Bank of 
Spain 
Testimony  of  Mr  Miguel  Fernández  Ordóñez,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Spain,  before  the 
Parliamentary Committee on Financial Affairs, Madrid, 2 April 2009. 
 Honourable Members of Parliament, 
Let  me  begin  this  testimony  by  thanking  you  for  the  opportunity  to  explain  the  recent 
decisions adopted by the Banco de España as supervisor of the banking system in relation to 
Caja de Ahorros de Castilla La Mancha (CCM). 
Last Saturday, the Executive Commission of the Banco de España adopted the decision to 
replace the governing bodies of the institution with three provisional central bank nominees. 
On Sunday, 29 March 2009, the government, in an extraordinary meeting of the Council of 
Ministers,  passed  a  Royal  Decree-Law  authorising  guarantees  by  the  Treasury  for  a 
maximum amount of €9 billion backing the loan the Banco de España could grant to CCM. 
These two decisions have allowed CCM to continue operating normally and to meet all its 
payment obligations and commitments. 
This solution was adopted once a "private" solution to CCM's problems under the Savings 
Bank Deposit Guarantee Fund had been deemed inviable. As you know, CCM has held talks 
(exploratory in some cases, more advanced in others) with other savings banks with a view 
to participating in a merger process giving rise to a new economically and financially viable 
institution.  In  this  connection,  assistance  from  the  Savings  Bank  Deposit  Guarantee  Fund 
had  been  envisaged  to  smooth  the  process.  The  talks  between  the  interested  parties 
themselves and with the Fund did not however prosper. Accordingly, the Banco de España 
took action to avoid a crisis of confidence in CCM and market convulsion. 
On this point I should like to draw your attention to the reasons for adopting this decision with 
such urgency. Article 31 of the Law on the Discipline and Intervention of Credit Institutions 
authorises the Banco de España to take control of a credit institution or to resolve to replace 
provisionally its governing and management bodies when there is a situation endangering its 
own funds or its stability, solvency or liquidity. 
Since  the  directors  of  CCM  had  been  unable  to  find  a  solution  to  prevent  the  problems 
worsening,  it  did  not  seem  reasonable  to  delay  the  use  of  the  precautionary  measures 
provided  for  in  the  Law  on  the  Discipline  and  Intervention  of  Credit  Institutions  in  order  to 
seek other solutions. 
Further, once the prospect of a merger had fallen through, there was  an evident risk that, 
once the financial markets opened on Monday, 30 March, CCM would be subject to a crisis 
of  confidence  on  the  bond  markets  and  further  withdrawals  of  deposits  from  its  branch 
network that could prompt a liquidity collapse. 
The delicate situation of CCM required the immediate activation by the Banco de España of 
the precautionary measure provided for in the rules governing the replacement of the Board 
and the appointment of new managers. To speed the process and avoid unnecessary delays 
that might exacerbate liquidity problems, and to halt any possible contagion to other parts of 
the  system,  the  Banco  de  España  took  the  swiftest  of  decisions  while  fully  observing  the 
provisions of the Law on the Discipline and Intervention of Credit Institutions. 
The conduct of the Banco de España has been informed by the lessons that all supervisors 
have  drawn  from  the  unfolding  of  the  financial  crisis  in  other  developed  countries.  In 
particular,  it  is  our  resolve  to  prevent  the  problems  of  an  individual  credit  institution 
degenerating to such an extent as to spread to other domestic banks and savings banks. 
BIS Review 42/2009 
 1
The speed behind the Banco de España's decision also justifies the urgency of and need for 
the  Royal  Decree-Law  adopted  by  the  government.  Without  going  into  details  on  the 
legislation, I would like to stress that the granting of guarantees by the Treasury has a dual 
purpose. 
First, it allows the Banco de España to act with full force, providing a very high volume of 
guarantees backing potentially significant funding. Such provision is necessary if the ailing 
credit institution is to meet all its commitments and honour all its payments. Since autumn 
2008,  when  the  suspension  of  payments  by  Lehman  Brothers  led  to  a  risk  of  widespread 
collapse on the international financial markets, no country has allowed any credit institution 
active  on  international  markets  to  suspend  payments.  Spain  has  followed  the  lead  of  the 
developed countries, and you should rest assured that CCM will meet all its commitments to 
depositors and other creditors. 
Second,  the  Maastricht  Treaty  prevents  central  banks  from  extending  emergency  liquidity 
assistance to an ailing institution, such as CCM, without the appropriate collateral. Given the 
amounts  that  might  have  to  be  committed,  the  Spanish  Treasury  had  to  provide  explicit 
guarantees to the central bank, so as not to infringe the Treaty’s prohibition on central banks 
extending "monetary financing" to public Treasuries. 
 Having explained the substance of and the reasons behind the urgent replacement of CCM’s 
directors,  allow  me  to  offer  greater  details  on  the  Banco  de  España’s  past  supervisory 
measures in relation to CCM and its current situation. Before that, however, I should highlight 
what is a primordial starting point: CCM is a credit institution with a positive net worth. That is 
to say, and in the vernacular of the press, the institution has no "hole" in its balance sheet. 
Yet this does not mean it is not facing serious problems, the cause of which must be sought 
in an inappropriate management of risk and a forceful business expansion – especially in the 
real  estate  sector  –  funded  largely  through  resort  to  the  international  bond  markets, 
generating sizable imbalances. Past experience shows that these credit expansion policies 
are very dangerous if unaccompanied by the related risk control measures since, generally, 
they usually entail a relaxing of credit standards. Responsibility for these decisions falls on 
CCM's previous directors. 
Given  CCM's problems, the Banco  de España’s supervisors had considered the institution 
worthy of "special monitoring". That justifies the constant vigilance of developments in CCM's 
risks, solvency, profitability and liquidity, since it was considered to be particularly vulnerable 
to a downturn in the business cycle and, in particular, in the real estate market. In the past 
year, CCM was subject to two inspections, with the second review based on year-end figures 
for 2008 currently drawing to a close. 
Allow  me  to  focus  on  the  recommendations  made  by  the  central  bank  in  its  supervisory 
capacity in recent years. Back in 2003, the recommendations detailed further to inspection 
called on CCM's directors, as was the case at other institutions, to reflect on the amounts 
assigned  to  funding  real  estate  development  activity,  owing  to  the  high  risk  this  entailed. 
These concerns were taken into account in the ongoing monitoring of the institution and were 
reiterated in the letter of requirements following the first inspection carried out in 2008. These 
requirements  referred  to  a  sizeable  volume  of  exposures  in  which  some  degree  of 
impairment  or  weakness  was  apparent,  denoting  a  deterioration  in  the  quality  of  lending, 
which was accounted for by the global financial crisis and its impact on developments in the 
real estate sector and by other specific factors. The letter of requirements urged the Board of 
Directors to analyse risk policies and decisions, and to urgently apply the measures needed 
for  a  more  effective  management  of  bad  debts,  demanding  as  at  that  date  an  increase  in 
write-downs. 
All  these  recommendations  and  requirements  simply  reflected  the  Supervisor’s  concern 
about credit-expansion and risk-management policies. Accordingly, in July 2008, CCM was 
2 
 BIS Review 42/2009
required to draft a report on future business plans and a strategic assessment of its position 
as at that time. This report, along with the Supervisor's conclusions further to the inspection 
in the first half of 2008, highlighted the need for CCM to find a solution that would ensure its 
future viability, preferably by merging with another savings bank. 
This  message  was  officially  communicated  to  the  senior  management  of  CCM  at  the 
beginning of October 2008. They began the search for an institution interested in merging 
with CCM. The failure of these negotiations is what finally prompted the decision taken last 
weekend. 
 CCM was formed in 1992 as a result of a merger of various savings banks in the region. It 
currently has a balance sheet exceeding €26 billion (representing approximately 0.8% of total 
Spanish financial system assets) and about 3,200 employees and 600 branches. 
As  regards  solvency,  as  at  31  December  2008  the  institution  had  positive  net  worth  for 
accounting purposes (i.e. net assets exceeding debts), even after recording the adjustments 
estimated in the inspection which is now being completed. These adjustments mean that the 
institution will incur a significant loss for the year, but one which is far from the figures being 
publicly  aired.  That  said,  I  do  not  wish  to  suggest  that  CCM  has  an  adequate  regulatory 
profile, since from a prudential standpoint it does not meet the minimum regulatory capital 
requirements. 
Allow me to clarify this point further. As you know, Spanish solvency law (which adopts the 
EU rules known as Basel II) requires credit institutions to observe a minimum capital ratio of 
8%  of  their  risk-adjusted  assets.  The  institution,  with  a  level  below  8%,  does  not  currently 
meet this requirement. However, this does not mean that it is insolvent or that its net assets 
are insufficient to meet its liabilities. 
Part  of  this  non-compliance  with  the  capital  ratio  is  due  to  the  growing  provisions  for  loan 
impairment  and  to  the  large  losses  on  its  portfolio  of  corporate  holdings  and  financial 
investments, which had a negative  impact on its income statement. The analysis currently 
being  completed  by  the  Supervisor  and  CCM’s  external  auditors,  which  is  based  on  data 
relating  to  end-2008,  allows  us  to  predict  that  CCM  will  post  a  significant  loss  in  its 
consolidated financial statements for 2008. This changes the projections issued by its former 
directors. 
Indeed, the former directors should have submitted the final accounts for 2008 at the board 
meeting scheduled for Tuesday, 31 March. The replacement by the Banco de España of the 
board of directors the previous weekend caused that submission to be postponed while the 
new provisional central bank appointees receive the latest reports from the audit firm and the 
Supervisor. 
These events, along with the reversal of certain losses previously charged to equity and the 
effect of these adjustments on the corporate income tax charge, mean that we can anticipate 
a notable decrease in net worth, which, however, will remain positive. 
In  sum,  I  have  to  inform  you  that  the  final  adjustment  figures  are  not  yet  available. 
Nonetheless, I can assure you that they are substantially lower than some of the figures that 
we  have  heard  in  the  last  few  days.  Also,  the  submission  of  the  annual  accounts  by  the 
provisional  central  bank  nominees  has  been  postponed  in  application  of  the  powers 
established in Article 36.2 of Law 26/1988 of 29 July 1988 on the Discipline and Intervention 
of  Credit  Institutions,  since  it  has  been  considered  preferable  to  await  the  conclusions 
reached in the inspection now drawing to a close. 
With regard to liquidity, the turmoil of the last few months put CCM in a difficult position: 
• 
Wholesale  financial  market  tensions  and  the  downgrading  of  CCM’s  credit  rating 
closed  the  door  to  institutional  funds.  This  lack  of  access  to  funding  via  wholesale 
BIS Review 42/2009 
 3
 markets was particularly painful for it, as it had resorted extensively to this source of 
funds for its business expansion plans. 
The institution’s gradual deterioration was common knowledge and increasingly the 
subject of political and media discussion. This adverse publicity gave rise to a drain 
on deposits. 
In  view  of  this  delicate  situation  and  since  the  problem  is  a  pressing  one,  the  Banco  de 
España, with the Government’s agreement, decided it was necessary to provide additional 
financing to CCM to preserve its stability. To this end, the Government granted backing to 
the loan, for a maximum amount of €9 billion, extended by the Banco de España. 
I would like to underscore this point. As reiterated by the Second Deputy Prime Minister at 
the press conference following the meeting of the Council of Ministers last Sunday, I should 
stress  that  we  forecast  that  approximately  €3  billion  of  this  amount  will  be  used. 
Nevertheless,  our  room  for  manoeuvre  will  make  managing  the  payments  more  flexible, 
without any constraints in respect of the amounts involved. 
Developments in CCM’s liquidity in the three days it has been under the control of the Banco 
de España nominees have proven more positive than expected. Given the response by all 
the  government  authorities  involved,  management  cooperation,  the  reaction  of  the  trade 
unions and understanding on the part of the general public, there have been no queues or 
panic at branches and there have clearly been fewer withdrawals of deposits than foreseen. 
Having  briefly  outlined  CCM’s  current  position,  let  me  move  on  to  the  ultimate  aim  of  the 
Banco de España’s supervisory decisions. 
While  seemingly  obvious,  the  Supervisor’s  aims  are  to  protect  depositors’  savings  and 
creditors, to avoid market turmoil and to preserve the stability of the financial system as a 
whole.  The  objective  of  the  central  bank’s  control  is  to  stabilise  CCM,  to  avoid  a  liquidity 
collapse and to manage the institution for as short a time as possible with a view to finding 
an orderly solution. 
Ultimately,  the  viability  of  CCM’s  future  business  may  be  achieved  in  different  ways  (for 
example, through a merger with other credit institutions), with the Banco de España currently 
not ruling out any options. The response to these options will be swift, but not immediate, 
and  will  require  the  collaboration  of  authorities,  financial  institutions,  employees  and 
creditors. 
I  would  not  like  to  forgo  the  opportunity  of  appearing  before  this  Committee  without 
highlighting some of the messages recently conveyed by the Banco de España. 
Firstly, I would like to reiterate that involving savings banks in the political debate makes it 
immensely  difficult  to  find  flexible  and  effective  solutions.  Opinions  become  distorted, 
suspicions,  demands  and  expectations  of  the  parties  involved  grow  and  solutions  become 
increasingly  complicated.  We  should  not  forget  that  past  experience  in  Spain  and  abroad 
shows  that  prudence  and  discretion  are  prerequisites  for  reducing  the  costs  of  possible 
solutions for troubled institutions. Otherwise, we will make the authorities work more difficult 
and, ultimately, taxpayers will pay a higher price. 
In  finding  a  solution  to  the  difficulties  encountered  by  CCM,  the  Banco  de  España  has 
adhered to its tradition of adopting decisions based solely on the objectives of preserving the 
stability of our financial system, minimising the cost in terms of public funds and maintaining 
the availability of sufficient financial services. To conclude, I have personally conveyed to the 
Government and to the main opposition party the need for certain regulatory changes that 
might notably improve finding solutions in keeping with the principles informing our actions to 
date,  which  as  you  are  well  aware,  were  backed  by  a  recently  approved  parliamentary 
motion. 
The purpose of my testimony today is not to debate what must be done in future, since that is 
evidently the primary responsibility of the Government and the parliamentary groups, since 
4 
 BIS Review 42/2009
any  changes  must  ultimately  be  approved  by  this  House.  However,  I  do  want  to  mention 
some changes which we would view very favourably. For example, providing savings banks 
with  the  wherewithal  to  increase  their  own  funds,  at  least  on  a  comparable  footing  with 
Banks. This is important because, as I have reiterated today, it is essential to consider all 
possible private solutions before asking taxpayers to contribute more public funds. Evidently 
we  must  comply  with  the  requirements  of  Monetary  Union  membership.  But  in  this 
connection, one desirable institutional change, along the lines of the deposit guarantee funds 
that  have  worked  so  well  for  us,  would  be  to avoid,  as  has  occurred  in  the  case  of  CCM, 
calling a cabinet meeting every time taking control of an institution is called for. These and 
other  changes  should  also  strive  to  ensure  the  orderly  restructuring  of  banking  institutions 
and, while maintaining the necessary discretion specific procedures require, comply with all 
government and parliamentary reporting procedures deemed necessary. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 42/2009 
 5
