Ben S Bernanke: The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program 
Speech  by  Mr  Ben  S  Bernanke,  Chairman  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Atlanta  2009  Financial  Markets 
Conference, Jekyll Island, Georgia, 11 May 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 just 
last  Thursday.  This 
My  remarks  this  evening  will  focus  on  the  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment  Program, 
popularly known as the banking stress test. The federal bank regulatory agencies began the 
assessment  program  in  late  February  and  concluded  their  review  with  the  release  of  the 
results 
involved  an  unprecedented,  simultaneous 
supervisory  review  of  the  19  largest  bank  holding  companies  in  the  United  States.  Its 
objective  was  to  ensure  that  these  institutions  have  sufficient  financial  strength  to  absorb 
losses  and  to  remain  strongly  capitalized,  even  in  an  economic  environment  more  severe 
than currently anticipated. A well-capitalized banking system is essential for the revival of the 
credit flows that will underpin a sustainable economic recovery.  
initiative 
Objectives of Supervisory Capital Assessment Program 
As you know, the abrupt end of the credit boom in 2007 has had widespread financial and 
economic  ramifications,  including  a  sharp  slowdown  in  global  economic  activity  and  the 
imposition  of  substantial  losses  on  banks  and  other  financial  institutions.  Economic  and 
financial  weaknesses  have  fed  on  each  other,  as  a  declining  economy  has  exacerbated 
credit  losses  and  the  resulting  pressure  on  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  has 
constrained the availability of new credit. 
A number of significant steps have been taken to restore confidence in the nation's financial 
institutions, including a substantial expansion of guarantees for bank liabilities by the Federal 
Deposit  Insurance  Corporation  (FDIC),  injections  of  capital  by  the  Treasury  in  many 
institutions  both  large  and  small,  and  Federal  Reserve  programs  to  provide  liquidity  to 
financial  institutions  and  support  the  normalization  of  key  credit  markets.  These  efforts 
averted serious threats to global financial stability last fall and have contributed to gradual 
improvement in key credit markets, though many markets remain stressed.  
These  steps,  however,  did  not  fully  address  market  concerns  over  the  depletion  of  bank 
capital caused by write-downs and increased reserving for potential losses. At the beginning 
of  this  episode,  bank  losses  were  focused  in  a  few  asset  classes,  such  as  subprime 
mortgages and certain complex credit products. Today, following the significant weakening in 
the global economy that began last fall, concerns have shifted to more-traditional credit risks, 
including rising delinquencies on prime as well as subprime mortgages, unpaid credit card 
and auto loans, worsening conditions in commercial real estate markets, and increased rates 
of corporate bankruptcy. 
The  loss  of  confidence  we  have  seen  in  some  banking  institutions  has  arisen  not  only 
because market participants expect the future loss rates on many banking assets to be high, 
but because they also perceive the range of uncertainty surrounding estimated loss rates as 
being  unusually  wide.  The  capital  assessment  program  was  designed  to  reduce  this 
uncertainty by conducting a stringent, forward-looking assessment of prospective losses at 
major banking organizations. The objective was to identify the extent to which each of the 19 
firms is vulnerable today to a weaker-than-expected economy in the future, and to measure 
how much of an additional capital buffer, if any, each firm would need to establish now to 
withstand the potential losses in more-adverse economic conditions.  
BIS Review 57/2009 
 1
To  make  this  assessment,  we  began  by  stipulating  a  hypothetical,  adverse  economic 
scenario, under which growth, unemployment, and house-price outcomes were assumed to 
be  more  unfavorable  than  those  implied  by  the  consensus  of  private-sector  forecasters. 
Using  this  hypothetical  adverse  scenario,  examiners  were  asked  to  estimate  the  range  of 
possible losses that our largest and most important banking organizations could experience 
over the next two to three years, as well as the resources, such as earnings and reserves, 
that those organizations would have available to offset those losses. It is important to note 
that this was not a solvency test. After including capital previously provided by the Treasury, 
all of these banking organizations currently have capital well in excess of the minimum stated 
capital  requirements  of  the  supervisors.  Instead,  the  purpose  of  the  exercise  was  to 
determine the size of the capital cushion that each organization would need to remain well 
capitalized  and  still  be  able  to  lend  –  even  in  an  economic  scenario  more  severe  than 
expected. 
We  have  now  learned  through  this  process  that,  if  the  economy  were  to  track  the  more 
adverse scenario, additional losses at the 19 firms during 2009 and 2010 could total about 
$600  billion.  After  taking  account  of  potential  resources  to  absorb  those  losses,  including 
expected revenues, reserves, and existing capital cushions, we determined that 10 of the 19 
institutions will require, collectively, common or contingent common equity of $185 billion to 
ensure adequate capital cushions. Of this amount, the equivalent of $110 billion has already 
been raised or is contractually committed to be in place, or to a lesser degree reflects first-
quarter  pre-provision  earnings  above  those  assumed  in  the  initial  supervisory  estimates. 
Consequently,  the  remaining  common  equity  buffer  that  must  be  raised  is  $75  billion.  The 
firms that are determined to need an additional capital buffer will have 30 days to develop a 
capital plan to be approved by their supervisors and six months to implement that plan. We 
have strongly encouraged institutions requiring additional capital to obtain it through private 
means, including, for example, new equity issues, conversions, exchange offers, or sales of 
businesses or  other  assets.  To  ensure  that  all of  these  firms  can  build  the  needed  capital 
cushions,  however,  the  Treasury  has  made  a  firm  commitment  to  provide  contingent 
common equity, in the form of mandatory convertible preferred stock, as a bridge to obtaining 
private capital in the future. Banking organizations will also have the option to exchange their 
existing preferred stock, issued under Treasury's earlier Capital Purchase Program, for the 
new  contingent  common  equity.  The  Treasury  has  indicated  that  it  expects  that  any  such 
exchange will be either accompanied or preceded by new capital raises or the conversion of 
private capital securities into common equity. 
Process and methodology 
To  properly  understand  the  results  of  the  capital  assessment  program,  it  is  helpful  to 
understand the process that produced the results. All U.S.-owned bank holding companies 
with  year-end  2008  assets  exceeding  $100  billion  were  required  to  participate  in  the 
program. These 19 firms collectively hold two-thirds of the assets and more than one-half of 
the  loans  in  the  U.S.  banking  system,  supporting  a  very  significant  portion  of  credit 
intermediation  in  the  United  States.  The  assessment  process  can  perhaps  best  be 
characterized  as  a  simultaneous  examination  of  19  large  bank  holding  companies  that 
addressed all major categories of assets as well as revenue expectations.  
The  assessment  was  a  resource-intensive  undertaking,  involving  extraordinary  efforts  by 
more  than  150  examiners  and  analysts  from  the  Federal  Reserve,  the  Office  of  the 
Comptroller  of  the  Currency  (OCC),  and  the  FDIC.  These  staff  members  conducted  a 
detailed, firm-specific analysis over a 10-week period. Their efforts were aided by access to 
data and management available only to bank supervisors. The supervisors also incorporated 
statistical  tools  and  quantitative  models  in  their  evaluation  of  each  firm's  data  to  facilitate 
comparative analysis across the 19 firms. 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2009
The  analysis  was  a  comprehensive  one,  which  included  an  exhaustive  review  of  loan 
portfolios,  investment  securities,  trading  positions,  and  off-balance  sheet  commitments. 
Typically, supervisory examinations focus on individual business lines or asset classes at a 
single firm. In this case, we simultaneously reviewed all of the major portfolios and business 
lines  at  each  of  the  19  firms,  making  unprecedented  efforts  to  achieve  methodological 
consistency across firms, portfolios, and supervisors. 
Through it all, we tried to be as transparent as possible. The assumptions, processes, and 
results  of  the  capital  assessment  program  have  been  communicated  in  detail,  taking  into 
account legitimate supervisory and firm confidentiality concerns. We released a white paper 
on  April  24  describing  the  process  and  methodology.1  On  May  6,  we  provided  more 
information on the measures used to size the required capital buffer, as well as a preview of 
the information that would be disclosed.2 The final release of results, this past Thursday, May 
7, included the supervisory-determined indicative loss rates that were used in evaluating firm 
submissions,  and,  most  importantly,  aggregate  and  firm-specific  estimates  for  losses,  loss 
rates, resources to absorb losses, and the resulting capital buffer needs.3
Finally,  as  I  have  noted,  the  assessment  was  forward-looking.  To  project  losses  and 
offsetting resources two to three years in the future under the adverse scenario, we analyzed 
the  historical  relationships  of  losses  and  earnings  to  macroeconomic  conditions  and  other 
determinants,  and  we  dug  deeply  into  cross-firm  differences  in  portfolio  compositions  and 
vulnerabilities.  
The process began in earnest in early March when each firm submitted its estimate of losses 
and  earnings  over  a  two-year  scenario,  under  two  alternative  assumed  paths  for  the  U.S. 
economy.  The  baseline  scenario  reflected  the  consensus  expectation  for  the  economy 
among  professional  forecasters  as  of  February  2009,  and  the  more  adverse  scenario 
incorporated  the  possibility  that  the  recession  could  be  more  severe  than  the  consensus 
expectation and that house prices could fall even more sharply. 
Although  we  began  the  process  by  asking  the  firms  to  submit  their  own  estimates  of 
expected  losses  and  revenues,  we  by  no  means  accepted  these  submissions  uncritically. 
Senior  supervisors  and  on-site  examiners  evaluated  the  firms'  estimates  to  identify 
methodological  weaknesses,  missing  information,  over-optimistic  assumptions,  and  other 
problems.  Examiners  had  detailed  conversations  with  bank  managers,  which  led  to 
numerous  corrections  to  and  modifications  of  the  firms'  submissions,  including  sensitivity 
analyses based on alternative assumptions.  
As a second step, supervisors made judgmental adjustments to the firms' loss and revenue 
estimates.  This  process  used  both  firm-specific  and  comparative  analyses.  For  example, 
supervisors  sometimes  disagreed  with  the  technical  assumptions  underlying  a  firm's  loss 
forecast.  In  these  cases,  they  adjusted  the  loss  rates  based  on  sensitivity  analyses 
performed by the firm, results from other firms, and the supervisors' own expert judgments.  
Third,  the  supervisors'  judgmental  assessments  were  supplemented  by  objective,  model-
based estimates for losses and revenues that could be applied on a consistent basis across 
firms.  For  example,  we  used  statistical  models  to  estimate  residential  mortgage  losses  at 
                                                 
1   See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2009),  "The  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment 
Program: Design and Implementation," white paper (Washington: Board of Governors, April 24). 
2   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "Joint Statement by Secretary of the Treasury 
Timothy F. Geithner, Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Ben S. Bernanke, 
Chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Sheila Bair, and Comptroller of the Currency John C. 
Dugan:  The Treasury  Capital  Assistance  Program  and  the  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment  Program,"  joint 
press release, May 6. 
3   See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  (2009),  The  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment 
Program: Overview of Results (Washington: Board of Governors, May 7). 
BIS Review 57/2009 
 3
firms based on loan data submitted by the firms as part of the exercise. Each participating 
institution  was  asked  to  supply  detailed  information,  in  a  standardized  format,  about  the 
composition of its residential real estate portfolios, including breakdowns by type of product, 
loan-to-value  ratio,  FICO  score,  year  of  origination,  and  so  on.  These  data  allowed 
supervisors  to  consistently  estimate  potential  future  losses  across  firms  using  a  variety  of 
independently constructed models. Some of these models were already in use to monitor risk 
as part of the ongoing supervisory oversight process, while others were developed or refined 
specifically for the capital assessment exercise.  
Similarly, to assess firms' revenue projections for 2009 and 2010, the agencies examined the 
components of expected revenue in detail, compared the projections to historical results, and 
cross-checked the underlying assumptions with projections of portfolio growth, funding costs, 
and the like. The agencies also used more-formal statistical analyses to develop firm-by-firm 
forecasts that would reflect the historical relationship between revenues and macroeconomic 
conditions,  thereby  enabling  them  to  assess  which  components  were  less  likely  to  be 
sustainable  in  a  weaker  economy.  Information  from  all  of  these  sources  was  incorporated 
into the final revenue projections. Finally, the supervisors systematically incorporated all of 
these inputs into loss, revenue, and reserve estimates for each institution.  
Determining the size of the capital buffer 
A key question in this assessment was the appropriate size of the capital buffers that these 
firms  would  be  required  to  hold,  as  well  as  the  quality  of  those  buffers.  Recall  that  our 
analysis of the firms' financial conditions focused not on current capital levels alone but also 
on  how  capital  levels  might  evolve  over  a  two-year  horizon,  assuming  a  more  adverse 
economic environment than currently anticipated. In other words, the assessment was not a 
forecast of expected outcomes but rather a "what-if" exercise, intended to help supervisors 
gauge the capital buffers needed to keep banks well capitalized and able to lend across a 
range of economic scenarios.  
In judging the needed buffer, we understood that no single measure of capital adequacy is 
universally  accepted  or  would  guarantee  a  return  of  market  confidence.  Fortunately,  our 
existing  capital  framework  is  well  understood  and  addresses  the  key  concerns  that  have 
been  voiced  by  the  market.  Under  our  existing  standards,  banks  are  considered  "well 
capitalized" with Tier 1 capital at 6 percent of risk-weighted assets. Using that benchmark in 
the  context of  bank  holding  companies,  we  sized  the  capital  buffer so  that  each of  the  19 
companies  would  be  expected  to  meet  that  threshold  at  year-end  2010  if  the  losses  and 
revenues implied by the adverse case were realized.  
In addition, common equity ratios in various guises are viewed by stockholders, bondholders, 
and counterparties as key measures of solvency, because common equity provides superior 
loss absorption and greater financial flexibility than other forms of capital. Because of these 
attributes  of  common  equity,  our  bank  holding  company  capital  rules  require  that  voting 
common stockholders' equity make up the dominant portion of Tier 1 capital elements. In the 
context of the assessment program, we have structured the required capital buffer to ensure 
that,  under  the  adverse  scenario,  each  of  the  19  firms  would  have  a  minimum  4  percent 
Tier 1 Common ratio at year-end 2010. (Tier 1 Common is simply common equity subject to 
the  same  deductions  from  capital  as  are  required  when  determining  Tier  1  capital  –  for 
example,  deducting  goodwill.)  Importantly,  the  "6-4"  metric  used  to  size  the  appropriate 
capital buffer does not represent a new capital standard and is not expected necessarily to 
be maintained on an ongoing basis. Going forward, with the required initial buffer in place, 
supervisors will work with banks and bank holding companies to ensure that capital levels 
are appropriate for the level of risk in banks' portfolios and in the economic environment. 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2009
Evaluating the results 
Projecting credit losses in an uncertain economic environment is difficult, to say the least, but 
the  intensive,  painstaking  nature  of  this  process  gives  us  confidence  in  our  results.  In 
particular,  we  believe  that  our  estimates  of  needed  capital  buffers  are  appropriately 
conservative. Notably, a comparison to historical loss rates shows that the loss estimates we 
obtained significantly exceed those experienced in past recessions. The estimated two-year 
cumulative  losses  on  total  loans  under  the  more  adverse  scenario  averaged  9.1  percent 
across  the 19  participating  bank  holding  companies.  This two-year  rate  is  higher  than  any 
two-year period dating back to 1920, including the historical peak loss years of the 1930s. In 
particular,  estimated  loss  rates  for  mortgage  and  consumer  credit  are  high,  reflecting  the 
combination of high unemployment and steep declines in house prices that were specified in 
the more adverse scenario. 
Still, it is useful to know whether our estimates are consistent with what has been found by 
others. Two studies released within the last few weeks essentially bracketed the supervisory 
estimate. The International Monetary Fund estimated lifetime losses that would imply a loan 
loss rate for U.S. banking firms of about 8 percent in a stressed scenario.4 One of the major 
rating  agencies  estimated  an  annual  loan  loss  rate  of  about  4-3/4  percent  in  a  stress 
scenario  for  the  next  two  years.5  More  broadly,  our  informal  survey  of  the  results  of  a 
considerable  number  of  private-sector  studies  and  analyst  reports  published  over  the  past 
several months generally placed our projected loss rates for key portfolios near the midpoints 
of the ranges of these independent estimates.  
When making comparisons, it should be kept in mind that studies differed in the ways that 
losses were estimated and reported. Four particular sources of differences are notable. 
First, studies differed in the time frames over which losses were calculated. Some outside 
reports included cumulative losses from the beginning of the financial crisis in mid-2007, and 
others included projections of losses over the lifetimes of currently held loans and securities. 
Our estimates are for potential losses in 2009 and 2010 and, indirectly, for 2011, through the 
estimate of the end-2010 loan loss reserve. Our estimates do not include the sizable losses 
that  have  already  been  recognized  by  the  19  banks  –  about  $325  billion  of  loans  and 
securities in the last six months of 2007 and in 2008 – because they are already reflected in 
the firms' balance sheets. Moreover, while we exclude losses beyond 2011, this limit would 
only  be  material  for  sizing  the  capital  buffer  if  those  losses  were  expected  to  substantially 
exceed pre-provision earnings after 2011, an outcome that we do not expect. 
Second,  a  few  private-sector  estimates  implicitly  or  explicitly  assumed  mark-to-market  or 
liquidation  prices  for  loans,  which  effectively  incorporate  a  substantial  liquidity  discount  in 
today's market. However, because banks are portfolio lenders with core deposit funding and 
the ability to hold loans to maturity, our estimated valuations are based on projected cash 
flow credit losses related to a borrower's failure to meet its obligation, not a liquidation value. 
Third, some private-sector studies may not have taken into account the markdowns in asset 
valuations  that  occurred  in  the  context  of  acquisitions  of  other  firms.  In  particular,  in  the 
course of acquisitions by the 19 bank holding companies in 2008, the value of troubled loans 
was written down by almost $65 billion.6 These potential losses should only be realized once 
and  thus  are  excluded  from  our  estimates  of  prospective  losses  for  2009  and  2010.  Of 
course, we took full account of these writedowns in our sizing of required capital buffers.  
                                                 
4  
International Monetary Fund (2009), Global Financial Stability Report: Responding to the Financial Crisis and 
Measuring Systemic Risks (Washington: IMF, April). 
5   Standard and Poor (2009), "What Stress Tests Reveal about U.S. Banks Capital Needs," May 1. 
6   Purchase accounting adjustments were recognized for Capital One Financial Corporation, JPMorgan Chase & 
Co., PNC Financial Services Group, Inc., and Wells Fargo & Company. 
BIS Review 57/2009 
 5
Fourth, in contrast to some outside estimates, estimated losses for the capital assessment 
program  are  for  the  19  firms,  not  the  entire  banking  system.  Moreover,  numerous 
adjustments were necessary to reflect particular facts and circumstances at these firms. That 
level of analysis simply has not been done –  nor could it be done –  by outside  observers 
without the level of access available to supervisors. 
Despite the care and rigor of this process, I would be the first to acknowledge that any loss 
forecast  is  inherently  uncertain.  The  assessment  program  did  not  address  some  risks  that 
institutions  still  need  to  consider  in  their  own  internal  stress  tests,  such  as  operational, 
liquidity,  and  reputational  risks.  For  all  19  firms,  and  particularly  those  with  trading  and 
investment banking businesses, those risks are important and will need to be monitored by 
both the firms and the supervisors. Ideally, the stress tests used in the assessment program 
should be part of a broader palette of internal stress tests conducted by firms; indeed, we do 
not intend that the capital assessments should be taken as all that those firms need to do. 
A  principal  goal  of  the  capital  assessment  process  is  to  help  increase  confidence  in  the 
banking system. In particular, if it helps reduce uncertainty among investors regarding future 
losses  and  capital  needs,  and  thereby  improves  the  banking  system's  access  to  private 
capital, one of the key objectives of the program will have been achieved. It will be some time 
before  we  can  evaluate  the  success  of  the  program  on  this  criterion.  However,  the  initial 
indications are encouraging. Each of the 10 banks requiring an additional capital buffer has 
pledged  to  have  the  necessary  buffer  in  place  by  the  November  9  deadline.  Many  of  the 
banks  are  well  ahead  in  finding  private-sector  options  for  increasing  their  common  equity, 
and several have announced plans for new equity issues. In another positive sign, several 
have announced plans to issue long-term debt not guaranteed by the FDIC.  
Lessons from the assessment program for the supervisory process 
We've  learned  important  lessons  in  the  capital  assessment  process  that  will  inform  our 
supervisory  efforts  in  the  future.  Notably,  the  process  of  comprehensively  evaluating  19 
major firms represented an important step forward in consolidated supervision, as it gave us 
insights  into  the  challenges  posed  in  understanding  risks  and  exposures  across  complex 
organizations. 
The cross-firm aspects of the assessment program were also instructive from a supervisory 
point  of  view.  As  I  have  mentioned,  unlike  traditional  examinations  focused  on  individual 
banks, the assessment process specifically incorporated cross-firm and aggregate analyses 
of a set of firms that constitute a majority of the banking system. This approach allowed a 
broader analysis of risks than is possible within the traditional supervisory focus on individual 
institutions. Supervisors evaluated loss rates for similar portfolios using consistent data and 
metrics,  allowing  them  to  identify  outliers  and  more  effectively  evaluate  the  quality  of 
individual  firm  estimates.  The  process  was  an  iterative  one,  with  both  the  firms  and 
supervisors conducting sensitivity analyses around key assumptions.  
The  federal  bank  regulators  –  the  Federal  Reserve,  OCC,  and  FDIC  –  cooperated 
extensively throughout this process, from the design to the implementation. In addition, within 
each agency, many resources across a range of skills were brought to bear. For example, 
quantitative  experts  supported  examiners  by  incorporating  statistical  tools  to  facilitate 
benchmarking across institutions and to develop consistent loss estimates. 
We  learned  from  this  effort  that  it  is  not  a  simple  matter  to  simultaneously  evaluate  the 
consolidated risks for two-thirds of the assets in the U.S. banking system, using a common 
forward-looking framework and common metrics. But it was an enlightening exercise that will 
improve  the  toolkit  we  use  to  help  ensure  the  safety  and  soundness  not  just  of  individual 
firms, but of the financial system more broadly.  
6 
 BIS Review 57/2009
Conclusion 
In  summary,  the  Supervisory  Capital  Assessment  Program  is  an  important  element  of 
broader and ongoing efforts by the Federal Reserve, other federal bank regulators, and the 
Treasury  to  ensure  that  our  banking  system  has  sufficient  resources  to  navigate  a 
challenging economic downturn. A collateral benefit is that many lessons of the exercise can 
be  used  to  improve  our  supervisory  processes.  In  particular,  the  supervisory  capital 
assessment  has  demonstrated  the  benefits  of  using  cross-firm,  cross-portfolio  information 
and  the  simultaneous  review  of  a  number  of  major  firms  to  develop  a  more  complete  and 
fine-grained view of the health of the banking system. 
Whether the objectives of the assessment program were achieved will only be known over 
time. We hope that in two or three years we will be able to reflect on the banking system's 
return to health with a sharply diminished reliance on government capital. More immediately, 
we hope and expect that the public and investors will take considerable comfort from the fact 
that our largest financial institutions have been evaluated in a comprehensive and rigorous 
fashion; and that they will, as a consequence, be required to have a capital buffer adequate 
to weather future losses and to supply needed credit to our economy – even if the economic 
downturn is more severe than is currently anticipated.  
BIS Review 57/2009 
 7
