Amando M Tetangco, Jr: Sustaining partnerships in a year of challenges 
Speech  by  Mr  Amando  M  Tetangco,  Jr,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  the  Philippines 
(Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas), at the Annual Reception for the Banking Community, Manila, 
16 January 2009. 
 Members of the judicial, legislative, and executive branches of government; leaders of the 
Philippine  banking  community;  special  guests  from  the  diplomatic  community,  the  private 
sector,  the  academe,  and  the  media;  fellow  central  bankers;  ladies  and  gentlemen,  a 
pleasant good evening to all of you. 
On behalf of the Monetary Board, I thank you all for taking the time to join us tonight for our 
traditional Reception for the Banking Community.  
That we are celebrating 60 years of Central Banking in the Philippines in 2009, makes this 
reception  doubly  meaningful.  We  are  happy  therefore  that  we  have  with  us  tonight  former 
deputy  governors  and  members  of  the  Monetary  Board;  two  former  governors  under  the 
Central Bank of the Philippines – Governor Jaime Laya and Governor Jose Cuisia, Jr.; and 
one former governor of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas – Governor Gabriel Singson. Ladies 
and gentlemen, let us acknowledge all central bankers – past and present – on this 60-year 
milestone with a round of applause.  
We  have  60  years  of  central  banking  behind  us  and  we  move  forward  to  the  future  with 
confidence having learned many lessons along the way. We therefore look forward to more 
opportunities for us to shape a better future for ourselves, our families, our communities, and 
our country through sound and responsive monetary and banking policies.  
Take  the  year  just  past,  for  instance.  No  doubt  about  it,  2008  was  challenging  given  the 
difficulties we had to face. But it was also the same difficulties that allowed us to confirm.. 
that our collective reform efforts have put our financial system in better shape.  
Indeed  the  irony  of  financial  markets  is  that  crises  invariably  occur  despite  the  best 
intentions; yet, it is in facing the next challenge in relative strength that we can truly say we 
have learned from the past. 
Ladies  and  gentlemen,  we  are  fully  cognizant  of  the  difficulties  that  the  current  global 
financial  crisis  has  created  and  the  spillover  effects  that  it  would  certainly  generate.  Our 
continuing  efforts  to  clean  up  our  domestic  banking  system  and  root  out  malpractices  that 
particularly victimize the most vulnerable customers and our financial safety nets may also 
be creating short-term anxiety alongside global turmoil.  
But I stand before you tonight to affirm that our banking system, in all its vital components – 
rural and cooperative banks, thrift banks, and commercial and universal banks, is in much 
better  shape  today  than  it  was  during  the  last  crisis  we  faced.  And  I  can  tell  you,  the 
Monetary Board and the rest of the Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas family remain confident that 
our banking system can work through these challenges.  
I  assure  you,  this  is  not  meant  to  be  a  self-acclamation.  Rather,  it  is  our  tribute  to  the 
collective efforts we have invested in our shared future. As a community of stakeholders, it is 
this common future that requires of us.. shared responsibilities to take on challenges together 
in  order  to  grow  and  gain  as  one.  I  refer  specifically  to  the  Bankers  Association  of  the 
Philippines,  the  Chamber  of  Thrift  Banks  and  the  Rural  Bankers  Association  of  the 
Philippines.  The  Bangko  Sentral  ng  Pilipinas  thanks  you  and  salutes  your  efforts  in 
sustaining economic activities not only in urban centers but also in the countryside through 
responsible and responsive banking. Ladies and gentlemen, let us give a round of applause 
to the Philippine banking sector.  
BIS Review 7/2009 
 1
There is a saying that it is okay to build sand castles in the sky for as long as our feet are 
well planted on the ground. What is the context, what do I mean by this? There are three 
points I wish to make.  
First, the best strategy is always to move forward as one. This is not an inspirational punch 
line  but  the  hard  reality  of  market  dynamics.  We  appreciate  that  banks  are  inherently 
business concerns, but protecting the institutional bottom line requires nurturing sustainable 
relationships in a thriving environment. What is not too obvious is that the financial system as 
a  whole  moves  forward  only  when  we  work  together.  Ultimately,  it  is  this  stability  from 
working together that gets us through the business cycles, even as this starts from a position 
of competing interests. As competitive elements within one system, we can always agree to 
disagree but we cannot fall into the trap of disagreeing to agree. 
Second, it is critical that any lingering risk aversion from whatever source does not spill over 
into our ability to provide needed financial services for our real economy. Global conditions 
will be challenging. But in the same breath, let us not allow fears of off-shore conditions to 
pre-judge our on-shore actions, when and where such links are not warranted. If we are to 
consolidate  our  position  of  relative  strength,  we  need  to  seize  opportunities  when  they 
present themselves, while mindful of our basic fiduciary responsibilities and our mandate to 
act prudently. 
This is a call for active participation at a time when the real economy needs us the most. We 
have seen how successful partnerships between the Bangko Sentral and the banking sector 
generated positive results for our people, our economy, and our country. I refer specifically to 
the banking sector as effective and responsive transmission channel for the Bangko Sentral’s 
policies concerning money, banking and credit.  
And  now,  to  pro-actively  move  forward,  I  also  ask  for  a  re-affirmation  of  our  partnership 
across a spectrum of initiatives – from expanding access to and improving the quality and 
cost of our services especially to the poor, to small enterprises, and to our overseas Filipinos; 
to  building  and  deepening  financial  awareness  and  literacy;  to  promoting  better  consumer 
protection;  to  structuring  organized  and  transparent  financial  markets.  The  times  are 
challenging  but  they  are  as  much  a  test  of  our  own  resolve;  this  will  prove  to  be  the  first 
hurdle in building sustainable relationships in a thriving environment. 
Third,  the  global  financial  architecture  is  broken  because  less  attention  was  given  to  the 
details  as  markets  moved  faster,  forward,  and  further.  There  was  over  reliance  on  market 
pressures to instill market discipline and global institutions – from multilaterals to regulators 
to market players – took comfort from the on-going work on best international practices. As 
we are now reminded, market failures happen at a painful cost to the displaced and that best 
international practices will mitigate domestic risks only if the supervisory framework evolves 
with market dynamics. 
Moving forward, I believe that the need is not necessarily for more complex and rigorous new 
regulations  but  for  greater  accountability.  Much  more  would  therefore  be  required  of  the 
Board of Directors of banks and of the technical expertise of the line functions that relate to 
prudential management of risks. This is the form of market-driven accountability that I believe 
will  be  needed  in  restructuring  the  financial  landscape  –  and  it  is  quite  different  from  just 
simply  having  more  regulations.  Let  us  therefore  work  more  closely  together  in  crafting 
regulations that would make markets more efficient and dynamic.  
Will 2009 be a difficult year? Given the downward trajectory of the global economy, volatile 
commodity prices, and the continuing financial turmoil, conventional wisdom says that it will 
be.  
Nevertheless, I believe that together we have the capacity to ride out the challenges before 
us.  The  key  is  to  manage  the  factors  that  are  within  our  control,  to  maintain  a  positive 
mindset,  and  to  capitalize  on  our  time-tested  resiliency  and  ability  to  innovate  amidst 
challenging times.  
2 
 BIS Review 7/2009
And  don’t  forget,  our  economic  fundamentals  continue  to  be  a  source  for  optimism.  This 
includes  sustained  economic  growth,  slowing  inflation,  declining  interest  rates,  record  high 
international  reserves,  balance  of  payments  surplus,  a  competitive  peso  and  a  stable 
banking system.  
In  the  end,  the  challenge  in  2009  for  the  banking  sector  is  to  quickly  act  on  the  painful 
lessons of the global financial crisis. It is simply far too convenient to point at the complexities 
of structured products, the over-leveraging, or the fundamental dilemma with market greed. 
All  these  were  necessary  inputs  but  together  they  are  not  sufficient  to  explain  where  the 
world is today. More importantly, debating the whys and wherefores will have its place, but at 
this juncture we need to act decisively with conviction, in unison, and move forward. 
Ladies and gentlemen, while the global prognosis for 2009 is daunting, the Bangko Sentral 
continues  to  believe  that  the  Philippines  remains  in  a  position  of  relative  strength  as  we 
navigate through these difficult times. What we do to consolidate our gains rests squarely on 
us. In the case of the Philippine banking community, I am confident it will prevail and remain 
sound and stable.  
On behalf of the Members of the Monetary Board, I thank all the sectors represented here 
tonight  for  their  continuing  support:  the  banking  community;  the  legislative,  executive  and 
judicial branches of government; the private sector, the diplomatic corps, the academe, the 
media, our special guests, and our partners in bilateral and multilateral agencies.  
Together, let us offer a toast to our continuing partnership in sustaining economic growth in 
our country and improving the quality of life of Filipinos. Cheers!  
Finally, before it becomes totally unfashionable, let me take this opportunity to wish all of you 
blessings of good health, success, and prosperity this New Year. 
Mabuhay!  
Thank you all and enjoy the rest of the evening. 
BIS Review 7/2009 
 3
