Masaaki Shirakawa: Preventing the next crisis – the nexus between 
financial markets, financial institutions and central banks 
Speech by Mr Masaaki Shirakawa, Governor of the Bank of Japan, at the London Stock 
Exchange, London, 13 May 2009. 
Ladies and Gentlemen,  
 Introduction 
I.  
It  is  a  great  honor  to  have  the  chance  today  to  present  my  views  at  the  London  Stock 
Exchange right at the heart of the City of London. This is the first opportunity for a Governor 
of the Bank of Japan to speak in the City. Let me extend my gratitude to the three hosts that 
have  made  it  possible:  International  Financial  Services,  London,  the  London  Stock 
Exchange,  and  the  Japan  Society  of  the  United  Kingdom.  They  have  all  played  and  are 
continuing to play critical roles in the development of the City as the world’s premier financial 
center. 
Both Japan as a country and the Bank of Japan have had a close relationship with the City 
since Japan entered the modern era. Japan issued its first government bond here in London 
in 1870, only two years after the Meiji Government was established. This was to raise funds 
to build its first railroad between Tokyo and Yokohama, which naturally was built by a British 
gentleman,  Mr.  Edmund  Morel.  The  Bank  of  Japan  was  established  in  1882  and  its  first 
overseas office was set up here in the City of London in 1904 at 120 Bishopsgate. At the 
time of its establishment, assimilating expertise on modern banking business was essential 
for the Bank of Japan, and young staff members were sent to commercial banks here in the 
City as trainees. Two of them returned to later become Governor of the Bank of Japan. 
Over the years, the Chief Representative of our London Office has continued to report back 
to Tokyo on developments in the London financial market which is an epitome of the global 
financial markets. Reading the reports in our archives one cannot be but surprised by the fact 
that  financial  crises  are  not  necessarily  rare  events.  They  have  occurred  quite  often  and 
unfortunately the lessons are also frequently forgotten. 
Our most pressing challenge today globally is to resolve this crisis and to get the economy 
onto  a  stable  growth  path.  But  we  also  simultaneously  need  to  think  about  how  we  can 
prevent the next crisis. On this point, the United Kingdom is demonstrating its leadership as 
the Chair of the G20, hosting and leading the discussions at the recent financial summit. In 
March,  the  Financial  Services  Authority  issued  its  Turner  Review1  which  examines  the 
factors behind the crisis and presents broad-based regulatory and supervisory responses to 
create a stable and effective banking system. Today, I would like to present to you my views 
on steps necessary to prevent the recurrence of financial crises, reflecting upon the history of 
past crises and the interlinkages between financial markets, financial institutions, and central 
banks. 
Current conditions 
II. 
To  set  the  stage,  I  will  briefly  explain  the  current  condition  of  the  Japanese  economy  and 
financial system, and then touch upon the global landscape. Japanese banks had relatively 
limited exposures to complex securitized products and thus the Japanese financial system 
                                                 
1   Financial Services Authority (2009), “The Turner Review”. 
BIS Review 60/2009 
 1
retained  its  stability  even  after  the  initial  shocks  during  the  summer  of  2007.  However, 
conditions  changed  dramatically  after  the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  although  stress 
levels in Japan’s financial markets were milder than those in US, UK, and the euro area. For 
example, three month Libor-OIS spreads, a signal for assessing tension in money markets, 
increased in the yen market only to twice the levels seen before the failure, while those in the 
US  dollar,  euro  and  sterling  markets  spiked  to  levels  three  to  four  times  higher.  In  sharp 
contrast,  when  one  looks  at  the  impact  of  the  global  financial  crisis  on  the  real  economy, 
Japan’s  real  GDP  fell  the  sharpest  among  the  major  economies,  falling  -12.1%  on  an 
annualized basis during the last quarter of 2008, though annualization might be misleading in 
this rapidly changing environment. In any event, the Japanese economy literally fell off a cliff. 
This large drop is a simple reflection of the fact that the export oriented industries, namely 
automobiles, electronics, and IT and capex related areas, which were impacted the most by 
the fall in global demand, have roughly a 50% share of Japanese industrial production. This 
is much larger than the US and UK where these sectors only have a share of approximately 
20%.  More  recently,  we  have  seen  some  positive  signs  as  industrial  production  has 
increased  for  the  first  time  in  six  months.  Although  we  expect  the  pace  of  deterioration  in 
economic conditions to moderate gradually and the economy to start to level out towards the 
end of this year, we are closely watching developments. 
Why has the global economy weakened so sharply since last autumn? 
First  and  foremost,  excesses  had  built  up  during  the  high  growth  period  earlier  in  this 
decade. Credit bubbles had emerged in several regions of the world which began to unwind 
rapidly as the financial turmoil unfolded. In this process, the adverse feedback loop between 
financial and real economic activities has compounded the damaging effects. Second, this 
was further aggravated by the sudden and severe erosion of confidence in financial markets 
triggered by the collapse of Lehman Brothers. This further restricted the flow of funds from 
the financial system to the real economy, and also sharply cut back capital flows to emerging 
economies. 
As  I  mentioned,  the  Japanese  financial  markets  have  been  relatively  calm  compared  with 
US, UK and the euro area. But, still, the effects of the global financial turmoil have been felt 
through  multiple  channels.  Foreign  banks  retreated  from  certain  business  areas  in  Japan. 
Their presence diminished in the yen money market where they had accounted for more than 
half of turnover before the crisis. In some cases, the Japanese operations of foreign banks 
faced difficulties in their yen funding. Additionally, the spillover of the shocks from the global 
financial markets basically froze our CP market and corporate bond market. On another note, 
as foreign banks came under capital constraints, Japanese banks faced increased demand 
for foreign currency denominated funds from both foreign and domestic firms. 
This  crisis  has  once  again  shown  that  conditions  in  the  financial  markets  and  financial 
system  strongly  influence  the  real  economy,  and  that  financial  markets  and  the  financial 
system are globally interlinked.  
Humbly learning the lessons of history 
III. 
I would like to review a bit of history to pick out what I believe to be commonalities of past 
crises.2
Financial  crises  have  occurred  repeatedly  in  history.  In  Japan,  we  experienced  a  major 
financial crisis shortly after World War I as an asset price bubble collapsed. Following many 
years of relative calm in the financial system, we experienced our next major financial crisis 
during the latter half of the 1990s. The total cost of dealing with non-performing loans in this 
                                                 
2   Masaki Shirakawa (2009), “Way Out of Economic and Financial Crisis: Lessons and Policy Actions,” speech at 
the Japan Society in New York. 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2009
episode was over 100 trillion yen or roughly 20% of nominal GDP. 12.4 trillion yen of public 
funds was injected into the banking system as capital. In the UK, in 1890, the bursting of an 
overseas investment bubble resulted in the Baring Crisis, and more recently, the Secondary 
Banking  Crisis  occurred  during  the  1970s  after  the  collapse  of  a  commercial  real  estate 
boom. 
In view of such historical episodes, we all have to be humble in avoiding complacency. To be 
specific, we must be mindful of the fallacy of the following two unsubstantiated views. One is 
that  benign  economic  conditions  will  continue  for  an  extended  period  into  the  future.  The 
other  is  that  policy-makers  can  deal  effectively  with  the  bursting  of  the  bubble  through 
aggressive ex-post monetary and fiscal policy. 
The  key  common  element  of  all  financial  crises  is  that  they  are  preceded  by  a  period  of 
positive economic performance. For example, in the case of Japan, during the late 1980s, 
real GDP grew at an average annual pace of over 5% for four years, while CPI remained 
generally stable staying in a range between slightly negative and 1%. This bred a conviction 
that the Japanese economy had entered a new era, and in this environment, equity and real 
estate prices boomed. Globally, after the mid-1980s, the so-called Great Moderation led to a 
substantial  decline  in  the  volatility  of  output  and  inflation  in  many  major  industrial  nations 
including the UK. I will not get into the debate today about the reasons behind this seemingly 
great moderation, but this change in the macro-economic environment may have lulled many 
of us, including central bankers into a false sense of stability. 
Of course, warnings are raised even during such times. In the late 1980s, senior officials of 
the Bank of Japan often used the expression "we are sitting on dry fire wood" to explain the 
precarious situation. The Bank of Japan, to send out a not-too-subtle warning, also published 
a  research  paper  in  1990  on  the  UK’s  Secondary  Banking  Crisis  and  its  lessons  for  the 
Japanese  financial  community.  Here  in  the  UK,  for  example,  before  the  current  crisis,  the 
Bank  of  England  repeatedly  pointed  out  its  concerns  in  its  Financial  Stability  Report 
regarding the unusually low risk premia prevalent in the markets and the possibility of sudden 
drop  in  asset  prices  due  to  a  sharp  change  in  the  assessment  of  risks.  Nonetheless,  the 
mentality “this time it’s different” always seems to win out, supported by supposedly credible 
arguments. Warnings often go unheeded and are drowned out by the party music to which 
everybody is dancing. 
What hinders us from learning the lessons from past crises despite the fact that crises occur 
repeatedly? 
First,  memories  fade  away.  As  I  mentioned,  in  the  current  financial  crisis,  the  condition  of 
Japanese financial institutions has been relatively resilient. Fortunately, not much time has 
passed since Japan's crises during the 90s and senior management still vividly remembers 
the painful experience. This has led them to be cautious about taking on complicated forms 
of risk. This might not be the case in the future. 
Second, though people may witness the bursting of a bubble and the shocks of a crisis in 
another  country  or  perhaps  read  about  it  in  reports  or  history  books,  it  is  difficult  to  really 
learn the lessons of the crises and to be able to actually take the necessary steps to prevent 
them, unless one has directly experienced it. Much has been written and presumably read 
about the Japanese crisis. But whether the lessons have been truly appreciated seems to be 
a different story. 
Third, crises are never exactly the same, and each crisis has its own unique characteristics. 
Japan's crisis and the current global crisis have many common elements, but there are also 
a number of differences. In Japan's case, the non-performing loans were mostly commercial 
real  estate  loans  extended  by  banks  and  the  crisis  was  basically  concentrated  in  the 
domestic banking sector. On the other hand, the current crisis is global in nature and covers 
both capital and banking markets. The tools involved, such as CDO squared and off-balance 
sheet  vehicles,  are  much  more  complex,  thus  making  the  nature  of  the  crisis  more 
complicated. 
BIS Review 60/2009 
 3
Additionally,  before  the  current  crisis,  the  pervasive  view  among  policy-makers  and 
academia  was  that,  even  if  a  bubble  were  to  burst,  aggressive  ex-post  monetary  easing 
could prevent a sharp deterioration in economic conditions. I personally was skeptical of this 
view. Now,  the proponents of this view seem to have dramatically decreased as the crisis 
persists.  Central  bank  policy  rates  are  close  to  zero  and  balance  sheets  have  expanded 
substantially  at  many  central  banks.  Some  central  banks  have  embarked  on  credit  easing 
policies as well. Nonetheless, the adverse feedback loop between the financial system and 
real  economy  stubbornly  remains,  though  there  are  some  slight  signs  of  improvement.  I 
wonder how many still unconditionally embrace the aforementioned naïve optimistic view. 
In short, policy-makers, private sector entities and academics all need to be humble. We can 
never  say  we  fully  understand  the  dynamics  and  interlinkages  between  the  financial  and 
economic systems. 
Perspectives toward reshaping the global financial system 
IV.  
The root cause of problems at financial institutions can be wide-ranging. But, the symptoms 
typically emerge through the lack of liquidity or capital. The problem is that, when we look 
back  at  the  summer  of  2007,  there  were  no  visible  signs  and  the  financial  environment 
seemed  quite  resilient. The  capital ratios  of  the  twenty  largest  commercial  banks  by  asset 
size in the world, mostly US, UK, Euro area and Japanese banks, were in the range of 10 to 
14  percent  and  were  concentrated  between  11  to  12  percent,  well  above  regulatory 
minimums.  On  the  liquidity  side,  the  sense  of  abundant  liquidity  persistently  remained,  as 
was evidenced by very low Libor-OIS spreads and the narrow bid-ask spreads for complex 
securitized products.  
However, since then, the landscape has changed in a way which was almost unthinkable. Of 
the twenty banks, more than half have received injections of capital from their government. 
Many banks have also faced liquidity difficulties, as raising funds in money markets became 
restricted reflecting the sharp drop in market liquidity. Some even have experienced outflows 
of deposits. 
Why  did  both  market  participants  and  authorities  let  their  guard  down  against  impending 
risks?  Why  couldn’t  they  recognize  the  problems  beneath  the  surface  and  take  mitigating 
actions? Let me raise three facets which I believe are relevant.  
First,  the  careful  assessment  of  both  funding  and  market  liquidity  is  essential  in  today’s 
financial markets. This has two dimensions. One aspect is the interaction between liquidity 
and  capital.  For  example,  with  regard  to  complex  products  such  as  certain  securitized 
instruments, pricing, and as a result, necessary levels of capital to cover risks, are dependent 
on both market and funding liquidity. Due to their limited market size, when market liquidity 
drops,  prices  fall  rapidly,  putting  pressure  on  banks’  earnings  and  capital  levels.  The 
shortage of capital then constrains the market-making activity of key dealers, further reducing 
market liquidity. Required capital levels are strongly dependent on the assessment of market 
liquidity risk, not just the underlying credit risks. There is also the risk emerging from crowded 
trades, where market participants accumulate similar positions in benign market conditions. 
When market conditions deteriorate, everyone rushes to close their positions, exacerbating 
market strains further, hence the fall in prices. The second dimension is the risk of liquidity 
mismatches when short-term funds cover long-term assets. Although this is fundamental risk 
of  the  banking  business,  it  seems  to  have  been  underestimated.  Before  the  crisis,  market 
participants  assumed  that  CP  and  interbank  markets  would  always  function  and  would 
provide access to sufficient liquidity. This led to the build-up of large liquidity mismatches, for 
example in SIVs. They also believed in the valuation of AAA-rated assets and assumed little 
risk was involved. They expected that, when cash liquidity was needed, they could promptly 
sell such assets regardless of the complexity or the size of the market. This led to a further 
build-up of liquidity risks. 
4 
 BIS Review 60/2009
Second, understanding the mechanisms through which leverage builds up and the impact of 
the unwinding of such leverage is essential. Before the outbreak of the turmoil, leverage had 
built up both through traditional channels such as repos and through non-traditional channels 
such as off-balance sheet vehicles and structured credit products. Much of the leverage was 
parked outside traditional financial institutions and also embedded in complex products held 
worldwide  by  various  investors.  As  a  result,  no  one  could  confidently  estimate  the  overall 
leverage in the financial system, and thus the depth and breadth of its negative impact, once 
the cycle went into reverse.  
Third,  assessing  the  effectiveness  of  diversification  and  hedging  strategies  are  important. 
Market participants need to understand that some risks cannot be truly diversified or hedged 
away.  For  example,  mortgage  backed  securities  cannot  avoid  the  risks  of  a  macro  shock 
such  as  a  nationwide  drop  in  residential  house  prices.  Hedging  often  involves  taking  on 
counterparty and basis risks. AAA–rated counterparties are not risk free. Hedging strategies 
tend to lose their effectiveness during times of extreme stress. The risks which seem to have 
been  neutralized  under  normal  market  conditions,  would  reemerge  once  the  conditions 
sustaining the benign market environment collapsed. 
The causes of the global financial crisis are multifaceted and there are many lessons to be 
learned  and  improvements  to  be  made.  If  I  may  repeat  what  has  already  been  raised  by 
many, the lessons are: market participants must improve risk management; disclosure and 
transparency must be enhanced to improve the effectiveness of market discipline; authorities 
must  revamp  prudential  rules  and  strengthen  supervision;  and  cross-border  cooperation 
among authorities must be further strengthened. 
Recognizing the importance of all of this, from a central banker’s perspective, let me offer 
two perspectives which I believe are essential in reshaping the global financial system.  
take 
into  consideration, 
interlinkages  among 
Assessing risks on a system-wide basis 
The first perspective is the assessment of risks on a system-wide basis. As a starting point, it 
is imperative that overall risks in the financial system are assessed on a macro basis. Risks 
in the financial system and ultimately in the economy as a whole are not simple sums of the 
risks held by individual financial institutions.  
During  the  build-up  of  the  excesses,  senior  management  of  financial  institutions  did  not 
sufficiently 
the 
interactions  between  the  real  economy  and  financial  markets.  Authorities  tended  to 
concentrate on regulation and supervision at an individual firm level rather than system-wide 
analysis which is critical for the stability of the financial system. 
System-wide risks need to be assessed in two ways.3 As a starting point, they need to be 
evaluated on a cross-sectional basis at a specific point in time. Both financial institutions and 
authorities need to look beyond individual products, risks and institutions. The dispersion and 
concentration of various types of risks together with how they interact within financial markets 
need to be evaluated. Additionally, system-wide risks need to be reviewed dynamically as it 
evolves over time. This is the pro-cyclicality problem, I will touch upon next. Risk exposures 
which  may  seem  to  be  reasonable  under  benign  economic  and  market  conditions,  may 
increase dramatically during times of stress. The fluctuation of risks as they change along 
with macro-economic environment needs to be carefully assessed as well. These steps are 
quite challenging, but have become essential in this globalized and fast changing financial 
system. 
financial  markets  and 
                                                 
3   Mervyn King (2009), “Finance: A Return From Risk”, speech at the Mansion House. 
BIS Review 60/2009 
 5
Mitigating pro-cyclicality 
The  second  perspective  concerns  pro-cyclicality,  the  feedback  mechanisms  between  the 
financial and real sectors of the economy. 
Can  we  expect  financial  institutions  to  take  into  consideration  system-wide  implications  in 
making  their  business  decisions?  Probably  not  automatically.  Financial  institutions  face 
strong  competitive  pressures.  Procyclicality  is  human  nature.  Such  tendencies  could  be 
exacerbated, for example, by short-termism built into compensation schemes. 
Another element which influences pro-cyclical behavior is the macro-economic and financial 
environment.  Looking  back  at  bank  behavior  since  the  beginning  of  this  decade,  interest 
rates  fell  in  a  low  inflation  environment,  banks  and  other  market  participants  initially 
increased duration risks, by increasing their holdings of longer-term assets. Then they took 
on  more  credit  risk  investing  in  a wider  range  of  products.  As  profits pressures increased, 
they  additionally  used  more  leverage  to  enhance  returns.  Considering  the  competitive 
pressures  in  the  markets,  behavior  of  individual  entities  was  quite  rational.  This  is  what 
“search for yield” is all about. Even though risk management at the institution level regarding 
individual risk factors may have been appropriate, risks were accumulating on a system-wide 
basis. 
What is necessary to avoid such accumulation of risks through pro-cyclical behavior? 
To  begin  with,  proper  incentive  structures  need  to  be  incorporated  into  rules  and  market 
practice.  For  example,  senior  management  requires  incentive  structures  which  have  time 
horizons  that  are  consistent  with  the  risk  profile  of  the  institution.  The  recently  published 
Financial  Stability  Forum’s  Principles  for  Sound  Compensation  Practices4  highlights  this 
point  and  such  perspectives  are  also  generally  relevant  in  the  areas  of  accounting  and 
disclosure. 
Not only micro-level incentives, but macro-level incentives also matter. Behavior of economic 
agents is importantly influenced by overall economic and market conditions. When rival firms 
are generating excess returns through new strategies in a low interest rate environment, the 
incentives  are  clear.  As  in  the  now  famous  remarks,  it  is  difficult  not  to  join  the  party,  if 
everybody  is  dancing  to  the  music.  This  is  where  policy  tools  to  mitigate  procyclicality 
become essential. 
Excellent work has already been carried out in various fora such as the Basel Committee on 
Banking Supervision and the Financial Stability Forum, the new Financial Stability Board, to 
assess  possible  pro-cyclicality  in  current  rules,  and  key  areas  for  further  work  have  been 
identified such as capital requirements, provisioning, and valuation. Developing a framework 
whereby banks build up buffers or cushions during good economic times which can be used 
to  absorb  shocks  during  times  of  stress  is  required.  Policy  tools  which  would  enable 
authorities  to  steer  bank  behavior  in  this  direction  are  called  for.  Work  is  continuing  but 
naturally the devil lies in the details. Policy tools need to be dynamic and flexible enough to 
reflect evolving financial and economic conditions and also deal with the unique condition of 
each institution. At the same time, they also need to be transparent and market participants 
would need to be confident in both their effectiveness and fairness. These are challenging 
conditions,  but  I  am  confident  the  discussions  among  experts  will  provide  positive  results. 
The important thing is to provide the experts with sufficient time to dig into the heart of the 
issue and to come up with lasting solutions.  
                                                 
4   Financial Stability Forum (2009), “Principles for Sound Compensation Practices”. 
6 
 BIS Review 60/2009
Actions by central banks 
V. 
Finally,  I  would  like  to  discuss  the  roles  of  central  banks  which  are  relevant  in  preventing 
financial crises. The central bank is the sole provider of unlimited liquidity and responsible for 
maintaining  the  stability  of  the  economic  and  financial  environment.  Though  the  specific 
details  differ  across  individual  central  banks,  this  is  traditionally  understood  to  include  the 
following roles: conducting monetary policy aimed at maintaining price stability, acting as a 
lender-of-last resort, operating and overseeing the payment and settlement system, and in 
some cases, supervising banks. Today, I would like to talk about the role of central banks 
from four slightly different angles. 
Central bank as providers of system-wide analysis 
First, the central bank is a provider of system-wide analysis. In order to develop a system-
wide analytical perspective, both hands-on knowledge of the institution as well as the ability 
of the central bank’s staff to engage in a constructive dialogue with management of financial 
institutions  are  crucially  important.  In  the  Bank  of  Japan’s  experience,  micro-level 
supervision, such as on-site examinations and off-site monitoring has been a valuable tool. 
The  Bank  of  Japan  began  its  on-site  examinations  in  1928.  This  was  founded  on  the 
experiences of the financial crisis during the latter half of the 1920s. The legal basis for on-
site examinations was clarified when the Bank of Japan Law was completely revised in 1998. 
In  practice,  periodical  on-site  examinations  are  complemented  by  off-site  monitoring, 
including daily liquidity monitoring, which enables the Bank of Japan to continuously assess 
risks on a system-wide basis. Regardless of which public institution is ultimately responsible 
for  macro-prudential  policy,  the  central  bank  naturally  has  a  role  to  play  given  its  unique 
functions.  The  central  bank  has  accumulated  skills  and  experience  in  macro  economic 
analysis  and  maintains  an  engrained  institutional  culture  emphasizing  the  importance  of 
research. The central bank also has access to information through its contacts with market 
participants and has built up expertise on payment and settlement systems in the course of 
their  banking  operations.  All  of  these  elements  provide  a  strong  foundation  for  effective 
system-wide analysis. 
Central banks as a plumber 
Second, the central bank is a plumber. When people think about the functions of the central 
bank, they tend to focus on monetary policy, which is, in recent years, often narrowly defined 
as  the  adjustment  of  short-term  interest  rates.  However,  as  central  bankers  have 
emphasized over the years,5 in order to effectively implement monetary policy and maintain 
the  stability  of  the  financial  system,  reliable  plumbing  including  a  robust  payment  and 
settlement  system,  is  necessary.  Markets  need  an  infrastructure,  where  liquidity  flows 
smoothly and efficiently across products, market participants, time zones and regions. As I 
mentioned earlier, the current crisis has reemphasized the importance of liquidity. Naturally, 
central banks need to provide liquidity as the lender of last resort. But it does not stop there. 
The  role  of  central  bank  as  a  plumber  is  indispensable,  even  though  this  is  not  fully 
recognized during normal times. For example, the currency swap market is used by banks to 
access  foreign  currency  funds,  especially  US  dollars.  Although  it  receives  little  media 
coverage, the existence of CLS (Continuous Linked Settlement) minimized so-called Herstatt 
risk  which  arises  when  conducting  foreign  exchange  transactions  across  different  time 
zones, during this crisis. This is a critical risk factor for a country like Japan where markets 
open  first  on  the  globe  everyday.  Without  this  system,  disruptions  in  the  financial  markets 
during the recent turmoil could have been more severe. Major central banks played a quiet 
but key role in the establishment of CLS. In other areas, enabling the efficient use of banks’ 
                                                 
5   See, for example, Paul Tucker (2009), remarks at the Turner Review Conference. 
BIS Review 60/2009 
 7
assets  as  central  bank  collateral  ensures  that  sufficient  liquidity  is  available  to  market 
participants.  Having  such  infrastructure  in  place  becomes  ever  more  important  in  stress 
situations.  Foreign  currency  liquidity  operations,  typically  the  US  dollar,  by  non-US  central 
banks are also ways to ensure that liquidity flows to where it needs to go when markets are 
dysfunctional. 
Central banks as a global network 
Third, central banks have become a part of a tight knit global network. Though needless to 
say there is no single global currency. But financial markets have become globalized. The 
Nobel Prize winning British economist Sir John R. Hicks made a keen prediction forty years 
ago. He predicted that in a globalized financial market “a national central bank will no longer 
be  true  central  bank”,  but  will  become  “single  banks  in  a  world-wide  system”.6  Of  course, 
each  central  bank  still  needs  to  fulfill  its  traditional  roles  within  its  jurisdictions.  But  in  this 
globalized financial system, central bank cooperation has become ever more critical, such as 
the exchange of information and the harmonization of central bank services.  
Central banks as an entity guided by long-term interests  
Fourth, economic and financial market conditions evolve continuously and it is impractical for 
us to foresee all future developments and thus predetermine detailed rules. Central banks 
are in a position to supplement the limitations of such rules. Recent experiences in monetary 
policy  offer  a  good  example.  All  central  banks  have  the  long-term  goal  to  maintain  price 
stability which is a prerequisite for sustainable growth of the economy. The key is how we 
define and attain price stability. Almost all central banks have a numerical expression of price 
stability as they understand, define or target. In the case of Japan, the Bank of Japan has 
provided its “understanding of medium- to long-term price stability.” The UK has an inflation 
targeting framework. These numerical expressions play an important role, since independent 
central  banks  have  to  be  accountable  with  respect  to  their  conduct  of  monetary  policy. 
However, to the extent that a specific number fosters the social presumption that a central 
bank is expected to focus narrowly on price inflation alone, especially in the short run, it may 
have the unintended effect of assisting the creation of bubbles when low inflation coexists 
with an excessive boom in economic and financial activity. If this is the case, it may hinder 
the central bank’s longer term goal of maintaining stable prices and a stable financial system. 
A fundamental issue arises when credit bubble emerges in an environment of general price 
stability. Do central banks hesitate to tighten monetary policy because prices are generally 
stable? Just as it is important for senior management of financial institutions not to succumb 
to short-termism exemplified by short-term ROE targets, central banks need to focus on long-
term  price  and  financial  stability.  Needless  to say,  price  stability  is  essential.  But  if  central 
banks  see  the  economy  only  through  a  lens  of  narrowly  interpreted  price  stability,  they 
sometimes  may  overlook  much  more  crucial imbalances. Milton  Friedman  explained  in  his 
famous presidential address to the American Economic Association in 1968, that the role of 
monetary policy is two fold; maintaining the smooth functioning of financial markets and the 
financial system, and price stability.7 What is intriguing here is that Friedman used the term 
monetary policy in a much broader context than we define now. Would it be appropriate to 
clearly detach the two objectives of the central bank, and as a result use two separate set of 
tools to attain them? Simply put, would we use interest rate policy to maintain price stability 
and  introduce  separate  macro  prudential  tools  to  maintain  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system? In my view, the two objectives of central banks are closely interlinked. One cannot 
                                                 
6   John R. Hicks, (1969), “Critical Essays In Monetary Theory”. 
7   Milton  Friedman  (1968),  “The  Role  of  Monetary  Policy,”  Presidential  Address  to  the  American  Economic 
Association. 
8 
 BIS Review 60/2009
be  achieved  without  the  other  on  a  long-term  basis.  Thus  separating two  set  of  tools  also 
would  be  impractical.  Central  banks  need  one  large  toolkit  to  achieve  the  two  inseparable 
long-term  objectives.  It  is  a  daunting  task  for  a  central  bank  to  act  with  a  long-term 
perspective  while  explaining  its  intention  and  rationale  in  a  society  which  is  liable  to  be 
influenced by short-termism. It is a real challenge. 
Concluding remarks 
VI. 
Let me conclude. 
International discussions to develop a new financial architecture and new rules which would 
prevent future crises are underway. However, new architectures and rules in themselves are 
not  sufficient.  There  is  no  doubt  that  through  advances  in  technology  and  innovation, 
financial products, institutions, and markets will continue to evolve rapidly. Rules, especially 
global rules, which require due process before implementation, will inevitably be behind the 
curve.  Using  expert  judgment  to  adapt  present  rules  to  a  new  environment  will  always  be 
important.  No  amount  of  rules  can  guide  the  ideal  response  among  economic  entities, 
especially  against  unforeseeable  future  events.  Central  banks,  through  their  skills  and 
experience  in  macro  economic  policy  as  well  as  their  unique  position  in  financial  markets, 
can help steer the policy debate in areas such as macro-prudential policy. 
Central  banks,  with  their  macro-perspective  towards  both  the  real  economy  and  financial 
system,  expertise  as  plumbers  of  payment  and  settlement  system,  and  real  time  market 
intelligence obtained from interaction from market participants can and must play a key role 
in preventing future crises. This also entails huge responsibilities for central banks and we 
will need to work extensively both individually and jointly to be in a position to fulfill such a 
role,  together  with  other  authorities.  Close  cooperation  with  financial  institutions  and  other 
market participants will also be crucial. 
Thank you for your attention. 
BIS Review 60/2009 
 9
