Axel A Weber: Reflections on the financial crisis 
Text of the Mais Lecture by Professor Axel A Weber, President of the Deutsche Bundesbank, 
at the Cass Business School, London, 13 May 2009.  
 Introduction  
1 
Ladies and gentlemen 
It is an exceptional honour for me to be invited to give this year’s Mais Lecture here at City 
University.  And  it  is  a  very  welcome  opportunity  for  me  to  present  my  reflections  on  the 
financial crisis.  
The events that have been shaking financial markets since the summer of 2007 and which 
escalated  markedly  in  September  2008  are  occupying  the  attention  of  governments  and 
central banks worldwide on an unprecedented scale. 
While  it  is  certainly  true  that  attempts  to  contain  the  financial  crisis  and  thereby  prevent 
financial market tensions from creating a vicious circle for the real economy is a challenge for 
monetary policymakers in nearly all areas, I would argue that, for monetary policy in the euro 
area, the challenges may be even larger than for other industrial economies. 
When  we  recently  celebrated  the  tenth  anniversary  of  the  launch  of  the  single  currency,  it 
was often stated that the first ten years of the euro have been a notable success with regard 
to price stability, trade and financial integration in Europe. However, it was also said that the 
years ahead are likely to pose an even greater challenge. 
Challenges for monetary policy 
2 
And indeed, as I have argued before, the challenges we are currently facing are, in many 
respects, more demanding than anything else in the euro area’s first ten years. 
To that end, it is my firm belief that the value of monetary union has never been greater than 
during  this  financial  crisis.  Try  to  imagine  what  would  have  happened  without  the  single 
currency. Probably, foreign exchange markets may have been subject to speculative attacks. 
Currency  fluctuations  may  have  aggravated  both  the  financial  crisis  and  real  economic 
tensions – and do not forget the political turbulence implied by such currency tensions. 
The financial crisis confronts policymakers with a situation of uncertainty in a very profound 
sense.  Such  Knightian  uncertainty  means  that  past  experience  is  not  of  great  value  when 
deciding  on  appropriate  policy  measures.  In  such  an  environment,  policy  has  to  strike  a 
difficult balance between short-term and long-term needs. More specifically, in the case of 
monetary  policy,  there  is,  on  the  one  side,  a  need  for  resolute  action  to  counter  the 
consequences of the crisis. On the other side, such actions should not undermine the long-
term  foundations  of  monetary  policy,  such  as  the  central  bank’s  credibility.  Striking  that 
balance  is  not  only  key  to  monetary  policy,  but  also  to  other  policy  areas,  such  as  fiscal 
policy and policies that aim to stabilise the financial system. And the appropriate balance is 
not independent of the institutional background against which these policies operate.  
This is all the more true of EMU, where the institutional setting is still comparatively young, 
the political balance between monetary policy and fiscal policy is more complex than in other 
mature  economies,  because  it  is  characterised  by  the  coexistence  of  a  supranational 
monetary and autonomous national fiscal policies. 
These  considerations  have  to  be  kept  in  mind  when  talking  about  appropriate  policy 
responses.  The  responses  may  differ  among  central  banks  even  in  the  face  of  common 
BIS Review 59/2009 
 1
economic shocks because of the differing institutional frameworks within which monetary and 
fiscal policy operate. 
Thus, I would like to go on to elaborate somewhat on the challenges for monetary policy, on 
the approach we have taken in the Eurosystem, and on lessons to be learnt for monetary 
policy in the longer term. 
A brief account of the financial crisis  
2.1 
When looking at the underlying causes of the recent tensions in the global financial system, 
numerous  culprits  have  been  identified:  securitisation,  quality  of  risk  management,  credit 
rating  agencies,  compensation  schemes,  accounting  standards  and  even  expansionary 
monetary policy – to name but a few.  
I am extremely sceptical about any monocausal explanation. Instead, I believe that a cocktail 
of  various  ingredients  generated  the  shock  waves  that  have  rocked  the  global  financial 
system. 
A key factor was a combination of new and complex instruments for transferring credit risks, 
and the “originate and distribute” business model of credit institutions. 
It has now become clear that the “originate and distribute” model can actually improve the 
resilience of the financial system if, and only if, a high-quality standard is maintained at all 
levels of the transfer process, and no new concentrations of risk arise. Since the outbreak of 
the financial crisis, however, we have learned about a series of distorted incentives, which 
manifested themselves in lax origination standards for products such as subprime mortgages 
and  in  some  investors’  excessive  reliance  on  credit  ratings.  In  the  end,  securitisation,  as 
Claudio Borio from the BIS aptly put it in 2008, has, ultimately, “distributed fear rather than 
risks”.  
However,  while  financial  innovation  has  undoubtedly  magnified  vulnerabilities  in  the  global 
financial system, there is more to the present financial market turmoil than the proliferation of 
structured  finance  products.  Arguably,  the  “originate  and  distribute”  model  would  not  have 
been possible without the benign macroeconomic and financial setting in the years preceding 
the current crisis: Booming global economic growth, low consumer price inflation, low-level 
long-term and short-term interest rates, and rising prices of real estate and other assets in 
many countries – not just in the USA. 
The possibility of a mis-pricing of risks and the attendant dangers were perceived by some 
commentators even before the crisis began. Indeed, central banks, in particular, pointed to 
such a development. Once the vulnerabilities in the global financial system were revealed in 
August  2007  and  intensified  in  autumn  last  year,  we  all  witnessed  financial  imbalances 
starting to unwind. Especially after the collapse of Lehman Brothers in September 2008, the 
process of unwinding of financial imbalances escalated. Frictions spilled over from the core 
segment of structured products to other asset classes, spreads on credit and bond markets 
rose dramatically and interbank markets froze. 
Banking stabilisation measures 
2.2 
As solvency risks in the banking system mounted, on both sides of the Atlantic governments 
in  close  cooperation  with  central  banks  set  up  rescue  schemes  that  moved  away  from  a 
case-by-case approach in dealing with troubled banks to broad-based schemes.  
The  rescue  schemes  focused  primarily  on  improving  the  banks’  capital  position  when  the 
ability  to  raise  private  capital  became  virtually  non-existent.  Moreover,  stabilising  banks’ 
access to medium-term funding through public guarantee schemes served as an additional 
tool.  
2 
 BIS Review 59/2009
This sketchy characterisation also holds true for Germany. Measures taken in Germany so 
far by the Financial Market Stabilisation Fund (SoFFin) have focused on the liability side of 
banks’ balance sheets, because it has been recognised that the financial market problems 
and, not least, the recessionary economic environment ultimately have a dramatic impact on 
the banks’ capital position.  
The capital-injection and guarantee programmes have contributed to a stabilisation, but have 
not been able to entirely eliminate uncertainty about banks’ soundness. Hence, the ongoing 
risk of balance sheet strains as a result of continuing write-downs on problematic assets led 
to a drying-up of private equity capital issuance and aggravated the issuance of debt (without 
a government guarantee).  
This, together with the fear that these problems could lead to a significantly reduced bank 
loan supply is likely to be the main reason why governments have recently augmented their 
previous approaches with plans to provide relief to the asset side of banks’ balance sheets. 
In  that  regard,  in  Germany  the  establishment  of  a  scheme  to  deal  with  problem  assets  is 
currently in the legislative making.  
I do not want to elaborate in detail on the various proposals that have already been adopted 
or scheduled to be implemented on both sides of the Atlantic. Instead, I would rather discuss 
some  basic  requirements  which  –  as  I  see  it  –  should  be  fulfilled  by  such  asset-side 
measures:  
• 
Banks must be restructured in a way which makes them attractive for new capital. 
More specifically, new equity as well as new debt capital should not be burdened by 
risks from the time prior to the stabilisation measure.  
Government  intervention  should  stabilise  banks,  not  subsidise  the  former  owners. 
Measures should provide guarantees for the continuity of the financial system in the 
form of insolvency protection for systemically relevant institutions. At the same time, 
investors who provided risk capital prior to the stabilisation measure are fully liable 
for any extant risks up to the amount of their capital. This is important not just from a 
fiscal standpoint, but also for creating an adequate incentive structure for the future. 
Given  the  uncertainty  it  currently  entails,  intervention  through  the  stabilisation  of 
asset positions should, as far as possible, avoid the need to value the assets. Or, to 
be  more  specific,  approaches  in  which  asset  valuation  plays  a  major  role  in  the 
distribution of risks and losses should be complemented by elements which ensure 
that  existing  shareholders  –  not  the  banks  –  fully  bear  the  consequences  from 
possible re-valuations of these assets at a later stage. 
  Monetary policy measures taken 
2.3 
I would now like to return to the monetary policy responses of the Eurosystem. 
Since the financial market turmoil began in August 2007, the Eurosystem has stabilised the 
European money market by generously providing liquidity above and beyond the benchmark 
allotment. This has enabled banks to fulfil their minimum reserve requirements early in the 
reserve period (frontloading). In the early stages, these measures were accompanied by the 
use of liquidity-absorbing fine-tuning operations at the end of the maintenance period. At the 
same time, the Governing Council also tried to stabilise the longer-term maturity segments of 
the money market by introducing refinancing operations with a maturity of up to six months 
owing to the continued weakness of interbank trading activities in these segments.  
From  mid-September  2008,  however,  as  the  crisis  intensified,  the  yield  spread  between 
secured and unsecured quarterly liquidity in the interbank market peaked at more than 1.8 
percentage  points.  Owing  to  the  renewed  sharp  increase  in  banks’  mistrust,  the  overnight 
money market also suffered heavily. Further adjustments to liquidity policy were unavoidable 
under such circumstances. The transition to fixed-rate tenders with full allotment of all bids 
BIS Review 59/2009 
 3
decided upon in October 2008, together with a widening of the collateral framework in our 
refinancing  operations,  ensured  that  all  banks  received  the  liquidity  they  needed  at  the 
interest rate deemed appropriate from a monetary policy perspective. 
The escalation of the financial market turmoil from mid-September onwards and the global 
shock to confidence led to a considerable change in the outlook for the real economy and 
price  stability  changed.  Against  this  background,  the  Governing  Council  of  the  ECB  has 
lowered its main policy rate decisively since October 2008 from 4.25% to 1%.  
Moreover,  given  that  very  short-term  rates  are  now  at  an  appropriate level,  the  Governing 
Council decided at its meeting last week to implement further measures in order to fulfil its 
primary goal – that is, safeguarding medium-term price stability. These measures include the 
introduction  of  tender  operations  with  a  maturity  of  12  months  and  outright  purchases  of 
covered bonds up to a maximum amount of €60 billion. The Governing Council will provide 
detailed information on the covered bond programme after its next meeting. 
Such  “non-standard”  monetary  policy  measures  extend  the  traditional  monetary  policy 
toolbox of the Eurosystem. They reflect the bank-based nature of the financial system in the 
euro  area  –  which  implies  that  monetary  policy  impulses  are  predominantly  transmitted 
through the banking system – by aiming to improve funding conditions for banks. 
All  in  all,  the  monetary  policy  actions  and  the  rescue  schemes  for  banks  in  stress  have 
helped to stabilise the financial system at a time when systemic stability was at risk. Thus, 
they have put a floor under the tail risk of a self-enforcing uncontrolled downward-spiral from 
feedback effects between the financial and the real spheres.  
However, monetary policy has created an enormous expansionary stimulus – not just in the 
euro area but also worldwide. While this stimulus is currently warranted, we have to keep in 
mind that it has to be reduced or even inverted very quickly as soon as the overall situation 
improves.  The  need  for  such  a  quick  retraction  of  the  expansionary  stance  stems  from  at 
least two factors. The first is that part of the monetary stimulus will remain in the pipeline for 
some  time  due  to  the  usual  lags  of  monetary  transmission.  The  second  is  that  there  is  a 
possibility of the recovery taking place in a more dynamic way than currently expected (if the 
factors  that  caused  the  non-linearity  in  the  downswing  work  favourably  in  the  upswing  as 
well).  Both  factors  could  lead  to  inflationary  risks  making  a  rapid  and  powerful  comeback, 
and we should all be aware of this. 
All  policy  responses,  especially  the  monetary  policy  actions,  cannot  –  and  should  not  – 
prevent  the  necessary  adjustment  processes  in  the  financial  system.  Above  all,  the 
excessive  leverage  in  the  financial  system  needs  to  be  corrected.  Short-term  policy 
measures  should  do  no  more  than  try  to  manage  this  deleveraging-process  in  an  orderly 
way, that is, it should prevent unnecessary collateral damage to the rest of the economy. 
Moreover,  monetary  and  fiscal  policies  are  unable  to  provide  shelter  for  the  domestic 
economy against the global symmetric confidence shock that hit the global economy after the 
collapse of Lehman Brothers. They can only attempt to dampen some of the second-round 
effects on the domestic economy by trying to stabilise domestic demand.  
Public 
to  macroeconomic 
stabilisation.  The  German  government  has  implemented  discretionary  measures  in  a 
magnitude  of  over  2%  of  GDP  for  the  years  2009  and  2010.  Most  of  the  effects  of  these 
measures have still come into effect. With regard to fiscal stabilisation it is also necessary to 
keep in mind that its effects should not only be evaluated by discretionary measures alone. 
Built-in  adjustments  in  public  budgets  –  so-called  automatic  stabilisers  –  provide  stimulus 
through  a  rule-based  fiscal  framework.  These  automatic  stabilisers  are  more  important  in 
countries with larger social security systems and progressive tax systems. For example, in 
Germany the contribution of automatic stabilisers in 2009 and 2010 will be nearly 3% of GDP 
(including developments in profit-related taxes). 
indeed  are  contributing  noticeably 
in  Germany 
finances 
4 
 BIS Review 59/2009
Thus, for a thorough assessment of public finances in its stabilisation role the swing in the 
overall public deficits is the most adequate measure. According to the latest forecast by the 
European  Commission  –  which  is  plausible  in  our  view  –  the  overall  public  deficit  will 
deteriorate by 6% of GDP over 2009 and 2010. This is somewhat less than in the UK, but it 
makes  clear  that  –  contrary  to  some  popular  misperceptions  –  Germany’s  fiscal  policy  is 
markedly contributing to stabilising the economy. 
There  is  not  only  a  structural  adjustment  need  in  the  international  financial  system.  In 
addition to a marked cyclical shock, some real imbalances in the global division of labour are 
being corrected through the current global downturn. Stabilisation policies should not try to 
prevent these processes; returning to a status quo ante is not a sensible option. 
Given  the  recent  encouraging  signs  from  financial  markets  and  a  number  of  leading 
economic indicators, I believe there are some grounds for being optimistic that the pace of 
decline  in  economic  activity  will  decelerate  markedly  in  the  months  ahead.  However,  it  is 
certainly  not  advisable  to  be  overly  optimistic  that  the  recovery  process  is  safely  on  track. 
This will most likely be a gradual process with growth rates – notwithstanding some volatility 
in quarterly figures – lying below potential for a considerable period of time. This means that 
economic slack measured by very low rates of capacity utilisation will not diminish rapidly.  
And we should take into account that, even if in many countries – including Germany – the 
worst may be over in terms of negative growth rates, the labour market situation will visibly 
deteriorate in the quarters ahead.  
The German economy has been hit hard by the global downturn. Germany as an open and 
export-oriented  economy  has  its  comparative  advantage  in  investment  goods.  And  it  has 
specialised by increasing its degree of openness markedly over the past decade. By doing 
so, the German economy has benefited from the dynamic global environment of the past few 
years. Currently, the sharp contraction in the German manufacturing sector makes clear that 
this kind of specialisation also means a more cyclical overall economy, at least in the face of 
rare massive common global shocks. An open economy like Germany’s cannot insure itself 
against truly global shocks regardless of how diversified its export portfolio is in regional or 
product terms.  
With  regard  to  measures  stabilising  the  global  economy,  one  aspect  that  is  too  often 
overlooked is the fact that due to the sharp contraction in net exports since summer 2008 the 
German economy is de facto stabilising the global economy. A decline in net exports means 
that  less  income  from  global  trade  flows  is  absorbed  by  Germany.  Then,  by  definition,  in 
some  other  countries  net  exports  must  rise,  de  facto  stabilising  production  in  those 
economies.  
Longer-term lessons for monetary policy 
2.4 
Let  me  turn  finally  to  what  are  more  longer-term  lessons  for  monetary  policy  to  be  drawn 
from  the  current  crisis.  In  doing  so,  I  shall  take  a  step  back  from  the  sort  of  crisis 
management I have just described to the more general issue of conducting monetary policy 
in the face of procyclical behaviour by financial market participants.  
As  I  have  already  mentioned,  in  the  first  half  of  this  decade,  monetary  policy  was 
expansionary in most industrial countries. This is indicated by interest-rate based measures 
of  the  monetary  policy  stance  as  well  as  by  indicators  based  on  money  and  credit 
aggregates.  At  the  same  time,  risk  premiums  on  financial  markets  have  been  too  low 
compared with traditional economic models based on macroeconomic factors.  
There  is  an  ongoing  debate  on  whether  low  interest  rates  may  have  increased  financial 
market participants’ risk appetite and played a part the dynamic growth of credit aggregates 
worldwide  via  a  so-called  risk-taking  channel  of  monetary  policy.  Given  this  debate,  the 
events of the past few months pose some fundamental questions about the role of monetary 
policy in the financial cycle. 
BIS Review 59/2009 
 5
At this point, I think that some commentators take too narrow a perspective by concentrating 
solely on the role played by monetary policy during the crisis. 
In my view, monetary policymakers should not view boom and bust episodes on the financial 
markets  as  unrelated  events.  Monetary  policymakers’  responses  to  upturns  as  well  as  to 
downturns  on  the  asset  markets  influence  the  risk  perception  of  the  market  participants. 
Therefore, an (expansionary) monetary policy response which is stronger in the downswing 
than the (restrictive) response in the upswing creates adverse incentives for investors which 
could increase the amplitudes of the financial cycle.  
A more symmetric approach by monetary policymakers would treat boom and bust episodes 
not  as  isolated  events  but  would  try  to  look  through  the  financial  cycle  in  order  to  steady 
policy.  To  be  more  specific,  a  more  symmetric  policy  would  also  consider  implicit  risks  in 
times  when  money  and  credit  growth  is  dynamic,  asset  prices  go  up  and  risk  perceptions 
decline, possibly weighing the need to act despite low current consumer price inflation rates. 
This,  however,  does  not  mean  that  monetary  policy  should  downgrade  the  price  stability 
objective  for  the  sake  of  other  objectives.  Indeed,  financial  crises  heighten  the  volatility  of 
macroeconomic variables such as inflation and growth. Rather, it means that central banks 
should  take  a  longer-term  perspective  which  takes  into  account  the  future  inflationary 
consequences of such unfavourable developments. Given the macroeconomic relevance of 
financial crises, we have good reason to enlarge our monetary policy time horizon and give 
low-frequency movements in credit and monetary aggregates more weight in our analytical 
frameworks and our monetary policy decision-making processes. 
That  is  not  to  say  that  such  an  approach  would  eliminate  financial  cycles  altogether. 
However,  in  the  medium  to  long  term,  a  monetary  policy  that  followed  a  more  symmetric 
course  would  do  more  to  dampen  damaging  financial  cycles  than  a  monetary  policy  that 
merely tries to limit damage after the event using aggressive interest rate measures. 
Here,  the  Eurosystem’s  monetary  policy  strategy  already  possesses  such  a  stabilising 
element  in  the  shape  of  its  monetary  analysis.  This  is  especially  suited  to  the  analysis  of 
long-term developments. 
The recent financial turmoil has shown that the often-criticised monetary and credit analysis 
has a valuable role to play in monetary policy analysis.  
Conclusion 
3 
The  financial  crisis  means  the  greatest  challenge  for  monetary  policy  in  decades.  Policy 
responses  have  to  take  into  account  the  specific  institutional  environment  under  which  it 
operates.  Thus,  policy  responses  might  somewhat  differ  among  countries  even  when  the 
underlying shocks are similar.  
The Eurosystem has responded in a decisive way to the emerging financial tensions. These 
measures have reflected the specific circumstances of the euro area – and will continue to 
do so.  
In the euro area fiscal policy is also contributing to dampen the economic downswing. This is 
also  true  for  Germany,  where  automatic  stabilisers  and  discretionary  measures  cause  a 
massive  swing  in  deficit  figures  in  this  year  and  next  year.  The  fiscal  policy  in  Germany 
contributes  visibly  to  the  stabilisation  of  the  macroeconomy.  Automatic  stabilisers  play  an 
important role in that regard. 
In  a  longer-term  perspective  one  lessons  from  the  current  crisis  and  its  causes  is  that 
monetary policy should treat financial cycles in a more symmetric way. This means taking 
account of the financial cycle in the upswing as well as in the downturn. In an operational 
sense  it  means  enhancing  the  time  horizon  for  monetary  policy  and  paying  paying  close 
attention to money and credit aggregates. 
6 
 BIS Review 59/2009
