Zhou Xiaochuan: On savings ratio  
Keynote  address  by  Dr  Zhou  Xiaochuan,  Governor  of  the  People’s  Bank  of  China,  at  the 
High Level Conference hosted by the Central Bank of Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, 10 February 
2009. 
 There are no commonly accepted explanations for savings and consumption behaviors in the 
economics and statistics community. With further transmission of the current financial crisis, 
discussions on the causes to the crisis intensified. Some believe that the high savings ratio of 
the East Asia and oil-producing countries is one major cause for the global imbalance and 
the crisis. This paper attempts to explore the factors that affect savings ratio, and examine 
the reasons behind the high savings ratios in the East Asian and oil-producing countries and 
the low savings ratio in the U.S. It also provides a brief description of savings ratio in China 
and the corresponding adjustment approaches, as well as a set of options for adjusting this 
ratio.  Major  views  of  this  paper  were  discussed  at  the  High  Level  Conference  Hosted  by 
Bank Negara Malaysia on February 10, 2009. 
Factors affecting savings ratios  
I.  
The  term  “savings”  in  this  paper  includes  domestic  savings,  current  account  surplus  and 
foreign  reserve.  As  of  now,  we  have  not  seen  sufficient  and  solid  academic  studies 
illustrating the linkage between the savings ratio and determinant factors, such as the level of 
wealth as measured by per capita GDP, foreign exchange rate, the development of financial 
intermediation  and  capital  market,  tradition,  demographic  structure  and  social  security 
system. While exchange rate is statistically correlated with savings ratio to some degree, the 
coefficients are generally low and the correlation usually insignificant. It therefore seems that 
savings ratio can’t be adjusted by simply adjusting exchange rate. 
Identifying the factors determining savings ratio is a major policy challenge for all countries. 
We can only come up with an effective policy tool kit after identifying determining factors for 
and their impacts on the savings ratio. 
Causes for high savings ratio in the East Asia and oil-producing countries  
II.  
Tradition,  cultural,  family  structure,  and  demographic  structure  and  stage  of  economic 
development  are  the  major  reasons  for  high  savings  ratio  in  the  East  Asia.  First,  the  East 
Asia countries are influenced by Confucianism, which value thrift, self-discipline, zhong yong 
or  Middle  Ground  (low-key),  and  anti-extravagancy.  Second,  we  may  be  able  to  trace  the 
cultural differences from a large number of textbooks and literature of different countries. For 
instance,  the  Latin  American  countries  have  similar  levels  of  national  wealth  as  the  East 
Asian countries but lower savings ratios. This can be attributed to the cultural differences in 
the region, where people have a higher propensity of consumption and tend to quickly use up 
all their salaries. Third, family tie is strong in the East Asian countries, and families shoulder 
social  responsibilities  such  as  providing  for  the  elderly  and  bringing  up  children.  Fourth, 
according to the Life Cycle Hypothesis by Franco Modigliani, more money is saved to meet 
future  pension  and  healthcare  needs  as  the  share  of  working  age  population  increases. 
When  we  study  the  phases  of  economic  growth,  in  times  of  exceptionally  high  economic 
growth, most of the incremental income will be saved, resulting in an unusually high savings 
ratio. China fits in the above-mentioned two conditions for a high savings ratio. Japan and 
the U.S. can also demonstrate the contribution of these factors in determining savings ratio. 
Similar  to  the  U.S.,  Japan  is  a  developed  country  with  high  per  capita  income.  The  social 
security systems in the two countries have their respective weaknesses. However, Japan’s 
BIS Review 37/2009 
 1
savings ratio is much higher than that in the U.S. This can be largely ascribed to cultural, 
family value and demographic feature in Japan, which are fairly similar to those in other East 
Asian countries.  
Some argue that an inadequate social security system leads to high savings ratio. Though 
logically sound, this argument lacks adequate empirical support. Moreover, it is based on the 
assumption that human behaviors are rational and people increase their savings for future 
healthcare and pension needs. In fact, such an assumption does not necessarily stand.  
High  savings  ratio  in  oil-producing  countries  has  different  reasons.  Endowed  with  rich  oil 
resources  that  far  exceed  their  normal  demand,  these  countries  naturally  accumulate  their 
wealth in the form of savings. 
The  elementary  textbooks  on  economics  always  start  with  “supply,  demand  and  prices”, 
which lead the readers to believe that certain prices (e.g., exchange rate and interest rate) 
can determine the behavior of savings and consumption. However, the fact is that the level of 
savings  ratio  is  influenced  by  a  wide  range  of  factors,  and  it  can’t  be  adjusted  simply  by 
changing  nominal  exchange  rate.  Factors  such  as  national  tradition,  culture,  family 
structures, demographics and social security system can’t be changed in the short term. As a 
result, it may take a long time for policies to yield intended impacts. 
Implications of the Asian financial crisis for savings ratio in the East Asia 
III.  
Savings in the GDP are composed of resident, corporate and government savings. If total 
savings exceed domestic investment, the surplus will take the form of foreign reserves. To 
analyze the drastic increase of imbalance of savings and trade in East Asian countries that 
emerged after 1997, we need to examine the impact of the Asian financial crisis on savings 
ratio in these countries.  
The high savings ratio and large foreign reserves in the East Asian countries are a result of 
defensive  reactions  against  predatory  speculation.  During  the  Asian  Financial  Crisis,  the 
rampant speculations of hedge funds caused large capital inflows and subsequent reversal in 
these  countries,  which  exacerbated  their  economic  woes.  People  in  these  countries  were 
shocked,  and  disgusted  by  these  speculative  attacks.  Afterwards,  many  suggested  that 
unregulated predatory speculation caused the crisis, and appropriate international regulation 
was  needed.  However,  for  various  considerations,  some  countries  were  against  such 
regulations,  and  failed  to  see  the  need  to  adjust  the  regulatory  frameworks.  International 
organizations  also  failed  to  perform  their  regulatory  responsibilities  over  abnormal  capital 
flows, forcing the East Asian countries to amass foreign reserves to fend for themselves.  
The increase of savings ratio and current account surplus in the East Asian countries is also 
a result of the rescue plan designed by international organizations. The rescue plans were 
silent on regulating cross-border speculative capital flows, which otherwise should have been 
put  under  scrutiny.  Instead,  excessive  and  stringent  conditionalities  were  imposed, 
demanding  that  the  crisis-stricken  countries  adopt  tight  fiscal  and  monetary  policies,  raise 
interest rates, cut fiscal deficits and increase foreign reserves. In the decade thereafter, the 
East  Asian  countries  learnt  the  lessons,  and  increased  foreign  reserves  and  domestic 
savings in order to beef up their defense against financial crisis. 
Of  course,  there  were  also  vulnerabilities  in  economic  development  models,  foreign  debt 
management  as  well  as  institutional  arrangements  of  the  East  Asian  countries.  Sweeping 
structural reforms on the corporate and financial sectors were launched in the wake of the 
crisis,  social  security  systems  were  improved,  and  education  and  healthcare  systems 
reformed. However, it takes time for these efforts to take effect. 
2 
 BIS Review 37/2009
Can China adjust its savings ratio effectively?  
IV.  
During the Asian Financial Crisis, China, as a responsible large economy, did not devalue its 
currency and paid the price – a fairly slow recovery. The endeavor of the Chinese authorities 
to maintain the stability of RMB against all odds contributed to stemming the spread of the 
financial crisis.  
After the crisis, China intensified efforts to revamp its corporate and government sectors with 
the  deepening  of  market-oriented  reforms.  Profitability  of  enterprises,  especially  SOEs, 
increased; fiscal position improved and residents’ income improved steadily. Starting 2002, 
savings ratio began to surge, with steadily rising resident savings and remarkable increase of 
corporate  savings.  China’s  savings  ratio  increased  from  37.5%  in  1998  to  49.9%  in  2007. 
During the period, the ratio of corporate sector disposable income to the national disposable 
income increased from 13% to 22.5%, while the share of government disposable income to 
the total increased by only 2 percentage points. 
The rate of corporate savings to GDP in China is high compared with other countries in the 
world.  This  is  closely  related  to  the  unsolved  distortion  of  cost/profit  of  enterprises  during 
China’s economic transition. Under the planned economy, housing, healthcare, and pension 
were provided by the enterprises and the government, and weren’t accounted for in wages. 
This had dampened people’s incentives to save. Savings were even considered “involuntary” 
as people had to regularly line up in queues at shops for consumer goods in short supply. 
After the reform in the 1990s, the “iron bowl” (lifelong secure job and welfare) system was 
smashed  and  the  enterprises  stopped  providing  pension  and  housing  for  free.  However, 
effective social security system had not been in place either. These significantly increased 
the incentive for precautionary savings. Nevertheless, the real cost of labor takes time to be 
reflected  in  the  cost  of  the  enterprises.  As  a  result,  the  extraordinary  profit  from  cost 
distortion  did  not  find  its  way  to  liability  accounts  of  pension,  healthcare  and  housing  for 
employees,  where  it  should,  lead  to  significant  surge  of  corporate  savings.  This  broadly 
explained the increase in household and corporate savings. This is also why some people 
suggested that part of the state-owned shares of listed companies should be transferred to 
the national social security fund. 
The  Chinese  authorities  have  a  clear  policy  intention  to  reduce  savings  ratio.  Since  2005, 
boosting domestic demand and encouraging consumption have been important components 
of  the  national  economic  policies.  These  policies  would  eventually  bring  down  the  savings 
ratio.  Yet,  in-depth  studies  are  needed  to  identify  factors  influencing  the  savings  ratio,  its 
elasticity with respect to these factors, and the specific adjustment measures to take. 
Besides,  the  incomplete  reforms  in  some  areas  have  affected  the  adjustment  of  savings 
ratio.  Although  private  enterprises  in  China  are  already  market-driven  and  free  of  cost 
distortion, the reforms of the public sector are incomplete despite considerable achievements 
in reforming SOEs. The lack of clearly-defined and fully monetized cost structure hampered 
the adjustment of savings ratio. It is therefore important to expedite the reform of the public 
sector and the transformation of the government functions. 
Observations on low household saving ratio in the U.S. 
V.  
The U.S. household savings ratio in recent years went through two phases: before the mid-
1990s, it ranged between 7-10%; after 1997, it declined remarkably with pronounced “twin 
deficits”, especially trade deficit. Some attributed the low savings to the so-called “euphoria” 
on the U.S. economic performance since the mid-1990s. Specifically, in late 1980s and early 
1990s,  after  the  collapse  of  the  central  planning  system  of  the  former  Soviet  Union  and 
Eastern  Europe,  growth  in  those  regions  steadily  slipped.  In  the  1990s,  the  Japanese 
economy  was  also  trapped  in  prolonged  stagnation,  and  EU’s  economic  performance  was 
lackluster  due  to  structural  problems  including  rigid  labor  market.  The  U.S.,  as  the  largest 
economy,  boasted  the  optimal  economic  system  that  was  seemingly  unparalleled  in  the 
BIS Review 37/2009 
 3
In  contrast, 
the  Asian  economies  suffered  heavy  blows. 
world.  The  only  remaining  challenge,  in  terms  of  economic  system,  came  from  Asia;  after 
1997, 
the  US  economy 
demonstrated strong flexibility and resilience, and recovered rapidly from the 9/11 attack and 
the  burst  of  IT  bubble  in  recent  years.  All  these  augmented  the  euphoria  sentiment  in  the 
market,  which  in  turn  influenced  the  saving  behavior  of  the  U.S.  residents.  However,  the 
unprecedented magnitude of the current financial crisis is expected to dramatically dampen 
such euphoria sentiments. 
The  time  series  show  that  this  round  of  low  savings  and  high  consumption  in  the  US 
commenced in mid-1990s. In contrast, the savings ratio of East Asian countries only surged 
after the Asian financial crisis and China's savings ratios did not begin to increase until 2002. 
The  difference  in  time  distribution  indicates  that  there  is  no  significant  causal  relationship 
between the two. 
Options for adjusting saving ratio 
VI.  
Global  savings  imbalance  exists  for  many  reasons.  It  seems  inappropriate  to  link  savings 
ratio only to exchange rate, and it is also unrealistic to resolve long-term issues in the short 
run. One should, instead, adopt a broader and more comprehensive mindset in examining 
the imbalance of savings. 
First,  a  comprehensive  set  of  prescription  is  needed.  Although  the  U.S.  can’t  sustain  the 
growth  pattern  of  high  consumption  and  low  savings,  it  is  not  the  right  time  to  raise  its 
savings  ratio  at  this  very  moment.  It  needs  to  strike  a  balance  between  stimulating 
consumption  and  facilitating  the  economic  recovery.  On  the  other  hand,  the  East  Asian 
nations should attend to economic growth model, economic structure, price system and the 
like, in order to bring down savings ratio. Of course, reform of the exchange rate mechanism 
is  part  of  this  prescription.  The  Chinese  government  has  focused  on  boosting  domestic 
demand  to  sustain  economic  growth  in  an  effort  to  tackle  the  ongoing  financial  crisis  and 
conducting  economic  adjustment.  The  RMB  4-trillion  yuan  stimulus  package,  one  of  the 
largest  in  the  world,  is  mainly  an  expenditure  program.  The  program  underscores  public 
welfare, job creation, and income growth for the rural areas and the underprivileged groups. 
Second,  countries  and  international  organizations  should  strengthen  their  cooperation  and 
intensify  the  regulation  of  the  international  speculative  capital  flows.  The  current  financial 
crisis underscores the necessity of reinforcing the regulation over international capital flows 
and  enhancing  their  transparency.  International  organizations  and  countries  concerned 
should  help  developing  countries  to  establish  a  robust  early-warning  system  and  guard 
against attacks from predatory speculation. International cooperation should be strengthened 
to  improve  the  aid  mechanism.  In  case  emerging  markets  experience  temporary  BOP 
difficulties, international aid should be swift, and conditionalities attached should be reduced. 
This  would  encourage  countries  to  lower  savings  including  foreign  reserves  and  expand 
domestic demand.  
Third,  appropriate  measures  should  be  taken  to  channel  more  savings  into  developing 
countries  and  emerging  markets.  Savings  flowing  from  emerging  markets  to  the  advanced 
economies is neither rational nor consistent with the intention of the advanced economies to 
increase their domestic savings. However, the adjustment of savings ratio in the East Asian 
countries will not see immediate effects. Meanwhile, savings in oil-producing countries may 
remain at a high level so long as oil prices don’t plunge further. Therefore, global savings 
imbalance will remain for some time in the future. The top priority at present is to facilitate the 
rational  flow  of  savings  and  improve  their  allocation  efficiency.  One  option  is  to  redirect 
surplus savings  to  other  developing  countries  and  emerging  markets,  those  with  abundant 
resources, low labor cost, but lack of capital. These economies are the future growth engines 
of the global economy. 
4 
 BIS Review 37/2009
Finally, the reform of the international monetary system should be advanced. Currently, U.S. 
dollar  is  used  in  most  international  trade  and  financial  transactions,  and  is  also  the  most 
important reserve currency. The IMF data showed that the U.S. dollar accounted for 63.9% 
of  the  total  foreign  reserves  by  the  end  of  2007.  When  countries  increase  savings  and  if 
these savings are in the form of dollar denominated foreign reserves, capital will inevitably 
flow into the U.S.. In the short run, the U.S. may need more capital inflows to deal with the 
financial crisis; over the long run, large capital inflows are not in its best interest of making 
adjustments  to  its  economic  growth  model.  Moreover,  the  over-concentration  of  foreign 
assets  in  one  particular  currency  may  bring  about  undesired  consequences.  Therefore,  in 
addition  to  upgrading  regulatory  cooperation  and  rationalizing  savings  allocation,  the 
international  community  should  move  forward  in  reforming  the  international  monetary 
system. Efforts should be made to strengthen the surveillance on the economic and financial 
policies in major reserve currency countries and to enhance the status of the SDR, so as to 
advance the international monetary system towards diversification over the long run. 
BIS Review 37/2009 
 5
