Michael C Bonello: Malta's experience of EU membership 
Speech by Mr Michael C Bonello, Governor of the Central Bank of Malta, to the European 
Documentation  and  Research  Centre,  at  the  Conference  “Malta  in  the  EU  2004-2009”, 
Valletta, 15 May 2009. 
 Introduction 
When I argued the case for membership of the European Union (EU) in November 2002,1 
the  underlying  premise  was  that  given  Malta’s  small  size  and  lack  of  natural  resources, 
wealth could only be created by adding value to imported inputs and transforming them into 
products  for  which  there  was  a  demand  abroad.  In  a  globalizing,  increasingly  competitive 
world economy Malta’s only viable option, therefore, was to seek a more secure access to 
foreign  markets.  In  this  context  I  went  on  to  argue  that  deeper  integration  with  our  major 
trading partner, with whom two–way trade was already equivalent to around 65% of GDP, 
represented  a  logical  response  to  the  challenge  of  creating  a  modern  economy  with  the 
capacity to grow in a sustainable manner. I did emphasise, however, that this objective could 
only be met if we were prepared to question the way we had managed the economy in the 
past and resolved to make the necessary changes to institutions and mindsets, policies and 
work practices. 
This explains why I was pleased to accept to participate in this conference, whose purpose is 
indeed to take stock of what has been achieved since Malta joined the EU in 2004 and, more 
importantly, to reflect on what still remains to be done. 
Where have we come from? 
In  order  to  appreciate  the  nature  of  the  challenge  that  membership  implied,  it  is  first 
necessary  to  recall  where  we  were  coming  from.  Suffice  it  to  point  out  that  the  European 
Commission’s response in 1993 to Malta’s application had been highly critical. It concluded 
that, “The adoption of the acquis communautaire … depends on a thoroughgoing overhaul of 
the Maltese economy’s regulatory and operational systems.” 
The  first  steps  in  the  reform  process  were  taken  in  the  mid-1990s.  These  included  the 
liberalisation  of  the  financial  system  and  of  the  import  tariff  regime,  the  gradual  easing  of 
exchange  controls,  the  partial  deregulation  of  interest  rates  and  the  introduction  of  value 
added  tax  and  of  lower  direct  taxes.  When  the membership  application  was  reactivated  in 
1998, however, the economy still needed significant restructuring. 
Further reforms were, therefore, launched once accession negotiations commenced in 1999, 
including  a  further  dismantling  of  trade  restrictions  and  the  privatisation  of  State-owned 
enterprises. This, however, was still not enough. The vulnerability of the Maltese economy 
was exposed in 2001 by the mounting competitive pressures from emerging economies and 
by  two  major  external  shocks,  the  bursting  of  the  dot.com  bubble  and  the  events  of  9/11, 
which together had an adverse impact on the manufacturing and tourism sectors. 
By  the  time  Malta  was  about  to  join  the  EU,  the  economy  was  emerging  from  a  period  of 
stagnation,  with  a  widening  output  gap,  a  slow  pace  of  productivity  growth  and  a  large 
current  account  deficit.  In  addition,  while  the  Government  planned  to  reduce  the  budget 
deficit  from  almost  10%  of  GDP  in  2003  to  below  3%  by  2006,  an  adjustment  of  that 
                                                 
1   Regional  economic  integration:  the  options  for  Malta,  speech  delivered  at  the  Annual  Dinner  of  the  Malta 
Institute of Financial Services on 7 November 2002. 
BIS Review 60/2009 
 1
magnitude clearly presented considerable risks, not least because some fiscal tightening was 
already  under  way.  The  unemployment  rate,  for  example,  was  edging  upwards,  partly  in 
response to the ongoing restructuring process and the further liberalization of markets ahead 
of EU accession.  
In  these  circumstances  it  soon  became  evident  that  the  advantages  of  the  single  market 
needed to be complemented by those of monetary union. The Central Bank of Malta was an 
early  advocate  of  this  objective,  particularly  because  of  the  greater  stability  and  policy 
credibility that it promised. From the Bank’s perspective a key advantage was the elimination 
of the risks inherent in managing a small, vulnerable currency. The irrevocable fixing of the 
exchange rate and the macroeconomic policy discipline of EMU, moreover, promised to offer 
a  congenial  environment  for  implementing  the  structural  changes  necessary  for  a  lasting 
improvement in the country’s international competitiveness. 
This belief was shared by the Government and the rest is history. In 2005 the decision was 
taken to join ERM II with a unilateral commitment to maintain the exchange rate at its central 
parity.  This  was  supported  by  a  process  of  fiscal  consolidation,  driven  both  by  revenue 
enhancing  and  expenditure  cutting  measures;  the  first  stage  of  pension  reform;  the 
liquidation  of  loss-making  State  enterprises  and  the  privatization  of  others;  and  further 
liberalization  measures,  including  in  telecommunications  and  the  postal  and  port  services. 
Measures were also taken in pursuit of the Lisbon Agenda objectives, especially to improve 
labour  market  participation  and  to  enhance  educational  attainment  levels.  Finally,  EU 
accession also saw the adoption of a new framework for product market regulation. 
The  decision  to  meet  the  Maastricht  criteria  at  the  earliest  possible  opportunity  seemed 
overly ambitious to some at the time, but a combination of appropriate policies implemented 
within a clear strategic framework and an improvement in Malta’s external environment led to 
the  desired  objective  being  achieved  just  three  years  after  EU  accession.  In  July  2007,  in 
fact, the European Commission recommended to the EU  Council that Malta be allowed to 
adopt  the  euro  on  the  grounds  that  it  had  achieved  the  high  degree  of  sustainable 
convergence required by the Treaty. 
Achievements of the past five years 
The  implementation  of  reforms  began  to  pay  dividends  after  2004.  Also  with  the  help  of 
stronger external demand, growth accelerated to an average annual rate of 3.4% between 
2005-2008, compared with 0.5% in the preceding four years. Importantly, growth was driven 
by a pick up in labour productivity and by faster employment growth.  
Closer  economic  integration  with  the  EU  led  to  increased  business  cycle  synchronization, 
which meant that Malta was better placed to benefit from the common monetary policy of the 
ECB. Between 2005 and 2008, economic activity displayed an average bilateral correlation 
of over 82% with the euro area, up from 45% in the previous four years.2
While  EU  funds  also  played  an  important  role,  economic  expansion  since  2005  has  been 
largely  driven  by  foreign  direct  investment  (FDI),  as  the  economy  shifted  towards  higher 
value-added activities and exploited new niche markets opened up by EU membership. As a 
proportion of gross fixed capital formation, FDI inflows increased from an average of 56% in 
the period 2001-2004 to 93% during 2005-2007. Meanwhile, the stock of FDI stood at around 
100% of GDP, an increase of more than half since 2003. 
                                                 
2   Business cycle synchronization is measured by the contemporaneous correlation of de-trended GDP levels in 
Malta and the euro area. The data  were obtained from Eurostat and de-trended using the Hodrick-Prescott 
filter on quarterly statistics that were seasonally adjusted and adjusted by working days. 
2 
 BIS Review 60/2009
At  the  same  time,  industry  became  increasingly  oriented  towards  more  capital  intensive 
activities,  such  as  generic  pharmaceuticals,  while  the  share  of  labour  intensive  operations 
such  as  textiles  continued  to  decrease.  In  the  services  sector,  the  importance  of  tourism, 
which rebounded in 2007 following the introduction of low-cost airlines and growth in cruise 
ship  business,  has  been  complemented  by  growth  in  a  broad  range  of  new  activities, 
including financial services, aircraft maintenance and repair, online gaming, ICT, call centres 
and  back  office  operations.  The  more  diversified  supply  of  services  and  the  shift  towards 
higher  value-added  manufacturing  helped  to  cushion  the  negative  impact  on  traditional 
manufacturing activities of the competitive pressures from low-cost countries. 
The changed structure of the economy, which is now service oriented to the extent of 77% of 
gross value added, led to an improvement in the balance of trade in goods and services and 
to gains in the terms of trade. The deficit on the former fell from more than 10% of GDP in 
2000 to 3.7% of GDP in 2008, while the terms of trade went up by almost 2% during this 
period,  driven  by  a  strong  increase  in  the  services  sector,  which  outweighed  the  steady 
deterioration in merchandise trade. Gains in the terms of trade can result either from higher 
export  prices  or  from  lower  import  prices,  or  a  combination  of  both.  Achieving  favourable 
terms  of  trade  is  vital  for  an  open  economy  where  real  income  depends  not  only  on  the 
volume of output produced, but also on the value of that output in international markets.3  
Positive changes in non-cost competitiveness were complemented by a favourable trend in 
cost competitiveness. Unit labour cost growth declined to an annual average of 0.6% during 
2005-2007, compared to 3.9% during 2001-2004. This improvement was driven by a pick-up 
in productivity and moderate wage awards. Wages and productivity drifted significantly apart 
in 2008, however, a divergence which will have harmful consequences if allowed to persist. 
Progress has been registered in other areas too, though at times not to the same extent as in 
other EU countries. In the labour market, the employment rate increased from 54% in 2004 
to  55.2%  in  2008,  driven  by  a  steady  rise  in  the  female  employment  rate,  while  the 
unemployment rate fell to a record low of 5.9% in 2008. In education, early school leavers 
declined  from  42%  in  2004  to  37.3%  in  2007,  although  this  is  still  well  above  the  15% 
average EU ratio.4 Education attainment levels increased from 51% to 55% during the same 
period.5  Since  the  start  of  this  decade,  the  student  population  pursuing  further  and  higher 
education  has  increased  by  an  annual  average  of  over  5%.6  An  improvement  in  human 
capital goes hand in hand with greater employability. In 2008, the employment rate of those 
with  a  tertiary  level  of  education  stood  at  86%,  compared  to  46%  for  those  with  only  a 
secondary level of education. 
On the social level, one indicator that captures the considerable advances made in recent 
years is the inequality of income distribution ratio, which fell from 4.6 in 2000 to 3.8 in 2007, 
well below the average of 4.8 in the EU and the euro area. 
                                                 
3   A broad treatment of this subject is contained in Duguay, Pierre, Productivity, terms of trade and economic 
adjustment, remarks by the Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada to the Canadian Association for Business 
Economists, 28 August 2006. 
4   Early  school  leavers  are  defined  as  the  percentage  of  the  population  aged  18  -  24  with  at  most  a  lower 
secondary education and not in further education or training. 
5   The education attainment level is defined as the percentage of the population aged 20 - 24 having completed 
at least upper secondary education. 
6   Data  obtained  from  National  Commission  for  Higher  Education  NCHE  Further  and  Higher  Statistics  2008, 
December 2008. 
BIS Review 60/2009 
 3
The challenge ahead 
Despite  this  encouraging  start  to  EU  membership,  much  clearly  remains  to  be  done.  An 
indication of the challenge ahead is provided by the gap between income levels in Malta and 
the EU. Measured in terms of real GDP per capita in purchasing power standards (PPS), this 
gap has not been narrowing of late and in 2008 was still about 21% and 29%, respectively, 
below the EU and euro area averages. 
A  useful  exercise  for  policy  purposes  decomposes  this  income  gap  in  terms  of  labour 
productivity  and  labour  utilisation.7  In  turn,  labour  utilization  can  be  broken  down  into  the 
employment  rate,  the  average  number  of  weekly  hours  worked  and  the  share  of  the 
population  in  the  15-64  age  bracket.  This  decomposition  facilitates  the  identification  of 
appropriate  measures  for  improving  growth  prospects  and,  therefore,  for  narrowing  the 
income  gap.  It  also  helps  to  demonstrate  that  living  standards  can  only  be  raised  in  a 
sustainable manner though a combination of a greater mobilization of human resources and 
higher productivity levels. 
Given  the  similarities  of  the  EU  and  euro  area  averages,  I  will  focus  on  the  income  gap 
relative  to  the  EU.  In  2008  this  gap  was  attributable  to  both  lower  productivity  and  labour 
utilization in Malta. Lower productivity can be the result of either a smaller capital stock, both 
physical  and  human,  or  an  inferior  level  of  technology,  or  some  combination  of  the  two. 
Malta’s labour productivity has been declining over time, dropping from around 90% of the 
EU  average  in  2003  to  87%  in  2008.  On  the  other  hand,  labour  utilization  has  improved, 
increasing from around 88% to 91% of the EU average over the same period. Malta’s lower 
labour utilization rate is entirely attributable to a low employment rate, as both the average 
working week and the share of persons of working age in the total population are higher in 
Malta  than  in  the  EU.  Since  2003,  in  fact,  Malta’s  employment  rate  declined  from  around 
87% to 84% of the EU average. This reflected a steadily falling male employment rate, the 
lowest  female  employment  rate  in  the  EU,  a  declining  rate  among  older  workers  and  the 
lowest average exit age in the EU of workers from the labour market. 
Apart  from  such  supply-side  considerations,  there  are  other  factors  which  may  hinder  the 
ability of the economy to generate sustainable growth. For instance, despite the widespread 
recognition that exports should be the engine of growth in a small open economy like Malta’s, 
insufficient attention has been devoted to the fact that between 2005 and 2008 GDP growth 
was largely driven by domestic demand. The average level of combined private and public 
consumption  was  around  85%  of  GDP  during  this  period,  against  78%  in  the  EU. 
Consumption  at  this  level  cannot  be  sustained  unless  substantially  more  resources  are 
allocated to investment and to other growth-enhancing activities. 
At  this  point  it  is  necessary  to  extend  the  analysis  to  two  important  dimensions  of 
membership  of  a  monetary  union,  namely  the  role  of  price  and  cost  competitiveness  and 
fiscal policy. 
Persistently faster increases in prices and costs in Malta relative to the euro area average 
lead inevitably to a loss of competitiveness. Since the interest rate and exchange rate policy 
tools are not available to euro area members, the necessary adjustments have to take place 
through domestic price and wage levels or in real variables such as output and employment. 
It is, therefore, important to avoid any such divergencies. 
The failure of domestic food prices to decline in line with trends abroad in recent months is a 
case in point and suggests the presence of market imperfections. The harmful effect of such 
                                                 
7   A  similar  analysis  is  presented  by  Papademos,  Lucas,  Determinants  of  growth  and  the  role  of  structural 
reforms and macroeconomic policies in Europe, a speech delivered at the 2004 Ludwig Erhard Lecture on the 
State of the European Economy at the Lisbon Council’s Board of Economists in December 2004 and in a box 
entitled  Labour  utilization  and  economic  convergence,  published  in  the  Central  Bank  of  Malta,  Quarterly 
Review 2008:2, pages 46-48. 
4 
 BIS Review 60/2009
rigidities is magnified when nominal wages are partly indexed to consumer prices, as they 
are  in  Malta,  because  temporary  price  shocks  can  lead  to  permanent  wage  and  price 
deviations  from  the  euro  area  average.  The  wage  determination  process  must,  therefore, 
give equal importance to achieving offsetting gains in productivity in order not to jeopardize 
competitiveness  and  employment  creation.  This  is  a  vital  requirement  because  Malta  is 
already at a disadvantage given that since 2000 unit labour costs have risen by some 22% 
compared with an average of 15% in the euro area. 
Failure to maintain low levels of inflation is also detrimental in the short term. Consumers in 
several euro area economies are currently experiencing increases in real purchasing power 
as a result of falling price levels. This is not the case to the same extent in Malta, where the 
HICP inflation rate is well above the euro area average. 
Let me now turn to the role of fiscal policy, which in the context of monetary union is the only 
national  policy  tool  available  for  short-term  adjustment.  In  Malta,  however,  in  spite  of  the 
remarkable fiscal consolidation achieved in the run up to euro adoption, deficit and debt to 
GDP ratios are still at a level that allows limited scope for using fiscal measures to support 
economic activity. I shall elaborate on the implications of this constraint later on. 
Fiscal  prudence  is  also  necessary  to  safeguard  the  country’s  credit  rating  and  maintain 
investor  confidence.  There  is  indeed  growing  evidence  that  investors  are  increasingly 
discriminating  among  euro  area  countries  on  the  basis  of  their  fiscal  outlook.  From  a 
budgetary standpoint, moreover, risk premia on long-term interest rates will increase, and the 
debt servicing burden will therefore grow, if the perception gains ground of a departure from 
the path of fiscal consolidation. Finally, from a longer-term perspective, a prudent budgetary 
policy  is  also  required  to  cater  for  the  growing  costs  of  Malta’s  ageing  population,  as  was 
vividly pointed out in a recent report published by the European Commission,8 and the still 
unidentified costs associated with climate change. 
The way forward 
Going  forward,  therefore,  it  must  be  realized  that  in  a  monetary  union  the  effects  of 
institutional  rigidities,  inappropriate  policies  and  inefficient  practices  on  prices,  costs  and 
competitiveness will inevitably become visible in the shape of lower income levels relative to 
the other members of the union. Given that a sizeable income gap already exists with the 
euro  area,  removing  the  remaining  impediments  to  faster  growth  is,  therefore,  a  policy 
imperative. 
Two elements of an appropriate response to this challenge emerge spontaneously from an 
analysis  of  the  current  macroeconomic  situation.  Attention  has  already  been  drawn  to  the 
over  reliance  on  consumption  as  a  driver  of  growth  since  2005,  highlighting  the  need  to 
devote more resources to investment. In Malta’s case, this must continue to take the shape 
predominantly  of  FDI  because  of  the  implied  technology  transfer  and  access  to  markets. 
Attracting  further  FDI,  however,  will  require  a  determined  effort  because  when  the  current 
recession  is  over  the  global  marketplace  will  be  characterised  by  fewer,  but  more  cost-
efficient suppliers and a slow-growing demand; a large pool of unemployed labour, implying 
downward pressures on wages; and an increased tendency for investment to shy away from 
relatively  expensive  locations.  A  review  of  Malta’s  investment  promotion  strategy  should, 
therefore, be undertaken that takes this scenario fully into account. 
Private investment must be supported by appropriate levels of public investment, mainly of 
an infrastructure nature. For reasons already explained, progress towards the attainment of a 
balanced budget over the medium term must at the same time also be a priority. Financing 
                                                 
8   Report entitled The 2009 Ageing Report: Economic and budgetary projections for the EU27 Member States 
(2008-2060), published by the European Commission and the Economic Policy Committee. 
BIS Review 60/2009 
 5
the necessary investment, therefore, represents a complex task. This is because some 65% 
of budgetary revenues come from cyclically-sensitive sources, essentially direct and indirect 
taxes,  and  current  projections  show  that  the  recovery  in  Malta’s  export  markets,  and 
therefore also in the domestic economy, is likely to be very slow. This means that the tax 
base  will  expand  only  moderately.  As  a  result,  the  need  to  allocate  more  public  funds  to 
investment while at the same time reducing the deficit can only be satisfied if a major effort is 
made on the expenditure side. 
Here  too,  however,  the  task  is  complicated.  This  is  mainly  because  about  69%  of  total 
budgetary  outlays  are  in  the  shape  of  fixed  commitments  such  as  wages  and  salaries, 
interest on the public debt and welfare payments. Since increased taxation must be ruled out 
as  an  option,  the  solution  must  be  centered  on  efficiency  improvements  in  the  use  of 
budgetary resources and a reordering of spending priorities. In this context it should be noted 
that  beyond  2013  Malta  is  unlikely  to  be  eligible  for  EU  funds  to  the  same  extent  as  at 
present. 
Two  areas  which  have  been  identified  as  having  the  potential  for  efficiency  gains  are  the 
education  and  healthcare  systems.  Together,  these  absorb  around  25%  of  general 
government expenditure. A recent study by the European Commission suggests that, as far 
as tertiary education is concerned, the same level of output could be attained with 44% of the 
present  level  of  expenditure  per  student.9  The  equivalent  figure  for  the  healthcare  sector 
stands at 38%. On this basis the study concludes that even incremental efficiency gains in 
these two areas can lead to substantial savings. No doubt, other spending categories offer 
similar possibilities. 
As for spending priorities, the choice needs to be guided by some important criteria, such as 
the delivery of a minimum social safety net for those who are genuinely in need; the ending 
of  benefits  that  discourage  participation  in  the  labour  market;  the  elimination  of  excess 
demand for, and waste of, free public goods and services; and a greater focus on policies 
and  programmes  that  would  promote  innovation  and  encourage  entrepreneurship  and 
investment, and thus generate long-term economic growth. The room for retrenchment may 
be  limited  in  the  short-term,  but  in  the  long-term  all  expenditure  categories  should  come 
under close scrutiny. Since the outcome of such an exercise will inevitably entail a departure 
from established practices and the loss of acquired rights, it should ideally be based on a 
broad consensus among the social partners. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  the  economy  has  come  a  long  way  since  2004,  and  is  now  much  more 
diversified  and  market-oriented.  There  is,  however,  no  room  for  complacency  because 
narrowing the income gap with the other euro area countries during a recession and a likely 
slow  recovery  will  be  a  formidable  task.  This  calls  for  a  renewed  impetus  in  the 
implementation  of  the  structural  reforms  contained  in  Malta’s  Lisbon  Agenda  programme, 
particularly  the  removal  of  remaining  labour  and  product  market  rigidities  and  anti-
competitive practices. 
It has also become clear that in spite of the undoubted protection they offer, neither EU nor 
euro  area  membership  is  a  panacea  for  deep  seated  problems.  The  global  financial  crisis 
has put a premium on sound economic policies and the efficient use of scarce resources. A 
reordering of public expenditure priorities and an overhaul of the welfare system would be a 
major  step  in  this  direction.  The  implementation  of  the  necessary  structural  and  fiscal 
                                                 
9   Ebejer, Ivan and Mandl, Ulrike, The efficiency of public expenditure in Malta, published in February 2009 as 
ECFIN Country Focus (Volume 6, Issue 2). 
6 
 BIS Review 60/2009
reforms,  however,  can  only  be  achieved  through  a  combined  effort  involving  all  the  social 
partners. 
Finally,  the  current  recession  also  serves  as  a  poignant  reminder  of  a  basic  truth  in 
economics: living beyond your means – and particularly borrowing to finance consumption 
even in good times – is not sustainable. We would do well to heed the advice Cicero gave 
the citizens of Rome in 55 BC.  
“The  budget  should  be  balanced,  the  treasury  should  be  refilled,  public  debt  should  be 
reduced, the arrogance of officialdom should be tempered and controlled … lest we become 
bankrupt. People must again learn to work, instead of living on public assistance.” 
BIS Review 60/2009 
 7
