Njuguna Ndung’u: Financial sector performance in Kenya 
Remarks by Prof Njuguna Ndung’u, Governor of the Central Bank of Kenya, on the occasion 
of the Silver Jubiliee Celebrations for Family Bank Limited, Nairobi, 22 June 2009. 
 Your Excellency Honourable Mwai Kibaki, President and Commander-In-Chief of the Armed 
Forces of the Republic of Kenya;  
Honourable Uhuru Kenyatta, Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance; 
Mr. Titus Muya, Chairman, Family Bank Ltd.; 
Mr. Peter Kinyanjui, Chief Executive, Family Bank Ltd.; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I  am  delighted  to  be  here  this  morning  to  join  with  Family  Bank  in  celebrating  twenty  five 
years  of  providing  financial  services  to  Kenyans.  Allow  me  at  the  onset  to  appreciate  the 
presence of His Excellency the President. I also wish to salute the Board, Management and 
Staff of Family Bank for successfully serving Kenyans for the last twenty five years. 
For most of the twenty five years of its’ existence, Family Bank operated as a building society 
with a microfinance focus. In the last two years, the institution has operated as a commercial 
bank  and  has  registered  a  commendable  performance.  In  2008,  the  institution  recorded  a 
profit  before  tax  of  Kshs.  530.7  million  and  opened  9  branches  countrywide  increasing  its’ 
branch network to 43. This is a sterling performance, but there still remains room for further 
expansion and improvement. 
Your Excellency 
The  banking  sector  continues  to  exhibit  resilience  in  the  face  of  various  local  and  global 
turbulences.  The  sector  has  also  continued  to  grow  and  now  consists  of  43  commercial 
banks, 2 mortgage finance houses and 123 foreign exchange bureaus. 
The first Deposit Taking Microfinance Institution was also launched last week. 
Allow me to mention some indicators of the financial sector performance that painted a rosy 
picture in the last 12 months to April 2009: 
• 
The Sector’s assets increased by 12% from Kshs. 1.09 trillion in April 2008 to Kshs. 
1.23  trillion  at  the  end  of  April  2009  as  banks  continued  to  expand  their  lending 
portfolio. 
Deposits increased from Kshs. 880bn in April 2008 to Kshs. 940 bn on the back of 
deposit mobilization and expansion of branch networks by banks. 
The  Capital  Adequacy  Ratio  stood  at  19.8%  above  the  statutory  minimum  of  12%. 
This is an indicator that the sector has a cushion against periodic shocks. 
The sector’s average liquidity at end of April 2009 was 41.6% well above the statutory 
minimum of 20%. 
The number of people employed by the sector increased from 24,911 at the end of 
April 2008 to 25,498 at the end of April 2009. 
The number of branches at the end of April 2009 stood at 904 an increase of over 
100 branches from the corresponding period in 2008. 
     Your Excellency, the strength of the Kenyan banks is now being felt in the region. There is a 
growing trend by Kenyan banks to expand their operations regionally particularly within the 
East  African  Community.  This  is  in  response  to  the  regional  expansion  by  businesses 
resulting from the drive towards integration. 
BIS Review79/2009 
 1
The  five  East  African  Central  Banks  therefore  signed  a  Memorandum  of  Understanding 
(MOU)  early  this  year.  The  MOU  will  facilitate  information  sharing  and  supervisory  co-
operation  amongst  the  Central  Banks  particularly  for  regional  banking  groups.  This 
arrangement will serve to mitigate cross border risks that regional banking groups may pose 
to the financial sectors of the East African countries. 
On  the  domestic  front,  banks  are  also  venturing  into  capital  markets,  insurance  and  the 
retirement  benefits  sectors.  Supervisory  co-operation  and  co-ordination  is  therefore  also 
paramount for effective regulation and supervision of domestic financial conglomerates. The 
Central  Bank  is  working  with  the  other  domestic  financial  sector  regulators  i.e.  Capital 
Markets Authority, Insurance Regulatory Authority and the Retirement Benefits Authority to 
finalize  an  MOU  that  will  facilitate  information  sharing  and  supervisory  co-operation 
particularly for the emerging financial conglomerates. This domestic supervisory co-operation 
and  coordination  will  mitigate  the  systemic  risk  posed  by  players  operating  in  the  different 
sub-sectors of the financial system. 
Your Excellency 
A  stable  and  efficient  banking  system  provides  a  safe  haven  for  the  savings  for  Kenyans. 
The  banking  sector  is  therefore  well  poised  to  tap  into  the  vast  reservoir  of  savings  that 
remain outside the formal banking space. But this can only be done through cost effective 
and innovative products, as well as improving access to financial services. 
Savings  mobilization  will  undoubtedly  support 
the  economy.  Such 
investments  will  increase  employment  and  uplift  living  standards  of  Kenyans.  This  will  be 
important  in  achieving  not  just  Kenya’s  Vision  2030  aspirations  but  also  the  Millennium 
Development Goals. The Central Bank will therefore continue to partner with banks and other 
market  players  to  ensure  that  the  sector  plays  its’  rightful  role  in  Kenya’s  development 
agenda. 
It is now my honour and singular pleasure to invite the Honorable Deputy Prime Minister and 
Minister for Finance to make his remarks. 
Honorable Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Finance, you have the floor. 
investments 
in 
2 
 BIS Review 79/2009
