Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: The post-crisis financial architecture 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central  Bank,  at  the  Saint  Petersburg  International  Economic  Forum,  Saint  Petersburg, 
6 June 2009. 
 Let  me  first  say  that  I  am  delighted  to  participate  in  this  highly  interesting  event  in  the 
beautiful  city  of  Saint  Petersburg.  The  architecture  of  the  historic  city  centre,  consisting 
mainly  of  Baroque  and  neoclassical  buildings  of  the  18th  and  19th  centuries,  is  indeed 
striking. It is no wonder it constitutes UNESCO World Heritage. The architects who designed 
those  buildings  looked  towards  the  future,  and  indeed  their  design  has  passed  the  test  of 
time. In the same vein, we - as the architects of the post-crisis financial era - should build a 
structure  that  will  pass  the  test  of  time  and  shape  the  future  of  financial  regulation  and 
supervision. Thus, I am pleased to present my  views on certain key features of the future 
financial  architecture  and  I  look  forward  to  also  listening  very  carefully  to  the  views  of  the 
other panellists.  
But let me also stress the importance of this forum also because of its focus on Russia, a 
large neighbouring market to the euro area and an increasingly important counterpart to the 
euro area banks. In the last eight years, lending activities of euro area banks in Russia have 
more than doubled, with the banking sector representing one quarter of this involvement.  
Therefore, we in the euro area all the more share the interest in ensuring financial stability in 
Russia which would be for the benefit not only for the EU but for the world as a whole.  
I will focus my remarks on the challenges that the current crisis poses to the global financial 
architecture and on how they should be faced. In this context, I would also like to highlight 
that  the  current  political  impetus  for  reinforcing  the  global  financial  architecture  should  be 
seen as a window of opportunity to reinforce national institutional frameworks and increase 
the pace of reform at the local level.  
Challenges for the financial architecture 
So let me start with the main challenges that we are currently facing. As you know, financial 
markets  have  experienced  an  extensive  correction  since  August  2007  which,  after  the 
demise of a renowned Wall Street bank in the fall of 2008, turned into a fully blown financial 
crisis. 
[These developments have clearly highlighted weaknesses in our financial system. To begin 
with, the undervaluation of risks and the lack of transparency resulted in unprecedented 
levels  of  uncertainty  and  mistrust  in  the  financial  markets.  This  rendered  some  banks 
vulnerable to the sudden disruption in the markets that followed the loss of confidence also 
owing to weak liquidity management practices, and in particular, underestimation of liquidity 
risk and overreliance on wholesale funding]  
Although the ECB and other institutions had warned of the developments in the years leading 
up to the crisis, with hindsight it has to be said that not enough attention was paid to the so-
called  macro-prudential  supervision.  While  the  notion  of  macro-prudential  supervision  is 
not yet well codified as is the case for micro-prudential supervision, there is agreement that it 
includes  the  monitoring  and  assessment  of  systemic  risk.  This  entails  taking  a  systemic 
perspective  of  how  risk  is  distributed  in  the  financial  system,  addressing  interlinkages 
between  institutions,  markets  and  instruments  as  well  as  monitoring  how  systemic  risk 
evolves  over  time,  taking  into  account  the  effects  of  collective  behaviour  in  the  financial 
system as a whole. Systemic risk has clearly become also in light of the crisis experience an 
issue that has to be addressed by the public authorities as it extends beyond the boundaries 
BIS Review 71/2009 
 1
of individual financial institutions and impacts on the financial system as a whole. Indeed, the 
need for addressing systemic risk has been at the centre of the policy initiatives in response 
to the financial crisis, to which I now turn. 
How to face the challenges: from global to local  
The crisis has had a substantial impact on all major economies and has clearly demonstrated 
the  limits  of  national  responses  in  dealing  with  the  activities  of  cross-border,  systemically 
important financial institutions, markets and instruments.  
This  realisation  led  the  international  community  to  acknowledge  the  importance  of  strong 
global coordination in effectively tackling the issues at stake.  
As the crisis reached its full global dimension in autumn 2008, the Leaders of the Group of 
Twenty not only committed to enhancing cooperation but also took the lead in defining the 
reform agenda, reflecting a common stance on the needed policy response. 
Let me now focus on three key areas that feature in the reform agenda and on which I think it 
is very important to keep the momentum.  
First, as I already touched upon, macro-prudential supervision has to be strengthened.  
This includes in particular the global monitoring of systemic stability and the supervision of 
systemically  important  cross-border  institutions,  while  properly  addressing  interlinkages 
among  themselves,  with  other  financial  and  non-financial  institutions  and  markets.  In  this 
context, I fully support the broadened mandate and stronger institutional basis given to the 
Financial  Stability  Board  (FSB).  The  G20  Leaders  called  on  the  re-established  FSB  to 
develop macro-prudential tools, together with the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), to 
identify and take account of macro-prudential risks across the financial system and limit the 
build up of systemic risk for regulated entities. Moreover, the envisaged cooperation between 
the  IMF  and  the  FSB  for  the  conduct  of  Early  Warning  Exercises  will  be  crucial  for  the 
success of the global monitoring of systemic risks. 
Second,  we  need  to  undergo  global  regulatory  and  supervisory  repair.  The  Basel 
Committee  has  already  set  some  milestones  in  this  regard  including the  publication  of  the 
principles  for  sound  liquidity  risk  management  and  supervision1  and  its  current  work  on 
strengthening  the  Basel  II  capital  framework.  Work  is  also  underway  concerning  the 
development  of  measures 
the  regulatory 
frameworks, namely by building buffers in good times that can be withdrawn in less benign 
conditions. In this context, let me recall that the G20 Leaders approved the recommendations 
by the FSB to address procyclicality, which are to be implemented by the end of this year.  
To  this  aim,  the  Basel  Committee  is  developing  proposals  for  countercyclical  buffers  and 
ways  to  promote  provisioning  over  the  cycle,  with  the  aim  to  come  up  with  concrete 
proposals  by  year-end.  [Let  me  also  mention  some  other  important  strands  of  work  of  the 
Basel Committee in the pursuit of strengthening the resilience of banking systems, such as 
the  introduction  of  a  non-risk  based  supplementary  (to  regulatory  capital)  measure, 
strengthening the quality of banks’ regulatory capital and the review of the minimum level of 
regulatory capital with the aim to arrive at a total level and quality that should be higher than 
the  current  Basel  II  framework.  For  this  last  point,  let  me  mention  the  importance  that 
increases  in  the  minimum  regulatory  capital,  as  a  result  of  the  aforementioned  initiatives, 
to  mitigate  pro-cyclicality  stemming 
from 
                                                 
1   “Principles  for  sound  liquidity  risk  management  and  supervision”,  endorsed  on  25  September  2008;  and 
Consultative papers on the enhancements to the Basel II capital framework, issued on 16 January 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 71/2009
should not take place in periods of economic and financial stress. This has been explicitly 
stated by the Basel Committee itself, but I would like to restate the importance of this point.2]  
And third, regulatory gaps need to be closed. In that respect, the G20 Leaders endorsed 
last April the extension of the regulatory net to all systemically important institutions, markets 
and  instruments.  These  include  systemically  important  hedge  funds,  credit  rating  agencies 
and  Over-The-Counter  (OTC)  derivatives  markets.  With  the  aim  of  preventing  regulatory 
arbitrage,  the  IMF  together  with  the  FSB,  have  been  requested  to  develop,  by  autumn, 
guidelines to assess systemic importance.  
Until now I have focused on global initiatives; let me now move to the European level and 
say  a  few  words  on  how  the  macro-prudential  approach  shall  be  strengthened  in 
Europe, not the least because this issue is of great interest, and will have a close connection 
to the ECB.  
As  you  may  know,  the  European  Commission,  based  on  the  recommendations  of  the  de 
Larosière  Group,  has  recently  proposed  to  establish  a  European  Systemic  Risk  Council 
(ESRC)  for  macro-prudential  supervision,  under  the  auspices  of  the  ECB/ESCB.3  This 
Council shall inter alia identify and prioritise risks to financial stability, issues risk warnings 
and  when  necessary  give  recommendations  on  measures  to  be  taken.  In  my  view,  the 
creation of the ESRC represents a major milestone in reinforcing the arrangements for 
safeguarding financial stability in the EU. However, three critical factors of success merit 
further consideration. 
First,  access  to  relevant  information  for  risk  assessment  and  monitoring  is  crucial  for  the 
effectiveness  of  the  ESRC.  In  this  context,  effective  institutional  mechanisms  should  be  in 
place to ensure adequate information-sharing between the ESRC and the micro-prudential 
supervisors.  
Second, the risk warnings and recommendations should be effectively translated into follow-
up actions by the competent supervisory authorities. This requires adequate monitoring and 
enforcement mechanisms. 
Third,  the  global  dimension  of  the  financial  system  calls  for  strong  cooperation  and 
coordination between the ESRC and the IMF and FSB.  
Finally,  let  me  stress  that  financial  stability  ultimately  starts  at  the  local  level,  as  all 
decisions need to be effectively implemented in the national context. In this regard, countries 
should exploit the current global political momentum to ensure that the national frameworks 
for  financial  regulation  and  supervision,  including  also  the  framework  for  data  collection, 
analysis and monitoring of systemic risk are adequate.  
When carrying out a reform, a fruitful strategy may be to benchmark against existing “best 
practices”,  thus  reaping  the  maximum  benefits  of  the  past  experience,  whilst  ensuring  the 
final  product  fits  the  local  conditions.  In  this  regard,  the  Russian  Central  Bank  and  the 
Eurosystem have been cooperating closely since 2003 on banking supervision issues. More 
recently, in April of last year, cooperation has focused on the implementation of the Basel II 
framework in Russia. I trust this cooperation to be fruitful and that our experience with regard 
to the Basel II in the EU during the past years will prove useful.  
                                                 
2   BCBS press release on “Initiatives on capital announced by the Basel Committee”, 12 March 2009. 
3   See the European Commission’s Communication on “European financial supervision”, COM(2009)252 final, 
27 May 2009. 
BIS Review 71/2009 
 3
Conclusion 
Let me now conclude. The international community is working towards a post-crisis financial 
architecture that gives more prominence to having a strong macro-prudential orientation, is 
based  on  strengthened  regulatory  and  supervisory  frameworks,  and  prevents  regulatory 
arbitrage. It is now important to keep the momentum in the implementation of the ongoing 
global initiatives. 
Effective  coordination  of  all  policy  initiatives  is  key  for  ensuring  global  consistency  and 
success; but financial stability ultimately depends on the implementation of global initiatives 
at the local level. Sound regulation, supervision and governance of financial markets are key 
parameters on the way towards a financial architecture that will pass the test of time. In this 
regard I encourage us all to seize the moment to push the reform agenda forward – it is now 
time to build for the future. 
Thank you for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 71/2009
