Mary C Nkosi: Creating an environment for banks to operate effectively 
in Malawi 
Speech by Mrs Mary C Nkosi, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Malawi, at the official 
launch of Dedza Agency, Dedza, 31 January 2009. 
 Dr Charles Mataya, who is representing the Board of Directors of the Bank 
The Managing Director of MSB, Mr Joseph Mwanamvekha  
Valued Customers of the Bank 
Management and Staff of the Bank here present 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It gives me great pleasure to preside over the official launch of the MSB Dedza Agency this 
afternoon. 
Let me begin by congratulating and commending the Board, Management and Staff of MSB 
for their untiring efforts in getting the Bank to where it is today. It is not too long ago when we 
heard of similar functions as the Bank launched its new outlets in the just ended year, 2008. 
Today we are here to witness the official opening of Dedza Agency. This is no doubt a visible 
sign evidencing the growth and expansion of the Bank and the Banking Industry in general. I 
have no doubt that the Bank is now well poised to effectively discharge its responsibilities on 
savings mobilization and financing of investments both in the rural and urban sectors of our 
economy. 
The  business  and  economic  environment  is  looking  good  for  Malawi  as  banks  require  a 
sound  economic  environment  in  order  to  operate  effectively  and  efficiently.  The  Reserve 
Bank of Malawi is sparing no effort in ensuring that it creates an enabling environment for 
banks to operate effectively in the country. As a result, more banks have come on the market 
and are willing to serve the rural and semi-urban communities owing to the ever improving 
rural infrastructure and conducive fiscal policies.  
Statistics  indicate  that  nearly  a  very  large  population  of  Malawi  remains  un-banked.  It  is 
therefore commendable to note that MSB has identified itself with the rural communities for a 
very long time. Through its wide rural network the bank has been able to take banking to the 
door steps of the rural people who would otherwise not be able to access banking facilities. 
The Bank, therefore, needs to leverage this network which is one of its strengths, to roll out 
products and services that should be convenient and easy to use by its client base. 
Let  me  take  this  opportunity  to  urge  the  Board,  Management  and  Staff  of  the  Bank  not  to 
relax in dealing with the many challenges that the Bank faces; particularly in spearheading 
bank penetration into the rural unbanked population.  
The Bank must improve further its strategies for nurturing the existing customer base as well 
as for attracting new ones and growing its book. Customers must be kept satisfied with the 
quality of service being offered. I have no doubt that you will succeed in this endeavour.  
In  conclusion,  I  would  like  to  challenge  the  banking  institutions  in  Malawi  to  come  up  with 
strategies  and  plans,  particularly  in  the  area  of  access  to  credit  by  rural  communities  and 
other banking services by the Malawian entrepreneurs so that jointly we all play our part in 
the process of transforming the Malawi economy. 
The Central Bank as a stakeholder will continue to support efforts by banks in improving their 
service delivery systems for the betterment of all stakeholders.  
Director Mataya 
The Managing Director, Mr Joseph Mwanamvekha  
BIS Review 33/2009 
 1
Customers of MSB here present 
Management and Staff of MSB 
Distinguished Guests 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
It is now my singular honour and privilege to declare MSB Dedza Agency officially opened. 
I thank you all for your attention and may God bless you. 
2 
 BIS Review 33/2009
