Ewart S Williams: The paradoxes inherent in the role of central banks – 
the case of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago 
Address by Mr Ewart S Williams, Governor of the Central Bank of Trinidad and Tobago, to 
the British-Caribbean Chamber of Commerce, Port-of-Spain, 11 March 2009. 
 The current economic slowdown 
The Clico/CIB crisis 
Thanks to the British Caribbean Chamber of Commerce for inviting me to address your forum 
this morning. 
My  invitation  listed  a  number  of  topics  and  the  one  that  caught  my  eye  was  entitled,  the 
paradoxes  inherent  in  the  role  of  central  banks;  I  would  therefore  wish  to  take  this 
opportunity to discuss the kinds of challenges that the Bank has been facing in the pursuit of 
its  mandate.  I  will  couch  the  discussion  in  the  context  of  two  current  macro-economic 
challenges: 
• 
• 
Over the last few years, we have achieved rapid economic growth. However, as you know, 
the Central Bank has had to face the specter of unacceptably high inflation. 
Since  2008,  the  international  economy  has  been  in  the  grip  of  an  unprecedented financial 
crisis  which  has  led  to  a  pronounced  global  recession.  Initially,  like  most  developing  and 
emerging  market  countries,  the  region  faced  only  limited  contagion  from  the  international 
turmoil. However, as the international credit crisis persists, as commodity prices continue to 
sag,  and  as  the  global  recession  gets  deeper,  the  region  is  finding  itself  on  the  cusp  of  a 
major economic slowdown with all its attendant consequences. 
Several indicators point to a pronounced slowdown in the Trinidad and Tobago economy. 
• 
Activity  in  the  energy  sector  has  declined  sharply,  with  several  firms  forced  to 
advance scheduled maintenance to contain layoffs. 
All the main construction indicators are down – local sales of construction materials, 
employment in construction : mortgage loans 
 On the demand side: 
• 
• 
• 
• 
• 
The index of retail sales is trending downwards. 
Christmas and Carnival sales were much lower than last year. 
Automobile sales and purchases of consumer durables are sharply down. 
Several large firms (Mittal Steel, Digicel, Hilton Hotel) have announced layoffs. 
While reliable data are not available, the decline in regional and local demand could 
be affecting manufacturing output and exports. 
Of course, there is some encouraging news on the inflation front as: 
• 
Headline inflation has declined from a high of close to 15 per cent to 11.7 per cent; 
and 
Food  prices  seem  to  be  coming  down  because  of  both  external  and  domestic 
influences; and 
We are seeing a steady decline in real estate prices, in line with the cooling of the 
property boom. 
  BIS Review 30/2009 
 1
Most  developed  and  emerging  market  economies  are  resorting  to  expansionary  fiscal  and 
monetary  policies  to  deal  with  a  worsening  world  recession  and  sharp  increases  in 
unemployment. As you know, the decline in energy prices initially prompted a reduction in 
fiscal  expenditures  but  as  oil  prices  continued  to  fall  the  Government  eschewed  further 
expenditure cuts, opting for a small amount of deficit financing. 
The  Central  Bank  has  not  yet  moved  to  ease  monetary  policy,  in  part  because  inflation 
continues  to  be  unacceptably  high  and  inflation  expectations  have  not  been  sufficiently 
contained. We need to be careful about an inflation spiral. 
However, as noted earlier, anecdotal evidence suggests that the incidence of lay-offs in the 
construction  and  services  sector  is  increasing.  As  a  practical  matter,  if  layoffs  and 
unemployment continue to rise, both the fiscal and monetary stance may need to be 
revisited and the pace of inflation reduction may need to be re-considered. 
Of course, any temporary relaxation of the fiscal stance puts even greater pressure on the 
government to achieve medium term fiscal sustainability. That’s in fact the problem in the US 
where  President  Obama’s  considerable  efforts  to  provide  fiscal  stimulus  to  address  the 
recession will need to be matched by a similarly bold program to reduce the fiscal deficit in 
the next few years. 
On present projections, oil prices are expected to remain depressed for the remainder of the 
year and the fiscal deficit will lead to an increase in government borrowing. The CL Financial 
crisis will further add to our borrowing requirements. However, we are in a good position to 
handle  this  since  we  have  fiscal  space,  a  relatively  low  level  of  public  indebtedness  and 
considerable excess liquidity in the banking system. 
We  are  in  a  similarly  fortunate  position  as  regards  our  foreign  exchange  reserves.  Low 
energy  prices  have  significantly  reduced  additions  to  these  reserves.  Further,  the 
international credit crisis is affecting the normal credit lines that were available to banks such 
that they need to depend more on foreign exchange from the Central Bank. In addition, the 
global and domestic financial uncertainties may be contributing to some capital flight. 
The  Central  Bank  has  the  resources  to  meet  the  increased  foreign  exchange  demands. 
Central Bank sales so far this year (over US$300 million) are more than double those for the 
comparable period of last year. 
The Central Bank stands ready to meet all foreign exchange demands for its gross reserves 
which now stand at around US$9 billion, the equivalent of eleven months imports. With that 
level of reserve cushion, rumours of an impending devaluation are misguided. 
I  would  like  to  make  some  comments  about  the  challenges  that  the  Central  Bank,  as 
Regulator, faces in a rapidly evolving financial system. 
Several  analysts  have  put  the  blame  for  the  CLICO/CIB  financial  collapse  squarely  on 
inadequate regulation by the regulator, the Central Bank. Of course, this is what happens 
whenever  there  is  financial  stress.  Invariably,  the  finger  is  pointed  to  the  Regulator. 
Inadequate  or  the  absence  of  regulation  has  been  blamed  for  the  collapse  of  financial 
institutions in the United States, as well as for the Madoff and Stanford scandals; the FSA 
has been faulted for the demise of the Northern Rock and the other failed institutions in the 
UK and the list goes on and on. 
If you look across the world, it seems that regulators are busy trying to resolve some sort of 
financial calamity. But regulation of financial institutions is not new. Regulation has been in 
existence for over one hundred and fifty years. So why have Regulators not mastered the job 
of regulation. Well, I could think of three reasons: 
1. 
Rapidly evolving innovation and creativity in terms of services and products being 
offered by financial institutions. 
2 
 BIS Review 30/2009
2. 
3. 
The recognition that risk taking should not be totally outlawed since under certain 
conditions it could benefit consumers. 
The  fact  that  laws  cannot  legislate  good  behaviour  or  by  extension,  good 
governance. 
An ideological shift towards free markets and minimal regulation. 
4. 
How does this relate to CL Financial and CLICO. 
CLICO, in many ways, was a pioneer and a path-breaker on the local financial scene. For 
years it led in the provision of insurance services in Trinidad and Tobago and indeed in the 
region.  For  the  most  part,  CLICO’s  expansion  proceeded  under  conditions  of  limited 
regulation as the Office of the Insurance Supervisor, in the Ministry of Finance, lacked the 
resources to act as a Regulator. 
As you know, in the early days insurance companies collected premiums and invested the 
proceeds  in  government  securities  and  in  mortgages.  Over  time,  as  incomes  and  the 
demand for savings-products increased and as our local capital markets did not expand in 
step,  insurance  companies  had  to  look  further  afield  for  investment  opportunities.  CLICO 
was the leader in this endeavour. 
By  the  time  the  insurance  industry  was  transferred  to  Central  Bank  in  mid-2004,  CL 
Financial,  with  CLICO  as  its  main  financial  company,  had  already  become  a  major 
conglomerate  in  Trinidad  and  Tobago  and  in  the  region  with  60  subsidiaries,  operating  in 
several fields, and spread over 20 countries – in the Caribbean, Central and North America 
and Europe. 
The  official  data  showed  that  CL  Financial  was  an  extremely  strong  and  profitable 
conglomerate and that CLICO was the centerpiece of the Group. It was clear that the Group 
had  major  vulnerabilities,  the  most  notable  being  the  excessive  amount  of  related-party 
transactions. 
From  the  beginning,  we  recognized  that  regulation  of  the  insurance  industry,  which  was 
accustomed to being unregulated, was always going to be a major challenge. And we knew 
that CLICO, being the biggest company, would be in the forefront of this process. 
Financial regulation is most effective when you have the confluence of a number of factors 
including  an  adequate  legislative  and  regulatory  framework;  an  effective  supervisory 
system;  including  highly  trained  regulators;  a  regime  of  supporting  and  supportive 
institutions such as the accounting and auditing profession and support from an informed and 
vigilant investor community – or market discipline. 
Even with all these pieces in place, any licensee who is committed to exploiting loopholes, to 
taking excessive risks with policyholders’ and depositors’ funds, and to bending the system 
could go undetected for a while and in so doing could do a lot of damage. 
Our insurance legislation dates back to 1980 and is very archaic. By way of example: 
• 
CLICO,  with  assets  in  excess  of  over  $24  billion,  only  requires  capital  of  $3 
million. This compares for example with banks which must have capital equivalent 
to a minimum of 8 per cent of its assets. Thus, a bank of CLICO’s asset size would 
have  at  least  $2.0  billion  of  capital;  regulatory  capital  requirements  for  the 
insurance industry is only now being developed. 
Even  when  the  Central  Bank  formally  took  over  regulation  of  the  industry,  the 
legislation  had  limitations  with  respect  to  on-site  supervision  (and  formally  it 
still does not); 
While the legislation did not restrict related party transactions, there were significant 
deficiency or loopholes and this was, perhaps CLICO’s greatest vulnerability; and 
  BIS Review 30/2009 
 3
 It is silent on the issue of actuarial methodology, which allowed companies to use 
their own standards which could result in a lower Statutory Fund requirement. 
As the Bank and the industry proceeded to work on a new Insurance Act, we tried to achieve, 
by moral suasion, what would have been mandatory under appropriate legislation. Thus for 
instance: 
• 
• 
We insisted on on-site inspections of CLICO; 
In the face of concerns about risk management and inadequate controls, we insisted 
on  the  appointment  of  independent  directors  and  other  measures  to  improve 
corporate governance; 
Concerned about  the  excessive  reliance  on short-term  funding,  the  Bank  required 
CLICO to cease sale and the renewal of a particular deposit product; 
After  facing  resistance for  many  years,  in  early  2008,  the  Bank  sought  to  enforce 
compliance  with  “the  admissible  asset  regulations”  that  put  restrictions  on  related 
party transactions on the balance sheet and in the Statutory Fund. Most companies 
had  been  adhering  to  the  regulation.  CLICO  was  one  of  the  few  that  did  not  fully 
comply. 
    Some analysts (critics) have asked – why did the Bank not intervene in CLICO before? To 
this I affirm that for all the inherent vulnerabilities: 
• 
CLICO met its Statutory Fund requirements in 2004, 2005, 2006; by our calculation 
there was a statutory fund deficit in 2007. However, up to the time the crisis broke, 
CLICO was challenging our calculation. 
CLICO had been given a clean bill of health by its auditors each year since 2004, 
when it came under Central Bank’s regulatory control in 2004. (You may have read 
that Madoff used a small obscure firm to audit its books. CLICO’s auditors was a 
highly recognized international firm). 
AM  Best  the  renowned  international  rating  agency  for  insurance  companies 
downgraded CLICO in 2007 from A- to B+++; B+++ is still a solid rating for an 
insurance company. 
CLICO posted healthy “bank” profits in each year since 2004. 
• 
With  these  credentials,  intervening  in  CLICO,  notwithstanding  its  inherent  vulnerabilities, 
would have been difficult to justify. It would certainly have prompted a long dragged out 
legal battle which could have had serious knockon effects both for CLICO and for the 
rest of the financial system. With slow progress being made via moral suasion and with 
new legislation on the way the case for intervention was even less defensible. 
There is no doubt that new legislation has taken far too long to come into being. This has 
been due, in part, to a fairly crowded legislative agenda and the shortage of legal drafting 
skills  in  the  public  sector.  I  should  note  however,  that  the  consultation  process  has 
dragged  on  for  much  longer  than  expected  because  of  a  certain  reluctance  of  the 
industry to accept changes that have become standard in other jurisdictions. 
Clearly some sections of the industry have been intent on jealously protecting the status-quo, 
resisting  change  even  when  this  has  meant  bringing  us  in  line  with  international  best 
practices. 
And then there are the consequences of limited market discipline. For all its tremendous 
growth  over  the  last  several  years, CLICO has remained a private company  which  has 
shielded  the  company  from  the  kind  of  scrutiny  (through,  for  example  the  submission  of 
quarterly accounts) to which public companies are exposed. 
4 
 BIS Review 30/2009
I would want to posit that the CLICO/CIB crisis represents a case of “systemic failure” from 
which we all can take invaluable lessons. 
Clearly we need to upgrade our legislation as a matter of urgency. It is hoped that the 
recent international financial crisis as well as the recent stresses in both the credit union and 
the insurance industry would convince industry participants of the need for modern legislation 
to cope with a modern financial sector. 
Two,  directors  and  management  need  to  take  seriously  their  fiduciary  obligation  to  protect 
depositors’/policyholders’  funds.  Independent directors  have  a  special  obligation  to  provide 
checks and balances and play a “whistleblowing role”, if necessary. 
Three, external auditors must also recognize their fiduciary responsibilities and must be held 
accountable. The self-regulatory bodies must set and enforce the highest auditing standards. 
That’s the legacy of Enron and World com. 
Four, as Regulator we need to continue to upgrade our skills and quickly achieve the level of 
competence in the insurance regulation as we have achieved in bank regulation. Of course, 
we have been in bank regulation for close to fifty years whilst we have only recently been 
doing insurance. 
The CLICO/CIB crisis is a major setback for the financial sector in the region. We have been 
able  to  contain  the  contagion  but  the  challenge  of  strengthening  market  confidence  and 
ensuring that the cost to taxpayers remains minimal in the medium term is ongoing. 
The CLICO/CIB collapse should be a lesson that serves to strengthen our financial system 
for the next several years. 
BIS Review 30/2009 
 5
