Donald L Kohn: Troubled Asset Relief Program 
Testimony of Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  before 
the  Committee  on  Financial  Services,  US  House  of 
Representatives, Washington DC, 13 January 2009. 
The  original  speech,  which  contains  various  links  to  the  documents  mentioned,  can  be  found  on  the  US  Federal  Reserve 
System’s website.  
 Chairman  Frank,  Ranking  Member  Bachus,  and  other  members  of  the  Committee,  I 
appreciate this opportunity to review some of the activities to date of the Treasury's Troubled 
Asset  Relief  Program,  or  TARP,  and  to  discuss  how  additional  funding  could  be  used  to 
strengthen our financial system and promote economic recovery.  
A  well-functioning,  stable  financial  system  is  essential  for  healthy  economic  growth. 
Unfortunately,  as  you  know,  after  the  collapse  of  a  credit  boom  that  encompassed  both 
mortgage lending and other major credit markets, the financial systems of the United States 
and of a number of other industrialized countries came under severe strain. Banks and other 
key financial institutions have seen their capital depleted and their balance sheets clogged 
with  poorly  performing  and  hard-to-value  assets.  Securitization  markets  have  largely  shut 
down, and credit spreads have widened dramatically on balance. Together with the ongoing 
contraction  of  the  housing  sector,  the  worsening  of  credit  conditions  weighed  heavily  on 
economic growth throughout 2008.  
The  financial  crisis  intensified  considerably  more  in  September  and  manifested  in  many 
countries that it had not yet touched, which led to grave concerns about the stability of the 
global financial system itself. The shocks to confidence and to the availability of credit that 
followed  the  intensification  of  the  crisis  last  fall  have  contributed  to  a  substantial  further 
weakening  in  global  economic  activity.  However,  although  the  economic  impact  of  the 
worsening crisis has been severe indeed, an international financial collapse – which seemed 
a real possibility in early October – would unquestionably have led to economic outcomes far 
worse even than those we are currently experiencing. The first and most urgent priority of 
policy was thus to avert such a collapse. The existence of the TARP allowed the Treasury to 
react quickly by announcing, on October 14, a plan to inject $250 billion in capital into U.S. 
financial  institutions.  Although  the  Capital  Purchase  Program  has  been  in  place  less  than 
three months, many banks, both large and small, have applied for and received capital from 
this program. The Treasury's actions were complemented by the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation's  (FDIC)  expansion  of  bank  liability  guarantees  and  by  the  Federal  Reserve's 
measures to increase liquidity and support the functioning of key credit markets. Together, 
these actions helped to bolster confidence in our lending institutions, which enabled them to 
access  funds  and  make  loans.  As  contemplated  by  the  enabling  legislation,  TARP  funds 
have  also  been  used  on  a  targeted  basis  to  prevent  potentially  disorderly  failures  of 
systemically  critical  financial  institutions  –  failures  that  would  have  had  highly  adverse 
consequences for the system as a whole.  
These  actions,  together  with  similar  measures  in  other  countries,  have  brought  greater 
stability  to  our  financial  system.  Moreover,  injections  of  new  capital  are  moderating  the 
powerful pressures on the financial institutions that received the injections to deleverage by 
selling  assets  and  pulling  back  from  new  lending.  Stabilization  and  slowing  the  pace  of 
deleveraging  are  critical  first  steps  toward  more-normal  credit  conditions.  The  federal 
banking regulators, pursuant to their joint November 12 statement, are working to help banks 
BIS Review 3/2009 
 1
ensure  that  they  are  fully  meeting  the  needs  of  creditworthy  borrowers.1  Bank  lending  to 
creditworthy  borrowers  is  good  for  the  economy,  but  it  is  also  good  for  the  profitability  of 
banks  and  supports  their  safety  and  soundness.  We  have  strongly  encouraged  our 
examiners to work constructively with banks as they perform the careful analysis needed to 
identify sound lending opportunities. 
Regarding  the  future,  the  remaining  TARP  funds  will  play  an  essential  role  in  further 
strengthening  the  financial  system  and  restoring  normal  credit  flows.  An  important  use  of 
these  funds  will  be  to  step  up  efforts  to  avoid  preventable  foreclosures.  Preventable 
foreclosures harm not only the affected borrowers and their communities but also, through 
their effects on the housing market, the broader economy and the financial system as well. 
Although  a  number  of  efforts  are  underway  to  address  the  problem  of  preventable 
foreclosures, more needs to be done. 
Generally speaking, the most attractive approaches to reducing preventable foreclosures fall 
into  two  main  categories.  The  first  category  features  highly  streamlined  re-underwriting 
processes  with  the  goal  of  modifying  large  numbers  of  troubled  mortgages  quickly.  Based 
partly on its experience working with troubled borrowers at IndyMac Federal Bank, F.S.B., 
the FDIC has proposed a plan of this type. To encourage an aggressive approach to loan 
modification,  the  FDIC  plan  would  provide  partial  insurance  against  the  losses  stemming 
from  borrower  redefaults  on  modified  loans  and  would  also  pay  servicers  $1,000  for  each 
loan they modify. An alternative program in this same category would have the government 
share the cost when the servicer reduces the borrower's monthly payment. 
The  second  category  of  foreclosure  prevention  plans  takes  a  less  streamlined  but  more 
deliberate  approach,  with  the  goal  of  increasing  the  proportion  of  loan  modifications  that 
borrowers  will  be  able  to  sustain  over  the  longer  term.  The  tradeoff  is  that  the  more 
deliberate  approach  would  likely  result  in  relatively  fewer  mortgages  being  modified.  One 
example  of  a  plan  that  puts  greater  emphasis  on  achieving  sustainability  would  have  the 
Treasury use TARP funds as working capital to buy delinquent mortgages from lenders and 
investors  at  steep  discounts  to  their  remaining  balances,  through  negotiations  or  through 
reverse  auctions.  The  acquired  mortgages  would  then  be  re-underwritten  and  modified  as 
appropriate  to  meet  the  criteria  for  refinancing  into  Hope  for  Homeowners  (H4H)  or  other 
government  programs.  Especially  if  the  Congress  moves  forward  on  a  plan  of  this  type,  it 
should  examine  the  possibility  of  enhancing  the  H4H  program  to  make  it  a  more  effective 
vehicle for this effort. 
A  second  broad  use  of  new  TARP  funding,  besides  foreclosure  mitigation,  would  be  to 
support programs to help restart key credit markets. The Treasury and the Federal Reserve 
recently announced such a program, the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility, which 
is  designed  to  stimulate  securitization  activity  in  the  market  for  asset-backed  securities 
collateralized by a range of consumer and small business loans.2 Under this program, which 
is  expected  to  begin  operation  next  month,  the  Federal  Reserve  will  lend  for  up  to  three 
years on a nonrecourse basis against asset-backed securities. By providing this financing, 
the program should increase the availability of credit to households and small businesses. 
The Federal Reserve will be protected from credit losses by lending amounts less than the 
market value of the financed security – that is, by applying a "haircut" – and by the $20 billion 
of  capital  provided  by  the  TARP.  If  the  program  is  successful,  the  program  could  be 
                                                 
1   See  Board  of  Governors  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System,  FDIC,  Office  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency, 
Office of Thrift Supervision (2008), "Interagency Statement on Meeting the Needs of Creditworthy Borrowers," 
joint press release, November 12. 
2   See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), "Federal Reserve Announces the Creation of 
the Term Asset-Backed Securities Loan Facility (TALF)," press release, November 25; and U.S. Department 
of  the  Treasury  (2008),  "Secretary  Paulson  Remarks  on  Consumer  ABS  Lending  Facility,"  press  release, 
November 25. 
2 
 BIS Review 3/2009
increased in size or expanded in scope to provide financing for additional types of securities, 
such  as  commercial  mortgage-backed  securities,  for  which  the  markets  are  currently 
distressed. 
Finally,  I  would  expect  the  bulk  of  the  remaining  TARP  funding  to  be  devoted  to 
strengthening  financial  institutions,  thereby  supporting  the  normalization  of  credit  markets 
and  the  flow  of  new  credit.  Some  of  this  support  might  take  the  form  of  additional  capital 
injections,  both  to  offset  additional  credit  losses  and  to  further  expand  lending  capacity. 
Consideration should be given to whether it is feasible for some capital injections to be made 
on  a  matching  basis  with  private  capital  raises,  thereby  providing  a  market  test  for  those 
injections. In addition, prudence requires that funds be held in reserve as needed to address 
urgent  contingencies,  such  as  averting  the  disorderly  failure  of  a  systemically  important 
financial institution.  
A  continuing  barrier  to  private  investment  in  financial  institutions  is  the  large  quantity  of 
troubled, hard-to-value assets that remain on institutions' balance sheets. The presence of 
these  assets  significantly  increases  uncertainty  about  the  underlying  value  of  these 
institutions and may inhibit private investment and new lending. The Treasury may thus wish 
to consider whether to supplement injections of capital with steps to reduce the uncertainty 
about the values of assets held by financial institutions. This objective could be accomplished 
in  several  ways,  including  by  directly  purchasing  troubled  assets,  by  setting  up  and 
capitalizing special banks that would purchase assets from financial institutions in exchange 
for cash and shares of capital in the special bank, or by making available to banks insurance 
that  would  pay  off  under  very  adverse  conditions.  Each  approach  could  build  on  the 
infrastructure that the Treasury developed when it was planning to purchase troubled assets 
directly. Moreover, as I noted earlier, purchases that include residential mortgages could be 
combined  with  steps  to  restructure  some  mortgages  as  needed  to  avert  preventable 
foreclosures. 
As you know, the ultimate cost of the TARP program to the taxpayer is likely to be far less 
than  the  total  amount  allocated,  because  the  funds  are  not  simply  spent  but  are  used  to 
acquire  financial  assets,  such  as  preferred  shares  in  banks.  Even  so,  the  public  is 
understandably  concerned  about  the  cost  of  this  program,  particularly  as  most  other 
industries  experiencing  distress  are  not  receiving  comparable  assistance.  History  clearly 
shows,  and  recent  experience  confirms,  that  –  because  of  the  dependence  of  modern 
economies on the flow of credit – serious financial instability imposes disproportionately large 
costs on the broader economy. The rationale for public investment in the financial industry is 
not, therefore, any special regard for managers, workers, or investors in that industry over 
others, but rather the need to prevent a further deterioration in financial conditions that would 
destroy  jobs  and  incomes  in  all  industries  and  regions.  That  said,  the  public  is  entitled  to 
demand that policymakers take near-term, concrete actions to ensure that we do not face a 
similar crisis in the future. An important part of those actions should be to create a stronger 
supervisory and regulatory system in which gaps and unnecessary duplication in coverage 
are  eliminated,  lines  of  supervisory  authority  and  responsibility  are  clear,  and  oversight 
powers are sufficient to curb excessive leverage and risk-taking, particularly in systemically 
critical institutions. The Federal Reserve stands ready to work closely with the Congress to 
achieve meaningful and effective regulatory reform.  
Thank you. I would be pleased to take your questions. 
BIS Review 3/2009 
 3
