Henrique Meirelles: Ten years of floating exchange rates in Brazil  
Speech by Mr Henrique Meirelles, Governor of the Central Bank of Brazil, to celebrate 10 
years of floating exchange rates in Brazil, Central Bank of Brazil, Brasília, 19 January 2009. 
 It is an honor for me to speak to you today, which marks a special date in Brazilian economic 
history. That is because ten years ago yesterday, January 18, Brazil floated the Real (BRL), 
breaking with decades of exchange rate manipulation and repression by the government. I 
will start with some facts and then offer an assessment of the regime so far.  
First, let me address the global context. Since its inception the floating exchange rate regime 
has weathered many storms, starting with the bursting of the high tech bubble in 2000, the 
Argentine crisis in 2001, the September 11th attacks and, recently, the effects of the 2008 
global financial crisis. On the other hand, the global environment was on the whole favorable 
between 2003 and 2007. So, it is fair to say that in its first ten years the floating BRL has 
faced a pretty diverse external environment, neither persistently challenging nor consistently 
favorable.  
Now, let us consider the behavior of the exchange rate itself. The floating BRL has averaged 
$2.34 against the USD, within a range of $1.32 on the outset, to $3.96 on 22 October 2002. It 
is  nothing  but  a  sheer  coincidence  that  the  nominal  exchange  rate  currently  stands  very 
close  to  its  10-year  average.  The  real  effective  exchange  rate  has  also  oscillated 
substantially, reacting to shifts in fundamentals such as the terms of trade, risk aversion and 
underlying  capital  flows.  Compared  with  a  long-term  average  of  100,  the  real  effective 
exchange rate (measured in terms of BRL) has moved within 58, on October 2002, when the 
BRL was particularly weak, to 125 in August 2008, when it was stronger than the medium-
term norm.  
Regarding  the  balance  of  payments,  the  current  account  balance  has  averaged  -1.0%  of 
GDP, compared with a long-term average (since 1970) of -2.1%. Net FDI inflows have also 
performed relatively well, with an average of 3.0% of GDP, compared with 1.5% since 1970. 
Thanks to the improvement in the balance of payments the Central Bank has been able to 
accumulate sizeable foreign exchange reserves, which stand at about $205 billion currently. 
The  process  of  reserve  accumulation  did  not  impinge  on  the  functioning  of  the  floating 
exchange  rate  regime,  as  the  Central  Bank  strove  to  buy  foreign  currency  always  through 
publicly announced auctions at the going market price.    
At inception of the floating exchange rate regime, the foreign sovereign credit rating was B+ 
(according to S&P) and Brazil had an active stand-by program with the IMF. Brazil is now 
investment  grade,  the  sovereign  credit  rating  stands  at  BBB-  and  the  Central  Bank  has  a 
currency swap agreement, as yet not drawn, with the US Federal Reserve.  
Of  course,  a  floating  exchange  rate  regime  is  a  pre-condition  for  inflation  targeting.  After 
struggling  to  reach  the  targets  in  the  early  years,  the  Central  Bank  has  managed  to  keep 
inflation within the targeted range (since 2005 at 4.5% plus or minus two percentage points) 
for 5 years in a row. In fact, last year, when global inflationary pressures were quite strong (at 
least until the third quarter), the BCB was one of the few monetary authorities, within the set 
of those formally targeting inflation, not to miss its target, even though economic activity, until 
the end of the third quarter, remained quite strong.  
Thus,  from  a  narrow  balance  of  payments  viewpoint,  as  well  as  from  a  macroeconomic 
stance, the floating BRL has been remarkably successful. 
BIS Review 8/2009 
 1
That has not meant that the regime has counted with unqualified support. Time and again 
criticism of the floating BRL has mounted, be it because the currency is seen as not floating 
enough, or floating too much, or being too weak, or too strong, or helping some sectors of 
the economy or regions of the country at the expense of others.  
More  fundamental  is  the  criticism  that  the  exchange  rate  is  too  important  to  be  left  to  the 
markets. The recent financial crisis and misdemeanors have made this position fashionable 
again in mature economies. In Brazil, with a long tradition of heavy state intervention in the 
economy,  which  was  characterized  by  close  linkages  between  a  few  privileged  segments 
and  the  government,  this  position  has  always  had,  and  still  has,  its  vocal  advocates  in  all 
sorts of media.  
The first point to acknowledge, which the opponents of the floating BRL often seem to forget, 
is that regardless of the exchange rate regime, the real effective exchange rate always floats. 
Or,  putting  another  way,  the  relative  price  of  tradeables  to  nontradeables  changes 
continually.  Thus,  the  relative  prices  that  are  relevant  for  production  and  consumption 
decisions  for  exporters,  importers,  households  and  enterprises  always  adjust,  whether  the 
nominal exchange rate is fixed by a group of, hopefully enlightened, civil servants, or set by 
the markets. But when the exchange rate is allowed to float, relative price adjustment tends 
to be faster, and the impact of external shocks on quantities, that is to say on income and 
employment, tends to be smaller than when the nominal exchange rate is fixed.  
The  second  point  to  highlight  is  that  even  controlling  the  nominal  exchange  rate  can  be  a 
challenge,  and  comes  at  the  cost  of  either  the  ability  to  pursue  an  independent  monetary 
policy or of free capital flows. Countries cannot elude this constraint: nominal exchange rate 
management requires either severing linkages between the home economy and international 
capital  markets,  or  shadowing  some  other  country’s  monetary  policy.  In  sum,  adopting  a 
workable  nominal  exchange  rate  target  (be  it  explicit  or  hidden,  for  the  level  or  the  path) 
imposes macroeconomic choices that fewer and fewer countries have been willing to make. 
It is somewhat heroic to assume that the State would be extremely competent at setting the 
nominal exchange rate. At least in the Brazilian case, there is very little empirical evidence of 
that.  Under  managed  exchange  rates  Brazil  suffered  recurrent  balance  of  payments 
difficulties  in  the  1950s  and  1960s,  the  1980s  debt  crisis,  which  contributed  to  a  dramatic 
deterioration in macroeconomic performance in the following years, and the slowdown and 
crisis of the 1990s, before its final collapse in January 1999.  
Letting the market set the exchange rate does not mean remaining inactive when markets 
become  dysfunctional.  Thus,  the  Central  Bank  has  used  its  reserves,  during  the  current 
period  of  global  financial  turmoil,  to  ensure  that  Brazilian  exporters  and  importers  retain 
access  to  trade  finance,  to  help  Brazilian  corporates  rollover  their  debts  and  to  provide 
liquidity to the spot market. Throughout this difficult period our focus has been on contributing 
to improve the way markets function, not to replace them. This approach is, and will remain, 
the cornerstone of our action in the foreign exchange market. 
There is no doubt that the world is currently experiencing an extremely difficult time. But it is 
also true that Brazil is among the countries that are better prepared to cope with the effects 
of the global financial crisis – a fact pointed out by several organizations in many occasions, 
such as the last issue of the OECD composite leading indicators, a survey encompassing 35 
countries.  1  Brazilian  fundamentals  not  only  enable  us  to  face  the  current  environment  in 
better conditions than most countries, but also in a much better shape than in the past.  
One  of  the  distinguishing  features  of  the  Brazilian  economy  is  its  prudential  regulatory 
framework.  The  vigilant  stance  of  the  Central  Bank  prevented  the  development  of 
                                                 
1   See  http://www.oecd.org/document/59/0,3343,en_2649_34349_41966331_1_1_1_1,00.html,  January  12, 
2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 8/2009
disequilibria  and  excesses  that  emerged  in  several  other  economies.  We  did  not  let  the 
markets adopt risk taking attitudes that led to the losses and problems that many countries 
are  facing  today.  In  fact,  the  Brazilian  framework  is  considered  a  model  for  prudential 
regulation and regarded as an example to be followed by other regulatory authorities.  
That  does  not  mean  that  Brazil  is  not  being  hit  or  suffering  the  impacts  of  the  financial 
turmoil.  But  the  Brazilian  government  is  prepared  to  react  and  take  all  the  necessary 
measures to tackle the crisis.  
In conclusion, a floating exchange rate is no cure-all remedy for all economic ills. But it is 
certainly the best regime for a large, relatively closed, economy like ours. If Brazil had not 
floated  the  BRL  in  1999,  it  would  surely  have  done  so  since  then,  and  possibly  in  more 
adverse conditions. For all the above, this 10th anniversary is worth celebrating. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 8/2009 
 3
