Lucas Papademos: How to deal with the global financial crisis and 
promote the economy’s recovery and sustained growth 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice President of the European Central Bank, at the 7th 
European  Business  Summit  organised  by  the  European  Business  Forum,  Brussels, 
26 March 2009. 
 Introduction  
I.  
The  European  and  global  economies  are  experiencing  the  most  severe  and  prolonged 
financial crisis since the 1930s. A few facts and figures highlight the magnitude and nature of 
the  challenge  we  face.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  financial  turbulence  in  2007,  the  total 
reported write-downs and losses of banks globally have exceeded 888 billion dollars. Some 
estimates of the overall expected losses by banks and other financial institutions are in the 
range  of  2.2  trillion  dollars.1  Asset  prices  have  plummeted  worldwide,  though  the  extent 
differs across countries and market segments. In the EU, the value of equity has fallen by 6 
trillion euro,2 a decline of more than 50% from the peak reached in summer 2007. Economic 
activity  decelerated  sharply  during  2008,  especially  in  the  last  quarter;  it  is  projected  to 
contract significantly in the EU this year and to recover very moderately and gradually in the 
course  of  2010.  Importantly,  the  economic  outlook  is  surrounded  by  exceptionally  high 
uncertainty  reflecting,  among  other  factors,  the  low  level  of  consumer  and  business 
confidence as well as the ongoing deleveraging of banks and other financial institutions. 
The economic and financial situation and prospects are characterised by two features: first, a 
synchronised  decline  or  deceleration  in  economic  activity  in  all  economies  which  is 
associated  with  a  collapse  in  world  trade;  and,  second,  growing  signs  of  an  adverse 
feedback loop between the real economy and the financial sector. Although the sharp drop in 
the  value  of  toxic  assets  has  weakened  many  banks’  balance  sheets,  the  weakening  of 
economic  activity  has  been  impairing  the  quality  of  bank  loans,  adversely  affecting  their 
capital  positions  and  their  willingness  to  extend  credit  to  the  private  sector.  This,  in  turn, 
constrains  the  pace  of  economic  activity  and  the  ability  of  the  private  sector  to  service  its 
debts, entailing a risk of a vicious circle. 
Policies for economic recovery and sustained growth 
II.  
These observations have two general implications for economic policy. First, the economy’s 
recovery requires the simultaneous implementation of macroeconomic policies to stimulate 
aggregate  demand  and  of  measures  that  will  help  repair  banks’  balance  sheets  and 
encourage the provision of credit to the economy. In this way, a potential vicious circle can 
be prevented. Second, concerted policy efforts in all economies, especially the large ones, 
are  necessary  so  that  world  trade  can  be  revitalised  and  financial  capital  flows  stabilised. 
This  will  help  support  the  emerging  market  economies  and  global  growth.  The  policy 
strategies pursued need not be identical across countries and regions and the required size 
of the economic stimulus and the nature of the other measures taken need not – and should 
not – be the same, as structural and conjunctural conditions differ. Nevertheless, a similar 
orientation and consistency is warranted. 
                                                 
1   See International Monetary Fund, Global Financial Stability Report Market Update, 28 January 2009, p.2. 
2   Based on data available up for January 2009. 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 1
Since  the  intensification  of  the  financial  crisis  in  September  2008,  central  banks  and 
governments globally have acted in a decisive and concerted manner to contain the adverse 
effect of the financial crisis on the real economy and promote its recovery. In the euro area, 
the  actions  taken  by  the  ECB  and  the  Eurosystem  are  unprecedented  in  size  and  scope. 
Government support for financial institutions in the form of recapitalisations, guarantees on 
bank debt and, more recently, asset relief schemes, have been significant and the pertinent 
measures  are  progressively  being  implemented.  And  the  fiscal  stimulus  packages  of  euro 
area governments are substantial, amounting to a total of about 2% of euro area GDP over 
this year and the next. 
The immediate priority of macroeconomic policies and bank support schemes is to promote 
the economy’s recovery and preserve price and financial stability. Yet, a fundamental policy 
objective should be that the recovery of activity and the repair of the financial system have to 
be achieved in a manner that will ensure a sustained growth performance and will prevent 
the recurrence of episodes of financial imbalances and market excesses that can threaten 
again financial stability and economic welfare. Put differently, it is important that the policies 
and reforms pursued today lay the foundations for sustained growth. Let me now elaborate 
on  these  issues  by  focusing  on  the  role  and  contribution  of  central  bank  policy  and  of 
financial system reform. 
the  monetary  policy  easing  since 
Central bank policy 
The ECB’s monetary policy and provision of liquidity have played a key role in containing the 
downside  risks  to  price  stability,  supporting  economic  activity  and  stabilising  the  financial 
system.  The  extent  of 
last  October  has  been 
unprecedented, with key ECB policy interest rates having been reduced by 275 basis points. 
At the same time, money market rates have declined even more from the peaks reached in 
October 2008 as a result of the reduction in the policy rates and the provision of unlimited 
liquidity  to  banks  at  a  fixed  interest  rate  (against  an  expanded  range  of  eligible  collateral) 
since last October. At present, Euribor rates of maturities up to three months are below or 
very  close  to  the  main  refinancing  rate  (MRO)  of  the  ECB  and  at  historically  low  levels  – 
ranging  between  0.93%  (overnight)  and  1.56%  (3  months).3  And  these  levels  are 
comparable  to  the  corresponding  Libor  rates  in  the  US  dollar  and  Pound  sterling  money 
markets.4 Thus, over the past six months, conditions in the euro area money markets have 
significantly  improved  and  effectively  are  similar  to  –  or  even  better  than  –  those  in  other 
major money markets. 
In addition, the provision of liquidity by the ECB to the euro area banking system has been 
extraordinary  in  size  and  scope.  The  size  of  Eurosystem’s  balance  sheet  in  mid-February 
had  reached  1.53  trillion  euro  (or  1.96  trillion  US  dollars),  compared  with  0.91  trillion  euro 
before the eruption of the crisis. The expansion of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet by about 
70% over this period reflects the various non-standard measures implemented by the ECB, 
including the provision of unlimited funding in euro at fixed interest rates over periods up to 
six months as well as the supply of liquidity in other currencies, notably US dollars, on the 
basis of a swap agreement with the Federal Reserve. The reduction in the policy rates and 
the  increased  supply  of  reserves  were  fully  in  line  with  the  ECB’s  primary  objective  of 
preserving  price  stability  over  the  medium  term,  as  inflation  pressures  eased  and  inflation 
risks diminished, and helped to alleviate pressures in the credit market and mitigate financial 
stability risks. 
                                                 
3   Euribor rates for longer maturities (on 25 January 2009) are following: 6 months: 1.71%; 9 months: 1.78%; 1 
year: 1.86%. 
4   US Dollar 3-months Libor on 25 January 2009 were 1.48%; and Sterling 3-months Libor 1.79%. 
2 
 BIS Review 38/2009
Nevertheless,  and  although  bank  lending  rates  have  been  gradually  falling,  bank  credit 
standards  on  new  loans  have  been  tightened  and  credit  growth  to  the  private  sector  has 
been decelerating. This partly reflects the impact of the decline in economic activity on the 
demand for bank loans, but it is also a consequence of the ongoing deleveraging process in 
the banking system and continued stresses in the funding markets.  
Government support for the banking system 
Since  last  autumn,  governments  have  supported  the  banking  system  through  various 
measures: by injecting new capital, by providing guarantees on new bank debt issuance and, 
more recently, through asset relief schemes (involving the removal of impaired assets from 
the banks’ balance sheets or the provision of guarantees to limit the valuation losses of such 
assets).  These  measures  have  succeeded  in  stabilising  the  banking  system,  by  reducing 
systemic risks and strengthening confidence. The support provided has been substantial, for 
example  banks  in  the  euro  area  have  received  115  billion  euro  of  capital  injection  from 
governments (of which 75 billion euro were provided to the major banking groups) and 217 
billion euro of funding guarantees. However, these bank support measures are taking some 
time to implement. So far, only one third of the commitments for capital injections have been 
used and a smaller fraction – about 12% – of the commitments to guarantee new bank debt 
have  been  called  upon.  The  participation  of  banks  in  the  debt  guarantee  schemes  is 
voluntary, and the very limited use of these guarantees may reflect a decline in the demand 
for credit and/or the desire of the banks to continue deleveraging their balance sheets. It is, 
however, important to ensure that other constraining factors are addressed, for example that 
the  disincentives  associated  with  the  provision  or  pricing  of  these  debt  guarantees  are 
promptly addressed, so as to help banks finance additional lending to the private sector. 
Possible further measures 
A relevant question is whether the tight financing conditions and the continuing stresses on 
the banking system require further measures by governments and central banks in order to 
help revive the extension of bank credit to the economy. The answer regarding the need and 
the  nature  of  potential  further  measures  depends  on  the  causes  or  determinants  of  the 
prevailing financing conditions and on the structure of the financial system. To the extent that 
(i)  financial  market  stresses,  (ii)  the  deleveraging  process,  (iii)  uncertainty  about  the 
economic outlook and about potential further bank losses, and (iv) low confidence impair the 
functioning  of  the  credit  and  bank  funding  markets  and  the  transmission  of  the  effects  of 
monetary  policy,  “non-standard”  measures  aimed  at  reducing  funding  uncertainty  and 
enhancing  the  functioning  of  the  credit  market  and,  consequently,  the  monetary  policy 
transmission  mechanism,  may  represent  possible  courses  of  action.  In  the  euro  area, 
because the banking system has a more dominant role in the financing of the private sector 
than  the  capital  market,  compared  with  other  economies,  the  implementation  of  such 
measures would be more focused on the banking system. Potential measures could include 
an extension of the maturity of the central bank liquidity provided to banks and purchases of 
private debt securities in the secondary market in order to improve its liquidity and reduce the 
cost of funding of the real economy, thus helping its recovery. 
Could a further easing of monetary policy contribute to containing potential disinflation risks 
and provide further support to economic activity? I would like to make two general remarks 
concerning  the  role  of  monetary  policy  in  fostering  the  economy’s  recovery  and  sustained 
growth at this juncture and more generally. First, as we have emphasised in the past, the 
ECB’s monetary policy should ensure that inflation expectations over the medium to longer 
term  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s  aim  to  keeping  inflation 
below, but close to, 2%. This anchoring of inflation expectations supports sustainable growth, 
employment  creation  and  contributes  to  financial  stability.  Second,  the  monetary  policy 
stance  should  be  determined  so  as  to  also  contribute  to  a  smooth  exit  strategy  from  the 
current exceptional circumstances of historically low rates and unlimited provision of central 
BIS Review 38/2009 
 3
bank money to the banking system. Consequently, a monetary policy that aims to address 
potential disinflation risks and maintain medium-term price stability must be implemented in a 
manner that also ensures the preservation of price stability over the longer term.  
Financial system reform 
And  this  brings  me  to  two  final  points  concerning  two  other  essential  conditions  for 
sustainable  growth:  financial  system  reform  and  sound  fiscal  policy.  It  is  by  now  generally 
agreed  that  there  is  both  a  great  and  urgent  need  to  introduce  reforms  that  prevent  the 
recurrence of episodes of financial market excesses and corrections and that will make the 
global  financial  system  more  resilient  to  shocks.  An  extensive  and  impressive  amount  of 
work  has  been  undertaken  by  national  authorities  and  international  bodies,  under  the 
auspices  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum  and,  more  recently,  the  G20  process.  Concrete 
proposals  have  been  formulated  –  and  others  are  currently  being  elaborated  –  on  how  to 
reduce  the  cyclicality  of  the  financial  system  through  various  measures  and  reforms, 
including  the  enhancement  of  the  scope  and  effectiveness  of  financial  regulation  and 
supervision. In the EU, the report of the de Larosière Group is a valuable contribution to this 
end.  The  forthcoming  summit  meeting  of  the  Group  of  20  in  London  can  mark  a  further 
important  step  in  the  effective  pursuit  of  this  reform  agenda  globally.  The  prompt 
implementation of the proposed financial reforms will not only foster sustainable growth and 
financial stability in the long run, but it should also contribute to boosting confidence in the 
financial system in the short run, thus promoting economic recovery. 
Fiscal policy 
Last, and definitely not least, it is also essential for sustainable growth and prosperity that 
confidence in the long-term soundness of public finances is maintained. Government deficits 
and  public  debts  are  rising  substantially  in  most  countries  as  a  result  of  the  economic 
downturn,  discretionary  measures  to  stimulate  the  economy,  and  the  funding  of  the  bank 
support schemes. This is partly inevitable – due to the downturn – and partly necessary – to 
help  stabilise  the  economy  and  the  financial  system  –  in  the  short  run.  But  it  is  also 
imperative  that  fiscal  policies  are  designed  and  implemented  in  a  manner  that  strikes  the 
right balance between the need to support the economy’s recovery and the need to preserve 
the  confidence  in  the  soundness  and  sustainability  of  public  finances  which  is  key  for  the 
long-term performance of the economy. 
Conclusion 
III.  
I  have  used  the  word  “confidence”  several  times.  The  severity  and  duration  of  the  current 
economic  and  financial  crisis  is  partly  a  consequence  of  the  reduced  confidence  in  the 
prospects of the economy and the soundness of the financial system. The recovery of the 
economy  also  hinges  on  the  restoration  of  consumer  and  business  confidence  that  can 
contribute to the revival of spending and investment, and the return to normality in financial 
markets  and  the  banking  system.  The  rebuilding  of  trust  will  depend  on  our  ability  to 
appropriately combine the policy actions needed to address the immediate challenges with 
the necessary reforms for establishing an economic, financial and institutional environment 
that is conducive to sustainable long-term growth. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
4 
 BIS Review 38/2009
