Elizabeth A Duke: The systemic importance of consumer protection 
Speech  by  Ms  Elizabeth  A  Duke,  Member  of  the  Board  of  Governors  of  the  US  Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  2009  Community  Development  Policy  Summit,  Cleveland,  Ohio, 
10 June 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 I  want  to  thank  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Cleveland  for  sponsoring  this,  its  seventh 
annual  Policy  Summit,  and  for  inviting  me  to  speak.  The  agenda  for  today's  meeting  is 
certainly an ambitious one. You will be tackling questions about how housing policy might be 
restructured  to  stabilize  neighborhoods  and  create  a  more  sustainable  approach  to 
homeownership. You will also be discussing how the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) 
might be revised to ensure its continued role as a catalyst for private investment in low- and 
moderate-income neighborhoods. These are certainly important issues to consider as we try 
to  find  solutions  to  a  set  of  very  complex  problems  brought  about  by  the  turmoil  in  the 
mortgage and housing markets. I don't have to tell anyone in Cleveland, where foreclosures 
have harmed whole neighborhoods, about the devastating impact the foreclosure crisis has 
had on individuals, neighborhoods, and the broader economy – an impact so deep that we 
would  be  remiss  not  to  reconsider  current  policies  to  ensure  a  lasting  recovery  and 
sustainable homeownership.  
As  I  look  at  your  agenda,  I  am  struck  by  the  fact  that  the  problems  we've  seen  with 
foreclosures  and  neighborhood  destabilization  stem  from  the  over-provision  of  poorly 
designed  credit,  whereas,  in  contrast,  CRA  had  its  birth  when  credit  was  generally 
unavailable  to  low-  and  moderate-income  neighborhoods.  So  as  I  talk  today  about  the 
Federal Reserve and our role in consumer protection, I'd like to emphasize the importance of 
both  the  availability  of  credit  and  the  ability  of  consumers  to  use  such  credit  safely  to 
increase their own well-being in transactions that contribute to economic growth. If we have 
learned nothing else in this crisis, we have learned that consumer protection is not just good 
for consumers; it is also necessary to restore investor confidence and promote a strong and 
stable economy. 
How we got here  
Given economic events over the past 18 months, few would question the importance of the 
link  between  the  performance  of  consumer-based  financial  products  and  the  health  of  the 
broader economy. Even so, it is important to examine this link in order to learn how we can 
do  a  better  job  of  both  protecting  consumers  and  protecting  the  stability  of  the 
macroeconomy in the future.  
The  current  economic  situation  developed  over  a  period  of  years  as  the  confluence  of 
several market developments created an environment of inexpensive  and readily available 
credit.  Advances  in  information  technology  and  financial  innovations  over  recent  decades 
encouraged  new  lending  products  and  the  extension  of  credit  to  a  wider  spectrum  of 
borrowers,  including  many  who  would  have  previously  had  difficulty  qualifying  for  credit. 
Such developments as credit scoring lowered transaction costs and helped to evaluate risk 
more  effectively  and  consistently.  Similarly,  advances  in  financial  engineering  encouraged 
and  broadened  opportunities  to  draw  on  capital  from  around  the  world  through  the 
securitization of debt. This inflow of capital provided creditors with new sources of funds for 
the expansion of credit. The securitization process was made more versatile – but also more 
complicated  –  by  the  introduction  of  structured  products,  such  as  collateralized  debt 
obligations, which were intended to match investors to various credit and prepayment risks. 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 1
As  the  credit  markets  evolved,  financial  products  also  changed.  Consumers  were 
increasingly offered more complex, but often less transparent, products. Where once the vast 
majority of mortgages were 30-year, fixed-rate products, by the height of the housing boom 
in 2007, adjustable-rate products proliferated – such products as the 2/28 (a loan with a low 
introductory rate for the first two years) or the option ARM (a loan on which the consumer 
could choose to pay a full payment, an interest-only payment, or even a payment that did not 
fully cover even the interest, with the difference being added to the loan's principal balance). 
For  large  numbers  of  borrowers,  piggy-back  second  mortgages  substituted  for  down 
payments. These products relied primarily on rising property values and borrowers' ability to 
refinance for repayment. The high levels of risk posed by these products became apparent 
only when home prices began to fall and the rate of foreclosure increased dramatically. 
Just as mortgage products were becoming more complex, credit card terms, rates, and fees 
also  were  becoming  significantly  more  complicated  and  difficult  for  consumers  to  fully 
understand.  New  practices  evolved,  such  as  charging  different  interest  rates  for  different 
transactions and double-cycle billing, whereby lenders calculated interest based not only on 
the current balance, but also on the prior month's balance. While such practices increased 
revenues  for  lenders,  it  is  less  clear  how  they  benefited  cardholders.  Also,  payment-
allocation  rules  tended  to  treat  consumers  unfavorably  and  made  it  difficult  for  them  to 
benefit fully from promotions such as balance-transfer programs. 
Even  as  credit  products  were  growing  in  variety  and  complexity,  consumer  debt  was 
expanding dramatically over recent years. In particular, mortgage debt rose from $3.5 trillion 
in 1995 to $11.1 trillion in 2007,1 while revolving credit grew from $443 billion to $939 billion 
over the same period and nonrevolving credit (mostly automobile and  student loans) grew 
from $697 billion to $1.6 trillion.2  
In hindsight, it is not hard to see how these various factors combined to create a perilous 
situation for consumers, investors, and the broader economy. Bad decisions resulting from 
poorly  underwritten  mortgage  products  with  complex 
features 
purposefully  hidden  from  consumers  were  made  on  such  a  scale  that  the  spillover  effects 
from  the  resulting  defaults  and  foreclosures  were  far  broader  than  in  prior  downturns. 
Previously,  the  negative  impact  of  foreclosures  had  tended  to  be  limited  to  local  areas 
experiencing significant job losses or to recessionary pressures resulting from fluctuations in 
the business cycle. But the accelerating growth rate in the subprime lending market and the 
fact  that  so  many  of  these  risky  loans  were  bundled  into  securities  set  the  stage,  so  that 
when individual borrowers failed to keep up with payments, the result was devastating to the 
entire market. 
Investors belatedly recognized the serious problems of poor underwriting and inappropriate 
loan structuring – practices that may have been facilitated by the securitization processes. 
Problems also spilled over to securities backed by credit card receivables, auto loans, and 
other asset classes. As a result, investors stopped purchasing most asset-backed securities 
and much of the secondary market stopped functioning. The loss of investor confidence has 
had enormous ripple effects in the economy as the tightening of credit has squeezed housing 
and  automotive  sales  and  threatened  the  viability  of  businesses  reliant  on  credit  lines  to 
cover inventory and other expenses. 
In  addition  to  the  loss  of  investor  confidence,  consumer  confidence  was  also shaken.  The 
collapse  of  the  housing  market  exposed  practices  that  were  not  consumer-friendly.  Some 
lenders,  brokers,  appraisers,  and  investment  banks  were  clearly  motivated  by  transaction 
fees  and  had  little  incentive  to  ensure  that  borrowers  would  be  able  to  sustain 
features  or,  worse, 
                                                 
1   "Federal Reserve Statistical Release, Z.1, Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States". 
2   www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/hist. 
2 
 BIS Review 72/2009
homeownership. Banks, under stress from losses in their mortgage portfolios, pulled back on 
private-label  mortgage  lending  and  increased  the  prices  associated  with  other  types  of 
lending.  The  effect  of  these  practices,  combined  with  the  impact  of  job  losses  and  other 
ramifications of a shrinking economy, have had a significant impact on consumer confidence. 
Consumer spending has fallen off as a result, further exacerbating the negative cycle. 
A banker's perspective 
In  thinking  about  what  it  will  take  to  achieve  economic  recovery,  I  often  draw  on  my 
experience as a community banker. In the days when I was lending money, we kept those 
loans  on  our  balance  sheet.  In  that  context  success  was  directly  related  to  the  ability  of 
customers to repay loans. Indeed, it was related to their ability to repay and borrow again 
over a career and over a lifetime. This was accomplished through effective underwriting and 
risk analysis and through proper loan structuring. When the incentives in the credit process 
are properly aligned, the benefits flow to both the borrower and the lender: the borrower is 
assured terms and conditions such that he or she can reasonably be expected to repay the 
loan, and the lender is paid interest on the money lent. While I don't necessarily believe we 
need to return to a time when all loans are held on balance sheet, I do believe we need a 
system of balanced incentives for the longer-term prosperity of all. 
Credit transactions conducted to the benefit of both borrower and lender expand economic 
growth. This is as true on the community level as it is at the macroeconomic level. Access to 
capital  to  create  and  expand  small businesses leads  to  job  growth  and  benefits  the  larger 
community. Likewise, mortgage lending, responsibly done, gives a community a solid base of 
residents with a stake in its future. 
The  problems  that  we  face  today  result,  in  large  part,  from  a  misalignment  of  incentives. 
Securitization, while providing liquidity, also weakened the incentives to properly underwrite 
loans,  in  many  cases  by  passing  default  risk  from  originators  to  investors.  Compensation 
structures  were  also  problematic.  Some  originators  were  compensated  on  the  basis  of 
particular loan features or loan volumes rather than on loan quality. Meanwhile, loans with 
features that may have been appropriate for a small subset of potential borrowers – such as 
interest-only mortgage loans or loans requiring little or no documentation of income – were 
offered to a wider group of consumers. Studies have shown that if borrower income is held 
constant, loan features do matter to the successful repayment of a loan. 
So I hope we have learned that misaligned incentives that result in harm to consumers have 
implications for the economy overall. If we recognize this, then we must also recognize that 
consumer protections cannot be viewed as an ancillary component of a scheme to regulate 
for  safety  and  soundness.  Rather,  they  are  fundamental  to  the  quality  of  the  credit  upon 
which the economy is built. Having said that, policymakers must also consider the desirability 
of a dynamic economy, one in which useful innovations are encouraged and credit is made 
available to as many consumers as have the ability to benefit from it. The tension between 
protecting  consumers  and  making  credit  broadly  available  is  one  that  is  as  important  in 
making an individual loan as it is to ensuring the stability of the economy. 
The key to successful policy formulation is to resist the temptation to regulate the problem of 
the moment. For example, if, in reaction to the abuses in consumer and mortgage lending 
over the past few years, we were to focus solely on consumer protection policies, the result 
could be overly restrictive access to credit, which could threaten future economic growth. On 
the other hand, if the policy focus is strictly on stabilizing the banking sector without giving 
due  consideration  to  consumer  protection,  both  consumer  and  investor  confidence  will 
remain weak and we will risk repeating the mistakes of the past. Trust in the financial system 
can be regained only if sufficient consumer protections are in place to give borrowers reason 
to believe they will be treated fairly. 
BIS Review 72/2009 
 3
The role of the Federal Reserve 
The Federal Reserve addresses its consumer protection responsibilities in a variety of ways, 
using its regulatory and supervisory authority as well as its consumer education, research, 
and  outreach  capabilities.  We  take  a  multifaceted  approach  to  consumer  protection,  for  a 
couple of reasons. First, our organization is in the unique position of being a central bank as 
well as a regulator and supervisor for the banking industry. Moreover, our experience in this 
arena has taught us that there is no one solution sufficient to address the information needs 
and substantive protection of consumers in credit transactions. By offering a broad spectrum 
of  products,  services,  and  activities,  we  aim  to  provide  consumers  with  the  information 
necessary to make good financial decisions. 
For  example,  based  on  our  belief  that  clear  and  well-organized  disclosures  can  help 
consumers make good choices among financial products, the Federal Reserve has used its 
regulatory authority to develop extensive new disclosures for a variety of financial products, 
including  credit  cards.  We  are  currently  in  the  midst  of  a  major  overhaul  of  mortgage 
disclosures. 
To  ensure  that  new  disclosures  are  useful  to  consumers,  the  Federal  Reserve  has  used 
consumer testing to explore how consumers process information and understand important 
features of financial products. This has been quite an informative exercise. We have used 
what we learned from consumer testing to improve the disclosures we require. For example, 
we  recently  revised  the  credit  card  disclosures  required  to  be  provided  to  consumers  at 
account opening. The new rules require that certain key terms be included in a conspicuous 
table  because  our  field  testing  indicated  that  consumers  were  unlikely  to  read  dense 
language but were comfortable with interpreting information in a table format.  
Our consumer testing efforts have also taught us that even the best disclosures cannot offer 
the protection consumers need in all cases. Some aspects of increasingly complex products 
simply cannot be fully understood or evaluated by consumers, no matter how well educated 
the consumer or how clear the disclosure. In those cases, we have chosen to prohibit certain 
practices.  For  example,  the  Federal  Reserve  recently  banned  the  practice  of  double-cycle 
billing when calculating interest rates on credit cards because we found in testing that there 
was no reasonable way to explain the practice. We have also banned practices related to 
mortgage  lending  that  have  potentially  unfair  and  deceptive  features.  We  found  that  the 
failure  to  require  escrow  accounts  for  homeowners'  insurance  and  property  taxes  often 
caused borrowers to underestimate the cost of homeownership, so we made such escrows 
mandatory  for  high-cost  loans.  Similarly,  we  have  also  placed  restrictions  on  the  use  of 
prepayment penalties. 
The  Federal  Reserve  has  also  become  more  proactive  in  its  efforts  to  make  consumers 
aware  of  its  role  in  consumer  education  and  outreach.  While  we  have  a  long  history  of 
providing  unbiased,  research-based  information  to  consumers  on  a  variety  of  financial 
products, we have stepped up our efforts to get information to consumers quickly. And we 
have  recently  made  use  of  some  unconventional  venues  –  unconventional  at  least  for  a 
central  bank.  For  example,  to  make  consumers  aware  of  foreclosure-rescue  scams,  the 
Board recently ran a 30-second public service announcement (PSA) in movie theatres in 18 
markets across 10 states having high foreclosure rates. Additionally, the coverage that the 
PSA campaign received on television, radio, and in newspapers carried the message about 
the existence of mortgage-rescue scams to a far broader audience. 
As  a  complement  to  the  PSA  campaign,  the  Board  developed  a  5  Tips  flyer  regarding 
foreclosure-rescue scams that provides essential information in an easily digestible format. 
Material developed by the Board is now being leveraged by others. Several Reserve Banks, 
for instance, are working to add the Board's PSA to additional theatres in their markets. And 
one  Reserve  Bank  has  decided  to  replicate  the  effort  with  a  PSA  tailored  to  its  particular 
market. In addition, the PSA and 5 Tips have been picked up by other public and nonprofit 
4 
 BIS Review 72/2009
organizations, including the National Association of Realtors, and mortgage servicers such 
as GMAC. 
The  success  of  this  campaign  has  highlighted  the  demand  for  timely  information  that 
consumers can use. Through this effort, we have learned a great deal about the importance 
of the Federal Reserve as an unbiased source of consumer information. We intend to build 
on  this  knowledge  going  forward  –  focusing on  the  content  provided,  leveraging  the  same 
message through multiple distribution channels, and creating awareness of the information's 
availability. 
Finally,  as  a  research  institution  we  engage  in  efforts  to  measure  the  effectiveness  of 
financial education, in order to understand what approaches work best. For example, Board 
staff,  working  with  the  Department  of  Defense  and  others,  conducted  a  longitudinal  study 
involving soldiers at Fort Bliss to determine whether receiving a two-day financial education 
course  as  part  of  their  advanced  individualized  training  improved  the  soldiers'  financial 
behaviors compared to those who did not receive training. We found that soldiers who took 
the  course  were  more  likely  to  engage  in  positive  financial  behaviors  (such  as  saving 
regularly, participating in retirement programs, and paying off credit card bills monthly) and 
less likely to engage in negative behaviors (such as paying overdraft fees and paying bills 
late). 
The  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Philadelphia  is  currently  engaged  in  a  longitudinal  study  to 
measure the effectiveness of homeownership counseling. Throughout the Federal Reserve 
System  we  continue  to  study  and  apply  the  lessons  learned  in  the  field  of  behavioral 
economics to improve our financial education and consumer information.  
The goal of each of the Federal Reserve's actions with respect to consumer protection has 
been  to  restore  consumer  confidence  by  making  credit  more  transparent  and,  where 
necessary, prohibiting practices  that  are  so  complex  as  to  be  unfair and  deceptive.  These 
actions  are  not  only  good  for  consumers,  but  will  benefit  the  financial  industry.  We  aim  to 
promote access to responsible credit for consumers to the greatest extent possible while also 
recognizing the value of innovation and the need to restore fully functioning credit markets. 
Being attentive to the interconnection between meaningful consumer protections and broad 
access to credit will ensure a more lasting and sustainable economic recovery. 
Conclusion 
With that, I would like to come full circle and end with the importance of dialogue between the 
Federal Reserve Banks and the regions they serve. This conference is an excellent example 
of the ways in which policy is shaped by your involvement. Every day across all 12 Federal 
Reserve  Districts  we  leverage  forums  such  as  this,  as  well  as  partnerships  with  financial 
institutions and community groups, to better understand how financial products are shaping 
the communities that make up our vast economy. I want to commend you for taking the time 
to  engage  in  thoughtful  consideration  of  policies  that  will  help  alleviate  the  impact  of  the 
current housing and economic crisis on our neighborhoods. I also look forward to a continued 
discussion of the role that strong consumer protection must play in our economic future.  
BIS Review 72/2009 
 5
