Andres Lipstok: The Estonian economy  
Speech by Mr Andres Lipstok, Governor of Bank of Estonia, at a lunch for the EU Deputies, 
organised by the Ambassador of the Czech Republic, Mr A Langer, Tallinn, 28 May 2009.  
 Excellencies, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I  am  genuinely  pleased  for  the  invitation  of  Ambassador  Langer  to  join  you  here  at  the 
working lunch. 
First of all, I would like to provide a short overview of Estonia's current economic situation 
and the plans related to the adoption of the euro. Afterwards I would be glad to discuss these 
issues with you. 
The global crisis has had a strong impact on Estonia's small and open economy via trade 
channel. Collapse of world trade and decreasing demand in Estonia's main trading partners 
has decreased considerably also Estonia's exports. 
Although  financial  channel  is  also  somewhat  strained,  we  have  not  witnessed  particularly 
excessive  tightening  of  credit  inside  the  banking  groups  that  operate  in  Estonia.  Estonian 
banking  market  is  fully  integrated  into  Scandinavian  groups,  which  has  provided  stability. 
Estonia's banking sector has enough capital and liquidity to support restructuring in the real 
economy. 
The global turmoil is clearly not over yet, though there have been some signs of stabilisation 
over  the  past  months.  Estonia,  too,  is  showing  some  signs  of  stabilisation  and  confidence 
indicators have also slightly improved. However, it has to be stressed that outlooks for this 
and  next  year  are  highly  uncertain  everywhere  in  the  world.  This  is  also  reflected  by  the 
growth figures of the EU and single Member States. 
According to Eesti Pank's spring forecast, this year's economic downturn in Estonia will be 
around  12%.  Estonian  economy  may  start  to  recover  towards  the  end  of  2009,  albeit  the 
resumption of growth is very much dependent on the state of economies of our main trading 
partners. In 2011, Estonia's economic growth should recover to almost 5%. 
I would like to stress that Estonia has undergone considerable economic adjustment, which 
started already at the end of 2007 and several risk factors are withdrawing rapidly. 
Estonia's  current  account  –  the  spread  between  savings  and  investment  –  is  practically  in 
balance.  Thus,  the  financing  of  the  economy's  current  expenditure  is  ensured  by  current 
income.  Any  external  current  financing  needs  will  be  covered  by  official  EU  funds.  The 
correction of labour market and the rapid decline in inflation are just as important. The sharp 
increase in prices and wages following Estonia's accession to the EU is over. Price level in 
Estonia  will  decrease  moderately  both  this  and  next  year.  This  is  an  important  factor 
supporting productivity growth in the economy.  
Let me now turn to euro adoption. The clear perspective of joining the euro area increases 
markedly Estonia's credibility and serves as the main factor supporting our economy in the 
near future. We are likely to meet the numerical values of the Maastricht criteria by the end of 
2009 and Estonia expects to join the euro area in 2011, in full accordance with the Treaty 
provisions. 
It is clear that in order to adopt the euro, the key issue of Estonia's fiscal policy is ensuring 
sustainable  public  finances  in  the  next  years.  Looking  at  longer-term  growth  potential,  it 
would be advisable not to achieve this by excessive increases in the tax burden. 
BIS Review 90/2009 
 1
Finally, the way out from the current crisis depends critically on further strengthening of the 
EU Single  Market for  goods, services and production factors (including capital, labour and 
know-how). 
To  conclude  I  would  like  to  assure  that  Eesti  Pank  is  always  open  for  your  inquires  and 
cooperation. 
Thank you for your attention! 
2 
 BIS Review 90/2009
