Eddie Yue: Hong Kong: the natural gateway to Islamic finance in Asia – 
current developments 
Keynote  address  by  Mr  Eddie  Yue,  Deputy  Chief  Executive  of  the  Hong  Kong  Monetary 
Authority, at the 2009 Asia Sukuk Summit, Hong Kong, 18 February 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, 
It is a great honour to be invited to speak at today's inaugural Asia Sukuk Summit in Hong 
Kong,  and  a  pleasure  to  welcome  you  all,  especially  those  of  you  who  are  visiting  Hong 
Kong. 
This is the first Sukuk Summit to be held in Asia and it takes place at the beginning of the 
Year  of  the  Ox  in  the  Chinese  calendar.  The  ox  symbolises  strength,  resilience,  and  –  of 
course  –  bullishness.  For,  while  it  may  be  true  that  we  are  still  in  the  middle  of 
unprecedented financial turbulence, every crisis brings with it new opportunities for renewal 
and change. The remarkable turnout today clearly reflects a desire to explore new ways of 
restoring financial market stability and, most important of all, promoting growth. This Summit 
has  assembled  an  impressive  gathering  of  colleagues  from  both  the  public  and  private 
sectors from many parts of Asia, Europe and the Middle East. The theme of the Summit – 
"Towards A New Silk Route for Islamic Finance" – is an apt one: it is a call for partnership in 
creating new regional bonds and links of the kind that once allowed this ancient trade route 
to flourish in a diverse yet co-operative world. In the globalised world, such co-operation is 
more  important  than  ever  if  our  economies  are  to  be  able  to  meet  future  challenges 
successfully.  
I have been asked to give a brief overview of Hong Kong, with particular emphasis on how 
this  city  is  developing  its  Islamic  finance  capabilities.  Hong  Kong’s  strength  as  a  free  and 
open international financial centre has helped nourish its deep and liquid financial markets. 
Yet maintaining a free and open market in such a turbulent world is not an easy task. It is 
therefore reassuring that Hong Kong’s monetary and financial systems have continued to be 
sound  and  robust,  reinforced  by  a  number  of  recent  contingency  measures  to  strengthen 
financial  stability.  There  are  many  factors  that  underline  the  resilience  of  Hong  Kong's 
financial markets: I would like to highlight two.  
First, even when extreme volatility prevailed in the global foreign exchange markets following 
the  collapse  of  Lehman  Brothers,  the  exchange  value  of  the  Hong  Kong  dollar  remained 
firmly anchored even as other major currencies suffered wide fluctuations, causing a ripple 
effect to other currencies in the region. Several reasons accounted for this extreme global 
volatility:  the  repatriation  of  large  amounts  of  capital  to  the  US  to  rescue  the  market; 
repositioning  by  those  outside  of  the  US  who  came  to  realise  the  severity  and  the 
contagiousness  of  the  crisis;  and  deleveraging  of  large  amounts  of  exchange  and  interest 
rate arbitrage activities triggered by the financial crisis.  
These volatile conditions should, in theory, be destabilising for the Hong Kong dollar. Yet, not 
only  has  there  been  no  depreciation  pressure  on  the  Hong  Kong  dollar:  it  has  in  fact 
strengthened following capital inflows into Hong Kong since the outbreak of the crisis in mid-
September last year. Consistent with the principles of the Currency Board, the Hong Kong 
Monetary Authority (HKMA) has bought a total of US$23 billion, injecting HK$179 billion into 
the local money market.  
The inflow of funds to the Hong Kong dollar was a welcome development, paving the way for 
monetary easing, which was fortuitously the appropriate monetary policy stance to support 
the economy. The reasons put forward for the inflow have not been a cause for concern for 
they  did  not  seem  to  relate  to  exchange-rate  speculation.  Market  consensus  about  the 
BIS Review 19/2009 
 1
causes pointed to the unwinding of carry trades and the repatriation of funds by corporates to 
finance  operations  in  Hong  Kong.  It  is  also  likely  that  there  have  been  some  inflows  to 
position for investment in Hong Kong, in light of the better economic prospects of the region, 
and in particular, China. 
The second factor in the resilience of Hong Kong’s financial markets is our robust banking 
system. One of the lessons from this experience is that the stability and effectiveness of the 
banking system becomes even more essential when financial crisis shuts down the two other 
financial  intermediation  channels:  the  bond  market  and  the  stock  market.  In  economies 
across the world, new issuance of corporate debt and listing of new companies came to a 
halt, posing an enormous challenge for the banking channel to sustain economic activities: 
as we have seen, in many cases that challenge was insurmountable.  
At the same time, the financial crisis grew to such exceptional proportions that governments 
worldwide had to implement a series of rescue measures of a kind never seen before, using 
public money to bail out the banking system. In a globalised world, it would be complacent to 
say that Hong Kong will continue to be less affected than their counterparts in Europe and 
the US: it is likely that the falling prices of financial assets, the economic downturn and other 
unfavourable factors will inevitably affect banks' asset quality and drive up the ratio of non-
performing  loans.  Nevertheless,  it  is  also  true  that  Hong  Kong  has  entered  this  crisis  in  a 
position of strength and should be able to weather it relatively well.  
Despite  the  complex  and  stressful  financial  environment,  the  fundamentals  of  the  banking 
sector in Hong Kong has remained strong and sound. The local banking sector here is well 
capitalised, at 13.8%, with a strong liquidity position averaging 45% in the fourth quarter of 
last  year.  The  asset  quality  of  retail  banks  is  also  high  by  historical  standards,  with 
preliminary figures showing overall non-performing loan ratio edging marginally from below 
1% before the global financial crisis to just above 1% at the end of 2008. These very solid 
foundations will help Hong Kong cope with the challenge of a possible rise in non-performing 
financial  assets  and  losses  in  the  financial  markets.  They  also  supply  the  conditions  for 
moving beyond crisis towards opportunity, and for exploring what seems set to become one 
of the strongest and more interesting of growth engines in markets in this region and beyond: 
Islamic finance.  
Like most other asset classes, the growth of Islamic finance decelerated last year as a result 
of  the  global  credit  crunch  and  unfavourable  economic  conditions.  New  sukuk  issuance 
retreated to US$14 billion last year, down from a high of US$31 billion in 2007.1 And without 
a doubt, there will continue to be great challenges in the coming year. Market participants are 
reportedly  expecting  a  slowdown  in  annual  growth  in  global  Islamic  banking  assets  to 
10-15% in 2009, compared with a growth of 20-30% last year.2 Even so, a growth rate of 
10-15% is robust by any standard, and especially so when set against the strong shrinkage 
in other areas of finance. There remains a healthy stock of sukuk issuance in the pipeline for 
this year, thus providing a good market to tap: one report conservatively estimates planned 
or announced sukuk for 2009 as being in excess of US$45 billion.3
As a new asset class, Islamic finance practices banking and investments in compliance with 
the  principles  of  Islamic  Shariah  law,  which  prohibits  excessive  leverage,  risk-taking  and 
uncertainty,  and  promotes  ethical  practices.  These  are  indeed  universal  principles  in  all 
markets – or at least they should be: one of the lessons of the present financial crisis is that 
too little attention has been paid to them. This is not to suggest that Islamic finance is without 
                                                 
1   Source: Bloomberg. 
2   Source: "Islamic inroads" by AsiaRisk, February 2009. 
3   Source:  "Sukuk  market  declined  sharply  in  2008,  but  long-term  prospects  remain  strong"  by  Standard  and 
Poor's, Islamic Finance News, 6 February 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 19/2009
risk – indeed many of the risks inherent in Islamic finance are similar to those of conventional 
finance, and, in fact, Islamic financial institutions may be subject to other unique risks from 
the liquidity and operational perspectives. But Islamic finance introduces an alternative form 
of  financing,  and  one  that  offers  many  opportunities  particularly  when  financial  market 
conditions start to improve.  
From  the  perspective  of  Hong  Kong,  we  are  optimistic  that  the  coming  together  here  of 
Islamic finance with development opportunities in neighbouring Asian markets and China will 
provide  an  exciting  growth  stimulus  for  financial  market  participants.  A  key  part  of  the 
Government’s  strategy  for  developing  Hong  Kong  as  an  international  financial  centre  is  a 
focus  on  Islamic  finance.  In  support  of  this  initiative,  the  HKMA,  in  collaboration  with  the 
Treasury  Markets  Association  (TMA),  has  devoted  considerable  time  and  resources  into 
establishing  an  appropriate  infrastructure  framework  and  developing  an  education  and 
awareness programme both locally and worldwide. Although we are still in the infant stages 
of development, we have accumulated some experience, which I would like to share with you 
today. 
First, since it is now such a hot topic to talk about change, I trust that you will agree with me 
that Islamic finance, at least for jurisdictions like Hong Kong, means change – a change in 
perception, a change in skills, a change in structures and techniques, in contracts, standards, 
and  so  on.  Change,  in  all  its  many  forms,  is  happening  within  the  global  Islamic  finance 
arena,  even  as  we  speak.  In  the  past  year  or  so,  we  have  seen  the  inception  of  several 
standardisation initiatives for Islamic financial documentation, spearheaded by international 
institutions  like  the  Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB)  and  the  International  Islamic 
Financial  Market  (IIFM).  This  form  of  change  is  significant  towards  facilitating  harmonious 
practices, providing greater clarity for the Islamic financial services industry and thus acting 
as a boost to the development of global Islamic financial markets. 
There have also been many exciting developments in the new markets for Islamic finance in 
Asia, where there is a growing tendency for sukuk issuance, such as the sovereign issues 
from Indonesia and Singapore to support the development of Islamic finance. At the same 
time,  we  have  also  seen  enhanced  co-operation  and  increased  linkages,  both  internally 
within  the  region  and  externally  with  other  Islamic  financial  centres  in  the  Middle  East. 
Malaysia,  for  one,  has  announced  its  co-operation  with  Bahrain  and  Dubai,  to  jointly 
cooperate  and  develop  Islamic  banking  and  finance  in  the  region.  At  the  market  level,  we 
have  also  seen  a  continuing  trend  of  regional  expansion  by  Islamic  financial  institutions 
beyond  the  traditional  markets  toward  newly  emerging  centres  in  Asia.  Such  changes  are 
happening, despite the challenging environment that firms are currently operating in. 
One  of  the  most  daunting  of  the  changes  required  for  policymakers  and  regulators  is  the 
change  in  regulations  and  taxation  rules  to  provide  an  equitable  environment  for  the 
operation of Islamic finance within the overall financial market framework. Within Hong Kong, 
with the wealth of expertise drawn from members of the TMA, recommendations were put up 
and  analysed  by  the  Government  as  a  priority  in  its  comprehensive  tax  review.  The 
Government has concluded that the legal system in Hong Kong is flexible enough to meet 
the demands of Islamic finance transactions. This is because, with our robust rule of law and 
our simple tax structure free of capital or interest gains tax, there have only been a minimal 
number of taxation issues that have to be dealt with. The legislation on tax also gives power 
to the Government to grant tax exemptions where necessary to those who apply for it. The 
legal  architecture  in  Hong  Kong  therefore  lends  itself  well  to  Islamic  finance.  There  is 
therefore little time to spare, in the run up to a revival of the sukuk market and the lead time it 
takes  to  promulgate  tax  exemption  rules  for  Islamic  finance  transactions;  financial  market 
players in Hong Kong must gear themselves up to embrace the change coming your way. 
Secondly, there is in general a greater awareness of Islamic finance within the local financial 
community, particularly among banks. Banks in Hong Kong are in the position of being both 
investors  in,  and  suppliers  of  Islamic  finance  products.  Instruments,  ranging  from  retail 
BIS Review 19/2009 
 3
Islamic  investment  funds  and  Islamic  treasury  placements  at  the  interbank  and  corporate 
level, to Islamic loan syndication, have started to emerge in Hong Kong within the past year. 
Financial market participants have also set up Islamic banking windows here to signal their 
readiness to cater for these types of activities.  
But even with all the significant developments achieved here in such a short period of time, 
more still needs to be done. While the recognition of Islamic finance as a viable fund-raising 
and investment alternative is gradually making its way to the corporate sector in Hong Kong, 
the pace of development is still rather slow. Furthermore, this market awareness should also 
be  promoted  beyond  banks  and  other  types  of  financial  institutions  to  all  related  service 
industries, such as investment managers, asset managers, securities and brokerage houses, 
exchanges and commodity firms, pension funds, insurance agencies, solicitors, accountants, 
and  trustees.  Not  only  will  this  require  a  much  wider  network  of  collaboration  among  the 
trade associations in Hong Kong, it will also require the financial institutions themselves to 
play a role in educating their customers and stimulating the potential supply and demand of 
Islamic financial products in Hong Kong.  
Last but not least, although Hong Kong is still a relative newcomer to this industry, it has the 
strengths  and  capabilities  to  make  significant  contributions  to  the  global  Islamic  finance 
market. Hong Kong is in many ways fortunate to have access to the Islamic finance talents 
and knowhow through an extensive network of international and regional players here. And I 
believe  that  there  is  endless  potential  for  us  to  innovate  in  the  area  of  Islamic  finance, 
especially in deploying our special strengths – our close affinity to China, our experience as 
an  international  fund  raising  centre  and  asset  management  hub,  and  our  role  as  a  testing 
ground for the Mainland’s financial liberalisation. There is, for example, no obstacle to Hong 
Kong’s becoming a centre for Islamic IPOs, given our distinct record as a leading IPO centre 
in  the  region.  What  is  needed  is  maximum  preparedness  on  the  part  not  only  of  the 
regulators  but  also  of  financial  market  players,  who  are  the  driving  force  of  financial 
innovation and growth. 
With  great  challenges  come  great  opportunities,  and  Islamic  finance  is  an  area  that  has 
shown  much  promise  over  the  past  years.  I  believe  that  now  is  the  time  to  lay  down  the 
groundwork for future growth and development. With these remarks, ladies and gentlemen, 
let  me  wish  the  inaugural  Asia  Sukuk  Summit  a  great  success  and  all  of  you  a  most 
productive time here in Hong Kong. 
Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 19/2009
