Stefan Ingves: The monetary policy landscape in a financial crisis 
Speech by Mr Stefan Ingves, Governor of the Sveriges Riksbank, at the Swedish Economics 
Association, Stockholm, 31 March 2009. 
 Introduction 
"The monetary policy landscape in a financial crisis" is the theme of my speech this time. I 
thought for once that I would begin by showing you a picture.  
   
The slide shows an oil painting that was done in 1842 by the English artist William Turner.1 It 
is called ”Snow Storm – Steam-Boat off a Harbour's Mouth”. It is part of the collection at the 
Tate Gallery in London.  
The  only  thing  you  need  to  know  about  the  painting  just  now  is  that  Turner  used  a  very 
special technique. He built up the picture gradually by painting several thin, semi-transparent 
layers on top of each other. He then added somewhat thicker, more pastose sections. As you 
can  see,  this  layer-by-layer  technique  gave  his  paintings  a  special  lustre  and  a  special 
atmosphere.  We  would  probably  say  that  the  atmosphere  in  this  painting  is  dramatic. 
Turner's  technique  can also  act  as a  starting  point  for  a  description  of  the  situation  today. 
Reality is made up of different layers. Every layer that is added or peeled away reveals a 
partly new landscape. 
We can compare the financial crisis to the snow storm in Turner's painting. In order to paint 
the  picture  of  the  complete  storm  we  need  to  begin  with  a  layer  that  describes  the 
macroeconomic  preconditions,  the  macroeconomic  landscape.  Then  comes  a  layer  that 
describes the financial landscape. This consists of financial players, institutions, markets and 
                                                 
1   Joseph Mallord William Turner (1775–1851), British artist most famous for his Romantic landscape paintings, 
whose style can be said to have paved the way for Impressionism. 
BIS Review 41/2009 
 1
instruments. Over this there is yet another layer that describes the regulatory landscape, that 
is the special legislation, regulations and supervisory arrangements that cover the activities 
of financial companies.  
Somewhere  in  the  middle  of  the  picture,  symbolised  by  the  steam  boat  that  is  trying  to 
navigate the right course through the snow storm, we have the Riksbank which is fighting to 
both  meet  the  inflation  target  and  safeguard  the  stability  of  the  payment  system.  For  the 
Riksbank, as for steam boats at sea, the room for manoeuvre is determined by the conditions 
in the surrounding landscape. We have to understand how the weather, visibility and other 
prevailing factors affect our chances of steering the boat in the right direction. This becomes 
particularly important when conditions are difficult, when there is a snow storm raging at sea. 
This  –  in  a  nutshell  –  is  what  my  speech  today  will  be  about.  First,  however,  it  may  be 
interesting to look at how we sailed into the storm. 
From fair weather to the perfect storm – what went wrong? 
The metaphor of the different layers in Turner's painting can be used to describe the causes 
of the current crisis. 
Global imbalances were built up 
If  we  are  to  understand  the  origins  of  the  crisis,  we  cannot  ignore  certain  factors  in  the 
macroeconomic  landscape.  This  applies  in  particular  to  the  major  global  imbalances  that 
were  built  up  over  a  long  period  of  time.  In  the  rapidly-developing  economies  in  the  oil-
producing countries and Asia, particularly China, domestic saving reached a level that was 
higher  than  required  to  fund  domestic  investments.  This  led  to  substantial  current  account 
surpluses.  Large  amounts  of  capital  were  built  up  which  sought  an  outlet  on  the  global 
financial markets. These were used, for example, to buy assets in the West.  
At the same time, the economies in the West, especially the USA, experienced an unusually 
long,  uninterrupted  period  of  favourable  conditions  with  strong  growth  and  low  inflation. 
Policy  largely  focused  on  maintaining  these  good  conditions.  It  was  possible  to  stimulate 
domestic  demand  at  the  cost  of  a  gradually  increasing  current  account  deficit.  The  large 
capital  flows  on  the  financial  markets  helped  to  keep  interest  rates  down.  With  consumer 
prices  held  in  check,  it  was  also  felt  that  there  was  no  real  reason  to  conduct  a  stricter 
monetary policy. The result was that significant global imbalances arose – a lasting savings 
surplus in some countries and a deficit in others.  
2 
 BIS Review 41/2009
Image 2: Current account deficit as 
percentage of GDP
Kina
Sverige
USA
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
95
98
01
 04
07
Källa: IMF
 Image 3: Credit spreads* for 
corporate bonds in the USA
Basis points
2200
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
0
2000
Aaa
Baa
High-yield
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
2007
2008
2009
*The difference between the yield on corporate bonds and  the yield on treasury bonds. Source: Reuters Ecowin
 The markets priced risk incorrectly 
This  also  laid  the  foundations  for  changes  in  the  financial  landscape.  The  good  supply  of 
capital available for investment and the low interest rates for risk-free assets increased the 
demand for assets with a higher yield, a ”search for yield” arose. However, investors all over 
the world, including many major banks, largely ignored the fact that, in the long term, higher 
yield can only be achieved by taking greater risks. This contributed to a dramatic increase in 
asset  prices.  The  very  favourable  conditions  that  prevailed  on  the  global  financial  markets 
BIS Review 41/2009 
 3
meant  that  the  premiums  for  credit  risk  were  generally  extremely  low  for  a  long  period  of 
time. 
The  explosion  in  asset  prices  was  fuelled  by  a  rapid  expansion  in  credit.  Money  was  lent 
more carelessly than previously. Housing bubbles developed in several parts of the world. In 
the USA, the development of such bubbles was reinforced by the inadequate regulation of 
the mortgage market and a political agenda that aimed to promote house ownership among 
people on low incomes.  
The search for yield drove investors to borrow more in order to achieve greater leverage in 
the investments. Financial innovations also helped to drive this development. A steady flow 
of  new  and  increasingly  complex  instruments  were  created  to  satisfy  the  demand  for 
investments with a higher yield. Advanced techniques arose for the securitisation of different 
forms of credit, including mortgages for less creditworthy borrowers. Many banks around the 
world – although this applies to a lesser extent to Swedish banks – thereby changed their 
business  model.  While  previously  they  had  specialised  in  developing  long-term  customer 
relations and in evaluating and monitoring credit risks, the banks now increasingly went over 
to repackaging and selling their credit risks as quickly as possible. One might think that the 
banks used securitisation to get rid of a large proportion of their credit risks. Unfortunately, 
this was largely an illusion. The banks created special intermediaries off their balance sheets 
to hold and structure the securitised credits. This made it possible for the banks to increase 
leverage both on and off the balance sheet. However, explicit and implicit guarantees from 
the banks to these special companies meant in practice that the risks led directly back to the 
banks' balance sheets.  
The result of all these new instruments and artificial intermediaries was a motley and almost 
impenetrable structure. A wide range of asset types with idiosyncrasies in pricing arose. This 
also made them more difficult to value. Moreover, the complicated links between the banks 
and  their  special  investment  vehicles  made  it  difficult  to  see  exactly  what  the  banks' 
exposures were. Eventually, no one knew where the risks were. The increasing amount of 
credit not only made investors highly indebted in relation to their equity, many banks also did 
not really have enough capital in relation to the risks they took.  
When  economic  activity  began  to  decline  in  the  USA  and  prices  fell  on  the  US  housing 
market,  many  institutions  suffered  major  losses.  Above  all,  however,  a  great  deal  of 
uncertainty  arose.  It  proved  to  be  simply  impossible  to  know  with  any  certainty  who  was 
exposed to "toxic assets", that is assets that risked losing value as a result of major credit 
losses. The realisation that many institutions could be more in debt than appeared to be the 
case on their balance sheets fuelled this uncertainty. The resulting anxiety led to the waning 
of  trade  on  a  number  of  financial  markets.  As  the  banks  have  become  increasingly 
dependent  on  the  financial  markets  for  their  funding,  many  banks  now  found  it  difficult  to 
refinance their operations. In other words, they found it difficult to borrow in order to cover 
their lending.  
When  the  US  investment  bank  Lehman  Brothers  was  forced  to  apply  for  bankruptcy 
protection in September last year, this had major repercussions in many parts of the world. 
The  global  financial  crisis  escalated  and  the  Swedish  banks  were  also  affected  to  an 
increasing  extent.  When  the  conditions  on  the  global  financial  markets  deteriorated,  there 
was a general increase in credit risk premiums. For those borrowers – banks or countries – 
that were deemed to entail the highest risks, the premiums increased more than for others. A 
process to reduce exposures and debt/equity ratios began among banks and other financial 
institutions around the world. The rapid decline in the supply of credit reinforced the downturn 
in global economic activity. This in turn accelerated the substantial fall in asset values and 
the increase in the bank's credit losses. A vicious circle arose in the global economy in which 
the financial turmoil aggravated the weakening of the real economy and vice versa.  
The events in the financial sector reflect fundamental failures in the risk management of the 
financial  players.  Securitisation  partly  removed  the  banks'  incentive  to  monitor  credit  risks. 
4 
 BIS Review 41/2009
The  credit  rating  institutions  largely  took  over  this  role.  But  the  models  used  by  the  rating 
agencies  were  in  many  respects  inadequate  and  the  credit  ratings  were  interpreted 
incorrectly.  The  correlation  between  credit  risks  was  underestimated,  as  were  the  liquidity 
risks.  The  market  thus  priced  risks  incorrectly.  This  did  not  mean,  however,  that  all  of  the 
players acted irrationally. Many players were able to make a lot of money in the upturn while 
others  had  to  bear  the  losses  in  the  downturn.  The  reward  systems  in  many  cases  thus 
encouraged exaggerated risk-taking by promoting short-term profits. 
There were thus shortcomings in basic corporate governance. These shortcomings were not 
helped  by  the  fact  that  many  institutions  had  developed  into  very  large  and  complex 
organisations – too large in some cases to be allowed to fail.  
Gaps in regulatory frameworks and supervision 
These  developments  of  course  all  took  place  against  the  background  of  the  landscape  of 
regulations  and  supervisory  arrangements  that  surround  the  financial  system.  A  general 
problem  in  all  forms  of  financial  regulation  is  that,  if  the  regulations  are  binding,  players 
attempt  to  conduct  an  increasing  proportion  of  their  activities  outside  the  regulated  sector. 
There were without doubts large gaps in the regulatory frameworks that enabled so-called 
regulation arbitrage. Some institutions, for example many investment banks, were not subject 
to the same insight or constraints as ordinary banks. Some markets, for example the OTC 
market  for  credit  derivatives,  were  permitted  to  grow  explosively  without  the  authorities 
having any real oversight. The capital adequacy frameworks also made it cheaper in many 
areas for the banks to expand off their balance sheets. After the event, we can also note that 
the  regulatory  frameworks  focused  too  little  on  liquidity  risks.  Many  of  these  gaps  in  the 
frameworks  are  now  being  closed.  However,  the  eternal  problem  is  of  course  that  the 
markets  are  always  faster  at  finding  new  ways  of  circumventing  the  regulations  than  the 
authorities are at closing the gaps. 
Perhaps a more fundamental problem was that there was too weak a link between financial 
supervision and macro factors and other factors that affect the risk of shocks in the financial 
system as a whole. There was quite simply too much focus on individual companies and too 
little focus on broader development trends. Nor did the supervisory arrangements adequately 
reflect  the  increased  internationalisation  of  the  financial  sector.  In  recent  decades,  the 
financial markets have become increasingly interlinked and very large sums change hands 
around  the  world  every  day.  Large,  complex  banks  and  other  financial  institutions  now 
conduct extensive operations in several countries. At the same time, supervision was mainly 
conducted on the basis of national mandates and focused on companies within individual, 
national jurisdictions. Supervision thus lacked the oversight required.  
factors 
interacting 
Many factors interacted 
A  number  of 
that  arose.  Global 
macroeconomic  imbalances,  fundamental  shortcomings  in  the  risk  management  of  the 
financial  players  and  gaps  in  regulatory  frameworks  and  supervision  together  formed  the 
underlying layers in the current financial and economic crisis – a crisis that many observers 
regard  as  the  worst  since  the  1930s.  In  order  to  avoid  a  total  breakdown  in  the  financial 
system, governments, central banks and other authorities around the world have been forced 
to take a range of massive and unusual measures.  
the  situation 
lay  behind 
thus 
Massive and unusual measures on the part of the authorities 
So, what have the authorities done? The central banks have lent large sums of money to the 
banks at longer maturities and against other forms of collateral than has normally been the 
case. This has improved the short-term funding situation for the banks. Several central banks 
have  also  provided  emergency  liquidity  assistance  to  individual  institutions.  The  Federal 
BIS Review 41/2009 
 5
the  Riksbank, 
too,  authorities  such  as 
Reserve,  the  European  Central  Bank  and  other  central  banks  have  also  entered  into 
agreements  to  provide  loans  in  their  own  currencies to  other  central  banks  to  mitigate  the 
effects of the crisis in other countries. The central banks have also cut policy rates rapidly 
and  forcefully,  sometimes  in  coordinated  actions,  to  alleviate  the  repercussions  of  the 
financial  crisis  on  production,  employment  and  inflation.  Governments  have  offered 
guarantees  and  capital  injections  to  reduce  the  risk  of  further  bankruptcies  in  the  banking 
sector.  Deposit  guarantee  schemes  have  been  extended.  Several  countries  have  also 
adopted fiscal policy stimulation packages to mitigate the effects on the real economy.  
In  Sweden 
the  National  Debt  Office  and 
Finansinspektionen (the Swedish Financial Supervisory Authority) have acted to alleviate the 
crisis.  As  in  many  other  countries,  the  government  has  increased  the  national  deposit 
guarantee  scheme  and  has  extended  it  to  cover  all  forms  of  deposits  in  accounts.  The 
government  has  also  introduced  a  guarantee  programme,  set  up  a  guarantee  fund  and 
decided on capital injections for banks. At the same time, the government is conducting a 
more expansionary fiscal policy than previously to mitigate the effects on the real economy. 
The Riksbank has implemented a large number of measures to safeguard financial stability 
and  mitigate  the  negative  effects  of  the  financial  crisis.  We  have  changed  the  collateral 
requirements  so  that  the  banks  can  use  more  types  of  security  as  collateral  when  they 
borrow  from  the  Riksbank.  We  have,  for  example,  begun  offering  loans  with  commercial 
paper  as  collateral  to  facilitate  the  companies'  financing.  We  have  also  begun  to  lend  at 
longer  maturities,  with  variable  interest  rates  and  with  smaller  supplements.  We  have 
provided special liquidity assistance to Kaupthing and Carnegie. In addition, we have entered 
into  loan  agreements  with  Iceland,  Latvia  and  Estonia  to  ease  the  situation  in  these 
countries. All this has meant that during the second half of 2008 the Riksbank increased its 
total lending to the banks by more than SEK 450 billion. I will discuss what this entails in just 
a moment.  
The  Riksbank  has  also  cut  the  repo  rate  to  the  lowest  level  it  has  been  at  since  we 
introduced an inflation target. How monetary policy can be conducted under the prevailing 
conditions  is  a  question  that  I  will  discuss  in  more  detail  later.  The  financial  crisis  has  of 
course changed these conditions a great deal. But before we get into that, I would like to say 
a few words about how monetary policy is supposed to work under normal conditions. 
How monetary policy works normally 
Normally, monetary policy aims to keep inflation at a low and stable level and to stabilise the 
real  economy.  To  achieve  this,  the  Riksbank  controls  the  shortest  market  rate,  that  is  the 
overnight  rate  which  is  the  interest  rate  on  loans  between  the  banks  from  one  day  to  the 
next. The overnight rate in turn affects the interest rates charged to the general public, and 
thereby  activity  and  prices  in  the  economy.  We  have  a  system  in  which  we  influence  the 
overnight  rate  by  determining  the  conditions  for  the  banks  borrowing  and  lending  with  the 
Riksbank  so  that  it  is  close  to  our  policy  rate,  the  so-called  repo  rate.  The  repo  rate 
expresses the level at which the Riksbank wants the overnight rate to lie.  
The way in which the monetary policy conducted has an impact on, for example, the banks' 
lending rates, the development of the real economy and inflation is usually called, somewhat 
loosely, the transmission mechanism. This mechanism is often described in terms of three 
different  channels:  the  interest  rate  channel,  the  credit  channel  and  the  exchange  rate 
channel.  These  channels  are  intertwined  with  each  other  and  the  division  is  mostly  for 
explanatory reasons.  
The interest rate channel can be used to influence the cost of saving and borrowing. A lower 
interest rate means that it becomes less expensive for companies to finance investments and 
for households to borrow for consumption. Lower interest rates normally also make saving 
less attractive.  
6 
 BIS Review 41/2009
Interest  rate  changes  also  affect  the  economy  through  the  credit  channel.  Lower  interest 
rates generally increase the net present value, that is the value today, of the cash flows that 
financial assets are expected to generate in the future. Lower interest rates also increase the 
demand for real assets, for example housing. In this way, the prices of both real and financial 
assets  increase.  As  these  assets  are  used  as  collateral  for  loans,  the  creditworthiness  of 
households and companies also increases. This leads banks and other financial institutions 
to  be  less  restrictive  in  their  lending  and  means  that  they  can  lend  more.  This  in  turn 
stimulates  investment  and  consumption  and  thus  increases  inflationary  pressures  in  the 
economy.  
Through the exchange rate channel, monetary policy can influence the value of the currency. 
Normally,  a  reduction  of  the  repo  rate  leads  to  a  weakening  of  the  krona.  This  is  partly 
because  Swedish  assets  appear  less  attractive  than  investments  in  other  currencies.  A 
weaker  exchange  rate  affects  inflation  directly  in  that  imported  goods  will  become  more 
expensive.  At  the  same  time,  domestic  goods  become  cheaper  than  foreign  goods.  This 
leads  to  a  decline  in  imports  and  a  rise  in  exports.  Higher  demand  for  domestic  goods 
contributes to an increase in resource utilisation and inflationary pressures.  
Inflation  expectations  are  also  important  to  the  way  in  which  companies  set  prices  and  to 
how  wage  formation  functions,  and  thereby  to  the  development  of  inflation.  If  everyone  is 
confident that inflation will remain low, the companies do not need to change their prices so 
often, and employees do not need to increase their wage demands. This makes it easier for 
the Riksbank to achieve the inflation target.  
This then is mainly how monetary policy is supposed to work normally. But when the financial 
markets are not working normally the transmission mechanism is also affected. The various 
channels  simply  do  not  work  as  effectively  as  they  usually  do.  This  also  makes  the  link 
between monetary policy and financial stability particularly important.  
Monetary policy and financial stability are interlinked 
As  you  know,  the  Riksbank  has  more  than  just  a  monetary  policy  mandate.  In  addition  to 
maintaining price stability, the Riksbank also has the task of promoting a safe and efficient 
payment  system.  We  thus  have  two  main  tasks:  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability. 
These tasks are of course interlinked even under normal conditions. Without stability in the 
financial system it becomes more difficult to conduct monetary policy, and price stability is 
part of an effective payment system. Practically and organisationally, however, these are two 
separate  fields  of  work.  You  could  say  that  we  normally  use  two  different  toolboxes  to 
perform these two tasks.  
First,  we  have  a  monetary  policy  toolbox,  parts  of  which  I  have  already  described.  The 
monetary policy measures, for example the setting of the repo rate, have a clear objective: to 
influence  economic  activity  with  the  aim  of  maintaining  price  stability.  This  in  turn  is  an 
important component of our efforts to achieve stable development in the real economy.  
Second,  we  have  a  box  of  tools  for  promoting  stability  in  the  financial  system.  Financial 
stability  is  a  basic  prerequisite  for  a  safe  and  efficient  payment  system.  The  Riksbank 
normally uses tools other than the repo rate to promote financial stability. Our analyses of the 
risks in the financial system that we produce and publish every six months in our "Financial 
Stability  Report"  represent  the  primary  tool  in  this  toolbox.  If  nothing  else,  this  and  other 
feedback that we provide to the banks makes them more aware of potential vulnerabilities 
and, in the best case, gets them to take preventive measures. This is usually referred to as 
"moral  suasion".  But  this  toolbox  also  contains  more  concrete  tools.  These  include  the 
possibility to quickly add liquidity to the banking system.  
We thus normally approach these two main tasks somewhat differently and we often regard 
monetary  policy  and  financial  stability  as  two  separate  parts  of  the  Riksbank's  mission. 
Recently, however, it has become increasingly clear just how interlinked these two tasks are. 
BIS Review 41/2009 
 7
When the interbank markets have been ineffective and interest rates have to a certain extent 
been governed by a lack of confidence, the impact of monetary policy has been weakened. 
This has meant that we have needed to use tools from both of the toolboxes during the crisis. 
The situation has required the use of some tools that we otherwise use rarely. We have even 
had  to  reinvent  some  of  the  tools  and  refine  them  as  we  go  along.  The  measures  have 
primarily  aimed  to  strengthen  financial  stability  and  to  maintain  the  functionality  of  the 
financial  markets  so  that  the  payment  and  credit  systems  work  effectively.  This  is  a 
prerequisite for the effective functioning of the economy as a whole.  
Many  measures  that  are  taken  with  the  aim  of  safeguarding  financial  stability  also  have 
indirect  monetary  policy  effects.  For  instance,  measures  that  lead  to  greater  confidence  in 
the  markets  contribute  to  lower  interest  rates  and  increased  access  to  credit,  thereby 
increasing  the  impact  of  monetary  policy.  Similarly,  the  Riksbank's  interest  rate  reductions 
contribute  to  financial  stability  by  improving  the  supply  of  credit.  The  measures  that  are 
normally taken under the framework of monetary policy or to promote financial stability have 
thus begun to complement and mutually reinforce each other. To illustrate what we are doing 
today we can use a simple equation that describes the banks' lending rate – that is the rate 
charged to households and companies – as the repo rate plus a premium.   
Image 4: Monetary policy and financial 
stability are interlinked
i
lending
t
 (
cmi
t
t
 The size of this premium depends on the bank's demand for compensation for, for example, 
credit risks, any differences in periods to maturity and the need to retain sufficient capital to 
cover the loans. What we are doing now is partly to control the first term, that is the policy 
rate, and partly to attempt to influence the second term, that is the risk premiums that are 
today reflected in large credit spreads as a result of the financial turmoil. To do this we must 
use  tools  from  both  of  the  toolboxes.  It  is  against  this  background  that  we  can  view  the 
monetary policy measures of a more or less unconventional nature that are now being taken 
in various parts of the world. I will now try to discuss this in a little more detail. 
 Unconventional monetary policy 
As I mentioned earlier, the central banks have reduced policy rates quickly and dramatically 
in order to mitigate the effects of the financial crisis. At the end of last year, the US central 
bank cut its policy rate target to an interval of 0-0.25 per cent. In early March, the Bank of 
8 
 BIS Review 41/2009
England cut its policy rate to 0.5 per cent and is thus also close to zero. Many other central 
banks, including the Riksbank, have also reduced their policy rate to all-time low levels.  
When  the  central  banks'  traditional  tools  for  influencing  demand  in  the  economy  can  no 
longer be used – when no further cuts in the policy rate are possible – then other options 
have to be found. In both the USA and the UK, as in some other countries, the central banks 
have begun to conduct monetary policy using unusual, and in some case untested, methods. 
It may be worth pointing out, however, that there may be good reasons for implementing a lot 
of what the central banks have done irrespective of whether the policy rate is close to zero or 
not.  This  relates  to  various  measures  that  aim  to  improve  the  functioning  of  the  financial 
markets and ease the supply of credit.  
One  way  of  trying  to  illustrate  the  course  of  events  is  to  study  the  central  banks'  balance 
sheets. The exact form of these balance sheets varies from country to country, but they have 
a number of common features. For the sake of simplicity, and without claiming to present an 
exact picture of reality, allow me to assume a stylised balance sheet. On the asset side there 
are foreign and domestic assets and the lending to the banks. On the liabilities side, there 
are banknotes and coins, deposits from the banks and equity.  
Image 5: Unconventional monetary policy
A stylised balance sheet for a central bank
Assets
Foreign assets
Domestic assets
Lending
Liabilities
Banknotes and coins
Bank deposits
Equity
The balance sheet totals of the central banks increased dramatically during the autumn of 
last year and have remained at approximately these levels since then. A major part of this 
increase was due to the expansion of lending.   
 BIS Review 41/2009 
 9
Image 6: Central banks’ balance sheets
Percentage of GDP
ECB
BOE
Federal Reserve
Riksbanken
25
20
15
10
5
0
jan-07
apr-07
jul-07
okt-07
jan-08
apr-08
jul-08
okt-08
jan-09
25
20
15
10
5
0
Sources: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Eurostat, Office for National Statistics, SCB and the respective central banks
 As I have mentioned, during the second half of 2008 the Riksbank increased its lending to 
the  banks  by  more  than  SEK  450  billion.  As  a  result  of  the  increase  in  lending,  the 
Riksbank’s balance sheet grew during the second half of 2008 from around SEK 200 billion 
to around SEK 700 billion, that is it more than tripled. What happened was, put briefly, that 
when the interbank and securities markets stopped working normally, the demand from the 
banks for loans and for liquidity reserves at the Riksbank increased. It could be said that the 
Riksbank acted as an intermediary in the sense that the banking system was able to borrow 
at longer maturities in order to invest in a secure and liquid asset in the Riksbank.   
Image 7a: The Riksbank’s balance sheet
30 June 2008 (before Lehman Brothers)
Assets
Gold
Currency reserve
Lending USD
Lending SEK
Other
Liabilities
26
158
Banknotes & 
coins
Fine tuning
0
4
4
Riksbank 
certificates
Debt to Fed
Equity
Other
TOTAL
TOTAL
192
108
0
0
0
59
25
192
 10 
 BIS Review 41/2009
Image 7b: The Riksbank’s balance sheet
31 December 2008 (after Lehman Brothers)
Assets
Gold
Currency reserve
Lending USD
Lending SEK
Other
TOTAL
Liabilities
30
200
196
262
7
700
Banknotes & 
coins
Fine tuning
Riksbank 
certifikates
Debt to Fed
Equity
Other
TOTAL
112
207
49
189
59
84
700
 If we compare the balance sheets at the end of June and the end of December 2008 – that is 
before  and  after  Lehman  Brothers  applied  for  bankruptcy  protection  –  we  can  see  that 
lending in Swedish kronor increased by approximately SEK 260 billion. This is reflected on 
the  liabilities  side  by  the  increase  in  the  Riksbank's  fine-tuning  facility,  where  the  banks 
deposit their surplus liquidity overnight, as well as the increase in Riksbank certificates with a 
maturity of one week. The banks have thus increased their reserves at the Riksbank.  
The  Riksbank  has  also  lent  almost  SEK  200  billion  in  US  dollars.  We  have  financed  this 
partly by borrowing against the currency reserve and partly by means of a loan agreement 
with the Federal Reserve. The fact that the currency reserve appears to have increased is 
primarily due to exchange rate effects.  
The liabilities item "Other" includes the Riksbank's net income and the revaluation account. 
This  item  has  increased  mainly  due  to  exchange  rate  effects,  but  also  because  we  have 
earned quite a lot of money from these transactions.  
Some other central banks, such as the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England, have gone 
one  step  further.  Apart  from  increasing  their  lending  to  the  banks,  they  have  also  bought 
various types of domestic financial assets. When a central bank lends money to the banks, 
or purchases different types of assets, the banks' access to funding increases. This in turn 
increases the so-called monetary base on the balance sheet's liability side, that is the total of 
outstanding banknotes and coins and the banks' deposits in the central bank.  
A common feature of the measures taken by the central banks is thus that they have inflated 
the  balance  sheets  and  increased  the  monetary  base.  There  are,  nevertheless,  some 
differences  and  different  central  banks  have  also  described  their  measures  in  slightly 
different  ways.  For  example,  most  of  the  measures  taken  by  the  Federal  Reserve  have 
aimed to make it easier for households and companies to get access to credit and to reduce 
risk spreads. The strategy has therefore been called credit easing. The Federal Reserve has 
thus  focused  on  the  asset  side  and  has,  for  instance,  bought  different  types  of  domestic, 
private financial assets. In this context, what happens to the monetary base on the liability 
side of the balance sheet has not been the central issue, although of course everything that 
happens on the asset side of a balance sheet is directly reflected on the liability side and vice 
versa. Technically speaking, the monetary base has increased in Sweden too because the 
Riksbank has increased its lending to the banks. This has not, however, been the main aim 
BIS Review 41/2009 
 11
of the lending and is not something that, in the present circumstances, can be expected to 
automatically lead to an increase in lending to borrowers outside the banking system. The 
Riksbank's lending has, on the other hand, eased trading on the interbank market.  
However, increasing the monetary base may sometimes be a deliberate strategy. In such a 
case we usually talk about quantitative easing. What we mean by this term is that the central 
bank has moved away from monetary policy easing in the form of reductions in the price of 
the banks' deposits in the central bank, that is the policy rate, to increasing the quantity of the 
bank's  deposits  –  and  the  monetary  base  –  directly.  Opinion  is  divided  on  exactly  how 
quantitative easing works and how it relates to credit easing. Most economists are cautious 
about describing the concrete channels. In very simple terms, it is possible to illustrate what 
we want to achieve with quantitative easing with the help of a classic quantity equation.   
Image 8: Quantity equation
YPVM
×=×
 This well-known equation says that the money supply times the turnover rate for money is 
equal to the price level times production. In severe crises, the turnover rate for money, V, 
declines. To keep up prices, P, and production, Y, we need to increase the money supply, M. 
By buying government securities and thus increasing the supply of money, the central banks 
aim to increase the supply of credit and thereby improve liquidity among private players – 
and  ultimately  increase  consumption.  This  presupposes,  however,  that  the  banks  do  not 
simply hoard these extra reserves but also actually increase their lending. If the central bank 
buys government securities, risk free interest rates at slightly longer maturities may also fall. 
It can be said, in simple terms, that the application of quantitative easing entails a focus on 
the  liability  side  of  the  balance  sheet,  while  the  state  of  the  asset  side  becomes  less 
important even though this is also reflected in the balance sheet. The express purpose of this 
shift from price to quantity is usually that "the price" can no longer be affected as the policy 
rate is zero. It could therefore be said that quantitative easing is a type of monetary policy 
that  is  more  directly  dedicated  to  dealing  with  a  zero  interest  rate  than  credit  easing.  The 
latter focuses more directly on reducing the spreads and improving the supply of credit in the 
economy. It should be emphasised, however, that a zero interest rate is not necessarily a 
precondition for either quantitative easing or credit easing and it may sometimes be possible 
to find a use for both methods even when the policy rate is positive.  
The measures that the Bank of England began to implement at the beginning of March can 
be  characterised  as  quantitative  easing.  In  its  communication,  the  Bank  of  England  has 
12 
 BIS Review 41/2009
talked about injecting money directly into the economy. This is done by buying government 
securities and, to a certain extent, securities issued by private players, for example corporate 
bonds.  The  latter  implies  that  the  strategy  also  includes  elements  of  credit  easing  in  the 
sense  that  the  supply  of  credit  to  companies  is  eased.  The  Federal  Reserve  has  a  more 
explicit focus on reducing spreads on those markets that are considered to be important to 
the  financial  system,  but  has  recently  also  begun  to  buy  government  securities  on  a  large 
scale. 
Both quantitative easing and credit easing are examples of a type of policy that is only used 
in  special  and  unusual  circumstances  and  whose  effects  we  therefore  do  not  really  know 
very much about as yet. I think it is important to be clear about this: the situation that has 
arisen  is  new  for  practically  all  central  banks  in  countries  with  well-developed  financial 
markets. It would be wise to address the question of how to best handle the situation with a 
great deal of humility. 
So what is the situation here in Sweden – will we need to implement as extensive measures 
as  those  now  being  implemented  by,  for  example,  the  Bank  of  England  or  the  Federal 
Reserve? The answer to this question is that we simply do not know yet. What we can say is 
that  we  are  prepared  to  do  what  is  required,  when  it  is  required,  within  the  existing 
frameworks.  We  also  have  the  advantage  of  being  in  a  situation  where  we  can  get  an 
indication  of  how  well  the  unconventional  measures  taken  by  other  central  banks  have 
worked, even though the differences between countries of course mean that we cannot draw 
too far-reaching conclusions. In this sense it is an advantage to us that the crisis is not "home 
made" and that it has not yet developed to the same point here as in many other countries.  
A  key  to  the  measures  that  may  become  necessary  in  Sweden  is  whether  traditional 
monetary policy, that is keeping the interest rate low, will be sufficient. The significant factor 
for demand in the economy is the real interest rate, that is the nominal rate minus expected 
inflation.  Inflation  expectations  among  households  and  companies  are  thus  important.  The 
most  important  thing  is  to  avoid  a  situation  in  which  the  credibility  of  the  inflation  target  is 
undermined and the players in the economy expect to see long-term deflation, that is that 
prices will continue to fall during the foreseeable future. Even if the nominal interest rate has 
been pushed down to the lowest possible level, the real interest rate may still be too high to 
stimulate demand. 
The  Riksbank's  monetary  policy  framework  is  a  strength  in  this  context.  The  fact  that  we 
have an established, numerical target for inflation probably makes it easier to keep inflation 
expectations  well-anchored  on  the  positive  side  of  zero.  Surveys  also  indicate  that 
expectations are well in line with the target a few years ahead. In the shorter term they are 
lower, but there is nothing particularly strange about this – inflation in our own forecasts is 
lower too.  
Nor should we forget that the Riksbank is not the only authority that influences interest rates 
in the economy. Apart from the measures taken by the Riksbank, crisis measures taken by 
the Ministry of Finance and the National Debt Office of course affect costs (spreads) on the 
credit market. Fiscal policy stimulation measures also affect the costs of credit risk and thus 
the price of credit. We should also remember that supervisory and regulatory measures that 
establish  different  forms  of  constraint,  for  example  capital  adequacy  requirements  for  the 
banks, can indirectly affect the price of credit.  
A  question  that  we  are  wrestling  with  just  now  is  how  serious  the  credit  crunch  is  and 
whether there is a risk that it will hit the non-financial sector so hard that it will have major 
repercussions on the real economy over and above the credit crunch that normally follows a 
recession that undermines the creditworthiness of companies and households. On the one 
hand the supply of credit declines when the banks want to shrink their balance sheets. Many 
companies  in  the  Riksbank’s  company  survey  state,  for  instance,  that  they  are  finding  it 
difficult to borrow at longer maturities. On the other hand, the demand for credit should also 
BIS Review 41/2009 
 13
decline as a consequence of weak economic activity. What can be done about this and what 
is the role of the central banks in easing the credit crunch?  
The  Riksbank's  view  is  that  it  is  the  financial  system  that  as  far  as  possible  should  be 
strengthened in order to ease the credit crunch. It is mainly the commercial banks that have 
knowledge about credit for non-financial companies. Primarily, the banks need more capital 
in  order  to  increase  their  resilience  to  potential  losses  in  the  future.  This  can  indirectly  be 
expected to increase the banks' credit capacity. Many banks have already strengthened their 
capital base. The government's capital programme has also made it possible to inject further 
capital if the need arises.  
In the worst case, it may of course become necessary for the government to provide loans or 
guarantees directly to the non-financial sector in some way. But this is not primarily a task for 
the Riksbank. At the same time, it is more important than ever that the authorities co-operate 
effectively and pull together. Different phases and components of the crisis require different 
measures  from  the  central  bank  and  from  other  authorities.  It  is  extremely  important  that 
these measures are well co-ordinated and that the division of work is clear.  
How can we prevent crises in the future? 
I have now talked about what public authorities can do to alleviate the financial crisis, how 
monetary policy is conducted both under normal circumstances and in the present situation, 
and  about  the  increasingly  clear  link  between  monetary  policy  and  financial  stability.  One 
very important question is of course what lessons we can learn for the future. How can we as 
public authorities help the financial system to avoid suffering similar problems in the future? 
Can we in some way ensure that macro economic factors and systemic risk factors have a 
better impact in our policy measures and supervisory systems?  
Bursting bubbles with interest rate policy? 
Many  analysts  consider  that  one  important  factor  behind  the  current  financial  crisis  is  that 
interest rates have been kept at a low level for a long period of time, particularly in the United 
States. The outlook behind the policy conducted was that central banks are not particularly 
good at assessing whether or not an asset bubble is being built up. Monetary policy should 
therefore only respond to a rapid increase in house prices and indebtedness if the forecast is 
that  this  risks  leading  to  overheating  in  the  economy  and  thereby  to  excessively  high 
inflation.  If  this  is  not  the  case,  the  central  bank  should  wait  and  see,  but  be  prepared  to 
quickly  ease  monetary  policy  if  the  housing  market  were  to  collapse  and  demand  in  the 
economy were to fall drastically.  
This  view  has  come  to  be  increasingly  questioned,  not  least  as  the  work  on  "cleaning  up 
afterwards"  has  proved  to  be  fairly  extensive  if  the  central  banks  have  been  too  passive 
during the build-up phase. This is particularly so if the price bubble can be linked to a credit 
expansion. In most cases it is the credit expansion – and not the prices themselves – that is 
the most worrying.  
Should it not therefore be possible to use monetary policy more actively to subdue an upturn 
in  asset  prices?  This  is  a  difficult  question  that  requires  more  detailed  analysis,  but  it  is 
unlikely that it will be easy to reach a general policy conclusion. I am convinced, on the other 
hand, that many central banks will review their macroeconomic models and more precisely 
define the role of asset prices in the transmission mechanism. I do not believe, however, that 
we should exaggerate the ability of monetary  policy  to prevent crises from arising. Even if 
excessively expansionary monetary policy can contribute to the build-up of a bubble, it is less 
clear to what extent monetary policy can entirely prevent this from happening. It is probable 
that  it  would  require  fairly  substantial  interest  rate  increases,  something  that  may  not  be 
received sympathetically when the reasons for the increases are not crystal clear. But more 
moderate  interest  rate  increases  could,  of  course,  contribute  somewhat.  If  nothing  else,  it 
14 
 BIS Review 41/2009
would provide a signal from the central bank that it envisages certain development problems. 
I also believe that risk scenarios with a longer forecast horizon may be an option for clarifying 
what the risks may be in the longer term. It is conceivable that the price of housing or some 
other asset may be driven by factors that are difficult to explain or which may be assumed to 
give rise to inefficient risk allocation and large fluctuations in economic activity and inflation. 
This would then be taken into consideration in our monetary policy thinking in some way.2 
Nevertheless,  it  is  probably  the  case  that  the  greatest  contribution  to  a  more  effective 
strategy is to ensure that appropriate regulations and supervision procedures are in place. 
New financial supervision arrangements 
As  I  mentioned  earlier,  one  of  the  problems  was  that  financial  supervision  did  not  give 
sufficient consideration to factors in the macro economy and to systemic risk. At the Swedish 
level,  an  important  step  in  this  is  of  course  to  ensure  that  the  coordination  between  the 
Riksbank and Finansinspektionen functions as efficiently as possible.  
It  is  also  necessary  to have  coordination  at  the  international  level.  In  November  2008,  the 
European Commission appointed Frenchman Jacques de Larosière to lead a task force to 
draw  up  proposals  for  reforming  the  regulatory  regime  within  the  EU.  The  proposals  were 
presented on 25 February this year.3 They include establishing a special body, the European 
Systemic Risk Council, with responsibility for overall financial supervision (macro-prudential 
supervision) in the EU. The idea is that the twenty-seven central banks in the EU would be 
members of the council and that the council would receive resources from the ECB. Its tasks 
would include pooling and analysing information, for instance on macro economic conditions, 
which may be significant to the stability of the financial system.  
Part of the problem is that financial supervision has had an excessively national focus. The 
de  Larosière  group  therefore  proposes  enhanced  coordination  of  the  national  supervisory 
authorities. There is already cooperation on financial supervision within the EU. This takes 
place for instance in the form of special committees for the supervision of banks, securities 
and  insurance.  Now  it  is  proposed that  these  supervisory  committees  should  be  given  the 
status of public authorities. This would make it clearer that the joint supervision standards are 
binding and not, as now, recommendations.  
Although I guess that in the long term we will need to go even further, this is a step in the 
right direction, and not a moment too soon!  
The  crisis  management  routines  also  need  to  be  reinforced.  Supervision,  regulation  and 
crisis management are interlinked. This may seem obvious. But here the same psychological 
phenomenon  that  has  driven  private  players  to  take  excessive  risks  has  also  been  found 
among politicians and others in positions of responsibility. As long as everything is going well 
they are happy to ignore the risks. I note that Sweden and the Riksbank have been at the 
forefront of these discussions. It is good that many other countries have now begun to be 
aware of this. 
A Taylor rule for capital adequacy? 
Let me now, towards the end of my speech, test out an idea on you. The nice thing about this 
gathering  is  that  one  can  take  such  liberties  without  it  leading  to  any  misguided  monetary 
policy  interpretation.  Everyone  here  is  familiar  with  the  Taylor  rule,  which  has  many 
                                                 
2   See Ingves, S. (2007), "Housing and Monetary Policy – a View from an Inflation Targeting Central Bank", at a 
symposium,  Housing,  Housing  Finance  and  Monetary  Policy,  arranged  by  the  Federal  Reserve  of  Kansas 
City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 1 September 2007. 
3   The  High-Level  Group  on  Financial  Supervision  in  the  EU,  Chaired  by  Jacques  de  Larosière,  Report, 
Brussels, 25 February 2009. 
BIS Review 41/2009 
 15
variations. Put briefly, these are short reactive rules to adjust the policy rate in response to 
changes in both inflation and economic activity. These Taylor rules have become  a useful 
tool  in  studying  and  assessing  monetary  policy  without  needing  to  make  a  more  detailed 
analysis of the supply of and demand for money. As an aside it may be worth mentioning in 
this context Knut Wicksell’s in many ways pioneering monetary theory, which he presented at 
the Swedish Economics Association’s meeting on 14 April 1898, that is almost exactly 111 
years  ago.(4,5)  In  his  theory  on  the  natural  interest  rate,  Wicksell  suggested  perhaps  the 
simplest  of  simple  reactive  monetary  policy  rules  ever:  ”If  the  price  rises,  the  interest  rate 
should be raised; and if the price falls, the interest rate should be cut…”.(6,7)  
Today, a Taylor rule usually expresses the policy rate as a function of the inflation rate and 
its deviation from the desired inflation rate, the output gap expressed as the logarithm of real 
GDP and the logarithm of its deviation from potential GDP, as well as the real interest rate. 
Image 9: Taylor rule for monetary policy
(
)YY
++=
βππβπ
−
t
r
*
t
tY
    π
 t
i
t
 This type of rule is one of many supplementary tools that most central banks currently use in 
their monetary policy analysis, although these do not replace other, more in-depth analyses 
and qualitative assessments.  
Should it not be possible to use similar simple rules to attain a more balanced credit growth 
in the economy and a more stable financial sector? Here it ought to be possible to combine 
supervisory regulations with macro factors into a simple rule to subdue fluctuations and make 
the banks more resilient. The cost of the banks’ lending is partly dependent on the market’s 
capital adequacy requirements, which in turn depend on the requirements of the regulatory 
regime.  The  principle  is  that  the  banks  must  maintain  an  amount  of  equity  capital  in  their 
balance  sheets  that  is  in  proportion  to  the  amount  of  risky  assets,  primarily  in  the  form  of 
                                                 
4  
In the same year Knut Wicksell published a book on the subject, Geldzins und Güterpreise (Gustaf Fischers 
publishing company, Jena 1898; translated in 1936 Interest and Prices, MacMillan, London). 
5   See also Siven, C-H. (1998) "Penningteori utan pengar – hundra år med Knut Wicksell", Ekonomisk Debatt 
1998, year 26, no. 6. 
6   Wicksell, 1898 [1936], p. 189. 
7   See also Orphanides, A. (2207), "Taylor Rules", Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 
2007. 
16 
 BIS Review 41/2009
lending. In the same way as the policy rate can be expressed as a Taylor rule, it should be 
possible to express the banks’ capital adequacy requirement as a function of, for instance, 
the lending gap, or growth in lending in the economy and the output gap.  
 
Image 10: A ”Taylor rule” for capital
adequacy
c
t
 c
α
L
(
L
t
 L
*
  α
Y
(
Y
t
)Y
  Here  the  capital  adequacy  requirement  the  banks  are  subject  to  depends  on  the 
development of total lending in relation to a long-term trend and economic activity. The idea 
is  that  the  capital  adequacy  requirement  will  increase  when  lending  increases  too 
substantially, and will decrease when lending declines. In this way the banking system will be 
forced to build up capital reserves in good time, which can in turn be used to cover losses 
when  times  are  hard.  One  creates  a  model  that  evens  out  cycles  rather  than  reinforcing 
them. The current capital adequacy rules are sometimes accused of being procyclical. In the 
best  case,  this  provides  a  more  balanced  development,  both  with  regard  to  the  growth  in 
credit and the banks’ resilience to shocks. This is a slightly more general approach than, for 
instance, the system of dynamic provisioning they have in Spain.8 The beauty of it is that by 
using  aggregate  measures  of  growth  in  lending  we  also  capture  other  things  that  would 
otherwise remain off the banks' balance sheets.  
Note  that  we  can  make  a  connection  between  the  Taylor  rule  for  the  policy  rate  and  a 
corresponding rule for capital adequacy. Let me refer back to an equation I showed earlier, 
namely the banks' lending rate expressed as a function of the central bank's policy rate and a 
risk premium.  
 
                                                 
8   http://www.bde.es/provesta/proestae.htm. 
BIS Review 41/2009 
 17
Image 11
i
lending
t
 (
cmi
t
t
  The premium is partly due to the bank’s demand for compensation for the need for capital 
cover for lending. If the capital adequacy requirement is controlled with the aid of our special 
rule,  then  not  only  bank-specific  risks  but  also  systemic  risk  factors  will  be  priced  in  the 
lending rate.  
The  banks’  lending  rate  thus  depends  on  both  the  policy  rate  and  a  premium  that  in  turn 
depends on the capital adequacy rule. In addition, both the Taylor rule for the policy rate and 
the capital adequacy rule depend on the output gap. This means that one can in principle link 
together  these  equations  into  a  system.  In  this  way  we  obtain  a  model  that  links  together 
monetary policy and financial stability. 
I would like to emphasise that these are merely very preliminary ideas, which I first launched 
at  a  conference  in  Geneva  in  January  this  year.  Incidentally,  an  excellent  report  resulting 
from this conference was published – I can recommend reading it.9 Of course, more work is 
needed  to  specify  and  estimate  a  model  of  this  type.  And  there  are  of  course  substantial 
problems in measuring the variables included. Moreover, it would require considerable effort 
to communicate a rule like this. But I think that stylised models like this can be useful as a 
starting point for consideration of these issues. Moreover, I believe that concrete quantitative 
rules  of  this  kind  could  provide  valuable  support  to  those  public  authorities  that  exercise 
supervision over the banks. I hope that this digression will inspire someone to take the idea 
further.  It  would  give  both  individual  countries  and  the  future  European  Systemic  Risk 
Council something to get their teeth into. 
Some concluding thoughts 
Let  me  in  conclusion  make  some  reflections.  The  current  financial  crisis  is  in  many  ways 
similar to earlier financial crises. Periods of strong optimism with rapidly rising asset prices 
and rapid credit expansion that suddenly break down into deep pessimism are nothing new. 
We have seen such boom-bust scenarios many times before. It appears to be human nature 
                                                 
9   Brunnermeier et al (2009). The Fundamental Principles of Financial Regulation. Geneva Report on the World 
Economy. 
18 
 BIS Review 41/2009
to be drawn into an overoptimistic frenzy and to underestimate the risks as long as things are 
still on the way up.  
What  distinguishes  this  crisis  from  earlier  ones  is  of  course  its  global  range  and  extreme 
complexity.  This  means  that  we  can  put  a  further  couple  of  layers  onto  the  foundation  of 
Turner’s  canvas.  The  globalisation  and  development  of  the  art  of  financial  engineering  in 
recent decades can be said to be part of the first coat of paint on the canvas. The scope and 
complexity  mean  that  the  situation  is  in  many  ways  much  more  serious  than  before.  The 
course of events has also made us more confused than we have been in previous crises.  
At the same time, we can now see an increase in deglobalisation in the wake of the crisis. 
The cross-border integration of the financial sector has come to an abrupt standstill. And in 
the  global  economic  downturn  many  countries  are  tempted  to  resort  to  protectionist 
measures. This is a worrying development. 
Both globalisation and the development of the financial services sector entail large potential 
welfare  gains.  In  recent  decades,  an  increasingly  large  share  of  the  world  population  has 
obtained a reasonable standard of living, and a smaller share is living in poverty. Financial 
integration and new services lead to efficiency gains that in the long term benefit households 
and companies in all countries. It is important that we do not throw these welfare gains out of 
the window. 
At  the  same  time,  we  have  seen  the  risks  in  this  development  in  no  uncertain  terms.  The 
flows  in  the  financial  system  have  increased  substantially  while  the  system  has  become 
increasingly complex and difficult to survey. The mutual dependence of the various markets 
has increased. This means that crises can more quickly and more forcefully hit an increasing 
number of economies at the same time.  
The  important  thing  now  is  to  find  the  right  tools  for  managing  these  new  risks;  to  find 
instruments for a better-balanced development. We need a better insight into the build-up of 
global  risks.  This  requires  increased  cooperation  between  public  authorities  around  the 
world. It requires greater harmonisation of regulations and supervision. It requires  a better 
readiness to manage cross-border crises. And to find the means to counteract the build-up of 
large imbalances we must begin to think along new lines.  
At  present  the  functioning  of  the  financial  system  is  being  maintained  with  the  aid  of  the 
measures implemented by public authorities. One sign that the crisis is no longer as acute is 
that the TED spreads have fallen in Sweden, as well as the United States and the euro area. 
These spreads are now back to around the same levels that prevailed immediately prior to 
the  worsening  of  the  crisis  in  autumn  2008.  But  the  financial  markets  are  still  functioning 
much less efficiently than normal. It is also still difficult for companies to finance themselves 
in the capital market. 
The major question now is how we can restore confidence in the financial markets so that 
they can manage on their own. This is a task that authorities around the world have been 
struggling with for some time now.  
In my opinion, we need a purge of the international banking system. The problems that are 
weighing down the banks’ balance sheets must be brought to light. It is only when we see the 
depth  of  the  losses  that  confidence  can  be  restored.  The  great  complexity  in  the  current 
financial system means that this is a much more difficult process than in the Swedish bank 
crisis of the 1990s. It is difficult to say how long it will take before the programmes currently 
being  implemented  in  Europe  and  other  parts  of  the  world  have  the  intended  effect. 
Meanwhile, the Riksbank is prepared to do whatever it takes to maintain the functioning of 
the Swedish financial system. Thank you! 
BIS Review 41/2009 
 19
