Ardian Fullani: Economic and financial developments in Albania during 
2008 
Speech  by  Mr  Ardian  Fullani,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Albania,  at  the  presentation  of  the 
2008  Annual  Report  to  the  Parliamentary  Commission  of  Economy  and  Finance,  Tirana, 
8 April 2009. 
 Honourable Mr. Chairman of the Commission,  
Honourable Ladies and Gentlemen,  
It  is  my  pleasure  to  be  among  you  again  in  this  annual  meeting.  The  Bank  of  Albania 
considers  this  forum  not  merely  as  a  fulfilment  of  its  legal  obligation,  but  also  as  an 
opportunity for enhancing its transparency and accountability. 
I will present in my speech an analysis of the Albanian economy over the past year and a 
summary  of  Bank  of  Albania’s  work  on  the  fulfilment  of  its  legal  mission  and  other 
commitments in view of strengthening the safety and raising the efficiency of the Albanian 
banking system. Also, availing myself of the opportunity of this public communication, I would 
like to share with you our views on the challenges the Albanian economy is faced with and 
the  right  path  for  their  solution.  The  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  the  addressing  of  these 
challenges should be in the centre of attention and a top priority for economic policies. 
Preceding  the  conclusions  of  Bank  of  Albania’s  analyses,  I  would  like  to  emphasise  right 
from the beginning that the country’s economic activity has performed on sound bases. The 
Albanian economy has fulfilled a number of prerequisites for having a stable and long-term 
economic  growth,  giving  primary  importance  to  macroeconomic  stability  of  the  country. 
However, in the presence of current challenges the Albanian economy is being faced with, 
these  bases  should  be  safeguarded  and  further  strengthened,  compiling  appropriate 
economic policies by relevant authorities  and reviewing the  economy agents’ development 
plans. 
Performance of Albanian economy during 2008  
1. 
Allow me to make in the following a brief retrospective analysis on the performance of the 
Albanian economy during 2008. 
Global background  
The  world  economy  experienced  a  constant  deterioration  throughout  2008.  The  world 
economic growth moderated to 3.4 percent in 2008, from 5 percent it was in the preceding 
four-year period. 
The most striking 2008 highlight was the financial turmoil and its spread to the real economy. 
The complex nature of derivative financial instruments, employed at most in the latest years, 
raised  uncertainties  about  assessment  of  certain 
financial 
instruments qualified as toxic. This uncertainty shifted into lack of confidence and termination 
of  financial  market  operation,  impeding  the  smooth  operation  of  the  lending  system  to  the 
economy. Under these circumstances, the real economy was instantly affected by the lack of 
funding  for  consumption  and  loans,  leading  developed  countries  to  recession.  High 
inflationary pressures over the first half of the year, conditioned by strong economic growth 
and reflected in price hikes of oil and raw materials, were significantly dampened during the 
second half of the year. Monetary and financial markets have experienced a great volatility. 
Risk re-evaluation in financial markets was associated with securities price cut. Also, interest 
institutions’  exposure 
to 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 1
rates, exchange rates, stock prices and trade volume were obviously volatile, depending on 
market news and on the perceived risk of the situation. 
Economic growth  
Against  this  turbulent  global  background,  the  Albanian  economy  has  had  a  comparably 
positive  performance.  Expecting  confirmations  from  official  statistics,  the  Bank  of  Albania 
deems  that  the  country’s  economy  has  grown  in  line  with  the  year-start  projections.  This 
growth has reflected the dynamic development of some sectors of the economy, supported 
by  increased  consumption  and  investments  and  constant  structural  and  infrastructural 
improvements in the economy. 
Economic  growth  of  the  country  has  been  sustained  mainly  by  strong  domestic  demand, 
which  remains  the  main  generator  of  economic  growth.  Consumption,  investments  and 
government  spending  increased  over  2008.  External  demand  in  the  form  of  exports 
increased  rapidly  during  the  last  years,  but  it  still  remains  at  low  levels  for  sustaining  the 
country’s economic growth. The country’s economic activity has been financed mainly from 
domestic sources. Due to its high liquidity during 2008, the banking system has been able to 
respond to the economy demand for funds through increased financial intermediation. The 
banking loan portfolio increased by 7.3 percentage points of GDP during 2008. 
The  economic  activity  at  home  was  presented  in  two  different  pictures  during  2008, 
significantly affected by international market developments. 
Official statistics indicate a significant growth in the economic activity volume during the first 
nine  months  of  the  year,  reflected  in  a  higher  turnover  indicator  and  an  increase  in  credit 
volume,  in  budget  revenues  and  in  external  trade  volume.  The  overall  turnover  indicator, 
which is a proxy of the value added in the economy, increased on average by 17% during the 
first nine months of the year. The highest annual growth rates were noted in construction and 
trade,  while  industry,  transport  and  communication  present  a  slowdown  of  the  growth  rate 
compared to the previous year. The last quarter presented a qualitatively different picture of 
economic  developments.  Under  the  influence of  the  global  economic and  financial  turmoil, 
the  economic  activity  showed  signs  of  slowdown,  while  monetary  indicators  underwent 
considerable volatility. 
The country’s economic activity slowdown during the fourth quarter of the year was signalled 
by  a  number  of  indirect  indicators,  such  as:  deterioration  of  the  economic  trend  indicator, 
resulting from the processing of business and consumer opinions about the current situation 
of the economy and their expectations; decreased remittances and export slowdown during 
the second half of the year; and curbing of lending activity during the last quarter. 
Consumer price inflation  
During 2008 the Bank of Albania fulfilled its legal obligation for maintaining price stability in 
the economy. Consumer price inflation has fluctuated within the Bank of Albania’s targeted 
rate. Annual average inflation rate settled around 3.4 per cent for 2008, being close to Bank 
of Albania’s target of 3 per cent and within the 2-4 per cent tolerance band of the Bank of 
Albania. The controlled inflation rate reflected Bank of Albania’s appropriate monetary stance 
and policy. The right monetary policy led to balancing of the demand and supply factors and 
anchoring of inflationary expectations around the Bank of Albania’s target. 
Inflation behaviour has not been uniform during 2008. High domestic demand and the shocks 
from the global economy, in the form of high prices of primary commodities, were reflected in 
high inflationary pressures during the first half of the year. The annual inflation peaked at 4.6 
percent in May, recording the highest inflation rate over last 5 years. These high inflationary 
pressures were clearly reflected in the increase of core inflation and of non-tradable goods, 
which  are  also  synthetic  indicators  of  inflationary  balances  in  the  economy.  The  easing  of 
supply shocks and the slowdown of the domestic demand during the last quarter of the year 
2 
 BIS Review 49/2009
were accompanied by a gradual fall of inflation rate, down to 2.2 per cent in December. This 
fall  reflects  a  better  balancing  of  the  domestic  demand  and  supply,  and  lower  imported 
inflation rates. 
Balance of payments and external sector of the economy  
Year  2008  was  characterised  by  a  significant  growth  of  economic  and  trade  exchanges. 
Domestic demand is reflected in the growth of both, the trade deficit and the current account 
deficit during 2008. The current account deficit is estimated at 14.9 per cent of GDP, mainly 
affected by rapid growth of imports and a decline of remittances during the second half of the 
year,  due  to  increased  spill-over  effects  of  the  economic  and  financial  crisis  on  the 
neighbouring  countries’  economies.  The  trade  deficit  accounted  for  Euro  2.4  billion,  being 
13.1  percent  higher  than  in  2007.  However,  foreign  currency  capital  inflows  have  been 
sufficient to contribute to closing of the balance of payments with a positive result for 2008. 
Foreign  reserves  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  increased  by  about  Euro  192  million  or  by  0.9 
percentage points of GDP. 
In macroeconomic terms, the high deficit on trade account signals high levels of consumption 
and investments in the economy, financed from foreign savings in the form of capital inflows. 
In a longer-term analysis, Albania’s current account deficit is a normal phenomenon in the 
context of the country’s development level. Especially positive is the fact that the major share 
of the country’s imports is represented by imports of machinery and equipments and that of 
intermediate consumer goods. However, current account deficit widening is an element that 
should  be  constantly  monitored,  since  its  financing  sources  are  not  always  steady  and 
necessary  corrections  for  the  current  deficit  compliance  with  the  available  funds  for  its 
financing are frequently difficult. Macroeconomic policies should be prudent to ensure long-
term  sustainability  of  the  balance  of  payments,  as  one  of  the  principal  aspects  of  the 
macroeconomic stability and long-term growth of the country. 
Fiscal policy and indicators  
Fiscal  policy  is  one  of  the  main  instruments  for  stimulating  and  controlling  the  economic 
activity. Due to its weight, the public sector is a significant generator of the economic activity 
and  a  determinant  of  the  financial  conditions  of  the  economy,  of  interest  rates,  of  the 
exchange rate, and its liquidity. 
During 2008 fiscal policy was more expansionary, thus being reflected in enlargement of the 
budget deficit and of the public debt. 
During  2008  budget  deficit  to  GDP  reached  5.7  percent,  being  expanded  by  about 
2.2 percentage points in a per annum basis. Public debt level amounted to 55.6 per cent of 
GDP, from 52.2 per cent in the previous year. Budget revenues and expenditures increased 
respectively by 15.3 and 22.6 percent during 2008, accounting for 27.3 and 32.9 percent of 
GDP. 
Improvement  of  public  debt  management  in  terms  of  extending  maturity  time-length  and 
diversifying the financing sources is a positive highlight, which has helped to refinance the 
debt and control its cost impact on debt indicators. However, the Bank of Albania deems that 
the  fiscal  policy  should  not  distract  attention  from  maintaining  long-term  stability  of  fiscal 
indicators and minimizing their impact on financial markets. Fall of budget deficit during 2009 
and the commitment for drop of public debt in the long run should be constant priorities of the 
fiscal bodies. In line with that, the Bank of Albania deems that more endeavours should be 
made  in  order  to  improve  the  expenditures  structure,  in  view  of  decreasing  the  share  of 
current expenses and increasing the capital investments. 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 3
Monetary performance  
Due to the slowdown noted in the last quarter, the pace of monetary expansion decelerated 
slightly relative to the previous year. The average annual growth rate of M3 eased to 12.3 per 
cent,  down  from  15.8  per  cent  in  2007.  Growth  of  monetary  assets  of  the  economy  is 
attributed mainly to banking system credit growth. The degree of financial intermediation in 
the  economy  further  increased.  Banking  system  deposits  to  GDP  amounted  to  80  percent 
during  2008,  compared  to  78  percent  for  2007.  Credit  to  GDP  amounted  to  37  percent, 
recording an annual growth of 7.3 percentage points. 
During 2008 deposit developments were characterized by seasonal volatilities. Deposits level 
recorded high growth paces mainly in summer and an obvious slowdown in the last quarter 
of 2008. On the asset side loan portfolio of the banking system for the economy increased by 
about 35 per cent during 2008. The credit structure performance revealed a slight shifting of 
the  loan  portfolio  towards  foreign-currency-denominated  loans.  The  preference  for  foreign 
currency-denominated  loans  is  attributed  to  their  lower  interest  rates.  It  would  have  been 
accurate in the presence of a stable exchange rate. 
It is wrong under Albania’s conditions, where the exchange rate is flexible and the possibility 
for its depreciating movements can not and should not be excluded. Therefore, the Bank of 
Albania  has  concluded  that  commercial  banks’  clients  do  not  pay  due  attention  to  the 
exchange rate risk, when they choose a foreign currency-denominated loan. 
Credit  growth  pace  has  been  decelerating  along  the  year,  reflecting  both  the  tightening  of 
lending standards in response to Bank of Albania’s regulatory measures and the tightening of 
the  system’s  liquidity  position.  The  banks’  difficulties  in  generating  adequate  liquidity  and 
their more prudential policy in terms of lending, were reflected in the slowdown of credit to 
the economy growth and of fiscal sector’s financing. 
financial  markets  have  reflected  not  only 
Financial markets  
Albanian 
the  performance  of  economic 
developments  at  home,  but  also  those  of  international  financial  markets.  Under  these 
conditions, their indicators, such as liquidity, interest rates, trade volume and exchange rate, 
have  been  characterised  by  a  higher  volatility,  however,  remaining  within  the  normal 
parameters of operation. 
In a general view, deposit interest rates indicated upward trends for deposits in the national 
currency  and  those  in  the  euro.  On  the  contrary,  credit  interest  rates  reflected  downward 
trend  during  2008,  bringing  about  reduced  intermediation  cost  of  the  banking  system.  In 
particular, positive is the latest evidence for drawing attention towards ALL credit and raising 
the competition through interest rates in this market. 
In  implementation  of  its  objective  for  price  stability,  the  Bank  of  Albania  applies  a  flexible 
exchange rate regime. It implies that the exchange rate price is market determined, reflecting 
the balancing of foreign currency demand and supply forces. During the major part of 2008 
the  lek’s  exchange  rate  vis-à-vis  foreign  currencies  was  steady,  but  it  started  to  slightly 
depreciate by the end of the period. The positive performance of the national currency during 
2008 was supported by a number of factors, such as: macroeconomic stability of the country, 
positive result of the balance of payments, inflation anchor close to Bank of Albania’s target 
and approaching of this indicator to that of the euro area, as well as the positive interest rate 
spread. 
The banking system  
Year  2008  was  characterised  by  intensive  developments  in  the  Albanian  banking  system. 
The  banking  activity  grew  further  throughout  the  year,  both  in  the  quantitative  aspect  – 
geographic coverage of the country and intermediation degree – and in the qualitative aspect 
4 
 BIS Review 49/2009
–  the  variety  of  services  provided  and  the  intermediation  cost.  In  the  meantime,  deposit 
withdrawals  taking  place  during  the  last  quarter,  tested  the  system’s  stability  sensitively. 
Developments  over  this  period  testified  that  the  Albanian  banking  system  passed 
successfully its first test of stability. 
This system continues to be committed mainly to collecting deposits and increasing lending 
activity.  Though  at  moderate  paces,  the  system’s  assets  and  liabilities  further  increased 
during  2008.  The  analysis  of  the  system’s  indicators  reveals  an  upward  risk  level  and  its 
downward  financial  capacity  along  the  year.  The  banking  system  performance  recorded  a 
downturn over 2008, from the viewpoint of net result performance. This reflected both, the 
enhanced competition in the system and the rapid increase of expenditures for provisioning, 
particularly  during  the  second  half  of  the  year.  However,  the  volatility  and  the  non-good 
performance of some of the main indicators has not put at risk the regulatory capital level 
needed for covering risks deriving from the system. The performance of above indicators is 
not  regarded  as  critical,  but  the  dynamics  and  intensity  of  development  require  a  more 
prudent monitoring on an ongoing basis. 
Bank of Albania’s activity during 2008  
2.  
As the monetary authority of the country, the Bank of Albania’s mission is to ensure price 
stability in the economy. In order to fulfil its mission, it drafts and implements independently 
the monetary policy and monitors and regulates the financial market activity in general and 
that of the banking system in particular. Also, the Bank of Albania is an important and active 
actor  in  the  country’s  efforts  for  European  integration.  Let  me  further  make  a  brief 
presentation of Bank of Albania’s work throughout 2008. 
Bank of Albania’s monetary policy and operations  
The  Bank  of  Albania’s  monetary  policy  is  drafted  and  implemented  exclusively  in  view  of 
fulfilling its primary objective, i.e., achieving and maintaining price stability. 
Inflationary  pressures  present  during  the  first  half  of  the  year  and  the  shaking  of  agents’ 
confidence dictated the pursuit of a prudent monetary policy during 2008. The key interest 
rate was held unchanged throughout the period, aiming at a better balancing of the demand 
and supply ratio, and contributing to subduing of inflation expectations in the economy. Along 
with  the  strengthening  of  some  banking  supervision  prudential  measures  for  credit  risk 
management,  this  policy  has  brought  about  a  more  balanced  credit  growth  and  has 
transmitted proper encouragement for consumption and savings. 
The  international  confidence  crisis  in  early  fourth  quarter  of  2008  encouraged  deposit 
withdrawals  from  commercial  banks  in  Albania,  highlighting  lack  of  liquidity  in  the  banking 
system. It was reflected in raised interest rates, slowed banking activity in the money market. 
The Bank of Albania intervened in the monetary market by injecting liquidity, in order to cover 
the banking system needs for liquidity. 
The  dynamics  of  2008  events  required  the  usage  of  all  open  market  instruments  and 
modification of some of them. The Bank of Albania has injected liquidity of a weekly, monthly 
and quarterly term. It has increased securities basis that may be used as collateral and has 
reduced  the  upper  limit  of  interest  rate  corridor  of  its  operations.  Also,  in  order  to  better 
satisfy  the  banks’  needs  for  liquidity,  the  Bank  of  Albania  changed  the  main  auction  type, 
from fixed-amount auctions into fixed-price auctions. Also, the Bank of Albania has induced 
more  flexibility  to  banks  for  short-term  liquidity  management,  by  raising  the  quantity  of  the 
daily required reserve usage. All these operations have served for settling down the liquidity 
situation and attenuating its impact on interest rate rise. They have also prevented balance 
sheets  of  commercial  banks  from  contraction  and  have  been  reflected  in  enlargement  of 
Bank of Albania’s balance sheet. 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 5
Banking regulation and supervision  
Year 2008 coincided with an upward prudence of supervisory policies of the Bank of Albania. 
The passing of the new banking Law gave way to adoption of a new package of measures, 
highlighting: 
• 
In  compliance  with  the  new  Law,  new  criteria  were  adopted  for  calculating  and 
reporting large exposures of banks to parent banks and connected entities, aiming at 
management of the risk deriving from concentrated exposure to them. 
In  order  to  achieve  a  more  effective  management,  a  new  Regulation  was  drafted, 
strengthening the internal audit in banks and branches of foreign banks. 
Taking  into  consideration  previous  problems,  a  special  importance  was  given  to 
transparency of banking and financial products and services. This is another aspect 
where  we  intervened  during  2008.  The  new  requirements  standardise  the  way  and 
form of providing information about banking products and services to clients. 
Part of the new package was also the standardization of the required information that 
banks and branches of foreign banks should make public, related to the banks’ main 
activity, their organisation and management, their financial performance and position, 
the risk management and the accounting policies. 
Aiming  at  a  better  diversification  of  risk  deriving  from  the  concentration  of  bank 
investments  in  international  financial  markets,  the  Bank  of  Albania’s  Supervisory 
Council  made  some  other  amendments  to  the  Regulation  on  Risk  Management, 
consisting mainly in putting more prudential benchmarks on large exposure indicators 
and on the techniques of collateral calculation and recognition. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  prohibited  lending  to  the  economy  with  “exotic  money”, 
implying funds of a very low cost, ready to penetrate even into our economy. Let me 
remind you that many developing economies have fallen into the trap of those funds, 
currently suffering gravely from their flight. 
     In view of enhancing the transparency, these measures were discussed in advance with the 
banking system, through an open forum held with representatives of the system. Financial 
market developments during 2008 highlighted the appropriateness of measures taken by the 
Bank of Albania. Its actions for absorbing the spill-over effects of the international crisis at the 
lowest cost possible, have continued to take place even during the first months of 2009. 
Legal and regulatory initiatives  
During 2008, upon the passing of the Law “title repurchase contract”, the Bank of Albania’s 
efforts  to  create  a  proper  legal  infrastructure  for  the  development  of  the  repurchase 
agreements market among commercial banks were finalised, creating the possibility for the 
usage  of  these  agreements  as  flexible  instruments  to  ensure  and  invest  interbank  market 
liquidities, in view also of enhancing the efficiency of the monetary policy transmission. 
Also,  another  important  highlight  of  the  effective  legal  framework  during  2008  was  the 
approval of some amendments to the Civil Code Procedure of the Republic of Albania, which 
are expected to provide positive effects in terms of easing and shortening the time frames of 
collateral execution procedures for loans extended by banks and branches of foreign bank. 
Also,  in  view  of  improving  the  existing  regulatory  framework  in  banking  supervision  area, 
intending its adjustment to the requirements of the new Law “On Banks in the Republic of 
Albania” (which entered into force on 01.06.2007) and to the Acquis Communautaire in this 
area,  and  in  accordance  with  the  commitments  under  the  Stabilization  and  Association 
Agreement,  the  Bank  of  Albania  adopted  some  regulations  on  internal  audit  system  and 
transparency  of  banks  to  the  public,  which  are  expected  to  positively  impact  the  overall 
management and administration of banks. 
6 
 BIS Review 49/2009
European integration  
In the framework of European Integration, the Bank of Albania has paid special attention to 
the meeting of Bank of Albania’s obligations stemming from the SAA related to meeting the 
Copenhagen  economic  criteria  for  EU  membership,  guaranteeing  the  right  of  decision-
making  and  the  freedom  to  provide  financial  services  to  EC  banks  and  other  financial 
institutions, liberalization of capital flows and of payments between Albania and the EU, as 
well as approximating the Albanian legislation with that of the European Community (acquis 
communautaire) in these areas. 
During  2008  the  Bank  of  Albania  kept  regular  contacts  with  the  Ministry  of  European 
Integration and posted there monthly progress reports, which reflect the progress achieved in 
terms  of  implementation  of  legal  and  applicable  measures,  in  accordance  with  the  terms 
specified under the National Plan for the implementation of the SAA, as well as a description 
of the degree of compliance of the legal acts adopted by the Bank of Albania with the acquis. 
In the framework of the National Plan for the Implementation of the SAA (2007-2012), the 
Bank of Albania continued working for legal issues and applicable measures it should adopt. 
Hence, pursuant to the Law “Banks in the Republic of Albania” which entered into force on 
June 2007, the banking supervision regulatory framework was reviewed, particularly in terms 
of management, transparency and internal auditing of banks. 
Transparency of the Bank of Albania and its communication with the public  
A  special  importance  in  the  everyday  activity  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  is  given  to  public 
relations and communication, since an open and transparent communication with the public 
helps to raise confidence in and efficiency of its decision-making. The Bank of Albania has 
carried  out  a  number  of  activities  and  meetings  with  banking  and  financial  system 
stakeholders,  with  different  representatives  of  the  media  and  academics,  lectures  at  high 
schools and universities, regional meetings with representatives of the banking system, local 
government, business and the public. 
The  Bank  of  Albania  has  carried  out  its  work  in  two  main  directions:  first,  enhancing  the 
transparency  and  communication  with  the  public  on  its  decision-making;  and  second, 
enhancing  the  banking  system’s  transparency.  During  2008  the  Bank  of  Albania  tried  to 
enhance the transparency about decision-making and its effects on the economy, adding not 
only physical contacts and the number of publications, but also investing in public education, 
in  order  to  raise  the  economic  culture  in  general  and  the financial  one  in  particular.  It  has 
aimed at ensuring a compliance of the rational decision-making at micro level with Bank of 
Albania’s decisions. 
Only during 2008: 
• 
There were published more than 4500 pages in Albanian and above 2100 pages in 
English; 
There were distributed about 80.000 educational brochures; 
There  were  carried  out  training  workshops  for  about  100  teachers  of  economics  in 
Tirana and Vlora; 
There was organised a competition on “Real value of money” in Tirana and Vlora;  
There  were  organised  44  conferences,  workshops,  seminars,  forums  and  round 
tables; 
There  were  organised  5  training  workshops  with  journalists  from  visual  and  written 
medias in the field of economics.  
   BIS Review 49/2009 
 7
Also,  “Transparency  on  Decision-making”  was  enhanced  by  providing  signals  on  future 
tendencies of monetary policy decision, thus creating a standard form of communication that 
enables the public to perceive the direction of future monetary policy decisions. 
“Transparency  on  Economic  Developments”  was  enhanced  through  the  publication  of 
inflationary  expectations  tendencies  generated  from  forecasts  and  analyses  based  on 
empirical  models  of  the  Bank  of  Albania  and  from  the  extension  of  the  forecasting  period 
from 12 to 24 coming months. Also, it is worth noting that in the framework of the banking 
system  transparency,  a  set  of  regulatory  measures  were  prepared,  aiming  to  enhance 
transparency to clients, and protect them in consequence. 
The financial result  
The Bank of Albania has carried out its economic and financial activity pursuant to effective 
laws.  Its  balance  sheets  have  been  constantly  monitored  and  have  been  audited  by  the 
KPMG, which has certified their truth in compliance with the accounting policies adopted by 
the Bank of Albania’s Supervisory Council. 
During 2008 Bank of Albania’s balance sheet assets increased by ALL 60.1 billion, or about 
23  percent.  This  growth  is  attributed  mainly  to  increased  foreign  reserve  of  the  Bank  of 
Albania  and  its  transactions  for  injecting  liquidity  in  ALL.  During  2008  the  Bank  of  Albania 
had a net profit of about All 9.3 billion. 
Current and future challenges  
3  
As I emphasized many times earlier in my speech, the Albanian economy is being affected 
more and more by the global crisis impact. The uncertainty induced from the global financial 
system shock was reflected in the withdrawal of a part of deposits from the banking system, 
thus generating liquidity problems in the system and upward interest rate tendencies. This 
situation has naturally decreased the possibilities and willingness of the system to credit the 
economy. 
On  the  other  hand,  global  economy  developments  suggest  that  during  2009  the  Albanian 
economy  may  be  faced  with  a  decreased  level  of  remittances  and  capital  inflows.  These 
developments,  in  turn,  would  further  decrease  the  possibilities  for  financing  the  economic 
activity and would damage the foreign currency demand and supply balances. They give rise 
to depreciating pressures on exchange rate, likewise in many economies of Eastern Europe. 
This  depreciation  is  in  itself  a  corrective  behaviour,  under  the  conditions  of  a  flexible 
exchange rate regime applied in Albania. 
From Bank  of Albania’s viewpoint, the main problem the Albanian economy will encounter 
during the current year is lack of liquidity, and related to it, the tightening of conditions for 
financing activities. As we have emphasised even in our public presentations, this restriction 
should be recognised and factorised in business plans of all economic agents. The Albanian 
economy  will  access  less  credit  during  2009.  Lack  of  liquidity  would  also  reduce  the 
possibilities  of  the  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  for  reaction.  Under  these  circumstances,  a 
broader efficiency is required in making use of banking system funds, via a priority ranking of 
expenditures in view of their impact on the economic growth. 
Furthermore,  the  Bank  of  Albania  deems  that  current  account  deficit  behaviour  should  be 
constantly monitored. Equalization of this deficit to reduced capital account inflows should be 
another priority of development of economic policies. As I emphasised earlier, this moment 
significantly conditions the financial and macroeconomic balances at home. Therefore, it will 
be constantly held in focus of Bank of Albania’s monetary policy. 
Honourable Mr. Chairman of the Commission,  
Honourable Ladies and Gentlemen,  
8 
 BIS Review 49/2009
The  current  problems  the  Albanian  economy  is  faced  with  have  not  originated  in  Albania; 
therefore, their solution will mostly depend on global economic activity improvement. 
The country’s macroeconomic stability has absorbed the economic and financial global crisis 
impact  on  the  country’s  economic  activity.  This  stability,  reflected  in  low  consumer  price 
inflation,  stability  of  the  balance  of  payments  and  public  debt,  sound  balance  sheets  of 
economic  agents,  low  financial  market  volatility,  and  public  confidence  in  financial 
institutions,  is  a  great  capital  of  the  Albanian  economy.  It  is  achieved  through  work  and 
sacrifice throughout the past years, therefore the Bank of Albania deems that even during 
these  challenging  moments  for  all  of  us,  we  should  pay  full  attention  to  its  further 
safeguarding  and  consolidation.  The  private  sector’s  dynamism  of  the  Albanian  economy 
needs long-term favourable economic and financial conditions, and transparent competitive 
market structures to fully release its potential. 
Only countries knowing how to rise and respond to these shocks have managed to grow and 
prosper  in  the  long  run.  Learning  this  lesson  requires  an  explicit  ranking  of  development 
priorities,  separation  of  long-term  interest  of  the  country’s  development  from  short-term 
intentions and the political willpower for their accomplishment 
BIS Review 49/2009 
 9
