Mario Draghi: Fact-finding preliminary to the examination of the 
Economic and Financial Planning Document for the years 2010-2013 
Testimony of Mr Mario Draghi, Governor of the Bank of Italy and Chairman of the Financial 
Stability  Board,  at  the  Joint  Session  of  the  Fifth  Committees  of  the  Italian  Senate  and 
Chamber of Deputies, Rome, 21 July 2009. 
 Economic policy is contending with the most severe recession since the Second World War. 
In 2009 Italy’s GDP will contract by more than 5 per cent. According to the macroeconomic 
scenario  presented  in  the  Economic  and  Financial  Planning  Document  only  in  2013  will 
economic activity return to its 2007 level.  
The  Government  has  taken  steps  to  attenuate  the  effects  of  the  recession  on  firms  and 
workers.  New  measures  are  in  the  process  of  being  approved.  In  Italy  fiscal  action  is 
constrained  as  far  as  the  deficit  is  concerned,  but  not  in  terms  of  the  composition  of  the 
budget, by the high and rising level of the public debt.  
In view of the sharp drop in revenue, this year’s deficit will exceed 5 per cent of GDP. Public 
expenditure will reach very high levels.  
The Planning Document sets the dual objective of strengthening the capacity of the economy 
to grow and consolidating the public finances. It is important to lay the basis immediately for 
achieving these results. This would also increase the scope for a more vigorous economic 
policy.  
The measures announced for pensions and the plans for reform of general government go in 
this  direction.  The  manner  of  implementing  fiscal  federalism  will  be  crucial  for  a  more 
effective management of resources. A comprehensive set of reforms must be drawn up with 
the aim of strengthening the country’s physical and human capital.  
Tax and social security receipts are still high in relation to GDP, close to the peak values of 
recent  decades.  Progress  in  curbing  current  expenditure  and  fighting  tax  evasion  is  of 
fundamental importance to allow labour and corporate tax rates to be reduced in the medium 
term.  
1.  
The state of the public finances  
After two favourable years for the public finances, the situation worsened in 2008  
After  two  years  of  gradual  improvement,  the  situation  of  the  public  finances  worsened 
markedly in 2008. Net borrowing began to grow again, rising from 1.5 to 2.7 per cent of GDP. 
The ratio of the debt to GDP increased by more than 2 points, to 105.7 per cent.  
The deterioration in the balance was due mainly to tax reliefs, the lapsing of some factors 
that had sustained tax receipts in the two previous years, and the high rate of growth (4.5 per 
cent) in primary current expenditure, which accelerated with respect to 2007 and outpaced 
nominal GDP by a considerable margin.  
The  impact  of  the  business  cycle  on  the  accounts  was  curbed  in  2008  by  the  relatively 
favourable performance of employment and earnings. The effects of the crisis are expected 
to be more pronounced this year and in 2010.  
BIS Review 27/2009 
 1
A further sharp deterioration in the public finances is expected in 2009  
According to the estimates in the Economic and Financial Planning Document for 2010-13, 
this year net borrowing will rise by 2.6 percentage points, to 5.3 per cent of GDP. The public 
debt is projected to grow by nearly 10 percentage points, to 115.3 per cent. The Planning 
Document indicates that GDP will decline by 5.2 per cent. These estimates are in line with 
those included in the forecasts recently presented in the Bank of Italy’s Economic Bulletin.  
The  new  estimate  of  the  deficit  is  0.7  percentage  points  higher  than  the  one  given  in  the 
Combined  Report  on  the  Economy  and  Public  Finances  in  April.  The  worsening  mainly 
reflects the expectation of a larger contraction in GDP, which was forecast at 4.2 per cent in 
April, and the increase in the appropriations made with the mid-year budget revision.  
Structural net borrowing is estimated at 3.1 per cent of GDP.  
For the first time in 18 years, a primary deficit is projected, equal to 0.4 per cent of GDP.  
Primary current expenditure is up sharply in relation to GDP  
Primary current expenditure is expected to increase from 40.4 to 43.4 per cent of GDP,  a 
historic peak around six percentage points higher than the figures recorded at the end of the 
1990s.  Less  than  a  quarter  of  the  forecast  increase  this  year  is  due  to  the  expansion  of 
expenditure  for  income  stabilizers  and  to  the  effects  of  the  measures  to  support  the 
economy, which will tend to be reabsorbed in the coming years.  
Capital expenditure is forecast to show a steep increase in nominal terms of more than 15 
per cent (equal to 6.3 per cent for the investment component alone, excluding the increment 
connected  with  the  repurchase  of  the  properties  securitized  in  2002).  Between  2005  and 
2008 capital expenditure had remained broadly stable, while the investment component had 
fallen by nearly 2 per cent (net of real-estate disposals). The forecast therefore assumes that 
the pronounced acceleration in outlays estimated by Istat for the first quarter will continue for 
the rest of the year.  
The  unfavourable  cyclical  situation  is  expected  to  lead  to  a  contraction  of  1.2  per  cent  in 
revenue, with a more marked drop in tax receipts. Indirect tax receipts are expected to fall by 
3.8  per  cent  and  direct  tax  receipts  by  1.5  per  cent.  Tax  and  social  security  receipts  are 
projected to rise by 0.6 percentage points, to 43.4 per cent of GDP.  
The  expected  worsening  of  the  public  finances  is  borne  out  by  the  interim  data  currently 
available.  
In the first few months of 2009 the borrowing requirement was far larger than in 
the same period of 2008  
Net borrowing amounted to 9.3 per cent of GDP in the first quarter of 2009, compared with 
5.7 per cent in the corresponding period of 2008.  
The  worsening  of  the  borrowing  requirement  reflected  the  contraction  in  tax  and  social 
security receipts and the significant growth in primary expenditure, which was affected by the 
Government’s  decision  to  speed  up  tax  refunds  in  order  to  assist  firms  and  by  the 
repurchasing of properties that had been disposed of with securitizations in 2002 (€7 billion 
in total).  
Tax revenue recorded on a cash basis in the state budget fell by 3.3 per cent in the first six 
months  of  the  year  compared  with  the  same  period  of  2008,  mainly  owing  to  the  steep 
decline in receipts from VAT (-11.3 per cent) and other business taxes (-9.2 per cent).  
In 2008 VAT receipts had already diminished by 1.5 per cent, against an increase of 2.3 per 
cent in household consumption, the macroeconomic variable that best approximates the VAT 
tax base. VAT receipts have continued to fall this year: they were down by 10.2 per cent in 
2 
 BIS Review 27/2009
the  first  quarter  from  a  year  earlier  (and  by  12.1  per  cent  in  the  second  quarter),  while 
consumption fell by 2.6 per cent. Only part of this gap appears to have been due to a shift in 
the composition of consumption towards essential goods, which are taxed at lower rates.  
In the first half of 2009 receipts of personal income tax on payroll employment decreased by 
only  0.7  per  cent,  benefiting  from  the  relatively  favourable  performance  of  per  capita 
earnings.  
Including receipts recorded in the first half of July, self-assessed taxes can be estimated to 
have grown by approximately €2 billion with respect to the corresponding period of 2008. The 
increase  reflects  the  higher-than-expected  receipts  from  the  one-off  substitute  taxes 
introduced with the Finance Law for 2008 and the anti-crisis decree of last November (more 
than €6 billion in total). Net of these items, there was a significant fall in corporate income 
tax. It should be noted that whereas the receipts from the  oneoff taxes have basically run 
their  course,  the  contraction  in  corporate  income  tax  points  to  a  fall  in  receipts  from  the 
second payment on account at the end of the year.  
2.  
Fiscal policy’s response to the crisis  
Countries have responded to the severity of the crisis with discretionary policies to 
sustain the economy 
The severity of the crisis has created a vast consensus at international level on the need to 
accompany  automatic  stabilizers  and  monetary  policy  with  discretionary  countercyclical 
budgetary policy interventions.  
In Italy, however, the high level of the public debt limits the scope for increasing the deficit. It 
remains possible to act through changes in the composition of the budget.  
It  needs  to  be  stressed  that  the  sensitivity  of  the  yields  on  public  debt  securities  to  the 
conditions of the public finances (deficit and debt) tends to increase in periods of turbulence 
on  the  financial  markets:  the  yield  differential  between  ten-year  Italian  and  German 
government securities widened in the second half of 2008 to more than 150 basis points and 
is still very considerable, of the order of 100 basis points.  
In  the  future,  various  factors  will  tend  to  increase  the  average  cost  of  the  public  debt:  the 
substantial  recourse  to  the  market  by  governments  to  fund  measures  for  supporting  the 
economy, the recovery of economic activity, and fears of a rise in inflation.  
In Italy, the use of the budget for anti-cyclical purposes has aimed above all, including via 
administrative  channels,  to  speed  up  the  employment  of  resources  already  allocated  and 
direct  them  in  order  to  support  aggregate  demand  and  mitigate  the  social  costs  of  the 
recession.  
The interventions  
The  response  to  the  crisis  has  consisted  primarily  in  three  decree  laws,  which  together 
appropriated €25 billion of resources for the three years 2009-11 (of which €17 billion funded 
by increasing revenue), and in the draft mid-year budget revision. Budgetary action came on 
top of measures aimed at guaranteeing the stability of the financial system and alleviating 
firms’ liquidity problems.  
In November 2008 a first package was approved. In addition to several tax reliefs for firms, 
the package introduced transfer payments to low-income households (known as the family 
bonus, which supplemented the social card scheme launched during the previous summer); 
automatic  income  stabilizers  were  strengthened  for  the  two  years  2009-10  (a  measure 
funded with national and EU funds on the basis of a State-Regions agreement); there were 
increases  in  the  allocations  for investment  in  public  works and  in investment  grants  to  the 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 3
State Railways group (in part to offset previous cutbacks), in conjunction with the adoption of 
new procedures to speed up the realization of projects included within the National Strategic 
Reference Framework.  
A second measure issued last February dealt mainly with incentives for the purchase of cars.  
At  the  beginning  of  July  a  third  decree  law  introduced  tax  incentives  for  investment  in 
machinery between July 2009 and June 2010, through the exclusion from firms’ income of 
half the expenditure.  
Tax benefits for new investment had already been introduced in 1994 and 2001. Unlike the 
more  recent  measure,  these  envisaged  the  exclusion  from  firms’  income  of  half  the 
investment  in  equipment  and  capital  goods  made  over  and  above  the  average  for  the 
previous  five  years  (in 2001  it  was  possible  to  exclude  the  year  in  which  most  investment 
was  made  from  the  calculation  of  the  average).  Only  investment  in  machinery  included  in 
division  28  of  the  ATECO  classification  qualifies  for  the  new  incentive,  while  previously 
property and cars were also included.  
July’s  measure  also  raised  the  limits  set  on  the  deductibility  of  credit  writedowns  and 
allocations to risk provisions for banks. Firms benefited from the introduction of accelerated 
depreciation  for  technologically  advanced  goods;  the  details  of  the  intervention  will  be 
defined in a decree to be issued before the end of the year. The decree law also introduced a 
series  of  measures  designed  to  curb  the  cost  of  bank  commissions,  reduce  the  cost  of 
energy for firms and households, and ensure greater timeliness in the general government 
payments system.  
Moreover, the decree law further expanded automatic income stabilizers for the two years 
2009-10.  
In the first quarter of this year, the number of hours worked fell by 3.8 per cent compared 
with  the  previous  year,  a  more  pronounced  decline  than  that  in  employment  (1  per  cent), 
partly the effect of the slowdown in productive activity and widespread recourse to the Wage 
Supplementation Fund, which more than tripled overall compared with the first three months 
of 2008. The number of hours of wage supplementation authorized increased further in the 
second quarter, by 60 per cent on the previous 8 period. Among those worst hit by the crisis 
were  temporary  workers,  whose  fixed-term  or  collaboration  contracts  were  not  renewed. 
According to Istat’s survey of the labour force, in the first quarter of 2009 the number of fixed-
term, collaboration or project workers was about 260,000 lower than a year earlier, against a 
slight rise in the number of permanent employees.  
Finally,  the  draft  mid-year  budget  revision  increases  the  resources  available  for  general 
government with the objective of reducing delays in payments to firms.  
Compared with the budget presented last September allocations on a cash basis increased 
by €18 billion; those on an accrual basis by about €5 billion.  
The funding of the anti-crisis measures  
The expansionary measures contained in the three anti-crisis decrees are all funded within 
the respective provisions.  
The costs associated with the November decree are covered by increases in revenue, half of 
which derive from the introduction of several substitute taxes on voluntary asset revaluations 
and, to a lesser degree, from a reduction in expenditure; those relating to the measures in 
the  February  decree  are  covered  by  the  revocation  of  a  number  of  tax  reliefs  and  with 
increased revenue as a consequence of the growth in demand for durable goods, which the 
purchasing  incentives  are  expected  to  deliver.  Finally,  the  costs  of  the  July  decree  are 
covered  by  new  legislation  to  combat  tax  evasion,  the  intensification  of  tax  collection 
activities, the tightening of the requirements for offsetting tax credits, and specific laws on the 
gaming sector and savings in the pharmaceutical sector.  
4 
 BIS Review 27/2009
A  decree  law  in  favour  of  the  population  hit  by  the  earthquake  in  Abruzzo  was  ratified  in 
June.  
The immediate aim of the legislation is to tackle the emergency and in the longer term the 
objective  is  to  finance  reconstruction  activity  through  2032,  by  means  of  grants  and  state 
guarantees;  compensation  for  firms  is  also  envisaged.  For  the  part  of  the  plan  that  is 
explicitly quantified, the impact on net borrowing in the three years 2009-11 is virtually nil. 
The  funding  of  the  interventions  is  assured  by  the  increase  in  revenue  deriving  from  a 
broadening of the range of gaming activities offered to the public and a tightening of controls 
in the sector, from further savings in pharmaceutical expenditure and a decrease in the use 
of the fund for family bonuses. In the two years 2010-11 the interventions will draw mainly on 
funds set up for other purposes.  
A rough indication of the level of support to aggregate demand expected from government 
interventions can be made by comparing the current estimates on expenditure in 2009 and 
those  in  last  September’s  Government  Forecasting  and  Planning  Report.  In  particular, 
investment  expenditure  is  now  expected  to  increase  by  6.3  per  cent  compared  with  2008 
(excluding, for uniformity of comparison, repurchases of real estate securitized in the SCIP2 
operation  in  2002),  while  in  September’s  Report  it  remained  unvaried;  this  revision 
corresponds  to  0.1  percentage  points  of  GDP.  For  expenditure  on  intermediate  goods  the 
upward revision is around 0.3 percentage points of GDP.  
The  housing  plan  defined  in  the  agreement  reached  on  31  March  2008  between  the 
Government, Regions, and local authorities will mobilize private savings and contribute to the 
recovery  of  investment.  The  agreement  will  be  enacted  fully  in  each  of  the  Regions;  in 
several cases draft laws are already in the process of being approved.  
Amongst  other  things,  the  plan  allows  owners  to  increase  the  size  of  one-  and  two-family 
residential buildings by up to 20 per cent, provided these do not already exceed 1,000 cubic 
metres and excluding unauthorized buildings or those situated in historic centres or in areas 
subject to a general building ban. The derogations will remain in place for a limited time and 
in any event not exceed 18 months.  
Other measures to guarantee the necessary liquidity to small -and medium-sized 
enterprises  
Other  interventions  concerned  the  Cassa  Depositi  e  Prestiti  and  SACE,  the  export  credit 
insurance  agency.  Although  they  have  no  impact  on  the  public  finances,  these  measures 
increase the liquidity available to firms, especially to small- and medium-sized enterprises. 
The guarantee fund for these firms was also increased.  
In  particular,  the  Cassa  Depositi  e  Prestiti  will  be  able  to  employ  up  to  a  maximum  of  €8 
billion in resources derived from postal savings to provide credit to small- and medium-sized 
enterprises; SACE will be able to provide guarantees to businesses on general government 
receivables.  
Last autumn and at the beginning of 2009 steps were also taken to guarantee the stability of 
the financial system. These made available to the Government a series of instruments aimed 
at  protecting  investors  and  maintaining  adequate  levels  of  capitalization  and  liquidity  for 
banks.  There  is  also  a provision  for  the  State  to  subscribe  financial  instruments  issued  by 
listed banks that are fundamentally sound; these instruments count as regulatory capital; in 
April 2009 the Combined Report on the Economy and the Public Finances assumed that the 
resources employed would amount to around €10 billion; to date issues of about €2 billion 
are nearing completion.  
A  description  of  the  steps  taken  to  support  the  financial  sector  is  contained  in  the  2008 
Annual Report published on 29 May (see Chapter 19: Supervision).  
BIS Review 27/2009 
 5
3.  
The projections based on current legislation and the objectives set in the 
Planning Document for 2010-13  
The deficit on a current legislation basis is expected to improve in the years 2010-13  
In 2010 net borrowing on a current legislation basis is estimated to reach 5 per cent of GDP, 
slightly lower than in 2009. In 2011 the deficit is forecast to fall to 4.4 per cent and to decline 
in the following two years, reaching 3.7 per cent in 2013.  
The  outlook  for  net  borrowing  takes  account  of  the  marked  improvement  expected  in  the 
primary surplus, equal to an annual average of 0.7 percentage points in the four years from 
2010-13, only partially offset by the progressive increase in interest payments as a share of 
GDP (from 5.1 per cent in 2010 to 6 per cent in 2013).  
The  expected  improvement  in  the  primary  surplus  is  ascribable  to  the  absence  of  several 
costs related to the recession, the effects of the three-year adjustment plan launched in the 
summer of 2008 and the adoption of the current legislation criterion. This criterion excludes a 
series  of  disbursements  which,  even  if  foreseeable  or  necessary,  have  not  yet  been  the 
object  of  formal  legislation,  such  as  future  public  employment  contracts,  the  renewal  of 
service contracts and the execution of public works.  
Compared with the estimates in the Combined Report, net borrowing on a current legislation 
basis is revised upwards by 0.4 percentage points in 2010, and by 0.1 per cent in 2011.  
For 2010, the deterioration in the budget balance with respect to the estimates made in April 
is mainly due to the decline in revenues, particularly from social security contributions (-0.2 
percentage  points  of  GDP  or  €2.5  billion)  and  direct  taxes  (-0.1  points  or  €1.7  billion), 
resulting from the reduction of 0.4 percentage points in the expected level of nominal GDP in 
2010. The adjustment of interest expense (-0.1 percentage points, equal to about €1 billion) 
will offset part of the increase in capital expenditure (0.2 percentage points or €2.4 billion).  
The planning scenario  
As far as the planning scenario is concerned, the EFPD sets the target for net borrowing in 
2010 at the value on a current legislation basis. As explained above, in order to achieve this 
result  it  will  be  necessary  to  cover  the  additional  expenditure  not  envisaged  in  current 
legislation.  
In the years that follow, the targets for the deficit are below the values on a current legislation 
basis, by 0.4 points in 2011 and by around 1.2 points in 2012 and 2013. At the end of the 
planning  period,  the  target  for  net  borrowing  is  set  at  2.4  per  cent  of  GDP.  The  primary 
balance is expected to improve by 0.6 percentage points of GDP in 2010, reaching a surplus 
of 0.2 points, and by 3.3 points over the following three years.  
The EFPD does not give details of the planning scenario  
Unlike the previous EFPD, the present planning scenario does not give information on the 
level or composition of revenues and expenditure. The Document states that on the revenue 
side  the  corrective  action  will  tend  to  reinforce  the  measures  to  combat  tax  evasion  and 
avoidance. On the expenditure side, the aim will be to ensure that the regional health service 
deficits are rectified and to introduce more efficient methods of disbursing public services.  
The  lack  of  information  on  revenue  and  expenditure  targets  makes  it  difficult  to  evaluate 
some  critical  aspects  of  the  fiscal  policy  outlined  in  the  EFPD.  For  example,  use  of  the 
current legislation basis, among other things, means that the baseline projection indicates a 
sharp decrease in capital expenditure in 2010. In particular, investment expenditure – after 
rising  by  6.3  per  cent  in  2009  –  is  expected  to  fall  by  6.6  per  cent  (excluding,  for  2009, 
outlays for the repurchase of real estate securitized in 2002), returning to its 2006 value. In a 
6 
 BIS Review 27/2009
cyclical phase that is likely to remain fragile, this public-sector support of aggregate demand 
should be maintained.  
Structural net borrowing, amounting to 3.1 per cent of GDP in 2009, is projected to improve 
steadily until 2012 (by around 0.3 percentage points per year) and remain virtually stationary 
in 2013.  
In 2013 less than a third of the recession-related increase in the debt will have been 
absorbed  
The public debt is projected to increase by a further 2.9 percentage points of GDP in 2010 (to 
118.2 per cent) before it begins to decline in 2011, reaching 114.1 per cent in 2013. At the 
end of the planning period, less than a third of the increase in the public debt associated with 
the recession will have been absorbed.  
In  the  future,  in  implementation  of  the  bill  on  public  accounting  and  finances  now  before 
Parliament, the EFPD will be replaced by the Decision on the public finances as part of a 
reform that will also affect the timing and content of the documents marking the progress of 
fiscal policy. The reform should heighten the importance of medium-term considerations in 
the drafting of fiscal policy.  
As far as concerns timing, the bill (as approved by the Senate) provides that the Government 
must submit the Decision on the pubic finances to Parliament by 20 September of each year. 
By  15  October  the  Minister  for  the  Economy  and  Finance  must  present  a  bill  before 
Parliament, called the Stability Bill, which replaces the Finance Bill and the Budget Law. The 
deadline for the introduction in Parliament of the measures linked to the Stability Bill remains 
15  November.  The  time  horizons  for  policy  planning  and  implementation  are  also  brought 
closer together: the targets set by the Decision on the public finances must relate at least to 
the next three-year period; budgetary policy must cover three years.  
4.  
Fiscal policy for the years following the recession  
Two objectives for economic policy  
The  EFPD  not  only  points  out  the  need  to  maintain  the  temporary  support  measures  in 
favour of households and firms, it also assigns fiscal policy two main objectives: ensuring the 
resumption  of  progress  towards  consolidating  the  public  finances,  in  order  to  converge 
towards budgetary balance; and sustaining productivity and economic growth.  
According  to  the  framework  outlined  in  the  EFPD  the  next  years  will  see  large  deficits. 
Measures  to  restructure  the  public  finances  are  planned  for  2011  and  2012,  once  the 
adverse  phase  of  the  cycle  is  past.  No  corrective  action  is  envisaged,  instead,  for  2013, 
beyond  what  is  needed  to  finance  the  expenses  not  included  in  current  legislation. 
Macroeconomic conditions permitting, it could be a good year in which to press on with the 
consolidation measures.  
The legacy of the recession for the public finances: a much larger debt  
The public debt is expected to diminish in relation to GDP starting in 2011, but – as pointed 
out earlier – at the end of the planning period less than a third of the increase due to the 
recession  will  have  been  absorbed.  The  high  debt  ratio  will  be  one  of  the  most  serious 
consequences of the recession.  
According  to  the  EFPD  forecasts,  the  debt  will  stay  below  the  peak  recorded  in  the  mid-
1990s. However, it should be pointed out that the quantity of easily liquidated public assets 
will  also  be  smaller  than  it  was  then.  During  the  decade  1995-2004  asset  sales  and  the 
restructuring  of  the  bonds  assigned  to  the  Bank  of  Italy  in  1994  accounted  for  about  11 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 7
percentage points of the reduction in the debt/GDP ratio. These transactions were not carried 
out in conjunction with structural measures to curb the growth in current expenditure capable 
of putting the debt back on a steady downward path.  
Compared with the 1990s the situation is aggravated by the pressure exerted on the public 
finances by the ageing of the population: in the mid-1990s the number of over- 65 year-olds 
was equal to about 25 per cent of the population aged 15 to 64, while in 2010 that proportion 
will reach 31 per cent, rising to 34 per cent in 2015 and 36 per cent in 2020. The public debt 
is building up again on the eve of the period in which the large post-war generations retire.  
The consolidation measures must curb primary current expenditure  
Given the magnitude of the adjustment needed to put the public debt permanently back on a 
downward  path,  it  is  essential  to  draw  up  programmes  with  medium-to-longterm  structural 
effects  as  early  as  possible.  Given  the  present  level  of  taxation  and  social  security 
contributions – high by both historical and international standards – action to consolidate the 
public finances must rely, as the EFPD also points out, not only on a significant reduction in 
tax evasion, but also on the containment and reorganization of current expenditure.  
The effort to contain outlays must be extremely incisive  
The achievement of the target set for the deficit in 2013 (2.4 per cent of GDP) requires an 
average annual reduction in primary current expenditure of about 1 per cent in real terms in 
the  period  2010-13.  This  estimate  assumes  that  GDP  will  grow  by  2  per  cent  per  year  in 
2011-13, in line with the macroeconomic framework of the EFPD; that interest expense and 
revenue will stay at their baseline levels; and that the ratio of capital expenditure to GDP will 
hold steady at the value forecast for 2010.  
In order to achieve the deficit target for 2013 without affecting social payments (which in this 
second  scenario  will  stay  at  their  baseline  levels),  the  other  primary  current  expenditure 
items will need to decrease on average by around 3 per cent annually in real terms.  
Efforts to contain outlays in the years to come must therefore be extremely incisive: in the ten 
years  1999-2008  primary  current  expenditure  recorded  an  average  annual  increase  of  2.1 
per cent in real terms. It should be noted that over the last decade the average growth in 
expenditure was 1.5 points greater than projected for the following year in the Forecasting 
and Planning Reports.  
In the years after 2013 the rapid curtailment of the debt will continue to be a priority. Unless 
significant progress is made in reducing current spending, and failing a resumption of growth, 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  both  the  public  debt  and  the  incidence  of  taxation  and  social 
security contributions will remain extremely high for a long time to come.  
Given the planning scenario adopted in the EFPD up to 2013, assuming the budget deficit is 
adjusted by about 0.5 percentage points of GDP each year (leading to balance in 2018) and 
that GDP grows at an annual rate of 1 per cent in real terms (slightly more than the potential 
growth indicated in the EFPD for 2013) and of 3 per cent in nominal terms, in 2018 the public 
debt will still equal 107.6 per cent of GDP. Under this scenario, assuming capital expenditure 
remains stationary at the level forecast for 2010 and that the average cost of the debt and 
the  ratio  of  revenue  to  output  stay  at  the  values  forecast  for  2013,  in  the  five-year  period 
2014-18 primary current spending should remain virtually stationary in real terms. 
Assuming  that  budget  balance  is  achieved  in  2015  with  GDP  growth  still  at  1  per  cent,  in 
2018  the  public  debt  will  amount  to  104.5  per  cent  of  GDP.  In  2014-15  primary  current 
expenditure will need to decrease on average by around 2 per cent per annum in real terms; 
in the years after, if budget balance is maintained, there should be scope to increase current 
spending in real terms or to reduce the incidence of taxation.  
8 
 BIS Review 27/2009
Finally,  assuming  budget  balance  in  2015,  but  assuming  a  more  favourable  rate  of  GDP 
growth (2 per cent), in 2018 the public debt should fall to just under 100 per cent of GDP. 
The average annual reduction in current spending in the two years 2014-15 would be about 1 
per cent in real terms.  
5.  
The structural policies for consolidation of the public finances and growth  
Structural reforms are needed to render the measures efficacious 
The  measures  to  contain  outlays  will  have  to  be  of  a  structural  nature  and  will  therefore 
necessitate a reform of the main public services and a reorganization of general government 
departments. In some cases this will mean continuing on a course already begun.  
The reform of the budget cycle may improve the control of expenditure  
The  planning  and  implementation  of  measures  to  curb  expenditure  may  benefit  from  the 
reform of the budget cycle currently under discussion in Parliament, which might contribute to 
enhancing  the  transparency  of  the  public  finances  and  encouraging  the  adoption  of  a 
medium-term approach to fiscal policy.  
The bill approved by the Senate specifies the information on the public finances that the key 
documents  of  the  budget  cycle  must  provide.  The  following  are  especially  important  for 
planning purposes: the information needed to construct the budget on an unchanged policies 
basis, the data on planned revenue and expenditure, and the economic policy objectives set 
for the subsectors of general government.  
In the last ten years the targets for the public finances have frequently been missed and the 
objective  of  budgetary  balance  has  been  repeatedly  postponed.  This  has  entailed  heavy 
costs in the management of the present crisis and reduced the scope for budgetary policy 
action.  Strengthening  the  rules  and  procedures  of  the  budget  is  therefore  of  great 
importance.  
Fiscal federalism must contribute to curbing expenditure  
The  implementation  of  fiscal  federalism  offers  an  opportunity  to  make  the  management  of 
public  resources  more  efficient  and  to  rationalize  expenditure,  while  bearing  in  mind  the 
principle of solidarity.  
The increase in the proportion of local taxes in the financing of local government expenditure 
in place of central government transfers and the strengthening of fiscal autonomy by allowing 
changes  to  tax  rates  and  bases  create  a  closer  link  between  expenditure  and  revenue 
decisions and can lead to greater efficiency.  
A crucial element of the enabling law passed by Parliament in April is the replacement of the 
historical cost criterion by that of standard costs and funding requirements for the allocation 
of  resources  to  local  authorities.  The  calculation  of  these  indicators  is  subject  to  technical 
difficulties that are accentuated by the lack of harmonized budgets at the different levels of 
government  and  the  large  territorial  disparities  between  the  levels  and  quality  of  public 
expenditure.  
The prompt approval of the so-called Local Government Code is also of crucial importance 
for  the  implementation  of  the  enabling  law  on  fiscal  federalism.  The  plan  for  achieving 
expenditure savings by rationalizing and simplifying the different levels of government, so as 
to exploit economies of scale and avoid useless overlapping, appears highly commendable.  
The  Local  Government  Code  will  specify  the  division  of  the  functions  performed  by 
municipalities  and  provinces,  including  the  identification  of  those  to  be  considered 
BIS Review 27/2009 
 9
fundamental  for  ensuring  fiscal  equality,  reorganize  the  network  of  intermediate  local 
authorities  (e.g.  mountain  communities  and  consortia  of  municipalities),  rationalize  the 
provinces,  reorganize  the  peripheral  offices  of  the  ministries,  streamline  municipal  and 
provincial councils, and rewrite the Domestic Stability Pact.  
A significant increase in the average effective retirement age is desirable  
In the medium term a significant increase in the average effective retirement age is required. 
Given the sharp rise in life expectancy, a lengthening of working lives is important in order to 
match the need to curb public expenditure with the need to ensure an adequate income in 
old age. If accompanied by  measures to make older workers’ working hours and earnings 
more flexible, such a lengthening would also help to increase the labour force participation 
rate and the economy’s potential growth rate. It would allow more resources to be allocated 
to other forms of social expenditure.  
Setting  the  same  retirement  age  for  male  and  female  public-sector  workers,  which  is 
necessary in order to comply with the judgment of the European Court of Justice, is a step in 
this direction. Thought will have to be given to completing the reform of the pension system.  
The Planning Document raises the forecast for the ratio of pension expenditure to GDP in the 
period  2010-50,  basically  to  take  account  of  the  lower  estimates  of  GDP  growth.  The 
increase  in  the  relative  importance  of  the  liabilities  associated  with  the  pension  system  is 
another adverse consequence of the recession.  
According  to  the  Planning  Document,  in  2010  pension  expenditure  is  likely  to  be  15.5  per 
cent  of  GDP,  1.4  percentage  points  higher  than  the  official  estimates  released  at  the 
beginning of 2008. In the following years the gap between the two sets of forecasts tends to 
narrow; in 2050 it is 0.7 percentage points of GDP. The sum of the revisions in the next forty 
years is about 35 percentage points of GDP.  
Reduce tax evasion  
In the budget on a current legislation basis tax and social security receipts exceed 43 per 
cent of GDP in 2009 and remain close to 43 per cent over the rest of the forecasting horizon. 
These values put Italy well above the average of the other euro-area countries and are high 
compared with the past, 43 per cent having been exceeded on only two occasions, in 1997 
and 2007.  
The Planning Document gives great importance to the fight against tax evasion. The large 
scale of the underground economy increases the burden on law-abiding taxpayers, causes 
distortions and reduces the competitiveness of the majority of firms. These effects may well 
be more pronounced in the present phase of economic crisis.  
As mentioned earlier, a gap has emerged between the rate of growth in VAT receipts and the 
VAT  base.  This  development  needs  to  be  examined  with  care,  not  least  in  view  of  the 
reliance  some  of  the  measures  adopted  in  the  last  twelve  months  have  placed  on  the 
reduction of tax evasion in order to cover expenditure.  
In addition to stepping up audits and sanctions, it is necessary to reduce the areas of evasion 
by lowering 
statutory tax rates, which is to be made possible by curbing 
expenditure. Stabilizing the legislation on assessments and fostering public intolerance of tax 
evasion would also help.  
in the medium term 
Reforms for reviving growth  
It is not sufficient to return to the growth rates of recent years, which were extremely low by 
international standards. There is a need for structural reforms that will put Italian industry in 
the best possible position to grasp the opportunities that will be offered by the recovery of the 
10 
 BIS Review 27/2009
world  economy.  Once  the  crisis  has  been  overcome,  Italy  will  find  itself  with  its  stock  of 
physical and human capital eroded by the fall in investment and the rise in unemployment. 
The  decline  in  potential  GDP  growth  that  could  follow  is  one  of  the  most  worrying 
consequences of the crisis, as the Planning Document also notes.  
Increase the efficiency of government departments  
In  Italy  the  administrative  and  bureaucratic  costs  incurred  by  businesses  are  high  by 
international  standards.  The  recent  measures  adopted  in  relation  to  setting  up  businesses 
are  a  move  in  the  right  direction,  but  they  need  to  be  strengthened  and  accompanied  by 
further  action  to  improve  the  efficiency  of  public  offices.  The  wide  gaps  between  the 
performances  of  different  public  structures  are  evidence  of  the  scope  for  large  efficiency 
gains for firms if every office adopted the best practices.  
The bureaucratic formalities the productive sector must comply with affect many aspects of 
firms’ competitiveness: their birth, size and productivity. The time consumed and the costs 
incurred in complying with these formalities show wide territorial variations. According to a 
survey conducted by the Bank of Italy (on the basis of an international comparison carried 
out by the World Bank), it takes 12 days on average to set up a company in the “fastest” area 
and  more  than  27  in  the  “slowest”  area;  the  costs  range  from  13  per  cent  of  per  capita 
income to nearly 30 per cent. The recent reforms have significantly reduced these times, with 
the  greatest  improvements  taking  place  in  the  slowest  areas.  Large  territorial  differences 
were also found in the case of the procedures for obtaining building permits and the transfer 
of real estate. 
Improve the quality and effectiveness of government action  
The recent reform of general government is marked by the scale of the intervention and the 
importance  of  the  principles  upon  which  it  is  based:  transparency,  linking  earnings  and 
performance,  and  benchmarking  for  the  control  of  results.  The  effect  on  the  quality  of 
government action will depend, however, on how these principles are applied in practice.  
Important factors will include the autonomy, organizational and otherwise, of the Assessment 
Committee  and  the  actual  independence  of  the  assessment  bodies  from  the  departments 
they  belong  to.  The  major  difficulties  encountered  in  measuring  the  output  of  the  public 
sector will have to be overcome.  
Modernize schools and universities  
It  is  necessary  to  continue  with  the  renovation  of  the  school  and  university  systems. 
Independence and assessment are the key principles. As is also stressed in the annexes to 
the Planning Document, the strategy for intervention in this field must aim at enhancing the 
value of human resources, recognizing merit and excellence, and curbing expenditure.  
Last year saw the inclusion in the Italian middle school final exam of a written exam that is 
the same across the whole country; it supplements the other tests and teacher assessments. 
The curricula of high schools have been revised. The reform of the technical institutes 
which 
will  come  fully  into  force  in  2010  
will  permit  a  closer  interaction  between  schools  and  the 
productive  sector,  as  a  result  of  the  increased  importance  assigned  to  scientific  and 
technological  subjects  and  English,  and  the  introduction  of  organizational  models  that 
facilitate training carried out in collaboration with firms. At university level, the allocation of 
resources is made more efficient by implementing the criteria previously announced, which 
reward the quality of research and teaching.  
BIS Review 27/2009 
 11
Eliminate the fragmentation of worker protection  
The  Government’s  anti-crisis  measures  have  appropriately  aimed  at  preventing  the 
interruption  of  employment  relationships  and  introduced  experimental  income-support 
solutions  for  some  less  protected  workers.  There  nonetheless  remains  a  need  for  a 
comprehensive reform of Italy’s system of automatic stabilizers.  
The ISAE survey of manufacturing firms shows some initial signs of a halt in the deterioration 
of the outlook for employment in the second half of the year. However, without a reversal of 
the trend of industrial production, which, despite remaining stable in the last three months, is 
about 25 per cent below the peak reached in April 2008, it is possible that not even recourse 
to the Wage Supplementation Fund, which has so far been extremely effective, will be able 
to fend off a fall in employment.  
A  reform  of  the  system  of  automatic  stabilizers  for  job-seekers  that  eliminated  the  present 
fragmentation  of  protection  
provided  it  is  accompanied  by  a  strengthening  of  the  eligibility 
checks  
would  improve  the  working  of  the  labour  market  by  fostering  the  reallocation  of 
workers  between  sectors  and  firms.  Household  consumption  would  also  benefit,  not  only 
through direct economic support in the event of the loss of a job but also by reducing the 
need to save in order to cope with unforeseen events.  
 The Italian economy is grappling with a very severe recession, which follows years of modest 
growth. The period during which economic conditions grew progressively worse appears to 
have  ended;  there  are  some  positive  signs.  Benefiting  from  the  recovery  of  the  world 
economy, economic activity should start to expand again during 2010.  
Giving support to industry nonetheless remains a priority objective; a structural weakening of 
the productive system must be avoided. The exit from the market of a large number of firms 
would reduce the country’s potential output and would also impose heavy costs in terms of 
human capital.  
Budgetary policy must continue in the effort to reallocate resources in favour of labour and 
firms. The immediate definition of structural measures, capable of curbing expenditure and 
the public debt in the medium term, would increase the scope for more vigorous action to 
counter the crisis.  
A comprehensive strategy of structural reforms, some of which are being implemented and 
others prepared, can enhance the effectiveness of the action to be taken in the short term, 
provide  certainty  to  households  and  firms,  and  create  the  conditions  for  the  economy  to 
move to a higher growth path.  
12 
 BIS Review 27/2009
BIS Review 27/2009 
  13
 14 
  BIS Review 27/2009
 15
BIS Review 27/2009 
 16 
 BIS Review 27/2009
BIS Review 27/2009 
  17
18 
  BIS Review 27/2009
BIS Review 27/2009 
  19
 20 
 BIS Review 27/2009
BIS Review 27/2009 
  21
 22 
 BIS Review 27/2009
