Barbro Wickman-Parak: The financial crisis – where do we stand today 
and where are we heading? 
Speech  by  Ms  Barbro  Wickman-Parak,  Deputy  Governor  of  the  Sveriges  Riksbank,  at 
Danske Market's Central Bank Seminar, Snekkersten, Denmark, 11 June 2009. 
 When  I  joined  the  Executive  Board  of  the  Riksbank  almost  exactly  two  years  ago,  in  May 
2007, I expected my new job to be varied and exciting. Though I perhaps wasn’t expecting it 
to be exciting in the way it turned out to be. Of course we were then already aware of the 
problems with subprime loans in the United States. But, like most other people in Sweden 
and abroad, I didn’t foresee that the worrying signs we saw then would gradually develop into 
a global financial crisis of historical proportions. Nor did I anticipate that as a result of this 
crisis  the  Riksbank  would  lend  several  hundred  billion  kronor  to  the  banks.  Or  that  the 
Riksbank would cut the repo rate by 4.25 percentage points during the course of just over six 
months, to its lowest level ever – the fastest monetary policy easing in the period we have 
had an inflation target. And of course I could not anticipate that several other central banks 
would by then have reached the lower limit for their policy rates and have begun to resort to 
unconventional measures. But nevertheless – this is where we stand now. 
Several explanations for the crisis 
One usually says that the crisis began in 2007 with problems in the US mortgage market and 
that  this  gradually  developed  into  a  global  financial  crisis,  which  became  acute  in  autumn 
2008  in  connection  with  Lehman  Brothers  filing  for  bankruptcy.  But  the  picture  is  more 
complex  than  this.  The  origin  and  course  of  the  crisis  will  be  analysed  thoroughly  and  we 
probably will not have a complete history of it until much later. 
However, we can already note that there are several explanations as to why the crisis arose 
and why it became so widespread. One circumstance that probably played some role is that 
growth had long been good in many countries, at the same time as inflation was low – quite 
simply, things had gone unusually well for an unusually long period of time. And when things 
have gone well for a long period of time it is probably human nature to relax and become 
slightly  incautious.  This  is  what  appears  to  have  happened  this  time  in  various  ways  and 
places, not solely in the US mortgage market.  
One  factor  that  probably  also  contributed  was  that  there  was  a  global  saving  surplus  that 
meant  there  were  large  capital  sums  to  be  invested  in  the  financial  markets.  This  surplus 
pushed down the interest rate on risk-free assets. The combination of a lot of money to be 
invested and low risk-free interest rates contributed to an increase in the demand for assets 
that  were  profitable  to  invest  in  and  led  to  an  intensified  hunt  for  high  yield.  This  type  of 
environment  often  inspires  great  inventiveness  in  the  financial  markets  and  many  new 
financial  instruments  were  also  created.  These  were  often  complex  and  difficult  to  valuate 
correctly. But in the optimistic climate prevailing then – everything had gone so well for so 
long  –  it  was  nevertheless  easy  to  sell  them.  Those  who  invested  in  the  new  instruments 
disregarded,  or  failed  to  sufficiently  understand,  the  risks  that  were  “inbuilt”  in  them.  The 
financial supervisory authorities and regulations also lagged behind this development.  
The problems in the international financial markets began to become more apparent as early 
as  summer  2007.  But  the  Swedish  economy  and  the  Swedish  financial  markets  long 
appeared able to manage fairly well, despite the fact that the turbulence was having more 
and more effects on the world around us. Of course, economic activity in Sweden began to 
weaken as international economic activity declined, but this did not initially seem to entail any 
very serious downturn. However, when Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy in September 
BIS Review 73/2009 
 1
2008 the situation worsened dramatically. The confidence that had existed between financial 
institutions was shaken to its foundations when no one was certain who might be next in line 
to  default  on  their  payments.  Now  the  Swedish  financial  markets  were  also  hard  hit  and 
some sub-markets were practically at a standstill. The earlier expectations that the decline in 
economic activity would be fairly mild were replaced by a much more negative view of future 
developments,  both  in  Sweden  and  abroad.  The  Lehman  Brothers  crisis  was  also  the 
prelude to a series of measures to stabilise the Swedish financial markets. At the same time 
the Riksbank took several rapid and resolute steps down the interest ladder to alleviate the 
effects of the crisis on economic activity. 
Still sensitive but liquidity risk has declined 
The  first  phase  of  the  crisis  can  be  described  as  a  liquidity  and  confidence  crisis.  No  one 
trusted  anyone  else  and  very  few  were  willing  to  lend  money  and  take  risks.  The  price  of 
loans  between  the  banks,  interbank  rates,  also  rose  sharply.  Since  the  crisis  started  the 
central banks have lent large amounts to the banks. For example, the Riksbank has offered 
loans in Swedish kronor at longer maturities than normal to facilitate the supply of liquidity to 
the Swedish banks. We have also lent US dollars to Swedish banks and we have made the 
collateral requirements for the loans somewhat more generous. The government has tried to 
reduce the banks’ liquidity risks through its guarantee programme, which basically involves 
banks  and  other  credit  institutions  being  able  to  sign  contracts  with  the  government  on 
guarantees for some of their borrowing. Without the measures taken by the Riksbank and 
other authorities the financial system would have ceased functioning and would still not be 
functioning. The same applies of course in many other countries. 
As we note in the Financial Stability Report that we published just over one week ago, these 
measures have contributed to ensuring that there is no imminent risk of a liquidity shortage 
for the banks. Interbank rates have fallen, although it still appears difficult to find funding at 
longer  maturities.  There  are  also  other  signs  that  the  conditions  on  the  international  credit 
markets  have  eased  somewhat  and  it  appears  to  have  become  slightly  easier  to  obtain 
funding by issuing securities, even when these are not backed by a government guarantee.  
Now  it  is  unfortunately  not  the  case  that  the  problems  are  over  –  we  are  not  yet  on  solid 
ground with regard to financial stability. There is still a lack of confidence between financial 
institutions  and  the  international  credit  markets  are  fairly  far  from  functioning  as  they  did 
before  the  crisis.  The  situation  is  still  sensitive  and  there  is  still  a  risk  of  a  surprisingly 
negative shock giving the crisis new energy and once again making it more difficult for the 
banks to obtain funding. The Riksbank will of course follow developments very closely. We 
will  continue  to  supply  the  banks  with  liquidity  and  we  are  prepared  to  do  so  as  long  as 
necessary. But to summarise briefly, the situation does look somewhat brighter with regard to 
liquidity risk.  
Greater focus on credit risks 
Now that liquidity risks are less prominent, there is instead a greater focus on credit risks, as 
economic  activity  has  weakened  and  growth  prospects  have  deteriorated.  The  very  large 
policy rate cuts made by central banks around the world and the fiscal policy stimulation from 
governments have not been able to prevent a severe weakening in economic activity. Our 
most recent forecast published in April points to GDP in the world falling by a good 1 per cent 
in 2009. This is a something quite unique: since 1970 GDP in the world has increased by on 
average 3.6 per cent a year and growth has not been negative even for a single year. The 
export-dependent  Swedish  economy  is  hard  hit  by  the  international  downturn.  In  our  April 
Monetary Policy Update we forecast a fall in GDP of more than 4 per cent in 2009.  
When  economic  activity  weakens  and  the  demand  for  goods  and  services  declines  it 
becomes  more  difficult  for  the  banks’  borrowers  to  meet  their  payments.  Bankruptcies 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2009
increase and the banks suffer loan losses. The loan losses in their turn make the banks even 
less willing to lend money and the economy risks ending up in a spiral where falling activity 
and stricter credit terms reinforce one another.  
The banks can cope with loan losses 
The  main  scenario  in  the  Riksbank’s  forecasts  does  not  involve  Sweden  ending  up  in  a 
serious  downward  spiral.  But  in  the  recently  published  Financial  Stability  Report  we  are 
nevertheless  assuming,  even  in  the  main  scenario,  that  the  Swedish  banks  will  face  fairly 
substantial loan losses in 2009 and 2010. A large share of the losses, approximately 40 per 
cent,  is  expected  to  arise  from  operations  in  the  Baltic  countries  and  the  rest  of  eastern 
Europe. But in the Report we also note that all of the major Swedish banks have sufficient 
capital to cope with the losses that will arise if the Riksbank's forecasts are correct. We also 
observe that the Swedish banks are well-capitalised in an international perspective. 
One  cannot  disregard  the  fact  that  there  is  great  uncertainty  over  future  developments  in 
economic  activity.  When  one  has  the  task  of  safeguarding  financial  stability,  it  is  natural 
preparing for situations where things go very badly. And when assessing the resilience of the 
financial system it is also of greater interest to study a more negative development than the 
one forecast. We have therefore investigated in our Financial Stability Report how the banks 
would cope with a scenario of a much weaker development than that considered most likely 
today.  There  we  assume,  for  instance,  that  GDP  in  Sweden  will  fall  twice  as  much  as 
predicted in our main scenario forecasts for 2009 and 2010 in the Monetary Policy Update 
published  in  April.  It  is  assumed  in  the  really  negative  scenario  of  the  Financial  Stability 
Report that developments in the Baltic countries and the rest of eastern Europe will be much 
weaker, although that is far from the only reason behind the poor development. Here, too, 
approximately 40 per cent of the loan losses are expected to come from operations in these 
regions.  
In this scenario all of the banks meet the statutory requirement of Tier 1 capital adequacy of 
at  least  four  per  cent.  However,  it  may  be  necessary  to  have  higher  capital  adequacy  to 
avoid negative consequences such as funding problems and downgraded credit ratings. In 
the  unlikely  event  that  this  very  negative  scenario  were  to  occur,  several  banks  might 
therefore  be  forced  to  act  to  strengthen  their  capital  bases.  If  this  could  not  be  achieved 
solely  through  private  capital  injections,  there  is  a  possibility  for  the  government  to  inject 
capital  by  virtue  of  the  Government  Support  to  Credit  Institutions  Act  of  last  autumn.  The 
Riksbank’s  assessment  is  that  we,  together  with  other  Swedish  authorities,  are  also  well 
prepared  to  be  able  to  manage  the  problems  that  could  arise  if  the  situation  were  to 
deteriorate to the level of the stress test described in the Financial Stability Report.  
Let me just clarify that the Financial Stability Report’s test of the financial system’s resilience 
cannot  be  compared  with  the  alternative  scenarios  of  a  “more  probable”  nature  that  are 
usually  presented  in  the  Monetary  Policy  Reports.  The  latter  normally  describe  the 
consequences for monetary policy of developments being better or worse than the situation 
described in the main scenario, but where the alternatives are not normally too far from the 
main forecasts. In the Financial Stability the scenario is rather more exaggerated. 
So where do we stand now and where are we heading? 
Let me briefly summarise where we stand now in terms of risk focus; the liquidity problems 
have  been  dampened,  while  credit  risks  and  feared  loan  losses  are  increasingly  in  the 
limelight as economic prospects have deteriorated. Credit risks and the size of loan losses 
are  of  course  closely  interlinked  with  economic  activity.  So  I  shall  now,  not  least  for  this 
reason, move on to talk about economic activity – the assessments made by the Riksbank at 
the  most  recent  monetary  policy  meeting  in  April  and  the  nuances  in  the  views  of  future 
economic developments that I put forward at the meeting. 
BIS Review 73/2009 
 3
Things could be better or worse 
It is natural in times like these to paint a gloomy picture and focus on downside risks. And I 
am probably the last person to deny that such risks exist. It is also natural that the focus of 
the monetary policy discussion should be on what a central bank can do when the policy rate 
approaches  zero  and  further  stimulation  may  be  necessary  as  this  is  to  some  extent 
“uncharted territory” for us.  
But  let  me  now  change  perspective  and  adopt  a  slightly  more  positive  tone.  In  the 
discussions at the two most recent monetary policy meetings I have pointed out that there is 
some possibility that the recovery both in Sweden and abroad could come more quickly than 
most people are assuming. One could perhaps say that I have acted as the devil’s advocate, 
if one can use this expression for arguing that there is some chance that things will be better 
than is generally believed.  
A more general reason as to why an upturn might come more quickly than expected, once it 
starts, is that the crisis can to a large extent be described as a massive confidence crisis that 
has made a lasting impression on the real economy. Households hesitate over consumption 
and companies hesitate over investment. But confidence is in many ways an on-off variable 
– either you have it or you don’t. All countries have been affected more or less at the same 
time  and  world  trade  has  declined  dramatically.  Once  confidence  and  faith  in  the  future 
return,  it  may  well  be  the  case  that  the  upturn  is  rapid  and  forceful  as  more  and  more 
countries come on board. 
My  views  at  the  April  monetary  policy  meeting  did  not  primarily  concern  2009.  I  think 
everyone is agreed that this year will unfortunately be a really poor growth year. In Sweden, 
as  in  many  other  countries,  growth  plummeted  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  last  year.  Recently 
published preliminary GDP figures for the first quarter also show that growth continued to fall, 
although the rate of the fall slowed down. My main emphasis was on what lies ahead of us – 
the economic cycle further on this year and into 2010. I shall not repeat everything I said at 
our  two  most  recent  monetary  policy  meetings;  anyone  who  is  interested  can  read  the 
minutes  of  the  meetings.  But  I  would  like  to  take  the  opportunity  to  bring  up  some  of  the 
views I expressed then. 
One view that I wished to highlight concerned the housing market in the United States, which 
is in many ways the origin of the problems. Some signs of stabilisation are now visible there, 
although some quarters of adjustment still remain before the stocks of unsold houses have 
been reduced and house prices stop falling. Falling housing investment has provided large 
negative contributions to growth in recent years. Very little housing has been built for several 
years  now  in  relation  to  the  increase  in  the  number  of  households.  When  the  turnaround 
comes, housing investment should provide a good contribution to growth.  
I also mentioned that stocks in the United States have been phased out rapidly and they will 
sooner or later be down to levels where the demand flow, even if it is declining, will need to 
be met with increased production. However, here one must bear in mind that this “cyclical” 
upturn will be temporary if final demand does not catch on further ahead. I could also see 
signs  of  stabilisation  in  important  forward-looking  indicators,  particularly  orders  in  the 
purchasing  managers’  index.  However,  the  picture  is  not  clear-cut  and  never  is  when 
economic  activity  is  in  the  balance.  But,  as  I  mentioned  at  the  meeting,  if  the  signs  of 
stabilisation become clearer they may affect the mood more permanently, not least on the 
stock market. This can in its turn have a positive effect on households’ undermined wealth 
and  help  increase  consumption.  Further  ahead  it  may  be  possible  to  reinforce  a  positive 
cycle and for investment to pick up. I also mentioned that a large part of the economic policy 
stimulation, particularly investments in the US infrastructure, would have its greatest effect in 
2010. 
Having  said  this,  I  would  like  to  point  out,  as  I  did  in  the  discussion  at  our  most  recent 
monetary policy meeting, that it might very well be the case that the signs of stabilisation I 
mentioned  then  were  delusive.  And  it  is  definitely  not  the  case  that  I  fail  to  see  the 
4 
 BIS Review 73/2009
seriousness of the economic downturn we are in. Nevertheless, the recovery could as I have 
said be quicker or slower than expected.  
Inflation outlook may change quickly 
Falling  resource  utilisation  and  inflationary  pressures  have  meant  that  we  could  conduct  a 
strong, expansionary monetary policy to alleviate the effects of the economic downturn and 
at the same time ensure that inflation does not undershoot the target very far. We will see a 
negative inflation rate this year if we measure inflation by the consumer price index, the CPI. 
But this is largely due to our own interest rate cuts. The low inflation rate is temporary and 
should  not  trigger  expectations  of  future  deflation.  Inflation  expectations  according  to,  for 
instance, Prospera’s survey, are anchored in a slightly longer perspective around the target 
of 2 per cent. 
My view at the April meeting was that we should begin to see signs next summer or autumn 
that the extremely low interest rate needs to be raised. I said then that it was not merely a 
question of an upturn possibly being on the way; I also pointed out that monetary policy is 
forward-looking  and  its  effects  come  after  a  time  lag.  It  is  therefore  more  guided  by 
developments in 2012 and 2013 the closer we come to this period. I also emphasised that 
although  inflationary  pressures  were  not  a  problem  at  that  point,  or  in the  near  future,  the 
situation  could  look  very  different  in  a  year  or  two.  For  example,  commodity  prices  could 
have begun to rise more than we had predicted, or the expansionary monetary policy and 
fiscal policy conducted in large countries could have pushed up international inflation with a 
risk  of  increased  imported  inflation.  I  also  mentioned  that we  could  not  be  certain  that  the 
krona would strengthen in the way we had assumed, or that productivity would recover as we 
had predicted. 
We know from experience that the inflation outlook can change rapidly. During the late spring 
and summer of last year we were concerned over inflation being too high, even though this 
was mainly  due to rising oil and food prices. Rising unit labour costs were also taken into 
consideration. Fears that high inflation expectations would become entrenched also formed 
part of the picture. We then raised the interest rate despite beginning to see signs of weaker 
economic  activity  in  the  future.  The  assessment  was  that  this  was  necessary  to  attain  the 
inflation target a couple of years ahead. When developments turned out differently, we had to 
quickly change our course. We are of course always prepared for situations like that. We are 
ready to act as quickly and as forcefully as is necessary, both to attain the inflation target and 
to carry out our financial stability responsibilities.  
Unconventional measures 
There  have  been  many  discussions  on  what  the  Riksbank  could  be  expected  to  do  if 
developments  turn  out  weaker  than  we  are  now  assuming.  And  our  toolbox  is  not  empty 
because the repo rate is so close to its lower limit.  
Put simply, the way the repo rate tool works is that the banks either borrow or buy Riksbank 
Certificates with a maturity of one week from the Riksbank at the price of the repo rate. In 
addition, there are what is known as daily fine-tuning operations between the Riksbank and 
the banks at an interest rate very close to the repo rate. The current level of the repo rate 
and expectations of what it will be in the future in turn affect other interest rates with longer 
maturities and, of course, activity in the economy. As I mentioned earlier, the Riksbank has 
implemented  a  number  of  measures  that  work  through  the  banks  in  order  to  improve  the 
functioning of the financial markets. This includes loans at maturities of 3 and 6 months to 
Swedish  banks,  against  collateral  and  at  a  variable  interest  rate.  These  measures  were 
recently supplemented with the possibility to borrow at a 12-month horizon. The primary aim 
of the lending has been to manage financial stability. But the measures also have monetary 
BIS Review 73/2009 
 5
policy side-effects in that the Riksbank is active further out on the yield curve than normal. 
The liquidity premiums decline, which in turn should lead to lower interest rates.  
If a central bank wants to affect interest rates more directly at slightly longer maturities there 
are various measures at its disposal. Central banks such as the US Federal Reserve and the 
Bank of England are for example buying government bonds with long maturities to influence 
long-term  interest  rates  in  the  economy,  thereby  trying  to  attain  monetary  policy  easing. 
However, the effects of such a strategy are uncertain. As yet our experience of that kind of 
action is rather limited. Moreover, government bond rates are affected by many other factors 
than the central banks' possible purchases of these securities. 
The Riksbank has not taken any such measures. The Executive Board decided at its meeting 
in April that the time was not yet ripe for this. But nor could we exclude the possibility that this 
might be possible further ahead, if the economic situation were to deteriorate more than we 
were assuming.  
During our discussion of this type of unconventional measure at our most recent monetary 
policy meeting I pointed out that the Riksbank is already implementing extensive measures 
through  its  lending  to  the  banks.  These  measures  will  continue  as  long  as  is  necessary.  I 
also considered that it was not necessarily the case that we would need to take the same 
measures as, for instance, the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England. There are several 
different reasons for this. The companies in these countries are more dependent on market 
funding, while in Sweden the banks are the most important source of funding. I also said that 
we  had  not  yet  seen  the  full  effect  of  the  radical  interest  rate  cuts  we  had  made,  which 
contributes  to  an  even  greater  uncertainty  in  the  question  of  whether  further  stimulation 
through unconventional measures is needed.  
When we meet in July we will present our forecasts for the economy and the repo rate over 
the coming three years and discuss once again whether there is a need to carry out other 
measures  than  those  we  have  already  carried  out.  We  must  always  maintain  the  best 
possible level of preparedness to deal with various situations that might arise. But this is not 
the same thing as needing to put those plans into action.  
Concluding thoughts 
I would like to carefully emphasise that what I have taken up regarding economic activity and 
monetary policy should not be interpreted to mean that in a sudden outburst of uncontrolled 
optimism  I  have  a  much  brighter  view  of  the  coming  period  than  most  others.  And  my 
message today does not contain anything new in relation to what I said at the most recent 
monetary policy meeting. I can assure you that I am aware of the seriousness of the ongoing 
downturn. And it is not a question of my being hawkishly “trigger-happy” and wanting to raise 
the interest rate again as soon as we see the slightest sign of a recovery. I believe, like my 
colleagues, that we need to maintain a low interest rate for a relatively long period of time. 
What I want to say is rather this: I believe it is easy to become a hostage to the situation 
when all of the figures are falling and to put a large emphasis – possibly too large – on the 
downside  risks.  And,  of  course,  one  cannot  rule  out  the  possibility  that  the  crisis  and  the 
economic downturn will be more protracted and more profound than we are now assuming. 
But there is also a risk that one may thus give too little weight to the possibility that things 
could actually go better than we believe and thus we may receive a surprise from a different 
direction.  
I have worked with forecasting for many years, and there are two things in particular that I 
have  noted,  and  for  which  I  also  believe  there  is  scientific  evidence:  that  it  is  difficult  to 
predict  turning  points  in  the  economy,  and,  once  they  have  happened,  it  is  easy  to 
underestimate the strength of the development that follows. This applies to both downturns 
and upturns. There is perhaps no reason today to assume that a rapid recovery will be the 
6 
 BIS Review 73/2009
most likely alternative. But it is definitely something that it is worth being prepared for in the 
slightly longer perspective.  
A central bank must have good long-term planning. Even if we are busy trying to alleviate the 
effects of a collapse in economic activity we must ensure that we bear in mind the medium-
term perspective. This may seem self-evident, but I believe it may be important to point it out. 
Not merely emphasising the short-term perspective is important for maintaining confidence in 
the inflation target in the long term. There must be a preparedness to act in a situation which 
could  differ  from  the  expected  by  being  both  better  and  worse.  We  currently  have  an 
extremely low interest rate and we are in a crisis that to some extent stems from having had 
a low interest rate for a long time. We must be aware of the imbalances that may build up 
and neither be “deflation nutters” nor “inflation nutters”. 
BIS Review 73/2009 
 7
