European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
6 August 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to today’s 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council. 
On the basis of its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council decided 
to  leave  the  key  ECB  interest  rates  unchanged.  The  information  and  analyses  that  have 
become available since our meeting on 2 July 2009 confirm our view that the current rates 
remain  appropriate.  As  anticipated,  annual  HICP  inflation  in  July  fell  further  into  negative 
territory,  reflecting  mainly  temporary  effects.  After  a  return  to  positive  inflation  rates  during 
the second half of the year, we continue to expect price developments to remain subdued 
over the policy-relevant horizon. Recent data releases and survey information still suggest 
that economic activity over the remainder of this year is likely to remain weak, although the 
pace  of  contraction  is  clearly  slowing  down.  This  assessment  takes  into  account  adverse 
lagged  effects,  such  as  a  further  deterioration  in  labour  markets,  which  are  likely  to 
materialise  over  the  coming  months.  Looking  ahead  into  next  year,  after  a  phase  of 
stabilisation,  a  gradual  recovery  with  positive  quarterly  growth  rates  is  expected.  Available 
indicators of inflation expectations over the medium to longer term remain firmly anchored in 
line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over 
the  medium  term.  The  outcome  of  the  monetary  analysis  confirms  the  assessment  of  low 
inflationary pressure,  as  money  and  credit  expansion  continues  to  decelerate.  Against  this 
background, we expect the current episode of extremely low or negative inflation rates to be 
short-lived and price stability to be maintained over the medium term, thereby continuing to 
support the purchasing power of euro area households. 
Let me now explain our assessment in further detail, starting with the economic analysis. 
The  data  and  survey  information  that  have  become  available  since  our  meeting  on  2  July 
2009 have broadly confirmed our previous expectations. While uncertainty is still high, there 
are increasingly signs that the global recession is bottoming out. As regards the euro area, 
recent  surveys  suggest  that  the  pace  of  contraction  is  clearly  slowing  down.  However, 
economic activity over the remainder of this year is expected to remain weak. Looking ahead 
into next year, after a phase of stabilisation, a gradual recovery with positive quarterly growth 
rates is expected. The significant policy stimuli in all major economic areas should support 
growth globally, including in the euro area.  
In the view of the Governing Council, uncertainty remains high and we have to be prepared 
for ongoing volatility in incoming data. Overall, the risks to this outlook remain balanced. On 
the  upside,  there  may  be  stronger  than  anticipated  effects  stemming  from  the  extensive 
macroeconomic stimulus being provided and from other policy measures taken. Confidence 
may also improve more quickly than currently expected. On the downside, concerns remain 
relating to a stronger or more protracted negative feedback loop between the real economy 
and the turmoil in financial markets, renewed increases in oil and other commodity prices, 
the intensification of protectionist pressures, more unfavourable than expected labour market 
conditions  and,  lastly,  adverse  developments  in  the  world  economy  stemming  from  a 
disorderly correction of global imbalances.  
With regard to price developments, annual HICP inflation was, according to Eurostat’s flash 
estimate, -0.6 % in July, compared with -0.1% in June. This further decline in annual rates of 
BIS Review 96/2009 
 1
inflation was anticipated and reflects primarily base effects resulting from the peaks observed 
in global commodity prices a year ago.  
Looking ahead, owing to these base effects, annual inflation rates are projected to remain 
temporarily in negative territory, before turning positive again later this year. However, such 
short-term movements are not relevant from a monetary policy perspective. Consistent with 
available forecasts and projections, looking further ahead, inflation is expected to remain in 
positive territory, while price and cost developments are expected to remain subdued in the 
wake of ongoing sluggish demand in the euro area and elsewhere. In this respect, indicators 
of inflation expectations over the medium to longer term remain firmly anchored in line with 
the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of  keeping  inflation  rates  below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the 
medium term. 
Risks  to  the  outlook  for  inflation  are  broadly  balanced.  They  relate,  in  particular,  to  the 
outlook  for  economic  activity  and  to  higher  than  expected  commodity  prices.  Furthermore, 
increases  in  indirect  taxation  and  administered  prices  may  be  stronger  than  currently 
expected owing to the need for fiscal consolidation in the coming years. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, the latest data confirm the ongoing deceleration in broad 
money and credit growth. The annual growth rates of M3 and of loans to the private sector 
recorded  in  June  –  3.5%  and  1.5%  respectively  –  are  the  lowest  since  the  start  of  Stage 
Three of EMU. These developments support the assessment of a slower underlying pace of 
monetary expansion and low inflationary pressures over the medium term. 
The  declining  pace  of  monetary  expansion  since  the  last  quarter  of  2008  continues  to  be 
accompanied  by  volatility  in  the  short-term  developments  of  M3  and  its  components.  This 
reflects to a large extent the impact that absolute and relative changes in interest rates have 
had  on  the  allocation  of  funds  between  financial  investments  inside  and  outside  M3  and 
between the different deposit categories within M3. In this respect, the shift in allocation from 
short-term  time  deposits  to  overnight  deposits  within  M3  has  led  to  a  further  substantial 
strengthening of annual M1 growth in June. 
The flow of bank loans to the non-financial private sector remained subdued in June, albeit 
with  differences  across  borrowing  sectors.  The  flow  of  loans  to  non-financial  corporations 
turned substantially more negative owing to a sharp contraction in short-term lending. At the 
same time, the flow of loans to households was slightly more positive than last month. The 
ongoing  uncertainty  seems  to  have  dampened  borrowers’  demand  for  financing. However, 
according  to  the  latest  euro  area  bank  lending  survey,  lenders  tightened  their  credit 
standards to a significantly lesser extent. Given the challenges that lie ahead, banks should 
take appropriate measures to strengthen further their capital bases and, where necessary, 
take full advantage of government measures to support the financial sector, particularly as 
regards recapitalisation.  
To sum up, the information and analyses that have become available since our meeting on 2 
July 2009 confirm the view of the Governing Council that the current key ECB interest rates 
remain  appropriate.  As  anticipated,  annual  HICP  inflation  in  July  fell  further  into  negative 
territory,  reflecting  mainly  temporary  effects.  After  a  return  to  positive  inflation  rates  during 
the second half of the year, we continue to expect price developments to remain subdued 
over the policy-relevant horizon. Recent data releases and survey information still suggest 
that economic activity over the remainder of this year is likely to remain weak, although the 
pace  of  contraction  is  clearly  slowing  down.  This  assessment  takes  into  account  adverse 
lagged  effects,  such  as  a  further  deterioration  in  labour  markets,  which  are  likely  to 
materialise  over  the  coming  months.  Looking  ahead  into  next  year,  after  a  phase  of 
stabilisation,  a  gradual  recovery  with  positive  quarterly  growth  rates  is  expected.  Available 
indicators of inflation expectations over the medium to longer term remain firmly anchored in 
line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over 
the medium term. A cross-check of the outcome of the economic analysis with that of the 
monetary analysis confirms the assessment of low inflationary pressure, as money and credit 
2 
 BIS Review 96/2009
expansion continues to decelerate. Against this background, we expect the current episode 
of  extremely  low  or  negative  inflation  rates  to  be  short-lived  and  price  stability  to  be 
maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby  continuing  to  support  the  purchasing  power  of 
euro area households. 
As  the  transmission  of  monetary  policy  works  with  lags,  our  policy  action  should 
progressively  feed  through  to  the  economy  in  full.  Hence,  with  all  the  measures  taken, 
including  our  covered  bond  purchases,  monetary  policy  will  provide  ongoing  support  for 
households  and  corporations.  Once  the  macroeconomic  environment  improves,  the 
Governing Council will take care that the measures taken are quickly unwound and that the 
ample liquidity provided is absorbed. Hence, any threat to price stability over the medium to 
longer  term  will  be  effectively  countered  in  a  timely  fashion.  The  Governing  Council  will 
continue to ensure a firm anchoring of medium-term inflation expectations. Such anchoring is 
indispensable to supporting sustainable growth and employment and contributes to financial 
stability.  Accordingly,  we  will  continue  to  monitor  very  closely  all  developments  over  the 
period ahead.  
Regarding fiscal policy, we welcome the position of the Eurogroup that, given the current 
economic outlook and projected public deficit and debt developments, further fiscal stimulus 
is not warranted. Budget plans for 2010, which are currently being finalised in a number of 
countries,  and  medium-term  consolidation  strategies  must  reflect  a  commitment  to  a  swift 
return to sound and sustainable public finances. Accordingly, governments should prepare 
and  communicate  ambitious  and  realistic  fiscal  exit  and  consolidation  strategies  within  the 
framework of the Stability and Growth Pact. The structural adjustment process should start, 
in  any  case,  not  later  than  the  economic  recovery  and  in  2011  the  consolidation  efforts 
should  be  stepped  up.  Structural  consolidation  efforts  will  need  to  exceed  significantly  the 
benchmark of 0.5% of GDP per annum set in the Stability and Growth Pact. In countries with 
high deficits and/or debt ratios the annual structural adjustment should reach at least 1% of 
GDP. Given the risks of lower potential economic growth in the euro area for a prolonged 
period  of  time,  governments  should  adjust  public  expenditures  appropriately  to  the  new 
macroeconomic conditions and reverse the sharp rises in public expenditure ratios as soon 
as possible. This is necessary also to prepare budgets for future ageing-induced expenditure 
burdens. 
Turning to structural policies, there is a need to intensify structural reform efforts in order to 
support sustainable growth in the euro area. Appropriate wage-setting and sufficient flexibility 
to get the unemployed back into work are crucial to prevent the crisis from having a lasting 
negative impact on labour markets. It is therefore essential to create appropriate incentives 
to work. At the same time, policies to speed up restructuring and investment, in line with the 
principle  of  an  open  market  economy  and  free  competition,  will  create  the  business 
opportunities and productivity gains needed to spark a sustained recovery. 
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
BIS Review 96/2009 
 3
