Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Going forward – regulation and supervision after 
the financial turmoil 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the 4th International Conference of Financial Regulation and Supervision “After the 
Big  Bang:  Reshaping  Central  Banking,  Regulation  and  Supervision”,  Bocconi  University, 
Milan, 19 June 2009. 
 Introduction1
Today, the European Council is expected to endorse significant changes to the institutional 
set-up for financial supervision and regulation in the European Union. Undoubtedly these are 
important reforms, particularly – but not only – against the background of the financial crisis 
that started in August 2007. While the ECB has an interest in all these reforms, in particular 
on  the  macro-prudential  side,  namely  the  establishment  of  the  European  Systemic  Risk 
Board (ESRB). 
Macro-prudential supervision has its origin in the phenomenon of systemic risk. A particularly 
illuminating account of the nature of and the need for a macro-prudential supervisory policy 
was  provided  in  2000  by  Andrew  Crockett,  then  the  General  Manager  of  the  Bank  for 
International  Settlements  and  Chairman  of  the  Financial  Stability  Forum.2  Crockett  argued 
that we should “consolidate a shift in perspective that is already taking place, complementing 
the micro-prudential perspective with increased awareness of, and attention to, the macro-
prudential  facet”.  He  defined  the  objective  of  macro-prudential  supervision  as  limiting  the 
likelihood  of  the  failure,  and  corresponding  costs,  of  significant  portions  of  the  financial 
system (responding to systemic risk). In contrast, the micro-prudential objective can be seen 
as limiting the likelihood of failure of individual institutions (responding to idiosyncratic risk).  
From today’s perspective the distinction seems as relevant as one decade ago. However, the 
experience of the present crisis and the history of past crises, as well as the transformations 
of modern financial systems, require us to go further. We should ask ourselves, for example, 
what is the scope of macro-prudential supervision. I would distinguish two dimensions. The 
first one is the analysis and monitoring of risk. The second one is the containment of the risks 
that have been identified, which requires specific instruments. This raises the question of the 
institutional set-up for conducting macro-prudential supervision. 
Monitoring and analysing risk 
1.  
The literature suggests three main considerations on the way in which systemic risks should 
be monitored and analysed.3 A first one is that macro-prudential analysis needs to capture all 
components  of  financial  systems  and  how  they  interact.  This  includes  all  intermediaries, 
markets and infrastructures underpinning them. In this respect, it is important to consider that 
at present some of these components, such as hedge funds, private equity firms or over-the-
                                                 
1  
I  would  like  to  thank  Philip  Hartman,  Fabio  Recine  and  Lorenzo  Cappiello  for  their  contributions  and 
comments. The views expressed represent only those of the author. 
2   See “Marrying the micro- and macro-prudential dimensions of financial stability”, remarks before the Eleventh 
International Conference of Banking Supervisors, held in Basel on 20-21 September 2000. 
3   See  for  example  De  Bandt  and  Hartmann  (2000),  “Systemic  risk:  A  survey”,  ECB  Working  Paper  No.  35, 
November; De Bandt, Hartmann and Peydro-Alcalde, “Systemic risk: An update”, forthcoming in Berger et al. 
(eds.), Oxford Handbook of Banking, and as an ECB  working paper; as well as the biennial ECB Financial 
Stability Reviews. 
BIS Review 77/2009 
 1
counter  (OTC)  financial  markets,  are  not  subject  to  micro-prudential  supervision.  But  they 
need  to  be  part  of  macro-prudential  analysis  and  risk  assessments,  as  they  influence  the 
overall  behaviour  of  the  financial  system.  To  gain  a  truly  “systemic”  perspective  on  the 
financial  system,  no  material  element  should  be  left  out.  This  includes,  notably,  large  and 
complex financial institutions.  
The  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  in  September  2008  and  its  consequences  for  the  world 
financial  system  could  not  illustrate  better  how  important  the  individual  viability  and  the 
multiple  connections  to  other  intermediaries  and  markets  of  such  large  and  complex 
institutions are for systemic stability and therefore for macro-prudential risk assessments and 
policies.4 At the same time, it illustrates well how micro-prudential and macro-prudential risk 
assessments and policies interact and should not operate in isolation from each other.5
A  second  consideration  is  that  macro-prudential  risk  assessment  needs  to  cover  the 
interactions between the financial system and the economy at large. Many systemic banking 
crises in history have been caused by macroeconomic downturns.6 The recent crisis shows 
the  magnitude  of  adverse  feedback  effects  between  financial  stability  and  real  economic 
developments.7  Macro-prudential  supervision  needs  to  fully  incorporate  the  two-sided 
interactions between financial and real sectors and the mutually reinforcing spirals between 
financial instability and real performance. This includes, but should in no way be limited to, 
the  assessment  of  the  pro-cyclical  behaviour  of  financial  systems  and  the  potential 
reinforcing elements embedded in the regulatory systems.8 The framework for analysing the 
interactions between the real and financial dimensions requires a substantial modification of 
the traditional tools for assessing financial stability. A lot of work is required in this respect.9
A  third  element  to  be  taken  into  account  is  that  financial  markets  are  not  static  and  are 
continuously evolving as a result of innovation and international integration. It is probably not 
a coincidence that the first published official document that I could find that used the term 
“macro-prudential  policy”  was  actually  a  report  dedicated  to  innovation  in  international 
banking.10 Several financial crises in history have been a result of financial liberalisations or 
innovations that were neither sufficiently understood nor managed. For example, one of the 
origins  of  the  present  crisis  is  to  be  found  in  the  use  of  certain  securitisation  techniques, 
which  were  implemented  in  opaque  ways.11  Again,  determining  the  extent  to  which  a  fully 
                                                 
4   For  a  much  more  wide-ranging  interpretation  of  the  financial  system  as  a  complex  network  with  influential 
nodes  and  analogies  to  other  sciences,  like  biology,  computer  science  and  medicine,  see  Haldane  (2009), 
“Rethinking the financial network”, speech delivered at the Financial Student Association, Amsterdam, April. 
5   See  for  example  the  European  Commission  communication  on  “European  financial  supervision”  (27  May 
2009). 
6   See for example Gorton (1988), “Banking panics and business cycles”, Oxford Economic Papers, 40, pp. 751-
781,  and  Demirgüç-Kunt  and  Detragiache  (1998),  “The  determinants  of  banking  crises  in  developing  and 
developed countries”, IMF Staff Papers, 45, pp. 81-109. 
7   See for  example the ECB’s June  2009 Financial Stability  Review  for  a discussion of the adverse feedback 
effects from the ongoing global downturn to financial stability risks. 
8   See for example Borio, Furfine and Lowe (2001), “Procyclicality of the financial system and financial stability: 
Issues and policy options”, BIS Papers, 1, pp. 1-57, Kashyap and Stein (2004), “Cyclical implications of Basel 
II  capital  standards”,  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  Chicago,  Economic  Perspectives,  1st  quarter,  pp.  18-31,  or 
Rajan (2006), “Has finance made the world riskier?”, European Financial Management, 12, pp. 499-533. 
9   One example is the recently established new project and working group on transmission channels between 
the real and financial sector by the Research Task Force of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision. 
10   See the so-called Cross Report on “Recent innovations in international banking” prepared by a study group of 
the  central  banks  of  the  Group  of  Ten  countries  (April  1986).  It  featured  also  a  full  chapter  on  “Global 
integration of financial markets”. 
11   See for example Ashcraft and Schuermann (2008), “Understanding the securitisation of subprime mortgage 
credit”, Foundations and Trends in Finance, 2(3), pp. 191-309, in particular the chart on “The seven “deadly” 
frictions of securitisation”. 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2009
developed  macro-prudential  function  would  have  to  take  into  account  innovations  shaping 
instruments,  institutions  and  processes  in  the  financial  system  would  go  beyond  regular 
financial stability analysis. 
On the basis of the above considerations, a key output of macro-prudential analysis would 
ideally be a periodical graduated ex ante risk assessment measuring the amount of risk in 
the overall financial system and its implications for the economy at large. This assessment 
would  also  estimate  the  overall  degree  of  instability  that  could  result  if  certain  unexpected 
adverse events were to materialise, including scenarios of extreme shocks, ultimately also 
assessing  the  resilience  of  the  financial  system  and  of  the  economy  in  general.  Whereas 
macro-prudential (and micro-prudential) supervision is mainly concerned with extreme events 
such as financial crises (“tail risks”), the forward-looking approach required to prevent those 
extremes implies that careful assessments also be made in more tranquil times, establishing 
how far the system is from a crisis and which risks – if they were to materialise – could bring 
it closer to a crisis. 
What  is  needed  to  conduct  such  analysis  and  monitoring?  The  starting  condition  for 
implementing a comprehensive macro-prudential function is an adequate information basis. 
The  first  part  of  the  information  basis  is  a  good  system  of  continuous  market  intelligence, 
which  gives  a  hands-on  picture  of  current  market  developments  and  expectations  through 
direct contacts. The second part consists of the regular collection of macro-prudential data 
and statistics, such as those relating to the macroeconomic environment, financial markets 
and  related  infrastructures,  payment  and  settlement  systems,  regulated  and  unregulated 
intermediaries,  non-financial  corporations  and  households,  as  well  as  to  the  relationships 
between  the  main  economic  and  financial  sectors.  The  third  part  consists  of  the  regular 
collection  of  firm-level  information  and  data,  in  particular  for  large  and  complex  financial 
institutions. This relates to specific items of information regarding on- and off-balance-sheet 
items,  with  appropriate  breakdowns  of  exposures  related  to  the  asset  and  liability  sides 
(geographical, sectoral, currency, etc.), including the identification of counterparties. For the 
identification of interlinkages between major intermediaries and the assessment of contagion 
risks,  an  international  “risk  map”  –  as  proposed  for  example  in  the  de  Larosière  Report  – 
would  be  particularly  helpful.12  Lastly,  for  the  large  and  complex  groups,  micro-prudential 
information about liquidity and risk management models would be required.  
The second instrument is a suite of analytical tools and models and a staff familiar with them. 
Although  formal  models  have  their  limitations,  they  do  help  structure  the  qualitative  and 
quantitative information that is collected for the regular risk assessments. Existing research 
offers eight broad groups of approaches and models: financial stability indicators, contagion 
and  spillover  models,  early  warning  signal  models,  stress  testing  models,  macro-financial 
risk-based flow-of-funds accounts models, macro-econometric forecasting models, calibrated 
general equilibrium financial stability models and other models (including models of firm and 
household  vulnerabilities).  These  models  have  their  pros  and  cons,  but  some  are  more 
promising or easier to implement than others. Each serves different purposes, but there are 
also  overlaps.  Since  financial stability  analysis in  general  and  macro-prudential  analysis  in 
particular is much less understood than other policy areas, it is advisable to use a multiplicity 
of approaches. How many of the overall list can be used and how much will depend on the 
resources available to develop and maintain them. But the investment in the analytical toolkit 
is  likely  to  be  significant.  I  expect  most  authorities  having  to  develop  a  macro-prudential 
supervisory function to extend or reallocate resources in order to meet these requirements.  
                                                 
12   “High-level Group on Financial Supervision in Europe”, report, Brussels, 25 February 2009. 
BIS Review 77/2009 
 3
Containing risks 
2.  
If risks to systemic stability have been identified, the next step is to contain them. I would 
consider  three  ways  to  achieve  this.  A  first  option  is  to  communicate  the  risks  and  the 
sources  of  these  risks  to  financial  market  participants,  with  a  view  to  alerting  them  and 
inducing  them  to  adjust  their  behaviour.  A  second  option  is  to  strengthen  supervisory 
oversight  over  financial  institutions  and  markets,  with  a  view  to  avoiding  excessive  risk-
taking.  The  third  option  is  to  achieve  the  same  objective  through  the  use  of  regulatory 
powers.  The  three  steps  can  be  summarised  as  follows:  (i)  alerting,  (ii)  supervising  more 
closely and (iii) regulating. The choice of which instrument to use may vary, depending on 
the severity of the risk and on the circumstances.  
A  major  challenge  for  macro-prudential  supervision  relates  to  the  decision-making  system 
capable of accommodating these three options. Let me provide some illustrations. First of all, 
addressing certain macro risks may require the adoption of regulatory measures across the 
board,  applying  in  particular  to  financial  institutions  and  markets.  This  may  blur  the 
responsibility between macro- and micro-prudential supervision. Alternatively, one can follow 
the suggestion by Crockett I mentioned above and distinguish the regulatory and supervisory 
actions between those conducted at the level of individual institutions and those affecting the 
whole  markets.  The  supervisory  and  regulatory  measures  aiming  at  containing  aggregate 
risk and externalities would be part of the macro-prudential toolkit, whereas measures aiming 
at the stability of individual institutions would be part of micro-prudential policy. 
Following this objective-oriented approach, the measures aimed at reducing pro-cyclicality of 
financial systems would be part of macro-prudential policy. Some concrete ideas are being 
discussed  on  how  to  reduce  pro-cyclicality,  such  as  adjusting  capital  requirements  to  the 
business cycle (making them less stringent in bad times and more stringent in good times), 
adding maximum leverage ratios or introducing dynamic provisioning rules (where reserves 
have to be accumulated in good times and are drawn down in bad times).13 Measures aimed 
at  dampening  pro-cyclicality  may  also  affect  compensation  structures,  transparency  and 
accounting  rules,  internal  governance  (e.g.  related  to  the  risk  management  function),  the 
design of certain financial instruments, and maturity mismatches.14  
The macro-prudential toolkit would also include measures to reduce contagion and to limit 
other transmission channels of financial instability. Much progress has been made in the last 
two decades in the area of payment and settlement systems, but more needs to be done, as 
suggested by the recent debate on central clearing counterparties for OTC derivatives. New 
challenges  have  emerged  as  a  result  of  the  significant  increase  in  wholesale  funding  of 
financial intermediaries, the emergence of new institutions (some of them highly leveraged 
and to which banks are very much exposed) and the increasing transfer of risks previously 
concentrated in the banking sector to other agents, such as insurance companies. 
A  comprehensive  framework  for  policy  analysis  is  still  lacking.  A  number  of  proposals  for 
specific macro-prudential measures have been put forward, following the objective-oriented 
approach.15  But  we  need  a  broad  framework  for  policy  analysis  and  implementation.  We 
have been working on this at the ECB for some time. 
                                                 
13   On dynamic provisioning, see Fernandez de Lis, Martinez Pages and Saurina (2000), “Credit growth, problem 
loans and credit risk provisioning in Spain”, Banco de España Working Paper No. 0018, Madrid, and Jimenez 
and  Saurina  (2006),  “Credit  cycles,  credit  risk  and  prudential  regulation”,  International  Journal  of  Central 
Banking, 3(2), pp. 65-98. 
14   Most or all of them have already been identified in the Draghi Report prepared by the Financial Stability Forum 
(2008), “Enhancing market and institutional resilience”, Basel, 7 April, as the first regulatory and supervisory 
response to the experiences of the present financial crisis. 
15   See in particular Brunnermeier et al. (2009), “The fundamental principles of financial regulation”, preliminary 
conference  draft  of  the  11th  Geneva  Report  on  the  World  Economy,  January,  who  propose  to  adjust  bank 
4 
 BIS Review 77/2009
To  be  sure,  many  of  the  risks  that  have  materialised  during  the  recent  crisis  had  been 
signalled earlier on, in the public communications by relevant policy authorities, such as the 
ECB (in its  Financial Stability Review and in speeches by Executive Board members), the 
Bank for International Settlements (in its Quarterly Review of Financial Market Developments 
and Annual Report), the Bank of England or the International Monetary Fund (in its Global 
Financial  Stability  Report).16  With  hindsight  we  can  perhaps  acknowledge  that  these 
communications were not effective in changing the behaviour of financial market participants, 
nor of the supervisory authorities. Furthermore, there has been an insufficient understanding 
of  the  force  with  which  the  different  risk  factors  have  materialised  and  combined.  For 
example, had there been a much more developed monitoring system, covering also the non-
regulated  financial  sectors  and  the  so-called  shadow  banking  system,  as  well  as  a  more 
granular and frequent picture of the main exposures of and among the large and complex 
financial institutions, a better insight could have been gained into the scope for the crisis to 
erupt and to spread across financial systems. Had there been a more integrated assessment 
of the impact of financial innovation, the risks developing in credit risk transfer markets would 
have  been  better  understood  and  monitored.  However,  the  flow  of  information  from  the 
micro-prudential supervisors was insufficient to undertake such an assessment.  
The institutional framework 
3.  
Having set out the main objectives and tools, I would now like to address the issue of the 
institutional  framework  which  should  support  the  implementation  of  macro-prudential 
supervision. Such a framework inevitably involves two main actors: the central banks and the 
authority in charge of regulating and supervising financial institutions and markets. The latter 
has the information on individual participants and market developments, and is responsible 
for  the  stability  of  individual  institutions,  while  the  former  has  the  analytical  capabilities  for 
assessing  macroeconomic  risk  and  global  financial  market  developments.  A  properly 
functioning system  requires  a  full flow  of  information:  from  the  supervisory  authority  to  the 
central bank, with a view to providing all the relevant information to monitor and analyse risk 
and, vice versa, from the central bank to the micro-prudential supervisor in order to provide 
the result of the risk analysis and ensure that appropriate measures are implemented. Also 
important are a clear allocation of responsibilities and proper accountability to ensure that the 
right incentives are in place for the achievement of results in a cooperative manner rather 
than inter-institutional fighting, which is a recipe for disaster.  
To consider the options available let me refer for simplicity the Turner Review as a basis for 
the  analysis.17  In  extreme  synthesis,  the  Turner  Review  attributes  to  the  central  bank  the 
main  responsibility  for  conducting  the  risk  analysis,  but  when  it  comes  to  the  policy 
implications, three models are considered: 
• 
In Model 1, the central bank identifies systemic risks and makes recommendations to 
the  authority  in  charge  of  micro-prudential  supervision,  which  sets  out  the  main 
actions to be taken to address these risks. 
                                                                                                                                                      
capital ratios for leverage, maturity mismatches and contagion risk, or Kashyap, Rajan and Stein, “Rethinking 
capital regulation”, for the 2008 Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas Jackson Hole Symposium, who propose a 
capital insurance mechanism. 
16   Nier  (2009),  “Financial  stability  frameworks  and  the  role  of  central  banks:  Lessons  from  the  crisis”,  IMF 
Working Paper WP/09/70, April, goes even further by stating that: “With hindsight, there has been a collective 
failure to address a key objective—mitigation of systemic risk” and “an expanded role of central banks that 
goes  beyond  the  tools  already  typically  at  their  disposal  may  enhance  the  overall  effectiveness  of  financial 
regulation, allowing synergies to be exploited between existing and new regulatory tools to mitigate systemic 
risk”. 
17   “The Turner Review: A regulatory response to the global banking crisis”, March 2009 (www.fsa.gov.uk). 
BIS Review 77/2009 
 5
  In Model 2, the central bank is not only in charge of identifying risks, but is also able 
to  take  specific  macro-prudential  measures  or  to  require  the  authority  in  charge  of 
micro-prudential supervision to do so. 
In Model 3, a joint committee, composed of representatives of the central bank and 
the  supervisory  authority,  makes  the  final  decision  as  to  the  appropriate  policy 
response.  
In my view, the third model is a third best, because it risks blurring responsibilities and does 
not  ensure  proper  accountability  of  the  central  bank  and  the  micro  supervisor.  Within  the 
proposed committee, no public disagreements between the central bank and the supervisor 
could arise, as it would hurt the credibility of the process. This means that de facto the micro 
supervisor  has  a  veto  right  on  the  central  bank.  If  instead  the  two  components  of  the 
committee are allowed to disagree in public, Model 3 would become quite similar to Model 1, 
where  the  differences  are  made  public  and  the  supervisor  would  have  to  explain  why  it 
disagrees  with  the  central  bank  and  does  not  take  the  suggested  action.  Another 
disadvantage of Model 3 emerges when the supervisory authority is not independent of the 
political authority. I will not elaborate on the need for such independence, but in my view the 
recent  crisis,  if  anything,  has  strongly  confirmed  it.  Looking  around  Europe,  it  would  be 
interesting to verify the extent to which during the recent crisis bank solvency problems have 
emerged mainly in countries where the supervisory authority is outside the central bank and 
where the independence of the former (also in financial and institutional terms) is less well 
protected  than  that  of  the  latter.  In  these  countries,  Model  3  would  create  a  channel  to 
influence the central bank. Furthermore, in the context of the European Union Model 3 would 
be particularly difficult to implement, as it would require agreement between a multiplicity of 
national  authorities,  unless  we  get  to  a  situation  in  which  the  central  banks  and  the 
supervisory  authorities  are  represented  by  one  European-wide  institution.  While  in  the 
current system the central banks can be represented by the ECB, the supervisors do not yet 
have a similar system. 
Models 1 and 2 ensure a clearer allocation of responsibilities, either to the central bank or to 
the supervisory authority. In assessing the two models, a key issue to consider concerns the 
conflict of interests, in particular within the central bank and within the supervisory authority, 
respectively.  
Let’s  consider  first  the  conflicts  of  interest  within  the  central  bank,  which  would  emerge  in 
particular  in  Model  2,  between  the  objective  of  price  stability  and  the  objective  of  macro-
financial stability.  A  conflict  would  arise  if  the central  bank would  have  to  address  the  two 
objectives with only one instrument, i.e. the interest rate. The central bank could be pushed 
to use the interest rate not only to achieve price stability but also to counter macro systemic 
risks.  For  instance,  it  could  have  to  increase  interest  rates  prematurely,  in  order  to  stop  a 
financial  bubble  from  developing,  while  the  underlying  economic  developments  do  not 
require  it.  The  interest  rate  is  not  necessarily  the  most  efficient  way  to  prevent  or  to  prick 
bubbles. The conflict of interest would vanish if the central bank had two distinct instruments 
to address the two objectives, with a clear assignment. The interest rate would be assigned 
to  achieving  price  stability,  while  macro-prudential  measures  would  be  aimed  at  macro-
financial stability. During the current crisis, the ECB has shown that such a separation can be 
achieved.  On  the  one  hand  the  interest  rate  has  been  used  with  a  view  to  achieve  price 
stability,  while,  on  the  one  hand,  liquidity-injecting  measures  have  aimed  at  stabilising  the 
money market. Each measure has been adopted and justified to the public in such a way as 
to keep separate the two objectives. Overall, the experience suggests that the interest rate 
and macro-prudential instruments are rather complementary and do not give rise to conflicts 
of interest. 
Let’s consider now the potential conflicts of interest for the supervisory authority, between the 
macro-  and  micro-prudential  objectives.  Supervisory  authorities  might  have  to  make  trade-
offs  to  achieve  both.  For  instance,  it  would  be  more  difficult  for  a  supervisor  to  decide  to 
6 
 BIS Review 77/2009
the 
incentive 
to  safeguard 
justification.  Ultimately, 
tighten  capital  requirements  and  liquidity  ratios  in  a  booming  economy  if  some  banks  are 
individually experiencing difficulties. There might be an incentive to address these difficulties 
with general, rather than specific, measures. 
In  the  European  framework,  given  that  the  micro-supervisory  authority  is  exerted  at  the 
national level, there is a problem of uniformity of action. In Model 1, in which the central bank 
can only make recommendations, it is not clear how the various national authorities would 
react and implement it. There could be a situation in which the implementation differs across 
countries,  without  clear 
the 
competitiveness of the national systems would induce the respective authorities to adopt a 
minimalist approach, which would be to the detriment of overall stability. 
On the other hand, national economies may develop in different ways, even in the euro area, 
and  the  macro  risks  arising  in  some  countries  may  not  be  as  relevant  for  others.  For 
example, over the last ten years some euro area countries have experienced fast growth of 
domestic credit and rising asset prices, while in others financial dynamics have been more 
subdued. However, when looking at the risks taken by the banking system across countries, 
they have emerged both in fast- and slow-growing countries. This implies that in Model 2 the 
central bank should be able to adopt measures that take adequately into account different 
macroeconomic developments across countries. 
Overall, there seems to be greater conflicts of interest between the objectives of macro and 
micro prudential supervision than between price stability and macro-prudential supervision. 
This is the reason why I tend to consider that Model 2, in which the central bank is given two 
instruments in order to achieve two distinct objectives is more appropriate, especially within 
the European framework, and even more so for the euro area. This seems to be the model 
that  will  be  implemented  in  the  US.  The  US  administration  has  proposed  to  give  the  Fed 
powers to address the build up of risks that threaten the financial system as a whole, with a 
focus  on  core  institutions  and  markets.  The  creation  of  a  Council  of  regulators  has  been 
proposed, but the Fed will not need to seek the council’s approval to act against systemic 
risks. 
The de Larosière Report opted instead for Model 1. It suggests the creation of a European 
Systemic  Risk  Council  (ESRC),  embedded  in  the  ECB,  corresponding  to  the  General 
Council.  The  General  Council  of  the  ECB  is  composed  of  the  governors  of  the  national 
central  banks  of  the  27  EU  Member  States,  plus  the  President  and  Vice-President  of  the 
ECB. The Council would be open to a series of observers, like the Commission, the three 
authorities being created from the three Lamfalussy Committees (for banking, markets and 
insurance),  and 
issue 
recommendations aimed at identifying and correcting systemic vulnerabilities, while national 
supervisors  would  be  responsible  for  the  implementation.  As  I  mentioned  previously,  this 
model raises the issue of uniformity of treatment across the single market. The experience 
over the last years has shown that national authorities tend to use at their own discretion the 
room for manoeuvre that is available in the transposition of European legislation. This would 
also be the case for the recommendations of the ESRC. Finally, the de Larosière Report did 
not foresee any separate arrangements for the euro area. We will thus be in the very peculiar 
situation in which those countries that do not participate in the euro will have two levels of 
discussion and decision on systemic risk, one at the EU level and one at the national level, 
while the euro area countries will have only the EU level. Unless, of course, the ECB decides 
to  issue  itself  recommendations  for  the  euro  area.  One  key  proposal  contained  in  the  de 
Larosière Report is the obligation for the national micro-prudential supervisors to provide all 
the  necessary  information  to  the  ECB  in  order  to  support  the  latter’s  risk  analysis  for  the 
ESRC. 
From  the  de  Larosière  Report  to  the  European  Council  Conclusions  that  will  be  adopted 
today, there has been a long discussion between the Member States, based on a proposal 
by the Commission. The main contents of the proposal have been maintained. The European 
the  27  national  supervisors.  The  ESRC  will  be  able 
to 
BIS Review 77/2009 
 7
Systemic Risk Board (rather than Council) has the powers to make recommendations but not 
to  implement  policies  directly.  It  will  be  supported  analytically  and  logistically  by  the  ECB. 
The  Commission  will  present  legislative  proposals  this  autumn  that  will  further  specify  the 
new  institutional  arrangements.  Indeed,  further  work  is  needed  to  elaborate  in  detail  the 
institutional framework of the ESRB, as well as of the new European authorities for micro-
prudential supervision. 
Conclusions 
The  recent  crisis  has  shown  the  importance  of  macro-prudential  supervision  in  promoting 
financial stability. A lot of work needs to be done to equip the competent institutions with the 
analytical instruments to assess and monitor systemic risk and with the toolkit necessary to 
contain such risks. 
Some  concern  may  arise  on  whether  the  decision-making  process,  in  particular  within 
Europe and even more so for the euro area, which is expected to be set up over the next few 
months will be effective in the context of the single financial market, also in comparison to the 
reforms which have been put forward in the US. Implementation will be key. Indeed, as time 
goes by, and financial markets show some signs of stabilisation, there is a risk that the sense 
of urgency for reform fades away and nationalistic tendencies and institutional jealousies re-
emerge. The forces pushing towards maintaining the status quo are gaining strength. If these 
forces  are  not  firmly  counteracted,  this  crisis  could  turn  out  to  have  been  a  wasted 
opportunity. And the next crisis could move closer. 
8 
 BIS Review 77/2009
