Jean-Pierre Roth: Recent economic and financial developments in 
Switzerland 
Introductory remarks by Mr Jean-Pierre Roth, Chairman of the Governing Board of the Swiss 
National Bank, at the half yearly media news conference, Berne, 18 June 2009. 
 Since the beginning of the financial crisis in August 2007, our monetary policy has passed 
through three distinct stages.  
In the first stage, as the interbank market gradually dried up, we sought to protect the Swiss 
economy from a deterioration in conditions on the credit market. From the start of the crisis, 
we  countered  the  forces  pushing  the  level  of  the  three-month  Libor  up  by  undertaking 
appropriate reductions in the repo rate. Between September 2007 and September 2008, we 
were  able  to  stabilise  the  Libor  at  2.75%.  Thus  we  protected  our  economy  from  a  rise  in 
interest rates resulting from the increase in risk premia on the money market. Since we were 
confident that the economic downturn would have a moderating effect on prices, we refrained 
from  adopting  a  more  restrictive  monetary  policy,  despite  the  fact  that  soaring  oil  prices 
caused inflation to rise and risked destabilising inflation expectations.  
The second stage began in autumn 2008 with the emergence of the first indications of a swift 
downturn in the economy and the sharp deterioration in the financial crisis after the collapse 
of  Lehman  Brothers  investment  bank.  We  rapidly  relaxed  our  monetary  policy  by  bringing 
down our Libor target by 225 basis points to a level of about 0.5% within three months. At the 
same time, we had been charged with stabilising the financial sector, committing ourselves to 
take over a large portfolio of illiquid UBS assets. In addition, we concluded euro versus Swiss 
franc swap arrangements with the European Central Bank and the central banks of Poland 
and Hungary, to ease refinancing of banks that had granted mortgage loans in Swiss francs 
in  these  two  countries.  These  swaps  made  it  possible  to  counteract  the  rise  in  the  Libor 
generated by an additional demand for Swiss francs outside our normal field of operation.  
The  third  stage  began  in  March  2009.  By  then,  price  stability  was  threatened,  not  by  the 
temporary inflationary escalation of 2008, but quite the opposite – the risk of a fall in prices 
over  the  coming  three  years.  Since,  by  that  time,  our  room  for  manoeuvre  in  the  area  of 
interest rates was limited, we decided to turn to unconventional instruments in order to bring 
about a further relaxation in monetary conditions.  
How has the economic and financial situation developed since our assessment in March?  
Global economic outlook 
Global  economic  activity  declined  more  sharply  than  expected  in  the  first  quarter  of  2009, 
especially  in  Europe  and  Japan.  However,  recent  financial  and  macroeconomic  indicators 
have shown a few encouraging signs. Stock exchange indices have started to edge up. Oil 
prices,  which  had  been  falling  since  July  2008,  have  been  rising  again  since  March.  Risk 
premia in the money and capital markets have declined. In addition, the indices of business 
activity and household confidence has clearly turned upward again, even if they remain at 
historically low levels. The combined effect of all these developments leads us to modify our 
risk assessment but does not substantially affect our scenario for the global economy. We 
still believe that positive growth could set in within the US in the second half of the year and 
in Europe at the beginning of next year. We continue to expect a modest global recovery, so 
that the considerable under-utilisation of production capacities will not be eliminated in the 
next few quarters. Consequently, unemployment is likely to increase further in the developed 
countries as a whole.  
BIS Review 77/2009 
 1
Swiss economic outlook 
As expected, the Swiss economic situation continued to deteriorate in the first months of the 
year. In the first quarter, GDP contracted by 3.2% in annualised terms. However, this figure 
obscures  a  much  sharper  drop  in  final  demand.  As  in  the  preceding  quarter,  part  of 
production  was,  in  effect,  absorbed  by  an  increase  in  stocks.  External  demand  again 
plummeted and the level of capacity utilisation fell substantially in the manufacturing sector. 
Final  domestic  demand  by  private  entities  stagnated,  and  is  most  likely  to  weaken  in  the 
months  ahead,  since  companies  will  reduce  their  equipment  investment  and  household 
expenditure  will  be  checked  by  growing  uncertainty  in  the  labour  market.  The  number  of 
individuals affected by short-time working was rising fast at the beginning of the year, and 
unemployment is increasing at a regular pace. This trend is likely to persist in the next few 
months since the leading indicators of labour demand are falling sharply. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  to  be  hoped  that  the  signs  of  improvement  observed  abroad  will  be 
gradually transmitted to the Swiss economy. From the second quarter, the decline in exports 
is likely to slow down. However, growth figures will probably remain negative over the next 
few quarters due to the weakening in domestic demand as well as the reduction of inventory 
levels.  For  2009  as  a  whole,  the  Swiss  National  Bank  (SNB)  continues  to  forecast  a 
reduction  in  GDP  of  between  2.5%  and  3%.  These  figures  are  still  relatively  moderate  by 
comparison with other countries since Switzerland benefits from the broad diversification and 
relative  flexibility  of  its  economy.  Even  so,  I  wish  to  stress  that  the  risks  attached  to  our 
forecast are clearly skewed to the downside. 
Changes in monetary and financial conditions  
How have monetary and financial conditions developed since our last assessment in March? 
Let us begin by looking at movements in interest rates on the money and capital markets as 
well as currency movements on the foreign exchange markets.  
On  the  money  market,  three-month  Libor  moved  down,  but  not  as  far  as  we  would  have 
liked. Its decline was checked by the level of risk premia, and it currently stands at around 40 
basis points. As announced in March, the objective is still “to gradually bring the Libor down 
to the lower end of the new target range, i.e. to approximately 0.25%.” Progress will be slow, 
since monetary policy can only influence risk premia indirectly, for instance, by promoting a 
climate of greater confidence in the banking sector.  
The capital market was affected by forces working in opposite directions. On the one hand, 
long-term rates of interest, which were affected by global developments, rose slightly. This 
increase reflects renewed optimism about an upturn in the economy, inflationary fears and 
increased  capital  requirements  on  the  part  of  the  public  sector.  On  the  other  hand,  risk 
premia  have  fallen  somewhat.  Nonetheless,  they  remain  elevated,  and  –  moreover  –  the 
reductions that have occurred have been varied, depending on the quality of borrowers, the 
maturity of the bond in question and the industry. 
The months from November 2007 to March 2009 saw a significant appreciation in the Swiss 
franc, by 10% in trade-weighted terms and by 11% against the euro. Although interest rates 
had been reduced between October and December last year, the strengthening of the Swiss 
franc  had  the  unwelcome  effect  of  tightening  monetary  conditions.  In  view  of  this 
development,  we  decided  at  our  March  assessment  to  prevent  further  appreciation  of  the 
Swiss  franc  against  the  euro  by  purchasing  foreign  currencies  on  the  foreign  exchange 
market. We achieved our objective. Since then the appreciation of the Swiss franc against 
the euro has ceased and its volatility with respect to the European currency has diminished 
considerably. 
Let us now proceed to an examination of monetary conditions in terms of volume – in other 
words,  in  terms  of  credit  and  monetary  aggregates.  Overall,  credit  is  still  growing  at  an 
annual  rate  of  more  than  3%.  However,  this  general  figure  is  composed  of  a  number  of 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2009
different movements in opposite directions. Mortgage lending has been increasing more and 
more rapidly since November. The growth rate rose from 3.6% in December to 4.2% in April, 
an advance related to the fall in the Libor. Other credits for all currencies, by contrast, began 
falling  in  April  (–0.8%),  as  might  be  expected  in  this  phase  of  the  economic  cycle.  Other 
credits granted in Swiss francs, however, continued growing at a rate of 1.2%, despite the 
fact  that  they  were  already  at  a  relatively  high  level.  Loans  granted  to  private  companies 
grew at a rate of 10.2% in the first quarter of 2009 as compared to the first quarter of 2008. 
Thus, we do not perceive the slightest indication of any credit crunch in Switzerland. Clearly, 
with the decline in the quality of certain borrowers during a recession, it is inevitable that a 
cyclical tightening of loan conditions will occur, but this cannot be termed a credit crunch.  
This statistical information is confirmed by the quarterly survey on lending conditions which 
the SNB has been conducting with the 20 most important Swiss banks since the beginning of 
2008.  The  survey  shows  that  a  third  of  the  banks  questioned  tightened  their  lending 
conditions slightly. This proportion is a little higher for loans granted to large companies than 
those granted to small and medium-sized companies. 
To  summarise,  the  situation  on  the  bank  lending  market  remains  relatively  relaxed  and 
clearly better than that in the US or in the euro area. Nonetheless, deterioration cannot be 
ruled out for the future.  
We  now  move  on  to  monetary  developments.  For  more  than  eighteen  months  now,  the 
demand  for  liquidity  on  the  interbank  market  has  increased  substantially  and  –  as  I 
mentioned before – the loss of trust among banks has brought the market to a standstill. The 
SNB  has  been  forced  to  take  the  place  of  the  lending  banks  and  provide  the  market  with 
generous  amounts  of  liquidity  through  a  major  expansion  of  its  repo  lending.  Moreover, 
additional  liquidity  has  been  created  by  purchasing  foreign  currency  on  exchange  rate 
markets and bonds issued by private sector borrowers, and by making Swiss franc funding 
available through swap arrangements with the European Central Bank and with the central 
banks of Poland and Hungary. Consequently, in May, the monetary base was up by 132% 
within the space of one year and now amounts to CHF 105 billion. The medium and long-
term inflationary threat of this large amount of liquidity is limited because we will be able to 
absorb  it  rapidly,  by  slowing  our  lending  or  by  issuing  SNB  Bills,  as  soon  as  confidence 
returns to the markets.  
However, liquidity accumulated by the banks could give rise to excessive creation of money 
through  a  massive  expansion  of  bank  credit.  In  May,  growth  in  the  narrow  monetary 
aggregates, which are very sensitive to changes in the rate of interest, exceeded 40% for M1 
and 30% for M2. In essence, this strong rate of growth reflects a preference on the part of 
the  general public  for  the  most  liquid  monetary  assets  over  time  deposits,  due  to  financial 
uncertainty and the fall in interest rates. The M3 aggregate, which is not affected by these 
substitution effects, continued growing at a more moderate rate of 4.2% in May, which shows 
that, at present, created central bank money is confined at the interbank level and has not 
been transmitted to the rest of the economy. Monetary policy needs to ensure that the level 
of the monetary aggregates does not become excessive over a longer period. The indicators 
we are monitoring show that this is not currently the case. 
Inflation and inflation risks 
Inflation  developed  in  line  with  our  expectations.  In  the  first  quarter  it  was  zero,  while  we 
were  anticipating  0.1%.  Overall,  our  forecasts  are  unchanged  for  the  current  year,  with 
inflation remaining negative for the rest of 2009. This, in essence, is attributable to the prices 
of  imported  goods,  which  are  down  by  comparison  to  their  high  levels  in  2008.  However, 
inflation  for  domestic  goods  and  services,  despite  weakening  during  the  year,  will  remain 
above 1%.  
BIS Review 77/2009 
 3
The outlook for the following years has been very slightly adjusted upwards. We shall return 
to this point in a few moments. 
Monetary policy decision 
At our monetary policy assessment in March, we identified a number of elements that led us 
to foresee negative inflation for 2009 and a risk of deflation for 2010 and 2011. In view of this 
threat, we relaxed monetary conditions by taking supplementary measures. We reduced the 
three-month Libor target range by 25 basis points to 0–0.75%, aiming for a rate of 0.25%. In 
order to achieve this, we granted longer-term repo credits and concluded foreign exchange 
swaps. To prevent the Swiss franc from further appreciating against the euro, we purchased 
foreign currency on the foreign exchange market; we also purchased bonds issued by private 
sector  issuers  to  foster  a  decline  in  capital  market  risk  premia.  All  in  all,  these  operations 
achieved  their  objective.  The  situation  is  gradually  normalising,  although  it  remains  very 
vulnerable.  The  risks  are  still  clearly  skewed  to  the  downside  and  are  major.  Given  these 
conditions, and in view of the inflation forecast, we consider that the time for a correction has 
not yet come, but that an additional relaxation of monetary conditions is not necessary either. 
We have thererfore today decided to continue our expansionary monetary policy, maintaining 
all of the measures we implemented on 12 March.  
Inflation forecast chart 
How has our inflation forecast been revised? The dashed red curve on the chart represents 
the new forecast. It covers the period from the second quarter of 2009 to the first quarter of 
2012, and maps the future development of inflation on the assumption that the three-month 
Libor remains unchanged at 0.25% over the forecasting period. For purposes of comparison, 
the dash-dotted green curve shows the inflation forecast of the March monetary assessment, 
which was also based on a three-month Libor of 0.25%.  
The  new  forecast  still  shows  negative  inflation  for  2009,  but  with  a  very  slight  adjustment 
upwards. This is explained by the recent upturn in prices of fossil fuels and of commodities in 
general. However, as an average for the year, inflation will remain negative, at an unchanged 
rate of -0.5%. In 2010, inflation is likely to return to slightly positive rates and could be a little 
above the figure forecast in March. This is due to the fact that although domestic inflation is 
falling it will still amount to around 1% at the end of the year while imported deflation recedes 
more rapidly. Finally, for 2011, the new forecast shows that inflation will accelerate a little at 
the end of the forecast horizon if the Libor remains at a level as low as that being aimed for 
at present. Thus, we see that the Libor cannot remain at 0.25% indefinitely. However, as our 
forecast also shows, it would not be advisable to increase the Libor now since the very weak 
inflation rates expected in 2010 (0.4%) and 2011 (0.3%) indicate that the deflation risk has 
not completely disappeared.   
We continue to use an inflation forecast to guide our decisions. In this way, we will ensure 
that the unconventional measures currently in force do not compromise medium and long-
term price stability.  
 
4 
 BIS Review 77/2009
 
 
 
Observed inflation June 2009 
 
2006
2007
2008
2009
2006
2007
2008
 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
1.23 1.33 1.22 0.46 0.09 0.52 0.63 1.68 2.50 2.70 3.00 1.60 0.00
Inflation
 
 
 
Inflation forecast of March 2009 with Libor at 0.25% and of June 2009 with Libor at 0.25% 
0.7
2.5
1.1
    2009
2010
2011
2012
2009
2010
2011
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
Forecast March 2009,
Libor at 0.25%
Forecast June 2009,
Libor at 0.25%
0.10 -0.86 -0.98 -0.43 0.09 0.19 0.13 0.01 -0.05 -0.04 0.10 0.25
  -0.74 -0.83 -0.28 0.55 0.50 0.40 0.26 0.16 0.17 0.31 0.46 0.65
      -0.5
0.1
-0.5
0.4
0.1
0.3
 BIS Review 77/2009 
 5
