Njuguna Ndung’u: Central Bank of Kenya’s new website – improving 
communication 
Speech  by  Prof  Njuguna  Ndung’u,  Governor  of  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya,  at  the  official 
launch of the Central Bank of Kenya’s new website, Nairobi, 1 September 2009. 
 Mr. Mutua Kilaka, Financial Secretary, Ministry of Finance; 
Dr. Geoffrey Mwau, Economic Secretary, Ministry of Finance; 
Dr. Bitange Ndemo, Permanent Secretary, Ministry of Information & Communication; 
Board Members here present; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
You  are  all  welcome  to  the  launch  of  the  new  CBK  website  today.  Let  me  at  this  early 
juncture thank our Chief Guest, Mr. Mutua Kilaka for accepting to launch our new website 
and  to  all  our  distinguished  guests  for  joining  the  Central  Bank  fraternity  in  marking  this 
occasion. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, it is important to note from the very onset that central banking has 
undergone  dramatic  changes  in  recent  decades  and  many  central  banks  now  post  and 
communicate their policies and forecasts in their websites. Conventional wisdom in central 
banking previously held that monetary policymakers should say as little as possible and say 
it  cryptically.  In  recent  years,  the  understanding  of  central  bank  transparency  and 
communication  has  changed  dramatically.  On  its  part,  the  Central  Bank  of  Kenya  has 
employed  a  wide  range  of  communication  channels  to  ensure  it  efficiently  and  effectively 
communicates with the market as well as target audience. 
The launch of our new website today marks a major milestone towards the achievement of 
the Bank’s vision of becoming a world class, modern Central Bank. Our new website is also 
part of the Bank’s communication strategy aimed at improving Central Bank communication 
platform and policy. 
Ladies  &  Gentlemen,  Central  Bank  communication  is  important  for  financial  market 
participants as it forms the basis for their extrapolations regarding current and future policy 
actions that might impact the value of their financial assets. So far, communication between 
the Central Bank and financial markets has worked fairly well. Market participants have learnt 
over time to distinguish between information and “noise”. The Central Bank, on its part, has 
remained  committed  to  provide  markets  with  information  while  avoiding  the  “noise”.  It  has 
become  increasingly  clear  to  us  that  managing  public  expectations  through  effective 
communication is a central part of monetary policy and indeed, of central banking. This is an 
important  aspect  of  formulating  and  communicating  policy.  Public  expectations  are  more 
likely to help foster economic stability when the public has a clear understanding of what the 
Central Bank’s goals are, how the Central Bank thinks the economy works and how it is likely 
to  respond  to  various  economic  circumstances.  Our  new  website  has  been  designed  to 
enhance  communication  with  the  financial  and  other  markets  by  providing  accurate  and 
timely  information.  The  feedback mechanism  demonstrated  today  will  serve  to  ensure  that 
the Bank stays in touch with public expectations and is responsive to the needs of the market 
and the general public. The new site also has a chart tool that will assist researchers and 
students analyze time series and other information available on the website to track policy 
and economic performance. We believe that our website should not only be a communication 
tool  but  also  a  resource  that  adds  value  to  those  who  visit  it.  We  encourage  our  website 
visitors to utilize these tools. 
Ladies & Gentlemen, our communication with the public has to be simple, clear and credible. 
The  sole  use  of  English  in  our  communication  has,  unfortunately,  disenfranchised  a  good 
BIS Review 113/2009 
 1
number of Kenyans who only speak and understand Kiswahili. The critical challenge we face 
is in developing a communication infrastructure and strategy that will effectively communicate 
to a wide audience. The development of a Kiswahili version on our new website is a first step 
towards  ensuring  that  the  Bank  is  responsive  to  the  demands  of  a  target  audience  that 
dominantly  speaks  the  national  language.  On  the  strength  of  this  initiative,  the  Bank  will 
consider publishing sections of the weekly bulletin and monthly economic review in Kiswahili. 
We will also continue to publish exhaustive analyses and commentaries on our website and 
offer assessments regarding future economic developments. The Bank also recognizes the 
critical role that the media plays in educating the public on financial and economic issues. 
Our  new  website  has  dedicated  a  link  for  media  houses  to  access  information  that  will 
facilitate their role. It is encouraging to note that some media houses have published staff 
commentaries  and  analyses  carried  on  our  website.  This collaboration  will  ensure  that  the 
public receives information that is complete and correct. 
In conclusion, let me observe that in uncertain economic times, communication is not only an 
instrument, it is also an asset valued by the public. The Central Bank, the media and other 
institutions have an obligation to communicate effectively while being aware of the adverse 
effects  that  misinformation  can  have  on  financial  market  participants,  households  and 
businesses. 
We  have  positioned  our  website  as  the  primary  tool  for  Central  Bank  communication  and 
encourage members of the public to visit it and give us their feedback. On our part, we shall 
strive to constantly enhance our communication infrastructure to meet the demands of our 
target audience. 
With these few remarks, it is my singular honour to call upon the Mr. Mutua Kilaka, Financial 
Secretary, Ministry of Finance to give his remarks and officially launch our website. 
Bwana Kilaka. Karibu Sana. 
2 
 BIS Review 113/2009
