T T Mboweni: Central banks and financial stability – some lessons for the 
future 
Keynote address by Mr T T Mboweni, Governor of the South African Reserve Bank, at the 
48th ACI World Conference, Cape Town, 13 March 2009. 
 Introduction 
Honoured ACI members, organisers, moderators, guests, ladies and gentlemen. 
Thank you for the invitation to speak at this illustrious event. It is indeed a privilege and a 
rare  opportunity  to  share  some  ideas  about  the  state  of  the  global  financial  system  with 
market practitioners from across the world. It is difficult in the current circumstances to give 
an optimistic address. Nevertheless, I will try to avoid to paint too dismal and depressing a 
picture  and  instead  will  focus  on  things  that  we  can  learn  from  our  recent  experiences,  to 
contribute towards a better future. 
The mood in the global economy has changed from almost over-exuberance to the depths of 
a recession in less than two years. We are certainly experiencing unprecedented events and 
the actions taken to restore stability and trust in the global financial system are surpassing 
previous ones. Judging from the programme of your conference, we expect that these issues 
will be discussed in greater detail over the next two days. This presentation will also make, 
towards the end, some comments about the state of the South African banking sector. 
It  remains  difficult  to  understand  how  various  role  players,  including  supervisors,  central 
banks,  rating  agencies,  multilateral  agencies,  governments,  risk  managers  and  highly 
competent  private  sector  participants,  failed  to  fully  comprehend  these  developments  that, 
with hindsight, were bound to bring us at some time to this point. 
Yet,  the  important  thing  is  not  to  apportion  blame,  but  to  try  and  understand  how  we  can 
avoid repeating the same mistakes. There are many lessons to be learnt, and we are of the 
view that these lessons can be valuable not only from the point of view of supervisors and 
policy  makers,  but  also  that  of  traders,  bankers  and  other  financial  market  participants. 
Clearly, as the situation is still unfolding, one can at best only talk of “preliminary lessons”. 
Lesson number 1: The sum of perfectly rational individual decisions doesn’t equal a 
perfectly rational market 
With  hindsight,  it  is  clear  that,  although  individual  institutions  hedged,  transferred  and 
managed  their  risk  exposures  in  very  sophisticated  ways,  at  a  systemic  level  a  point  is 
reached at which it becomes impossible to fully diversify or transfer risk. The global financial 
system is a finite entity, and although risk can be passed around, it does not disappear. We 
had  probably  underestimated  the  inter-linkages  of  financial  systems  across  the  globe,  and 
the  extent  to  which  globalisation  had  created  a  complicated  network  of  circuits  for  the 
contagion of financial risk. 
The lesson to take forward is that we should never lose sight of the systemic implications of 
individual institutions, transactions and events. Financial stability is a systemic concept, and 
it will play a much bigger role in future and should be taken much more seriously than was 
the case during the exuberant years prior to 2008. Issues such as macro-prudential analysis 
and supervision, crisis preparedness and stress testing of the financial system are likely to 
feature much more strongly in our collective endeavours for years to come. 
BIS Review 32/2009 
 1
Lesson number 2: If something seems too good to last, it probably is 
The  current  crisis  resulted  from  a  specific  combination  of  a  number  of  causes.  For  years, 
liquidity in global financial markets was mispriced, and therefore generally taken for granted. 
Interest rates were low, and huge profits were locked in through carry trades where funding 
could  be  obtained  at  a  minimal  cost  in  overnight  markets,  and  invested  in  high-yielding 
longer-term  assets,  be  it  emerging-market  financial  assets,  equities,  securitised  mortgage 
loans or asset-backed securities. 
South Africa was a beneficiary of this trend: between 2004 and 2007, net inflows recorded in 
the financial account of the balance of payments totalled R391 billion. If the inflows that are 
included  under  “unrecorded  transactions”  are  added,  this  figure  would  be  well  over  R500 
billion.  Compare  this  to  a  combined  net  outflow  of  around  R23  billion  over  the  prior  four 
years.  The  advantages  of  these  inflows  were  significant:  they  allowed  the  South  African 
Reserve Bank to restore a fragile foreign exchange reserves position to a more healthy one, 
they helped the country to finance its current account deficit, to build infrastructure, to boost 
economic growth and to increase employment. Overall, they made the country slightly more 
resilient against the adverse developments that we are currently experiencing. 
However,  we  have  been  abruptly  reminded  that  portfolio  flows  are  fickle,  and  cannot  be 
relied upon as a source of external funding when the tide turns. Even though South Africa 
still maintained a positive net balance on its financial account for the first three quarters of 
2008,  there  were  significant  net  outflows  of  portfolio  investments  as  global  investors  were 
forced  to  deleverage.  In  addition,  funding  in  the  international  markets  has  become  much 
more expensive. 
We have also been reminded that markets move in cycles, and the fallacy of some people 
who  advocated  a  “decoupling  of  emerging  markets”  or  that  “the  business  cycle  has  been 
conquered”  has  been  proven  to  have  widely  missed  the  point.  What  is  the  lesson  to  be 
learnt? The lesson is that prolonged periods of high asset growth that are not fully justified by 
trends in the real sector are bound to correct. For example, how can house prices continue to 
grow at double-digit rates if economies grow by two to three per cent per year? How can the 
balance  sheets  of  banks  consistently  grow  four  to  five  times  faster  than  the  underlying 
economy?  How  can  off-balance  sheet  activities  of  banks  consistently  outpace  on-balance-
sheet growth without signalling some sort of distortion? How can profit targets and bonuses 
keep on rising year after year, while the underlying real economy is still very much the same? 
It  is  human  nature  to  be  more  tolerant  of  continuous  rises  in  asset  prices  than  of  price 
declines. Perhaps we should be more careful in future: if growth rates and price increases 
are  not  justified  by  developments  in  the  underlying  activity  in  the  real  economy,  asset 
bubbles develop, and the effects when such bubbles burst can be very serious. 
Lesson number 3: The seeds of the next crisis are sown in the solutions for the 
current one 
Without  having  much  choice,  central  banks  and  governments  in  (mainly)  the  industrialised 
world  have  taken  unprecedented  actions  in  their  attempts  to  restore  confidence  in  the 
financial system. These actions included significant liquidity injections, lowering of collateral 
requirements,  asset  swaps,  longer-maturity  refinancing  operations,  intervention  in  foreign 
exchange markets, co-operation among central banks in their market operations, monetary 
accommodation, quantitative or credit easing, capital injections into banks and other financial 
institutions,  substantial  fiscal  stimulus  packages  and,  in  some  cases,  nationalisation  of 
banks. Looking at the instruments available to banks and governments, there really are only 
a few that have not been used in one way or another during this crisis. 
Actions being implemented now may be the lifeline for the world financial system, but we are 
also well aware that they may, inherently, have negative consequences over the long term. 
The major central banks will have to plan their exit strategies well. Governments will have to 
2 
 BIS Review 32/2009
manoeuvre  themselves  out  of  their  heavy  indebtedness,  the  potential  crowding  out  of  the 
private sector would have to be addressed and some reasonable limits to moral hazard will 
have to be restored. In a recent speech1, Jeffrey Lacker, President of the Federal Reserve 
Bank  of  Richmond,  noted  that  “the  striking  feature  of  central  bank  lending  and  other 
government financial support during the current turmoil is the extent to which it has extended 
well beyond the boundaries that previously were understood to constrain such lending”, and 
that “the scope of the financial safety net ultimately must be rolled back”. Although inflation is 
currently not an issue that many people are worried about, we all know that the measures 
currently taken are potentially inflationary, and at some point this will have to be attended to. 
As  one  of  our  colleagues  has  remarked  when  “the  house  is  on  fire,  we  need  all  the  fire 
engines on the scene, the mopping up operations will come later”. 
Lesson number 4: Every good party needs a strong bouncer 
In  financial  markets,  the  bouncers  are  the  supervisors.  Looking  at  previous  issues  of  the 
IMF’s  Global  Financial  Stability  Report,  the  BIS  Quarterly  Reports,  and  various  individual 
central banks’ Financial Stability Reports, it is evident that many of the causes of the financial 
crisis  had  been  noted,  but  that  they  had  not  been  acted  upon.  As  pointed  out  by  our 
colleague Jean-Claude Trichet2 in his capacity as chairman of the Global Economy Meetings 
of  central  bank  governors  at  the  BIS  –  meetings  that  we  also  attend  on  a  regular  basis  – 
several policy makers had indicated to market participants that they needed to prepare for a 
significant  correction.  With  hindsight,  there  were  clear  danger  signs  that  supervisors  could 
possibly  have  countered  more  decisively.  To  list  but  a  few  of  these  warnings,  excessive 
leverage  through  securitisation  and  re-securitisation,  excessive  dependence  on  short-term 
wholesale  funding,  a  complete  under-estimation  and  under-pricing  of  risk,  in  particular 
liquidity risk, skewed incentive structures, an overreliance on mathematical and statistical risk 
models  without  a  proper  understanding  of  their  assumptions,  dynamics  and  constraints,  a 
blind  reliance  on  credit  ratings  without  properly  analysing  and  understanding  their 
methodologies  and  caveats,  and  a  proliferation  of  financial  innovation  that  resulted  in 
complex products that were not well understood by those selling or buying them. 
However,  supervisors  and  advocates  of  financial  stability  seemed  powerless  to  address 
these  issues  while  the  party  was  still  going  on.  Only  weeks  before  being  nationalised, 
Northern Rock reported record profits and was hailed for its innovative business model and 
financial strength, including capital adequacy. It is very difficult for supervisors to spoil the fun 
while everything is going so well. 
Yet, if supervisors and financial stability functions in central banks have to take on the role of 
bouncers, they have to have muscle! Much attention is currently given in international forums 
to strengthening supervisory and regulatory frameworks and to giving more legal powers to 
financial stability practitioners. For example, some of the recommendations that have been 
made by the Financial Stability Forum are to strengthen the prudential framework for banks, 
including  with  regard  to  capital,  liquidity,  risk  management  and  market  infrastructure,  to 
strengthen  the  framework  for  transparency  and  valuation,  changing  the  role  and  uses  of 
credit ratings, and enhancing the responsiveness of authorities to risks and cooperation in 
dealing with weak banks.3  
Other  issues  being  addressed  in  various  forums  are  ways  in  which  the  pro-cyclicality  of 
financial regulations could be reduced, how areas of regulatory arbitrage could be eliminated, 
                                                 
1   Lacker,  J.  Financial  Conditions  and  the  Economic  Outlook.  Remarks  made  at  the  South  Carolina  Business 
and Industry Political Education Committee, 13 January 2009. 
2   Trichet, J-C. Undervalued risk and uncertainty – some thoughts on the market turmoil. Speech at the 5th ECB 
Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt am Main, 13 November 2008. 
3   Draghi, M. How to restore financial stability. Lecture at the 5th Bundesbank Lecture, 16 September 2008. 
BIS Review 32/2009 
 3
and how cross-border supervisory and crisis resolution frameworks could be strengthened, 
for example through supervisory colleges. 
Lesson number 5: Common sense should prevail 
A comment was recently made that perhaps one good thing about the current crisis is that 
engineering  students  will  in  future  actually  do  what  they  have  been  trained  for:  to  be 
engineers.  In  the  past  decade  or  so,  the  financial  world  has  been  taken  over  by 
mathematicians,  statisticians,  engineers  and  scientists.  These  professionals  have  made 
breakthroughs  in  the  development  of  sophisticated  risk  management  and  valuation 
techniques,  which  contributed  vastly  to  financial  innovation  and  the  development  of  new 
products.  But  we  have  probably  over-relied  on  these  models.  After  all,  engineering  is  a 
different  field  from  banking,  finance  and  business  management,  and  in  many  instances  a 
great divide was created between the business acumen of boards of directors of banks, and 
the models on which the banks’ operations were based. While financial and risk modelling 
should  continue  to  play  an  important  role  in  future,  it  should  be  better  balanced  by  basic 
business  common  sense,  which  should  challenge  the  underlying  assumptions  of  such 
models and attempt to understand their inherent limitations and constraints. 
Some comments on the South African banking system 
We would like to conclude this address as promised earlier, by making some comments on 
the South African banking system, and why it appears to have weathered the storm relatively 
well up to now. To date, South Africa’s banking system has remained largely shielded from 
the  direct  effects  of  the  global  financial  market  crisis,  although  our  banks  have  been 
somewhat  affected  by  the  general  re-pricing  of  risk  and  increases  in  funding  costs.  South 
African banks have very limited direct exposure to the troubled toxic securitised debt market 
in the US, partly owing to prudential restrictions on the type of assets and on the extent to 
which domestic banks are allowed to invest offshore. In addition, securitisation activities of 
our  banks  have  been  moderate  and  prudent.  As  a  result,  the  high  leveraging  observed  in 
some other jurisdictions has not been evident in the South African banking sector and our 
banks  have  continued  to  follow  a  fairly  traditional  banking  model.  Even  more  significantly, 
South  African  banks  are  predominantly  funded  by  domestic  deposits,  and  not  through 
internationally held structured products. As at the end of December 2008, the total foreign-
currency  denominated  deposits  of  banks  amounted  to  R78,3  billion,  and  other  foreign-
currency  denominated  funding  to  R86,7  billion,  together  comprising  6,7  per  cent  of  banks’ 
combined total funding liabilities of R2,4 trillion. Even of this relatively small amount, only a 
portion is provided by non-residents. 
South African banks are well capitalised, with an overall capital adequacy ratio of 13,0 per 
cent  of  risk-weighted  assets  under  the  Basel  II  measurement,  as  at  the  end  of  December 
2008, which is 3,5 percentage points above the minimum requirement of 9,5 per cent. Even 
on  the  basis  of  capital  to  total  un-weighted  assets,  they  are  not  highly  leveraged.  Also 
noteworthy  is  that  Tier  1  capital  adequacy  stood  at  10,2  per  cent.  This  high  level  of 
capitalisation makes the banking sector more resilient to economic shocks. Although some 
deterioration in asset quality has been observed over recent months (for example, impaired 
advances to gross loans and advances increased to 3,8 per cent by December 2008), this 
was more attributable to the tightening of domestic monetary policy and slowing growth than 
to the global financial crisis. These trends are not out of line with what would be expected in 
the  current  stage  of  the  domestic  economic  cycle,  and  impaired  loans  are  adequately 
provided for. The foreclosure procedures in South Africa are also different from those in the 
US, for example, allowing banks to recover a greater portion of their non-performing loans. 
In  this  environment,  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank  (SARB)  will  continue  to  focus  its 
monetary  policy  decisions  based  on  the  inflation  outlook, within  the  context  of  its  inflation-
targeting  framework  whilst  taking  full  cognisance  of  the  global  collective  efforts  to  avoid  a 
4 
 BIS Review 32/2009
deep recession. An improved inflation outlook, against a backdrop of slowing domestic and 
global growth, allowed the monetary policy committee of the SARB to reduce the policy rate 
by 150 basis points since December 2008, to 10,5 per cent. 
The  SARB  continued  to  drain  significant  amounts  of  liquidity  on  a  net  basis  in  order  to 
maintain  a  shortage  in  the  money  market  as  part  of  our  monetary  policy  implementation 
framework.  The  domestic  interbank  market  continued  to  operate,  with  no  anomalies 
observed  in  either  the  volumes  or  rates  of  interbank  funding.  In  general,  financial  market 
stability continues to be observed in South Africa. 
Far  from  being  complacent,  however,  we  are  monitoring  the  situation  closely.  Crisis 
preparedness  is  a  key  consideration  for  the  South  African  Reserve  Bank.  In  fact,  in 
partnership  with  the  World  Bank  we  are  hosting  a  regional  crisis  preparedness  simulation 
test for the SADC region next week, to be facilitated by the Toronto Centre. We are also very 
conscious  of  the  potential  impact  of  the  global  economic  slowdown  on  our  own  economy, 
and are starting to feel the painful effects of this through job losses, rising insolvencies and 
lower volumes of exports. In this regard, fiscal and monetary policies have to play a much 
more central role. 
Conclusion 
There is a G-20 meeting of ministers of finance and central bank governors taking place in 
the United Kingdom on Saturday, 14 March 2009. Many issues similar to those you might 
discuss  here  are  also  on  the  G-20  agenda.  Hopefully,  the  G-20  conclusions  will  assist  in 
taking us forward. Time is of the essence. 
I wish you well in your deliberations. 
Thank you very much. 
BIS Review 32/2009 
 5
