Tarisa Watanagase: Thailand's weathering the global downturn 
Address by Dr Tarisa Watanagase, Governor of the Bank of Thailand, at a Luncheon with EU 
Ambassadors, Bangkok, 3 February 2009. 
 Your Excellency Ambassador Hotek, 
Excellencies, Honourable Guests, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am delighted to join this luncheon gathering of prominent Ambassadors of the Council of 
European Union in Thailand, under the presidency of Ambassador Ivan Hotek of the Czech 
Republic. Indeed, I would like to extend my sincere appreciation to Ambassador Hotek for his 
kind  invitation  for  me  to  update  Excellencies  from  the  EU  countries  on  recent  economic 
developments in Thailand and the prospects for 2009. 
Let me begin with the overview of Thailand's economic performance. 
The Thai economic performance was satisfactory for 2008 as a whole. GDP is estimated to 
grow by around 3.6 percent, driven by the growth momentum during the first three quarters 
of  the  year.  Notably,  from  October  2008  onwards,  economic  developments  have  been 
deteriorating.  During  the  fourth  quarter  of  2008,  exports  weakened  considerably,  falling  by 
9.4 percent from the same quarter of the previous year. Since October, exports showed large 
reduction in manufacturing products, especially high-technology products. 
On  the  domestic  side,  demand  as  well  as  consumers'  and  investors'  confidence  have 
deteriorated as evidenced by several indicators reported by the Bank of Thailand, including 
the Business Sentiment Index, which fell to the lowest level at 34.4 in November last year. In 
light of this, businessmen and the press started to become concerned about the potentially 
higher unemployment, which exacerbated confidence further. 
Turning  to  economic  stability,  inflation  pressure  has  dissipated  starting  August  2008. 
Headline  and  core  inflation  rates,  which  were  at  9.2  and  3.7  percent  respectively  at  their 
peaks  in  July  2008,  fell  to  0.4  and  1.8  percent at  the  end  of  the  year.  As  for  the  financial 
sector, our banking system is healthy in terms of profitability and capital base. I will return to 
touch on the financial sector later on. 
Economic  stability  on  the  external  front  is  also  very  strong.  For  2008,  the  current  account 
recorded a small deficit of 0.2 billion US dollar. Our international reserves amounted to 111 
billion  US  dollar,  which  is  4  times  of  short-term  external  debt.  The  exchange  rate  remains 
competitive  and  stable.  For  2008,  the  capital  account  recorded  an  overall  surplus  of  12.8 
billion US dollar, of which foreign direct investment or FDI was 9.9 billion US dollar. FDI from 
Europe accounted for about 11 percent of total FDI. 
Excellencies,  
For the prospect of the Thai economy this year, the Bank of Thailand sees a growth rate of 0-
2.0 percent and 2.0-4.0 percent next year. I wish to emphasize that the growth performance 
depends not only on how fast the global economy recovers, but also on how fast confidence 
within  the  country  could  possibly  pick  up,  which  will  help  ensure  the  recovery  of  domestic 
demand. 
On the prospect of global economic recovery, the consensus forecasts of world growth for 
2009 have been continuously revised downward as the severity of the financial crisis hits the 
financial markets and the real sectors of industrialized economies. The latest IMF forecast 
expects the global economy to be stagnant this year and some economies in Asia to record 
negative growth. 
BIS Review 15/2009 
 1
As a result, it is most likely that international trade and investment cannot be a major driver of 
growth for a large number of economies. Intra-regional trade, which has strong ties in Asia, is 
also  likely  to  decelerate.  Most  economies  will  have  to  turn  inwards  to  look  for  domestic 
demand  as  a  source  of  growth.  This  is  why  room  for  policy  maneuver  and  domestic 
confidence are important at this juncture. 
Amid the tremendous challenges that we face, I am cautiously optimistic that Thailand will be 
able to weather the storm relatively well. Allow me to share with you the reasons behind this. 
First,  the  growth  momentum  of  domestic  demand  has  been  cushioned  by  supportive 
monetary and fiscal policies, and declining costs of production. As Excellencies have already 
followed recent policy initiatives, there continues to be room for the Government to pursue 
fiscal  initiatives  for  stimulus  and  social  safety  net  protection  as  the  public  debt  is  low, 
accounting for about 37 percent of GDP. 
As for the monetary policy, the Monetary Policy Committee has already cut the policy interest 
rate twice by a total of 1.75 percent from 3.75 to 2 percent. These were significant reductions 
by the history of Thai monetary policy. The cuts aim to shore up confidence by sending a 
strong message that monetary policy can now focus on supporting growth now that inflation 
is not a threat. They also help shore up domestic demand. Nevertheless, we are mindful that, 
at this juncture, monetary policy easing may transmit slowly to support economic growth. 
Second, the Thai private sector has strong underlying strengths to withstand economic and 
financial volatility. Both business and household debts are low. Our production and service 
sectors, now adversely affected by the global slowdown, were able to build up profits earlier 
as a cushion. The agricultural sector continues to show signs of growth. Although agricultural 
prices have adjusted downward, agricultural production cost such as fuel and fertilizer have 
also declined, which helps reduce the burden of farmers. 
Third, the banking system is liquid and resilient. Banks have ample liquidity because they do 
not rely on inter-bank funding but rather predominantly on domestic deposits. But the Bank of 
Thailand  remains  vigilant.  We  maintain  close  dialogue  with  the  top  management  of  banks 
concerning important external developments and stand ready to provide liquidity should such 
a need arise. 
Unlike the crisis of 1997 when the banking system failed to function as financial intermediary 
of economic activities, our banking system today has remained resilient in the aftermath of 
US financial turmoil. The Thai banking system’s foreign investment exposure was only about 
1 percent of its total assets as of end-2008, of which investment in toxic assets was only a 
small portion. All sub prime-related CDOs have either been unwound or losses provided for 
in line with international accounting standard. 
In the past several years, the Bank of Thailand put great emphasis on robust stress testing 
and risk management on the part of banks, with an aim to strengthening the banking sector 
while the economy was still good and the sector profitable. More recently, our financial and 
legal  infrastructures  have  also  been  strengthened  particularly  through  new  legislations, 
including the Bank of Thailand Act, the Financial Institutions Business Act, and the Deposit 
Protection  Act.  Our  accession  to  the  Basel  II  Accord  at  the  end  of  last  year  will  further 
enhance  banks’  risk  management  and  financial  sector  stability.  Moreover,  the  second3 
phase  Financial  Sector  Master  Plan,  which  will  be  announced  this  year,  will  also  increase 
competition and further enhance financial efficiency and resiliency. 
Banks  also  deserve  credits.  They  have  made  significant  improvements  in  their  risk 
management. The fact that they did not make significant investment in those high-yielding 
sub-prime related assets in spite of their abundant liquidity is a testimony in itself. I’m glad to 
say that our efforts to reform and strengthen the risk focus have paid off. 
Excellencies, 
2 
 BIS Review 15/2009
In summary, the Thai economy has achieved significant structural improvements since 1997. 
Our  economy  has  strong  fundamentals,  underpinned  by  price  and  financial  stability. 
Nevertheless, it is perhaps inevitable that we may yet see more negative impacts from the 
present international financial market turmoil before the improvement,  since no one knows 
how much deeper or longer this global downturn will be. 
What  we  need  to  do  now  is  to  ease  some  of  the  pain  currently  experienced,  build  up 
safeguards  and  prepare  for  the  eventual  upturn.  In  Thailand,  policymakers  on  all  fronts 
together with the private sector are doing just that. 
BIS Review 15/2009 
 3
