Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Presentation of the book entitled “L’acqua e la 
spugna” by Franco Bruni 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank, at the Center for American Studies, Rome, 24 June 2009. 
 Above all, I should like to thank the Center for American Studies for inviting me to present 
this  book  by  Franco  Bruni;  a  book  which  is  a  real  pleasure  to  present  because  it  actually 
shows to be untrue what many have claimed recently, namely that the economists did not 
foresee the crisis and that they did not send out the alarm signals. Some economists, such 
as  Franco  Bruni,  had  been  pointing  out  the  imbalances  accumulating  on  the  financial 
markets for a long time, and, whilst they may not have anticipated the full extent of the crisis, 
they did, for sure, signal the risks. 
Franco Bruni’s book is a book well worth reading, because it helps us understand how the 
science of economics, is, at the end of the day, linked to common sense, and also that the 
“new  paradigms”,  which  are  increasingly  cited  to  justify  events  that  cannot  be  easily 
explained,  should  be  questioned.  If  you  base  your  own  judgements  on  sound  analytical 
grounds,  albeit  unsophisticated  –  and  the  book  has  the  great  advantage  of  also  being 
accessible to non-specialists in economics – you can get to grips with the general trends, at 
least in the medium term. In this context, the conflicting schools of thought, for example, the 
Keynesian and monetarists, serve no purpose. Those who did not understand the crisis were 
those who, in some way or another, were trapped in simplified models without understanding 
that these models are the starting and not the finishing points of an analytical path aimed at 
understanding reality. 
On  the  one  hand,  those  who  have  made  the  neo-Keynesian  models  extreme,  excluding 
money and the financial markets, have made the search for model elegance an end in itself, 
without understanding that it does not actually help to explain reality.  
This may seem absurd nowadays, but at a conference organised by the European Central 
Bank,  in  the  autumn  of  2006,  to  explain  its  own  monetary  policy  strategy  –  a  strategy  in 
which money and the financial markets play an important role – the majority of academics, 
above all on the other side of the Atlantic, played down the usefulness of taking money and 
financial markets into account in economic models. In the more sophisticated neo-Keynesian 
models, they managed to completely get rid of money! Consequently, monetary policy could 
also get rid of money, and focus only on the interest rate as the variable representative of the 
equilibrium on the money and financial markets. 
With such models, it was sufficient to align the interest rate with the equilibrium level, or the 
so-called  “neutral”  level,  in  order  to  ensure  a  monetary  policy  in  line  with  the  general 
equilibrium. No one, however, asked, in a world of uncertainty, how to measure the “neutral” 
level of the interest rate. That was assumed as a given. This is the theoretical basis of the 
so-called Taylor rule.  
Nor was the crisis understood by those who continued to assume that financial markets were 
perfect, without frictions, in which the inflating and bursting of speculative bubbles is part of a 
moving equilibrium condition, in which economic policy should not intervene.  
In  accordance  with  this  approach,  monetary  policy,  or  the  prudential  supervision  system, 
should not intervene in order to avert erratic market behaviour, which causes excessive flows 
of indebtedness and unstable dynamics in financial activities, but rather intervenes ex post, 
in order to reinflate the bubble when it bursts. Doing it that way, by reinflating it, the bubble 
has finally burst with detrimental effects on the world economy. 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 1
Franco  Bruni’s  book  demonstrates  that  the  excessively  accommodative  monetary  policy 
following the dot-com bubble and 11 September fuelled the subsequent speculative bubble, 
which  then  burst  in  the  summer  of  2007.  He  himself  acknowledges  that  the  main 
responsibilities  probably  do  not  lie  with  monetary  policy,  but  rather  with  the  absence  of 
regulation of new financial instruments, which permitted institutions to increase their leverage 
capacity and favoured the indebtedness of households and firms.  
However, monetary policy contributed to the build-up of imbalances by keeping interest rates 
very low, above all, during the period when the US economy was starting to pick up again. I 
believe that by now there is a broad consensus on this theory. Alan Greenspan’s counter-
argument that US monetary policy was not responsible for low interest rates, but rather the 
inflow of capital from China, is not convincing. 
Even if there were any truth in Greenspan’s theory, the lesson that should have been learnt 
was that the short-term interest rates were too low and should have been increased. 
It  was  decided  not  to  do  so  for  fear  of  the  US  economy  falling  into  deflation  and  it  was, 
therefore, preferable to “err” in the direction of excessive monetary growth, in order to avoid 
the  risk  of  deflation,  despite  the  low  probability  of  this  occurring,  rather  than  to  err  in  the 
opposite direction.  
This  fear  was  evidently  well  founded.  And,  as  such,  the  mistake  developed  into  an 
excessively  expansive  policy,  which  led  to  the  subsequent  bubble.  This  experience 
demonstrates that the monetary policy approach in terms of “risk management”, as defined 
by Greenspan, which does not take into account the medium-term probability of events, but 
rather  the  extreme  risks,  does  not account  for the  errors  that  the  statisticians  call  “second 
type”,  which  is  to  give  too  much  importance  to  a  hypothesis  which  does  not  actually 
materialise.  This  is  interesting  because,  generally,  it  is  academics  who  underestimate  this 
type of error and attach greater importance to the first type of error. Empirical research tends 
to be taken note of when it demonstrates the significance of a statistical relationship, not its 
insignificance.  In  2003  heavy  emphasis  was  placed  on  evaluating  the  significance  of  the 
hypothesis of deflation, not its absence, nor the probability of future inflation. 
Franco Bruni does not assign to the ECB the same level of responsibility, given that it kept its 
rates  higher  than  those  in  the  United  States.  He  is  not  one  of  the  many  who  belatedly 
reconverted  to  monetary  rigour  ex  post,  forgetting  what  was  written  at  the  time.  On  2 
December 2005, Franco Bruni wrote: "The small ECB rate increase was announced. It is a 
logical increase (which in fact comes a little late) for various reasons. The starting point is 
very low…".1 And yet Bruni seems ungenerous. First of all, the European economy grew at a 
rate of 1.5% over the three-year period 2003-05, below potential and even lower than the US 
rate (3%). Moreover, in this period, the effective exchange rate of the euro appreciated, by 
slightly less than 10%, signalling a relative tightening of monetary conditions. I would like to 
recall that at the time there were many, both in academia and in politics, who argued that the 
ECB should tie its monetary policy to that of the United States and fix the exchange rate to 
the dollar. Just imagine how much more liquidity would have been provided to the market in 
those years and how much more devastating the effects of the bursting of the bubble would 
have been now!  
Indeed, at that time, the ECB was subject above all to criticism contrary to that levelled by 
Franco Bruni. At least three European heads of state, and many ministries of finance, not to 
mention business people, trade unionists, journalists, politicians and commentators, exerted 
public  pressure  on  the  ECB  to  finally  cut  rates.  And  when,  at  the  end  of  2005,  the  ECB 
decided (rather late, in Bruni’s opinion) to increase them, many of those persons lined up, 
together with renowned international institutions, to severely censure the decision, because 
                                                 
1   La Stampa, 2 December 2005. 
2 
 BIS Review 82/2009
they felt it would have cut off the legs of the recovery. The ECB is independent, fortunately, 
and cannot dump on others the responsibilities of its own choices. But what we should not 
forget  is  the  context  in  which  it  operates,  largely  influenced,  also  in  the  countries  of 
continental Europe, by an “activist” vision of monetary policy with an Anglo-Saxon inspiration.  
It is also surprising how the teachings taken from that period of monetary policy are quickly 
put  aside  when  you  go  from  the  historical  analysis  to  that  of  the  economic  juncture,  in 
particular  the  current  economic  situation.  If  the  experience  of  the  first  half  of  this  decade 
teaches us that monetary policy should have a medium-term orientation, should take into due 
consideration  the  developments  in  the  financial  markets  and  should  avoid  focusing  on 
extreme  events  that  are  unlikely  to  take  place,  and  should  be  put  into  effect  by  an 
independent central bank, with a clear mandate that favours price stability – in line with the 
analysis  contained  in  Franco  Bruni’s  book  –  the  assessments  of  the  present  frequently 
continue  to  be  contingent  on  opposed  preconceptions.  In  the  current  circumstances,  the 
actions of the central bank, especially those of the ECB, continue to be assessed in terms of 
a comparison with the United States and in terms of quantity rather than results. There’s a 
tendency to look above all at the number of rate cuts and points cuts and the scale of the 
refinancing  operations,  rather  than  looking  at  the  results  in  terms  of  the  sustainability  of  a 
certain policy over time. As I have had an opportunity to explain, a policy that quickly brings 
rates down to zero but cannot generate expectations of stable rates at those levels, can end 
up  being  less  effective  than  a  policy  which  maintains  rates  slightly  higher  but  has  stable 
expectations, allowing a flatter yield curve to be maintained.2 If you look today at the results 
obtained  in  terms  of  the  yield  curve  and  inflation  expectations,  you  can  appreciate  the 
strategy followed by the ECB in the rate-cutting phase.  
One  point  on  which  I  don’t  agree  with  Franco  Bruni’s  analysis  concerns  his  judgement  on 
changing  the  objective  of  monetary  policy  after  the  failure  of  Lehman  Brothers  on  15 
September 2008. Bruni writes: “…the objective became only that of saving the credit system 
from  the  collapse.  This  last  change  of  objective  is  of  great  conceptual  and  political 
importance, it has a significance that could prove to be, so to speak, historic. And yet it has 
never  been  officially  declared,  particularly  by  the  ECB”.  The  proof  that  he  provides  for  the 
above remarks is the decision to reduce interest rates from 2% to 1.5% in March this year, a 
step which, in his opinion, was not justified by the trend of the economy, but by the problems 
facing Europe’s banking system.  
There  is  a  misunderstanding  here  that  needs  to  be  quickly  clarified,  also  in  view  of  the 
ensuing discussion on macro-prudential supervision and on the powers of the central banks 
in question. From the outset of the crisis in August 2007, the ECB has pursued a policy of 
separation between, on the one hand, the interest rate decisions, based solely on the priority 
objective of price stability and, on the other hand, the decisions concerning the instruments 
used to pump liquidity into the system in order to tackle the difficulties being encountered by 
the market.  
The most obvious example of the separation is precisely the one which occurred on 9 August 
2007, when amid market tensions, it was decided both to maintain the rates unchanged and 
to intervene on a substantial scale to satisfy the banks’ demand for liquidity, with a €90 billion 
operation. And the same separation has been continued in all the months since then. 
That the decision to reduce interest rates in March to 1.5% was justified is, I believe, evident 
from  the  growth  and  inflation  estimates  published  at  that  time.  I  remember  the  ECB  staff 
projections were pointing to euro area GDP growth for 2009 and 2010 being equal to -2.7% 
and 0.0% and inflation of 0.5% and 1.1% respectively. Also taking into account the relevant 
horizon  for  monetary  policy,  between  one  and  two  years  ahead,  an  interest  rate  of  2% 
                                                 
2  
“Three  questions  on  monetary  policy  easing”,  University  of  Ancona,  6  March  2009  (available  at 
www.ecb.europa.eu). 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 3
seemed excessive, also considering the downside risks to growth that the ECB’s Governing 
Council  had  signalled  and  that  they  duly  manifested  themselves.  Indeed,  the  projections 
were again revised in early June, and the cut in the official interest rate to 1% decided in May 
is consistent with that revision.  
The objective of the decisions to supply liquidity to the banking system was not to “rescue the 
banks” but to ensure the continued functioning of the financial market, starting with its base, 
i.e.  the  money  market.  The  ECB’s  entire  range  of  instruments,  characterised  by  a  wide 
corridor between the interest rate on the marginal lending facility and the rate on the deposit 
facility, weekly repurchase agreements, the acceptance of a large number of counterparties 
and  a  wide  range  of  collateral,  is  based  on  the  money  market  functioning.  If  the  money 
market doesn’t work, the mechanism for transmitting monetary policy doesn’t work. The only 
solution remaining for a central bank at this point is to stand in for the market and perform the 
role of the banks, even by lending directly to the private sector. Maybe this solution is the 
most preferable? I don’t believe so. In my opinion, the functioning of the market is a statutory 
objective  for  a  central  bank.  It  should  therefore  intervene  to  guarantee  the  liquidity  of  the 
market.  It  should  be  remembered  that  every  injection  of  liquidity  is  guaranteed  by  the 
collateral  deposited  by  the  counterparty  banks.  This  means  that  banks’  assets  are  made 
liquid. It’s obvious that without such a liquidity intervention, the market would collapse, taking 
the banking system with it. This is always true for last-resort interventions whose objective is 
to  keep  a  solvent  but  illiquid  system  alive.  It  is  at  the  heart  of  the  role  of  central  banking, 
particularly in times of systemic crisis. There can be no doubt that the ECB had to take on 
this role and I believe it has done so in an appropriate way. 
However, the point is not to intervene to remedy problems of solvency resulting from wrong 
decisions regarding investment or resulting from insufficient capital. In this regard, a central 
bank  is  not  in  a  position  to  deal  with  these  problems,  nor  is  it  its  job  to.  This  is  the 
responsibility of the political authorities. Following the collapse of Lehman Brothers, this has 
become clear in Europe. Only the heads of state and government, in their meeting in Paris 
prompted  by  President  Sarkozy,  were  able  to  commit  public  funds  to  avoid  several  banks 
going under. The programme aimed at supporting banks’ capital and at guaranteeing bonds 
was  a  government  initiative,  even  if  the  ECB  made  a  technical  contribution.  And  this  is 
exactly how it should be. 
If  something  can  be  said  to  have  gone  wrong,  it  was  with  the  implementation  of  the 
measures,  not  with  the  decision  itself.  The  ECB  has  repeated  its  invitation  to  financial 
institutions many times to make full use of the state measures for increasing capitalisation in 
the banking system. 
If this doesn’t happen, there is a risk that the retroactive effect of the current recession on 
banks’ accounts will cause the banks ultimately to reduce their financing of the real sector, 
thereby further exacerbating the economic crisis. Evidently, there is not enough incentive for 
bank shareholders and bank managers to make use of such instruments, the shareholders 
out of fear that their shares will drop in value, and the managers for fear of operational and 
pay  structure  constraints.  This  poses  a  problem  in  terms  of  coordinating  behaviour,  which 
has  to  be  resolved  by  policy-makers.  However,  time  constraints  prevent  us  from  exploring 
this matter any further today. 
I  would  like  to  conclude  by  looking  to  the  future.  I  agree  with  Franco  Bruni’s  analysis  and 
recommendations. 
This crisis affirms the need for fully independent central banks in which the appointment of 
Executive Board members is not linked to electoral cycles, and where such members have 
long-term mandates. It also confirms how important it is for price stability to be the primary 
objective of monetary policy. This experience has shown that having more objectives than 
this does not make the task any easier, neither in terms of preventing a crisis, nor resolving 
it.  Given  the  objective  of  price  stability,  central  banks  should  also  aim  to  contribute  to 
financial stability but they should also have instruments at their disposal to achieve this. 
4 
 BIS Review 82/2009
Finally,  whenever  central  banks  are  given  specific  powers,  they  are  also  expected  –  and 
rightly  so  –  to  exercise  accountability.  Franco  Bruni  is  no  exception,  but  in  this  regard  he 
cannot be distinguished from a certain trend which erroneously considers the ECB to be less 
accountable than the Federal Reserve, particularly with regard to parliament. The appendix 
gives  details  about  the  methods  of  reporting  to  the  respective  parliaments,  in  terms  of 
reporting, hearings and responses to questions posed by the parliament. It can be confirmed 
from this that the ECB reports with the same intensity and frequency as the US central bank. 
This does not mean that the quality of interaction cannot be improved, but this depends, to a 
large extent, on the European Parliament. 
BIS Review  82/2009 
 5
