Lorenzo Bini Smaghi: Regulation and supervisory architecture – is the 
EU on the right path? 
Speech by Mr Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, Member of the Executive Board of the European Central 
Bank,  at  the  2009  ECON  meeting  with  national  parliaments  “Financial  crisis:  Where  does 
Europe stand?”, Brussels, 12 February 2009. 
 Introduction1
It is a pleasure for me to be invited to talk about regulation and supervisory architecture at 
this important meeting. I think we have an excellent opportunity today to exchange thoughts 
about these interesting and demanding times. 
This  is  a  topic  of  special  interest  to  the  ECB,  as  well  as  to  the  citizens  and  taxpayers  of 
Europe.  Restoring  confidence  in  financial  markets  and  institutions  is  of  fundamental 
importance,  and  safeguarding  such  confidence  is  one  of  the  main  raisons  d’être  of  any 
supervisory system. International fora are seeking to identify and analyse the weaknesses of 
the  current  regulatory  and  supervisory  framework,  and  are  reflecting  on  the  improvements 
needed.  The  next  G20  summit,  on  2  April  2009,  will  play  a  crucial  part  in  reaching  an 
international understanding on the main elements of the new regulatory framework resulting 
from the financial crisis. 
Today,  I  would  like  to  focus  on  the  enhancements  to  the  European  regulatory  and 
supervisory architecture which need to be implemented in order to restore confidence. The 
financial  crisis  has  affected  all  European  countries.  In  some,  the  financial  landscape  has 
dramatically changed. There is now a broad consensus that shortcomings in the regulatory 
and  supervisory  framework  have  been  at  the  root  of  the  problem.  Restoring  confidence  in 
financial markets thus requires a substantial overhaul of the supervisory framework, both at 
national  and  European  level.  These  changes  call  for  political  decisions,  which  are  in  your 
area of responsibility, at national and European level. 
Various bodies are examining the situation. In particular, the group chaired by Jacques de 
Larosière will deliver its report to the European Commission shortly. The ECB has provided 
input to this report, although I am not sure how its contribution will be reflected in the final 
version. I would like to make some remarks today in a personal capacity. This might help me 
to be more direct and clear-cut. Let me mention from the very beginning, however, that I very 
much  concur  with  the  European  Parliament  draft  resolution  on  the  European  economic 
recovery programme as far as the ECB role in supervision is concerned. 
I  will  start  by  mentioning  three  key  financial  market  developments  that  have  changed  the 
prudential supervision environment in Europe. I will then look at three ways in which the EU 
supervisory framework has been affected. After that, I will ask what is needed, and indicate 
three main areas of change. Then I will address the institutional issue of where to locate the 
strengthened European competences for prudential supervision. 
Financial market developments 
Let me start by considering three recent financial market developments of relevant impact to 
the existing EU supervisory framework. 
                                                 
1  
I  thank  F.  Recine,  W.  Coussens,  L.  Stracca  and  T.  Martens  for  their  input  and  comments.  The  views 
expressed belong to the author. 
BIS Review 17/2009 
 1
First, financial market integration has increased enormously over the last decade, at a global 
level but also, and especially, within the euro area. Let me give you just a few statistics: at 
the  end  of  2007  there  were  45  banking  groups  in  the  EU  with  cross-border  activities, 
representing  about  70%  of  EU  banking  assets.  33  of  these  banks  are  incorporated  in  the 
euro area. Integration means greater interconnection and thus a greater risk of contagion. A 
crisis affecting an institution in one country is more likely to affect other countries’ institutions.  
Second,  financial  innovation  has  accelerated  over  the  years,  leading  to  the  creation  of 
sophisticated  instruments  and  vehicles.  The  pricing  and  marketability  of  instruments  has 
become complex and interconnected.  
Third, competition is a key driving factor in financial markets. Importantly, competition takes 
place  not  only  between  financial  institutions  and  market  participants,  but  also  between 
financial centres. This is true also within the EU’s single financial market. To the extent that 
EU Member States have their “own” financial centres, there is also competition between the 
Member States. 
To  sum  up,  financial  markets  have  become  more  European,  more  complex  and  more 
competitive, and competition has increased between institutions and jurisdictions. 
European supervisory shortcomings 
Against this background, the EU regulatory and supervisory framework, which is based on a 
set  of  EU  directives  and  some  mechanisms  for  cooperation  designed  several  years  ago, 
does not seem to have worked as expected. Let me mention three shortcomings. 
First,  even  though  we  have  a  single  market  in  Europe,  there  remains  substantial  room  for 
discretion in the transposition of EU directives into national legislation. This latitude can be 
used  by  national  legislators  to  improve  the  competitiveness  of  the  institutions  and 
infrastructures  in  their  own  countries.  The  Lamfalussy  framework,  which  was  supposed  to 
promote the convergence of regulatory and supervisory practices, has been insufficient. High 
costs are being imposed on banks, especially those that have to comply with more than one 
rulebook and interact with more than one supervisor because of their cross-border activity. 
Furthermore,  regulatory  competition  tends  to  reduce  prudential  standards  and  make  the 
whole  system  more  fragile.  The  current  financial  crisis  seems  to  suggest  that  financial 
institutions  have  been  more  resilient  in  those  countries  where  EU  directives  have  been 
transposed in a more prudent way. 
Second,  competition  between  national  financial  centres  and  between  institutions  is  an 
obstacle to effective cooperation between national supervisors. In particular, it reduces the 
incentive to exchange information on individual institutions. This hampers the effectiveness 
of any cooperative mechanism for crisis prevention. It is even more problematic in the event 
of crisis resolution, especially for cross-border institutions, as has been seen in the specific 
case  of  a  large  and  complex  banking  group.  This  particular  case  also  showed  that  the 
resolution of a crisis of a cross border nature is further complicated by a mis-match between 
the supra-national nature of some financial institutions and the national nature of solvency 
aid. 
Colleges of supervisors have been created recently, but whether they can overcome these 
disincentives to cooperate is a moot point. Although the recent amendments to the Capital 
Requirements Directive (CRD) strengthen the legal underpinning of the colleges, they do not 
reduce or eliminate the disincentives to exchange information. In addition, all these colleges 
create level-playing-field and coordination problems. Moreover, the CRD does not introduce 
clear rules as regards decision-making, which may make it very difficult for colleges to come 
to a joint decision, especially in a crisis situation. 
Third, the financial turbulence has shown that in respect of both crisis prevention and crisis 
resolution  the  supervisory  and  central  banking  functions  have  to  be  closely  linked,  even 
2 
 BIS Review 17/2009
within  individual  countries.  When  these  functions  are  allocated  to  different  authorities, 
exchanges of information are more complex and action tends to be slower and less effective. 
Moreover, the smooth management of crisis situations may be undermined by different views 
of the central banks and the supervisory authority about actions to be taken, as it happened 
in a well documented case.  
To  sum  up,  the  incentives  to  cooperate  are  weaker  in  a  more  integrated  and  competitive 
environment. This has made the supervisory framework more fragile. 
What is needed?  
I  will  not  try  to  offer  some  instant  solutions  here,  but  I  will  just  mention  three 
recommendations  made  in  most  international  reports  lately.2  First,  there  should  be  no 
discretionary  interpretation  of  EU  directives  in  order  to  secure  advantages  for  domestic 
institutions  and  markets.  This  can  only  happen  if  regulations  are  harmonised  as  much  as 
possible, maybe even by creating some kind of European supervisory rulebook. The same 
applies to prudential supervisory practices. This means less room for manoeuvre for national 
legislators and supervisory authorities in interpreting EU directives. 
Second,  macro  and  micro-prudential  supervision  have  to  be  brought  closer  together.  The 
macro-prudential  authority  has  to  have  access  to  micro-prudential  information,  and  vice 
versa. This exchange of information can be better achieved within a single institution. 
Third,  national  and  European  authorities  have  to  work  in  a  more  integrated  way,  both  in 
respect  of  crisis  prevention  and  resolution.  Given  the  disincentives  and  legal  obstacles  to 
exchange information, the institutional framework must be compatible with the confidentiality 
of supervisory policies.  
To sum up, the institutional framework underpinning prudential supervision in Europe needs 
to be changed. This requires political will and political decisions. 
Institutional models for European supervision  
If  there  is  the  political  will  to  proceed  in  the  direction  of  a  strengthened  supervisory 
framework,  two  key  principles  should  be  restated:  decentralisation  and  institutional 
foundations. On the one hand, prudential supervision can only be implemented, in practical 
terms,  at  national  level,  by  those  authorities  that  are  close  to  the  field  and  know  the 
institutions well. On the other hand, there is a need for cooperation and coordination at the 
European level. Coordination can function only if it is supported by a solid, sound and simple 
institutional framework, ensuring common rules, standard and practices. The design of this 
framework  is  important.  Indeed,  coordination  does  not  automatically  lead  to  results.  Jean 
Monnet  gave  us  an  important  warning  in  this  regard,  when  he  said:  "I  have  too  often 
observed the limits of coordination. It is a method which promotes discussion, but it does not 
lead to a decision." Hence, the institutional framework must ensure effective crisis prevention 
and resolution. It must guarantee the transmission of the information needed to support swift 
decision-making.  
From an institutional point of view, at least two avenues can be pursued. Maybe more, but I 
will concentrate on two. The first would be to create a totally new institution responsible for 
micro-prudential supervision, outside the European System of Central Banks. This institution 
would  be  composed  of  all  the  supervisory  authorities  of  the  Member  States  plus  a  central 
                                                 
2   See in general the recent reports of: Financial Stability Forum, Enhancing Market and Institutional Resilience, 
April 2008; Group of Thirty, Financial Reform - A framework for financial stability, January 2009. As regards 
Europe, OECD, Economic Survey of the Euro Area 2009. 
BIS Review 17/2009 
 3
body. The second avenue would be to assign new competences to the ESCB or to a body 
close to the ECB.  
These  may  well  be  medium-term  solutions,  and  take  some  time  to  be  implemented,  but  it 
might  be  useful  to  think  along  these  lines  in  order  to  move  towards  a  stronger  European 
supervisory framework. 
The pros and cons of the various models have been examined thoroughly in the literature.3 
The discussion has sometimes bordered on the doctrinal, if not dogmatic. But pragmatism is 
the key. After all, even within countries there have been changes over time, in one direction 
or another. In all likelihood, there is no perfect system. Even the US is currently considering 
changes to its supervisory framework, and there are concrete proposals on the table.  
I can misquote Keynes and say that when the facts or circumstances change or when new 
information emerges, I can change my mind. Indeed, I have partly changed my mind in the 
light of experience. Let me share with you some of these reflections. I won’t go into all the 
pros and cons of the various models, but just make a few observations. In the 1990s, the 
trend  was  to  separate  prudential  supervision  from  central  banking.  It  was  thought  that  the 
conduct of monetary policy would be “polluted” by prudential supervision considerations. The 
temptation  to  try  to  help  some  banks  with  monetary  policy  tools  would  be  greater  if  the 
central bank exercised prudential competences.  On the other hand, given that supervisory 
powers are closer to the political authorities and that ultimately taxpayers may step in to prop 
up a failing bank, the governing body of the institution conducting both monetary policy and 
prudential  supervision  would  risk  being  more  exposed  to  political  pressures.  This  would 
undermine  the  independence  of  the  central  bank.  Furthermore,  the  negative  reputation 
effects of unsuccessful supervision can undermine the credibility of the central bank and its 
monetary  policy.  This  has  happened  in  the  past,  although  it  has  mainly  affected  central 
banks  which  were  not  fully  independent.  These  arguments  have  been  developed  in  the 
literature, and in fact were examined in a book written by Daniel Gros and myself in 2000.4
Recently  I  read  a  couple  of  other  reasons  for  not  entrusting  the  ECB/Eurosystem  with 
supervisory tasks. The first is that conferring direct micro-prudential supervision responsibility 
would  considerably  reinforce  the  powers  and  influence  of  the  ECB,  which  may  affect  the 
balance of power within the current institutional set-up. The second reason is that the Treaty 
does  not  currently  allow  the  ECB  to  be  allocated  supervisory  tasks  related  to  insurance 
companies or financial conglomerates.  
I am not in a position to judge whether extending the ECB’s responsibilities would affect the 
balance of power or not, and whether this would be a positive development. It seems to me 
to  be  more  of  a  pretext  than  a  real  argument.  In  any  case,  whatever  task  the  ECB  is 
entrusted with, it should remain independent, as the Treaty stipulates, but also accountable. 
It seems to me that over the years the ECB has developed an accountability dialogue with 
the European Parliament (as well as other EU bodies) which has been to the satisfaction of 
both parties, indeed all parties involved.  
Finally, the argument based on the fact that Article 105(6) of the Treaty does not allow the 
ECB to be assigned supervisory tasks on insurance companies does not stand to a closer 
scrutiny.  First,  it  could  be  argued  that  such  provision  would  not  prohibit  the  attribution  of 
responsibilities  to  the  ECB  as  regards  the  supervision  of  financial  conglomerates,  as  the 
                                                 
3   See for instance: Group of Thirty, The Structure of Financial Supervision – Approaches and Challenges in a 
Global Marketplace, October 2008; E. Wymeersch, The Structure of Financial Supervision in Europe - About 
Single,  Twin  Peaks  and  Multiple  Financial  Supervisors,  2006,  available  on  www.ssrn.com;  D.  Masciandaro 
(ed.), Handbook of Central Banking and Financial Authorities in Europe, 2005. 
4   “Open Issues in European Central Banking”, Macmillan, 2000. 
4 
 BIS Review 17/2009
related supervisory regime (as introduced by the Financial Conglomerates Directive5) is only 
supplementary with regard to the conglomerate as a whole, and does not regard the direct 
supervision of insurance undertakings. Second, this is not an argument that could support 
the case for the attribution of supervisory responsibilities to a new European entity and not to 
the ECB: also in the former case the Treaty would need to be amended. 
A stronger role for the ECB? 
Strengthening the role of the ECB in the field of supervision has some important advantages 
which, in my view, outweigh the disadvantages. 
First, there is no need to follow the normal procedures for changing the Treaty. Article 105.6 
can  be  applied  if  unanimously  agreed  by  the  Member  States  and  with  the  assent  of  the 
European Parliament. This article could also be used to address governance issues that are 
of concern to those who would like to safeguard the independence of the ECB in monetary 
policy,  and  keep  some  degree  of  separation  between  the  prudential  and  monetary  policy 
function. If responsibility for prudential supervision were to be entrusted to a body other than 
the ECB, a change in the Treaty would be needed, and this might take years, as we all know. 
In the light of the current financial crisis, it would be irresponsible to wait for a Treaty change 
via the normal revision procedures to achieve a stronger supervisory framework if the same 
result could be achieved without it. 
Second,  bringing  prudential  supervision  under  the  roof  the  ESCB  would  ensure  that  the 
information-related synergies between central banking and supervision are exploited to the 
maximum extent. 
Third,  it  would  ensure  that  supervision  is  put  in  the  hands  of  an  institution,  which  has  a 
proven track record, has relevant technical expertise in the house, and has an independent 
status. The latter point should not be underestimated. 
Fourth,  the  current  crisis  has  shown  the  need  to  strengthen  macro-prudential  supervision, 
which  concentrates  on  the  systemic  components  of  financial  markets.  It  was  the  lack  of  a 
comprehensive  perspective  which  led  to  the  contagious  nature  of  the  crisis  being 
underestimated,  even  in  countries  where  financial  institutions  were  thought  to  be  sound. 
Macro-prudential supervision can obviously not be conducted at national level, certainly not 
within  the  euro  area.  It  has  to  be  conducted  at  a  level  close  to  the  central  bank,  where 
analyses of monetary and financial developments are undertaken. This is consistent with the 
recommendations made by the FSF and other bodies in response to the current crisis. It has 
been suggested also by various members of the European Parliament. Furthermore, it is in 
line  with  the  proposal  in  the  US  to  assign  macro-prudential  responsibilities  to  the  Federal 
Reserve.  The  ECB  has  in  fact  laid  the  necessary  basis  for  taking  on  such  a  task,  notably 
through  the  preparation  of  its  Financial  Stability  Reports.  Yet  it  is  clear  that  the  warnings 
contained  in  these  reports  were  not  heeded  by  the  relevant  authorities.  This  shows  the 
authority for macro-prudential supervision should be equipped with the necessary powers. 
The  macro-prudential  supervisory  tasks  to  be  assigned  to  the  ECB  should  include:  the 
development of early warning systems about the emergence of risks and vulnerabilities in the 
financial system; the conduct of macro-stress testing exercises aiming at verifying the degree 
of  resilience  of  the  financial  sector  to  specific  shocks  and  propagation  mechanisms  with 
cross-border  and  cross-sector  dimensions;  the  definition  of  reporting  and  disclosure 
requirements;  macro-prudential 
risk 
concentration and liquidity mismatch.  
to  pro-cyclicality, 
regulation 
leverage, 
related 
                                                 
5   Directive  2002/87/EC  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  16  December  2002  on  the 
supplementary  supervision  of  credit  institutions,  insurance  undertakings  and  investment  firms  (OJ  L  35, 
11.2.2003, p. 1). 
BIS Review 17/2009 
 5
Fifth, in order to conduct macro-prudential supervision, it is necessary to have access to all 
the  relevant  information,  including  from  systemically  relevant  institutions.  This  requires  the 
ECB  to  participate  in  the  relevant  colleges  of  supervisors  of  major  banking  groups.  There 
also needs to be a full and proper exchange of information between national and European 
supervisors.  The  decentralised  structure  of  the  Eurosystem  permits  strong  coordination 
between  the  national  central  banks  and  the  ECB.  Any  European  supervisory  structure  will 
have 
to  rely  on  a  combination  of  centralised  decision-making  and  de-centralised 
implementation. The Eurosystem’s experience can be very useful in this respect.  
On  the  other  hand,  in  some  countries,  like  Germany  or  Austria,  where  the  supervisory 
authorities are not part of the central bank, the supervisors consider that they cannot deliver 
information  on  their  own  institutions  to  European  authorities  for  reasons  of  confidentiality. 
This does not make sense in a single financial market. These obstacles have to be removed 
rapidly.  
In order to overcome the disincentives to provide information on domestic banking systems, 
which arises from the fact that countries compete in a single financial market, a strong and 
independent  institution  at  the  centre  of  the  European  framework  is  needed,  an  institution 
which  can  safeguard  confidentiality  and  pursue  the  interests  of  the  Union.  At  present,  the 
European supervisory bodies, constructed on the Lamfalussy framework, have a very weak 
centre, which acts mainly as a secretariat. Building on these structures does not – in my view 
– give national authorities the guarantees or incentives they need to cooperate effectively.  
Conclusions 
To conclude, let me summarise my main points as a basis for the discussion today. 
First,  the  European  supervisory  framework  needs  to  be  overhauled,  in  the  light  of  recent 
experiences. This is certainly the case in respect of the euro area. We cannot afford to let 
this crisis go to waste. For that, it has created too much havoc. The people of Europe are 
suffering from the fallout of the financial crisis. They now expect their leaders to tackle the 
source of this crisis. 
Second, such a move  requires a political decision, because it entails greater and stronger 
coordination between national decision-making bodies. 
Third, coordination in Europe is credible only if it is based on an institution which offers and 
ensures confidentiality, independence and efficient decision-making. 
Fourth,  there  is  such  an  institution  today.  It  performs  this  role  in  monetary  policy  and  has 
performed it in areas associated with financial stability. It is the ECB and the Eurosystem, for 
the euro area. 
Fifth,  it  is  a  political  responsibility  to  decide  which  institution  to  entrust  with  enhanced 
responsibilities for prudential supervision. What is sure is that we cannot wait interminably to 
strengthen the current system. 
My final message is: rest assured, the ECB is ready to assume responsibility for the tasks 
that Europe’s political authorities may assign to it. 
Thank you. 
6 
 BIS Review 17/2009
