Philipp Hildebrand: Current state of the financial system in Switzerland 
Introductory remarks by Mr Philipp Hildebrand, Vice-Chairman of the Governing Board of the 
Swiss National Bank, at the half-yearly media news conference, Berne, 20 June 2009. 
 Introduction 
This time last year we reported that the overall market environment had calmed somewhat. 
However, we also stressed that it was too early to sound the all-clear, and that there was 
considerable  uncertainty  about  the  future  development  of  the  crisis.  Our  concerns  at  that 
time proved more than well-founded. Indeed, the actual events outstripped our expectations. 
If  I  may,  I  will  start  with  my  conclusion:  the  state  of  the  Swiss  and  international  financial 
system is – and remains – vulnerable overall. Consequently, we are still maintaining close 
contact with the big banks and with Swiss and foreign authorities, and are monitoring further 
developments  with  great  attention.  In  addition  we  are  continuing  our  intensive  efforts  at 
national and international level to improve the regulatory framework. Given the scale of the 
crisis, the Swiss National Bank (SNB) is convinced that although the measures taken so far 
in this area are heading in the right direction, some of them do not yet go far enough. I will 
therefore begin by briefly assessing the situation of the financial system, and then present 
the issues to which the SNB attaches medium to long-term priority with regard to reform of 
the banking sector operating environment. In the short term, however, the main focus is on 
overcoming the crisis.  
Situation in the banking sector 
As  our  Financial  Stability  Report  published  today  describes  in  detail,  the  situation  in  the 
Swiss banking sector deteriorated considerably in 2008.  The turbulence in the money and 
credit  markets  that  had  erupted  in  mid-2007  worsened  in  2008,  also  spilling  over  to  other 
areas. The two big banks, in particular UBS, were hit hard by these negative developments. 
As you know, together the two institutions recorded a total loss of some CHF 30 billion in 
2008.1 They took extensive measures to strengthen their resilience. In addition to reducing 
risky positions, they raised sizeable amounts of private capital. The resilience of UBS was 
further  strengthened  by  the  package  of  government  measures  announced  by  the  Federal 
Council, the SNB and the then Swiss Federal Banking Commission (SFBC, now FINMA or 
Swiss Financial Market Advisory Authority) in October 2008. Owing to all of these measures, 
the big banks’ capital situation at the end of 2008 improved slightly compared to the end of 
2007, despite the massive losses incurred. However, our assessment is that, overall, risks in 
the big banks’ books are still material. This is all the more serious since, compared to the end 
of 2007, the profit potential of the big banks is lower.  
Banks with a domestic business focus, i.e. cantonal, regional and Raiffeisen banks, present 
a much more favourable picture. Although the overall profitability of these bank categories 
declined in 2008, it still remains above the long-term average. Their capital base is high by 
historical standards and they were able to build up their liquidity reserves last year. However, 
for these banks, too, the economic downturn will represent an increasing challenge.  
The  outlook  for  the  banks  is  also  shaped  by  the  negative  forecasts  for  the  entire  world 
economy.  These  suggest  a  substantial  deterioration  in  credit  quality  –  including  for 
                                                 
1   The figures published in our publication, Banks in Switzerland, are reported at parent company level, not at 
group, or consolidated level. According to these figures, the total loss for the big banks amounted to some 
CHF 38 billion. Cf. press release of 18 June 2009 on Banks in Switzerland for further details. 
BIS Review 77/2009 
 1
Switzerland. Consequently, increasing loan losses, substantial reductions in earnings and a 
deterioration in the capital situation may be expected for a large number of banks. However, 
cantonal, regional and Raiffeisen banks appear in relatively good shape to withstand these 
negative developments. The situation for the big banks appears more difficult. In addition to 
the still sizeable market risks, they face significant credit risks overall. Simple comparisons 
with earlier crisis periods show that potential losses on traditional lending are high, when set 
in  relation  to  the  capital  cushion.  The  longer  and  deeper  the  recession,  the  greater  these 
potential losses will be.  
In  our  basis  scenario  we  expect  the  economy  to  recover  gradually  as  of  2010,  both 
internationally and in Switzerland.  
However,  we  cannot  rule  out  a  significantly  deeper  and  longer-lasting  recession  than  that 
forecast in the basis scenario. In this adverse scenario of a deep and long-lasting recession, 
large losses would be possible for banks with a domestic business focus as well as for big 
banks.  Such  losses  might  lead  to  a  depletion  of  a  substantial  share  of  the  banks’  current 
capital reserves. This might in turn impair market confidence in their soundness.  
Given  this  risk  potential,  it  is  therefore  essential  that  the  big  banks  take  all  the  necessary 
measures  to  ensure  their  resilience  to  any  further  significant  deterioration  in  conditions. 
These measures include another reduction in their risk positions, a further strengthening of 
their capital base, the preservation of an adequate liquidity cushion and the alignment of their 
cost  structure  with  the  changed  market  environment.  The  opportunity  offered  by  the 
somewhat calmer environment at present should be used to take these measures. The SNB 
and  FINMA  will  monitor  developments  in  these  areas  closely.  In  this  respect,  the  SNB 
explicitly welcomes the fact that, at their last General Meetings, the big bank shareholders 
agreed to the creation of authorised capital. This allows the big banks to react appropriately 
and flexibly to market developments.  
Regulatory agenda 
However, if the stability of the financial system is to be increased in the medium and longer 
term, the authorities themselves face challenges, and not just the banks. Intensive efforts are 
currently going into the development of appropriate solutions, both at the international level 
and in Switzerland.  
Last autumn, for instance, the then SFBC issued decrees imposing tighter capital adequacy 
requirements on the big banks. In future, the capital base at these institutions will have to 
exceed,  in  good  times,  the  minimum  risk-weighted  capital  requirements  by  100%.  As  a 
complement to this, FINMA has also introduced a “leverage ratio”, i.e. a limit to the banks’ 
leverage. The SNB considers that leverage of over 20 in the banking sector is not prudent 
and thus is undesirable in good times. In other words, we consider that, in good times, the 
capital  base  should  account  for  at  least  5%  of  the  balance  sheet  total.  This  is  in  line  with 
FINMA’s requirements. FINMA expects the big banks’ “leverage ratio” to be well over 3% at 
group level and well over 4% for individual institutions in good times. To prevent the capital 
requirements from having a procyclical impact, two steps have been taken. First, there will be 
a long time delay before they are implemented. The new FINMA targets will apply as of 2013 
at the earliest, and an extension would be an option for the big banks if compliance becomes 
impossible due to the situation on the capital markets or the big banks’ individual earnings 
position. Second, an anticyclical element is explicitly built into the new Swiss regulations. In 
bad times, the big banks will be allowed to fall short of the new targets. In other words, a 
capital cushion will be built up in good times to absorb losses in crises. 
Alongside  reinforcement  of  the  capital  base,  liquidity  also  needs  to  be  strengthened  to 
increase  the  resilience  of  banks.  Consequently,  a  comprehensive  revision  of  the  liquidity 
regulations  for  big  banks  is  currently  underway.  Nonetheless,  better  capital  and  liquidity 
requirements do not rule out the possibility that banks will again face existential difficulties in 
2 
 BIS Review 77/2009
the future. The SNB therefore considers all of the efforts that are going into facilitating orderly 
wind-downs of large international institutions in future to be just as important. The lack of any 
clearly defined and internationally coordinated wind-down procedure contributes to a de facto 
obligation on the part of the state to provide assistance to these institutions. Any rescue of a 
large financial institution brings more than just high costs. The “too big to fail” issue also has 
a tendency to harbour incentives for banks to enter into excessive risks. In Switzerland, the 
“too  big  to  fail”  question  is  particularly  relevant  and,  in  many  respects,  unique,  given  the 
importance  of  the  big  banks  for  the  country’s  banking  sector  and  its  economy.  A  clearly 
defined  and  internationally  coordinated  wind-down  procedure  would  help  to  ease  this 
problem.  The  interplay  between  national  jurisdictions  is,  however,  extremely  complex,  and 
finding a solution for a predefined and internationally coordinated procedure of this kind is 
correspondingly challenging and time-consuming. 
The  SNB  therefore  believes  that  careful  consideration  must  also  be  given  to  alternative 
approaches.  These  include  rules  governing  the  organisational  structure  of  large  financial 
institutions. The aim of such rules would be, in a crisis situation, to split off those units of a 
bank that are important for the functioning of the economy and wind down the rest. This does 
not mean, however, that this type of approach would question the universal bank model as 
such. The SNB is aware that rules governing the organisational structure of large financial 
institutions are not easy to draw up. Legal and operational aspects would therefore need to 
be analysed with the requisite care and any regulations drawn up in close collaboration with 
the banks affected.  
We are convinced that everything needs to be done to implement one of these approaches 
for  facilitating  the  wind-down  of  large  financial  institutions.  If  significant  progress  is  not 
achieved  within  a  reasonable  time  frame,  measures  that  address  the  size  of  the  banks 
should also be examined. One way in which the size of a bank can be influenced is through 
capital  regulations.  Capital  requirements  that  are  dependent  upon  size  reduce  a  bank’s 
incentive to inflate its balance sheet without restraint. Measures with a direct impact on the 
size of banks are also conceivable. A size restriction would of course be a major intervention 
in an institution’s corporate strategy. Naturally the SNB is aware that there are advantages to 
size. For this reason, the advantages and disadvantages of such a measure would have to 
be  examined  and  weighed  up  very  carefully.  Nevertheless,  in  the  case  of  the  large 
international  banks,  the  empirical  evidence  would  seem  to  suggest  that  these  institutions 
have  long  exceeded  the  size  needed  to  make  full  use  of  these  advantages.  It  should  be 
noted that although the instrument of size restriction is far-reaching, it is by no means new in 
economic policy. For decades it has been one of the tools for preventing market dominance 
in the area of competition policy. Within the context of financial stability, the objective of such 
a  measure  would  be  to  reduce  risks  to  the  stability  of  the  banking  and  financial  system, 
rather than to maintain competition.  
I would like to run through the last few points again briefly. In the short term, priority must be 
given  to  overcoming  the  crisis.  However,  in  order  to  increase  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system in the medium to long term, we consider a reform of the operational environment in 
the banking sector to be essential. We attach particular importance to alleviating the “too big 
to  fail”  problem.  Apart  from  stricter  rules  for  systemically  important  institutions,  the  SNB 
currently  envisages  two  further  options  that  it  intends  to  examine  –  first,  measures  to 
facilitate  the  wind-down  of  large,  international  institutions  and,  second,  direct  and  indirect 
measures to limit their size. The SNB will examine all of these in depth, in close collaboration 
with  FINMA,  alongside  possible  further  options.  There  can  be  no  more  taboos,  given  our 
experiences of the last two years.  
The role of the authorities 
What are the lessons to be learnt from this crisis with respect to the role of the authorities? If 
the regulatory progress we are aiming for is also to be enforced, we need strong authorities. 
BIS Review 77/2009 
 3
This applies, on the one hand, to FINMA, which is charged with oversight of individual banks, 
or microprudential oversight. FINMA needs sufficient qualified resources to fulfil its oversight 
responsibilities. On the other hand, the SNB must step up its own activities through an even 
closer  collaboration  with  FINMA  and  also  by  reinforcing  our  macroprudential  oversight. 
Unlike  FINMA,  the  SNB  does  not  supervise  banks.  We  do  not  focus  our  attention  on 
individual institutions but on the banking system as a whole. Our macroprudential oversight is 
largely complementary to the microprudential oversight carried out by FINMA. However, in 
Switzerland,  overlaps  occur  naturally  between  the  microprudential  and  macroprudential 
perspectives due to the systemic importance of the two big banks.  
Within the ambit of its mandate, the SNB therefore considers it imperative to maintain direct 
and frequent contact with the big banks. Where necessary, we will step up the frequency and 
intensity  of  these  contacts.  Their  purpose  is  to  obtain  information  of  relevance  for 
macroprudential oversight, but also to inform the big banks of our risk assessment. The SNB 
will also become increasingly involved in regulatory projects that are relevant from a systemic 
point of view. Initial examples are the work on the introduction of a leverage ratio and on the 
reform  of  liquidity  regulations,  which  FINMA  and  the  SNB  have  been  driving  forward 
together.  This  development  does  not  essentially  call  into  question  the  division  of 
responsibilities between the supervisory authority and the central bank. However, because of 
the importance of the big banks for our financial system and our economy, greater weight 
must  be  given  to  the  macroprudential  perspective,  both  in  the  oversight  of  the  financial 
system and in its regulation. 
4 
 BIS Review 77/2009
