Zeti Akhtar Aziz: Islamic finance developments in Malaysia 
Address by Dr Zeti Akhtar Aziz, Governor of the Central Bank of Malaysia, at the Launch of 
Public Islamic Bank Berhad, Kuala Lumpur, 3 March 2009. 
 It is my pleasure to be here today on the official launch of "Public Islamic Bank Berhad". This 
marks  the  transformation  of  the  Islamic  window  operations  into  an  Islamic  subsidiary,  a 
dedicated  institutional  structure  that  will  give  greater  focus  to  Islamic  banking  business 
operations.  The  continued  progress  of  Islamic  finance  in  our  financial  system  has 
demonstrated  that  despite  the  on-going  global  financial  crisis,  it  has  not  discouraged  the 
further expansion and development of Islamic finance. Malaysia now has a total of 17 Islamic 
banks, of which nine (9) are the subsidiaries of the domestic banking groups.  
The underlying philosophy for the incorporation of an Islamic subsidiary is primarily aimed at 
further  strengthening  the  institutional  structure  for  Islamic  banking  business  operations. 
Financial institutions which have achieved a critical mass in their Islamic banking business, 
have  migrated  from  their  Islamic  banking  window  operations  to  an  Islamic  subsidiary.  The 
establishment  of  Islamic  subsidiary  has  greater  potential  to  complement  the  goals  of  the 
banking group by providing business flexibility and autonomy to the Islamic subsidiary.  
Currently,  the  Islamic  banking  system  in  Malaysia  has  successfully  positioned  itself  as  a 
robust  and  competitive  component  of  our  financial  system.  Islamic  banking  assets  now 
account for 17.4% of the total banking assets of the Malaysian financial system while in the 
bond  market,  the  sukuk  market  constitutes  57%  of  the  total  market  as  at  end-2008.  The 
product  range  has  now  also  expanded  into  broad  array  of  innovative  instruments.  Several 
innovative  Islamic  financial  products  have  been  introduced  which  included  residential 
mortgage backed securities, commodity based financing, as well as investment and equity 
linked products based on musharakah, mudarabah and ijarah.  
Today,  however,  the  international  and  domestic  environment  in  which  we  are  operating  is 
going to become even more challenging. Delays in the resolution to the financial crisis in the 
advanced economies have resulted in a sharp and rapid deterioration in the recent months. 
The  inability  to  stabilise  conditions  is  highly  likely  to  have  a  more  protracted  effect  on  the 
global economy. While there has been concerted monetary policy action and fiscal stimulus 
across the globe, confidence needs to be restored. This can however, only happen when the 
financial  system  in  the  crisis  affected  countries  are  repaired  and  credit  continues  to  flow 
again, when markets continue to function efficiently and when prices reflects the value of the 
assets.  
While  Malaysian  banks  are  sound  and  well  capitalised  and  our  economy  is  not  over 
leveraged and our external position remains strong, Malaysia as an open economy is already 
adversely affected by these global developments. The domestic conditions are expected to 
remain  challenging  in  the  coming  quarters  and  a  range  of  policy  responses  are  being 
implemented. Two elements are vital in this process. The first is to ensure that the domestic 
intermediation process remains strong so as to support domestic demand. And secondly, the 
fiscal stimulus is key to containing the effects of the external developments and to placing 
Malaysia in a position to resume growth once conditions in the global economy stabilises.  
During  this  challenging  period,  financial  institutions  including  Islamic  financial  institutions 
have an important role to ensure the continuous access to financing by the private sector. 
Key to this, is the forward looking business strategies being adopted by banking institutions, 
the organisational structure and the operational capability that is put in place.  
I  would  like  to  take  this  opportunity  to  highlight  two  other  important  dimensions  in  the 
development  of  Islamic  finance,  going  forward.  For  more  than  two  decades,  the  Islamic 
financial  system  in  Malaysia  has  gradually  transformed  into  a  comprehensive  Islamic 
BIS Review 25/2009 
 1
financial  landscape.  This  has  been  reinforced  by  a  legal  and  regulatory  framework,  the 
essential financial infrastructure, and an environment conducive for product innovation.  
Notwithstanding the success of Islamic finance, the global ramifications of the crisis also calls 
for more concerted efforts to bring the industry to a higher level of resilience. Of importance, 
in  this  process,  is  to  embrace  the  values  of  Islamic  finance  of  justice  and  fairness  that 
benefits  the  society  and  the  system.  It  is  thus  important  for  Islamic  finance  to  transcend 
beyond just the pursuit of growth and monetary performance but also to emphasise ethical 
market  conduct  practices.  Indeed,  this  is  in  line  with  the  principles  of  Maqasid  al-Shariah 
(objectives of Shariah).  
Financial  innovation,  as  has  been  shown  in  the  recent  crisis  has  led  to  adverse 
consequences for the economy. By learning from the lessons of the recent crisis, the process 
of  innovation  in  the  formulation  of  Islamic  financial  products  and  services  must  be  done 
carefully and in accordance with Shariah in its entirety and to take into account the distinct 
risk characteristics of Islamic banking.  
The  second  dimension  is  on  the  need  for  continuous  investment  in  human  capital 
development. It is important for the Islamic financial services industry to continually promote 
human capital development and expertise to create a larger pool of experts and high calibre 
professionals.  This  involves  enlarging  not  only  the  existing  talent  pool,  but  also  building  a 
robust pipeline of skilled human resources for the future.  
Bank  Negara  Malaysia  is  committed  towards  promoting  human  capital  development.  The 
establishment of the dedicated ancillary institutions such as the Islamic Banking and Finance 
Institute  in  Malaysia  (IBFIM),  the  International  Centre  for  Education  in  Islamic  Finance 
(INCEIF) and the International Shariah Research Academy (ISRA) to focus on the area of 
training, education and research are aimed to meet this objective. We would like to see a 
higher  degree  of  engagements  by  the  financial  institutions  to  meet  the  talent  need  of  the 
industry. Islamic financial institutions are encouraged to collaborate and engage with these 
educational institutions, with exchange of staff, attachments, and internships. 
In  addition  to  these,  is  the  strengthening  of  Malaysia's  international  linkages  with  other 
financial centres in the area of Islamic finance. Recently, Bank Negara Malaysia, under the 
MIFC  agenda,  signed  an  MOU  with  the  UK  Trade  and  Investment  to  promote  the  mutual 
development  of  Islamic  finance  and  business  linkages.  In  this  respect  Islamic  financial 
institutions in Malaysia are encouraged to leverage on the MOU platform in building strategic 
partnerships with their counterparts to develop new value added activities and to expand the 
market.  
While these steps are being taken to strengthen our international inter-linkages in the area of 
Islamic finance, Islamic financial institutions in Malaysia need to continue to strengthen their 
capacity  and  capabilities  to  meet  the  significant  challenges  of  the  current  and  future 
environment. On this note, I wish to congratulate Public Bank Berhad on the official launch of 
Public Islamic Bank Berhad and for the commitment to contribute to the success of Islamic 
finance. Wishing Public Islamic Bank every success in its endeavours.  
2 
 BIS Review 25/2009
