Donald L Kohn: Monetary policy in the financial crisis 
Speech by Mr Donald L Kohn, Vice Chairman of the Board of Governors of the US Federal 
Reserve  System,  at  the  Conference  in  Honor  of  Dewey  Daane,  Nashville,  Tennessee, 
18 April 2009. 
The original speech, which contains various links to the documents mentioned, can be found on the US Federal 
Reserve System’s website.  
 In  response  to  the  financial  turmoil  and  economic  weakness  of  the  past  18  months,  the 
Federal  Reserve  has  taken  unprecedented  steps  in  conducting  monetary  policy.  Not  only 
have we reduced our target federal funds rate aggressively, essentially to zero, but we have 
also  made  credit  available  to  institutions  and  markets  in  which  we  had  not  previously 
intervened.  To  varying  degrees,  similar  actions  have  been  taken  by  other  central  banks 
around the world. For Dewey's class each January, I have been describing my take on the 
framework for making monetary policy. I thought a natural extension of that role and a way of 
honoring  Dewey  and  his  abiding  interest  in  policymaking  would  be  to  talk  about  how  the 
crisis has and has not affected that framework. Chairman Bernanke has done that already in 
several  speeches,  but  participants  in  this  conference  might  find  my  perspective  useful.  In 
providing it, I will try to address some of the questions people have raised about our policy 
actions.1
Although  our  actions  have  been  unprecedented,  the  framework  in  which  I  have  been 
considering them remains, at its most fundamental level, the same as the one I have been 
describing  to  Dewey's  classes  over  the  years.  Our  objective  is  to  promote  maximum 
sustainable employment and stable prices over time. These goals are enshrined in law, and 
they also make sense in economic theory and practice. Central banks are uniquely suited to 
promoting price stability, and they contribute to maximum employment and growth over time 
by  eliminating  the  uncertainties  and  distortions  of  high  and  unstable  inflation.  The  goal  of 
maximum employment also is critical: A balance between aggregate demand and potential 
supply  is  needed  to  maintain  price  stability;  in  addition,  significant  fluctuations  in  output 
impose  costs  on  our  economy,  add  to  uncertainty,  and  impede  planning  and  growth.  Our 
monetary policy actions in the crisis have been aimed at fostering both broad objectives.2  
We  achieve  our  objectives  by  influencing  financial  conditions  –  the  cost  and  availability  of 
credit as well as asset prices. Changes in financial conditions, in turn, affect spending and 
thus the balance between aggregate demand and potential supply. And how close we are to 
maximum  employment  is  a  basic  ongoing  determinant  of  inflation,  with  slack  reducing 
inflation  and  overly  high  resource  utilization  increasing  it.  The  other  major  determinant  is 
inflation  expectations:  If  expectations  are  not  anchored  –  if  they  vary  in  response  to  our 
actions or to persistent gaps between actual and potential output – inflation itself will follow.  
Historically, we've achieved needed adjustments in financial conditions by moving our federal 
funds rate target, and we have done that by adjusting the supply of bank reserves through 
                                                 
1   See  Ben  S.  Bernanke  (2009),  “The  Federal  Reserve’s  Balance  Sheet,”  speech  delivered  at  the  Federal 
Reserve Bank of Richmond 2009 Credit Markets Symposium, Charlotte, N.C., April 3; and Ben S. Bernanke 
(2009),  “The  Crisis  and  the  Policy  Response,”  speech  delivered  at  the  Stamp  Lecture,  London  School  of 
Economics, London, January 13. 
The views presented here are my own and not necessarily those of other members of the Board of Governors 
or the Federal Open Market Committee. 
 2   My remarks will concentrate on actions aimed at broad sectors of the financial markets, not on those aimed at 
stabilizing  individual  systemically  important  institutions,  like  The  Bear  Stearns  Companies,  Inc.;  American 
International Group, Inc., or AIG; and several bank holding companies. 
BIS Review 48/2009 
 1
open  market  operations  in  the  government  securities  market.  In  well-functioning  financial 
markets,  changes  in  actual  and  expected  targets  for  the  federal  funds  rate  are  arbitraged 
through the financial system to affect the cost of credit and the price of assets. Many factors 
affect these markets, and the relationship of our actions to financial conditions is very loose, 
but, on balance, we have been able to use our control of the federal funds rate to make the 
adjustments  to  financial  conditions  needed  to  foster  our  objectives  for  prices  and 
employment.  
From the time that the financial market turmoil emerged in force in August 2007, however, 
we could see that the relationship of the federal funds rate to financial conditions, and hence 
to  spending,  was  especially  disrupted,  with  any  given  federal  funds  rate  implying  much 
tighter  conditions  than  usual.  Banks  became  quite  uncertain  about  the  losses  they  might 
have to absorb on mortgages and other lending, about the losses their counterparties might 
also suffer, and about the extent to which their liquidity was at risk from having to support off-
balance-sheet  entities  or  from  experiencing  a  withdrawal  by  their  own  lenders.  This 
uncertainty  made  banks  much  more  cautious  about  extending  credit  to  each  other  and  to 
households and businesses. As financial disruption continued and the economy weakened, 
lenders generally became much more uncertain about the financial condition of borrowers, 
sparking a strong preference for safe and liquid assets like Treasury bills. Trading liquidity in 
many  markets  dried  up,  the  usual  arbitrage  among  markets  broke  down,  and  spreads 
widened  –  often  by  more  than  seemed  justified  by  the  underlying  deterioration  in  the 
economy and the ability of borrowers to repay. The tightening of financial conditions, in turn, 
further  restrained  aggregate  demand  and  economic  activity.  This  adverse  feedback  loop 
between  financial  conditions  and  the  economy  has  been  a  prominent  feature  of  the 
recession.  
The  Federal  Reserve  took  a  two-pronged  approach  to  countering  the  effects  of  financial 
stringency on the economy: We used our conventional policy tools, and we initiated a range 
of unconventional policy actions to support the extension of credit. In the first category, we 
cut the federal funds rate target and did so aggressively after the economy began to weaken 
substantially in late 2007. By December of last year, we had reduced the target to a range of 
0  to  1/4  percent.  Lowering  the  federal  funds  rate  helped  offset  a  portion  of  the  effects  of 
financial  disruption  on  credit  conditions  for  households  and  businesses.  And  policy  easing 
should have helped the flow of credit by reducing some of the concerns about the effects of a 
weaker economy on repayment prospects.  
But reducing the federal funds rate has not seemed sufficient, and so we also have taken 
actions  to  ease  conditions  in  credit  markets  more  directly  –  what  Chairman  Bernanke  has 
referred to as "credit easing." In many respects, these actions have been extensions of our 
traditional methods of operation, though they have taken us into new territory in which we 
have used the tools in very new ways.  
Beginning early in the turmoil, we eased the terms on which we lent to depository institutions 
(our  traditional  borrowers)  quite  dramatically.  We  lowered  the  interest  rate  on  discount 
window  loans,  increased  their  maturity,  and,  to  reduce  the  stigma  of  borrowing  from  the 
window, auctioned credit. We cooperated with foreign central banks through currency swaps 
to make dollar funding available to banks operating abroad. Later, for the first time since the 
1930s, we extended credit to nondepository institutions, granting discount window access to 
primary  dealers  when  it  became  evident  that  constraints  on  their  access  to  liquidity 
threatened broader financial stability and economic activity.3 Given the increasing reliance on 
securities markets to intermediate credit in our financial system, these dealers had become 
more central to maintaining the flow of credit from savers to borrowers. Last fall, when a run 
                                                 
3   Primary dealers are broker-dealers that trade in U.S. government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of 
New York. 
2 
 BIS Review 48/2009
on  money  market  mutual  funds  was  severely  constricting  their  purchases  of  commercial 
paper,  an  important  source  of  credit  to  many  businesses,  we  supported  the  funds,  their 
customers, and their borrowers by making credit available that allowed funds to meet heavy 
redemption requests and also provided credit directly to borrowers in the commercial paper 
market.  
Our  objectives  in  these  programs  are  consistent  with  central  banks'  classic  function  as 
lenders of last resort. We are encouraging the continued provision of private-sector funding 
to intermediaries by assuring their creditors that sound intermediaries have a sure source of 
liquidity  to  repay  debts.  When,  despite  this  encouragement,  private  lenders  have  such  a 
strong preference for safety and liquidity that credit is not forthcoming, we lend, often at a 
penalty  rate  relative  to  normally  functioning  markets;  that  lending  is  intended  to  prevent 
disorderly  and  disruptive  failures  and  fire  sales  of  illiquid  assets,  which  would  drive  asset 
prices lower, intensify the disruption of credit flows, and deepen the pullback in spending.  
Most  recently,  in  collaboration  with  the  Treasury,  we  have  begun  supplying  liquidity  to 
purchasers of securitized credit. Under this program, private investors absorb credit risk up to 
a certain level, and the Treasury takes on the bulk of the credit risk above that level. The 
Federal  Reserve's  residual  credit  risk  is  designed  to  be  quite  small.  The  asset-backed 
securities market that this program supports had become a key vehicle over the past couple 
of decades for financing credit extended to households and businesses, but its functioning 
deteriorated  rapidly  over  the  second  half  of  last  year,  with  issuance  tailing  off  almost 
completely.  The  availability  of  credit  from  the  Federal  Reserve  and  the  insurance  against 
severe downside risks from the Treasury should buoy demand for securitized debt and thus 
help bolster the flow of credit to households and businesses.  
A shortage of funding has not been the only factor impeding the extension of credit. Lenders 
have been concerned about counterparty risk and about conserving their own capital against 
unforeseeable events. We can't deal with those concerns through our lending because we do 
not take appreciable credit risk. But confidence about access to funding has been a part of 
the problem, as reflected in the evaporation of trading in term maturities in a wide range of 
wholesale funding markets and the elevated spreads paid by even very safe borrowers. The 
limited availability of credit to sound borrowers, even when secured by what had been seen 
as  good  collateral,  has  been  a  source  of  instability  and  constraint  on  credit  flows.  Central 
banks can address such a shortage because they can remain unaffected by panicky flights to 
liquidity and safety. Their willingness to extend collateralized lending in size against a broad 
range of assets can replace flows of private credit that are normally uncollateralized.  
Another aspect of our efforts to affect financial conditions has been the extension of our open 
market  operations  to  large-scale  purchases  of  agency  mortgage-backed  securities  (MBS), 
agency  debt,  and  longer-term  Treasury  debt.  We  initially  announced  our  intention  to 
undertake large-scale asset purchases last November, when the federal funds rate began to 
approach  its  zero  lower  bound  and  we  needed  to  begin  applying  stimulus  through  other 
channels as the economic contraction deepened. These purchases are intended to reduce 
intermediate-  and  longer-term  interest  rates  on  mortgages  and  other  credit  to  households 
and businesses; those rates influence decisions about investments in long-lived assets like 
houses,  consumer  durable  goods,  and  business  capital.  In  ordinary  circumstances,  the 
typically quite modest volume of central bank purchases and sales of such assets has only 
small  and  temporary  effects  on  their  yields.  However,  the  extremely  large  volume  of 
purchases now underway does appear to have substantially lowered yields. The decline in 
yields  reflects  "preferred  habitat"  behavior,  meaning  that  there  is  not  perfect  arbitrage 
between the yields on longer-term assets and current and expected short-term interest rates. 
These preferences are likely to be especially strong in current circumstances, so that long-
term asset prices rise and yields fall as the Federal Reserve acquires a significant portion of 
the outstanding stock of securities held by the public.  
Against this general background, let me address some questions about our operations. 
BIS Review 48/2009 
 3
Have they been effective?  
Yes, I believe they have helped ease financial conditions, though they can't address all the 
problems in financial markets. And the situation in financial markets and the economy would 
have  been  far  worse  if  the  Federal  Reserve  hadn't  taken  the  actions  we  did  in  supplying 
liquidity as well as lowering our federal funds rate target.  
Clearly,  sharp  decreases  in  the  federal  funds  rate  target  have  shown  up  directly  in  other 
short-term  interest  rates.  Our  commercial  paper  facilities  helped  stabilize  money  market 
mutual funds and have steadied the commercial paper market and lowered rates for high-
quality issuers. And the announcements of our purchases of MBS and Treasury bonds have 
reduced  mortgage  and  other  long-term  interest  rates  appreciably  –  by  some  estimates  as 
many as 100 basis points.  
Our provision of liquidity to banks in the United States and, via currency swaps with other 
central  banks,  abroad  appears  to  have  eased  pressures  in  dollar  funding  markets,  as 
indicated by declines in spreads between the London interbank offered rate, or Libor, and the 
overnight index swap rate. This easing has lowered rates for bank borrowers paying rates 
tied  to  Libor  and  given  banks  better  access  to  interbank  liquidity  to  support  lending  and 
market  making.  The  extension  of  liquidity  to  primary  dealers  has  been  critical  in  providing 
stability  when  private  lenders  have,  from  time  to  time,  become  reluctant  to  make  even 
secured  loans  to  these  counterparties.  Our  own  sense,  reinforced  by  many  reports  from 
market  participants,  is  that  our  willingness  to  extend  credit  to  commercial  and  investment 
banks prevented far worse market outcomes when flights to liquidity and safety intensified – 
say, around the time of the problems of Bear Stearns and in the wake of multiple failures and 
near-failures  of  financial  firms  in  the  second  half  of  September.  Private  lenders  have 
demanded that intermediaries be much less leveraged. That development is healthy over the 
long  run,  but  when  the  transition  is  compressed  by  extreme  risk  aversion  and  market 
participants  are  forced  to  delever  through  fire  sales,  the  financial  markets  and  economy 
suffer. Our liquidity facilities allow for a more gradual and controlled process.  
Are we allocating credit? 
Our actions are aimed at increasing credit flows for the entire economy; we are not trying to 
favor some sectors over others. However, an element of credit allocation is inherent in some 
of  our  interventions.  That  element  grows  out  of  the  very  market  characteristics  that  have 
necessitated these interventions and have made such interventions effective. If markets were 
highly liquid and investors and lenders were willing to take normal risks and arbitrage across 
markets,  financial  conditions  wouldn't  have  tightened  so  much,  intensifying  the  economic 
downturn, and adjustments in the federal funds rate could well have sufficed to stabilize the 
economy. As we have been forced to attack overly tight financial conditions by extending our 
discount  window  facilities  to  new  intermediaries  and  certain  markets  and  to  extend  open 
market operations to agency debt and MBS, we have recognized that the resulting effects 
can be uneven across markets and lenders. This outcome is not a comfortable one for the 
central bank, and we have taken steps to minimize the extent of any credit allocation. We try 
to  limit  our  interventions  to  broad  market  segments  or  classes  of  intermediaries,  and  we 
choose them based on judgments that improved functioning will reduce systemic instability or 
have a material effect on credit flows and the economy and that our actions have high odds 
of yielding improvements.  
Are we taking credit risks that will end up being paid for by the taxpayer? 
For the credit facilities that we make available to multiple firms, we are not taking significant 
credit risk that might end up being absorbed by the taxpayer. For almost all the loans made 
by  the  Federal  Reserve,  we  look  first  to  sound  borrowers  for  repayment  and  then  to 
underlying collateral. Moreover, we lend less than the value of the collateral, with the size of 
4 
 BIS Review 48/2009
the "haircuts" depending on the riskiness of the collateral and on the availability of market 
prices for the collateral. Some of our lending programs involve nonrecourse loans that look 
primarily to the collateral rather than to the borrower for repayment in the event that the value 
of the collateral falls below the amount loaned. In these circumstances, we insist on taking 
only the very highest quality collateral, lend less than the face amount of the collateral, and 
typically  have  other  sources  to  absorb  any  losses  that  might  nonetheless  occur  –  for 
example, Treasury capital for our lending against securitized loans.4  
We have increased the amount of information that we publish about the collateral and other 
steps we take to protect against credit losses. But, understandably, given the sharp increase 
in  loans  to  new  institutions  and  markets,  the  public  is  naturally  interested  in  our  lending 
practices,  and  we  will  be  releasing  even  more  information  about  what  stands  behind  our 
loans in coming weeks.  
How will we gauge how much to do?  
This is a difficult question without a ready answer, even under more normal circumstances 
when we are focused on the federal funds rate, and it is an even harder judgment when, as 
now,  the  federal  funds  rate  is  near  zero  and  we  are  intervening  in  other  ways  to  affect 
financial conditions. We have some, albeit limited, ability to gauge the effects of large-scale 
asset  purchases  on  interest  rates;  the  effects  of  liquidity  facilities,  like  the  Term  Asset-
Backed Securities Loan Facility and other programs, are even more difficult to assess and 
predict. And with markets disrupted and confidence depressed, the relationship between a 
particular constellation of interest rates and asset prices and future spending and inflation is 
more  uncertain  than  usual.  We  will  continue  to  analyze  these  relationships  in  light  our 
experience  and  adjust  our  forecast  of  the  evolution  of  the  economy  under  various  policy 
alternatives, but we need to recognize that those forecasts could change appreciably and be 
ready  to  adapt  policy  flexibly.  That  flexibility  could  entail  doing  more  to  ease  credit  if  the 
economy proves resistant to the monetary and fiscal stimulus now in train, or it could involve 
reversing actions to forestall potential inflationary effects of past actions, as I will discuss in a 
moment.  
In gauging the effects of market interventions in the current crisis, one approach is to look to 
the  size  of  increases  in  the  quantity  of  reserves  and  money  to  judge  whether  sufficient 
liquidity  is  being  provided  to  forestall  deflation  and  support  a  turnaround  in  growth  –  an 
approach  often  known  as  quantitative  easing.  The  linkages  between  reserves  and  money 
and  between  either  reserves  or  money  and  nominal  spending  are  highly  variable  and  not 
especially reliable under normal circumstances. And the relationships among these variables 
become even more tenuous when so many short-term interest rates are pinned near zero 
and monetary and some nonmonetary assets are near-perfect substitutes. In our approach to 
policy, the amount of reserves has been a result of our market interventions rather than a 
goal in itself. And, depending on the circumstances, declines in reserves may indicate that 
markets  are  improving,  not  that  policy  is  effectively  tightening  or  failing  to  lean  against 
weaker  demand.  Still,  we  on  the  Federal  Open  Market  Committee  (FOMC)  recognize  that 
high  levels  of  Federal  Reserve  assets  and  resulting  reserves  are  likely  to  be  essential  to 
fostering recovery, and we have discussed whether some explicit objectives for growth in the 
size of our balance sheet or for the quantity of the monetary base or reserves would provide 
some assurance that policy is pointed in the right direction.  
                                                 
4   Loans  or  credit  protection  offered  in  association  with  government  help  to  stabilize  individual  systemically 
important institutions probably have higher credit risk than the more general liquidity facilities described in this 
talk. But even in those cases, the Federal Reserve has taken steps to protect itself from credit losses. 
BIS Review 48/2009 
 5
Will these policies lead to a future surge in inflation? 
No, and the key to preventing inflation will be reversing the programs, reducing reserves, and 
raising interest rates in a timely fashion. Our balance sheet has grown rapidly, the amount of 
reserves  has  skyrocketed,  and  announced  plans  imply  further  huge  increases  in  Federal 
Reserve  assets  and  bank  reserves.  Nonetheless,  the  size  of  our  balance  sheet  will  not 
preclude  our  raising  interest  rates  when  that  becomes  appropriate  for  macroeconomic 
stability.  Many  of  the  liquidity  programs  are  authorized  only  while  circumstances  in  the 
economy  and  financial  markets  are  "unusual  and  exigent,"  and  such  programs  will  be 
terminated  when  conditions  are  no  longer  so  adverse.  Those  programs  and  others  have 
been designed to be unattractive in normal market conditions and will naturally wind down as 
markets improve.  
However, our newly purchased Treasury securities and MBS will not mature or be repaid for 
many years; the loans we are making to back the securitization market are for three years, 
and their nonrecourse feature could leave us with assets thereafter. But we have a number 
of tools we can use to absorb the resulting reserves and raise interest rates when the time 
comes. We can sell the Treasury and agency debt either on an outright basis or temporarily 
through  reverse  repurchase  agreements,  and  we  are  developing  the  capability  to  do  the 
same  with  MBS.  We  are  paying  interest  on  excess  reserves,  which  we  can  use  to  help 
provide a floor for the federal funds rate, as it does for other central banks, even if declines in 
lending or open market operations are not sufficient to bring reserves down to the desired 
level.  Finally,  we  are  working  with  the  Treasury  to  promote  legislation  that  would  further 
enhance our toolkit for absorbing reserves.  
Our work on the framework for exiting these programs is one indication that we are focused 
on  maintaining  price  stability  over  time  even  as  we  concentrate  for  now  on  promoting 
economic recovery. Another such indication is our increased emphasis on defining the price 
stability goal more clearly. Already the FOMC has extended its forecast horizon to indicate 
where the Governors and Reserve Bank presidents would like to see inflation coming to rest 
over  time.  And  we  are  continuing  to  discuss  within  the  Committee  whether  an  explicit 
numerical  objective  for  inflation  would  be  beneficial.  Under  current  circumstances,  those 
benefits  would  include  underscoring  our  understanding  that  our  legislative  mandate  for 
promoting  price  stability  encompasses  both  preventing  inflation  from  falling  too  low  in  the 
near term and from rising too far as the economy recovers.  
financial 
to  cooperate 
instability,  we  have  needed 
Have we compromised our independence? 
No. Central banks all over the world and the legislatures that created them have recognized 
that  considerable  independence  from  short-run  political  influences  is  essential  for  the 
conduct of monetary policy that promotes economic growth and price stability. To be sure, in 
the  process  of  combating 
in 
unprecedented ways with the Treasury. Our actions with the Treasury to support individual 
systemically  important  institutions  have  sparked  intense  public  and  legislative  interest.  As 
Chairman  Bernanke  has  indicated,  the  absence  of  a  regime  for  resolving  systemically 
important nonbank financial institutions has been a serious deficiency in the current crisis, 
one that the Congress needs to remedy. Congress and the public, quite appropriately, want 
to know more about lending programs that have greatly increased the scope and size of the 
Federal Reserve's interventions in financial markets, and we will give them that information. 
In addition, our country, like others, is undertaking a broad examination of what changes are 
needed  in  our  financial  regulatory  system.  This  examination  will  consider  the  role  of  the 
Federal Reserve in the supervision and regulation of financial institutions and the advantages 
and disadvantages of establishing a systemic risk authority.  
It  is  natural  and  appropriate  for  our  unusual  actions  in  combating  financial  instability  and 
recession to come under intense scrutiny. However, increased attention to, and occasional 
criticism  of,  our  activities  should  not  lead  to  a  fundamental  change  in our  place  within  our 
6 
 BIS Review 48/2009
democracy.  And  I  believe  it  will  not;  the  essential  role for  an  independent  monetary  policy 
authority pursuing economic growth and price stability remains widely appreciated and the 
Federal Reserve has played that role well over the years. The recent joint statement of the 
Treasury and the Federal Reserve included an agreement to pursue further tools to control 
our balance sheet, indicating the Administration's recognition of the importance of our ability 
to independently pursue our macroeconomic objectives.5
Conclusion 
The  Federal  Reserve's  actions  over  the  past  20  months  have  been  consistent  with  the 
principles of central banking that have been developed over the course of centuries. But the 
greatly increased complexity of our financial institutions and markets, as well as the virulence 
of the financial crisis in choking off the flow of credit through a broad range of channels, has 
meant that in applying these principles, the Federal Reserve and other central banks have 
had  to  extend  their  reach  and  adopt  new  measures  to  preserve  financial  stability  and  to 
counter the effects of financial turmoil on the economy. In my view, these actions have been 
necessary, safe, and effective and will not lead to adverse aftereffects. But they have raised 
a number of questions that I have addressed today. I expect to be back here in 10 years to 
celebrate  Dewey's  100th  birthday,  at  which  time  you  can  hold  me  accountable  for  my 
answers.  
                                                 
5   Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and U.S. Department of the Treasury (2009), “The Role of 
the Federal Reserve in Preserving Financial and Monetary Stability: Joint Statement by the Department of the 
Treasury and the Federal Reserve,” joint press release, March 23. 
BIS Review 48/2009 
 7
