Caleb M Fundanga: Access to improved financial services in Zambia 
Remarks  by  Dr  Caleb  M  Fundanga,  Governor  of  the  Bank  of  Zambia,  at  the  Standard 
Chartered Bank M-Banking Media Launch, Lusaka, 17 March 2009. 
 The Standard Chartered Bank Plc – Managing Director, Ms Mizinga Melu 
Management and Staff – Standard Chartered Bank Zambia Plc 
Members of the Press; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen 
I  am  honoured  and  thankful  for  the  invitation  to  officiate  at  this  important  launch  of  the 
m-Banking product. 
Distinguished  Ladies  and  Gentlemen;  allow  me  to  begin  by  commending  Standard 
Chartered Bank for the important role it continues to play in the financial sector in Zambia. 
Since 1906, when Standard Chartered Bank was established in Zambia, the bank has grown 
to be one of the biggest players in the market. As at 31 January 2009 the bank accounted for 
about 15% of the banking sector’s total assets, while its deposit base accounted for 18% of 
total  sector  deposits.  More  importantly,  the  bank’s  loan  portfolio  accounted  for  13%  of  the 
total loans in the sector. 
Madam  Managing  Director,  I  congratulate  you  for  the  Bank’s  commitment  to  providing 
products  and  services  that  best  suit  the  needs  of  customers.  This,  in  my  view,  should  be 
emulated by other banks to ensure that more people have access to banking and financial 
services  that  are  tailor  made  to  meet  the  needs  of  customers.  Under  your  leadership  the 
bank  has  continued  to  bring  to  the  banking  sector  an  array  of  products  and  services  that 
provide  convenient  alternative  channels  that  lead  to  customer  satisfaction  and  improved 
service delivery. 
The introduction of new products and services such as mobile banking, internet banking and 
e-statements  provide  customers  with  greater  flexibility  in  their  banking  requirements, 
enabling  them  to  transact  at  their  own  convenience,  knowing  that  their  finances  are 
completely secure. This will no doubt enhance customer confidence in the banking system in 
Zambia. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, I am reliably informed that the m-Banking product we are launching 
today,  will  allow  the  bank  to  reach  out  to  many  more  customers.  This  will  increase  the 
number  of  people  with  access  to  the  financial  system.  At  Bank  of  Zambia,  we  believe 
strongly  that  wider  access  to  financial  services  through  positive  action  by  the  banking 
community is vital. We also believe that the driving force will be banks and other financial 
institutions searching for new, profitable market opportunities. 
Furthermore, a key element in the strategy of poverty alleviation is the provision of financial 
services to the majority of our people especially the small and micro entrepreneurs who are 
financially  excluded.  Access  to  improved  financial  services,  through  the  provision  of  better 
ways of accumulating savings and access to credit to augment accumulated savings, avails 
funds for investment in income generating projects that help the public to lay foundation for 
better standards of living for themselves and their families. 
Madam Managing Director, as your bank introduces these products on the market, please 
ensure  that  the  pricing  aspect  is  also  critically  looked  at.  Many  a  time  a  good  product  is 
introduced on the market yet it is out of reach of ordinary citizens due to the costs associated 
with the products. Consumers of these products expect an affordable service if indeed these 
are new and innovative products. Banks need to show more commitment to the growth and 
BIS Review 34/2009 
 1
development of the country by encouraging more Zambians to open bank accounts through 
provision of easily accessible and affordable products and services. 
As  I  end  my  remarks,  I  want  to  remind  all  players  in  the  financial  sector  that  some  of  the 
challenges we face in our country today can indeed be mitigated by all stakeholders playing 
their respective roles. In particular, we have seen food prices increasing dramatically in the 
past few months. This is despite Zambia possess vast arable land, relatively good weather 
and plenty of fresh water. 
Further, Zambia is predominantly an agricultural country, but lending to agriculture has been 
limited. The challenge therefore is to devise financial products that meet the requirements of 
the sector while at the same time devise means of protecting the financial institutions from 
the risks associated with lending to the agricultural sector. A vibrant Agriculture sector will no 
doubt lead to a vibrant economy less dependent on the mining sector. 
I  hope  that  Standard  Chartered  Bank  will  lead  the  way  in  establishing  affordable  products 
and  services  for  our  small  scale  farmers  throughout  our  country.  I  encourage  you  Madam 
Managing Director in your capacity as the Deputy Chairperson of the Bankers Association of 
Zambia to expand your horizon and collectively join hands with all stakeholders in addressing 
this problem. 
I thank you for your attention. 
2 
 BIS Review 34/2009
