Ajith Nivard Cabraal: Ensuring stability and integrity of the world’s 
financial system over the next few years  
Keynote address by Mr Ajith Nivard Cabraal, Governor of the Central Bank of Sri Lanka, 27th 
International  Symposium  on  Economic  Crime,  Jesus  College,  University  of  Cambridge, 
Cambridge, 5 September 2009. 
 Chairman, Professor Barry Rider, Distinguished Delegates,  
Ladies and Gentlemen; 
I am delighted to be here this afternoon at the historic University of Cambridge to deliver one 
of the closing addresses at your 27th International Symposium on Economic Crime. Thank 
you very much for your invitation, which I am honoured to accept. I am also happy that this 
year, 2009, marks the 800th Anniversary of this great institution. Therefore, I would like to 
take this opportunity to congratulate the University of Cambridge on reaching this amazing 
milestone, and extend my best wishes for the centuries ahead.  
Mr. Chairman, at your invitation, I would, today, discuss the ways and means of ensuring the 
stability and integrity of the world’s financial systems in the future.  
As in the case of all serious and complex reviews, our starting point should necessarily be to 
critically examine the basic and underlying reasons for this crisis. In that regard, there is now 
reasonable global consensus that the origin of the turmoil could be traced to excessive risk 
taking due to pure and simple greed; recklessness driven by intense, unadulterated greed; 
leading  to  the  creation of  massive  “bubbles”  in  many  developed  economies,  that were  not 
supported by a robust, representative real asset base. No doubt, such risk taking had often 
been  fuelled  by  lax  and  short-sighted  regulation.  To  make  matters  worse,  many  rating 
agencies  too,  tacitly  and  indirectly,  encouraged  the  excessive  risk  taking  by  assigning  top 
ratings to toxic financial instruments, thereby helping to blow up the bubble even bigger. The 
bubble  creating  drivers  had  also  been  strongly  supported  by  the  global  ability  to  transact 
business at unbelievable speeds and in mind-boggling volumes. This capacity provided the 
scope to move capital, wealth and resources across borders instantaneously, almost without 
restrictions or regulatory oversight, at the press of a button. But whatever may have been the 
drivers,  the  end  result  was  that  this  greed  and  its  ill-effects  created  and  nurtured  massive 
“bubbles” in many developed economies; and the subsequent puncturing of these massive 
bubbles has now revealed just how hollow and empty the financial structures that we relied 
upon, had been.  
However,  even  at  that  stage,  the  usually  conservative  multi-lateral  “watchdogs”,  rating 
agencies  and  experienced  academics  could  not  realize,  let  alone  predict,  that  the  world’s 
financial system was fast reaching breaking point! Perhaps, from everyone’s point of view, 
the  going  was  too  good  to  obstruct;  the  expansion  was  too  exciting  to  discourage;  the 
resulting luxuries and wealth were too wonderful to hold back. No wonder therefore, that the 
financial world continued to happily tootle along this unrealistic path, at break-neck speed. 
Logically, the accident had to happen, and happen it did, and what an accident that was! A 
crash landing that was sudden and unbelievably disastrous, not only to the developed world, 
but to all economies of the globe!  
Mr. Chairman, the events of the recent past clearly suggest to us that the world’s financial 
and  economic  communities  have,  albeit  unintentionally,  placed  the  entire  civilized  world’s 
systems and structures at intense risk, and perhaps even endangered the gains of civilization 
built  over  several  centuries.  However,  to  the  eternal  credit  of  the  world’s  political  and 
economic  leaders,  we  could  be  relieved  that  we  have  been  able  to  face  that  shock  and 
BIS Review 106/2009 
 1
emerge  out  of  it,  bruised  and  battered  no  doubt,  but  fortunately,  with  our  systems  still 
reasonably intact.  
Nevertheless,  the  major  down-turn  suffered  by  the  world  economy  as  a  result  of  these 
shocks  is  yet  to  be  fully  overcome.  The  tight  liquidity  crunch  that  is  suffocating  our  credit 
markets;  the  stubborn  toxic  assets  that  won’t  go  away;  the  suspicions  with  which  banking 
and  financial  institutions  view  each  other,  are  yet  continuing,  although  there  are  signs  of 
some abatement. The embarrassing summersaults that various governments had to perform 
by unceremoniously ditching some of their most sacred and fundamental policies, have also 
been better understood, by many communities. 
Now,  what  is  needed  is  to  move  forward  decisively  within  this  new  paradigm.  To  do  so 
effectively, we have to essentially place some barriers to deal with unsustainable risk taking. 
The  freedom  of  the  wild  ass  that  supported  unfettered  and  reckless  economic  actions  to 
create things out of nothing has to be dealt with. At the same time, we need to revisit some of 
the fallacies that developed over the last decade or so, including those that indirectly said: 
“Don’t worry too much about a few bubbles”; “markets are always right”, “innovation should 
not be discouraged”; “state intervention is dangerous”, etc. In a way, some of these positions 
perhaps  prompted  a  kind  of  an  unconscious  regulatory  anarchy!  The  resulting  subdued 
regulatory reactions were of course exploited by the greedy market and the rest is history! 
This  time  round  therefore,  the  wisdom  of  such  concepts  and  absolute  reliance  on  them, 
would need to be critically reviewed.  
What then should we do? Maybe, we could start by making a “Wish-list”, and then moving 
towards making a “To-do list” to realize such wishes.  
What  could  we  wish  for?  First,  perhaps  we  should  wish  for  effective  “immunization” 
mechanisms to safeguard national financial systems from the contagion effects of globalized 
viruses  and  cross  border  toxic  elements.  Second,  we  could  wish  for  lesser  volatility  in 
markets,  greater  credibility  of  regulatory  and  enforcement  systems,  and  more  responsible 
and prudent lending standards. Third, let’s wish for much higher attention being paid by all 
stakeholders  towards  risk  management,  better  governance  practices  and  more  relevant 
disclosures; and Fourth, we could wish for top priority being given by regulatory authorities, 
rating agencies and auditors towards risk and risk mitigation, with tough and decisive action 
being taken in the event of any unhealthy developments. 
These, in my view, would be the broad wishes, but each of these “wishes” would probably 
have  a  series  of  sub-wishes  to  expand  the  scope  of  the  main  wishes,  and  consequently 
many more could be added, depending on various national and international imperatives.  
Mr. Chairman, as with all good wishes, it is easy to wish, but a lot more difficult to make the 
wishes  come  true!  Unfortunately,  even  the  highly  creative  financial  community  will  not  be 
able to perfect some “mantras” or conjure up some suitable derivatives to make these wishes 
come true! Necessarily therefore, a lot of painstaking work will need to be done in order to 
translate these and other wishes into reality.  
Let me now dwell briefly on a seven point framework, which in my view, would be useful to 
ensure stability and integrity of the world’s financial system over the next few years. 
First, as a global financial community, we should establish pragmatic standards in relation to 
the  creation  and  sustenance  of  globalized  financial  instruments,  (particularly  complex, 
structured finance products). Any drug, before it is introduced into the market, has to undergo 
a quality testing process because a substandard drug, if allowed to be marketed, could hurt 
people badly. If so, why shouldn’t financial products that could hurt the global system, not be 
subjected  to  stringent  pre-tests?  Accordingly,  we  need  to  develop  institutions  to  recognize 
and approve norms for derivative frameworks and structures.  
Second,  we  have  to  ensure  greater  transparency  in  reporting  and  valuation  methods. 
Notwithstanding  the  robust  application  of  international  accounting  standards  and  other 
globalized  approaches,  we  still  have  too  many  subjective  features  in  our  valuation  and 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2009
reporting systems, and these need to be addressed. It must also be noted that even after 
years  of  debate,  many  of  the  advanced  financial  markets  still  use  their  national  financial 
reporting frameworks. 
Third, we need to develop financial and business professionals who would regard their own 
reputations  and  integrity  ahead  of  that  of  their  institutions.  In  order  to  ensure  that  this 
happens, we may need to put in place, rewards schemes, laws and sanctions that support 
and encourage such behaviour. 
Fourth, we have to ensure that individual national regulatory authorities would take a greater 
interest in safeguarding the quality of the balance sheets of the financial institutions within 
their  purview,  without  conveniently  abdicating  that  responsibility  to  a  mythical  “global” 
regulator. 
Fifth,  we  have  to  build  long-lasting  and  stable  partnerships  amongst  central  banks  and 
regulators.  By  doing  so,  we  could  put  in  place  a  mechanism  to  ensure  the  effective 
supervision  of  conglomerates,  particularly  in  the  case  of  cross  border  institutions  that  are 
today described as those that are “too big to fail”.  
Sixth, we need to create large pools of global or regional funds that could be conveniently 
accessed by regulators in times of impending crisis for purposes of bail-out, so that crises 
are  not  allowed  to  spin  out  of  control.  In  this  regard,  it  may  perhaps  be  easier  for  central 
banks  in  a  particular  region  or  a  regional  economic  zone  to  provide  leadership  for  the 
creation of such funds for the mutual benefit of the participating countries.  
Seventh, we have to develop mechanisms that ensure that there is greater transparency in 
rating  methodologies  and  rating  decisions.  Credit  rating  agencies  should  be  compelled  to 
elaborate  on  their  rating  methodology  and  ensure  strict  compliance  with  Standards  of 
Conduct which should be carefully reviewed in the light of the present gaps. We should also 
consider introducing serious penalties for inappropriate rating practices.  
There  may,  of  course  be  some  overlap  of  policy  actions  when  we  implement  these 
strategies;  but,  by  and  large,  if  these  are  focused  upon  diligently,  there  is  a  reasonable 
likelihood that it would be possible to realize some of our key wishes and with it, ensure the 
stability and integrity of our financial systems. 
Mr. Chairman, in a strange and a paradoxical sort of a way, it is somewhat “fortunate” that 
the current financial crisis shocked (and indeed, almost ruined) the worlds financial system, 
at the present stage of evolution of the worldwide financial landscape. If, on the other hand, 
this  crisis  had  not  impacted  us  at  this  time  of  history  and  consequently  we  had  happily 
progressed  at  the  same  pace  for  a  further  10  years  or  so,  and  then  in  2017  or  2018  this 
shock had hit us, can anyone imagine the magnitude of the disaster at that time? In fact, I am 
quite sure that, if that eventuality had taken place, this crisis would have been too much for 
the world’s financial system to bear, and the resulting catastrophe would have crippled the 
world’s  financial  systems,  as  well  as  the  world’s  political,  security  and  social  systems  with 
disastrous  consequences.  Perhaps  some  keen  film  maker  might  even  consider  doing  a 
simulation of such a scenario, and then making a gripping and horror filled movie, allowing 
those of us with horror appetites to experience such a dreadful tragedy!  
Mr.  Chairman,  while  we  are  putting  into  effect  various  initiatives  to  improve  our  processes 
and  procedures  to  respond  to  the  crises,  we  must  also  be  conscious  that  we  should  not 
throw the baby out with the soiled bath water. Yes, the bath water has been terribly muddied 
and  needs  to  be  replenished.  However,  at  the  same  time  we  must  realize  that  the  baby 
although rather dirty, is still quite wonderful. The world’s current financial system with all its 
imperfections,  can  still  deliver  enormous  value.  Already,  the  bold  and  far  reaching  steps 
introduced  by  many  governments  and  regulatory  authorities  as  well  as  by  the  “victims”  of 
destability, have shown us that the “baby” could recover and grow. In fact, many economies 
are showing signs of recovery and are seeing light at the end of their respective tunnels. In 
the light of these developments, we must maintain our energy levels and optimism. Even in 
BIS Review 106/2009 
 3
the midst of the crisis, we have observed many systems that are solid, and frameworks and 
institutions that are strong, reliable and credible. These institutions must be recognized and 
encouraged  to  provide  the  leadership  and  direction  to  bring  stability  and  credibility  back, 
quickly.  It  is  also  time  for  the  productive  sectors  of  economies  to  re-invigorate  themselves 
and deliver higher outputs, so as to support a faster turn-around.  
Mr. Chairman, it is also now abundantly clear that the world must collectively approach the 
present  unprecedented  threat.  Already,  the  integrated  actions  of  several  governments  and 
central banks, by virtue of the successes achieved so far, have proved this point. But there is 
a  lot  more  to  be  done.  In  that  endeavour,  the  consolidation  of  the  thoughts  and  ideas  of 
academics, activists, practitioners, regulators, and policy makers at fora such as the one you 
have  so  efficiently  organized,  would  undoubtedly  enrich  this  process  and  policy  debate. 
These in turn, will surely accelerate the global recovery.  
Mr. Chairman, in good times, we normally take the stability and integrity of our systems for 
granted. Perhaps one of the key lessons from the current crisis is that we should never, ever, 
take stability and integrity as being “given” conditions, in the future. But, let’s remember that 
memories are short. This global crisis will almost certainly be forgotten in a few years time. It 
is also likely that if we enjoy a strong run of growth and prosperity for a few years, our minds 
too  will  probably  dismiss  thoughts  of  destability.  Today’s  grim  discussions  would  then  be 
relegated  to  the  drab  background,  and  in  its  place,  the  glitz  and  glamour  of  fast  growth, 
handsome  profits,  stunning 
fabulous  wealth  would  reign  supreme. 
Unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, if and when that happens, the world would unconsciously drift 
into the danger zone yet again. Needless to say, if we do not want such an eventuality to 
take place, the price would be intense vigilance on the part of the regulators, governments, 
media  and  the  academia.  I  know  that  is  going  to  be  tough,  but  in  the  interest  of  all 
stakeholders,  I  sincerely  hope  it  works  and  that  the  academia,  governments,  media  and 
regulators would face up to that challenge. 
May  I  therefore,  at  the  concluding  session  of  this  important  Symposium  at  the  historic 
University  of  Cambridge  make  an  appeal  to  the  global  financial  community  to  continue  to 
keep the events of 2007/2009 fresh in mind, continue to protect and improve our systems, 
and continue to build sustainable frameworks to deliver prosperity to the people of the world. 
Thank you. 
incentives,  and 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2009
