European Central Bank: Press conference – introductory statement 
Introductory statement by Mr Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank 
and Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main, 
4 June 2009. 
 Ladies and gentlemen, the Vice-President and I are very pleased to welcome you to today’s 
press conference. We will now report on the outcome of today’s meeting of the Governing 
Council, which was also attended by Commissioner Almunia.  
On the basis of its regular economic and monetary analyses, the Governing Council decided 
to  leave  the key ECB interest rates  unchanged.  The  current  rates  are  appropriate  taking 
into  account  our  decisions  of  early  May,  including  the  enhanced  credit  support  measures, 
and all the information and analyses which have become available since then. We confirmed 
our  expectation  that  price  developments  over  the  policy-relevant  horizon  will  remain 
dampened  by  the  marked  weakening  of  economic  activity  in  the  euro  area  and  globally. 
Recent  survey  information  indicates  that,  following  two  quarters  of  very  negative  growth, 
economic  activity  over  the  remainder  of  this  year  is  expected  to  decline  at  much  less 
negative  rates.  After  a  stabilisation  phase,  positive  quarterly  growth  rates  are  expected  by 
mid-2010.  This  assessment  incorporates  adverse  lagged  effects,  such  as  a  further 
deterioration in labour markets, which are likely to materialise over the coming months. At the 
same  time,  available  indicators  of  inflation  expectations  over  the  medium  to  longer  term 
remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the  Governing  Council’s  aim  of  keeping  inflation  rates 
below,  but  close  to,  2%  over  the  medium  term.  The  outcome  of  the  monetary  analysis 
supports  the  assessment  of  moderate  inflationary  pressure,  as  money  and  credit  growth 
have further declined on an annual basis. Against this background, we expect price stability 
to  be  maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro 
area households. 
Let  me  now  explain  our  assessment  in  some  more  detail,  starting  with  the  economic 
analysis. Reflecting the impact of the financial market turmoil, and in particular a sharp fall in 
global  demand  and  trade,  economic  activity  weakened  considerably  in  the  first  quarter  of 
2009. According to Eurostat’s first estimate, economic activity in the euro area contracted by 
2.5% quarter on quarter, after a decline of 1.8% in the fourth quarter of 2008. This will have a 
significant  negative  impact  on  the  average  growth  rate  for  2009.  However,  more  recently, 
there  have  been  improvements  in  survey  data,  albeit  at  very  low  levels.  In  line  with  such 
evidence,  after  the  extremely  weak  first  quarter,  activity  over  the  remainder  of  this  year  is 
expected to decline at much less negative rates. After a stabilisation phase, positive quarterly 
growth rates are expected by mid-2010.  
This  assessment  is  broadly  in  line  with  the  June  2009  Eurosystem  staff  macroeconomic 
projections for the euro area, according to which annual real GDP growth will range between 
-5.1% and -4.1% in 2009 and between -1.0% and 0.4% in 2010. Compared with the March 
2009  ECB  staff  macroeconomic  projections,  the  ranges  have  been  revised  downwards,  in 
particular for 2009. A substantial negative carry-over effect from the previous year and the 
very  weak  result  for  the  first  quarter  of  2009  significantly  contributed  to  this  downward 
revision. The projected gradual recovery next year, with rates of growth returning to positive 
levels by mid-2010, reflects the effects of the significant macroeconomic stimulus under way 
as well as of the measures taken so far to restore the functioning of the financial system both 
inside and outside the euro area. Forecasts by international organisations are broadly in line 
with the June 2009 Eurosystem staff projections, taking into account the results of the first 
quarter.  
BIS Review 68/2009 
 1
In the view of the Governing Council, the risks to the economic outlook are balanced. On the 
positive  side,  there  may  be  stronger  than  anticipated  effects  stemming  from  the  extensive 
macroeconomic stimulus under way and from other policy measures taken. Confidence may 
also  improve  more  quickly  than  currently  expected.  On  the  other  hand,  concerns  remain 
relating  to  the  following  potential  factors:  a  stronger  impact  on  the  real  economy  from  the 
turmoil  in  financial  markets,  more  unfavourable  developments  in  labour  markets,  the 
intensification  of  protectionist  pressures  and,  finally,  adverse  developments  in  the  world 
economy stemming from a disorderly correction of global imbalances.  
With regard to price developments, annual HICP inflation was, according to Eurostat’s flash 
estimate, 0.0% in May, compared with 0.6% in April. As explained on earlier occasions, the 
further  decline  in  inflation  rates  was  fully  anticipated  and  primarily  reflects  base  effects 
resulting from the sharp swings in global commodity prices over the past 12 months.  
Looking ahead, owing to these base effects, annual inflation rates are projected to decline 
further and temporarily remain negative over the coming months, before returning to positive 
territory by the end of 2009. Such short-term movements are, however, not relevant from a 
monetary  policy  perspective.  Looking  further  ahead,  price  and  cost  developments  are 
expected to remain dampened in the wake of ongoing sluggish demand in the euro area and 
elsewhere. 
This  outlook  is  consistent  with  the  June  2009  Eurosystem  staff  projections  for  euro  area 
inflation, in which annual HICP inflation is seen to range between 0.1% and 0.5% in 2009, 
revised  slightly  downwards  from  the  March  2009  ECB  staff  projections.  For  2010, 
Eurosystem  staff  project  annual  HICP  inflation  to  range  between  0.6%  and  1.4%,  broadly 
unchanged from the March 2009 ECB staff projections. Available forecasts from international 
organisations provide a similar picture.  
Against  this  background,  it  is  again  important  to  stress  that  the  indicators  of  inflation 
expectations  over  the  medium  to  longer  term  remain  firmly  anchored  in  line  with  the 
Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over the medium 
term. 
Risks  to  these  projections  are  broadly  balanced.  On  the  downside,  these  risks  relate  in 
particular to the outlook for economic activity, while on the upside they relate to higher than 
expected  commodity  prices.  Furthermore,  increases  in  indirect  taxation  and  administered 
prices may be stronger than currently expected owing to the need for fiscal consolidation in 
the coming years. 
Turning to the monetary analysis, the latest data confirm the continued deceleration in the 
pace  of  underlying  monetary  expansion  and  thus  support  the  assessment  of  moderate 
inflationary pressures. In April, the annual growth rate of M3 declined further to 4.9% and that 
of  loans  to  the  private  sector  to  2.4%.  However,  especially  with  regard  to  M3  growth,  the 
pace of decline in annual growth rates was slower than in previous months, reflecting a brisk 
growth in monetary aggregates in April. 
The latest developments in M3 components continue to reflect to a large extent the impact of 
past reductions in key ECB interest rates, which have led to declines both in the levels of 
different  deposit  interest  rates  and  in  the  spreads  between  them.  This  has  implied,  for 
instance,  lower  opportunity  costs  for  market  participants  to  shift  funds  into  highly  liquid 
overnight deposits and explains the strengthening of annual M1 growth to 8.4% in April. At 
the  same  time,  the  reduced  remuneration  of  other  short-term  deposits  and  marketable 
instruments continues to foster the allocation of funds to instruments outside M3.  
The outstanding amount of MFI loans to the private sector contracted somewhat further in 
April. This development is again mainly due to a negative flow of short-term lending to non-
financial  corporations,  which  partly  reflects  a  lower  need  for  working  capital  in  view  of  the 
sharp deterioration in economic activity and business prospects during the first few months of 
the  year,  and  greater  recourse  to  liquidity  buffers  in  financing  such  working  capital.  By 
2 
 BIS Review 68/2009
contrast,  longer-term  lending  to  non-financial  corporations  remained  positive.  The  past 
reductions in key ECB rates have continued to be passed on to lending rates to both non-
financial  corporations  and  households.  The  resulting  improvement  in  financing  conditions 
should  provide  ongoing  support  for  economic  activity  in  the  period  ahead.  However,  given 
the  challenges  which  lie  ahead,  banks  should  take  appropriate  measures  to  further 
strengthen their capital bases and, where necessary, take full advantage of the government 
measures to support the financial sector, in particular as regards recapitalisation. 
To  sum  up,  the  current  key  ECB  interest  rates  are  appropriate  taking  into  account  our 
decisions  of  early  May,  including  the  enhanced  credit  support  measures,  and  all  the 
information  and  analyses  which  have  become  available  since  then.  We  confirmed  our 
expectation that price developments over the policy-relevant horizon will remain dampened 
by the marked weakening of economic activity in the euro area and globally. Recent survey 
information indicates that, following two quarters of very negative growth, economic activity 
over the remainder of this year is expected to decline at much less negative rates. After a 
stabilisation  phase,  positive  quarterly  growth  rates  are  expected  by  mid-2010.  This 
assessment  incorporates  adverse  lagged  effects,  such  as  a  further  deterioration  in  labour 
markets, which are likely to materialise over the coming months. At the same time, available 
indicators of inflation expectations over the medium to longer term remain firmly anchored in 
line with the Governing Council’s aim of keeping inflation rates below, but close to, 2% over 
the medium term. A cross-check with the outcome of the monetary analysis supports the 
assessment  of  moderate  inflationary  pressure,  as  money  and  credit  growth  have  further 
declined  on  an  annual  basis.  Against  this  background,  we  expect  price  stability  to  be 
maintained  over  the  medium  term,  thereby  supporting  the  purchasing  power  of  euro  area 
households. 
As the transmission of monetary policy works with lags, our policy action will progressively 
feed through to the economy in full. Hence, with all the measures taken, monetary policy will 
provide  ongoing  support  for  households  and  corporations.  Once  the  macroeconomic 
environment  improves,  the  Governing  Council  will  ensure  that  the  measures  taken  can  be 
quickly unwound and the liquidity provided absorbed. Hence, any threat to price stability over 
the  medium  to  longer  term  can  be  effectively  countered  in  a  timely  fashion.  As  has  been 
emphasised many times, the Governing Council will continue to ensure a firm anchoring of 
medium-term 
to  supporting 
sustainable growth and employment and contributes to financial stability. Accordingly, we will 
continue to monitor very closely all developments over the period ahead.  
Regarding  fiscal  policies,  the  latest  projections  by  the  European  Commission  point  to  a 
sharp  increase  in  the  euro  area  general  government  deficit  and  debt  ratios  in  2009.  The 
deficit ratio is projected to rise to 5.3% of GDP in 2009 and further to 6.5% in 2010, from 
1.9% in 2008, with the debt ratio exceeding 80% of GDP in 2010. A large majority of euro 
area countries are expected to exceed the 3% of GDP deficit reference value in 2009 and 
2010.  To  ensure  trust  in  the  sustainability  of  public  finances,  an  ambitious  and  credible 
adjustment  effort  will  be  required  to  return  as  soon  as  possible  to  sound  fiscal  positions, 
supported by a full application of the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact. The rapid 
attainment  of  sound  fiscal  positions  will  be  necessary  to  enable  countries  to  deal  with  the 
additional  fiscal  burden  owing  to  demographic  ageing  as  well  as  the  risks  arising  from 
government guarantees that were provided to stabilise financial sectors. 
Turning  to  structural  policies,  there  is  a  strong  case  for  undertaking  further  efforts  to 
support potential growth in the euro area. It is crucial that the focus is now on strengthening 
the adjustment capacity and flexibility of the euro area economy in line with the principle of 
an open market economy. In this respect, the current situation can be seen as a catalyst to 
accelerate the implementation of necessary domestic reforms, notably labour market reforms 
to facilitate appropriate wage-setting and labour mobility across sectors and regions, as well 
as product market reforms to foster competition and speed up restructuring and productivity 
inflation  expectations.  Such  anchoring 
indispensable 
is 
BIS Review 68/2009 
 3
growth. At the same time, many of the policy measures taken in recent months with a view to 
supporting specific segments of the economy need to be phased out in a timely manner.  
We are now at your disposal for questions. 
4 
 BIS Review 68/2009
