Heng Swee Keat: The future of Islamic financial services 
Welcome address by Mr Heng Swee Keat, Managing Director of the Monetary Authority of 
Singapore, at the 6th Islamic Financial Services Board Summit, Singapore, 7 May 2009. 
 President of the Islamic Development Bank, H.E. Dr. Ahmad Mohamed Ali Al-Madani 
IFSB Council Chairman and Governor of the Saudi Arabian Monetary Agency, 
H.E. Dr. Muhammad Al-Jasser, 
IFSB Governors, 
Secretary-General Prof Rifaat Ahmed Abdel Karim, 
Ambassadors, 
Honoured guests 
Welcome 
I  extend  a  very  warm  welcome  to  all  our  guests,  especially  those  from  overseas.  As  an 
Islamic  Financial  Services  Board  (IFSB)  member,  MAS  is  honoured  to  host  this  6th  IFSB 
Summit.  This  is  IFSB’s  first  Summit  in  East  Asia,  and  the  strong  interest  shown  by 
participants  here  is  a  testament  to  the  growing  opportunities  for  Islamic  Finance  and 
economic cooperation in our region. I very much appreciate the support of fellow Governors 
and IFSB Board members. A special thanks to all our panel chairmen and speakers, and to 
Professor Rifaat and the IFSB secretariat for organising this so well. 
We meet at a most challenging time. The IMF and the World Bank have forecast the global 
economy to contract for the first time since World War Two. The economies of Asia, like the 
rest of the world, have slowed significantly. So have all forms of financial services, including 
Islamic Finance. While actions taken by governments and financial authorities have helped to 
stem the sharp deterioration, the road to full economic recovery is likely to be bumpy. 
While the crisis is painful, there are several silver linings. This Summit, with its theme of “The 
Future  of  Islamic  Financial  Services”  provides  a  timely  opportunity  for  us  to  reflect  on  the 
shortcomings  in  economic  and  financial  models,  and  in  our  supervisory  approaches.  By 
drawing the right lessons, we can build the foundation for a better future. Allow me to share 
some reflections on the future shape of economic linkages and financial services, as well as 
the supervisory approach. 
Economic linkages 
First, the crisis shows that while the idea of the “de-coupling” of Asian economies from the 
rest  of  the  world  was  premature,  the  structural  trend  of  a  dynamic  Asia  remains.  I  should 
clarify  that  in  this  speech,  my  reference  to  Asia  includes  the  Middle  East.  Even  for  2009, 
while  the  World  Bank  has  trimmed  its  growth  forecasts  for  Asia,1  this  remains  the  faster 
growing region in the world.2  
When global growth resumes, developed economies will remain important markets. But the 
significant  deleveraging  and  the  repair  of  balance  sheets  are  likely  to  dampen  growth 
prospects for some time. Asia has entered this crisis with less baggage. But this crisis will 
                                                 
1   World Bank East Asia and Pacific Update, “Battling the Forces of Global Recession”, April 2009. 
2   The World Bank projected Developing East Asia (including China) to grow by 5.3% in 2009; South Asia by 
3.7% and Middle East and North Africa by 3.0%. 
BIS Review 57/2009 
 1
force  an  acceleration  of  structural  economic  change  in  Asia.  The  drive  towards  greater 
domestic  consumption,  as  well  as  greater  Asia  intra-regional  trade,  investment  and 
consumption, will take on greater urgency.  
The growth of intra-Asia trade and investments will be driven by both bottom-up initiatives as 
businesses  expand  their  ties,  as  well  as  top-down  policy  measures  as  governments  enter 
into  agreements  on  free  trade  and  economic  cooperation.  A  recent  survey  by  the  ADB 
Institute  found  that  a  higher  than  expected  22%  of  responding  firms  use  preferences 
accorded by free trade agreement (FTA) and more are planning to do so.3 China, Japan and 
Korea have implemented their FTAs with ASEAN. The ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand FTA 
was signed in February 2009. Singapore has signed FTAs with the GCC and Jordan, and we 
can expect more of such pacts within Asia in the future. Cross-border capital flows between 
the GCC and East Asia will grow significantly in the coming years. 
With this forced pace of global re-balancing, the relative economic weight of Asia will rise. 
This would be a positive development for the global economy, as more engines of growth 
provide greater resilience. 
Financial services and Islamic finance 
However, it is crucial that our optimism does not turn into hubris. Economies in our region 
face many important challenges. In particular, getting the financial system to play its proper 
role is critical. So let me turn to my second reflection on the role of financial services. 
Many causes have been cited for the current financial crisis – excessive leverage, complexity 
and risk-taking incentivised by inappropriate compensation systems; pro-cyclical regulatory 
requirements  and  inappropriate  cost  of  capital;  the  flawed  originate-to-distribute  model  in 
credit origination that worsened the principal-agent problem; the role of rating agencies; and 
the use of instruments such as CDS and CDOs that were supposed to distribute risks more 
broadly but ended up concealing and concentrating risks instead. The list goes on. Each of 
these plays a role but if we are to identify a common factor across these various causes it is 
this: that finance has become detached from economic realities.  
As we look to develop our financial system, we have to bear in mind that the basic role of 
finance is to allocate scarce capital to its most productive use. We earn a return only if the 
capital is deployed to eventually produce goods and services that are valued by the market. 
When  the  nexus  between  the  mobilization  of  capital  and  the  productive  use  of  capital  is 
broken,  the  returns  cannot  be  sustained  –  the  bubble  must  eventually  burst,  with  painful 
consequences.  
In  this  crisis,  both  conventional  and  Islamic  financial  markets  have  been  affected,  but  the 
restrictions on the use of leverage and speculation has put Islamic Finance in a better stead. 
In the coming years, as the Shariah principles of using capital to build productive capacity 
gain  wider  recognition,  Islamic  Finance  will  assume  a  more  prominent  role.  Estimates  of 
global  Islamic  Finance  assets  today  range  from  US$700  billion  to  US$  1  trillion  and  one 
consultancy firm estimates this could potentially grow to US$1.6 trillion by 2012.4  
Countries  in  Asia  are  using  Islamic  Finance  to  fund  urban  development  and  public 
infrastructure projects to meet the growing demands of their populations. The ADB estimates 
that Asian countries would need more than US$8 trillion of infrastructure investment between 
                                                 
3   Kawai  and  Wignaraja,  “The  Asian  "Noodle  Bowl":  Is  It  Serious  for  Business?”  Asian  Development  Bank 
Institute Working Paper Series No. 136, April 2009. 
4   Oliver Wyman, “The Next Chapter in Islamic Finance - Higher Rewards but Higher Risks”, April 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 57/2009
2010  and  2020.5  International  financial  institutions  such  as  the  Islamic  Development  Bank 
are active in funding worthwhile investment projects. 
The global sukuk market remains a relatively new asset class with much room to grow out. In 
2007, Asian currency-denominated sukuk outstanding grew by almost 50% but the market 
contracted by only 1.5% to US$64.3 billion at end-2008.6 Around US$1.3 billion in sovereign 
sukuk issuance will come from Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore in the first half of 2009, 
and  more  private  sector  issuers  are  expected  to  tap  the  sukuk  market  and  to  attract  new 
investors and clients. 
In asset management, an industry report7 estimates the number of high net worth individuals 
and their financial wealth in Asia combined to be about the same as those of Europe and 
America,  but  growing  faster.  The  number  of  Asian  middle  class  has  also  surged  with 
economic  growth.  While  growth  momentum  may  moderate  in  the  next  few  years  as  the 
global economy recovers, the underlying trend remains. The growing interest in Islamic funds 
will provide opportunities for asset managers who can provide the right products. 
In  short,  my  second  reflection  is  that  nature  of  financial  services  in  the  coming  years  will 
change, with a focus on deepening the symbiotic relationship between financial services and 
economic growth. This will be favourable for various segments of Islamic finance. 
Nature of financial regulation 
Let me move on to my third reflection, on the nature of financial regulation. This crisis shows 
that proper regulation of financial activities is difficult – it’s unpopular to take away the punch 
bowl when the party is going. But it is necessary. Equally important is the need to focus on 
the economic substance and underlying risks of the activities, regardless of its form.  
Prof. Rifaat provided a very timely reminder when he said recently, “Every financial institution 
requires close supervision, regardless of whether it is conventional or Islamic.” While Islamic 
Finance  has  features  that  make  it  robust,  there  are  also  risks  such  as  liquidity  and 
concentration risks that demand special attention. 
MAS  applies  a  single  regulatory  framework  to  both  conventional  and  Islamic  banking 
because our regulations address prudential issues of liquidity, credit, market, operational and 
concentration risks. These are relevant to both conventional and Islamic banks. While Islamic 
funding  and  financing  structures  are  different,  we  consider  the  economic  substance  the 
underlying risk of these structures, and apply the regulatory treatment that is consistent with 
the  risk.  Our  regulatory  framework  therefore  provides  a  level  playing  field  for  Islamic  and 
conventional banking. MAS has for some time now issued regulations to clarify the regulatory 
treatment of various Islamic finance structures under our rules. 
Today, we have issued another two regulations,8 as well as a consolidated set of Guidelines 
which  provide  clarity  on  how  our  banking  regulations  apply  to  Islamic  banking,  and  offers 
specific information of the regulatory treatment of various Islamic banking structures. This set 
of Guidelines will provide greater clarity and certainty for financial institutions offering Islamic 
banking products in Singapore. Taken together, these various changes will allow banks to 
                                                 
5   ADB, “Infrastructure for a Seamless Asia”, April 2009. 
6   Moody’s  Global  Corporate  Finance,  “Islamic  Finance:  Asian  Sukuk  Market  Faces  New  but  also  Familiar 
Challenges”, April 2009. 
7   Capgemini & Merrill Lynch, “World Wealth Report” 2008. 
8   MAS  Regulations  23C  and  23D  on  Diminishing  Musharaka  financing  and  Spot  Murabaha  transactions 
respectively. 
BIS Review 57/2009 
 3
conduct a wide range of Islamic financing activities, and to have greater flexibility to structure 
instruments to meet their risk management needs. 
The facility for a reverse-enquiry Singapore dollar sukuk was completed in January. We have 
issued the first tranche to the Islamic Bank of Asia, and are reviewing applications from other 
banks. We have also ensured equal tax, regulatory and liquidity treatment of the sukuk with 
Singapore Government Securities, effective immediately.  
Members  of  the  IFSB  Board  and  the  industry  have  been  very  active  in  developing  talent. 
Several credible Islamic finance training providers are offering courses here. The Singapore 
Management  University  offers  an  undergraduate  module  on  Islamic  Law,  Banking  and 
Commerce  and  the  Wealth  Management  Institute  has  incorporated  an  Islamic  Finance 
module  in  its  Masters  of  Science  in  Wealth  Management  programme.  The  National 
University of Singapore recently organized an Islamic Finance conference. These initiatives 
help to raise understanding of Islamic Finance among students and industry practitioners. To 
support  professionals  who  wish  to  deepen  their  expertise,  I  am  pleased  to  announce  that 
beginning  from  this  year  we  will  sponsor  students  for  the  eligible  Islamic  Finance  Masters 
programmes. 
MAS  will  continue  to  work  towards  a  regulatory  approach  that  is  clear,  relevant  and 
consistent, across the range of Islamic financial activities. We are committed to working with 
fellow  regulators,  and  to  developing  the  infrastructure  and  talent  to  support  the  growth  of 
Islamic Finance in Singapore. 
Conclusion 
In  conclusion,  we  face  challenging  times.  But  the  dynamism  of  Asia,  including  the  Middle 
East, will return and the structural economic changes are likely to accelerate. The focus on 
the role of finance to develop productive sectors will raise the profile of Islamic Finance, and 
create new opportunities. 
On that note, I wish you a fruitful discussion during this Summit and a very pleasant stay in 
Singapore. Thank you. 
4 
 BIS Review 57/2009
