Hezron O Nyangito: Impact of the global financial crisis on the Kenyan 
banking system 
Keynote address by Dr Hezron O Nyangito, CBS, Deputy Governor of the Central Bank of 
Kenya, at the Kenya Institute of Bankers, Eldoret, 16 January 2009. 
 Mr Stephen Anjichi, Executive Director, Kenya Institute of Bankers; 
Mr Ben Kamau, Honorary Chairman, Kenya Institute of Bankers, Eldoret Chapter; 
Committee Members of the KIB Eldoret Chapter present; 
Distinguished Guests; 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
I am honoured to be here this evening to join you on the occasion of the Kenya Institute of 
Bankers (KIB) Eldoret Chapter Annual Dinner. I take this early opportunity to sincerely thank 
the  Chairman  and  Committee  of  the  Chapter  for  the  invitation.  At  the  Central  Bank  we 
welcome opportunities such as this one that enable us to exchange views on topical issues 
with industry practioners. Given also that the year is still young, it is appropriate for me to 
wish you all a fruitful and prosperous 2009. 
Mr. Chairman: 
The topic that I was requested to speak on, “The impact of The Global Financial Crisis on the 
Kenyan Banking System” is indeed topical and has engaged policymakers across the world 
since 2007. I will therefore first explore the genesis of the global financial crisis, then review 
its potential impact on Kenya from a macro perspective and conclude by analysing its impact 
on the Kenyan banking system. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
2008  was  indeed  a  historic  year.  Aside  from  the  domestic/political  problems  experienced 
during  the  first  quarter  of  the  year,  the  financial  disruptions  triggered  by  the  US  subprime 
mortgage market precipitated a global financial crisis, which has simultaneously affected all 
the  major  world  economies  including  the  United  States  of  America,  the  European  Union, 
Japan and China. By end of 2008 all these economies were in a recession. 
As  you  are  already  aware,  the  current  financial  crisis  can  be  traced  to  a  decade  of  low 
interest rates in the United States of America during the 1990s, which in turn spurred liberal 
lending practices by commercial banks to clients that had no ability to repay loans (the so 
called  sub-prime  clients),  thereby  compromising  the  quality  of  loans  held  by  financial 
institutions. The widespread nature of lending to the sub-prime market, in turn, promoted a 
boom in the property market. 
However, as the US experienced an economic slowdown and rising interest rates during the 
past two years, sub-prime mortgage defaults began soaring, and the securities built around 
these  debts,  including  property  prices  began  loosing  value  with  contagion  effect.  The 
resultant strain from the financial crisis has had two critical consequences internationally: a 
Credit  Crunch  in  the  USA,  and  in  countries  that  were  exposed  to  the  high  risk  mortgage-
backed securities in Europe and Asia, and a liquidity crisis arising from the uncertainty over 
which institutions held problem debt and its actual value, so that banks have been prompted 
to  restrict  lending  to  one  another,  creating  a  major  liquidity  crisis  in  the  global  financial 
market. 
The combination of a deteriorating credit market and liquidity strains precipitated the current 
financial crisis, and the collapse of America’s largest mortgage institutions (Fannie Mae and 
Freddie  Mac),  and  globally  important  investment  banks  such  as  Bear  Stearns,  Lehman 
BIS Review 25/2009 
 1
Brothers  and  Merrill  Lynch.  The  resultant  crisis  has  also  led  to  panic  selling  in  financial 
markets and a remarkable response by central banks. 
Ladies and Gentlemen: 
The current concern for most Kenyans and investors is the extent to which the contagion of 
this  global  crisis  will  affect  the  domestic  economy.  Among  the  questions  being  asked  are: 
how  will  the  domestic  economy  be  affected?  Through  what  channels  will  the  global  crisis 
permeate  the  domestic  economy?  What  is  the  Central  Bank  or  the  larger  Government  of 
Kenya doing to mitigate any of these effects? What policy actions is the Central Bank and the 
Government supposed to undertake when such crisis occur? How does the global financial 
crisis affect economic outlook domestically? 
First, I would like to underline that African markets have so far been remarkably resilient to 
the current Global Financial Crisis, primarily due to the fact that our financial systems do not 
hold any of the “toxic” securities and debts that have precipitated and spread the crisis in the 
international financial system. The exception is Nigeria, whose financial markets are currently 
experiencing enormous strains due to both global and local market liquidity issues and high 
dependence on oil. 
However,  it  is  expected  Kenya’s  exposure  to  the  crisis  will  be  driven  by  the  following  key 
factors: 
• 
Demand  for  Kenyan  exports  may  decline.  The  recession  in  North  America  and 
Europe  triggered  by  the  credit  crunch  may  reduce  demand  for  Kenyan  exports 
goods. 
Kenyan  banks  have  deposits  and  placements  in  foreign  institutions.  Kenyan 
institutions also do have credit lines with foreign banking institutions. Collapse of any 
of  these  institutions  or  a  credit  crunch  could  hurt  the  economy.  However,  so  far 
these effects have not been witnessed. 
Kenyans  living  abroad  remit  money  home  to  support  consumption,  and  for 
investment  purposes.  Early  indications  show  that  Remittances  may  decline  as 
disposable incomes decline in the countries experiencing the global recession. 
Tourism could be affected as tourists postpone or cancel visits abroad on account of 
difficult  economic  conditions  and  uncertain  duration  of  the  economic  recession. 
However,  recent  data  indicates  that  tourism  has  fully  recovered  in  Nairobi  but 
Mombasa and the lodges are still lagging.  
Kenyan exporters and importers use letters of credit issued by financial institutions 
abroad to facilitate trade between Kenya and the rest of the world. Since confidence 
is returning and global interbank lending has now resumed, this effect may be very 
minimal. 
The shilling depreciated to the US dollar between September 1 and November 30, 
2008 following pressure from the global financial crisis as foreign investors “fled to 
safety” while consolidating their finances to meet their obligations abroad. 
The stock markets, and respective investors, recorded a sharp fall in the value of 
their  investments  and  general  financial  net  worth  following  the  current  global 
financial meltdown. Stock markets fell by 21 percent in Uganda, 24 percent in the 
South Africa and 27 percent in Kenya between September 1 and November 30. 
Kenya  receives  foreign  assistance  from  overseas  for  official  use  to  finance 
development projects (e.g. roads, energy etc), and through NGOs to finance poverty 
reduction activities. This assistance could decline due to the crisis. 
       2 
 BIS Review 25/2009
Mr. Chairman: 
Let me now turn to the heart of my address this evening on the impact of the financial crisis 
on the Kenyan banking system. Overall, I am pleased to note that the outlook for Kenya’s 
financial  sector  remains  stable  in  view  of  the  prevailing  levels  of  capitalization,  sound  risk 
management  systems,  strong  asset  quality  and  profitability  that  the  banking  sector  is 
currently enjoying. Specifically, the banking sector has enjoyed relatively strong performance 
during  the  last  five  years,  supported  by  improved  macroeconomic  stability  and  legislative 
reforms  which  resulted  in  the  implementation  of  revised  prudential  guidelines  and  risk 
management frameworks. These reforms have enabled the Central Bank to identify, monitor 
and  control  risks  in  a  timely  manner,  while  also  strengthening  corporate  governance  in 
banking institutions. The key highlights of the banking sector by end of November 2008 are: 
• 
Deposits increased by 25% from Shs. 730 billion at November 2007 to Shs. 911bn 
in 2008 as the sector continues to expand its outreach and aggressively market for 
new deposits. The asset base of the sector also increased by 33% to stand at Kshs. 
1.2  trillion.  The  asset  growth  was  largely  fuelled  by  an  increase  in  loans  and 
advances. 
The  total  capital  to  total  risk  weighted  assets  ratio  of  the  sector  increased  from 
16.7% in November 2007 to 18.1% in November 2008. This ratio is an indicator of 
the  capital  adequacy  of  the  sector.  The  minimum  statutory  ratio  is  12%  and  at 
slightly over 18%, the sector has some cushioning to absorb losses. 
The average liquidity of the sector which is the ratio of liquid assets to deposits and 
other short term liabilities stood at 37.3%. This was above the statutory minimum of 
20%. 
The stock of non performing loans to gross loans decreased from 11.4% as at the 
end  of  November  2007  to  8.4%  at  the  end  of  November  2008.  The  reduction  is 
largely  attributable  to  enhanced  risk  management  practices  by  banks  and  NPL 
recoveries. 
The sectors profit before tax stood at Kshs. 40.2 billion for the eleven months ending 
November 2008. This is a 21% increase from the Kshs. 33.2 bn registered over a 
similar period in 2007. The enhanced profitability was driven by interest income on 
loans and advances and foreign exchange dealing income. 
    Ladies and Gentlemen: 
This performance notwithstanding, it is important to observe that the financial sector could be 
vulnerable to effects of the global financial crisis and economic recession, as individuals and 
firms are likely to struggle to repay debts, thereby resulting in a deterioration of the quality of 
loan  portfolio,  and  profitability  in  the  financial  system.  In  particular,  the  Central  Bank  is 
cognisant  that  there  may  be  a  lag  and  perhaps  second  round  effects  of  the  crisis  on  the 
Kenyan  economy.  We  are  therefore  actively  engaging  banks  to  ensure  that  they  have 
adequate  capital  buffers  to  withstand  the  current  turbulences.  We  are  also  focusing  on 
liquidity management strategies by banks to ensure that they can meet their obligations as 
and when they fall due. 
Broadly  speaking,  there  are  three  main  areas  of  focus  for  Kenyan  monetary  authorities  to 
respond  in  dealing  with  the  current  global  financial  crisis,  notably:  (a)  the  need  to 
continuously strengthen the regulation of the financial sector; (b) a reappraisal of the role and 
activities  in  the  capital  markets  and  (c)  the  importance  of  strengthening  coordination  of 
regulatory authorities in Kenya. In this regard, the following policy measures and actions are 
recommended  to  safeguard  the  confidence  of  credit  markets  and  stability  of  the  financial 
system in Kenya. 
BIS Review 25/2009 
 3
In  the  Kenyan  context,  a  highly  enhanced  regulatory  and  supervisory  oversight  of  the 
banking  system  remains  the  key  plank  to  addressing  the  on-going  and  unfolding  global 
financial crisis. 
This entails: 
First, enhanced capital requirements for banks, thereby reducing their vulnerability to sudden 
asset-price movements and ensure they have the resources to support any off-balance sheet 
exposures.  We  have  also  enhanced  and  are  constantly  monitoring  commercial  banks’ 
liquidity  positions,  thereby  reducing  the  chances  of  institutions  being  threatened  by  a 
reduction in financial market liquidity. This is made possible through improving the bank’s risk 
management  capabilities,  through  better  stress-testing  of  their  market  positions  against 
possible  adverse  price  movements.  Also  to  review  the  role  of  credit-rating  agencies  in  the 
financial system. 
It  is  therefore  gratifying  to  note  in  this  regard  that  the  recent  passage  of  the  Finance  Act, 
2008 has increased the minimum core capital for banks to Kshs. one billion by the end of 
2012.  This  measure  we  believe  will  strengthen  the  banking  sector  further  and  enable  it 
withstand  periodic  local  and  global  turbulences.  We  are  currently  engaging  banks  whose 
core capital is currently below Kshs. 1 billion on their capital build up plans. 
Secondly there is need to undertake reforms in the Capital Markets to restore investor trust 
and  confidence.  The  reforms  should  also  cover  a  reappraisal  of  the  role  and  activities  of 
investment banks which remain the weakest link in the financial sector and their regulatory 
structure in order to stem any downside risk to the banking system. The reforms will entail: 
- 
Developing a comprehensive and enforceable regulatory framework and streamline 
the corporate governance in line with the international best practices and a thorough 
fit and proper vetting of directors and owners of these institutions. 
Re-assessing the use of the word “bank” by investment banks in Kenya – there is 
potential to confuse the public with traditional banking. 
Increase  capitalization  requirements  –  capital  adequacy,  and 
Institute  risk 
management  practices  as  well  as  improve  disclosure  requirements  so  financial 
market participants have better information. 
  Thirdly, the Kenyan financial sector is regulated by various institutions, namely, the Central 
Bank of Kenya, the Capital Markets Authority, the Insurance Regulatory Authority, and the 
Retirement  Benefits  Authority.  Given  the  inter-dependence  of  financial  markets,  and 
contagion effects of risks emanating from any sector, there is need to begin thinking towards 
a  Financial  Services  Authority  (FSA),  which  will  coordinate  financial  sector-wide  stability 
surveillance at the technical level. In addition, regional cooperation is critical in addressing 
financial risks arising from events outside our borders, and within the Eastern Africa region. 
Mr. Chairman: 
I would like to conclude by underlining the role of professionals in managing global financial 
crisis. Professionals including bankers are on the spot like never before. There is of course 
considerable  debate  on  the  capacity  of  bankers,  analysts,  fund  managers,  credit  rating 
agencies, regulators and accountants in the crisis. 
Professionals have a sacrosanct responsibility to provide advice and guidance in their areas 
of  speciality.  Institutions  such  as  KIB  therefore  play  a  key  role  in  building  the  capacity  of 
bankers to respond to emerging issues. The global financial system is evolving rapidly and 
professionals  have  to  “up  their  game”  if  their  institutions  are  to  survive  in  these  turbulent 
times. Bodies such as KIB must therefore provide relevant and appropriate capacity building 
programmes  for  their  members.  I  must  therefore  commend  the  KIB  Eldoret  Chapter  for 
organising today’s forum that will enable your members to gather insights on topical issues. 
KIB  indeed  provides  a  useful  knowledge  base  on  the  banking  sector.  I  would  therefore 
challenge you to add your voice in times such as this by providing advice as to how Kenya 
4 
 BIS Review 25/2009
I 
therefore  urge  you 
to  continue  addressing 
can continue on a growth trajectory, the global financial crisis not withstanding. At the Central 
Bank,  we  are  open  to  knowledge  sharing  and  welcome  ideas  from  organizations  such  as 
KIB. 
issues  and  share  your 
recommendations with policymakers. 
I  do  not  wish  to  extend  my  remarks  much  further  as  I  am  acutely  aware  that  social  “ice 
breaking” and renewal of existing acquaintances is a critical component of gatherings such 
as this. I therefore wish the KIB Eldoret Chapter well in all its endeavours. Let me close my 
remarks by wishing you all a very pleasant and memorable evening. 
Thank you. 
topical 
BIS Review 25/2009 
 5
