 Lucas Papademos: The dual crisis – economic impact, policy response 
and exit strategy 
Speech by Mr Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, at the High-
Level  Panel  Debate  on  “Europe  in  the  Economic  and  Financial  Crisis:  How  to  bring  back 
prosperity for everyone?”, organised by the European People’s Party, Brussels, 4 May 2009. 
 Introduction 
I.  
Let  me  start  by  thanking  the  organisers  for  inviting  me  to  this  policy  debate  on  how  to 
overcome the current economic and financial crisis and bring back prosperity for everyone. 
This subject remains topical and challenging. Lately, among the generally gloomy reporting 
on the state of the economy, we have observed some positive signs emanating from market 
developments and confidence indicators suggesting that the economy is stabilising. Indeed, 
one indicator that has recently surged is the one measuring the use of pertinent metaphorical 
expressions:  we  hear  of  “green  shoots”;  “glimmers  in  the  dark”;  and,  the  more  traditional, 
“light  at the  end  of  the tunnel”.  Some  indices suggest  that  the  pace of  deterioration  in  the 
global and European economies is slowing, and equity markets seem to reflect expectations 
of  improving  prospects.  But  it  will  take  some  time  before  our  economies  fully  recover  and 
grow at a robust and sustained rate. 
The theme of this debate rightly emphasises two important issues that are relevant for public 
policy: first, the dual character of the current crisis, which is both financial and economic and, 
second, the need to also focus on the longer term. The actions of policy makers and market 
participants  should  not  only  aim  at  overcoming  the  current  difficulties,  but  should  also 
consider  the  strategy  and  measures  that  will  ensure  sustained  prosperity  and  that  crises 
such as the current one will not occur again. 
Accordingly, in my remarks I will address three issues: 
• 
first, the evolving nature of the ongoing crisis and its potential total impact on the 
European economy; 
second,  the  rationale  and  the  effectiveness  of  some  of  the  measures  being 
implemented to resolve the problems we are confronted with; and 
third,  the  need  to  implement  reforms  and  adopt  an  appropriate  exit  strategy,  from 
the  extraordinary  policy  interventions,  so  as  to  improve  the  functioning  and 
resilience  of  the  financial  system  and  achieve  sustained  economic  growth  in  an 
environment of monetary and financial stability. 
  The evolving nature of the crisis and its economic impact  
II.  
The nature and scope of the crisis has evolved substantially since it erupted in the summer 
of  2007.  Initially  and  for  a  considerable  period of  time,  it  was  mainly  an  episode  of  strong 
financial  turbulence  that  affected  certain  segments  of  the  credit  market  resulting  in  large 
writedowns  on  a  class  of  assets  (complex  structured  products)  that  affected  a  relatively 
limited  number  of  institutions  in  advanced  economies.  Progressively,  and  especially  since 
mid-September  2008,  it  has  evolved  into  a  global  crisis  affecting  advanced,  emerging  and 
developing  economies;  and  it  has  spread  across  economic  sectors.  The,  more  or  less, 
synchronised decline or deceleration of economic activity worldwide has been accompanied 
by a collapse of world trade that has further depressed global economic activity. 
A key feature of the current crisis is the mutually reinforcing interaction between, on the one 
hand,  the  weakening  of  economic  activity  and  the  rising  unemployment  and,  on  the  other 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 1
hand,  the  process  of  deleveraging  and  repair  of  banks’  balance  sheets  and  the  persisting 
tensions in some financial markets. The weakening of economic activity has been impairing 
the  quality  of  bank  loans  thus  adversely  affecting  banks’  capital  positions  and  their 
willingness  to  extend  credit  to  the  private  sector.  This,  in  turn,  imposes  constraints  on 
economic activity and the ability of firms and households to service their debts, increasing 
the likelihood that banks will suffer further credit losses and tighten their lending standards. 
Therefore,  the  main  immediate  policy  challenge  is  to  prevent  the  emergence  of  a  strong 
adverse feedback loop between the real economy and the financial sector. 
Before examining the effectiveness of the policies being pursued to address this challenge, 
let me briefly refer to the impact of the crisis on the economy and the financial system of the 
euro area. Since the financial turmoil deepened and broadened in the autumn of 2008, its 
impact on the economy has increased substantially. The significant deceleration in real GDP 
growth in the euro area to 0.8% in 2008, from strong growth rates of 2.7% in 2007 and 3.0% 
in 2006, reflects the sharp contraction in activity by 1.5% in the fourth quarter of last year. 
The latest available information suggests that aggregate output recorded a further sizeable 
decline in the first quarter of this year. The recent forecasts by the IMF paint a gloomy picture 
for economic activity in the euro area, with real GDP projected to decline by 4.2% in 2009 
and by 0.4% in 2010.1 The European Commission also predicts a significant contraction of 
euro area GDP this year, by 4.0%, and still slightly negative growth of -0.1% for 2010.2
What is behind these forecasts? Two important determinants, among others, that have been 
adversely  affecting  private  consumption  and  investment  are  the  perceived  unusually  high 
uncertainty surrounding the European and global economic outlook and the exceptionally low 
confidence in the financial system. Reducing this uncertainty and restoring confidence will be 
crucial  for  increasing  the  effectiveness  of  the  policy  measures  being  implemented  and  the 
pace of the recovery. 
The  estimated  total  potential  impact  of  the  ongoing  crisis  on  the  value  of  assets  held  by 
global  and  European  financial  intermediaries  is  very  large  and  has  recently  been  revised 
upwards.  According  to  the  IMF,  the  total  potential  writedowns  on  assets  originated  in  the 
United States, Europe and Japan could reach USD 4.1 trillion over the period 2007 – 2010, 
of which USD 2.8 trillion would be borne by banks. The total expected writedowns on assets 
– both loans and securities – held by European banks are estimated at USD 737 billion. It is 
useful to distinguish between the actual losses incurred so far, and potential future losses. In 
Europe, the reported writedowns (on securities and loans) of banks so far3 amount to almost 
USD  358  billion  (of  which  euro  area  banks  account  for  less  than  USD  173  billion).  At  the 
same time, a total of USD 382 billion of fresh capital has been raised by European banks (of 
which USD 190 billion was raised by euro area banks). Therefore, the newly injected capital 
into European and euro area banks exceeded the reported writedowns. 
Looking  forward,  the  potential  further  losses  of  European  banks  until  the  end  of  2010  are 
estimated at USD 750 billion.4 It is important, however, to keep in mind that estimates of the 
potential  future  writedowns  on  assets  are  based  on  many  underlying  assumptions 
concerning  the  future  path  of  economic  activity,  asset  market  developments  and  the 
calculation  of  impairment  charges  on  loans.  These  estimates  are  therefore  subject  to  a 
substantial margin of error. There is, however, one important point concerning the estimated 
potential future writedowns of European banks. They mainly reflect expected losses on loans 
and to a lesser extent further writedowns on securities. This underscores the significance of 
                                                 
1   See International Monetary Fund, Word Economic Outlook, April 2009, released on 16 April 2009. 
2   See European Commission, Economic Forecast Spring 2009, released on 4 May 2009. 
3   Data included up until 19 April 2009. 
4   See International Monetary Fund, Global Financial Stability Report, released on 21 April 2009. 
2 
 BIS Review 53/2009
 pursuing policies that can prevent, or at least limit, the negative feedback loop between the 
banking  system  and  the  real  economy.  And  this  brings  me  to  the  appropriate  policy 
responses. 
The rationale and effectiveness of policy measures 
III.  
The nature and scope of the crisis has required the concerted and parallel implementation of 
three types of policy responses: (1) macroeconomic policies to stimulate aggregate demand; 
(2)  the  provision  of  liquidity  by  central  banks  to  ensure  the  orderly  functioning  of  money 
markets,  contain  spillover  effects  on  the  financial  system  and  foster  the  financing  of  the 
economy; and (3) government measures to repair and strengthen bank balance sheets so as 
to stabilise the banking system and help restore the provision of credit to the economy. 
There are three general points I would like to make at the outset concerning the magnitude 
and  effectiveness  of  these  policy  actions.  First,  the  overall  effectiveness  of  the  measures 
depends not only on their design but also on their implementation which must be timely, well 
targeted and concerted so as to simultaneously address financial market stresses and the 
weakening  of  economic  activity,  thus  preventing  the  development  of  adverse  feedback 
dynamics between the financial system and the real economy. Second, policy actions must 
be implemented in a manner that helps achieve the immediate objectives of stabilising the 
financial system and supporting economic activity, and at the same time, (ensures that the 
recovery  of  the  economy  will  be  sustained)  lays  the  foundations  for  sustained  growth  and 
prosperity. 
The third point concerns the appropriate size of the economic stimulus and the nature of the 
other  measures  taken  across  countries  and  economic  regions.  The  features  of  the  policy 
strategies  pursued,  the  precise  design,  magnitude,  and  implementation  modalities  of  the 
relevant policies need not be identical across countries or economic areas, for instance, on 
both  sides  of  the  Atlantic,  or  –  for  that  matter  –  on  the  two  sides  of  the  English  channel. 
Some  differences  in  size  or  scope  are  warranted  by  different  economic  and  financial 
conditions  as  well  as  by  different  institutional  structures.  Having  said  that,  the  general 
orientation  and  the  overall  strategy  of  the  policies  being  pursued  have  been  similar  in  all 
major economies. This commonality derives from our shared analysis of the causes of the 
crisis,  its  evolving  global  character  and  the  lessons  that  have  been  drawn  about  the 
appropriate policy responses and the need for concerted actions across the globe. 
Let me now focus on central bank policy in the euro area. Since the eruption of the financial 
turmoil,  the  ECB  has  acted  decisively  providing  and  managing  liquidity  in  the  interbank 
currency market so as to foster its orderly functioning and ensure that banks have adequate 
access to central bank funding and can continue to finance the economy. The provision of 
liquidity  by  the  ECB  to  the  euro  area  banking  system  has  been  extraordinary  in  size  and 
scope. It has involved the implementation of non-standard measures, such as the provision, 
since last October, of unlimited funding in euro at fixed interest rates over periods up the six 
months  against  an  expanded  list  of  eligible  assets  for  use  as  collateral  in  Eurosystem 
refinancing operations. In addition, the ECB has supplied liquidity in other currencies, notably 
US  dollars,  on  the  basis  of  a  swap  agreement  with  the  Federal  Reserve.  These  money 
market interventions contributed to the growth in the size of the Eurosystem’s balance sheet 
which  has  increased  since  the  financial  turmoil  broke  out  by  around  EUR  600  billion, 
between end of June 2007 and end of April 2009, and had reached EUR 1.51 trillion (or USD 
2.01 trillion) by the end of April. This figure is equal to 16.0% of the nominal GDP of the euro 
area.  For  comparison,  the  balance  sheet  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  was  USD  2.03 
trillion or 14.0% of the US nominal GDP. 
The extraordinary expansion of liquidity provision to the euro area banking system has made 
an important contribution to the financing of the economy because of the dominant role of the 
banking system in the financing of the private sector in the euro area. More generally, the 
generous provision of central bank money has ensured that banks’ funding constraints and 
BIS Review 53/2009 
 3
perceived liquidity and counterparty risks have not caused a systemic crisis. Nevertheless, 
bank  lending  standards  have  been  tightened  and  credit  growth  to  the  private  sector  has 
declined. The latter is partly a consequence of reduced demand for bank loans and partly a 
result of the deleveraging process in the banking sector and persisting stresses in the bank 
wholesale funding markets. 
As the financial crisis deepened and broadened from mid-September last year, inflationary 
pressures  and  risks  diminished  in  the  euro  area  and  globally.  This  was  mainly  due  to  the 
substantial weakening of global economic activity and the accompanying marked decline in 
commodity prices. Moreover, and despite the huge increase in the provision of central bank 
liquidity,  broad  money  (M3)  growth  and  the  expansion  of  credit  to  the  private  sector 
decelerated, confirming that the upside risks to price stability were abating. In response, the 
Governing Council reduced the key ECB interest rates by an unprecedented 300 basis points 
between October 2008 and April 2009. As a result of the lowering of the key policy rates and 
the  provision  and  management  of  liquidity,  money  market  rates  have  declined  even  more 
from the peaks reached in October 2008. For example, the six-month Euribor rate was 1.56 
% at the end of April, almost 400 basis points lower than its peak value last October (5.45%) 
and  virtually  the  same  as  the  corresponding  Libor  rate  (1.51%)  in  the  US  dollar  money 
market. Thus, over the past seven months conditions in the euro area money markets have 
significantly improved and they are virtually the same as, or even better than, those in other 
major money markets. These favourable money market developments have gradually been 
reflected  in  a  decline  in  bank  lending  rates,  especially  on  short-term  credit  to  the  private 
sector. 
Later  this  week,  the  Governing  Council  will  assess,  on  the  basis  of  the  latest  available 
information  and  analysis,  the  medium-term  outlook  for  and  the  potential  risks  to  price 
stability,  and,  accordingly,  will  decide  on  the  appropriate  monetary  policy  stance  and, 
possibly,  on  the  implementation  of  further  non-standard  measures  to  foster  market 
functioning.  For  this  reason,  I  will  not  elaborate  on  these  issues  and  will  turn  next  to  an 
assessment of the measures taken by governments to support the banking system and on 
necessary reforms to strengthen its stability and resilience. 
The  support  that  has  been  provided  by  governments  to  the  European  banks  has  been 
substantial. For  example,  banks  in the  euro  area  have  received  EUR  113  billion of  capital 
injections  from  governments  and  EUR  300  billion  of  government  guarantees.  Moreover,  a 
number  of  asset  relief  schemes,  involving  the  removal  of  impaired  assets  from  banks’ 
balance sheets on the provision of guarantees to limit the valuation losses of such assets, 
are in different stages of implementation. The Eurosystem provided advice for the design of 
these  measures,  in  the  form  of  recommendations,  for  instance  on  the  pricing  of 
recapitalisation  and  of  government  credit  guarantees,  which  aimed  at  ensuring  that  such 
measures would contribute to safeguarding financial stability and restoring an adequate flow 
of credit to the private sector, while preserving a level playing field within the Single Market to 
the maximum extent possible.  
The  implementation  of  the  bank  support  measures  has  been  gradual  over  the  past  few 
months. In the euro area, only one third of the commitments for capital injections had been 
used  until  the  end  of  April  and  a  smaller  fraction,  less  than  18%,  of  the  commitments  to 
guarantee  new  bank  debt  have  been  called  for.  The  use  of  government  credit  guarantees 
varies considerably across countries reflecting several factors. It is still too early to accurately 
assess  the  effectiveness  of  these  government  measures  in  improving  the  longer-term 
funding  of  banks  and  in  fostering  bank  lending  to  the  private  sector.  The  evidence  is 
relatively  limited  and  the  positive  impact  of  the  bank  support  measures  cannot  be  easily 
disentangled  from  the  negative  effects  of  other  factors  on  the  bank  funding  and  credit 
markets, notably of the weakening economic activity. 
4 
 BIS Review 53/2009
 The need for financial reform and an exit strategy 
IV.  
Overall,  the  combination  of  significant  macroeconomic  stimulus,  the  provision  of  unlimited 
central  bank  liquidity  and  the  wide  range  of  government  measures  to  strengthen  banks’ 
balance sheets will jointly support the economy’s recovery and alleviate stress in the financial 
system.  Their  impact  will  become  progressively  more  visible  in  the  coming  quarters.  The 
effectiveness  of  these  policies  over  time  will  depend  on  the  extent  to  which  other  factors 
reinforce or counteract their positive impacts. There is, therefore, no room for complacency 
as  several  risks  and  uncertainties  lie  ahead,  including  the  extent  and  duration  of  the 
deleveraging  process  in  the  banking  systems  as  well  as  in  the  non-financial  sectors  of  a 
number  of  countries.  Moreover,  the  pace  of  recovery  will  crucially  depend  on  how  quickly 
confidence  will  be  restored  in  the  prospects  of  the  economy  and  in  the  soundness  and 
resilience of the financial system.  
To this end, it is essential that the revealed weaknesses in the functioning of the financial 
system and the inadequacies of the regulatory and supervisory framework are effectively and 
promptly addressed. In particular, there is a growing consensus among policy-makers about 
the  need  to  strengthen  and  broaden  the  regulatory  framework  and  to  develop  macro-
prudential supervision globally and in the European Union. 
Even if we agree on the objective, attaining it is undoubtedly a great challenge. There are 
different  views  about  how  to  best  achieve  that  goal.  At  the  initiative  of  the  European 
Commission, the group chaired by Jacques de Larosière undertook a comprehensive review 
of  the  EU  framework  for  financial  regulation  and  supervision  and  proposed,  among  other 
innovations, the creation of a European Systemic Risk Council with responsibility for macro-
prudential  supervision.  The  ECB  welcomes  the  group’s  report  and  broadly  supports  its 
recommendations  for  macro-prudential  supervision,  as  well  as  the  related  communication 
issued  by  the  European  Commission.  The  proposed  establishment  of  the  Systemic  Risk 
Council under the auspices of the ECB and the Council’s composition are a recognition of 
the extensive analytical capabilities developed by central banks in the fields of monetary and 
financial-stability  analysis,  their  relevant  expertise,  and  their  closeness  to  the  financial 
markets.  
The development of effective macro-prudential supervision is especially challenging because 
the institutional framework does not exist. We are therefore called upon to create something 
entirely new – and the ECB and the entire European System of Central Banks stand ready to 
assume the macro-prudential supervision tasks envisaged in the report of the de Larosière 
Group  and  to  provide  the  necessary  analytical  and  logistical  support  to  the  Systemic  Risk 
Council. For the new Council to function effectively, three key requirements will have to be 
fulfilled. They relate to the input, the output and the institutional foundation of the Council’s 
work:  
• 
First,  the  Systemic  Risk  Council  will  need  to  have  a  comprehensive  and  relevant 
information  base  that  draws  on  both  macro-  and  micro-prudential  supervisory 
information in order to be able to identify and assess the risks and vulnerabilities in 
the  EU  financial  system  as  a  whole,  to  issue  risk  warnings  and  to  adopt  related 
macro-prudential  policy  recommendations.  Close  cooperation  and  well-functioning 
information-sharing  mechanisms  between 
the  new  Council,  national  micro-
prudential supervisors and the proposed European System of Financial Supervision 
will therefore be indispensable.  
Second, adequate institutional mechanisms need to be in place to ensure that the 
risk warnings and the related recommendations issued by the Systemic Risk Council 
are translated into effective action.  
Third, for the Systemic Risk Council to be effective, legitimate and independent in its 
decision-making, a solid legal basis is essential. Such a basis will also provide legal 
clarity  regarding  the  tasks  to  be  performed  and  the  access  to  the  necessary  EU-
  BIS Review 53/2009 
 5
wide  macro-  and  micro-prudential  information,  subject  to  adequate  confidentiality 
arrangements.  
The development of an effective framework for macro-prudential supervision in the EU is an 
important  policy  priority  which  should  be  accompanied  by  the  strengthening  of  the 
arrangements for micro-prudential supervision. Macro- and micro-prudential supervision are 
complementary processes and the interplay between them should be smooth and efficient.  
Conclusion 
V.  
Let  me  conclude  with  a  few  remarks  on  another  important  policy  challenge  that  must  be 
addressed in order to ensure long-term prosperity by adopting an appropriate exit strategy 
from the extraordinary macroeconomic stimulus and support measures. And I will focus on 
fiscal policies. It is evident that that the economic downturn, discretionary fiscal measures to 
stimulate economic activity and government intervention to support the financial sector have 
had  a  substantial  impact  on  public  finances.  The  latest  information  and  the  Commission’s 
forecast  today  indicate  a  serious  fiscal  deterioration.5 The  current  focus  of  fiscal  policy  on 
supporting the economy’s recovery is warranted. At the same time, due attention should be 
paid  that  current  actions  do  not  undermine  the  integrity  of  the  EU  fiscal  framework.  It  is 
essential to preserve the public’s trust in the sustainability of public finances. Therefore, fiscal 
policy needs to have a credible exit strategy from the current extraordinary circumstances. 
Governments  need  to  be  credibly  committed  to  achieve  sound  fiscal  positions  as  soon  as 
possible and to fully apply the provisions of the Stability and Growth Pact.  
We  are  living  in  very  challenging  times,  and  bringing  back  prosperity  to  everyone  –  as 
referred  to  in  the  topic  of  today’s  debate  –  is  unquestionably  key  priority.  But  just  as  we 
currently experience a dual crisis – an economic and financial crisis – our response should 
also  be  of  a  dual  nature:  we  should  do  what  is  necessary  to  support  economic  recovery, 
while  at  the  same  time  being  mindful  of  pursuing  a  credible  and  sustainable  exit  strategy 
from the current extraordinary policy interventions, once conditions normalise again. 
Thank you for your attention. 
                                                 
5   The government deficit for the euro area as a whole is projected to be -5.3% of GDP in 2009, and -6.5% in 
2010 – see European Commission Economic Forecast Spring 2009. 
6 
 BIS Review 53/2009
