Radovan Jelašić: Serbia against the economic crisis  
Speech by Mr Radovan Jelašić, Governor of the National Bank of Serbia, in a meeting of top 
officials  and  leading  businessmen  themed  “Serbia  against the  Economic  Crisis”,  Belgrade, 
9 January 2009. 
 Your Excellencies, Ministers, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I am grateful for the invitation to attend this meeting and hope it will, if not resolve, then at 
least contribute to improved understanding of both current events and possible responses to 
the challenges our economy and the overall Serbian society are now facing. 
Allow me to begin by emphasizing the following four items of concern: 
1. 
The  level  of  disruption  in  international  economic  relations  is  unprecedented  since 
WW2.  There  is  no  institution,  no  scenario  or  study  which  offers  a  ready  made 
solution to the current crisis.  
Nobody, and absolutely nobody, can tell how long the crisis will last nor how deep 
the disruptions will cut into the tissue of the world economy. This fact should be born 
in mind by all decision makers when deciding on any measures, either those relating 
to the use of foreign reserves or measures involving changes in the exchange rate 
for the dinar!  
To  err  is  human,  especially  when  the  problem  at  hand  and  the  urgency  of  quick 
response  are  so  paramount.  But  it  is  also  of  ultimate  importance  to  admit  one’s 
mistake  and  to  adopt  corrective  measures  as  the  market  is  quicker  than  ever  in 
dealing punishing blows for any mistake!  
Of  course,  we  need  to  face  up  to  the  reality,  the  reality  which  in  Serbia  is  most 
commonly termed “harsh”. This time, though, this attribute is more than applicable, 
but should not be used as an excuse for us not to confront the reality.  
2. 
3. 
4. 
Both the exchange rate of the dinar against the euro and the current movements in prices 
are the “blueprint” of economic and political reality in Serbia and beyond. Naturally, we may 
blame  most  of  such  problems  on  the  movements  abroad,  but  I  hope  we  all  agree  on  one 
point at least – movements in prices and the exchange rate depend heavily on the type of 
measures we undertake in response to internal and external challenges. And the challenges 
have never been so numerous! What with the recent gas crisis and its fallout on both prices 
and the exchange rate in Serbia! Out of the blue, we are hit by rising prices of coal and wood 
for heating and there are no electricity heaters in the market even if your life depended on it. 
That  is  what  constitutes  a  market-run  economy  in  its  harshest  form.  A  responsible  state, 
however, takes precautionary measures. It anticipates movements and acts as a buffer in the 
most extreme cases. This role is now being played by the National Bank. But what can the 
National Bank responsibly commit to achieve in these turbulent times? Let me point out the 
main areas:  
1. 
Preserving stability of prices in the current economic environment – In all its 
activities,  the  National  Bank  is  committed  to  „achieving  and  maintaining  price 
stability”.  Achievement  of  its  commitment  determines  the  general  economic 
environment and the standard of living of our citizens. Let me emphasize again: the 
real  increase  in  wages  once  the  exact  nominal  increase  is  specified,  depends 
exclusively on consumer price growth, i.e. inflation. Any real growth in wages in the 
course of this year will be determined by the effectiveness of the government and 
the National Bank in terms of keeping inflation under control.  
BIS Review 4/2009 
 1
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
Adoption  of  (additional)  measures  to  prevent  or  moderate  the  effects  of 
disruptions in the banking system and/or financial market – a set of measures 
posted  on  the  NBS  website  have  already  become  operational,  from  measures  to 
moderate the effects of changes in the exchange rate on debtor categorization, to 
measures  aiming  to  create  conditions  to  improve  foreign  liquidity  of  banks  and 
enable access to cheaper sources of funding from abroad. Naturally, in time, this list 
will grow longer as movements in our economy and experiences of countries in the 
region and wider may command.  
Ensuring unobstructed functioning of the foreign exchange market – Serbia’s 
international reserves have risen quite substantially during the earlier period of high 
foreign  exchange  inflow.  In  addition,  the  National  Bank  has  been  engaged  in  the 
repurchase of foreign currency cash from exchange dealers, and in 2006 alone such 
repurchase came to as much as EUR 1,730 million, in 2007 to EUR 1,158 and in 
2008 to EUR 507 million. Such activity, plus setting high reserve requirements and 
implementing  prudential  measures  in  the  area  of  supervision  have  managed  to 
preempt stronger appreciation of the national currency. Namely, strengthening of the 
national  currency  is  a  normal  byproduct  during  the  period  of  abundant  foreign 
currency  inflow  from  privatization  and  increased  borrowing  abroad.  Yesterday  we 
sold  EUR  43.5  million  in  the  fixing  session,  while  the  overall  volume  of  trading 
among commercial banks reached EUR 17.5 million only. So, the NBS is doing its 
job and is supplying sufficient amounts of foreign currency during the current phase 
of high demand just like it did in earlier periods when the supply was not so low as it 
is  now.  But  at  times  of  low  foreign  currency  supply  and  substantially  increased 
demand  for  foreign  currency  resulting  from  an  abundance  of  dinars  on  hand,  the 
exchange rate for the dinar must bear the brunt.  
Additional measures to ensure the financial sector stability – Allow me to point 
out  that  the  NBS  is  currently  preparing  measures  to  ensure  that  the  majority  of 
profits earned in 2008 are retained in the country in order to strengthen the domestic 
banking sector. To that end, we have already undertaken measures to ensure more 
favourable terms of borrowing for our banks abroad. After all, the NBS has already 
proved its readiness to extend financial support to banks, which of course comes at 
a price – both financial and personal.  
Encouraging credit activity primarily in the area of productive sectors of the 
economy  –  There  will  no  longer  be  any  reserve  requirement  on  fresh  borrowing 
abroad  and  no  upper  limit  on  the  amount  of  credit  granted  to  entrepreneurs  and 
small  enterprises.  The  approach  to  credit  repayment  by  each  and  every  client 
individually and by the economy as a whole will be much more relaxed. New credit 
lines with the guarantee of Republic of Serbia have been secured via the EIB and 
from the Government of the Republic of Italy in addition to the revolving loans of the 
European Agency for Reconstruction. However, substantial efforts will be required in 
the future by all involved, the Government of the Republic of Serbia, National Bank 
and international financial institutions. But, let us be realistic, harsh realities of the 
21st century and the financial capacity of the country will act as restraining factors in 
this respect.  
In my view, however, major challenges in the period ahead will concern the following: 
1. 
Increase in domestic savings should be made our key priority in 2009 through 
measures of the Serbian government and the restored confidence of our citizens in 
the  domestic  banking  sector.  The  first  steps  to  that  direction  have  already  been 
made: the level of insured deposits has been increased to EUR 50,000 and a draft 
bill has been sent for adoption by the Assembly, which should enable tax exemption 
of interest income from foreign currency savings. Bear in mind that if any sector in 
Serbia  has  won  acclaim  from  international  financial  institutions,  it  certainly  is  the 
2 
 BIS Review 4/2009
2. 
3. 
banking sector. This calculation is simple, the volume of fresh borrowing determines 
the  future  volume  of  savings.  In  addition  to  earning  interest,  our  citizens  should 
know  that  by  saving  they  help  their  neighbours  buy  a  new  flat  and  enable 
enterprises  to  purchase  new  equipment.  Everybody  does  well  if  the  saving  and 
credit scheme runs smoothly.  
Economic growth by 3.5% in 2009 is very challenging indeed! Lower economic 
growth implies lower income, and in case of no decline in spending, a higher than 
currently  planned  growth  of  1¾%  in  consolidated  budget  deficit  will  automatically 
follow!  Hence,  it  is  of  utmost  importance  that  we  design  a  set  of  measures  to  be 
implemented  in  case  economic  growth  turns  out  to  be  lower  than  planned  for  the 
period ahead.  
Proving that Serbia is different than other countries in the region. Serbia was 
the  first  country  in  the  region  to  seek  financial  arrangement  with  the  IMF  as  a 
precautionary  measure.  This  proves  that  we  are  a  responsible  state  and  wish  to 
implement transparent economic policy under the IMF umbrella. This is certainly a 
point in our favour and will prove useful in Serbia’s attempts to remain an attractive 
foreign  investment  destination  in  the  near  future  of  extremely  cautious  capital 
spending and restrictions on investments.  
Thank you for your attention! 
BIS Review 4/2009 
 3
