José Manuel González-Páramo: Address for the 2008 Bernácer Prize 
Award Ceremony in honour of Markus Brunnermeier 
Speech  by  Mr  José  Manuel  González-Páramo,  Member  of  the  Executive  Board  of  the 
European Central Bank, at the 2008 Bernácer Prize Award Ceremony in honour of Markus 
Brunnermeier, Madrid, 10 June 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,1  
It is a great pleasure for me to be given the honour of addressing a few words to you on the 
occasion  of  this  year’s  award  ceremony  of  the  Bernácer  Prize  to  Professor  Markus 
Brunnermeier from Princeton University. Guillermo de la Dehesa asked me to share some 
thoughts with you about the importance of scientific research for the European Central Bank 
and  its  monetary  policy.  In  this  context,  I  would  like  to  express  my  appreciation  for  the 
influential contributions made by this year’s laureate to the academic debate in fields which 
are  of  particular  relevance  for  central  bank  policymakers.  Markus  Brunnermeier  has  to  be 
particularly praised for helping us to improve our understanding of some of the main causes 
and  mechanisms  behind  the  current  financial  crisis,  as  well  as  for  his  scholarly  advice  to 
policymakers and the general public as to how the global financial system can be put on a 
more stable and solid footing through regulatory reform. But I will revert to this later. 
Let me first emphasise that research plays a crucial role for the Eurosystem as much as for 
other central banks. Research provided an essential input to the definition of the ECB’s price-
stability  monetary  policy  strategy  as  well  as  to  the  design  of  its  operational  framework. 
Besides,  in  order  to  conduct  monetary  policy  on  a  regular  basis,  the  ECB  needs  to 
accumulate knowledge and information on how the dynamics of the economy tend to evolve, 
how  specific  markets  work,  how  its  policy  instrument  influences  price  and  output 
developments  through  the  various  transmission  chains.  Moreover,  the  ECB  also  performs 
core  functions  and  tasks  in  supporting  a  smooth  operation  of  payments  systems  and 
contributes to safeguarding financial stability which likewise requires substantial theoretical 
and empirical knowledge. It should go without saying that such detailed information about the 
financial  markets  and  the  economy  as  a  whole  mainly  originates  from  research  efforts, 
whether they are undertaken from within or outside the ECB.  
Central banking will certainly always remain an art as much as a science in the sense that a 
clear rulebook prescribing the best policy action in all specific circumstances does not exist. 
Uncertainty is simply pervasive. For example, the quantitative knowledge of central banks on 
the monetary transmission process remains imperfect and fragile due to the preponderance 
of data, estimation and model uncertainty in macroeconomic model building, compounded by 
the constant risk of structural change in evolving economies and societies. Central bankers 
also regularly face situations which are unique and unprecedented, and where the alternative 
states (or their likelihood) are not really well known or understood. These situations of so-
called  Knightian  uncertainty  clearly  defy  measurement  and  thus  pose  challenges  for 
empirically-validated policy advice. In the face of uncertainty, to arrive at a certain decision 
monetary  policymakers  need  to  combine  knowledge  derived  from  a  variety  of  models  with 
individual experience and judgement. Notwithstanding this, the way monetary policymakers 
filter the information they receive and the experiences they have made usually depends on 
some theoretical concepts adopted and internalised during their professional lives. It is the 
responsibility of a central bank as an institution to ensure that the fundamental ideas behind 
                                                 
1  
I am grateful to M. Hoerova and M. Kremer for their input into this speech and to P. Hartmann and F. Smets 
for comments. 
BIS Review 73/2009 
 1
actual monetary policymaking reflect as far as possible the “state of the art” of the respective 
disciplines, and not invalidated or even falsified ideas of some “defunct economist”, to loosely 
quote from John Maynard Keynes’s famous conclusions to The General Theory. 
The  ECB  attempts  to  cope  with  this  responsibility  by  fostering  a  very  intense  exchange  of 
information  and  manpower  with  the  academic  world  at  all  levels.  Leading  experts  in 
economics  and  finance  regularly  visit  the  ECB  to  discuss  their  most  recent  findings  at 
seminars,  conferences  or  workshops,  often  co-hosted  with  other  major  central  banks  and 
research  institutions,  as  well  as  to  provide  consultancy.  The  members  of  the  Governing 
Council and the Executive Board of the ECB play an active part themselves in this regular 
exchange  of  views  between  the  theory  and  practice  of  monetary  policy.  It  should  be 
emphasised that a close relationship between theory and policy making gives rise to cross-
fertilisation. Scientific progress definitely improves the conduct of monetary policy and other 
central  bank  tasks  over  time;  but  it  is  likewise  true  that  academics  often  benefit  from 
practitioners´  deep  knowledge  of  data  and  institutional  detail  as  well  as  their  broad 
experience in all aspects of real-world monetary policymaking.  
Insights  from  research  have  been  invaluable  particularly  in  times  of  the  biggest  financial 
crisis  since  the  Great  Depression.  Finding  the  correct  policy  prescriptions  to  alleviate  the 
consequences  and  resolve  the  current  crisis  requires  a  thorough  understanding  of  the 
underlying causes. Markus Brunnermeier’s research has played a prominent role here. For 
instance,  his  research  on  bubbles  sheds  light  on  how  institutional  frictions  and  strategic 
considerations can lead to significant mispricings of assets.2 While market participants may 
be aware of the flawed asset valuation, the lack of common knowledge can lead to a build up 
of the bubble and hinder its bursting. This approach departs from the conventional market 
efficiency view that rational traders will immediately stabilise prices by shortening overvalued 
assets  and,  by  contrast,  integrates  important  aspects  of  trading  behaviour  into  the 
mainstream of economics and finance. 
When  a  bubble  bursts  and  risk  is  re-assessed,  financial  institutions  suffer  losses.  In  the 
current  crisis,  uncertainty  over  the  size  and  location  of  exposures  of  banks  or  bank-
sponsored  conduits  to  “toxic”  assets  translated  into  funding  liquidity  problems.  A  paper  by 
Brunnermeier  and  Pedersen,  “Market  Liquidity  and  Funding  Liquidity”  explains  how  such 
funding problems can affect market liquidity and lead to mutually reinforcing liquidity spirals.3 
Balance  sheet  constraints  of  financial  intermediaries  can  naturally  lead  to  market  illiquidity 
and the expectations of future liquidity risk can lead to panic and more asset price declines. 
Indeed, liquidity shortage was one of the key propagation mechanisms of the current crisis 
which illustrates a negative externality that fire-sales by individual institutions can impose on 
the  financial  system  as a  whole.  It is  also  one of  the  factors  that contributed  to  prolonged 
tensions in the interbank market as banks were reluctant to lend to each other to minimise 
counterparty  exposures.  These  markets  are  crucial  for  banks’  liquidity  managements  and 
also for the transmission of monetary policy. The work on funding and market liquidity also 
offers possible mechanisms for the resolution of liquidity spirals. The key policy prescription 
is  to  improve  the  funding  liquidity  of  financial  institutions  in  order  to  prevent  solvent 
institutions from being driven out of business by protracted illiquidity. This policy has been 
followed extensively by the Eurosystem over the recent past. 
Liquidity spirals also create an important pro-cyclical mechanism in the financial system. This 
issue  is  discussed  in  the  draft  notes  on  the  next  Geneva  Report  on  the  World  Economy 
written by Professor Brunnermeier and co-authors on “The fundamental principles of financial 
                                                 
2   Abreu, D. and M. Brunnermeier (2003), “Bubbles and crashes”, in: Econometrica, Vol. 71, No. 1, pp. 173-204. 
3   Brunnermeier, M. and L.H. Pedersen (2009), “Market liquidity and funding liquidity”, in: Review of Financial 
Studies, Vol. 22, No. 6, pp. 2201-2238. 
2 
 BIS Review 73/2009
the 
important 
theoretical  advances 
regulation”.4 The policy conclusions include both crisis prevention – with recommendations 
like the introduction of macro-prudential regulation or liquidity regulation – as well as crisis 
management  with  analyses  of  toxic  asset  purchases,  asset  guarantees  or  mortgage 
subsidies, for example. 
Notwithstanding 
to  which  Markus  Brunnermeier 
contributed substantially, there is still much to be learnt about the root causes, the triggers 
and the propagation mechanisms of the financial turmoil, and how precisely it spread to the 
real  sector,  causing  a  deep  financial  and  economic  crisis  arising  from  negative  feedback 
loops  between  the  two  sectors.  The  severe  challenges  for  policymakers  posed  by  the 
existing  knowledge  gaps  are  reflected  in  the  very  controversial  debates  about  the  optimal 
responses  to  mitigate  and  resolve  the  current  crisis  and  to  prevent  future  crises  from 
occurring.  
Quick  progress  on  these  and  related  research  topics  is  essential  for  the  ECB  both  from  a 
monetary  policy  and  a  financial  stability  perspective.  While  at  present  the  ECB  already 
performs  certain  tasks  which  shall  contribute  to  safeguarding  the  stability  of  the  financial 
system,  it  is  foreseen  that  the  range  of  tasks  and  responsibilities  of  the  ECB  related  to 
financial stability matters becomes substantially enlarged. According to the recent proposal 
by the European Commission on the reform of financial supervision in the European Union, 
drawing on the recommendations of the de Laroisière High-Level Group, the ECB would play 
an  important  role  in  a  new  European  Systemic  Risk  Council  to  be  in  charge  of  macro-
prudential  financial  supervision  in  the  European  Union.  For  the  ECB  to  effectively  perform 
such  tasks  requires,  among  other,  major  investments  into  a  supporting  macro-prudential 
analytical infrastructure, for example the development and implementation of a suite of early 
warning signal models and the significant extension of existing macro stress testing models. 
But we also need innovative approaches on optimal policy responses once macro-prudential 
risks have been identified, since the European Systemic Risk Council will also have to issue 
policy recommendations. In contrast to the assessment of systemic risks where we have a 
basis to build on and where our staff has also made research contributions to the literature, 
macro-prudential regulation or policy is a relatively new concept for which a good analytical 
basis  still  needs  to  be  developed.  This  is  an  area  where  brilliant  scholars  like  Markus 
Brunnermeier can make an invaluable contribution. And he has already started to do so. I 
herewith  extend  my  sincerest  congratulations  to  you  –  Markus  –  for  winning  the  2008 
Bernácer Prize, which you very much deserve. 
                                                 
4   Brunnermeier, M., Crockett, A., Goodhart, C., Persaud, A.D. and H. Shin (2009), “The fundamental principles 
of financial regulation” (preliminary conference draft), Geneva Report on the World Economy 11, January. 
BIS Review 73/2009 
 3
