Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell: Business models in banking – is there a best 
practice? 
Speech by Ms Gertrude Tumpel-Gugerell, Member of the Executive Board of the European 
Central Bank, at the CAREFIN Conference on “Business Models in Banking: Is There a Best 
Practice”, Bocconi University, Milan, 21 September 2009. 
 Ladies and Gentlemen,1
It is a real pleasure for me to speak today at Bocconi University. Founded in 1902, Bocconi 
was the first Italian university to offer degrees in economics. As one of the oldest economics 
departments in Europe, Bocconi leads the way in intellectual thinking on economic progress 
and innovation. It therefore seems the perfect place to host today’s conference on banking 
business models and to discuss their future.  
Given that the worst financial storm since the 1930s is only gradually calming down, the topic 
chosen  for  this  conference  is  very  apt.  Banks  have  taken  centre  stage  in  the  ongoing 
financial and economic crisis, and any definitive resolution to the crisis essentially hinges on 
banks  regaining  financial  health  and  public  confidence  on  the  basis  of  sustainable  and 
welfare-enhancing business models.  
However, not all banks have been equally affected by the crisis, nor have they been equally 
responsible for it. The main players have mostly been large international investment banks or 
banks that had moved away from traditional retail banking activities. This movement towards 
a presumably more “modern” business model relied principally on the origination, distribution 
and trading of often complex securities, on other fee-income generating activities, as well as 
on a funding structure more dependent on wholesale markets.  
Many  factors  have  contributed  to  the  current  financial  crisis,  namely  excessive  risk-taking, 
the emergence of a shadow banking system, the exponential growth of innovative financial 
products, inadequate corporate governance incentive structures at banks, the lack of proper 
regulation  and  an  environment  of  abundant  liquidity  at  low  interest  rates.  But  my  speech 
today is going to focus on excessive risk-taking and banks’ creation of innovative financial 
products, which has led to the transformation of their business models.  
To a large extent, this shift towards a new business model was based on innovation in the 
structured credit market, particularly in respect of securitisation instruments, such as credit 
default swaps, asset-backed securities and collateral debt obligations. A common feature of 
all these financial innovations is that they transform, transfer and trade credit risk. One of the 
main consequences of the use of such instruments is that large amounts of credit that were 
previously  predominantly  illiquid  (such  as  bank  loans)  then  became  liquid  and  could 
potentially be traded in financial markets. 
However, we must not blame such credit risk transfer instruments and vehicles per se . I am 
confident that those instruments generating real economic value will survive the crisis, albeit 
probably at much reduced volumes, in less complex structures, with improved transparency, 
and  subject  to  financial  regulation  and  supervisory  structures.  They  will  survive  because, 
when  prudently  applied  and  sufficiently  monitored  in  terms  of  their  impact  on  financial 
stability,  financial  innovations  generally  tend  to  make  a  financial  system  more  efficient 
without necessarily increasing its fragility.  
                                                 
1  
I would like to thank Florian Heider, Manfred Kremer and David Marqués Ibañez for their valuable input. 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 1
At this point, it is worth asking what the main banking business models could or should look 
like  from  a  policy-maker’s  perspective,  which  takes  into  account  implications  for  both 
financial efficiency and stability. I will limit the remainder of my speech to a few of the main 
points of the argument and will also point out some early lessons to be learnt from the crisis.  
What is so special about the business of banking? 
I will start with a standard definition of a “bank”, recalling the main functions that banks are 
supposed to perform and explaining why these functions are so important and special that 
they warrant relatively close public intervention and oversight.  
A  bank  is  “an  institution  whose  current  operations  consist  in  granting  loans  and  receiving 
deposits  from  the  public”.2  This  definition  refers  to  the  core  activity  of  commercial  banks, 
namely the simultaneous acceptance of deposits and offering of loans, which distinguishes 
them from other financial intermediaries. However, banks typically conduct a broader range 
of activities, which can be subsumed under the following three functions:3  
• 
First, banks provide the public with liquidity (money) and payment services through 
their deposit-taking business.  
Second,  banks  transform  assets  in  terms  of  denomination,  quality  and  maturity,  as 
well as manage the associated risks.  
Third,  banks  process 
information  and  monitor  borrowers  using  specialised 
technologies.  In  so  doing,  they  often  establish  long-term  relationships  with  their 
clients,  which  may  further  mitigate  the  negative  impacts  of  adverse  selection  and 
moral hazard on the resource allocation process.  
  Changes in banking business models 
Before I turn to the question of how this traditional banking model has changed over the past 
few years, I am going to take a brief look at financial market history. 
Glass-Steagall: investment banks versus commercial banks  
Looking specifically at the history of the financial markets in the United States, it was bad 
banking  practices  and  the  public  outcry  after  the  stock  market  crash  of  1929  that  brought 
about the Glass-Steagall Act of 1933. Interestingly, the Act followed an enquiry into whether 
commercial banks had sold unsound securities to their customers, thus converting potential 
bad  loans  into  securities  issues.  The  Act  therefore  prohibited  commercial  banks  from 
underwriting, holding or dealing in corporate securities, either directly or through securities 
affiliates.4  In  my  view,  the  concerns  that  prompted  the  Act  were  very  similar  to  those 
currently  being  voiced  –  particularly  in  relation  to  concerns  about  banks’  business  models 
and the sale of unsound securities to unsuspecting investors.  
The Act had a global impact on competitive conditions. For instance, the large presence of 
major US investment banks in Europe can be traced back to the implementation of this Act, 
which separated investment banks from commercial banks. The Act also had an impact on 
the supervision of banks, mostly in the United States, but also in other regions in the world, 
                                                 
2   X. Freixas and J. C. Rochet (1997), The Microeconomics of Banking, MIT Press. 
3   X. Freixas and J. C. Rochet (1997), op. cit. 
4   R. Kroszner and R. Rajan (1994), "Is the Glass-Steagall Act Justified? A Study of the U. S. Experience with 
Universal Banking before 1933", American Economic Review. 
2 
 BIS Review 112/2009
including Europe. Owing to the funding structure of commercial banks and the stronger links 
between them – and hence their importance for financial stability – commercial banks were 
regulated  accordingly.  In  contrast,  investment  banks  were  expected  to  be  in  less  need  of 
close  monitoring  and  regulation,  as  they  were  seen  to  be  less  important  from  a  financial 
stability  perspective.  The  current  crisis  has  vividly  illustrated  how  the  actions  of  not  only 
commercial banks and investment banks, but also other financial players, can have a major 
impact on all parts of the financial system and the economy at large.  
I  should  now  like  to  focus  on  two  major  factors  that  have  changed  the  way  banks  do 
business.  First,  I  will  discuss  the  changes  in  banks’  business  models  that  relate  to  the 
sources of their revenue. And, second, I will focus on the changes in the funding of banks 
and  talk  about  the  unintended  consequences  of  the  expansion  of  their  securitisation 
activities.  
Diversification in the sources of revenue  
With regard to the change in the sources of banks’ revenue, the repeal of the Glass-Steagall 
Act in 1999 is a prime example of deregulation in relation to banks’ business models. If we 
compare the regulations in place today with those of 20 years ago, we see an unprecedented 
process  of  deregulation  across  regions  and  financial  sectors.  One  consequence  of  this 
deregulation has been a global trend towards more diversification in banks’ income sources, 
i.e.  towards  higher  brokerage  fees  and  commission  –  more  generally  called  “non-interest 
income”.  The  increase  in  non-interest  income  provides  banks  with  additional  sources  of 
revenue and can therefore provide a diversification in their overall income. At the same time, 
non-interest income has usually been a much more volatile source of revenue than interest 
rate  income.  Investment  banks,  for  example,  have  a  high  dependence  on  non-interest 
income. Typically, they are more profitable than traditional commercial banks, but they are 
also much more leveraged and their earnings are more volatile (see Chart 1). The volatility 
of earnings, combined with the close ties of investment banks to other financial players, calls 
for a higher level of monitoring for these systemically important players.5  
                                                 
5  
In  addition,  recent  evidence  suggests  that  there  are  indeed  conflicts  of  interest  in  banking  that  are  not 
anticipated by the public. Investment banks affiliated with financial conglomerates take positions in takeover 
targets  before  the  conglomerate  announces  its  bid.  Moreover,  it  appears  that  these  inside  trades  are 
profitable, while the M&A deals are not wealth-creating. See A. Bodnaruk, M. Massa and A. Simonov (2009), 
“Investment  Banks  as  Insiders  and  the  Market  for  Corporate  Control”,  Review  of  Financial  Studies, 
forthcoming. 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 3
Chart 1: Bank profits and volatility of earnings 
(median values of return on equity and standard deviation from 2000 to 2007) 
 Source: Bankscope. 
In addition, there is one problem relating to the banks’ risk management that applies mostly 
to  investment  banks,  but  also  to  other  large  financial  institutions:  most  risk  management 
techniques neglected the correlations of risks across securities, as not just banks, but also 
rating  agencies,  did  not  sufficiently  internalise  the  growing  systemic,  market  and  liquidity 
risks.  Moreover,  banks  underestimated  tail  risk.  The  existing  risk-management  techniques 
worked well at predicting small day-to-day losses in the middle of the distribution but failed to 
anticipate severe losses that are much rarer. But clearly, it is exactly those severe losses that 
matter most. This mispricing of risk relates to deficiencies in risk management techniques, 
but also, and perhaps more importantly, to existing incentives in the banking system oriented 
towards the short term profitability of banks. 
Diversification in the sources of funding  
Turning now to the second factor, the change in banks’ funding sources: at the same time as 
the  change  in  the  sources  of  banks’  revenue,  there  has  been  a  wider  change  relating  to 
banks’  liability  side  of  the  balance  sheet.6  In  particular,  this  refers  to  the  shift  in  banks’ 
business models away from the traditional model of financing. In the traditional model, there 
was a heavy reliance on retail deposits, but this has been replaced by an increasing reliance 
on market-based sources of funding. The significant recourse to specific funding instruments, 
such  as  mortgage  bonds  and  securitisation,  has  made  banks  increasingly  dependent  on 
capital markets, but at the same time, of course, less dependent on deposits, to expand their 
loan base. This is evident from both an upward trending total assets to deposits ratio of the 
largest euro area banks (see Chart 2.a) and an increase in the loans to deposit ratio of large 
EU banks (see Chart 2.b). To the extent that more stable retail deposit financing has been 
replaced by wholesale funding, banks may have become more exposed to market dynamics 
and perceptions, constituting a potential source of instability in the banking sector.7  
                                                 
6   See Banking Supervision Committee (2009), “EU Banking Structures Report”, forthcoming in October. 
7   A.  Shleifer  and  R.W.  Vishny  (2009),  “Unstable  Banking”,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  Working 
Paper Series No 14943. 
4 
 BIS Review 112/2009
Chart 2.a: Total assets to total deposits of the largest euro area bank  
(outstanding amounts, eonia banks) 
Source: Bankscope. 
Chart 2.b:Loans to deposit ratio of large EU banks  
(corrected for extreme outliers) 
 Source: Bankscope. 
 Securitisation markets and the current crisis  
The  element  of  this  change  in  banks’  sources  of  funding  that  I  would  like  to  focus  on  in 
particular  is  securitisation.  Securitisation  activity  did  indeed  increase  substantially  in  the 
years  prior  to  the  financial  crisis  (see  Chart  3).  As  you  know,  securitisation  and  financial 
innovation in credit markets have generated significant changes, particularly in the financial 
structure of banks, and, more generally, in financial market activity in the euro area. It has 
become  clear  that  the  change  in  banks’  business  models  from  “originate  and  hold”  to 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 5
“originate,  repackage  and  sell”  also  had  significant  implications  for  financial  stability. 
Securitisation was meant to disperse credit risk to those who are better able and more willing 
to  bear  it.  But,  as  the  current  crisis  has  shown,  this  did  not  work  out  as  envisaged.  This 
stems from  the fact that the same instruments that are used to hedge risks also have the 
potential to undermine financial stability – by facilitating the leveraging of risk, for example. 
Moreover,  there  were  major  flaws  in  the  actual  interaction  among  the  different  players 
involved  in  the  securitisation  process.  These  included  misaligned  incentives  along  the 
securitisation  chain,  a  lack  of  transparency  with  regard  to  the  underlying  risks  of  the 
securitisation  business,  and  the  poor  management  of  those  risks.  There  was  a  dramatic 
increase  in  the  complexity  of  securitised  products  prior  to  the  crisis,  owing  largely  to 
misaligned incentives and investors’ search for yield, which, in particular, made the valuation 
and risk assessment of these products extremely complex and difficult.  
Chart 3: Securitisation issuance in Europe  
(in EUR billions) 
 Source: European Securitisation Forum. 
In  contrast,  the  covered  bond  market  has  been  more  sheltered  from  these  incentive 
problems  than  securitisation  markets,  partly  because  traditional  covered  bonds  have  a 
simpler structure. This makes the overall market more transparent, and the valuation and risk 
assessment easier. Covered bonds also have a much stricter regulatory framework. 
Overall,  there  have  been  problems  in  the  securitisation  market  that  relate  to  opacity  and 
misaligned incentives, which – looking ahead – need to be addressed by market participants 
and regulators in order to restore the securitisation market to health.  
Money market problems as a symptom 
Having  gone  through  some  of  the  major  factors  that  have  affected  the  condition  of  banks 
during the current crisis, I will conclude by recalling not only the exceptional speed with which 
the crisis hit the financial sector, but also the unprecedented size of its impact. Consider, for 
example, interbank markets. In normal times, interbank markets are among the most liquid in 
the financial sector. In 2006 the daily turnover in euro area money markets was €140 billion.8 
The sudden seizing up of interbank markets and subsequent failure to redistribute liquidity 
                                                 
8   ECB (2008), Euro Money Market Survey. 
6 
 BIS Review 112/2009
has  become  very  much  a  key  feature  of  the  financial  crisis.9  Chart  4  shows  the  spread 
between  the  three-month  unsecured  rate  and  the  three-month  overnight  index  swap  rate, 
which is a standard measure of interbank market tension. Until 9 August 2007, which is often 
said  to  mark  the  start  of  the  financial  crisis,  the  unsecured  euro  interbank  market  was 
characterised by a very low spread of around five basis points. After the announcement by 
BNP  Paribas  that  it  would  freeze  some  funds,  the  spread  increased  by  a  factor  of  12  to 
around 60 basis points. After the collapse of Lehman Brothers and the events surrounding 
the  last  weekend  of  September  2008,10  the  rates  shot  up  further,  eventually  reaching  a 
maximum of 186 basis points. The increase of rates in September 2008 is mirrored by the 
amount of funds deposited with the ECB at that time.  
Chart 4: Interbank market 
Source: F. Heider, M. Hoerova and C. Holthausen (2009), op.cit. 
The  events  of  the  last  two  years  have  not  only  shown  that  even  the  most  liquid  funding 
markets  for  banks  can  seize  up  within  days,  but  also  proved  that  long-standing  economic 
relationships  across  different  market  segments  can  suddenly  break  down  precisely  as  a 
result of the links between banks. Future regulation will take into account liquidity risk and 
prescribe sound liquidity policies.  
 How banks have fared during the recent financial crisis 
The  recent  financial  crisis  has  illustrated  how  banks’  own  business  models  and  incentives 
can have a major impact on financial stability. In this regard, recent international evidence 
suggests  that  banking  strategies  that  rely  primarily  on  generating  non-interest  income  or 
                                                 
9   For  an  analysis  see  Heider,  F.,  M.  Hoerova  and  C.  Holthausen  (2009),  “Liquidity  Hoarding  and  Interbank 
Market Spreads: The Role of Counterparty Risk”, ECB Working Paper (forthcoming). 
10   Washington  Mutual,  the  largest  S&L  institution  in  the  United  States,  was  seized  by  the  FDIC  and  sold  to 
JPMorgan Chase. At the same time, negotiations on the TARP rescue package stalled in the US Congress. 
Over the weekend, it was reported that British mortgage lender Bradford and Bingley had to be rescued, and 
the  Benelux  countries  announced  the  injection  of  €11.2  billion  into  Fortis  Bank.  On  the  following  Monday, 
Germany announced the rescue of Hypo Real Estate and Iceland nationalised Glitnir. 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 7
attracting  non-deposit  funding  are  very  risky.11  There  is  also  evidence,  for  example  by 
Andrea Beltratti, from Bocconi University, and co-authors, suggesting that those banks that 
performed  better  prior  to  the  crisis  have  also  fared  worst  during  the  crisis.  This  seems  to 
suggest that the more profitable strategy prior to the crisis, has also been the more riskier 
strategy. Their research findings also suggest that there may be additional policy tools that 
could  contribute  to  containing  future  threats  to  financial  stability.  In  particular,  banks  in 
countries with stricter capital requirements and more independent banking supervisors seem 
to have performed significantly better during the crisis. Also, banks with more Tier I capital 
and in countries with more restrictions on banks’ activities have also done relatively well in 
recent quarters.12
The way forward 
What have we learnt about sustainable bank business models from the events of the past 
two  years?  First,  it  is  important  that  the  structure  of  banks’  liabilities  is  appropriate  for  the 
structure of the assets that they hold. Banks have been excessively leveraged relative to the 
risks they were taking.  
Second, we still know too little about why different banks hold different levels of equity.13 We 
do know, however, that, ultimately, equity is the only robust buffer against realising losses. 
Although holding equity is costly, bank capital regulation should also take into account the 
macroeconomic implications of bank capital requirements.  
Third, banks to a large extent ignored the role of deposits as a stable source of funding. More 
and  more  assets  were  funded  by  non-deposit  liabilities.  Banks  turned  excessively  to  the 
wholesale markets in order to finance their growth. Relying on wholesale markets for funding 
and liquidity has proved to be exceedingly precarious. 
Fourth,  owing  to  its  potential  benefits,  innovation  in  the  financial  sector  will  continue. 
However, a serious evaluation of the possible implications of financial innovation for financial 
stability is warranted. In the case of securitisation, a sharp reduction in the level of complexity 
and leverage of the instruments issued is expected, while a higher level of transparency and 
more aligned incentives are crucial for an efficient securitisation market. 
Fifth,  I  would  like  to  just  say  a  few  words  on  the  macro-prudential  aspects  of  financial 
stability.  It  is  very  important  to  develop  a  proper  framework  for  the  macro-prudential 
supervision not just of banks, but also other financial institutions, markets and instruments 
that can be systemic in nature, irrespective of whether they are regulated or not. For that, we 
need  a  deep  understanding  of  the  major  trends  in  the  financial  sector,  including  new 
business models, and their impact on financial stability.14  
                                                 
11   A.  Demirguc-Kunt  and  H.  Huizinga  (2009),  “Bank  Activity  and  Funding  Strategies:  The  Impact  on  Risk  and 
Return”, CEPR Discussion Papers 7170, February. 
12   A. Beltratti and R. M. Stulz (2009), “Why Did Some Banks Perform Better During the Credit Crisis? A Cross-
Country Study of the Impact of Governance and Regulation”, Charles A. Dice Center Working Paper No 2009-
12, July. 
13   On  this,  see  for  example  R.  Gropp  and  F.  Heider  (2009),  “The  Determinants  of  Bank  Capital  Structure”, 
Review of Finance, forthcoming. 
14   For further information on macroprudential issues, see A. Crockett, “Marrying the micro- and macro-prudential 
dimensions  of  financial  stability”,  remarks  before  the  Eleventh  International  Conference  of  Banking 
Supervisors,  held  in  Basel  on  20-21  September  2000.  See  also  the  Report  of  the  High-Level  Group  on 
Financial Supervision in the EU chaired by Jacques de Larosière, in Brussels, on 25 February 2009. In the 
European Union, following the publication of the Report of the de Larosière Group, the European Commission 
proposed in May 2009 a set of ambitious reforms, including the creation of a new European Systemic Risk 
Board  responsible  for  macro-prudential  oversight.  The  European  Council  in  June  2009  supported  the 
European Commission’s proposal. 
8 
 BIS Review 112/2009
I  am  pleased  to  note  that  the  relevant  authorities  have  already  started  to  take  action  in 
response to all these lessons that have been learnt from the financial crisis. With a view to 
strengthening  the  resilience  of  the  banking  sector,  the  regulatory  reform  agenda  that  has 
been launched and agreed internationally will:  
• 
introduce  a  leverage  ratio,  as  a  measure  to  curb  banks’  excessive  balance  sheet 
growth. This measure will be introduced initially as a supplement to the Basel II risk-
based  framework  and,  subject  to  proper  calibration  and  review,  as  a  minimum 
regulatory requirement;  
raise the quality, consistency, transparency and level of capital, namely the amount 
of common equity and other instruments of equally high loss-absorption capacity; 
introduce a framework for counter-cyclical capital buffers above the minimum capital 
requirement,  which  will  be  raised  during  economic  upturns  and  be  used  in 
downturns, as well as promote more forward-looking provisions; and 
establish a minimum global standard for funding liquidity which includes a stressed 
liquidity coverage ratio requirement and a longer-term structural liquidity ratio.  
   These  measures  will  be  introduced  by  the  end  of  the  year,  and  phased  in  as  financial 
conditions improve and economic recovery is assured. 
Measures  to  address  the  misalignment  and  lack  of  transparency  of  incentives  in  the 
securitisation market include strengthening the capital requirements for exposures, as well as 
introducing risk management practices and disclosures. These measures have already been 
agreed  and  will  be  implemented  in  the  course  of  2010.  As  improving  economic  conditions 
may lead to the resumption of securitisation activity, the measures taken will ensure that it is 
relaunched on a sounder and more sustainable basis. 
Finally, work is under way to ensure that all systemically important institutions, markets and 
instruments are subject to adequate regulation and oversight. As a first step, a report will be 
issued in November by the IMF, the FSB and the BIS that will provide guidance on identifying 
systemically important institutions, markets and instruments. 
I started this speech by briefly describing why banks are special. The last two years have 
painfully stressed how special and important they really are. When the financial system fails, 
the  whole  economic  system 
financial  sector  has  undergone  an 
unprecedented  wave  of  innovation,  change,  consolidation  and  now  crisis.  We  now  have  a 
better understanding of the business models that may not be sustainable, but there are still 
many open questions. For example, will future capital requirements provide banks with better 
loss bearing capabilities and the economic system with less procyclicality? How can future 
compensation and corporate governance principles support the long term value creation of 
banks? And, how can risk management practises and risk pricing models better represent 
possible  gains  and  losses?  Overall,  there  seems  to  be  no  simple  answer  on  banks’  best 
practises  and  their  business  model.  Therefore,  we  need  the  contribution  of  the  academic 
community for the future design of banks’ business models and for the policies supporting 
them. I am – of course - already looking forward to this conference providing some answers 
to the important questions at stake. 
is  affected.  The 
BIS Review 112/2009 
 9
