Martín Redrado: Effects of the crisis and different policy responses – 
emerging vs. advanced economies 
Speech by Mr Martín Redrado, Governor of the Central Bank of Argentina, at the Money and 
Banking Conference 2009, Central Bank of Argentina, Buenos Aires, 1 September 2009. 
 Welcome  once  again  to  our  already  traditional  space  for  discussion  in  the  Southern 
hemisphere.  While  the  agenda  covers  the  most  current  economic  and  financial  topics,  as 
usual, the aim is more ambitious: to see beyond the short term; to look through the economic 
cycle into the medium term, anticipating the challenges that we have in face.  
The  international  crisis  triggered  economic  policy  responses  that  were  both  suited  and 
aggressive.  And  we  have  learnt  from  this  framework.  In  central  banking,  it  has  become 
evident that we need a more comprehensive view including financial stability as a key goal 
for every monetary authority in the planet. 
Moreover, in contrast with what happened with previous episodes, now emerging countries, 
have the chance to participate in the decision-making of how to design the new international 
financial architecture. For example, we take part sistematically in international bodies such 
as the G-20 with a view of making an intelectual contribution in the world economy.  
Our  knowledge  and  experience  in  managing  turbulences  is  valuable  and  also  show  that 
“there is life after a crisis”. 
Another  example  is  the  participation  of  emerging  economies  –  and  of  Argentina  as  a  full 
member  since  June  –  in  the  newly  created  financial  stability  board  (FSB)  and  Basel 
Committee on Banking Supervision. 
The  FSB  is  beginning  to  play  a  key  role  in  the  new  system.  The  inclusion  of  emerging 
countries  –  with  more  experience  in  adjusting  regulatory  frameworks  to  avert  crises  or 
mitigate  their  impact  –  will  provide  a  new  perspective  to  the  board.  We  will  have  higher 
quality standards and, thus, a greater probability of adequately applying them at the national 
level.  
Through  our  direct  participation  in  the  Standing  Committee  for  Vulnerabilities  Assessment, 
we  are  working  towards  opening  private  sector  access  to  credit,  policy  sustainability  and 
strategies  for  exiting  the  crisis.  Also,  we  take  part  in  the  Basel  Committee  on  Banking 
Supervision, where we have proposed concrete steps towards liquidity management and the 
regulatory treatment of currency mismatches.  
Further  evidence  of  increased  integration  is  the  currency  swap  agreements  with  our 
colleagues from the central banks of China and Brazil. An agreement on contingent liquidity 
lines  in  foreign  currencies  for  nearly  12  billion  dollars  also  reflects  the  confidence  of  our 
peers  in  our  monetary  and  financial  system  as  well  as  in  the  policies  the  Central  Bank  of 
Agentina is implementing.  
The  strength  many  emerging  countries  –  particularly  in  South  America  –  have  shown  in 
overcoming the crisis will allow us to strenghten our position in the global economy.  
The  impact  of  the  crisis  has  been  stronger  in  those  emerging  economies  with  external 
imbalances,  higher  financial  fragility  and  fixed  exchange  rate  regimes.  But,  through  its 
“second  round”  effects,  the  spread  of  the  crisis  has  compromised  short  term  economic 
growth of most developing economies, even those with relatively robust positions.  
As to most economies in our region, this episode has found them in a better position than in 
previous  occasions,  with  higher  growth  rates,  an  improved  fiscal  position  and  a  relatively 
sound external front, supported by a previous foreign reserve accumulation process through 
BIS Review 106/2009 
 1
sterilized operations. It is clear that, in a very favorable international context, cyclical factors 
had  an  influence  on  these  developments.  However,  the  better  performance  the  region 
achieved  was  mainly  due  to  the  gradual  assimilation  of  the  lessons  learned  from  a  past 
characterized by recurring macroeconomic instability episodes.  
The  magnitude  of  an  unprecedented  crisis  has  forced  us  to  face  some  difficult  policy 
dilemmas.  In  fact,  for  the  first  time  in  a  long  period,  it  has  given  policymakers,  a  clear 
opportunity to make a difference with the past. The world was headed to the abyss at a very 
high speed. A new great depression.  
But,  now  we  can  say  that  such  free  fall  was  left  behind  and  that  policymakers  around  the 
world, have been up to the occasion, being able to avoid the abyss and instead overcome a 
period that will probably be inscribed in history as a great recession. 
Of course, this does not mean there is room for complacency.  
On the contrary, great challenges that need full attention still remain ahead of us; not only for 
policymakers but also for the entire profession.  
In  South  America  we  got  around  the  challenges  trying  to  preserve  most  of  the  basic 
equilibriums achieved in the external and fiscal fronts. We suddenly moved from a context 
characterized  by  an  abundance  of  financing  to  a  much  more  adverse  scenario.  Most 
governments  have  adopted  a  set  of  expansionary  measures  aimed  at  mitigating 
contractionary  trends.  The  chance  of  adopting  these  measures  in  an  adverse  context  has 
been  a  relatively  unusual  phenomenon  in  the  region,  traditionally  characterized  by  highly 
procyclical policies.  
And  this  is  the  behavior  we  have  adopted  in  Agentina.  We  have  built  a  monetary  and 
financial framework that gives priority to avoiding "the next crisis", a concept that is present in 
every citizen’s mind. We have designed the mechanisms to confine the shock and prevent it 
from affecting the rest of the economy. For the first time in decades, the central bank has 
been an anchor of stability for our entire economy. 
In particular, our risk management strategy based on four pillars (convergence of supply and 
demand in the monetary market, a managed floating exchange rate regime, a countercyclical 
policy  with  liquidity  buffers  both  in  domestic  and  foreign  currency,  and  adequate  banking 
regulation  and  supervision)  allows  us  to  overcome  every  episode  of  stress,  minimizing  its 
impact  on  the  real  economy.  Our  strategy  also  prevents  inconsistencies  that  could 
undermine its sustainability over time.  
We have recently gone through periods of considerable stress in the domestic market, and 
our  policies  have  responded  as  expected.  We  successfully  overcome  four  episodes  in  the 
past two years (July-October 2007, April-June 2008, September-November 2008 and March 
2009),  proving  beyond  any  doubt  the  soundness  of  the  approach  adopted  by  the  central 
bank.  
During each episode, we acted firmly in an attempt to normalize the demand for money and 
stabilize the foreign exchange market. Then, with simple tools – easy to understand by the 
market – we ensured the supply of liquidity to guarantee systemic stability.  
In  this  framework,  the  managed  floating  exchange  rate  regime  has  proven  useful  for  the 
current stage of development, considering our history of macroeconomic volatility. But, it has 
also  proven  to  be  useful  in  other  countries.  The  literature  is  clear:  even  for  central  banks 
using inflation targeting regimes, the exchange rate is a significant variable in their reaction 
function.  
In the specific case of emerging countries that are very prone to financial and fiscal crises 
(such  as  Agentina),  where  dollarization/currency  substitution  levels  are  high,  we  have 
designed a monetary regime that is sufficiently robust to weather the challenges that we face 
in the transition phase towards a long term equilibrium. 
2 
 BIS Review 106/2009
Thus, we have avoided “corner solutions”, implementing a flexible and robust monetary and 
financial regime based on a managed floating exchange rate regime and the strict control of 
relevant monetary aggregates.  
This regime has allowed us to achieve stability and, at the same time, build a sound financial 
system  (with  no  currency  mismatches  or  excessive  public  sector  exposure),  which  has 
gradually regained its function as savings intermediary.  
Given the history of our economy, the monetary and financial policy options are part of an 
extensive  review  of  the  relevance  for  central  banks  of  the  various  policy  objectives. 
Particularly, what role to assign and how to weigh up monetary stability, GDP stability and 
financial stability. For instance, both in developed and emerging countries, monetary regimes 
focused on a single instrument, such as the interest rate, have become more flexible. Many 
central  banks  have  had  to  revisit  their  usual  regulation,  operation  and  intervention 
mechanisms.  
In this sense, it is essential to analyze how this crisis affects the economy and policies. As a 
matter of fact, there was partly a “surprise effect” due to which early warning mechanisms 
failed. Therefore, there is a social debt in terms of the capacity to prevent and warn about 
potential risks.  
Furthermore,  the  dramatic  reversal  of  the  previous  prosperity  has  led  to  a  significant 
reassessment  of  risk  premia.  Even  the  "awareness"  of  the  meaning  of  risk  in  itself  has 
changed. Previous confidence in the possibility to accurately quantify and estimate risk has 
been lost and later proved to be naïve. In addition, academics have come to revalue Frank 
Knight’s  definition  of  uncertainty,  according  to  which  the  relevant  variable’s  probability 
distribution  may  be  unknown  to  economic  agents.  All  in  all,  the  crisis  has  caused  greater 
“humility” in all of us.  
Undoubtedly,  the  interaction  of  several  phenomena,  in  econometric  terms,  was  what 
mattered most. The synergy of different factors combined was not taken into account. For 
this  reason,  a  vibrant  and  healthy  discussion  is  taking  place  about  the  most  appropriate 
theoretical models and paradigms. 
Another important debate focuses on fiscal policy. This issue has gained so much relevance 
that in the most recent Jackson Hole Symposium there was a whole section dealing with it.  
Professor  Auerbach  from  the  University  of  California  and  Professor  Gale  from  Brookings 
thoroughly  compiled  a  series  of  empirical  and  theoretical  studies  related  to  the  impact  of 
countercyclical  fiscal  policies,  arriving  at  a  single  clear  conclusion:  the  controversy  on  the 
multipliers will remain open.  
This  year  we  have  seen  a  paper  by  Cogan,  Cwik,  Taylor  and  Wieland,  from  Stanford 
University,  and  another  by  Christiano,  Eichenbaum  and  Rebelo,  from  Northwestern 
University, both based on the same “workhorse”, the Smets and Wouters’ stochastic dynamic 
general equilibrium model, showing opposite results: the former argue the multiplier is below 
one, whereas for the latter, it is above one. 
Why such differences? Because of the assumption that consumers and monetary policy will 
behave in a certain way. And again, an interesting contribution of Auerbach and Gale’s paper 
was to emphasize the greater effectiveness achieved when coordinating fiscal and monetary 
policies. 
What can we say about economic policy? 
I think, in this respect, there seem to be better outcomes. Quite a number of lessons were 
learned at various levels:  
1. 
2. 
Regarding the importance of financial stability as an objective. 
Regarding the position of the countercyclical (fiscal and monetary) policy. 
BIS Review 106/2009 
 3
3. 
Regarding  the  need  to  create  protection  buffers,  both  in  terms  of  liquidity  and 
solvency. 
Regarding the relevance of coordination of economic policy. 
4. 
Moreover, the value of immediate action, without relying too much on automatic stabilizers, 
has proven to be essential. Besides, it was necessary to be forceful (and even overact) in 
order to overcome economic agents’ negative expectations.  
For an appropriate international policy coordination, to avoid the temptation to act selfishly 
was key. Instead of confining economies and failing to cooperate, we globally avoid “beggar-
thy-neighbour” protectionisms, through action at G-20 and other fora.  
But there is yet another lesson as regards to timing: policies implemented should never be 
prematurely abandoned. Several authors pointed out how the reversal of the United States' 
expansionary fiscal policy in the mid 1930s was a setback for recovery. Moreover, it delayed 
the efforts to bring the economy back on the long-term path, which only happened in 1942. 
Of course, being careful so as not to frustrate the recovery does not mean we should run 
unnecessary risks in the opposite direction. The monitoring of potential (non-linear) reversals 
especially in inflationary expectations must be ongoing.  
Economics  is  a  dynamic  discipline.  Two  years  ago,  many  of  our  colleagues  were  worried 
about  inflationary  pressures  derived  from  the  booming  commodity,  real  estate  and  stock 
markets. The adjustment process started in the real estate market which, together with the 
subprime meltdown, caused fears to take the opposite direction: a deflationary environment 
would most likely be created. 
Massive  interventions  around  the world,  through  fiscal  and  monetary  tools  largely  reduced 
the risk of deflation. However, even today, when activity is showing signs of improvement, in 
some  markets  the  fiscal  and  monetary  policy  exit  strategy  may  tip  the  scales  either  way. 
While an early exit could affect the recovery, a late exit could fuel inflation, which would bring 
uncertainty in terms of employment and economic activity.  
It would be senseless to consider only two extreme scenarios: going back to the 1930s or the 
1970s. Both episodes have provided economic theory and practice with important lessons. 
Therefore,  this  is  the  time  to  maximize  efforts  to  put  the  world's  economy  on  the  track  to 
sustained and credible growth. The best strategy is to match three closely related aspects: 
the  gradual  decrease  in  public  incentives,  the  normalization  of  credit  markets,  and  the 
improvement of regulation and supervision. Due to the financial sector’s unique features – 
especially  its  multiple  negative  externalities  and  systemic  aspects  –  governments  should 
reduce  their  incentive  policies  as  the  financial  system  fully  recovers  its  traditional 
intermediary  role.  At  the  same  time,  we  should  implement  new  prudential  regulations  and 
supervision mechanisms to ensure this role is played in a healthier framework.  
Although since March, international financial  markets have shown significant improvement, 
after the stress peaks in October 2008 and February 2009, the need for caution still prevails. 
Expected volatility for the US equity (VIX index) was reduced by half in the past five months, 
although  it  still  doubles  pre-crisis  levels.  Something  similar  occurs  with  interbank  market, 
corporate debt, and CDS spreads of US banks.  
Given that institutions operate transnationally, there is a need to implement new regulations 
to level the playing field. Simultaneously, new regulations should be careful not to stifle credit 
recovery.  
If institutions were forced to comply with new regulations at once – for example, in terms of 
capital – when unable to increase their capital through stock injections or retained earnings, 
they would have no choice but to liquidate their assets and cut down on loans, which would 
have an opposite effect on credit expansion. 
4 
 BIS Review 106/2009
After  all,  all  great  crises  have  led  to  the  reformulation  of  the  international  financial 
architecture. The world is facing a new stage where our region has to take a leading role. 
Many  of  the  world  financial  crises  in  the  past  few  decades  started  and  expanded  in  and 
among  emerging  economies.  These  traumatic  experiences  taught  us  a  lesson.  Our 
economies started adopting sound policies which have allowed us to withstand the contagion 
effect of the crisis.  
The  challenge  is  to  ensure  this  framework  persists  after  the  crisis  is  over,  so  that  our 
countries  may  be  inserted  in  the  global  economy  in  a  less  asymmetric  and  more  effective 
way.  By  less  asymmetric  I  mean  the  need  and  possibility  to  reduce  the  “cost”  of  being 
insured  against  financial  crises.  In my  opinion,  this  is the path  to  a  more  stable, balanced 
system which is less prone to inconsistencies that jeopardize the sustained development of 
our nations. 
In  short,  we  must  deepen  those  policies  that  enable  us  to  face  changes  in  the  external 
context  and,  in  turn,  to  develop  our  economic  institutions  so  as  to  better  channel  benign 
scenarios  and  improve  the  power  of  our  policy  instruments,  with  the  aim  of  being  fully 
responsible for the achievement of the objectives set and, thus, aim higher and higher. 
This  is  the  path  for  monetary  and  financial  policy  to  provide  the  stability  and  predictability 
needed for the development of our people. Thank you. 
BIS Review 106/2009 
 5
