John Hurley: Comments on the financial crisis 
Address by Mr John Hurley, Governor of the Central Bank & Financial Services Authority of 
Ireland, at a lunch meeting of EU Ambassadors to Ireland, Dublin, 27 April 2009. 
 Among Governor Hurley’s comments at the event were:  
The global economy is currently experiencing the deepest and most synchronised downturn 
for  many  decades.  In  its  latest  economic  outlook,  the  International  Monetary  Fund  has 
forecast  a  contraction  in  global  activity  of  around  1½  per  cent  this  year.  We  have  seen  a 
small improvement in some economic indicators internationally in recent weeks, but I have to 
say  that,  at  this  stage,  these  remain  more  consistent  with  further  contractions  in  output  – 
albeit at a slower pace – rather than actual growth. While the Fund has forecast very modest 
positive growth at the global level for next year, the recovery may be rather gradual.  
On  the  other  hand,  global  inflationary  pressures  have  moderated  significantly  since  the 
middle of last year. The euro area headline rate was 4 per cent as recently as last July but 
has  now  fallen  to  below  1  per  cent.  This  easing  initially  reflected  a  sharp  decline  in 
commodity prices – oil prices fell by over $100 per barrel in the second half of last year – but 
the  impact  of  the  downturn  on  prices  is  increasingly  playing  a  role.  Reflecting  these 
developments,  headline  inflation  could  turn  negative  in  a  number  of  advanced  economies 
this year. This is a development that is likely to last for a number of months in the case of the 
euro area, before there is a return to moderate rates of positive inflation.  
Policymakers have taken unprecedented steps to limit the impact of the current downturn. 
These have included financial sector intervention, as well as monetary and fiscal policies. A 
very wide range of measures has been taken to support financial institutions. These include 
recapitalisations,  deposit  guarantee  extensions,  debt  guarantees,  extensive  provision  of 
credit and liquidity, and acquisition or ring fencing of bad assets. As the global outlook has 
continued  to  deteriorate,  many  countries  have  also  introduced  significant  wider  fiscal 
measures to support the economy.  
As far as monetary policy is concerned, central banks have cut policy rates significantly – in 
many cases to unprecedented levels – and have taken a range of unconventional measures. 
This has led to a sizeable expansion of central banks’ balance sheets, including the ECB’s. 
In  particular,  it  is  worth  noting  that  euro  area  banks  have  been  permitted  to  borrow  an 
unlimited  amount  at  the  relevant  policy  rate  against  eligible  collateral  for  some  time  now. 
There has also been a cumulative reduction of 300 basis points in the key policy rate and, 
while the Governing Council is never pre-committed, I cannot exclude the possibility that the 
Council  may  –  in  a  very  measured  way  –  further  reduce  the  main  policy  rate.  As  regards 
further  non-standard  policy  measures,  decisions  will  be  made  and  announced  on  the 
occasion of our next meeting in early May.  
Policy makers have also been focusing on how to rebuild trust in the financial system. These 
issues  dominated  the  recent  meeting  of  the  G20,  where  actions  to  build  a  more  globally 
consistent supervisory and regulatory framework for the financial sector were announced. At 
a  European  level,  the  De  Larosière  Report  has  made  proposals  for  a  stronger,  more 
coherent  supervision  framework,  which  will  be  the  basis  for  reforming  the  EU  supervisory 
framework.  As  far  as  this  country  is  concerned,  the  Government  has  also  announced 
changes  to  the  system  of  financial  regulation  that  provides  for  full  integration  and  co-
ordination  within  the  Central  Bank  of  the  prudential  supervision  and  stability  of  individual 
financial institutions with that of the financial system as a whole.  
BIS Review 51/2009 
 1
